APA Theories_Wheeler Title 5/6/14 11:05 PM Page 1




                                             Gestalt
                                             Therapy
 Theories of Psychotherapy Series
Acceptance and Commitment Therapy
      Steven C. Hayes and Jason Lillis
The Basics of Psychotherapy: An Introduction to Theory and Practice
      Bruce E. Wampold
Behavior Therapy
      Martin M. Antony and Lizabeth Roemer
Brief Dynamic Therapy
      Hanna Levenson
Career Counseling
      Mark L. Savickas
Cognitive Therapy
      Keith S. Dobson
Cognitive–Behavioral Therapy
      Michelle G. Craske
Emotion-Focused Therapy
      Leslie S. Greenberg
Existential–Humanistic Therapy
      Kirk J. Schneider and Orah T. Krug
Family Therapy
      William J. Doherty and Susan H. McDaniel
Feminist Therapy
      Laura S. Brown
Gestalt Therapy
      Gordon Wheeler and Lena Axelsson
Interpersonal Psychotherapy
      Ellen Frank and Jessica C. Levenson
Narrative Therapy
      Stephen Madigan
Person-Centered Psychotherapies
      David J. Cain
Psychotherapy Integration
      George Stricker
Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy
      Albert Ellis and Debbie Joffe Ellis
Reality Therapy
      Robert E. Wubbolding
Relational–Cultural Therapy
      Judith V. Jordan
APA Theories_Wheeler Title 5/6/14 11:05 PM Page 2




                       Theories of Psychotherapy Series
                        Jon Carlson and Matt Englar-Carlson, Series Editors




                                       Gestalt
                                       Therapy

                      Gordon Wheeler and Lena Axelsson




                            American Psychological Association
                                           Washington, DC
Copyright © 2015 by the American Psychological Association. All rights reserved. Except
as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication
may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, including, but not
limited to, the process of scanning and digitization, or stored in a database or retrieval
system, without the prior written permission of the publisher.
Published by
American Psychological Association
750 First Street, NE
Washington, DC 20002
www.apa.org
To order
APA Order Department
P.O. Box 92984
Washington, DC 20090-2984
Tel: (800) 374-2721; Direct: (202) 336-5510
Fax: (202) 336-5502; TDD/TTY: (202) 336-6123
Online: www.apa.org/pubs/books
E-mail: order@apa.org
In the U.K., Europe, Africa, and the Middle East, copies may be ordered from
American Psychological Association
3 Henrietta Street
Covent Garden, London
WC2E 8LU England
Typeset in Minion by Circle Graphics, Inc., Columbia, MD
Printer: Edwards Brothers Malloy, Inc., Lillington, NC
Cover Designer: Minker Design, Sarasota, FL
Cover Art: Lily Rising, 2005, oil and mixed media on panel in craquelure frame,
by Betsy Bauer
The opinions and statements published are the responsibility of the authors, and such
opinions and statements do not necessarily represent the policies of the American
Psychological Association.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Wheeler, Gordon, 1949-
 Gestalt therapy / by Gordon Wheeler & Lena Axelsson. — First edition.
     pages cm. — (Theories of psychotherapy series)
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
 ISBN 978-1-4338-1859-2 — ISBN 1-4338-1859-0 1. Gestalt therapy. I. Axelsson, Lena.
II. Title.
 RC489.G4W44 2015
 616.89'143—dc23
	2014032667
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A CIP record is available from the British Library.
Printed in the United States of America
First Edition
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/14527-000
                            Contents




Series Preface	                                       vii
How to Use This Book With APA Psychotherapy Videos	    xi
Acknowledgments	                                      xiii
1.	Introduction	                                        3
2.	History	                                             9
3.	Theory	                                            29
4.	   The Therapeutic Process	                         71
5.	Evaluation	                                        111
6.	   Future Developments	                            119
7.	Summary	                                           127
Suggested Readings	                                   133
References	137
Index	145
About the Authors	                                    151
About the Series Editors	                             153




                                 v
                       Series Preface




S   ome might argue that in the contemporary clinical practice of psycho-
    therapy, evidence-based intervention and effective outcome have
overshadowed theory in importance. Maybe. But, as the editors of this
series, we don’t propose to take up that controversy here. We do know that
psychotherapists adopt and practice according to one theory or another
because their experience, and decades of good evidence, suggests that hav-
ing a sound theory of psychotherapy leads to greater therapeutic success.
Still, the role of theory in the helping process can be hard to explain. This
narrative about solving problems helps convey theory’s importance:

     Aesop tells the fable of the sun and wind having a contest to decide
     who was the most powerful. From above the earth, they spotted a
     man walking down the street, and the wind said that he bet he could
     get his coat off. The sun agreed to the contest. The wind blew, and the
     man held on tightly to his coat. The more the wind blew, the tighter
     he held. The sun said it was his turn. He put all of his energy into
     creating warm sunshine, and soon the man took off his coat.

    What does a competition between the sun and the wind to remove
a man’s coat have to do with theories of psychotherapy? We think this
deceptively simple story highlights the importance of theory as the pre-
cursor to any effective intervention—and hence to a favorable outcome.
Without a guiding theory we might treat the symptom without under-
standing the role of the individual. Or we might create power conflicts

                                       vii
                              Series Preface



with our clients and not understand that, at times, indirect means of help-
ing (sunshine) are often as effective—if not more so—than direct ones
(wind). In the absence of theory, we might lose track of the treatment
rationale and instead get caught up in, for example, social correctness and
not wanting to do something that looks too simple.
     What exactly is theory? The APA Dictionary of Psychology defines
theory as “a principle or body of interrelated principles that purports to
explain or predict a number of interrelated phenomena.” In psychotherapy,
a theory is a set of principles used to explain human thought and behavior,
including what causes people to change. In practice, a theory creates the
goals of therapy and specifies how to pursue them. Haley (1997) noted
that a theory of psychotherapy ought to be simple enough for the average
therapist to understand, but comprehensive enough to account for a wide
range of eventualities. Furthermore, a theory guides action toward suc-
cessful outcomes while generating hope in both the therapist and client
that recovery is possible.
     Theory is the compass that allows psychotherapists to navigate the
vast territory of clinical practice. In the same ways that navigational tools
have been modified to adapt to advances in thinking and ever-expanding
territories to explore, theories of psychotherapy have changed over time.
The different schools of theories are commonly referred to as waves, the
first wave being psychodynamic theories (i.e., Adlerian, psychoanalytic),
the second wave learning theories (i.e., behavioral, cognitive–behavioral),
the third wave humanistic theories (person-centered, gestalt, existen-
tial), the fourth wave feminist and multicultural theories, and the fifth
wave postmodern and constructivist theories. In many ways, these waves
represent how psychotherapy has adapted and responded to changes in
psychology, society, and epistemology as well as to changes in the nature
of psychotherapy itself. Psychotherapy and the theories that guide it are
dynamic and responsive. The wide variety of theories is also testament to
the different ways in which the same human behavior can be conceptual-
ized (Frew & Spiegler, 2008).
     It is with these two concepts in mind—the central importance of theory
and the natural evolution of theoretical thinking—that we developed the
APA Theories of Psychotherapy Series. Both of us are thoroughly fascinated

                                     viii
                               Series Preface



by theory and the range of complex ideas that drive each model. As univer-
sity faculty members who teach courses on the theories of psychotherapy,
we wanted to create learning materials that not only highlight the essence
of the major theories for professionals and professionals in training but also
clearly bring the reader up to date on the current status of the models. Often
in books on theory, the biography of the original theorist overshadows the
evolution of the model. In contrast, our intent is to highlight the contempo-
rary uses of the theories as well as their history and context.
     As this project began, we faced two immediate decisions: which theo-
ries to address and who best to present them. We looked at graduate-level
theories of psychotherapy courses to see which theories are being taught,
and we explored popular scholarly books, articles, and conferences to
determine which theories draw the most interest. We then developed a
dream list of authors from among the best minds in contemporary the-
oretical practice. Each author is one of the leading proponents of that
approach as well as a knowledgeable practitioner. We asked each author to
review the core constructs of the theory, bring the theory into the modern
sphere of clinical practice by looking at it through a context of evidence-
based practice, and clearly illustrate how the theory looks in action.
     There are 24 titles planned for the series. Each title can stand alone
or can be put together with a few other titles to create materials for a
course in psychotherapy theories. This option allows instructors to create
a course featuring the approaches they believe are the most salient today.
To support this end, APA Books has also developed a DVD for each of the
approaches that demonstrates the theory in practice with a real client.
Many of the DVDs show therapy over six sessions. Contact APA Books
for a complete list of available DVD programs (http://www.apa.org/pubs/
videos).
     Gestalt therapy is an experiential and existential form of psycho-
therapy that highlights the present moment and personal responsibility
with the goal of helping clients become more alive. Many contemporary
theories utilize Gestalt therapy techniques; however, few clinicians under-
stand the theoretical roots of this approach and these interventions. In this
book, Gordon Wheeler and Lena Axelsson share their thorough knowl-
edge of the theoretical underpinnings of this complete contemporary

                                      ix
                              Series Preface



system of psychotherapy. They cleverly invite the reader to participate in
a conversation about the origins and philosophy of Gestalt as well as its
modern application. We include this important approach in the Theo-
ries of Psychotherapy series in the hope that readers can understand this
approach and its application to a wide range of challenges involved with
modern life.
                                  —Jon Carlson and Matt Englar-Carlson


                            References
Frew, J., & Spiegler, M. (2008). Contemporary psychotherapies for a diverse
   world. Boston, MA: Lahaska Press.
Haley, J. (1997). Leaving home: The therapy of disturbed young people. New
   York, NY: Routledge.




                                    x
How to Use This Book With APA
    Psychotherapy Videos



E    ach book in the Theories of Psychotherapy Series is specifically paired
     with a DVD that demonstrates the theory applied in actual therapy
with a real client. Many DVDs feature the author of the book as the guest
therapist, allowing students to see an eminent scholar and practitioner
putting the theory they write about into action.
     The DVDs have a number of features that make them excellent tools
for learning more about theoretical concepts:

77 Many DVDs contain six full sessions of psychotherapy over time, giving
   viewers a chance to see how clients respond to the application of the
   theory over the course of several sessions.
77 Each DVD has a brief introductory discussion recapping the basic
   features of the theory behind the approach demonstrated. This allows
   viewers to review the key aspects of the approach about which they
   have just read.
77 DVDs feature actual clients in unedited psychotherapy sessions. This
   provides a unique opportunity to get a sense of the look and feel of real
   psychotherapy, something that written case examples and transcripts
   sometimes cannot convey.
77 There is a therapist commentary track that viewers may choose to play
   during the psychotherapy sessions. This track gives unique insight into
   why therapists do what they do in a session. Further it provides an


                                     xi
        How to Use This Book With APA Psychotherapy Videos



  in vivo opportunity to see how the therapist uses the model to concep-
  tualize the client.

The books and DVDs together make a powerful teaching tool for show-
ing how theoretical principles affect practice. In the case of this book,
the DVD Gestalt Therapy, which features Dr. Wheeler as the guest expert,
provides a vivid example of how this approach looks in practice.




                                   xii
                 Acknowledgments




M       y thanks go first of all to my coauthor, Lena Axelsson: Without your
        energy, creative drive, and the fresh imagination you bring of a new
generation of Gestaltists and healers, this book would never have come to
fruition. Growing older I become ever more mindful of existing as part
of a unified web of giving and receiving, which underlies and empowers
all our actions, experiences, and coevolution. The great benefit of long life
is having the chance to love, learn from, nourish and be nourished by so
many people. Thanks go to all my teachers, mentors, colleagues, students,
sparring partners, clients, friends and family, children and grandchil-
dren, for being the people I continue to learn from and learn with—and
to my teachers and mentors in Gestalt, themselves direct students of Kurt
Lewin, Paul Goodman, and Fritz and Laura Perls, to whom I dedicate my
work in this book.
                                                           —Gordon Wheeler

    I would like to start by thanking my coauthor, Gordon Wheeler, not
only for asking me to write this book with him but mostly for the many
years of mentorship and friendship he has provided. I also want to thank
Helen Resneck-Sannes for her support in helping me understand not only
intellectually but in my own body the effects trauma has on a cellular level.
    Thank you also to my colleagues at the Gestalt Academy of Scandi-
navia, especially Helena Kallner and Petra Juneholm, for your support
through this process, and to my friends who have encouraged and supported

                                    xiii
                          Acknowledgments



me especially during the times when I was questioning my abilities to
reach the end of the journey of writing this book.
    I want to also acknowledge the psychotherapists at PVPSA (Pajaro
Valley Prevention and Student Assistance in Watsonville, CA)—my for-
mer coworkers and supervisees, especially Diana Ramirez-Zuniga, who
was the family therapist on two of the cases presented in this book. You
are all doing such amazing work bringing help and support to children
and families who have no means of getting help in any other way, work-
ing from a true field perspective and always looking at how to expand
the support for each client outside of the therapy room. Finally, I offer
special thanks to my teachers and mentors in Gestalt, and to my students,
to whom I dedicate my work in this book.
                                                         —Lena Axelsson




                                   xiv
APA Theories_Wheeler Title 5/6/14 11:05 PM Page 1




                                             Gestalt
                                             Therapy
                                               14

                              Introduction




W       elcome to this book on Gestalt therapy. Our aim in writing it has
        been to give you, the reader, an overview of the theory and the phi-
losophy and values behind it, as well as a sense of how Gestalt therapy is
practiced. We hope you will find it an interesting and worthwhile read, one
that will give you not only a good introductory view of Gestalt therapy
theory and practice but also a new perspective on what it means to be
a therapist, no matter what school of thought you practice from.
     Gestalt therapy is a distinct therapeutic approach in its own right, and
at the same time the psychological theory behind Gestalt therapy has had
a far-reaching influence on other schools of research psychology in the
past century; thus, we believe (and hope to convince you here) that many
of the basic assumptions of Gestalt can clarify and support your learning
and growth in any therapeutic model and methodology. This is especially
true when it comes to how Gestalt therapy views the importance of the


http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/14527-001
Gestalt Therapy, by G. Wheeler and L. Axelsson
Copyright © 2015 by the American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.


                                                3
                              Gestalt Therapy



therapist–client relationship for the client’s healing and growth and how
Gestalt therapists work from a profoundly phenomenological approach,
grounded in the firm, research-backed idea that that each of us is engaged
at every moment in life in a unique project of creating our own view and
understanding of reality. In Gestalt, it is this creative human process of
meaning making, shared and at the same time unique to each of us, which
is the focus in therapy.


                               AUDIENCE
As authors, we always have in mind the question of who our audience may
be as we write. Many of our readers, we know, will be students and trainees in
psychotherapy and related fields (counseling, coaching, group and organiza-
tional work, and increasingly, working with teams, communities, and policy
issues). Thus, we have done our best, using a diverse variety of case examples
and settings, to convey a hands-on feel for how Gestalt therapy works in prac-
tice, hopefully bringing the theory discussions to life in a way you can relate
to, find yourself in, and adapt creatively to your own needs. We believe Gestalt
has much to offer as you clarify and deepen your own source models and your
own work, just as we have learned over the years from a wide range of teachers
and approaches, often adapting ideas from other schools to specifically chal-
lenging clients and populations—without leaving our “home” orientation
and theory perspective in relational Gestalt.
      Therapists and related professionals are lifelong learners, always look-
ing for new tools, new ideas, and new opportunities for personal and
professional growth to help us meet the challenges coming from our cli-
ents, our projects, our personal relationships—and ourselves. This should
not be surprising, because as members of the helping professions, we take
as our study area nothing less than the most complex process system in
the known universe: a human relationship. How human beings work, how
we live in and emerge from a “relational ground” from before birth and all
through life (and in some sense beyond), is the subject matter of Gestalt
therapy and the source of our theories and methods for being of more
service to other people (clients and others)—and to ourselves.

                                       4
                              Introduction



                            WHO WE ARE
Diversity (and connection) is the dual nature of life—between group and
group and also between any two individuals: In today’s multicultural
world, none of us can afford not to be mindful of how group membership
and identification affect each and all of us in every situation—including
the therapist–client relationship. Thus, we, the coauthors, want readers to
know something about our own backgrounds. As well as in other impor-
tant ways, we are alike in that we both come from the generally privileged
North Atlantic community of nations (Europe and North America), and
we have both had the blessing of the opportunity for a high-quality edu-
cation. Beyond that, one of us is of Caucasian origin, the other Caucasian
plus Native American. We are of different genders and from different gen-
erations, with different cultures of origin and different primary languages.
But we are joined in a passionate commitment to Gestalt therapy as the
most useful basic framework and tool we have come across for studying
relationships, and we are joined in our commitment to being of service to
a wide range of people as they address the challenges of their lives.


                   OVERVIEW OF THIS BOOK
Every method, every school of therapy, rests on an underlying theory and
set of assumptions (spoken or unspoken) about human nature. Underly-
ing Gestalt therapy is the research-based theory of Gestalt psychology—
a basic model and research core that has come to inform the assumptions
and underlying concepts of most modern research psychology (including
the contemporary revolution in neuroscience and interpersonal neurobi-
ology, about which we will have much more to say later in the volume).
Because the roots and essential connections between this Gestalt psy-
chology legacy and the later (midcentury) emergence of Gestalt therapy
have often been underdiscussed or misunderstood, we spend some time
in Chapter 2 showing you the basics of that earlier Gestalt psychology
model and how it gave rise to Gestalt therapy after decades of basic lab
and social research. That Gestalt psychology revolution of a century ago
first challenged and then came to underlie and unify the other two great

                                     5
                              Gestalt Therapy



rival schools (or families of schools) we know as behaviorism and psycho-
dynamics. This deeper shared ground among all three of these movements
(behavioral; psychodynamic; and relational/humanistic, of which Gestalt
therapy is a part) is also not always understood in the (sometimes) con-
tentious wider field of psychology and psychotherapy, and we hope you
will find the discussion here to be lively and of value to you in locating and
clarifying your own assumptions and perspective.
     In Chapter 3, we take up the emergence of Gestalt therapy—its theory
and its evolution over the past six and more decades. We round out that
discussion with an overview of contemporary relational Gestalt theory
and practice, as we understand and articulate it. In Chapter 4, we take
this theory into the therapy room, highlighting the practice of relational
Gestalt therapy with a number of diverse case studies (diverse demographi-
cally, and with regard to age, setting, presenting problem and issues, and
mode of therapy). As we introduce the case vignette we insert our initials,
respectively, to identify the therapist/speaker in that case. We move on
in Chapter 5 to current outcome research on Gestalt and closely related
methods. Although outcome research on Gestalt therapy per se has so far
been limited, we argue that the more extensive research on relationally ori-
ented therapy in general is directly relevant. Even more, across the field
of outcome research in psychotherapy the evidence emerges again and
again (even in cases in which the research focus was initially different)
that the most consistently important, repeatedly recurring factors in suc-
cessful therapeutic outcomes have to do with the basic Gestalt tenet of
the importance of the dynamics and qualities of the therapeutic relation-
ship. Indeed, in this chapter and throughout this volume, we argue that
in Gestalt therapy the client–therapist relationship is the therapy in some
real senses. We hope that by the end of this volume you will have a feel for
what we mean by this.
     In Chapter 6, we examine the trajectory we believe relational Gestalt
therapy will take in the coming years, which will be a time of continuing
and amazing ferment and transformation in psychology in general, thanks
to the neuroscience revolution that is today only still dawning. We relate
that revolution to ongoing developments we foresee in Gestalt therapy in

                                      6
                               Introduction



general, in trauma healing in particular, and in the widespread and grow-
ing awareness that psychotherapy must move beyond the therapy room
and integrate with the larger field of community, educational, and family
needs and support.
     In Chapter 7, we sum up this journey, in hopes that we have contrib-
uted something to your own journey as a student, trainee, or active pro-
fessional already in the field. To accommodate the relatively brief space
of this volume, we have made many difficult choices about what to delve
into deeply and what to touch on lightly. We have so much to tell you, and
we sense that we can only give you a taste here of the whole rich menu of
Gestalt. Therefore, we hope that you will continue your studies in Gestalt
therapy using the Suggested Reading section at the end of this book.
     Finally, a note on the use of the pronouns you, we, and us. We view writ-
ing a book as a way of opening a conversation with you, the reader—albeit
only half a dialogue for now, because this is in book form. Thus, we invite
and welcome your comments, questions, requests for further reading, and
so forth (see the e-mail addresses in each of our bios). Meanwhile, we hope
this way of writing will invite you to explore your own process of meaning
making and your thoughts, feelings, and sensations as you read. Blessings to
you on your journey as you learn, grow, serve, and help to heal others and
yourselves.




                                      7
                                               2

                                      History




A     century ago, when psychology was still in its infancy, a group of
      young academic researchers in Berlin set out to explore a set of old
problems in a radically new way. In the view of this renegade group, soon
to be known as Gestaltists or the Gestalt school, the prevailing approach
of the times to a scientific understanding of perception, cognition, and
ultimately human experience and behavior was fundamentally too lim-
ited; a new beginning was needed. The issues at stake were among the
most daunting and significant involving human nature; namely, how do
we actually take in, know, and use our world? How do human perception,
cognition, behavior, motivation, experience, and so forth, actually work?
    Centuries of speculative philosophy (the branch known as philosophy
of mind) had wrestled deeply with these questions, with whole schools of
thought emerging based on speculation and imagined models of expla-
nation. Formalists or idealists (who held that the mind is preorganized by


http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/14527-002
Gestalt Therapy, by G. Wheeler and L. Axelsson
Copyright © 2015 by the American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.


                                                9
                               Gestalt Therapy



fixed, innate structures) had vied for centuries with empiricists or realists
(who believed that the mind is a “blank slate,” merely the sum of sense impres-
sions; Russell, 1946/2004), with no clear result. By the turn of the 20th cen-
tury the new philosophical school of phenomenology was trying to renew
the discussion by reflecting deeply on experience, but this approach was
highly subjective and speculative and thus not in tune with the era’s vigor-
ous empirical research in physics, chemistry, physiology, and related fields
(Husserl, 1928/1990). In the second half of the 19th century the legacy of
philosophy of mind had birthed an entirely new offshoot: scientific psy-
chology, the empirical, experiment-based study of human behavior and
experience taking the mind as a research topic and using the new tools and
methods of modern empirical science to try to unravel mysteries that had
fascinated (and often stumped) the best minds of the past 2,500 years of
the Western philosophical tradition.


 THE AGE OF ENGINEERING: ASSOCIATIONISM AND
    THE WORK OF THE FIRST PSYCHOLOGISTS
The end of the 19th century was the dawn of the great modern age of science
and technology, a time of vast optimism in scientific circles and beyond. In
the late 19th century, amazing new advances in physics and chemistry—
from molecular and atomic theory to the germ theory of disease to appli-
cations such as the harnessing of electricity, the radio and the telephone,
the first automobiles and then airplanes, and so much more—seemed
to promise that nature’s power and secrets would soon be solidly under
human control. And because the new theories of Darwin were placing
humans fully in the natural world, surely human behavior and the human
mind could likewise be unlocked, understood scientifically, and reshaped
for human betterment.
     It was in this spirit of self-confidence and faith in science that the first
research labs in psychology were founded in 1879 in Leipzig, Germany, by
the great pioneer of psychological research, Wilhelm Wundt, founder of
modern psychology as a research-based discipline (Wundt, 1904/2009).
Following the lead of the physical sciences of the day, the research approach
was resolutely atomistic—that is, the methodology involved breaking down

                                       10
                                   History



the complex mysteries of activities such as perception, cognition, and
behavior into what surely must be their simplest basic units. The approach
was similar to those of physics and chemistry in material science, reduc-
ing complex substances and reactions to the basic building blocks of mol-
ecules and atoms and then recording their properties and interactions to
“build up” again into larger understandings that would explain and predict
the natural world (Wundt, 1904/2009). The approach was grounded in
the exciting new work of Pavlov (1897) on the stimulus–response (S–R)
bond. The awarding of the 1906 Nobel Prize in Medicine to Pavlov for this
work provided, at the most scientifically prestigious level, a kind of official
endorsement of this way of thinking.
     As Wundt and his group imagined it, perception and cognition could
be understood by measuring and administering the smallest possible unit
of a physical stimulus (e.g., minimal increments of heat, light, sound, skin
pressure, electrical impulse) to a participant in the lab and then tracking
and measuring the physiological response (not the “whole-person” or full
behavioral response but first the microreaction at the level of the nervous
system, exact physical measurements such as muscle movement, nerve
impulse, retinal or aural reaction, voltaic potential changes on the surface
of the skin, etc.; see Wheeler, 2000; Wundt, 1904/2009).
     Certainly Wundt and his followers understood that research at this
level was still far removed from the ultimate goal of understanding and
predicting changes in behavior and consciousness. But those larger pro-
cesses, they felt, must surely be made up in some direct way of associative
chains of smaller, concrete S–R events. As long as the researchers stayed
faithful to their principles of concrete physical data with no speculation
or imposition of any imaginary ideas, their theory would be as solid as the
material physics of their day, the great Newtonian synthesis, augmented
by 19th-century chemistry and atom theory, which was transforming the
physical world around them. In this way, the new field of psychology took
its place alongside the other empirical sciences, with the same status and
the same explanatory power and limitless applications for societal issues,
education, and social engineering.
     This was the vision on which psychology had been founded only a
few decades before. The idea of associative chains gave the new research

                                      11
                             Gestalt Therapy



movement its name: associationism, or the associationist school in the new
psychology. By the turn of the 20th century—which is to say just a single
generation after the founding of research psychology as a discipline—
associationism had outpaced its more speculative rivals, amassing huge
quantities of basic S–R data and arriving at a neurological understanding
of the human nervous system and how it works, at least at the most basic
physical response level, information that today remains fundamental in
modern behaviorism, much of learning theory, and the foundations of
neuroscience, even if the conceptual model of associationism no longer
serves as a basic framework of psychology (Boring, 1950).
     Despite the productivity and usefulness of the first generation of basic
associationist research, the original aims of the field—a fuller understand-
ing of higher order phenomena such as consciousness, behavior, and
how the mind actually works—seemed no closer than before to any use-
ful answers. If anything, the mystery surrounding these larger questions
seemed only to grow deeper the more the basic building blocks of per-
ception in the form of S–R links accumulated, without any clear way
to get from these basics to a fuller, empirically tested model of how the
larger processes work.


            ASSOCIATIONISM AND ITS CRITICS:
              THE UNANSWERED QUESTIONS
From its beginnings, associationism did not lack doubters and critics.
Prominent among them was the great American psychologist William
James, widely recognized today as the founder of American psychology
(James, 1890/2007). James, who had a European education, had studied for
a time as a young man at the Wundt labs in Leipzig soon after their found-
ing and had come away dissatisfied. The problem, as he later put it, was
that although we are certainly being bombarded at every moment by a near
infinitude of stimuli, how do human beings ever actually get out of that
raw stimulus world of “blooming, buzzing confusion” (James, 1890/2007,
p. 488) to the manifestly organized, coherent, and above all, usable world
of perceptions, cognitions, and useful learning, leading at least at times
to reflection and learning, evaluation and perhaps prediction, and then

                                     12
                                   History



to strategies, integration, and even the sensation at least of making judg-
ments and choice?
     All this amassing of S–R data, James argued, was missing the real ques-
tion of perception (James, 1890/2007; see also Wheeler, 2000). One does
need to know about atoms to understand the physical world, but just
counting atoms and then adding them up in chains—even all the atoms
in the universe, if that were possible—would not do the whole job. The
problem is much more complex: One also needs to know the principles of
interaction, which include the laws of attraction and which atoms do what
and under what conditions. In the same way, the problem of perception,
according to James (1890/2007), could never be explained away by simply
registering and measuring all the physical sense impressions and then asso-
ciating one S–R pairing with another in some linear way—if only because
the stimuli around us, at a physical level, are essentially infinite and always
changing (utterly unlike the static world of the Wundt labs with their care-
fully measured doses of single stimuli).
     Each perceiving subject has to have some criteria for relevance and
selection and some principles of construction and integration to get out
of the chaos of pure stimulus and into organized, selected, and usable per-
ceptions. Out of the infinitude of all the energy impulses that are assault-
ing you at every waking moment, which stimuli matter? How would you
select among them (and even more important, deselect or screen out the
majority of them—and keep doing so all the time as your only possible
defense against being overwhelmed)? Under what circumstances would
you not pay attention to different aspects of the environment under differ-
ent conditions (a key point that would only begin to be clarified with the
work of Gestaltist Kurt Lewin a generation later, as we will see later in the
chapter)? Once we have selected or deselected, how do we make a coherent
whole picture of all those elements we have somehow “screened in.” Asso-
ciationism seemed to have no answers to offer to questions such as these.
     James (1890/2007) proposed studying attention, specifically selective
attention, as he termed it. Otherwise one would be left with an unbridge-
able gap between sensory data and S–R cataloging and the actual emer-
gence of a coherent perceptual image, cognition, or memory—much less
anything such as a full account of learning and judgment and their role

                                      13
                             Gestalt Therapy



in behavior. Atomism and associationism alone could never accomplish
this; something more would always be needed for a coherent, scientific,
and ultimately predictive explanation (and prediction, after all, is the gold
standard of science). What that “something more” is and how to describe
it James left for other scholars to work out. But without that inquiry and
a fuller theory, the gap between empirical research and a fully articulated,
fully usable model remained and even seemed to widen.


       THE GESTALT PSYCHOLOGY AGENDA:
   THE WORK OF THE FIRST GESTALT GENERATION
It was into that gap—the unexplored expanse between the static, sim-
pler S–R world of the associationists and the dynamic, complex world
of the actual, purposive responses that make up our experience and our
behavior—that this intrepid new group of young psychologists in Berlin,
the first Gestalt psychologists, beginning in the early years of the 20th
century, were determined to go. Like the philosophers who searched for
“mental categories” from Plato to Kant to Husserl down to the new phe-
nomenologists of that day (Brentano, 1988; Husserl, 1928/1990; Kant,
1781/1983), they would be exploring the larger organizing principles and
dynamics of perception and cognition. The idea was to fill in that gap
between environmental stimulus and behavioral response with clear prin-
ciples, mechanisms, and demonstrable “laws” (like the S–R bond but with
greater complexity) that might get us more persuasively from “input” to
“output.”
     Unlike the more traditional reflective philosophers, the Gestaltists
explored these questions empirically, using the methods and tools of the
new psychology labs: controlled measurement, repeatable trials, hypoth-
esis formation, and hypothesis testing, followed by model building on the
bases of those hypotheses that had survived the fire of rigorous testing.
In this way they built on Wundt’s innovation of applying the tools and
methods of the physical sciences to psychological research; only in place of
the discrete physical stimulus or doses and the measurement sensory reac-
tions, thresholds, and response times of much of the Wundt lab’s work,

                                     14
                                  History



they turned their focus to the behavioral response of the whole perceiving
subject, dealing with some perceptual scene or situation and responding
to the image or pattern as a whole.
      As experimental variables they used visual or auditory presentations,
often some incomplete or ambiguous sequence or image—all those rela-
tively more lifelike situations and presentations that challenge an active
subject to learn or use something, recognize on the basis of incomplete cues,
or make a judgment, a discrimination, or other choice. They were trying to
solve the mystery of selection, deselection, and above all, synthesizing that
James had pointed to, in search of those unifying principles (Wertheimer,
1912) that would transform the sheer perceptual inputs or stimulus
events of much of the Wundt lab’s research into some whole coherent
picture or recognition (something like the famous “Aha!” reaction that
is popularly associated with much of this early Gestalt thinking and
research; Wertheimer, 1925, 1938). They took their name, Gestaltists
and Gestalt psychology, from the term introduced into research as early as
the 1890s by Ehrenfels (1890) to indicate this unifying phenomenon, which
was still missing but now named as a research topic (Gestalt is simply a
German word signifying form or whole configuration).
      One might think (as many associationists did) that this “how” ques-
tion, being invisible and thus perhaps speculative, would be nearly
impossible to pin down in the lab. And yet, in an outpouring of creativ-
ity, the initial Gestalt research team led by Max Wertheimer, Kurt Koffka,
Wolfgang von Köhler, and their associates (Henle, 1961), in just a few
years before the outbreak of World War I, generated a wealth of new
experimental directions and findings casting light on just these yet-invis-
ible processes. The findings soon confirmed not just the existence but
also the active role of these selective and integrative mental processes in
mediating behavior; they at least began to describe the workings and the
principles governing “in-brain” processes in well-researched detail. (For a
broad sweep of this first decade’s work, see the primary research in Ellis,
1938, and Henle, 1961; see also Wheeler, 2000.)
      Often the specific experiments that they came up with were prob-
ing and quite ingenious. One elegant, deceptively simple example was

                                     15
                               Gestalt Therapy



based on the research carried out by Pavlov (1897), who trained people (or
dogs, or birds) to always associate a given stimulus—a simple disc image,
say—with some reward (generally food, if working with animals). The
picture was then complicated, first by presenting the subjects with a choice
between two discs (e.g., 1 inch and 2 inches), and pairing only one of them
with the reward. Even a chicken would soon learn to reliably choose and
pick on the correct disc (e.g., the larger, 2-inch disc) most of the time,
ignoring the other one and getting the reward.
     And then the task was complicated further: Once the animals were
trained on the 2-inch disc, the stimuli were changed again, the ignored
(and irrelevant) 1-inch disc was removed, and the same subjects were pre-
sented with the same 2-inch disc—only now paired with, for example, a
4-inch disc in place of the smaller one. Would the participants now pick
the same 2-inch disc as before (as the associationist model would certainly
predict—the “correct” physical stimulus has not changed in all this time),
or would they now choose the larger of the two (i.e., the 4-inch disc),
just as they had been picking the larger one (i.e., the 2-inch disc) in the
previous training phase? This is an ingenious way of ascertaining what
the participant was actually learning: whether absolute size (always the
same 2-inch disc) or relative size (the larger of any two) was related to the
likelihood of reward.
     If it turned out (as it often did) to be the latter (i.e., they had actually
been learning to choose the larger stimulus—a relative discrimination,
not a simple one-to-one stimulus training), then the result was not simply
a matter of responding to pure physical stimuli. On the contrary, the par-
ticipant was making an interpretive judgment call and not a one-to-one
direct physical stimulus response. The response was not to the stimulus
alone but to the stimulus in a given context (the same 2-inch disc may be
the larger one in one array and the smaller in another pairing, and subjects
would pick it or not, depending on what else it was paired with).
     Although this task is a simple perceptual challenge compared with
the complex perceptions humans and other animals handle nearly every
moment, even at this simple level we can no longer reduce the whole per-
ceptual problem to just a fixed, passive S–R bond or direct physical stim-
uli; it is clear that the subject is active and is making complex contextual

                                       16
                                  History



judgments that are “whole-picture” interpretations, more relative (larger,
smaller) than absolute (the number and spacing of photons coming from
the disc to our retina). These judgments do not occur just after the act of
perception; they are part of that perceptual act and process. With this kind
of work, the Gestaltists opened the research field to those internal processes
the early behaviorists still hoped to avoid with a pure S–R model. (For this
and other such ingenious experiments, again see Ellis, 1938; Henle, 1961;
see also Wheeler, 1991.)
     Thus the Gestalt revolution in cognitive research began. Not only did
these findings (and many more, many of them equally ingenious) hold up
under repeated trials, but the Gestaltists also found that subjects could be
presented with more and more difficult challenges, such as smaller and
smaller size discriminations or keeping the “same” stimulus in entirely
different situations, and give different responses to the same physical input
(e.g., participants could be asked to label the same object with the same
objective brightness as either white or black, depending on the overall
lighting and shading of the whole scene, and still get reliable, repeatable
and surprising patterns of results; see Köhler, 1938a; Wheeler, 1991).
     Another classic example, even more familiar and seemingly simple, is
a melody. How is it that we can recognize what we call “the same tune” no
matter what note it starts on or what key it then unfolds in? How can that
be, if we are presumably just responding directly to the physical stimulus of
the absolute frequencies of the notes? Clearly, what we are governed by here
is not any one frequency or note but the melody as a whole—that is, the
whole pattern or the relative intervals of frequencies (or the relative spaces
between notes—i.e., the places where there is no physical stimulus—that are
regulating the response). Again, a reductive S–R or associationist approach
seems to have little to offer in pattern-recognition problems such as this.
And yet, all perception, all recognition, involves pattern recognition in some
way, to varying degrees (Ehrenfels, 1890).
     In another hallmark study in this early Gestalt research, participants
were forced into discrimination or judgment challenges through the use
of ambiguous or incomplete images (or images containing intentional
errors); experimenters registered the perceptual patterns and biases that
emerged as they manipulated experimental variables such as time, light,

                                     17
                             Gestalt Therapy



focus, inclusion or exclusion of important elements of detail, differing
or competing contexts, and so forth (e.g., the optical illusions or ambig-
uous images often found in textbook illustrations of early Gestalt work).
From this they began to collect and catalog the perceptual biases and
tendencies that would go into the early Gestalt principles of perception
(Wertheimer, 1925, 1938). The following is a brief outline with com-
mentary of the most important of these principles—radical at the time,
familiar (if still challenging) today, in a world where these ideas are now
the bedrock of contemporary psychology and the ongoing revolution
in neuroscience, brain modeling, and the exciting new field of interper-
sonal neurobiology (Siegel, 2012).

77 We tend to perceive in whole forms more than in the actual constituent
   parts. It is these organized patterns that we can resolve into organized
   whole images, series, or linkages that the human brain picks out, takes
   in, stores in memory (or not), and then integrates, where we can, with
   other perceptions and broader learning. This is the first and funda-
   mental discovery and principle of the Gestalt psychology legacy from
   the first half of the 20th century (and which laid the groundwork for
   Gestalt therapy, in ways we will see in the pages to follow).
77 These whole forms (or gestalts) are organized according to particular
   principles, which became known as Gestalt laws of perception (Köhler,
   1938b; Wertheimer, 1925, 1938; Young, 1999). These principles included
   such whole-form characteristics as boundary (forms or patterns show-
   ing borders contrasting with the background), similarity (parts of the
   perceptual field showing repeating features), contiguity (nearness vs.
   distance), continuity and closure (forms that are unbroken), and so forth,
   which could then be researched empirically and manipulated experi-
   mentally by changing the spacing, timing, contrast, and so on, of the
   stimuli or by introducing variations, contradictions, or “errors” into
   a stimulus presentation in the ways described earlier in the “smaller–
   larger” disc experiments. In a real sense, the stimulus the brain or cen-
   tral nervous system interacts with and responds to is the whole form
   or pattern and not the various elements that could be shown by other
   measurements to really exist (Ellis, 1938).

                                     18
                                  History



      This is fundamental to how we actually function (and to all the
   Gestalt work up to the present day): The stimulus we see, hear, or other-
   wise take account of is not the infinity of energy impulses that bombard
   us but some organized synthesis or reduction of all that into the forms
   or gestalts our brain and minds are adapted to register and respond to.
   In other words, in classic Gestalt psychology language, the whole is often
   more significant than the parts that go into it (e.g., see Koffka, 1935).
   (For a clear summary of the most important of those Gestalt laws of
   perception or built-in neurological biases, as we might put it today, see
   http://web.engr.oregonstate.edu/~sinisa/courses/OSU/CS559/lectures/
   CS559_1.pdf).
77 This then means that perception is active, not passive. Just as William
   James pointed out, nature simply does not come to us tidily arranged
   in static, unambiguous, preorganized wholes that we can take as mean-
   ingful (in the sense of their being useful to us, having implications,
   potentially at least, for coping with our situations, surviving in our
   worlds, and hopefully thriving in our lives). This means we have to
   select, screen out, emphasize or deemphasize particular features or
   elements, fill in gaps, leave out contrasting elements, and so forth (all
   the Gestalt laws of perception in action), to synthesize (and create)
   and then register images of “what’s there” or “what’s happening.” As
   Gestaltist Kurt Lewin put it, all perception is a form of problem solv-
   ing (Marrow, 1969), a proactive process of engaging with our environ-
   ment to extract and create (and oftentimes modify or distort, as the
   Gestaltists were showing in “hard,” repeatable empirical research) the
   possible organized forms “out there” that we can remember, relate to,
   and use in coping with our ever-changing situations and our complex
   multidimensional lives.
77 This also means that there is no perception without interpretation.
   This is not one of those early laws of perception but rather the direct
   implication of all those empirical laws taken together. Perception and
   interpretation are not two completely separate steps (e.g., first I take in
   what is really there, and only then do I interpret what it means). Rather,
   we perceive by interpreting (some of) what is there as organized forms

                                     19
                            Gestalt Therapy



  and then acting on the basis of that interpretation, not on the basis of
  completely objective percepts, as the associationists had been assuming.
  The errors we then make in interpreting cannot be dismissed as just
  flaws in our human equipment; they are inherent to the perceptual
  and cognitive process, which is by nature and by necessity a process
  that is experimental, often rapid, and above all, practical. We scan and
  integrate and (hopefully) compare and evaluate, all in the service not
  of “perfect pictures” but practical bases for understanding and action
  in a dynamic, changing situation.
     Again, this is an implication of Gestalt psychology research that
  later had a direct and transformative impact on psychotherapy; after
  all, if there is no absolutely objective, finally correct interpretation
  of perceptions and phenomena and the higher level concepts that
  emerge from them, what happens to the authoritative interpretations
  of the classical analyst, which were not offered as interpretations at
  all in this sense but rather as fixed meanings that the patient had to
  accept uncritically if she or he were to get better? In the Gestalt psy-
  chotherapy model that would emerge from this basic research at mid-
  century, the old authority basis would shift to a dialogic paradigm, as
  we see in Chapter 3.

     In summary, the human brain is not (as the associationists had
assumed) a device for recording reality, at least in any camera-like way.
Rather, the human brain and central nervous system form an organ for
pattern detection (and pattern creation as well) because it is noticing and
creating patterns and whole forms that enable us to adapt to our environ-
ment and deal with the ever-changing, ever-new challenges around us. As
the creative species par excellence, we need a quick perceptual apparatus
that can respond to changing situations, not a stimulus-bound physical
response system based on concrete, material S–R bonds alone. Without
this essential human interpretive or evaluative step, our behavior cannot
be adjusted to our situation; our remarkable capacity for novel, creative
responses to new situations, which is our hallmark as humans, would
not be possible, and we would be reduced to the mechanistic response
to stimuli that is common in the instinctive, largely inflexible response

                                    20
                                   History



patterns of most other living species. We might never arrive at later stages
of reconsideration, checking back, correction, and further levels of inte-
gration and learning that we can also attain after the fact, yet are still based
on those interpreted perceptions that are the basis of our interactions with
our worlds.
     Viewed now, nearly a century later, it is easy to see why this basic,
research-based conclusion about the fundamental uncertainty of human
problem solving, perception, and practical understanding was the most
disturbing implication of the new Gestalt perspective, creating contro-
versy at times even among Gestaltists themselves (Gibson, 1950; see also
Wheeler, 1991, pp. 66ff). After all, if our perceptions of the world are
not just flawed at times but also by their nature always experimental and
subjective, never completely objective and stable, then what hope do we
have of the kind of absolutely reliable knowledge about our world and
ourselves that many were dreaming science would soon be able to pro-
vide? (The Gestalt answer to this conundrum of our human condition
is deeply dialogic and, in a real sense, intersubjective, in the sense that it
is a cocreation between and among individuals, as we will see later and
in Chapter 3.)
     Meanwhile, James’s question and suggested research direction still
needed to be addressed. If our perceptions are dependent on context and
to that degree are unstable, what is it that determines what we do and
do not pay attention to in our over-busy, stimulus-overloaded percep-
tual environments? What makes some things that seem to us to “hang
together” as a meaningful sequence or cause and effect or whole “stand
out” for selection in some other way? Are those meaningful wholes actu-
ally “out there in the world,” or are they purely constructions on our
part, subjective assumptions unmoored from the constraints of real-
ity (which is then what, if we cannot know it absolutely or finally)? To
understand Gestalt’s early investigation into questions of what enables
us to construct our situational understanding in one way rather than
another, we need to turn to the second generation of Gestalt psychology
work, in particular, the work of the most significant Gestalt psychologist
of them all, Kurt Lewin.

                                      21
                              Gestalt Therapy



         THE CONTRIBUTIONS OF KURT LEWIN:
           FROM PSYCH LAB TO “LIFESPACE”
The Gestalt psychologist Kurt Lewin (1890–1947) is recognized today as
the leading founder of social psychology as a discipline, group dynamics
as a field of study and practice, organizational psychology, and the meth-
odology known as action research, which is in wide use today in organi-
zational studies around the world as a tool for understanding the hidden
dynamics of large social systems or fields (Marrow, 1969; see also Wheeler,
1991, 2000). Lewin’s contribution and legacy to fields ranging from clini-
cal to coaching, group, and organizational settings was to take the basic
pioneering work of the first generation of Gestalt research and apply it to
more lifelike, real-world situations. Using the basic Gestalt picture of an
active, selective subject, coconstructing, interpreting, and making mean-
ing in the act of perception, Lewin then applied this fundamental model
to new research situations in which the human subjects, instead of being
in a static, values-free lab situation, were in more lifelike situations with
more real stakes and real consequences of their actions.
     This way of thinking about perception and behavior, integrating the
early Gestalt work with real, dynamic situations, is outlined in Lewin’s first
academic paper, “War Landscape” (1918), sketched out while he was still a
young graduate student on active duty on the German front during World
War I. His thinking unfolded at this early point, growing out of the situa-
tion and concerns he saw and felt around him: Imagine a traveler moving
through a valley in a war zone, Lewin wrote—like any perceiving individ-
ual, the traveler will note certain features of the environment, necessarily
ignoring or deleting others and integrating the ones he or she does note
into some coherent picture, for memory, comparison, orientation, mean-
ing making, and so forth (i.e., meaning making in the sense of assigning
some meaning to the perception, often in a predictive, “what’s-likely-next”
sense). As Gestalt research had shown over the decade before, the subject/
traveler’s behavior will then be based in some way on that interpreted
whole picture and not simply on “everything that’s there,” much less on
just the specific physical inputs of light and sound and so forth coming
from the concrete objects in the scene.

                                     22
                                   History



     This is basic Gestalt psychology as we have reviewed it here, although
applied to a much more complex and urgent “scene” than the early work
in a lab setting. Lewin’s next step closely followed this same line of analysis.
Each person crossing this scene, he reflected, will necessarily see a some-
what different whole picture: his or her own uniquely subjective, interpre-
tive synthesis of the complex elements in the environment—one of them
registering the farmhouse, another the church, another the color of the
barn or the state of the fields or something else entirely. We even know
quite a bit about particular physical characteristics of the objects and
images and patterns in the scene—contrast, boundary, brightness, conti-
guity, and so forth (the Gestalt perceptual laws outlined previously)—that
are the environmental contribution, we might say, to the whole gestalts
being synthesized in the minds of the various observers.
     But what about the subjective side of the construction of these whole
forms, or gestalts? What is it exactly that often makes one person’s inter-
pretive synthesis of “what’s there” so different from another person’s
perception and memory of the same scene? This is where Lewin had his
next, most fertile insight, one that would open up the next level of Gestalt
theory and research, leading in the decades ahead to the articulation of
Gestalt therapy. Imagine one of the people crossing this valley: a soldier or
scout (lost, fleeing, or maybe deserting), a local farmer, or even a lover on
the way to a rendezvous. What codetermines what each of them will see (in
the sense of selecting, integrating, and interpreting into usable, memorable
organized pictures that he or she can further integrate with other images
and learning)?
     Lewin’s answer was that in each case it is necessarily the need or con-
cern that is uppermost in the individual’s mind at the time that will tend
to carry the most weight in selecting and organizing the perceptions of
that person. The spire of the church may be a heartening symbol to one
person but a potential sniper post to another and completely missing in
the subsequent memory of another who was only interested, say, in find-
ing food. A haystack might be a resource to one, a menace to the other, a
refuge or an opportunity to yet another, and so on. In a real sense, each
of them is operating in a quite different world, not because there is no

                                      23
                              Gestalt Therapy



reality that constrains and informs our interpreted pictures of it but sim-
ply because—once again—we cannot take it all in and make all of it the
basis of our behavior. Our flexible and creative human perceptual equip-
ment is inherently predisposed to organize our relevant field of awareness
(Lewin, 1936), including a changing physical environment as well as a
social environment of other human beings, each of them actively inter-
preting our shared situation in relation to her or his own agenda. Our
behavior then is based on that unique creative synthesis of dynamic sub-
jective and objective factors. We are acting and reacting, in other words,
not to the real scene but in terms of the relevant, constructed, and evalu-
ated scene synthesized in our own minds. It is this interpreted scene we
respond to and behave in relation to, always with some implicit need or
goal that is organizing our response.
     This process of selecting, resolving, interpreting, and integrating these
most relevant features into a coherent, usable whole understanding as a
basis for behavior (which is, again, basic lab Gestalt, applied here to living
situations), Lewin (1936) simply called mapping. We enter a new situ-
ation, perceive the situation by Gestalt principles in relation to our felt
needs at the time, and then use that gestalt picture as a map for orienting
our behavior in relation to that situation, those interpreted perceptions,
and those needs (both aware and unaware). The relevant field we are map-
ping Lewin termed the lifespace, meaning the part of everything that is
psychologically relevant to our own concerns as we move proactively to
resolve a workable map in relation to those concerns, our awareness of our
own inner states and needs, and our current and larger aims.
     This naturalistic description of how our human process works (and
has to work) was what the Gestaltists were looking for from the begin-
ning: a new model based on an understanding of perception, cognition,
and behavior that would emerge from the research data, rather than being
imposed on the data ahead of time in the way of the older associationist
(and also of the then-new Freudian libido theory, which the Gestaltists
regarded as circular in that it first just asserted that all behavior was a
function of one or two basic drives and then interpreted the behavior
according to that assertion, without any independent research step; see

                                     24
                                 History



Wheeler, 2004). If many of Lewin’s principles strike us today as familiar,
even obvious, that of course is because along with the basic lab Gestalt
principles he was starting from, these general ideas about pattern seeking
and mental mapping and the crucial role of affect and emotion in cogni-
tion, behavior, and memory have permeated all of cognitive psychology,
cognitive behavior psychology, psychotherapy, and beyond, so that we
easily view our world today through Lewinian lenses (see Ullman, 2005).
     Before leaving Lewin, we note one more area in which he was far
ahead of his time: his move to treat values as part of the felt needs, aims,
and desires that organize an individual’s “map” for behaving in a given
situation (Marrow, 1969). By interpreting values as a kind of enduring
dynamic element in the individual’s felt needs, Lewin recast the subject as
a viable topic of research and theory in mainstream psychology, a move
that would pay off with a burst of research beginning in the 1960s. Before
then, the importance of the individual’s system of values was a prominent
new feature of Gestalt therapy building on these features of his work (see
Lewin, 1936).
     “The need organizes the field” (Marrow, 1969, p. 167) is how Lewin
summed up much of his own work up to this point, meaning simply that
the world one knows—the world one is trying to cope with and thrive in
as best as possible—is the world one constructs in relation to the most
urgent needs of the moment as they are felt and understood (again,
including one’s own needs for commitments and consistency of values,
however they are felt and understood). With this formulation, Lewin
related the world of interpreted perceptions, the world of inner experi-
ence, and the world of emotions and values, intentions and goals, all in
one conceptual dynamic. With this framework, it became imaginable at
least to apply Gestalt theory in a coherent way both to social systems such
as groups and organizations (as Lewin would spend the rest of his life
doing) and to the kinds of subjective personal issues and developmental
dynamics psychotherapy is most often dealing with (as Gestalt psychology
founders had actually thought about and suggested, without proposing
any methodology for such applications; e.g., see Koehler, 1947; Koffka,
1924; Wertheimer, 1945; see also Goldstein, 1940).

                                    25
                             Gestalt Therapy



     How would one reveal and understand complex dynamics such as
these, which after all, like all the dynamics Gestalt had theorized about
and researched, are not easily visible to the naked eye? Lewin’s answer—
at least at the level of groups and other social systems—was in the same
spirit as the whole first generation of Gestalt research he had come out
of: One could challenge the “subject” (individual or larger system) with
some task or problem and then look at the whole person’s (or whole sys-
tem’s) behavioral—and now emotional as well—response to see whether
hypotheses about hidden dynamics are confirmed or contradicted. This is
the action research model Lewin pioneered for the study of social systems,
in which no single person would have a final, authoritative perspective on
the dynamics of the system as a whole. It was only a short step to apply
the same approach to the complex and often hidden dynamics of an indi-
vidual or a family, as in a clinical setting.
     Lewin was not a clinician and did not take this step. He spent the last
decade of his life, the years of World War II and immediately after, pio-
neering those social applications touched on previously: group dynamics,
organizational studies, as well as this action research method for studying
dynamics by intervening, observing, and discussing with the subjects the
results of studies (Marrow, 1969). In the process he founded the Group
Dynamics Lab at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge,
Massachusetts, where his group would create the innovative “t-groups,”
out of which the sensitivity training and encounter groups of the 1960s
and 1970s would emerge. He also founded the National Training Labs,
for many decades the pioneering center in the world for applied group
dynamics and organizational consultant training (Marrow, 1969).
     Thus, it remained for an unlikely pair of psychoanalytic critics and
writers, both of them reinventing themselves in midcareer in the immedi-
ate postwar years, to see the potential for a radically new approach to psy-
chotherapy in the Gestalt psychology model as it had evolved in the hands
of Lewin and others of academic Gestalt’s second generation (e.g., Gold-
stein, 1939). In Chapter 3 we turn to the theory they articulated (Perls,
Hefferline, & Goodman, 1951) and the methodology that grew out of it,
but to understand better how the Gestalt therapy model arose as it did,
we complete the history and roots of the model by sketching out briefly

                                    26
                                   History



the climate in which this new theory and method would emerge, together
with the background of influences, deep concerns, and creative innova-
tions both men would bring to their remarkable project.


                  GOODMAN AND PERLS:
              THE BIRTH OF GESTALT THERAPY
The postwar years of the mid-20th century were an extremely fertile time
in the evolution of psychotherapy and its related fields. The war years had
left unimaginable suffering, desolation, and loss in their wake, but the
crisis and collapse of so many “isms” and absolute ideologies that had held
much of Europe and other cultures in sway across the first half of the cen-
tury also meant that rigid and absolute authority was now often viewed
with suspicion in the aftermath of so much societal upheaval in fields
ranging from politics to culture to religion and more. Greater faith in the
independent judgment and ethical core of the autonomous individual was
the new order of the day.
     It was in this climate that social theorist and cultural critic Paul Good-
man and renegade psychoanalyst Fritz Perls met and partnered on a wholly
new theory project for a new psychotherapy model (along with Laura
Perls, who took a training role essential to development of their ideas; see
Stoehr, 1994b). Their project would be nothing less than an entirely new
approach, based on Gestalt psychology and closely related sources, to
understanding human behavior, perception and meaning making, rela-
tionship and values, health and dysfunction—a radically new theory and
method for psychotherapy based on Gestalt-derived ideas. Their starting
point was a now-lost, unfinished monograph that Perls had brought with
him from South Africa, where he and his wife had spent over a decade
in wartime exile, practicing and developing their first book and consid-
ering ideas for the next. In this first work, Ego Hunger and Aggression:
A Critique of Freud’s Theory and Method (1947), coauthored with Laura
Perls but published under Fritz Perls’s name alone (Wysong & Rosenfeld,
1982), the Perlses had articulated their theory of oral aggression, one
that Fritz had tried and failed to present to Freud before the war (Stoehr,
1994b).

                                      27
                               Gestalt Therapy



     It is not clear in retrospect whether Perls realized at first the full poten-
tial of the material this new monograph was presenting, which would take
the two authors and their new model far beyond a critique of Freud’s
legacy into a wholly new understanding of human pathology and optimal
health and of the role and operating principles, at least, of therapy in sup-
porting movement from one to the other. Goodman saw immediately the
potential in Perls’s thinking for a radically new articulation of self theory
and human relations; his role in the project quickly progressed from edi-
tor to coauthor to lead author of the second theoretical volume, Novelty,
Excitement, and Growth, of the two-part series that would be released as
Gestalt Therapy: Excitement and Growth in the Human Personality (Good-
man, 1951; see also Stoehr, 1994b).
     Although there were important differences in the two authors’ sources,
backgrounds, interests, and agendas, they were joined in their open debt
to the profound legacy of Freud, while still sharing a deep concern that
the classical Freudian model leaned far too heavily on the idea of adjust-
ment to society at the expense of individual creativity, self-exploration
and self-expression, desire and passion, authentic relationship, and social
reform. In the postwar climate of consumerism, mass industrialization,
and rigid anticommunism, they saw the danger that psychotherapy in its
classical analytic form could become a tool for conformism and social
passivity (Stoehr, 1994b). Their vision, by contrast, was that by drawing on
the legacy of Gestalt psychology, they could combine the radical insights
of Freud (and especially the Freudian revisionist Wilhelm Reich, 1945)
with the more action-oriented psychology of Kurt Lewin to create a model
in which psychotherapy would reclaim its place as a primary agent for
human freedom, social progressivism, and a new capacity for deeper pas-
sion, satisfaction, and meaning in living. To see how they proposed this
would work, we turn to their new theory in Chapter 3.




                                       28
                                               3

                                      Theory




A     t the conceptual and methodological center of their radical new therapy
       model, Gestalt therapy, Paul Goodman and Fritz and Laura Perls placed
the integrative concept of contact (Perls, Hefferline, & Goodman, 1951). This
term captured and summarized the central findings of Gestalt psychology:
We make sense of and deal with our world not by passively receiving (and
adjusting to) some exact objective reality but by using an active process of
reaching out, selecting, interpreting, and organizing whole pictures of our
situations and then basing some behavior or some action on that inter-
preted picture. This most often happens fairly automatically in a single
integrated act of perception, interpretation, and action without reflective,
conscious awareness—or we may stop and be more aware of trying to “figure
out what’s going on,” strategize, evaluate, and make conscious choices. Either
way, the process has the same structure: We approach situations with some
need (or a number of needs), both in conscious awareness and without full


http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/14527-003
Gestalt Therapy, by G. Wheeler and L. Axelsson
Copyright © 2015 by the American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.


                                               29
                              Gestalt Therapy



awareness of our experience and needs. We then understand the situation
and take actions in relation to those perceptions and subjective needs.
     Each person does this in both unique and partly routine ways, depend-
ing on her or his history, culture, values, conditioning, and experiences and
also on his or her desires, needs, values, creative capacities, and perceptions
of the situation, short and longer term. Responses and behaviors are ideally
partly patterned and habitual and partly ad hoc, or creatively responsive to
the situation (in relation to the individual’s goals and needs at the time); too
much patterning and repetition in responding results in a rigid or unspon-
taneous gestalt formation, which is always the same no matter how much
the situation varies. Too much spontaneity (too little basic patterning or
context) means a chaotic experience and chaotic behavior. True creativity is
a “sweet spot” blending and integrating the two poles: conservation (of past
experience) and spontaneity (the new response to the unique situation).
     That’s how human behavior is dynamically organized, Goodman and
Perls argued—in more or less effective ways to cope with the situations in
which we find ourselves. In different areas and situations our experience
and behavior may be more or less freely responsive and creative or more
rigidly patterned and, in this sense, unfree. Here they agreed with Freud
(1933/1965) that neurosis is unfree repetition, a mere reaction rather than
a response in the full creative sense. This is contact (experience plus behav-
ior), whether creatively free or neurotically unfree. The therapy is then the
analysis of contact in this sense. But by analysis, Goodman and Perls pic-
tured something quite different from classical Freudian or psychodynami-
cally informed models. Their analysis was more dialogic and relational,
more action based and experimental, and more concerned with the client’s
constructive process of interpreting, valuing, goal setting, and meaning
making. The following are the broad areas in which the new Gestalt-based
perspective and model differed from models that were current at the time.


          THE ROLE OF THE PATIENT OR CLIENT
In place of the more passive Freudian patient, meekly “swallowing” (as
they saw it) or reactively defending against the authoritative interpreta-
tions of the analyst (only to have each defense analyzed until the patient

                                      30
                                   Theory



agreed to the imposed interpretation), Goodman and Perls had some-
thing much more mutually active in mind: Therapy should be a place
where the client could at last stop swallowing society’s or other people’s
values and rules and begin challenging them in an active quest based on
his or her desires, emotions, and value preferences; on experimentation
with new strategies; and on a deeper knowledge and expression of his or
her authentic creative self.


                 THE ROLE OF THE THERAPIST
This changes the position of the analyst/therapist from that of a detached
or neutral expert pronouncing judgment on the client’s behavior and
understanding, to a participant/observer, a fully engaged partner in the
therapeutic process. The therapist challenges the client’s behavior and
experience and understanding not from a position of expert correction
but rather in the service of restoring the client’s healthy process of con-
structing, revising, discarding, and recreating “wholes” of understanding
and behavior (because from a Gestalt perspective, behavior will always be
in response to one’s interpreted understanding of the situation at the time;
the two things cannot be separated).
     Thus, it is the client’s experience that is prioritized, not the thera-
pist’s authority. The therapist’s skills and expertise remain crucial, but that
expertise consists not in providing the right answers to the meaning of
the client’s experience but in facilitating a particular type of encounter in
which the client discovers and creates those meanings for him- or herself
in a collaborative process of contact, in the sense outlined earlier. The ther-
apist’s expertise then rests on her or his capacity for authenticity in contact
and relationship, not for the sake of the therapist’s self-expression but in
support of the client’s quest for greater understanding and deeper, more
flexible contact capacities. In the process, the therapist often urges the cli-
ent to slow down, relax unexamined and fear-based patterns of rigidity,
and notice features of his or her process, pointing out contradictions as
the therapist experiences them (between affect and content, for example,
or observations/events and interpretations/conclusions drawn from it by
the client) and offering challenges to the client’s understanding, especially

                                      31
                              Gestalt Therapy



in areas in which the client is reporting dissatisfaction, dysfunction, or
distress.
     Some of this may sound similar to cognitive behavior therapy models
(e.g., see Young, 1999), but Perls and Goodman recognized (as contempo-
rary cognitive behavior therapy writers often do as well) that verbal and
analytic accounts of our experience are far from the full picture: Our gestalts
of understanding—our interpretations of experience and the world—are
naturally subject to the same selective biases or out-of-awareness distor-
tions that support old, rigid, and out-of-awareness behavior patterns that
are the source of the problem in the first place. This is what the Gestalt
psychology model is all about.
     Specifically, with their agenda of greater personal freedom in a freer
society, Goodman and Perls shared the concern that these learned, often
rigid understandings may not be authentic and autonomous at all but
imposed on us from outside forces, whether through early conditioning
or by the pressure of social conformism. That is, they may be social intro-
jects, a kind of conformity to parental or societal messages and norms, an
idea that they viewed as the blind spot of the classic Freudian adjustment
model they hoped to get away from. Thus, they brought a whole series
of new conceptual tools to bear on challenging rigid received beliefs and
fears, all drawn from a more holistic, Gestalt-based understanding of how
we construct our experience.
     These new techniques and tools included first (a) a new understand-
ing and use of the therapeutic relationship, yielding a new sense of thera-
peutic dialogue; then (b) a deeper use of affect and emotion; (c) a new
level of attention to the body; and finally, (d) the use of experiment in
therapy. Each of these became a major theme and tool in supporting the
client to deconstruct those tightly integrated behaviors and understand-
ing, moving the therapeutic encounter beyond merely talking about an
issue (Perls, 1969) to directly experiencing it in the present moment and
situation, moving toward a new capacity for a more creative, open-ended,
and less rule-bound approach to living. A later parallel to this Gestalt psy-
chology idea of a tightly integrated “whole” of action, interpretation, emo-
tion, and belief is schema theory in cognitive behavior therapy (Young,

                                      32
                                   Theory



1999). In this sense a schema is essentially a gestalt of understanding and
emotion plus embodiment and behavior.


             THE THERAPEUTIC RELATIONSHIP
By shifting to greater equality and a participant/observer dynamic in
the therapeutic relationship (in place of detached expert and more pas-
sive patient), the new therapy opened the way to a different and much
freer use of the therapist’s experience in therapy—in sharp contrast to
the detached, neutral traditional Freudian analyst of the day. Following
Lewin, we can understand that any relationship at any given moment is a
situation in which both people make interpretations of the conditions as
they subjectively experience them. By making more of his or her experi-
ence transparent, the therapist makes the coconstructed relational situa-
tion much more available as material for the client to process with more
awareness. In this way the therapeutic relationship becomes a living lab for
the same issues the client is likely dealing with in other relationships and
other situations of life. This then enables the transfer of skills and insights
experienced in therapy to other less protected and thus more challenging
situations in “real life” (i.e., life outside the protection and special support
of the therapy situation).
     Using his or her experience in the therapeutic encounter is not a mat-
ter of “anything goes” for the therapist: The session is still in the service
of the client, and the therapist remains thoughtful about when and what
to share and what not to share. Therapist authenticity never means shar-
ing things that are not relevant to the client’s goals and issues; rather, it
most often means noticing when an issue or difficulty in the client’s life is
being enacted in the therapeutic relationship and then opening that up for
exploration (as opposed to interpreting it as being about some other rela-
tionship, most often with a parent, as would have been a standard analytic
practice of the times). To make use of the client–therapist relationship in
the therapy process, the therapist has to be fully aware of his or her own
experience and, when it supports the client’s growth of understanding and
contact capacity, share parts of that experience with the client.

                                      33
                               Gestalt Therapy



     For example, if a client were to take a position of always rejecting, inter-
rupting, or contradicting any perspective or challenge the therapist offers,
the Gestalt therapist would not respond, “I’m getting really annoyed by
all these contradictions” (which may well only replicate the response the
client often gets to this behavior in daily life), nor would he or she say (in
a caricature of the traditional interpretive analyst), “Now you’re treating
me as if I were your corrective, punitive mother—and at the same time
you’re identifying with her aggression, by constantly correcting me.” This
kind of analytic interpretation, Goodman and Perls felt, might have some
validity at times, yet stating it out loud would likely only reinforce the cli-
ent’s contact pattern of compliance (or reactivity) to authority rather than
build a capacity for more complex, thoughtful contact that would transfer
to other relationships and situations outside the therapy hour.
     Instead of interpreting, the therapist might say, “I’m feeling frustrated
now because I want to be here in a way that is potentially helpful, and if you
only tell me you disagree with what I say, I don’t learn much about what
you think and feel. It leaves me to figure out on my own by trial and error
what you mean and what might be helpful to you.” This kind of sharing can
readily become the basis for an experiment—for example, “What would it
be like if every time I offer some observation or perspective, you were to
tell me first what part of that makes sense to you and then what part you
disagree with? We could do this just as an experiment to see what feelings
and thoughts come up. Otherwise the moment goes by so fast that we don’t
get to find out more about each feeling that might be involved.” In this way
the therapist is being true to her or his experience but not just for its own
sake; rather, this kind of self-report places more information (the reaction
of the other person) at the service of the client, opening up new possibili-
ties rather than closing the door in the face of the client’s problematic con-
tact. (For further discussion of experiment as a concept and as a method,
see the section “Action and Experimentation as Therapeutic Tools” later in
this chapter.)
     The art and discipline here is to exemplify and model the practice
of reporting emotional self-experience and not make interpretive analy-
ses or impositions, both for the reasons outlined previously and because

                                       34
                                   Theory



the client is likely to be inexperienced in sensing, owning, and expressing
authentic present emotional experience (and in having it received with
interest and inquiry, not interpretation or other corrective counterinput).
This capacity for emotional self-contact is key to greater autonomy and
authenticity and more complex, satisfying relational contact, which are
among the chief aims of Gestalt therapy. If the therapist is concerned
about burdening the client with knowledge of the therapist’s experience,
the Gestalt solution is to bring attention to that topic—the present rela-
tionship at the present moment—in the live relational “lab” that is therapy.


        THE FOCUS ON EMOTIONAL EXPERIENCE
A second tool for unlocking and opening up the client’s contact process is
to slow down and simply focus longer and with greater intensity and sup-
port on the feelings that come up when not engaging in habitual behavior
or “contact style” (Wheeler, 1991). The immediate goal, after all, is to sup-
port the client in opening up areas that are too rigidly integrated into pre-
constructed whole sequences of thought, emotion, and behavior, blocking
open experimentation and new learning in that area of living. If the thera-
pist quickly moves to offer an explanation for everything that comes up,
it would only serve, Goodman and Perls felt, to leave the client’s habitual
contact patterns in place. The therapy could then quickly become only
a discussion about the issues, missing the opportunity to come to grips
with them directly with the “charge” of the real situation and relation-
ship in the present moment—all the emotions, assumptions, and unaware
behaviors that are being compressed (and lost for exploration) into the
habitual response pattern in the first place—hence the frequent Gestalt
therapy exhortation “Just stay with that feeling, breathe into it, and let’s see
together where it leads,” moving into the structure of the present moment
rather than away from it into what probably is a safer, more distanced dis-
cussion of a kind the client has likely already had, perhaps again and again.
     In this way the therapist opens up the dynamic roots of an unsatisfy-
ing behavior in the present situation, where it is actually being lived out
“here and now.” This is what it means to treat the therapeutic situation as

                                      35
                              Gestalt Therapy



an authentic relationship in its own right rather than as something just
transferred from other, earlier relationships. If, as in the earlier example,
the client has a basic contact habit or “move,” such as indiscriminately
contradicting and rejecting most or all input, at least in situations where
a perceived, felt power difference may be present, that gestalt pattern, that
whole of behavior and understanding, was constructed originally to manage
some perceived threat in the past. When the felt threat and the response
strategy have passed out of awareness, the whole original sequence of per-
ceived approach, apprehension or interpretation of danger, feelings of fear,
chronic defensive or distancing response of contradicting or rebuffing the
approach, and the lessening of the fear becomes an integrated behavioral
pattern, more or less automated and more or less extreme depending on the
present triggers and the present perceived conditions of safety or threat.
     What good will it likely do, Goodman and Perls asked, to interpret that,
offering the therapist’s guess about the client’s out-of-awareness experi-
ence, which would then only likely be experienced as one more instance
of a threatening approach, one more possible menace or imposition to
be managed? How much richer and more productive it can be in therapy,
they argued, to join the client in just “being with” that moment, letting the
feelings arise, and begin to open up that automated (and now buried or
invisible) sequence, letting the client first experience all the dynamic parts
that are going into that pattern and then making her or his own interpre-
tation about where it comes from and how it might be put back together
differently. As we will see later, the other available tools—body experience
and experiment—further support and deepen this in the context of the
relationship of therapeutic partnership, which is more equal and authen-
tic in these ways.
     The therapeutic situation and relationship could best be character-
ized, Goodman (1951) proposed, as a safe emergency, the basic Gestalt
therapy idea of restoring a dynamic, flexible balance between safe
habits and creative new moves (which by definition are often more exposed
and vulnerable, at least at first). The therapy aims to be safe, through the
attuned relationship based on nonjudgmental, nonauthoritarian, non-
corrective respect for the client’s experience and meaning making, and

                                     36
                                  Theory



also an emergency, as a result of the new, modulated amount of risk that
is still under relational conditions creating enough safety to support that
new experiment.


                THE FOCUS ON EMBODIMENT
In addition to slowing down to focus on out-of-awareness feelings,
Goodman and Perls also made rich use of the work of one of Freud’s most
creative, revisionist followers, the psychoanalyst Wilhelm Reich. Reich’s
insight was that past emotional and relational conflicts that are buried (or
integrated and habituated, in Gestalt psychology terms) are still carried in
the present by the client, not just in buried emotions but also in “frozen”
or habituated bodily tensions. Thus, attention to the body constitutes the
third major focus of Gestalt therapy, in the context of this new kind of
therapeutic relationship, supplementing the use of attention to feelings
and emotions in the process of slowing down and deconstructing the too
tightly structured patterns of behavior and understanding that the Gestalt
model holds as often lying behind the client’s current difficulties.
    One of the main techniques in using this tool is support for slowing
down, noticing, and pointing out body tensions or habits (especially ones
that contradict the client’s verbal sharing or self-awareness) and staying
with those states till a new possibility, a new tension, or new experiment
emerges. For example, the therapist might say, “You’re telling me some-
thing terribly sad (or angry or embarrassing, etc.), yet you have a big smile
(or a clenched fist or perhaps a frozen jaw; perhaps the client’s breathing
has stopped or the voice has become small, and so on). What would hap-
pen if we stop and you just stay with that smile (or fist or jaw or breath-
ing)?” Tears can be the first result of this kind of supported pause in an
automated contact sequence; the buried frustration and pain of carrying
the underlying issue and feelings so long and so alone come to the surface.
    This may then lead into the kind of dialogue or empty-chair work
Gestalt therapy is often known for, which entails the client shifting from
one chair or stance to another to give voice to the person or message
imagined as the source of that particular message. Thus, the client can

                                     37
                              Gestalt Therapy



experience an unintegrated point of view within him- or herself directly
and often resolve it. For example, the therapist might propose, “What
would your smile (or fist or breath-holding) be saying to us, if it had its
own voice?” The client might respond, “My smile says, ‘I can take this, I
can’t let this get me down’ or ‘I mustn’t let you see how sad I’m really
feeling . . . don’t let the world really see you.’ ” The habituated or stuck
contact pattern begins to open to the possibility of a new, more open-
ended response pattern to similar situations and feelings.


                AWARENESS, CONSCIOUSNESS,
                  AND THE UNCONSCIOUS
In Gestalt therapy, the comprehensive term awareness refers, as in Gestalt
psychology, to all those selected features of our situation (internal as well
as external) that we register, integrate, and respond to in some way, with
and/or without consciousness. These selected features include everything
we have attended to in the earlier discussion—thoughts, emotions, and
body states, as well as aspects of our physical and social or relational situ-
ation, both in and out of consciousness—interpreted and integrated in
relation to our background of memories, beliefs, assumptions, needs, and
perceptions of what we need to manage now and in the future. This is the
integrated background out of which our behavior emerges at any present
moment; it is how our organizing process works, enabling us to deal with
ever-changing situations in relation to our ongoing and ever-changing
needs. Thus, the term awareness includes both conscious and unconscious
domains; the Gestalt model does not view these two domains as sharply or
rigidly distinct, as in the classical Freudian model. To be sure, most of our
behavior is the integrated result of processes that are outside our aware-
ness, but the right balance of attentional focus and fuller awareness plus
relational support can bring the out-of-awareness dynamics back into the
present contact, where they can then be open to new and different patterns
of integration.
     Awareness may often be divided loosely into conscious awareness,
body awareness, emotional awareness, and so forth, and then extended to

                                     38
                                   Theory



include awareness of the other person and of the conditions of the field or
situation (to which we are always responding, with or without conscious
awareness). Awareness is a basic tool in Gestalt that is used with each of
these techniques and interventions by calling attention and focus (sup-
ported by the self-support of more open breathing plus the other support
of the therapist’s attuned presence) to feeling states, the body, or the pres-
ent dialogic relational situation. Thus, in Gestalt the therapist frequently
asks questions such as, “What’s it like for you now when . . . ?” or “What
comes up for you when . . . ?” or “What do you feel when I point that out?”
All of these are questions about experience in the present moment and
situation (again, not with the aim of changing or correcting that experi-
ence but to open up the dynamics of the present contact, with an aim of
opening new possibilities for patterns of integration and flexibility).
     The present relationship and dialogue can be called into awareness, for
example, by asking, “What’s it like for you right now when I tell you I’m
experiencing you in this (or that) way?” or “What’s it like to share that feel-
ing with me now and have me see you in this way?” or even, “What’s it like
for you here and now, as we sit here together? How safe does it feel here? Do
you feel like I’m getting you in a way you can feel? What’s that like? When
do you feel less safe—or too exposed—here with me now?” In this way the
relationship becomes a lab for exploration and experimentation in all the
ways discussed earlier, using focused awareness as the main technique.


              ACTION AND EXPERIMENTATION
                 AS THERAPEUTIC TOOLS
We have already seen how the focus on awareness in Gestalt naturally
passes into some imagined or emergent experiment. This is in sharp con-
trast to the classical psychodynamic practice of the day, when the analytic
interpretation was seen as designed to block enactment (which by defini-
tion would just be a neurotic repetition of a defense in the face of pres-
sure or conflict). Experiment, by contrast, is understood in the sense of
Lewin’s action research discussed in Chapter 2. That is, the purpose of an
experiment is not so much to learn or practice some new skill, much less

                                      39
                                Gestalt Therapy



to “fix” anything (though all those things may also happen in the process
of experimenting); rather, the aim is to bring to the surface underlying
dynamics, which are out of awareness and out of sight of both client and
therapist (though the therapist may have some good hypotheses of what
the underlying issues are). In other words, the goal is always learning—
slowing down and deepening experience in the service of new under-
standing and new possibilities for more flexible and effective response.
     Experiments in therapy may be formal and planned or informal and
spontaneous; Goodman and Perls gave us examples of both kinds. Either
way, they center on the present situation, with present emotions and pres-
ent felt needs and goals, and always with the aim of a deeper understand-
ing of how we are constructing our contact process and where that might
become open to new creative adaptation.
     A more formal experiment is the classic Gestalt two-chair work (a vari-
ation of the classic Gestalt empty-chair work described earlier), in which
the client, faced with a dilemma, conflict, or choice, outlines some polar
positions or conflicting voices about the situation and then actually sits
in each chair, embodying just that particular voice and point of view. An
example is the familiar situation of conflicting desires or a desire in conflict
with a cautionary voice, correcting or warning about safety and exposure
to risk. On the one hand, for example, the client may want to tell her or his
boss (or parent or spouse or other important person) where and why she
or he needs more appreciation, more money, or more freedom to develop a
project, to drop a too-burdensome, unfair role or responsibility, or to have
better treatment in some other way; on the other hand, a paralyzing cloud
of apprehension and anxiety may lead to thinking, “Don’t do it. Don’t risk
it. Don’t provoke the negative consequences that will follow,” more loudly
and sternly the closer the client comes to taking the prohibited step. This is
a familiar kind of issue in therapy: a desire (a self-assertion, a creative idea, an
unexpressed resentment) in conflict with a set of fears (e.g., people will not
like you, you will be punished, you will lose the marginal acceptance you have
now—the kinds of feelings that can lead to even harder-to-contact depths of
guilt, shame, and doubt about self-worth).
     The client can give fuller voice to each of these positions in turn—the
desire, the warning voice, the feelings and longings and fears behind each

                                        40
                                   Theory



of them—and there can be dialogue back and forth between the positions,
all still in the voice of the client, who may move back and forth between
the chairs. The client may often be able to identify the sources of the voices
(e.g., “That’s my grandmother’s voice, most of all, telling me I can do it,
that I’m special and wonderful and can have all those things” or “That
stern voice is my father, always telling me not to stick my neck out, not to
take a risk”). By spending more time within the voices, the client might
also be surprised to discover, for example, that the father’s voice is more
afraid than judging, more protective than punitive.
     The same kind of experimental enactment may happen more organi-
cally and dialogically, using the “relational lab” of the therapy situation
more directly. In the earlier example, the client was asked what it might be
like if before each critical, dismissing, or distancing response (to whatever
the therapist offered), he or she first agreed to offer some positive response
to some part of what the therapist said that he or she could agree with.
What would happen to the distance between the client and the therapist?
What would it be like for the client? Would it be greater or less? Either way,
would it be a good thing or a “bad” thing (in the sense of being less safe
and more problematic) or some more complex mixture in between? Using
this more naturalistic experiment of enacting the repeating contact habit
in the real therapeutic relationship, client and therapist alike get to know
much more about what this contact style (which may be causing problems
in the client’s life and relationships) is actually serving. By doing the oppo-
site of some too-typical behavior pattern or response, the feelings that the
habitual pattern was containing and mitigating are clearer.
     An alternative, when this kind of direct deconstruction is not work-
ing, is to propose the parallel experiment of simply doing the behav-
ior more—in this case, for example, intentionally taking pains to always
contradict or correct each thing the therapist says. This can “loosen up”
out-of-touch feelings and thoughts as the exaggerated behavior becomes
freeing or burdensome or perhaps comic, embarrassing, or even sad, as
the loneliness of it is contacted more deeply. This is analogously like trying
to relax a habitually tense muscle: Because the underlying emotional tension
has likely become habituated, it can be difficult to find the “off button” for
the muscle constriction, which has long since become automated and lost to

                                      41
                            Gestalt Therapy



awareness. What can be done is to tighten it more, enabling us to find or
become aware of that muscular–nervous connection and allowing us to
experiment more easily with relaxing it.
     In Gestalt therapy work, this kind of move has become known as a
paradoxical approach to change: Perform the targeted sequence or move-
ment more, not less, and many of the same feelings, beliefs, and memories
that are tied up in that habituated pattern will often come into awareness
and be available for change. Here we see the influence of Reich’s work
on character armor, the holding of old neurotic conflicts as patterns of
embodied tension that can be loosened directly to open up hidden feel-
ings (Reich, 1945, mentioned earlier as one of Goodman and Perls’s chief
neo-Freudian influences). This kind of therapeutic maneuver of emphasis
and exaggeration has also been termed the paradoxical theory of change
(Beisser, 1970) and is often referenced that way in Gestalt discussions
(perhaps somewhat confusingly, because the move is not a theory per se,
so much as a technique for supporting attention in the service of basic
Gestalt exploration and deconstruction of all those kinds of tightly inte-
grated sequences of perception, interpretation, and behavior we discuss
here). We return to the topic of a fuller Gestalt theory of change in the
discussion of contemporary Gestalt therapy practice later in the chapter.
     As experiments and explorations such as these open up new possibili-
ties, the client may also find that an old underlying and self-organizing
dynamic of right and wrong, approval and shame, surfaces and begins to
soften. As this develops, the therapist continues to make use of relational
connectedness, emotional resonance, attention to embodiment, new con-
nections, and meaning making, all in the context of a therapeutic relation-
ship dedicated to the client’s goals, values, and expanding contact range.
(We say more about the particular Gestalt approach to the experience and
dynamics of shame later in the chapter.)
     Here the basic Lewinian insight about perception as problem solv-
ing opens up the larger idea that experiment in Gestalt is not just a tech-
nique or method but an attitude or an approach to life at a larger level.
This stance underlies and transcends the therapy setting, amounting to
a kind of living philosophy of life as an ongoing process of experiment,
learning, and ever-growing capacity for ever-more complex creative

                                    42
                                  Theory



contact and relationship. Everything we experience, everything we do,
can be looked at as experiment, part of a lifelong series of learning exer-
cises that build on, challenge, confirm, deepen, and at times transform
our integrated “ground” of past experiences and our evolving capac-
ity for complex experience. Our understanding and our perceptions are
always interpretive, never final; our growth in contact capacities—for
deeper meanings, more complex contacting, and greater effectiveness
and satisfaction—can be lifelong. The shift to an experimental stance on
living and learning is support for these transformational processes, both
in therapy and all through life.


                   THE GOALS OF THERAPY
                  AND THE IDEAL OF HEALTH
One of Goodman and Perls’s shared concerns was the idea that Freudian
analysis placed far too heavy an emphasis on a conservative goal of adjust-
ment, which they saw as inevitably leading to social conformism, the dull-
ing of passion and creativity, and passivity in political and community life.
In its place they held up a different goal: creative adjustment, which they
took as synonymous with healthy growth. In the Gestalt therapy model
our basic human nature is lifelong growth, which can be defined as the
capacity to integrate ever-increasing complexity of response and mean-
ing making in relationship with our world. We have the capacity to meet
evermore complex challenges creatively and sustainably, with new expe-
riences and new forms that remain rooted in a web of connection and
communication.
     When asked for a definition of mental health, Freud famously answered
tersely, “Love and work.” A fuller Gestalt answer might be “capacity for
love, work, and play”; the capacity to allow for the free play of experiment
is central to a Gestalt psychology understanding of creativity (Wheeler,
1989, 2003). Because the model places creativity of response at the center
of the goals of therapy, it would not necessarily include a single “healthy”
image; healthy individuals in Gestalt differ widely from one another. What
they have in common is the capacity for ongoing growth in contact capac-
ity and relationship.

                                     43
                              Gestalt Therapy



     Rather than describing an end point, Gestalt emphasizes the living
process we need and use to continue our growth through life. At the same
time, we know that each person’s growth and development will likely be
uneven across different life situations and challenges—this is true for our-
selves as well as for our clients. In one area our clients (or we ourselves)
have an open creative process that meets new challenges with flexible
responses based on an integrated history of previous learning, resources,
and past creative responses; but in the same person in another area we may
also find inhibition, rigid habituation, and a low level of resources (or use
of available resources), both internal (self-supports, such as skills base and
past experience) and external (“other” supports, the capacity to draw on
available support from others). These are the issues and topics our clients
(or we ourselves) bring into therapy in the face of different challenges at
different times of life. Gestalt therapy, as Goodman and Perls outlined it,
moves to meet these challenges with the tools and concepts outlined here,
always supporting and restoring a natural arc of contact based on greater
awareness, greater response repertoire, and ongoing learning and growth
where these were undeveloped or interrupted.


                  PRESENT-CENTERED WORK
                  AND THE ROLE OF HISTORY
Lewin emphasized that a problem or an issue that occurs in the present
must be the result of dynamic forces operating in the present. Phrased this
way, the point seems self-evident: No matter the historical roots of an issue
or problem, that original conflict or challenge in past development must be
still present and active, at least potentially, blocking or freezing flexibility
of response whenever that challenge presents itself again. Goodman and
Perls, with their deep (if critical) appreciation of Freud, did not reject or
neglect the importance of history and development. Rather, the authors
felt that if the therapist takes history and childhood as the entry points
into the issue, the likely outcome will be just discussion about the issues—
which is potentially endless—with little opportunity to experience, relax,
open up, and thus deconstruct the stuck and problematic response habit,
which would otherwise have led to a new synthesis and a deeper, more

                                      44
                                  Theory



flexible contact. The Freudian patient is one who risks “understanding
everything and changing nothing,” Goodman is reported to have quipped
(E. Nevis, personal communication, July 18, 1976). By starting with fuller
presence and contact—first by the therapist her- or himself, and then
through the tools and techniques outlined earlier for enriching self-
awareness, emotional presence, embodied awareness, and experimental
“play”—the therapist aims to support an experience in which the client
may try out a new behavior, potentially leading to new meaning-making
and newly integrated understanding.


              RESISTANCE AND THE DEFENSES
Contact, in this Gestalt sense of the ongoing flow of new experience being
integrated into (and challenging or changing) our accumulating learning,
can then be viewed across time as a natural, lifelong process arc of accu-
mulating growth as well as the capacity for further growth. What happens
when this natural process arc becomes interrupted, as in all the cases of
outdated, stuck, or frozen gestalt formation such as we have been dis-
cussing here? What are those mechanisms of interruption, and how does
knowing more about them help the therapist deal with specific instances
of problems and developmental blocks in clients’ lives and material? With
this articulation of a new vision for psychotherapy in place, Goodman and
Perls then outlined a clinical map of prototypical ways in which this natu-
ral human arc of contact and growth may typically become interrupted
and chronically stuck.
     Where the older psychoanalytic model had spoken of defenses (which
were conceived of as solutions to overwhelming instinct pressures; A.
Freud, 1937; S. Freud, 1933/1965), here the focus is on challenges past and
present in dealing with our relational environment, including our inner
world of thoughts and feelings, impulses and needs, as well as our outer
world of situations and other people. Given the conditions and our resources
and capacities at the time, each of us solved those challenges with the most
creative solutions we could assemble and integrate. Where those condi-
tions were too daunting, our needs too urgent, and our capacities and
resources not yet developed enough for a more flexible solution, each of us

                                    45
                             Gestalt Therapy



came up with more rigid, less open-ended solutions that may still be with
us today in the form of all those rigid, nonevolving contact habits and
moves that may get in our way and block new development—the kinds of
issues and response patterns we as therapists see in our clients in therapy
(and, of course, in ourselves at particular times and in particular areas of
challenge).
     Goodman and Perls identified five typical or directional moves each
of us may habitually make, often old, out-of-date solutions to problems
we could be addressing in new ways today, if only we could be supported
in taking the old habit apart and tolerating the uncertainty of not know-
ing how to respond till a newer, more functional and flexible pattern or
sequence can be created, practiced, and integrated.


                               Confluence
Normally, as they saw it, we experience a dynamic sense of a self-boundary,
which both joins and distinguishes us with and from others and from our
physical environment. Confluence is the lessening or loss of this “bound-
ary of difference.” As such, enforced confluence (i.e., where differentia-
tion is not allowed) is at the root of maladaptive learning and contact
patterns in childhood development (a particular concern of Perls’s; Perls,
1947, 1969) and also at the root of social conformism and oppressive
societal rules and restrictions (a central concern of Goodman’s; Stoehr,
1994a).


                               Introjection
When confluence is chronic or extreme, we are forced to learn by intro-
jection, which is the taking in or “swallowing” of ideas and positions of
others without any critical stage of “chewing”—that is, reflecting, tak-
ing the input apart and breaking it down, trying out which parts fit and
which parts are not authentic for us individually and socially, and then
integrating those parts that are nourishing or useful and discarding or
revising the rest. Clearly, both these primary contact interruptions grow
out of Goodman and Perls’s concern (and the concern of the times, as

                                    46
                                   Theory



we discussed at the end of Chapter 2) that authentic individual judg-
ment and choice may easily get lost in modern mass industrial society, to
the detriment of both individual health and healthy societal functioning
(again, a central focus of Goodman’s life and work; see Stoehr, 1994b;
here and in the rest of the discussion of contact interruptions, see Perls,
Hefferline, & Goodman, 1951).


                                 Projection
Projection, closely following the Freudian concept of this same term, is
the act of disowning some impulse or thought or part of the self that
is not acceptable or comfortable for us to own up to (A. Freud, 1937).
Thus, if sexual desire, say, or anger or assertiveness (often judged nega-
tively in women in our society, and even more so in in those times), or
tenderness or vulnerability (likewise often more problematic for men in
their socialization, then and now), or any other quality or behavior is held
as inadmissible or shameful, the person may seek to lessen that tension
by desensitizing it (as, say, with particular sexual desires or just sexual
impulses in general), blanking out awareness of it (this would be James’s,
1890/2007, selective inattention, discussed in Chapter 2 but raised here to
a dysfunctional extreme), and then compensating by imagining it or an
exaggerated attention to it in others.
     Like Freudian and other writers (Allport, 1954), Goodman and Perls
saw this interruption or resistance to contact as the underlying mecha-
nism behind societal projection. If the society has puritanical values about
sex, for example (as the society of their times certainly did, especially by
today’s standards), then rather than seeing oneself as bad in this way,
people might see others as embodying this dangerous or immoral trait:
women, say, or men (depending on who is doing the projecting), or bohe-
mians, leftists, sexual or other minorities, foreigners, and so on. As with all
resistances, this projection can be traced to harsh childrearing plus aver-
sive and punitive social norms; at the social level the only answer would lie
in progressive social reform and education, but in individual cases therapy
could and should support the reowning of everything human, as Goodman
put it (Stoehr, 1994a).

                                      47
                               Gestalt Therapy



                                Retroflection
Retroflection, like all the resistances, is the interruption of a normal, organic
contact process (i.e., the unfolding of a healthy desire, only blocked or
distorted), in this case by turning the desire back toward the self. Psycho-
analysis had long seen depression as involving a holding in of aggression,
turning punishment toward the self (S. Freud, 2005). Goodman and Perls
expanded on this, seeing other activities, such as self-stimulation and self-
soothing, as likewise interruptions of a natural expressive reach outward.


                                   Egotism
With each of these archetypal contact resistances, the interruption is
conceived in terms of a physical state or motion; thus, retroflection is a
turning inward, projecting is an expulsion outward, introjection is a sus-
pension of normal resistance and destructuring (Perls, 1947) at the self-
boundary, whereas confluence is a passive collapse of the self-boundary
entirely, at least for that issue and situation. Egotism is then a rigidification
of the boundary, an inability to let go organically in what was termed final
contact (Goodman, 1951), holding back from the final release of arrival in
a journey of contact, the final thoughtless melding of the artist with her or
his materials in the act of creating, a healthy dissolution of separateness in
a kind of creative union or flow.
     This is one of the places where the theoretical differences between the
two authors—which were partly suspended for the brief period of their
collaboration on this seminal project—still persist in the emphasis and
urgency of their central concerns. Goodman, with his abiding concerns
about the loss of healthy social connections (see Stoehr, 1994a), intro-
duced this idea of a healthy loss of the self-boundary (and the contact
interruption of fearing and resisting that loss, in full contact), which was
not among Perls’s much longer list of possible contact interruptions listed
in his earlier book on oral aggression and the importance of breaking with
infantile dependency in the move toward mature development (Perls,
1947). Maturity, wrote Perls (1969), is the move from (early) dependence
to mature independence, a move that he saw as threatened by confluence

                                       48
                                     Theory



and all its accompanying ills. Perls’s metaphor of reference was always
eating and digestion, which fit with his revision to Freud’s theory and
method in exploring oral aggression as a necessary and healthy drive, to
break this dependency (Perls, 1947).
     Goodman, for his part, most often used a sexual metaphor to illus-
trate his concepts. Thus “full or final contact” (Goodman, 1951, pp. 416ff)
is more like orgasm than digestion, more a melting of the self into the
other (or the artist into her or his work) than an aggressive “chewing”
out of a concern about being dominated or invaded. We might say that
Perls, like Freud, saw the relationship as something to be risked only in the
context of energized self-expression (Perls, 1947; see also Wheeler, 2000),
whereas Goodman saw the self as fulfilled in relationship, with the greater
risk being the missed opportunity for nourishment and reenergizing if
contact is constantly interrupted at the end by the resistance of egotism.
     In this way Perls kept one foot always firmly planted in a Freudian regis-
ter, where the crisis of development centers on the oedipal conflict, in which
the growing male child breaks the dependency on the mother, internalizing
the aggression of the threatening father (S. Freud, 1933/1965). Gestalt ther-
apy, however, is squarely planted in a relational register, where the ongoing
challenge of life for the subjective self is to take up a fulfilling, sustainable
relationship with the environment (i.e., the social environment). As Lewin
observed, the human field is a world of other human beings:

      The American cultural ideal of the self-made man, of everyone stand-
      ing on his own feet, is as tragic a picture as the initiative-destroying
      dependence on a benevolent despot. We all need each other. This
      type of interdependence is the greatest challenge to the maturity of
      individual and group functioning. (Marrow, 1969, p. 201)

Thus, the subsequent development of Gestalt therapy over the coming
half century (which would become the new age of relational psychology;
Wheeler, 2011) owed more to Paul Goodman’s (and Laura Perls’s) legacy
and concerns than to those of Fritz Perls, while still drawing and building
on Fritz Perls’s original fertile insight that in Gestalt psychology theory lay
the potential for a radically new approach to psychotherapy based on the

                                        49
                               Gestalt Therapy



dynamism and authenticity of the individual’s meaning making, relatively
freed from the weight of old cultural assumptions and old therapeutic
biases about adjustment and conformity. Without the original impetus
of Perls’s initiative and iconoclastic thinking, Goodman might never have
considered the idea of self-development in relation to Gestalt psychology.
Had Laura Perls not studied with Wertheimer and Gelb, Fritz Perls might
never have intuited the fertile connections between his interests and the
potential of Gestalt theory.
    Continuing our story, it is to those next developments in Gestalt the-
ory, based on and extending the methodology outlined by the founders,
that we now turn.


    THE ONGOING EVOLUTION OF THE GESTALT
   THERAPY MODEL AFTER GOODMAN AND PERLS
If Perls et al.’s presentation in Gestalt Therapy: Excitement and growth in
the human personality in 1951 was revolutionary in its vision, it was also
fairly sketchy when it came to method; it was short on tools and long on
theory (including theoretical reflections on life, society, creativity, the arts,
and what Goodman would term anthropology, by which he meant roughly
the study of human nature and human behavior at a generalized, species-
wide level). Nor did it directly address the issue of therapist training, other
than by assuming the essential condition that therapists in training must
have a deep experience of the process themselves as clients before work-
ing with others (a training requirement which is being dropped or min-
imized, disturbingly, by some schools of therapy today). By 1960 Fritz
Perls had left New York for the West Coast, where he would spend the
last decade of his life, soon leaving clinical practice altogether in favor of
the public demonstration and workshop sessions at the Esalen Institute
in California and elsewhere, for which both he and Gestalt therapy first
became widely known (American Psychological Association, 2012; Perls,
1969). Paul Goodman also moved on from clinical work to a wider public
role in the 1960s as a major writer and public spokesperson for progres-
sive causes (Goodman, 1962; see also Stoehr, 1994a). Thus, it was up to
Goodman’s and Perls’s associates and students to continue evolving the

                                       50
                                   Theory



model in areas left open or undefined by the founders, or to deal with new
issues and applications that arose in response to new research and new
social challenges and new insights and opportunities in psychotherapy as
a whole and psychology as a wider field.


         THE WORK OF THE NEW YORK SCHOOL
               OF GESTALT THERAPY
After the publication of Gestalt Therapy, Excitement and Growth in the
Human Personality in 1951 (F. Perls et al.), the original study group out of
which the model had emerged soon gave rise to the New York Institute for
Gestalt Therapy, long under the leadership of Laura Perls until shortly before
her death in 1990. Laura Perls and Isadore From (Wysong & Rosenfeld,
1982), together with other senior associates, trained two generations of
Gestalt therapists from across North America, Europe, and beyond, many
of whom went on to write, teach, and found institutes of their own. Laura
Perls wrote little over her long career (L. Perls, 1992), and From declined
to write altogether; thus, their influence on the field was exerted mainly
through their many students, some of whose work we discuss later.
     Laura Perls was known for her focus on embodiment and move-
ment and on the development of embodied self-supports (e.g., breathing,
“grounding” in the sense of stance), whereas From placed great empha-
sis on adhering closely to the founding text written in 1951, with a close
focus on the typology of the resistances outlined earlier; in this sense From
interpreted Gestalt as a “therapy of the ego” (his phrase; I. From, personal
communication, October 11, 1992), referencing Goodman’s definition
of the ego function as the choosing and identifying function of the self
(Perls et al., 1951, p. 429ff). Thus, it was left to the next generation to
continue evolving the articulation of the basic relational process model
of Gestalt therapy (Feder & Ronall, 1980) derived from Lewin’s work in
extending Gestalt psychology into a relational field model and also from
the basic terms and emphases of Goodman’s relational premises and
concerns (Goodman, 1951; Stoehr, 1994a; see also his extensive body of
work as a poet: Goodman, 1951), much of it on these same relational
themes. Important and representative later writers of the New York school

                                     51
                             Gestalt Therapy



include Lichtenberg (1990) on the application of Gestalt to social ques-
tions of prejudice and political oppression; Feder and Ronall (1980) on
group work; Frank (2001) on embodiment and relational development in
Gestalt perspective; and Bloom (2009) on relational, aesthetic, and ethical
considerations in clinical Gestalt perspective, to name just a few.


       THE WORK OF THE GESTALT INSTITUTE OF
       CLEVELAND: THE CONTACT CYCLE MODEL
For the next steps in the evolution of the Gestalt model we turn to the
work of the teachers and writers of the Gestalt Institute of Cleveland (GIC),
who were trained directly by Fritz and Laura Perls, Paul Goodman, and
others of the founding New York group. Like Goodman, a number of the
founders of the GIC were educators and activists as well as clinicians, with
a core group coming out of social and organizational psychology at the
Case Western Institute in Cleveland. Several were also faculty members of
National Training Labs, which had been founded by Lewin in the late 1940s
to study group dynamics (E. Nevis, personal communication, July 18, 1976;
see also Polster & Polster, 1974, 1999). Thus, from the beginning, the found-
ing GIC group carried the influence of Lewin’s Gestalt-based work with
groups and organizations, as well as the clinical model and methodology
laid out by Goodman and Perls (Perls et al., 1951; Wheeler, 1991).
     From the beginning, the teachers at GIC struggled with two related
training issues. First was how to make a Gestalt teaching curriculum that
would reach and be of introductory value to both clinical and nonclinical
audiences (including ever-growing numbers of students coming out of
the nascent movements of human potential and personal growth, who
might be from any walk of life and were studying Gestalt not necessarily
for professional reasons but in search of a more vivid aliveness, greater
satisfaction, and intensity of experience amid the routinization of mod-
ern life). Second was how to apply the concepts of Gestalt therapy to
larger social units than just the therapist–client dyad: couples, families,
groups, organizations, and society. All of these students and needs would
be well-served, these teachers felt, by a summary Gestalt model of how the
human system of experience and behavior works that could be taught to

                                     52
                                   Theory



and experienced by groups at different levels with different kinds of set-
tings and goals. Such a model should be hands-on and portable yet not
reductive and without losing the transformative enlivening spark of being
desire-based and also experience-near that was key to the whole Gestalt
therapy enterprise.
     Their answer to both these needs lay in the creation of what has
become known and widely used as the cycle of experience or contact cycle
model, a schematic that could unfold richly into dimensions and impli-
cations for therapeutic, dyadic, organizational, or even culture-wide
issues and skills. In essence, the model followed closely Perls and Good-
man’s outline of a contact sequence or stages of contact arc: pre- or fore-
contact, contacting and full or final contact, followed by post-contact
(Goodman, 1951, p. 403). But the cycle model offered a much more
detailed map of how therapy might be approached on the basis of this
sequence and offered a key to relating the typology of resistances to contact
to the particular stages of contact where they would arise, together with
typical exercises and experiments for each resistance and each stage of the
cycle (Polster & Polster, 1974). In addition, the cycle model served to orga-
nize a curriculum and method for training therapists and process facilita-
tors as well as others. From the beginning, Gestalt has never made a rigid
distinction—at least for initial training—between personal growth and
development (the expansion and increasing complexity of contact capaci-
ties) and basic preparation or pretraining, at least for counseling and ther-
apy. Here, of course, Gestalt is not different from the other “depth” methods;
capacity and skills as a counselor or therapist have to rest on an extensive
knowledge of one’s issues, blind spots, and “growth edges,” or in Gestalt
terms, contact capacities and contact restrictions. By now the contact cycle
has been presented in countless published works over the past half century,
often with slight differences of organization or purpose from one presen-
tation to another. Figure 3.1 shows one way of representing the cycle, as a
self-contained circle (it has also often been an ongoing wave).
     What are the uses and limitations of this cycle model, viewed now after
some 50 years of varied use in a wide range of applications? We know that
the map is not the territory (Korzybski, 1994), an idea that follows and
restates Lewin’s fertile work on perception, behavior, and field mapping of

                                     53
                                 Gestalt Therapy



                                               Sensation
                 Withdrawal




                                                           Figure formation
              Contact




                                                    Mobilization
                        Action

                                    Figure 3.1

The cycle of experience model. From Body Process: A Gestalt Approach to Working With
the Body in Psychotherapy (p. 91), by J. I. Kepner, 1987, Dalton, OH: Gardner Press.
Copyright 1987 by Gardner Press. Adapted with permission.


the previous decade. Thus, the question is not whether the cycle model is a
complete or final description of the contact process as Gestalt describes it;
rather, the issue involves James’s pragmatic question: Does this particular
model (whether Gestalt therapy as a whole, or the cycle model specifically)
capture something essential and render it useful to us in a way that can be
usefully applied?
     This pragmatic truth question becomes all the more relevant in sche-
matic diagrams such as the cycle model; with schematics it is even more
important to consider what is left out as well as what is captured usefully.
The contact cycle as presented here (and as currently in wide use around
the world in settings ranging from clinical to organizational) offers some
clear strengths and user-friendly features: It is simple, teacher- and student-
accessible, and lends itself easily to application at different levels of
system—that is, individuals, couples and families, groups and organiza-
tions, and even cross-cultural study. Anglo-American culture, for example,
is known, at least stereotypically, for moving quickly to the action stage of
the cycle, with less attention spent, compared with some other cultures,
in earlier, less action-oriented parts of the contact arc. Modern consum-
erist society has frequently been criticized as exaggerating the early sen-
sation or desire phases of the cycle, while neglecting full awareness, full
contact, and withdrawal, integration, and learning. When dealing with

                                          54
                                   Theory



today’s multicultural organizations and teams, as well as clinical issues
across cultural boundaries, this kind of difference in cultural contact style
or cultural signature becomes important to address; the cycle model offers
a naturalistic and relatively value-neutral way of doing that.
     In the same way, the contact cycle can also serve to highlight personal
stylistic clashes or misfits across levels of system—for instance, the good
or ill fit of one manager with the overall style and pace of the wider orga-
nization (or the nature of the problems at hand) or between members of
the same systemic or relational level, such when one member of a couple
typically delays decisions whereas the other tends to rush them (they often
tend to polarize further from there, exaggerating the difference as each
reacts to or tries to compensate for the extreme of the other).
     At the same time, the cycle model suffers, as schematic models especially
tend to, from its own strong points. By extracting the contact process from
its context of a meaningful, actively relational social and experiential field,
the cycle can seem to imply that contact is just a matter of an individual’s
internal impulse in isolation (e.g., hunger, pain or pleasure, sexual drive—
even though Gestalt insists that even these seemingly biological needs and
impulses are always shaped and conditioned with social meanings). Thus,
quality of contact might seem to rest on just the uninterrupted flow of
impulse energy toward tension release, no matter the context (a kind of
throwback to a more primitive Freudian drive and tension-reduction
model) rather than resting on the richness, complexity, relationality, and
depth of meaning of the whole situational field and the whole gestalt being
achieved, in dynamic integration with the complexly prefigured ground of
previous contact and learning. (See Wheeler, 1991, for further discussion
of the cycle model, pointing out its tendency to become “figure bound”
by seeming to privilege the expression of desire or impulse without equal
respect for the complexities, trade-offs, strategies, risks and stakes, and
meanings that actually go into each moment of contact.) This oversim-
plification loses much of the richness of Lewin’s (admittedly sloganistic)
observation, “The need structures the field” (emphasis added; Marrow,
1969, p. 198), which underlined more clearly the holistic, figure–ground
integration going on at all times, even in the simplest-seeming impulse
satisfaction process. The point is that the cycle model is a useful tool for

                                      55
                              Gestalt Therapy



studying contact patterns as long as we remember that it is not a depiction
of some ideal of contact.
     The simple fact of arranging the elements of Goodman and Perls’s
stages of contact or contact sequences model into an ideal circle also
tends to obscure what Goodman saw as a particular gift of the Gestalt
model: the way the model emphasized the full contact stage, with its qual-
ity of timelessness or self-transcendence, that sense of losing oneself fully
in an activity or a relational process (e.g., a lover and beloved or an artist
absorbed in her media or that healthy melting of boundaries of time,
space, and self that is creativity). This full or middle mode contact was
an ideal of health and healthy creative process to Goodman, the payoff
of working on the interruptions to contact the therapy was designed to
attend to and repair.
     The cycle model lends itself to a nonrelational interpretation of con-
tact and of Gestalt theory more broadly. Indeed, Goodman and especially
Fritz Perls at times seemed to imply that the model was most concerned
with a healthy individual process, apart from the richness of the relational
context that is always preconditioning our individuality as it emerges from
the relational field.
     Yet the Gestalt paradigm, from theory, research, and therapeutic appli-
cations alike, is inherently an interactionist field model, in which the inte-
gration of a unique individual perspective into and with a richly relational
context, as depicted by Lewin, is the essence of human experience and
the source of human behavior. The central concept of the Gestalt therapy
model is contact, the process of resolving an experiential field into mean-
ingful relationships among parts and parts, self and others, and self with
ever-larger wholes of meaning. In this model the self and others are always
the most significant parts and wholes of our experiential worlds, both
individuals as whole selves and individuals as emergent dynamic parts of
important groups of reference and belonging.
     Finally, the cycle model can seem to reduce the Gestalt perspective to a
transactional model, one in which contact, rather than being understood as
the full ongoing, essential human process of meaning making that defines
our species and informs our lives, is reduced to the everyday sense of the
word contact as simply moving toward and then reaching or failing to reach

                                     56
                                  Theory



the object of the motion. Gestalt therapy is not a model of object relations
at all in the classic Freudian way of understanding behavior in terms of
drives, defenses (against drive energy), and other people as objects of those
drives. Rather, Gestalt is a relational field model of subject relations, in
which full contact is the integral, meaning-making arc of understand-
ing the self, the other person, and the field in an ever-evolving, ever-
complexifying way. This perspective on contact—to which the authors of
the cycle model itself would likely subscribe—can be lost in the acontextual
simplification of the cycle model.
     Thus, as the “me generations” of the 1970s and 1980s passed and a new
decade (and new information technologies) brought forth a new age of
complexity (Wheeler, 2008), the deep Lewinian and Gestalt psychology
roots of Gestalt therapy have come increasingly to the fore as contem-
porary concerns shift from those of the too-repressed individual seeking
self-expression to those of a whole-field, whole-world community strug-
gling to find new and sustainable forms for dealing with each other in
our ever-shrinking, ever-complexifying world. For Gestalt, the emergent
outcome of these urgent concerns is a more fully and radically relational,
fully and radically field-based contemporary practice.


             THE RELATIONAL FIELD MODEL:
           CONTEMPORARY GESTALT PRACTICE
By stepping fully into our Lewinian, relational field roots and sources,
contemporary Gestalt achieves further steps in the evolutionary theory
process begun by Wertheimer and his associates a century ago, advanced
and applied to real-life situations by Lewin and his followers, crystallized
into a psychotherapy form by Goodman and the Perlses, and developed fur-
ther over the past decades by a wide range of creative teachers and authors.
We can trace this growing relational emphasis clearly through the work
of Gestalt authors over the past several decades, including prominently
(among many others) Polster and Polster (1974), emphasizing the rela-
tional nature of the resistances; Zinker (1978) on creativity and also work-
ing with couples; Nevis (1987), opening up the field of Gestalt work with
organizations and large groups; Melnick and Nevis (1994) on dyadic

                                     57
                              Gestalt Therapy



process, the intimate couple, and the family; Kepner (1987, 1996) on
relational embodiment and on trauma and healing; Wheeler (1991,
1996, 2000, 2003) on self-theory, development, shame and support, the
human potential curriculum, and the application of Gestalt to systems
constellations work; Yontef (1993) on dialogue and the I–thou relation-
ship in therapy; Parlett (1992; in press) on field theory and on Gestalt
as a curriculum for world citizenship; Lee (1996; 2004) on couples,
shame, and ethics; Clemmens (2005) on addiction and on embodi-
ment; McConville (1995) on adolescence and development; Jacobs and
Hycner (2009) on relationship, dialogue, and intersubjectivity; Roberts
(1999) on field theory and creativity; Ullman (2005) on Lewin’s work
and on spirituality in Gestalt; Spagnuolo Lobb (2013) on empathy and
relationship; Bloom (2009) on relationship, aesthetics, and ethics; and
many more (to name just a few of the writers in the English language
who have emphasized and developed the relational field perspective).
This relational evolution in our understanding and expression of the
Gestalt therapy model, strongly informed and validated by the emergent
neuroscience revolution as well as by clinical experience, has a number
of direct dimensions and implications that together make up contem-
porary Gestalt.


     Self-Theory and the Understanding of the Individual Self
Humans are the most distinctly, uniquely individual of all animals and also
the most complexly socially embedded species found in nature. This inher-
ent duality of human nature and process—complex social embeddedness
and complex individual creativity—is at the heart of our more complex
Gestalt understanding of how we organize and construct our social field
of experience in unique interpretive ways and also how we are (pre)orga-
nized by that same field, not just in early development but also in dynamic
interaction all through life. This is the essence of Gestalt’s answer to James’s
challenge of a century ago—how we ever manage to organize the potential
sensory overload of our infinitely variable social field. Following Lewin’s
model, we map a field (especially a social field) in relation to the patterns
we are predisposed (preconditioned) by our nature and by past social

                                      58
                                   Theory



experience to attend to (or impose inflexibly) in relation to our perception
of the needs, emotional states, intentions, goals, and values that reflect our
unique creative interpretive synthesis of our present self-state (Wheeler,
2000, 2011). (For influential source discussions of these and related ideas
from parallel traditions that have interacted deeply with Gestalt psychol-
ogy, see Gergen, 2011, for a social constructionist account of how this works
on a cultural level; Schore, 2009, and Siegel, 2012, for a contemporary inter-
personal neurobiology discussion of how this brain plasticity continues to
operate throughout our lives; and Stolorow, Atwood, & Orange, 2002, for
an intersubjective and psychoanalytic discussion of these dynamics in the
therapy session.)
     Key to this contemporary relational field Gestalt understanding is the
new knowledge coming from contemporary evolutionary biology (Hrdy,
2009; D. S. Wilson, 2007). We understand more today—and will continue
to deepen this understanding as research continues to unfold and expand
in this area—about the prematurity of our prefrontal cortex (PFC) at
birth, that newest part of our evolved brain that sets us apart from our
closest animal relations. The fact that our PFC is not wired at birth is
key to what enables our open-ended creativity (because we are so exten-
sively freed from the rigidity of inborn instinct patterns; see D. S. Wilson,
2007). Early relational and cultural patterning then takes the place of fixed
instincts, giving us enough patterning to cope with complex social vari-
ability. This helps us understand the extremely deep influence of culture,
which can have almost the force of biological instinct, and also shows us
the source of most of the issues and problems our clients bring to us: too
rigid or otherwise dysfunctional areas of early patterning, which is what
happens when our nervous system is forced to adapt to overwhelming
stress or trauma with insufficient relational support, the context of what
we call today developmental trauma, or trauma patterns arising more
from neglect than from assault (though sadly, both can and do often
occur together; see Axelsson, in press). The outcome, as we see continu-
ally in our practices, is a rigid (or rigidly disorganized) self-process in
which complex integrative PFC activation is not available to the per-
son, who remains stuck in a repetitive, unsatisfying cycle of avoidance
or other dysfunction in some areas of life until a more healthy, natural

                                     59
                             Gestalt Therapy



gestalt process of ongoing and ever-more complex creative response can
be supported and restored.
     This is how Gestalt therapy relational self-theory aims to do full jus-
tice to both these poles of our integral being: the uniquely individual and
the radically social. This means that we view the individual as uniquely
emergent from a dynamic social field of relationships (thus the term rela-
tional field Gestalt; see Wheeler, 2000, 2011). Each of us sees and expresses
a unique viewpoint in and from a constantly interactive web of dynamic
social influence, energy, and belonging (Wheeler, 2011). Each of us has
the capacity, with support, to express and evolve our self-process and our
relational social nature as part of larger wholes of being and meaning in
unique and ever-more complex, creative forms.
     These views contrast fundamentally with an older self-paradigm
in Western culture. Earlier versions of a classic Freudian model, classic
behaviorism, and indeed the individualist self-ideal in Western culture
generally, have considered the individual and her or his development first
and the relationship as something that is secondary to this primary reality
(secondary process in Freud; see Wheeler, 2000). Relational field Gestalt
completely reverses this (in parallel with the contemporary evolution of
the other major models). This way of understanding human nature—who
we are in the most basic sense—is more complex than that older para-
digm, with consequences for our understanding of development, clinical
issues, shame and support, and change, as outlined next.


      The Developmental Model and the Definition of Health
Perls viewed healthy maturity, the ideal of growth and maturation, as the
progress from other-supports to self-supports (see Perls, 1969). As a slo-
gan, this was useful and had appeal as a description of a healthy critical
process in that oppressively conformist cultural and historical context (the
mass fascistic times of the early and mid-20th century), but such a for-
mulation of the goals of development and health fails to take account of
the full relational legacy of Gestalt psychology, particularly as formulated
by Lewin. Today, we expand on that picture further by reaching deeper

                                     60
                                   Theory



into the full Gestalt theory background of human process to support the
following definitions.

                               Development
In relational Gestalt perspective, growth is the coconstruction of an increas-
ingly complex integrated resolution of relational experience and capac-
ity. In childhood development this means incorporating the increasing
potential capacities of the growing child into wider and wider spheres of
relationship, action, and meaning as the child’s developmental abilities
mature and take the child into wider and wider spheres of action and learn-
ing. The relational field Gestalt model defines development as the ongoing
coconstruction of wider and more complex wholes of meaning and action
that serve to enable the person to continue growing, creating, and resolv-
ing ever-more complex understanding, which serves in turn as a platform
for ever-more creative and complex actions and experiences. This view of
development is lifelong and open-ended, based on relationships, creativity,
and the crucial capacity to tolerate and meaningfully resolve complexity
and ambiguity in ever-more complex settings and situations over the life
span. Growth, in the Gestalt view, never stops. This leads to a different—in
a sense, double—view of health and the goals of therapy.

            The Goals of Therapy and the Definition of Health
The goal of Gestalt therapy is a complex, doubly dimensioned one. Health,
in this relational field creative and evolutionary view of self and self-
process, is the capacity to cocreate new patterns of experience, action, and
understanding that serve to support further evolution of ever-increased
complexity of relationship and understanding. This means, among other
things, that Gestalt is particularly well-suited for supporting work with an
older demographic as well as other age groups: Although physical abilities
eventually decline with age, we know today that the human brain’s capac-
ity to continue to create and elaborate increasingly complex wholes of
meaning and understanding—barring organic illness—only deepens with
age. The cocreation of meaning is what the Gestalt model—and Gestalt
definitions of health and development—are all about.

                                     61
                              Gestalt Therapy



               Relationship and Presence: Showing Up
Therapists have long known that the capacity to “show up” and be in an
attuned, empathic relationship with our client is absolutely key to thera-
peutic progress and outcome (see much more about this crucial predic-
tor in therapeutic outcomes in Chapter 5). Today, standing as we do at
the richly fermenting beginnings of the neuropsychology revolution that
is transforming our field, we are beginning to know much more about
what showing up in a relationship really means and why that capacity
in the therapist is so crucial and effective. We examine this more deeply
in Chapter 6; meanwhile, it is important to note that the arc of devel-
opmental capacity and the definition of health here are dependent on—
and synonymous with—an increase in integral response capacity in the
brain (the simultaneous activation of multiple brain centers in response to
self, situations, and other people; e.g., empathic, embodied, emotive, facial,
autobiographical, and other brain centers; see Siegel, 2010, 2012). In neuro-
biological terms, this is the increasing capacity for complexity discussed
earlier (see A. N. Schore, 2009; J. R. Schore & Schore, 2008).
      From its beginnings, Gestalt has been directly focused on pattern for-
mation and pattern recognition, the remarkably developed human capacity
to perceive a variable environment by selecting and attending to patterns
(detailed in Chapter 2) and forming and modifying behavior patterns or
sequences so as to automate or habituate complex behavioral repertoires.
This pattern creation (i.e., learning) is our essential strategy to free up
attentional space for the most urgent new condition in the present situ-
ation (the key to our human creative capacity to manage a near-infinite
range of variability, especially social variability). These created behavioral
strings or patterned sequences are our functional adaptation to managing
background, or the familiar aspects of a situation, while leaving us free to
attend to the most urgent need or most challenging new feature of that
situation. This works well in humans—most of the time. When this natu-
ral gestalt-forming process breaks down, with rigid, out-of-date response
patterns being transferred—mostly involuntarily—to new situations, it
produces the dysfunctional, unsatisfying results—which may often be
mystifying to the clients themselves—that bring our clients into therapy.

                                     62
                                   Theory



     Those “stuck” learned patterns of experience, behavior, and mean-
ing are what therapy is all about. A gift of this perspective is helping us
to better understand how and why therapist presence makes such a dif-
ference: When the therapist shows up in this full, integrated way (Siegel,
2012), a pattern of multiple-center activation occurs in the client’s brain.
This means the client has more integrative or creative PFC capacity in
the therapist’s attuned presence than he or she likely will in other chal-
lenging situations that provoke or evoke those same old, nonproductive
responses (much like what earlier models called defenses, or the original
Gestalt therapy model called resistance or interruptions to contact; see the
earlier discussion).
     This further clarifies Goodman’s paradoxical image of therapy as
a safe emergency. The situation is an emergency in the sense that it is
evoking or provoking overlearned, probably anxiety-based, no longer
functional response patterns, including emotions, understanding and
predictions, and behavioral responses (i.e., a familiar stuck defense). Still,
the emergency, although real (because the relationship is real), is relatively
safe because the stakes are lower (than out there in the world of heavier
consequences for “wrong” responses) and because of the additional
support of the therapist’s full presence, in the ways outlined previously.
     Thus, in relational field Gestalt we emphasize that therapist pres-
ence and the therapist–client relationship are not preconditions or a pre-
therapy stage; they are our first, most impactful, and most ongoing active
interventions all through the therapy. In Gestalt therapy the coconstruc-
tion of the relationship is the therapy as well as the lab in which the most
experiments can be made (explicitly or organically, as the therapist facili-
tates the measured challenge for greater and greater capacity for relational
complexity in the growing client).


                           Support and Shame
Another strength of Gestalt is a new and deeper understanding of what
we mean by support in a relational field model—and with this new under-
standing we gain a new capacity to deal directly and creatively with that

                                     63
                             Gestalt Therapy



most pervasively challenging of therapeutic issues and topics: shame. If
we take a Lewinian relational field model seriously, we can say (tauto-
logically but meaningfully) that whatever happens in a field is supported
and enabled by the conditions of that field. Thus, at any moment, support
means all the conditions that promote, support, and favor what is hap-
pening. In a relational field model, one’s inner world is not something
separated from one’s field of experience; rather, the relative distinctions
inner and outer experience simply refer to a different kind of attentional
focus and different ways of registering “what’s happening” subjectively.
Thus, experiences and memories such as hope, willpower, confidence in
one’s abilities, past experience overcoming and achieving in some relevant
area—all those kinds of resources that we think of as inner—are also field
conditions that condition behavior and experience.
     These inner field conditions interact dynamically with external field
conditions such as perceived opportunities and obstacles and, above all,
the expected perceptions of support or lack of support from other people,
particularly other people perceived as powerful or personally important.
Thus, field conditions are the whole experiential field, one’s inner world
and outer world (which, most important, includes oneself and other sig-
nificant people). Note how this also includes one’s perception, attribution,
and imagination of others’ inner experience and motivations and thus
their likely next behavior. One has to know these areas of the field; they
comprise an essential part of the best available interpretation of the condi-
tions of the situation. Too rigid patterns of assumptions about others on
the basis of trauma or lack of support in the past are a huge impediment
to ongoing growth and healthy, satisfying responses and relationships in
present life. Learning how to manage and hold those assumptions more
lightly and how to consider other interpretations of the field, plus learn-
ing new skills for dialogue and inquiry, will all be a correspondingly large
part of therapy (see Wheeler, 1996, 2000). This is a much broader, richer,
and we argue, more useful understanding of support as the dynamic
conditioning factors of one’s experience and behavior. Armed with this
understanding, one can then take a more productive approach to that
universally problematic human challenge: the issue of shame.

                                     64
                                    Theory



     Shame, from a relational field perspective, is first and always a crucial
aspect of pervasive social embeddedness, the way our individuality emerges
from a holistic social and relational web of shared interactive being. For
humans—most acutely in our long, helpless childhood and then through-
out life—the capacity to attune to, read, anticipate, and manage the reac-
tions of others is key to our surviving and thriving. Shame is the sense that
this necessary web of coparticipatory human existence is thinning, ruptur-
ing or being threatened with rupture, or pulling away from the individual
(leaving him or her more alone). Seen in this way, shame is an essential part
of our affective tool kit, sensitizing us to the social reactions or lack of sup-
port around us so that we can make necessary adjustments and possibly fall
in line with the social norm—or, equally possibly, organize more support
to make a change in the direction of more choice and creativity in what is
acceptable in that social field. A third alternative is to take the shame signal
to leave that social field and find a new one (for further discussion, see Lee,
1996; Wheeler, 1996, 1997).
     This sensitivity to the social field does not have to be a paralyzing
experience—it merely depends on past experiences of support or social
rupture. In the regular, healthy flow of the interactive relational process,
an early sign of shame (others not meeting or supporting one’s pres-
ence or action) can be simply a social signal to “step up” other supports
(i.e., inner supports and also the mobilization of memory of supports
from others perhaps not present) so that the sum of supportive con-
ditions in the present field is great enough to permit one to operate
creatively, freely, and with a low enough sense of risks and stakes that
one still has the capacity to generate more complex, productive behav-
iors (i.e., new ways of encountering new or old challenges). In practice,
this can be as familiar and simple as trying harder, enlisting others in
support, attending more to others’ discomfort, reaching for practiced
self-support skills (e.g., breathing, thought stopping or interrupting,
becoming reinspired through evoking other relationships and larger
meanings).
     This is the case for the healthy, supported individual for whom past
experience has been affirming enough to provide flexibility to continue

                                       65
                             Gestalt Therapy



responding creatively, even under challenge. However, evocations and
repetitions of experiences occur when the lack of affirmation from others
creates a more desperate emergency (and perhaps a physically dangerous,
abusive, or panicking loss of safety and support, especially in childhood).
If trauma involves a situation that overwhelms the nervous system’s
capacity to respond in an integrated way, a trauma disorder is persistent
reactivity (at least to certain situations or stimuli) as a habit pattern in
the nervous system so deeply imprinted that it bypasses the PFC, with
reactions governed by the faster, more primitive response centers (the
familiar and paralyzing fight–flight–freeze reaction). Significantly, it is
only in trauma patterns that we find the one-to-one, stimulus–response
patterns unmediated by PFC, meaning making, and strategic and deci-
sional processes that were the paradigm for understanding human
behavior a century ago in the pre-Gestalt associationist model discussed
in Chapter 2.
     Thus, in this sense, shame—the loss of a field of social resonance and
support—is always a central dynamic in trauma and a central issue in
trauma healing and recovery. In an older pre-Gestalt individualist self-
model, shame was understood more simplistically as a sense of inferior-
ity (which should be overcome with maturity, a social “should” that only
leads to a vicious circle of shame about shame, hiding the shame feel-
ings, and further isolation; see Wheeler, 1996). Our approach to working
with shame dynamics is to first revalorize and validate shame as a part of
our inherent social capacities for navigating complex social fields, sensing
where relational support is weak or missing and helping to strategize and
respond creatively. Second, shame feelings are met with greater empathic
attunement (combined with great respect for boundaries and not invad-
ing or correcting the client at vulnerable moments). This helps us under-
stand, for instance, why it can be reshaming to try to talk people out of
their shame feelings (e.g., “You shouldn’t feel that way”; such words are
meant well but probably also express the therapist’s discomfort with feel-
ings of shame; for more discussion of this key dynamic in therapy and in
development and life, see Wheeler, 1996).



                                    66
                                  Theory



             A Relational Field Gestalt Theory of Change
The evolution of the contemporary relational field Gestalt model to
include the full relational implications of the Lewinian model underly-
ing Goodman and the Perlses’ work opens up our understanding of a
relational field Gestalt theory or model of change. If experience and the
behavior that emerges from our integrated experiential field are always
outcomes of field conditions of support, it follows that any significant
change in behavior (and experience) depends on a change in those field
conditions of support. This may seem like a circular proposition or tautol-
ogy, but in practice we believe this exploration of new supports to be one
of the most often neglected areas in the therapy process and one of the
most important, directly useable contributions of the Gestalt perspective
(equally applicable under any model). Therapy, after all, is about change,
hopefully and most often change desired and codesigned by and with the
client in line with her or his goals and values. In addition to exploring
ground (the dynamic issues or fears holding a given nonfunctional pattern
in place and getting in the way of needed change), and along with experi-
menting with new desired behaviors both within and outside the therapy
session, the crucial additional step for change to be lasting is to identify
and activate new, additional supports in the experiential field that will
promote the new desired behavior (and often interrupt or lessen support
for the old, undesired, and fixed or repetitive pattern).
     These new supports can come from the inner and/or outer experien-
tial field, and in most instances will be most effective if they come from
both arenas. In practice, this idea of identifying social or “other” supports
may often seem startling or unnatural (or downright weak) at first to
the client; in our individualistic culture we are habitually supported and
expected to think only of self-supports when we are designing (and sup-
porting) intentions for change. Because we are often dealing with behav-
iors and areas the client has tried many times and ways of changing before
without success, these self-supports are often strongly tinged with shame
(e.g., “If I would just try harder,” “The problem is my weak willpower,” or
other such self-deprecating responses).



                                     67
                             Gestalt Therapy



    There is nothing wrong with trying harder; indeed, that is probably
the way we achieve most of our intentional changes. However, people do
not tend to come to counseling with issues for which trying harder alone
has been successful; rather, the things people want counseling for (we
know this well from repetitive and unfulfilling relational patterns and
aspects in some parts of our lives) are likely to be issues that are strongly
dynamically charged with anxiety, fear, and shame. This is where adding
outer or “other” supports can be revelatory and can unblock issues that
may have been stuck for many years (for more discussion of this issue in
practice, see the case of the couple, among others, in Chapter 4).
    Restating this field-relational Gestalt theory of change now, we
can say: for any change in behavior and experience to occur and last
(your own behavior or your client’s), there must be some change in the
dynamic pattern of supports in the whole field. Conversely, a significant
change in the pattern of supports in the experiential field (“positive” and
“negative” supports alike) will produce a change in behavior and experi-
ence in your client’s life, or in your own. Taken together, these thematic
theory points represent and summarize key aspects of the ongoing evo-
lution of Gestalt therapy theory, bringing the contemporary articulation
of theory and method more fully in line with those basic Gestalt psy-
chology insights discussed in Chapter 2, which have proved so pervasive
and durable across a century of research and incorporation into other
models.


                           WIDER IMPACT
Looking back over the half century since Goodman and Perls cocreated
their seminal volume presenting their revolutionary approach, what can
we say about the impact of Gestalt therapy on the wider field? First, it
would be difficult to overstate the impact, which was at first quite slow
and then gathered steam at the end of the 1950s, of the introduction of the
Gestalt model (and other present-centered approaches) on the world of
psychotherapy and on the evolution of nearly all major models of psycho-
therapy since that time. Much like the impact of Gestalt psychology on the
wider field of psychology, there are few major models of psychotherapy

                                     68
                                  Theory



today that have not adopted some of the chief hallmarks of the then-radical
Goodman–Perls model: (a) the here-and-now, present-life-situation focus;
(b) the focus on developmental challenge and response in place of an
older emphasis on pathology and cure; (c) the emphasis on affect, emo-
tion, and body experience; (d) the cultivation of an authentic encoun-
ter and real (if still bounded) relationship between therapist and client;
(e) the use of the therapy situation as a here-and-now experimental rela-
tional lab; (f) a radical respect for and focus on the client’s agency and
validity as a coconstructer of her or his values, meanings, and criteria for
making choices organizing his or her life, together often with (g) a more
nuanced, judicious use of the therapist’s experience as a rich source of
information for the client to know and integrate in her or his navigation
of relationship and growth of relational capacity. Many other aspects and
dimensions of the model, such as the fuller use of embodied experience
and data, the strong emphasis on self-expression and creativity, the radi-
cal revisioning of the therapist’s role as a full coparticipant or observer
in the process, and the revalorization of desire and passion, remain more
specifically characteristic of Gestalt therapy, in contrast to some other
contemporary models.
     The model was revolutionary, and as such it contributed to and became
part of an even wider revolution in psychotherapy over the coming decades
as therapy shifted from an elite to a mass phenomenon and widened
extensively from a focus on pathology and dysfunction to a new interest
in the depth and quality of satisfaction of each person’s life journey in
our overwhelmingly complex, often deeply undersupported contempo-
rary lives. For all its remarkable contributions and influence and with all
its radical emphasis on relationship and positive constructive capacities
(both such strong therapy themes today), particular key elements needed
today for a fully realized, fully relational field-based contemporary Gestalt
therapy theory and methodology were still un- or underdeveloped in the
Goodman–Perls model. They include a fully intersubjective model of self
and relationship, a fully relational model of attachment and development,
an articulated model of working with shame and support, a neurologically
coherent understanding of trauma and recovery, and (integrating all of
these) a fully relational field Gestalt theory of change. Having reviewed

                                     69
                             Gestalt Therapy



these further developments and outlined the hallmarks of a contempo-
rary, field-theory-based relational Gestalt therapy, we turn in Chapter 4 to
the application of the model with a diverse range of clients, types of cases,
and settings. Gestalt therapy is about the enactment of actual living: fuller
presence in ourselves and our worlds, richer and deeper relational capac-
ity, greater capacity for passion and satisfaction in living, and a deeper
sense of meaning making in our lives.




                                     70
                                               4

             The Therapeutic Process




I  n this chapter, we illustrate, apply, and in the process, further develop
   the concepts introduced earlier in this book. Case studies give life to the-
ory, and as we hope you have already realized from the earlier discussion,
Gestalt is about finding and enlivening the themes and places in our lives
and experience that are stuck, deadened, not satisfying our deepest yearn-
ings for connection and meaning, and not supporting new growth in our
capacity to support and use ever-more complex relational and experiential
processes all through life. Thus, in this chapter we provide case accounts in
a Gestalt way by giving you not just the facts but also our experience of the
client and the exchange we experienced and made meaning of. Our hope is
that you will be able to see through our eyes and think and feel through our
minds and hearts as we worked as creatively as we could to be fully present
with our clients and to be of service to them when their development was
blocked or deadened, as well as at times when they were in desperate crisis.


http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/14527-004
Gestalt Therapy, by G. Wheeler and L. Axelsson
Copyright © 2015 by the American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.


                                               71
                              Gestalt Therapy



     The cases discussed here are extracts and vignettes, not complete
accounts. We have made every effort to protect each client’s identity. We
select the cases to illustrate particular dimensions, potentials, and applica-
tions of Gestalt methodology, with accent on where Gestalt might support
a greater focus on some dynamic aspect or issue or intervention that is
different from other approaches; we try to give only enough of the back-
ground (and of the rest of the story after the point illustrated) for read-
ers to get the feel of the situation and be oriented to the points we want
to highlight. Different aspects of Gestalt theory and method will come
to the fore in different cases, and we have tried to select, in this brief
format, a broad range of types of clients (adults and children, couples,
and clients with diverse cultural identities, sexual identities, ages, and
parent and nonparent status, among other differences). We invite you
to note again that we, the coauthors, belong to different generations and
different genders, we hail from different national and cultural origins,
and we have quite different professional histories (with significant over-
lap: Both of us have worked with children and adults in public mental
health and private practice settings and in schools and organizations as
both counselors and consultants as well as coaches). This is the human
variation that is always present, though it may be more or less attended
to in various methods. Gestalt is founded on these dynamics of diversity,
with its long, research-based dual legacy of individual uniqueness (the
constructivist perspective we wrote about in Chapter 2, that founding
contribution of Gestalt and Gestalt research that revolutionized all of
psychology) plus Gestalt theory’s emphasis on coconstructionism, our
inherent, always-present embeddedness in our relational context and
dynamic, past, present, and anticipated future.
     How do we find our way in all this rich complexity without reducing
or simplifying away the dynamics that make up the present field condi-
tions of each emergent consciousness in each interaction? A particular
Gestalt move that occurs repeatedly in the vignettes is the emphasis on
our “showing up” with full and embodied emotional attunement to other
and to self. This self and other awareness is a hallmark of Gestalt and
offers us a kind of touchstone for understanding the here-and-now field
conditions (by “checking in” with one’s own body and emotions) and then

                                     72
                        The Therapeutic Process



either mentioning them explicitly or using them as a guide to our inquiry
or other experiments with the client, depending on our assessment of his
or her capacity for using that kind of direct, person-to-person contact
(that essential self and social skill that will certainly be a developmental
goal and benchmark for the client’s evolving capacities throughout our
work). Self and other awareness also helps us in attuning to the client and
looking for how that attunement may be turned into relational contact in
a way the client can use, relax into, and grow from.
     This special attention follows from our discussion in the previous chap-
ters of the importance of attuned, empathic relational contact as the key
precondition for beginning to relax old, rigid patterns of engagement and
self and other organization that were established behaviorally and neuro-
logically often long ago under conditions of inadequate support, or worse.
As we seek this “sweet zone” of attuned engagement (the zone for experi-
ment, new experience, and new integration that is growth), we pay atten-
tion to neurological states of arousal or disorganization—our own as well
as the client’s—as we perceive and register the activation in our own state
of arousal and awareness. In particular, this includes awareness and attun-
ement to the nervous system (our own as well as the client’s). This kind of
attending is crucial, because as relational Gestalt therapists, we focus not
just on offering support from us or support as a checklist of behaviors but
also on the actual experience of support by the client her- or himself. As we
watch for signs of dis-arousal and more coherent organization (e.g., Siegel,
2010) in the client, we begin to understand what is facilitative and what
causes “flooding” for this client in this situation at this moment. When we
can meet and attune to this (without being lost in it), we are in the zone of
the kind of contact between us that serves the client, and the work unfolds
from there.
     One final note in a contemporary register in preparation for the dis-
cussions: Some of the most basic, structural ways we show support include
concrete, seemingly simple actions such as not having a cell phone that is
turned on and can disrupt us and an office space that provides privacy and
can block outside distractions. We start the session on time, do not keep
the client waiting, and try to demonstrate our attentiveness by facing her
or him and maintaining an amount of eye contact that seems to be the

                                     73
                               Gestalt Therapy



most comfortable and useable for the client at that moment. The last of
these points (the amount of eye contact) is one of our first experiments
in the therapy (which we may or may not elect to share with the client at
this early point—if eye contact is uncomfortable, it is not likely the time
to comment on that fact yet). The other points may seem unnecessary to
mention, but we live in a time when turning away and reading or even
answering a text in the middle of a conversation is normative. The point
is to signal to the client that this is not a time for multitasking (at least for
the therapist) but a time and space to focus on the client’s experience. This
is something that may have been partially or wholly missing in the client’s
development (or worse—the attention was there and unsafe).
     In true Gestalt fashion, we then look for an opportunity to inquire
how that “experiment” of privileged personal focus is going, both so we
can offer more attunement and accommodation and so the client has an
opportunity to experience that crucial self-inquiry step that will be so use-
ful in therapy and in life (“How is this feeling for me right now? What do
I want? What do I need?”) and feel him- or herself stepping into an active
cocreative role in the process of the therapeutic encounter.


 MARIE: PUZZLES AND MODULATION OF CONTACT
Thirteen-year-old Marie, a Caucasian girl living with her parents and
two younger brothers in a small rural farming community, was brought
to therapy by her parents. She suffered from severe social anxiety and
some general anxiety as well. During our intake session she was able to
express that she did not like talking and that her previous therapist had
always asked her question after question. This only made her feel more
anxious. I (LA) promised her that there were other ways we could work,
ways that did not include me firing questions at her, which she would
then have to try to answer. I thanked her for this clarity (especially
because she “didn’t like to talk”), which would serve us in building our
relationship.
     We started out playing board games, none of which looked “therapeu-
tic” from the outside; this helped us get to know each other and negotiate
together the issue of trust, at least on the level of building familiarity and

                                       74
                         The Therapeutic Process



managing expectations as we began to relate to one another. I let Marie
pick the games, but even that was a difficult task, and often she would
freeze in her anxiety and ask me to pick one. After a few sessions like this, I
began picking out three games and asking her whether there was one game
of these three she did not want to play. As I did this I also asked her to rate
her anxiety and tell me if having to make this choice made her anxiety
too high and unmanageable. These concrete, “here and now” questions
seemed more manageable than the more probing kind she had warned
me about. Marie reported that when I asked this, her anxiety did become
higher but not unmanageable. When I asked whether she could then pick
one of the two games left, the game she wanted to play, she reported that
her anxiety became too intense. I thanked her for helping our process by
telling me, and I picked one of the two games myself.
     This was Gestalt contact work, slowed down to meet the client in her
proximal learning zone of mild but moderate anxiety and at the same time
providing Marie with a model and an experience of how power and close-
ness in relational exchange could be shared and modulated. Every time
we were at the point of choosing the next game I would encourage her
to check in with herself to see where her anxiety level was, and she would
report back to me, usually on a scale of 1 to 10. From time to time I would
ask whether she was ready to choose not just which of the three games to
exclude but also which of the two games to play. Sometimes she was able
to pick the game, and when that happened I would invite her to check in
with herself to see whether she could tell what made her able to make the
choice this time but not other times. I would also ask what she believed
would happen if she chose which game to play. I did not expect an answer,
and I did not need one; my intention was to help her increase her aware-
ness. A few months into the therapy she told me that she was afraid to pick
the wrong game, a game I did not want to play. I did not probe this answer
further at the time; I just thanked her for this new awareness and sharing.
     After a few more sessions I introduced art materials as one of the
three activities. The first few times she picked that activity as the one
she did not want to do, but later she began leaving it as one of the two
for me to choose from. The times I picked the art materials I did not
ask her to make something specific but allowed her to create whatever

                                      75
                             Gestalt Therapy



she came up with, just experimenting with mixing colors or some more
figurative picture.
     During this period, which lasted several months, I did not use many
words; I mostly followed her lead of just hanging out together. If I did
experiment with asking her a few questions about her anxiety outside
the therapy room, she would withdraw and stop, reverting to giving me
her default one-word answers, which told me I was pushing her over her
anxiety threshold. One day she answered that she found it difficult when I
looked at her while she did her art projects. I asked her whether she wanted
me to turn my back to her, and she answered with a clear yes. During quite
a few sessions she started asking me to turn my back to her while she drew
or painted. I would always do this, letting her know in this direct, enacted
way that I respected her boundaries and that she had the power to affect
her environment in a way that helped her. I also asked her how my turning
my back toward her made a difference in her body, again coming back to
the immense resource her body could be for helping her track and modu-
late her anxiety.
     I sometimes wrote a question on a piece of paper because it seemed
easier for her to communicate in written form. At one point I suggested
hanging a blanket over two chairs so there was a wall between us, to see
whether that would make it even easier for her to be in the room with me,
compared with having me turn my back to her. As we tried this, I contin-
ued with the written communication, writing a question then crumpling
the paper into a ball and tossing it over the wall of the blanket. She would
then write the answer and throw the paper back to me. The messages back
and forth were about what she wanted to do in the sessions with me and
how difficult it was for her to make these decisions. Slowly, at her pace,
we were finding our own creative way toward a deeper, fuller exchange,
expression, and trust.
     After about half a year Marie had grown more comfortable with the
choices she could make in the therapy room with me. At this point she was
able to pick what she wanted to do for the session, sometimes with more
anxiety than others, but no matter what the level of anxiety, our focus was
on the experiential quality of the anxious state, where she felt it in her

                                    76
                        The Therapeutic Process



body, sometimes what she anticipated as a possible bad outcome, and the
words she was telling herself as she tried to choose.
     In one session she asked whether I had a puzzle, saying she really liked
doing them. I told her I shared that interest and promised her I would
bring some puzzles from home the following session. Realizing that doing
a 1,000-piece puzzle is something that would take longer than one ses-
sion, I also brought in a felt blanket and a roller to roll up and store the
puzzle between sessions. At this point the ability to focus on the puzzle was
enough of a regulator for Marie, a big step forward from when she pre-
ferred to have me turn my back to her or even sit on the other side of the
blanket/wall only communicating through notes tossed back and forth.
As her anxiety became lower she became increasingly verbal, even though
she still sat quietly for a minute or two before she answered a question.
Many a time although I expected she was not going to answer a question at
all and just needed to be quiet, she all of a sudden gave me a long answer.
My understanding was simply that she needed time to check in with her
body, perhaps settle her anxiety, and make sure she could feel our connec-
tion strongly enough for her to share her thoughts with me.
     Marie was starting high school, and as the beginning of school
approached, her anticipatory anxiety increased sharply. As we sat on the
floor putting together the pieces of the puzzle, we also put together the
different pieces of her anxiety puzzle. She was slowly able to tell me how
much she wanted to fit in with her peers but also that she did not want
to give up who she was. She worried what others would think about her.
When I suggested that part of the anxiety she still experienced in the
therapy room with me might be that she worried what I might think
about her, she was able to confirm this as true. My suggestion was that
she check in with herself before sharing her thoughts and remind herself
she always had the choice of either saying what she was thinking, deciding
to say nothing at all, or stating the feeling of anxiety out loud. When she
started to do this, she found that speaking about her anxiety often led her
to be able to state what she thought had been hard to share. In this way we
were experimenting with, without naming it, the essential skill of actively
modulating the contact difficulty. That is, instead of the all-or-nothing

                                     77
                             Gestalt Therapy



choice of silence or intense, unmanageable anxiety, there is the “middle”
choice: naming the difficult action and naming the feeling that is present.
     As we were putting together the puzzle and talking about school before
and after she started the fall semester, we often played around with the dif-
ferent parts she described having inside her head. One was just wanting
to fit in, to be a regular teenager, whereas another part was wanting to
be just who she was; in addition, she wanted to be who she was but with
more attitude. Different parts gave her more or less anxiety in different
situations, but as she became more aware of the choices she could make
as to how to present herself, she reported feeling less anxious at school. I
encouraged her to explore the new part, the one with the most attitude, to
help her practice being more assertive, because that was the part that gave
her the most anxiety.
     While we were putting together the puzzle in one of the sessions (with
me nonchalantly asking questions), I asked her what would happen if she
did not have anxiety and how it would change her life, a question I had
asked on a few occasions throughout our work together. This time she
became quiet, and I asked her to check in about her anxiety level. She
reported feeling very anxious, saying she was worried what I would think
about her if she answered the question. I told her I doubted she was able
to say anything that would make me like her less but that she needed to
check in with herself if she was ready to take that risk. After a few minutes
sitting quietly and working on the puzzle, she told me that without her
anxiety she would receive less attention. This represented a breakthrough,
a huge summing up of our work together. I felt celebratory. She was dis-
tancing herself from the experience of anxiety in a whole new way: Instead
of identifying with it and being taken over by it, she was looking at it as a
“part” in itself, a feeling or function that might serve a purpose or get in
the way but that in any case she could step apart from and look at, with
me, from some other deeper, more capable part of her developing sense
of self. I did not convey any of this to Marie at the time. My response was
to reflect what she had shared, remarking in the most normalizing way
I could that I could see how that must make it quite difficult at times to
leave the anxiety behind.

                                     78
                          The Therapeutic Process



               CARLOS: SUPPORT AT ANY PRICE
 One wants to be loved, in lack thereof admired, in lack thereof feared, in lack
  thereof loathed and despised. One wants to instill some sort of emotion in
  people. The soul trembles before emptiness and desires contact at any price.
                 —Hjalmar Söderberg [Translated by Lena Axelsson]



A conceptual dilemma in discussing support from a Gestalt perspective
is the notion of inner and outer support, if there is any distinction as to
where support is coming from. After all, even when we are alone, the sup-
port we draw on is not something that comes from within but something
that once was developed in relationship; we reference absent relationships,
communities, and groups implicitly or explicitly. The same goes for when
we perceive the support as coming from our surroundings: We can per-
ceive and use it as support because at some earlier point in our lives we
have been able to internalize the sense of belonging, in some way deserv-
ing and receiving support.
     Gestalt theory supports shifting our way of looking at our world to a
more relational view. We are cocreating our experiences, not just with the
people who are currently present with us, but to a greater or lesser extent
with every significant person and experience we have had up to that point
in our lives (for better and, sadly, sometimes for worse). Support grows
out of the contact we have and have had with our social and relational
environment. As support grew in the past or grows now, it conditions our
expectations about what is and is not going to be easy or even possible
(or harder or even unthinkable) in current or upcoming relationships or
situations.
     We predict outcomes from previous experiences; we want to create
patterns. An infant who cries and is picked up by a caregiver to be held and
soothed will on a deep level see and come to expect the pattern of “distress/
express/get met with comfort and help” (Bowlby, 1994; A. N. Schore, 2003;
Tronick, 2007). Whoever has a consistent experience of being with care-
givers who meet them at their level of excitement or withdrawal will then
begin to develop a regulated nervous system and the ability to self-soothe,

                                       79
                             Gestalt Therapy



growing out of the experience that there are people around who are there
when they are needed. As the infant grows up, when there is a negative
incident on the playground or at school (as there will inevitably be as we
move out into wider life circles), for example, he or she will seek out sup-
port from an adult or possibly another child in the surroundings at the
time or later when she or he gets home.
     An infant who is not picked up when crying or who is not changed or
fed on a regular basis within his or her window of tolerance when it comes
to discomfort, an infant who has caregivers who are not available or able to
attune to the infant’s level of excitement or withdrawal, will establish and
then experience a different, more reactive brain pattern and a less regulated
nervous system. When this infant grows older he or she will not have the
sense of having much support available in her or his world. Instead of run-
ning to the yard duty teacher or a friend at school (why would one do that
if one did not see the point of reaching out for support?), this child might
instead punch the child who may have accidentally bumped into him or
her. Given the less regulated nervous system that, from a lower or less stra-
tegic region of the brain, makes this child more prone to act impulsively, we
might have what many will see as a “problem child.” For some of the clients
we work with, the wish to feel supported and the deep-rooted longing to
find a group or at least one or two individuals who the client believe sup-
ports them can lead to situations of risk and danger, in the extreme even a
matter of life and death.
     This was the case with Carlos, who came to me (LA) as a seventh
grader toward the end of the school year, already on the local police list
for his known involvement with gangs. He was in foster care, with a mother
who was a drug addict and a father whose whereabouts were unknown
and who was addicted to marijuana and alcohol to some degree. Carlos
had a report card with a straight line of Fs. It was not love at first sight
between Carlos and me. On the contrary, he was brought in by his social
worker, who told me that if he did not make some real changes, including
committing to weekly therapy, he was going to a group home, one far away
from “civilization.” In the next breath she stated that he was a smart kid
who had a great side to him, a side she wished to see more often.

                                     80
                        The Therapeutic Process



     We sat down, and I told him about confidentiality and the exceptions
to it. For instance, if he were to tell me something was “going down” and
where and against whom, I would have to call the police. I also told him my
ground rules: He was not allowed to hurt or threaten me, hurt himself, or
destroy anything in the office on purpose. Apart from that, barring safety
threats to himself or others, he could use whatever language he needed to
use, and I would not tell his social worker or anyone else what we talked
about unless he and I discussed it beforehand and agreed on what could
be said. I added one last thing: I was there to help him; I was not a teacher
who would grade him on how well he did or did not do during our ses-
sions. There was no right or wrong way to be in my office. I became quiet
while Carlos continued to text on his phone with one earphone in his ear
and the volume turned up so loud I had no problem hearing the music.
     After about half the session had passed, I asked whether he wanted to
play Uno between texts, just to make time pass a bit quicker; we both knew
he had to hang out with me for 50 minutes, not just this week but once
every week for the foreseeable future. He agreed to that. That became our
routine: We played Uno while he also answered his texts and listened to
music in one ear. I asked a question here and there: Who was the teacher
he disliked the most? What was the worst thing about his foster home?
My comments were focused on siding with his experience: I agreed it was
not right that his foster parents would buy their daughter a big meal from
McDonalds whereas he had to eat the regular dinner, and it was not right
that their daughter had a TV in her room but he did not.
     As we continued to see each other, Carlos became more verbal and gave
me longer answers, with me being able to ask progressively deeper ques-
tions. I started to explore his involvement with the gang. It was a slow pro-
cess, given that anyone involved in a gang is not prone to talking about it
and also because I suspected that this was a sensitive topic in other ways as
well. My questions were about how he felt when he was with his “homies”:
What had made him decide to affiliate himself with the gang at such a
young age, and what did it mean to him that they had accepted him as one
of them? He slowly started to share that he knew the other gang members
were there for him; they “had his back.” He always had someone to hang

                                     81
                              Gestalt Therapy



out and smoke with when things were too difficult around the foster home
or when he just felt down. I spoke about this as support and belonging,
acknowledging what he experienced as positive and that I understood his
need to feel this belonging. I was well aware that all the other adults in his
life told him about all the bad things that came out of being a gang mem-
ber: the illegal activities, the drug use, and the danger. I told him I agreed
with them but that I also understood the other side. These discussions
lasted over a few months of playing Uno, a period during which he also,
to my cautious delight, did less and less texting. Some time during this
period the music stopped as well.
      Carlos began sharing more about the opposite of the feelings of sup-
port he felt from his friends in the gang: He felt that no one else wanted
him; his dad had totally dropped out of his life, his mom had moved away
and was deemed by social services to be an unfit mother, and his school
could not suspend him quickly enough any time he even spoke out of
turn in class. He said that there was only one person he had ever felt “cared
about him even some”: an old boyfriend of his mom’s. He had some spo-
radic contact with the man, who had managed to clean up his life and now
worked as a counselor at a drug rehabilitation center in town.
      I asked Carlos whether I could speak to the social worker about this
man so that we could see whether there was a way he could come to one
of the sessions and I could meet him, because he meant something to
Carlos. Carlos agreed. He knew he wanted support and belonging; he did
not have many people in his life whom he saw as his allies. We invited this
man, and I facilitated a discussion between them about Carlos’s need to
have someone in his life and what it was he longed for. The ex-boyfriend
was perceptive and showed interest in stepping up.
      As we neared the end of Carlos’s eighth-grade year, I received a voice-
mail from him on a Monday morning. He asked whether he could come
to see me as soon as possible, even though our session was not until later
that week. I called back and asked him to come in that same day. When he
came to the session he sat down and started crying. He told me he had been
out with one of his close friends on Saturday evening, and a few teenagers
from the opposing gang had shot this friend. Carlos was not the target and
got away unhurt. He called 911, and the friend was taken to the hospital

                                     82
                        The Therapeutic Process



with life-threatening injuries. Carlos was in shock, and what he did was to
call his therapist. After a year of working together I now knew he saw me
as a person whom he could seek and receive support from. This made it
possible for him to share his fears about possibly being the target the next
time, his fears that his friend might die, and all the images he had from
that evening when he tried to stop his friend from bleeding to death.
     After this experience Carlos realized he wanted to change. He started
to see that what he longed for he might be able to get from someone other
than his friends in the gang. He continued to be in contact with his moth-
er’s ex-boyfriend, who had been participating in some of Carlos’s therapy
sessions. Carlos asked his social worker whether it would be possible for
him to spend weekends with this man. The social worker agreed to this
arrangement. Carlos also announced that he did not want to attend the
regular high school because he would only be known as the “old” Carlos
he used to be. He and I checked out some of the alternative high schools
and found one that seemed to be a good fit for him: a small school with
few students in each class and teachers who would be there for the stu-
dents even after the school day was over, a school that spoke about the
importance of building community among students and adults. Again,
my job as a therapist went outside the therapy room in an effort to help
my client get the support he needed.
     We continued our work together for 1 more year, during which I never
saw the cell phone during the sessions; even the Uno game was put away.
We sorted out some of the issues that had made him start using drugs,
something he had more or less stopped doing during this year. He slowly
started to build new friendships, friends whom he felt supported by with-
out having to create a bond under the dire common fate of being in a gang
together. Carlos now could find support in his teachers, his mother’s ex-
boyfriend (who was taking the steps toward becoming Carlos’s guardian),
and to some extent, me. His teachers reported that he was able to come to
them and talk about what was bothering him instead of trying to get their
attention in a negative way.
     We wrapped up our sessions together after about two years, but our
contact has not stopped. Carlos calls and leaves me messages from time
to time telling me how his life is going. Things have generally been going

                                    83
                               Gestalt Therapy



well for him: He is living with his new guardian (his mom’s ex-boyfriend),
has 1 year left in high school, is on track to graduate, and feels generally
pleased with his life. I know he knows that if something should go wrong
or he is not feeling supported enough in his life, he can always come back
for more sessions. His messages, I believe, are to help him keep the con-
nection with me, to help him know he can reach out if he wants to.


         DIANA: TRAUMA AND ROLLER COASTERS
The treatment of clients with trauma is a fast-growing sector within the
psychotherapeutic field. Trauma is biochemically encoded in the brain
(Cozolino, 2010), and the notion that the trauma is not in the event but
in the nervous system makes the knowledge of neuroscience important
(van der Kolk, 2006). van der Kolk (2006) pointed out that the individu-
als most likely to develop the symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder
(PTSD) are the ones who fail to establish a new homeostasis after a trau-
matic event. As relational gestalt therapists, we would say that the best way
to establish a new homeostasis is by being in a relationship with someone
who can provide an attuned, empathic presence and a calming sense that
everything will be all right. The effect of the trauma is seen in the way the
traumatic event comes to dominate the total organism and how the person
organizes her or his life after the event. In Gestalt theoretical terms, a person
who experiences the symptoms of trauma has a different way of perceiving
his or her field after as opposed to before the traumatic event happened, an
insight which is helpful in therapeutic work with these clients.
     Diana, a 36-year-old Caucasian woman working as a school admin-
istrator and living with her 13-year-old son, was encouraged by her son’s
therapist to seek therapy for PTSD, which she had developed during years
of living with a physically and emotionally abusive husband. At her first
session Diana sat on the edge of the chair, hugging her purse in front of
her on her lap. She avoided eye contact, her eyes darting from one point
in the room to another in no seeming order. When I (LA) was first intro-
duced to her by her son’s therapist, who suggested that Diana needed her
own support, Diana was reluctant to start therapy. She did not want to talk
about what had happened to her but just wanted to move on. I assured

                                       84
                         The Therapeutic Process



her that I would not force her to talk about anything she did not feel
like talking about, that she was in control over her own treatment, and
that I in fact welcomed her “no” in our work and would not be offended;
on the contrary, I would celebrate it. To be able to say no and have that
respected by the recipient is to express your personal boundaries—exactly
the boundaries that are violated in interpersonal trauma.
     Just a few months earlier Diana and her son had moved from southern
California to a small town in the north to get away from Diana’s husband
(who was her son’s father). The marriage had been filled with domestic vio-
lence, and Diana had sustained physical injuries during the last few years.
When her husband pushed her down the stairs and she badly injured her
leg, she finally reached the point where she was able to leave the relationship.
     My intention during (and after) the first session was to help Diana
feel less threatened in the room with me, more able to explore trusting her
present situation. I took care to let her take this at her own pace, making
her own decision as to whether this was the right place for her to be at this
point. The question was not whether she needed help—we both agreed
on that—but whether my office was the right choice for her right now
(and I the right person). The notion of control is important when work-
ing with trauma; one of the defining hallmarks of trauma is the lack of
control over the situation. My intention was to show Diana that she was
in control and that she could get up and leave the room at any moment,
without any negative consequences (again, I would not be offended). This
was exactly what she had not been able to do with her husband, through
the many years of abuse.
     The notion that trust is just an early stage of therapy, something we
spend a bit of time building before we achieve it, is one of those notions
for which a Gestalt perspective gives us a different view. From a Gestalt
point of view, trust is not something you simply have or do not have;
rather, it is an ongoing experiential process on a multidimensional con-
tinuum. That is, one may come to trust a person in one area under certain
conditions but not in other areas or under different conditions. Trust is
not a single event or a final state but a complex, dynamic interpersonal
field condition, subjectively perceived (like all social field conditions) and
which changes, evolves, complexifies, and perhaps deepens (or not) over

                                      85
                              Gestalt Therapy



time. The dynamics of trust are always there; in a Gestalt view, a major
part of our role as therapists, as can be seen in these cases, is to offer sup-
portive relational-field conditions in the session to keep deepening the
safety of the here-and-now field so that the client can keep experimenting
with more self-management of risk and exposure level between therapist
and client. This, after all, is the capacity that is needed in every situation
of life if we are to live freely and choicefully in a range of situations, as
opposed to rigidly and avoidantly, or heedlessly and reactively. As always
in Gestalt, we “work on” issues by exploring them actively in the here-and-
now process that is our living experimental lab. Working on and exploring
in Gestalt are the same: We expand capacity by knowing our own and one
another’s process better, not by trying to “fix” it.
     For victims of abuse, especially if the perpetrator was a person with
whom the victim had a close relationship, the concept of trust becomes
difficult and likely generalized: How can I trust anybody around me if the
person I trusted and let in hurt me so? Paradoxically, the closer I get to a
new person now, the more anxious I may become about trust, because I
now have more exposure and more to lose. How can I trust my own judg-
ment about whom to trust at all, if I have been so wrong in the past?
     As we continued to talk about Diana’s day-to-day life and what her
interests were, she started to slowly relax; she put down her purse, and
I could tell her breathing had slowed, signaling to me that her nervous
system was becoming less hyperaroused. At that point I directed her atten-
tion to the sensations in her body and how she felt being in the room with
me at that moment. She reported that she felt a bit calmer and that it was
easier to breathe, but at this point she still was not able to report any body
sensations.
     Thus, our first experiment (still managed by me in this early stage
because she was not ready yet for a full therapeutic partnership in the
usual sense) was supporting her and waiting for her to be able to “show
up in the room.” When she could register sensations in her own body, I
would know that her reactive dissociation response to the years of abuse
in which she had become paralyzed had begun to ebb, at least in our ses-
sions. At that stage we began having conversations about the daily issues
and struggles she and her son were experiencing: relocating, their loss of

                                      86
                         The Therapeutic Process



financial stability, living with PTSD (meaning, for Diana, learning how to
be around more than just a few people at a time), Diana’s deep concern
about her son’s well-being following the suicide attempts that had brought
him—and then her—into counseling, and her positive longing, under all
that, for a future in which she felt in control of her own life. As we talked,
I kept gently inviting her to start noticing her body—specifically simple,
concrete sensations. I slowed down the process to help her titrate the
hyperarousal she often experienced, offering her the simple experiment
of looking at my face to see whether that was calming her or making her
nervous; this quickly became a new source of support for her. Much of my
attention was on her nervous system arousal (again, as indicated by her
breathing or other signs of agitation), supporting her to find and practice
ways of regulating her nervous system both in the sessions with me and
on her own outside the sessions.
     As Diana began reporting that her life was feeling more “under con-
trol,” she felt more able to handle day-to-day living, and she also began to
speak about the abuse she had lived through with her ex-husband. I was
not pushing her in that direction; it was something she was ready to do
on her own “organically” because she felt supported enough by our rela-
tionship and the self-regulating skills she was gradually mastering. At this
point in our work together she could identify her own sensations when
she felt anxious or fearful, and we both worked together on managing this
new level of physical awareness as she learned to slow down the process so
she did not become overwhelmed.
     When Diana expressed feelings of anger at her ex-husband, instead of
using a hesitant, deadened voice, she spoke from a place of greater strength
(being “in her power,” Diana called it) and not from the place of a fright-
ened victim. Both her body posture and her tone were different. This gave
me the sense she was ready to tolerate a higher level of arousal: From this
place I invited her to fantasize about what she could imagine doing to
him as “payback.” This was challenging. Gathering her strength visibly, she
spoke in a calm, determined voice. She imagined having him strapped in a
roller coaster for some hours without a break—she knew he “hates roller
coasters and is afraid of heights.” Just that: not violence but being trapped
in fear. Suddenly she started to laugh, and I laughed with her. The perfect

                                     87
                             Gestalt Therapy



payback: just a taste of what she had felt living with him; no physical dam-
age, no direct pain, but now he would know. Her comment at this point
was that she did not know which felt better: the freedom to imagine the
perfect revenge or our shared space to laugh about it together.
     After this landmark conversation, Diana felt centered in a different,
freer place. With this much self-regulation in place, we “brought” her ex-
husband into the office—not in person but in the form of an empty chair.
At first this was just to see how Diana felt imagining being in the same
room with him without saying anything, but she soon found the power
in herself to start giving voice to all the things she had been too afraid to
tell him when they lived together and he abused her. At this point in the
therapy she was well aware of the sensations in her body and her arousal
level; whenever she started to feel a higher level of charge, she would track
herself and slow down the process or turn to me and say that she felt a bit
overwhelmed and needed help to ground herself again. Her life, she told
me, was “opening back up.” She felt, as she put it, “like my old self again.”


  ARMINDA AND SAM: LONELINESS AND INTIMACY
“It’s just that I’d rather be lonely by myself, than go on being lonely with
you.” Because Arminda had already told me (GW) on the phone when
she booked the appointment that she and her husband needed help
“negotiating the divorce,” I was not completely taken aback by these
bleak words. Still, we both turned to Sam, whose face I read as glum,
somewhere between resentful, hopeless, and exhausted. Silence, fol-
lowed by more silence.
     “Tell me something about what you’re experiencing right now, when
Arminda says that,” I finally offered. I put it this way in hopes of getting
something fresher than a prepared answer but also to test out and begin
modeling a practice I imagined was probably missing in their relationship:
If Arminda was this lonely after some 25 years of marriage and family
life, it seemed unlikely that they had much facility or even capacity to
share their real inner experience with each other—or perhaps to know it
themselves.

                                     88
                         The Therapeutic Process



      “Well it’s not like she hasn’t said it before,” Sam offered after another
long pause. “And your reaction?” I queried again. “Don’t see the point of it,”
Sam spoke in a tired voice. “I don’t want to be alone, at this age.” They were
both close to 60. “And after all that trouble it would probably just not be
that different with another person.” With that pronouncement Sam lapsed
back into his slumped, withdrawn state.
      This was one of the occasions for which here-and-now experience as a
therapist is so key to the process. Already after a couple of remarks I began
to feel how lonely it might be to live with this man, who I also knew, from
Arminda’s initial conversation, was a “good father,” “a good man,” “good
in a crisis,” “a good provider,” and who had several other good qualities as
well. The question was what to do with my own feelings, which could easily
be experienced by Sam as accusatory, “siding with her” from the begin-
ning, and likely critical and shaming as well. At the same time I felt sadness
thinking of how lonely Sam must be and imagining that his loneliness
might well just be “like water to the fish,” something so deeply constant
and habitual he was not fully aware of any other way to be. To flood him
with possibly overwhelming, possibly intrusive empathy that may have
seemed condescending might have made me one more problematic per-
son to be managed in some way. I decided to take a different kind of risk:
“I guess my problem here—and maybe you can help me with this—is that
I don’t really believe you.”
      This jolted Sam out of his hangdog look. “Oh, I don’t mean I think
you’re lying,” I hastened to add. “I’m sure what you said is true—divorce
is a lot of trouble and so is dating, or whatever it is you’re thinking would
come after that. But I’m looking at your face—I believe I see a lot of sad-
ness, and I’m thinking after 25 years, with grown children doing well, a
lot of life ahead to share together—or not. And that’s when I don’t believe
you when you say the reason you don’t want to divorce is just that it would
be a lot of trouble.”
      “OK, touché,” said Sam with a rueful smile and a bit more engage-
ment. Then he added, “But actually, I didn’t say that was the reason.” I
became mock-judicious, suppressing a smile. “No, you didn’t say ‘the.’
Point taken.” That exchange set the tone for Sam’s and my relationship: He

                                      89
                              Gestalt Therapy



was going to allow, even reluctantly welcome, my pushing him beyond his
comfort zone, as long as we could still engage in a friendly poke back and
forth to reestablish parity on the terrain of humor and verbal intelligence.
     I have drawn this out a bit to illustrate how critical it is to establish
some equal-weight alliance with each partner, if couples therapy is to be
productive. In this case, Arminda was a primary grades teacher, I am a ther-
apist, and Sam was a successful engineer. The territory Arminda wanted to
explore and claim was intimacy—that transparent, unguarded, and authen-
tic sharing of our inner thoughts, feelings, and states of being—which is
something gender typed more as feminine than masculine in the crude
stereotypes of North American culture. For all these reasons I paid special
attention to finding and supporting a kind of contact with Sam—slightly
sparring, perhaps more “male-typed”—that he could feel comfortable and
“in charge” with, before moving to challenge his habitual ways of feeling
safe in relationships, which were leaving Arminda in such a lonely place.
     What is intimacy from a Gestalt perspective? What does it do for us
when we know how to experience and transact it? Why can it be so desper-
ately painful when we do not have it—especially in close relationships of
couples, families, and other connections in which that longing comes up so
easily and so often? The answer to this question hearkens back to our Gestalt
understanding of human development, experience, and behavior. Behav-
ior, our model tells us, emerges as a best-available, constructed response to
some challenge—originally, the challenge of how to satisfy our needs for
attachment, nourishment, safety, and some degree of emotional resonance
in earliest infancy and then all through childhood. As we cocreate strategies
and solutions for these developmental and survival challenges, which orig-
inally occurred in our families, we are constantly habituating our responses
so that most of our behavior becomes automatic, while we turn present,
active attention to the constantly new challenges at hand.
     As we discussed earlier and have illustrated in these cases, these complex
habit responses can be flexible and open to further learning and develop-
ment, or they may be more rigid “emergency” responses girded with anxi-
ety boundaries that make them resistant to further change and growth.
These become parts of the stuck areas of our lives. What makes the dif-
ference between these two kinds of development: open and creative and

                                      90
                         The Therapeutic Process



ever-changing, leading us to new challenges, learning, and meanings, or
stuck and repetitive and unsatisfying, when “after all these years” some
painful situation reoccurs and we try to deal with it (often without realiz-
ing it) in the same dysfunctional, unsatisfying way (which may have been
our best possible creative solution in the past but is sadly out of date now)?
     The answer, as we have seen, lies in the field conditions of support (in
the past and then, at least potentially, in new situations and relationships).
This is what Gestalt therapy—and perhaps all therapy—is about: promot-
ing and providing a new safe container and a supportive relationship that
can serve as the experimental field for feeling and opening up these old
habit chains that may have been long out of awareness and too protected
by anxiety reactions (or worse, in severe trauma, including panic attacks,
dissociation, or even violent responses toward others or the self). This is
Goodman’s idea of therapy as a “safe emergency,” a venue for “proximal
learning” (Zaretskii, 2009): These are safe enough for the client to relax
some of the old anxiety and mobilization, and at the same time they have
just enough “real life” urgency to support using the “lab” of the therapeu-
tic relationship as a venue for trying out new behaviors and new supports
(in the session or as “homework” the client and therapist designs together)
or, more simply and organically, by attending to the ongoing “experiment”
of contact in the therapy session and in the relationship.
     As we come back to again and again in this volume and in Gestalt
theory and practice, our method for providing that safe container and
that supportive field for exploration is first and foremost by “showing
up” with the most fully attuned, empathic, and authentic presence we can
provide. Contemporary neuroscience has confirmed and expands on the
notion every day that when we do this, our fuller activation of “integrated
brain circuitry” (Siegel, 2010) has effects on the client’s sense of resources
and (relative) relaxation, supporting new awareness and the opening up
of old patterns long locked in anxiety and reactivity so that change can
begin to take place.
     However, this same supportive container, permitting the relaxation of
old blocks and facilitating new growth in relationships, can exist outside
therapy, potentially any time we are in a sustained relationship with a
friend or partner who can show up empathically in this (e.g., C. M. Wilson

                                     91
                              Gestalt Therapy



& Oswald, 2005). In other words, intimacy (whether in marriage or other
emotionally intimate relationships) is not a luxury for the benefit of a
privileged few; rather, an intimate relationship (whether in a couple or
with close friends) is an ongoing support for the growth of personal and
relational capacities and meaning making throughout life. This is why
intimacy, in this full, emotionally resonant and empathic sense, is so
important in life and only becomes more so as we grow older.
     We repeatedly find that those areas of life in which one can feel that
empathic gaze, that acceptance and curious interest from important oth-
ers, and that sense of available support are the areas of life that have kept
growing and developing flexibly and openly, leading one in widening and
deepening circles of complex understanding, relationships, and creativity.
Conversely, areas of life in which that has been missing, or worse (where one
has been met with shaming or worse abuse), tend to be the areas in which
something in life feels stuck; the same old patterns come around painfully
again and again and disappointment often makes one avoid that area alto-
gether. In other words, the intimate regard of the other—that empathic
interest and seeing and wanting to know what’s going on “inside me” for
its own sake (i.e., not just strategically to get me to do something)—is the
key field support for stimulating, unblocking, and supporting growth in
any area of life (including therapy); this is true not just in childhood but at
any time all through our lives.
     This was exactly the kind of process Arminda and Sam were so handi-
capped in transacting: the capacity to offer empathic interest and curiosity
about what was going on with each other, where their thoughts and feel-
ings and behavior were coming from, how they were perceiving and feel-
ing (and fearing and hoping about) the world. Arminda and Sam had lost
the capacity to trust and welcome interest from the other person and make
use of it to know themselves better and thus become freer, less reactive,
more responsive, and more able to meet each situation as it arose, with its
unique challenges and opportunities, so that they could respond in a fresh,
more authentic, and perhaps more satisfying way.
     I decided, with the security of that small moment, that little joking ver-
bal tussle between us, as a guide, that Sam might tolerate—and Arminda
could benefit from witnessing—one more small risky experiment. “So in

                                      92
                          The Therapeutic Process



other words,” I dropped to a serious tone again and looked him full in the
eyes, “Arminda is not the only one here who is lonely.” Sam’s eyes filled with
tears, which he nervously daubed at. “The thing is . . . ,” he tried to begin, but
had to clear his throat, “the thing is, I don’t know why that makes me cry.”
“Maybe to tell us all we’re touching a tender area,” I spoke quietly. “Maybe
we can get to know a lot more about tender areas, together here, for both of
you—not just to solve something, but for its own sake. For your own sakes.”
Then we all let the moment rest in stillness a bit longer. This is what inti-
macy is, after all: that warm, interested gaze (in both directions, both of us
looking “into” me and then the same for you). That was what Arminda and
Sam had such a hard time doing—and were about to divorce because of.
     Arminda and Sam’s marriage had gone well overall. Now, with less
pressure, more leisure, and a new chapter of life opening up, for the first
time they were “face to face,” and that is where their skills and capacities
were failing them. Sam had had a distant, critical father who probably
wanted the best for his son but seemed to believe that the best support for
that outcome would be constant coercion and correction, not just of Sam’s
actions (he was an achiever, but his father could still find fault) but also of
his thinking, his feelings, his sullen moods or passive manner. As he grew
up, Sam learned to go inward, concentrating on academics and problem
solving, and just “blanked out” (his words) his thoughts and desires. If he
expressed them, they would only be criticized and corrected all the more.
     Arminda’s parents were both more focused on their own careers than
on their daughter; what time and attention they did have for their children
went to her brother (ironically, considering that, in her way, her mother was
a pioneering woman in her field for her day—but that meant that in the
family, above all, “mom’s career came first”). This legacy had given Arminda
a great capacity to focus on and empathize with others, which had served
her and her young students well in her own career as a teacher, but it had
also given her a great need for listening, mirroring, and taking interest in
her own thoughts, feelings, and experiences in an intimate relationship. The
inability to feel this with Sam was so painful for her, we quickly found in the
sessions, that she flipped quickly to cover her own feelings with criticism,
driving him further into the adaptive withdrawal and “blankness” he had
adopted under stress and criticism since childhood.

                                       93
                             Gestalt Therapy



     In other words, as with so many distressed couples we see, Arminda and
Sam found themselves in a perfect storm of self-reinforcing conditions, a
vicious circle in which the more alone Arminda felt, the more she criticized
Sam, both to cover her own feelings and, in her words in those early weeks,
“to assert myself, not go under—just feel myself, hear the sound of my own
voice.” The more criticized Sam felt, and the more he felt himself unable to
“be different” and relieve her distress, the more he withdrew, “waiting for
it to blow over.” The thousand tasks and even the crises of family life came
as a relief to him because these were problems he could share with her and
they could work on together. Without those problems, he felt depressed,
hopeless, and helpless to change.
     Sam and Arminda were sophisticated, highly verbal people. As young
adults they had known each other’s parents, and each had quite a bit of
empathy for what the other one was “up against,” now and especially as a
child. This close knowledge of the other (and of the self) in the moment,
and especially under stress, was new to them. The idea that their con-
tact styles, especially in emotional conflict, were an amalgam of old habit
responses learned under high stress and low support made immediate
sense to them verbally, but they had no idea how to apply this in the heat
of the moment. Together in the sessions we learned to identify the stress
adaptation for each of them. Sam’s first impulse was to look for a problem
he could solve. Failing that, he went into the withdrawal that was dull-
ing him and panicking Arminda. Arminda was aware of “filling the space
with the sound of my own voice” to forestall a feeling of disappearing and
becoming totally invisible, which she could directly relate to her childhood.
She had some idea of how critical she sounded but did not realize how
that was affecting Sam (not surprising, because he was doing his utmost to
cover up his own feelings, even from himself).
     Completely new to them was the idea of “dropping down” to look for
the deeper feelings covered by habitual adaptation and then speaking
from there. Over the weeks, they learned to recognize the top impulse (to
assert or criticize or to withdraw or “go blank”—admittedly a harder one
to “catch in the act,” as Sam put it). Because Sam particularly wanted con-
crete cues, we worked out that any time Arminda spoke from “below” the
criticism (naming any vulnerable feeling, such as feeling alone, wanting

                                     94
                         The Therapeutic Process



his companionship, needing to feel seen, and the like), he would likewise
reach for some true feeling and offer it at “more than three-word length”
(his words). The keys to this kind of more intimate exchange are (a) to
remember that any offering of authentic experience such as this is a gift
and (b) in case of hesitation, one can always go with the actual here-and-
now experience (which at that moment, is the hesitation), as in, for exam-
ple, “Right now I’m not sure what to say because I’m afraid I’ll say it badly
or it could easily be misinterpreted,” and so forth.
     This kind of close attention to emotional process is Gestalt contact
work opened up. It is also the flow of intimacy in vivo for couples and
others, the enacting of a fuller personal presence that keeps a nourish-
ing exchange going, providing the emotional base for all the changes and
challenges a couple faces all through life (even when some of the earlier
life tasks have been handled successfully, as here). Elements of this kind
of feeling exchange may take place and be facilitative in any relationship;
where knowing the other (and the self) is a goal for its own sake, the rela-
tionship becomes an intimate one, symmetrically intimate in a friendship
or equal couple but also appropriately asymmetrical, at least to a degree,
in caretaking and facilitative relationships such as parent–child, teacher–
student, or therapist–client (all cases where a fully equal “equal-time”
process would be burdensome and developmentally inappropriate for the
client, student, or child). This is not because a client is in an infantilized
position but rather because the client’s position is especially privileged in
terms of the agenda and contract that bring the parties together.
     In all these cases the full, interested, and empathic presence of one
partner becomes the facilitative field conditions for exploration and
growth for the other (and for the self—giving these conditions is as pow-
erful a change–intervention for the self as it is for the recipient). Going
back to our basic Gestalt understanding of contact as creative problem
solving (adaptation) often followed by automation or habitual patterning
of the adaptation, we can see where the facilitative, inquiring presence of one
leads to the relaxation of too-rigid habits in the other and the opportunity to
experiment together on a freer and more satisfying new adaptation (leading
to a new habit practice). In this way intimate relationships—those in which
intimate process in this sense becomes a goal not just strategically but in

                                      95
                              Gestalt Therapy



its own right—whether as couples or as intimate friends or relations, are
our natural relational lab for ongoing personal growth and development
throughout life. Thus, in this Gestalt relational sense, intimate relation-
ships become the ongoing venue and life-lab for growth in depth and free-
dom of awareness and choice, just as the process works in therapy. In the
words often attributed to the systemic thinker Gregory Bateson (1979), “It
takes two to know one.” With this insight, plus the new skills to back it up
and put it in action, Arminda and Sam had a new opportunity to make the
new chapter of their already long marriage into a challenging, rewarding,
and evolving new adventure.


           DAISY: JUMP ROPE AND JUNGLE GYM
Violet Oaklander (2006) wrote, “Children come to therapy for two basic
reasons: for one, they have difficulty making good contact: contact with
teachers, parents, peers, books. Secondly, they generally have a poor sense
of self ” (p. 5). Daisy, a 9-year-old Hispanic girl, was referred to therapy by
her teacher. She lived with her parents and three younger brothers, with her
extended family close by. Daisy was morbidly obese and had poor social
skills, general anxiety, and low academic performance; thus, she seemed to
fit Oaklander’s picture well. She was seen through a school-based program
for low-income students, which gave them the opportunity to receive free
therapy at their school during school hours (for some families this may
often be the only way we have of being sure the child can show up for the
therapy session).
     I (LA) have a toy magic wand in the playroom that Daisy found dur-
ing our first session, no doubt because I often put it in a strategic place
when I meet with a client for the first time. When she found it, I asked her
what three things she would like to change in her life if she could have
three wishes come true. First, she wished she could play like the other kids
during recess—and that they would want to play with her. Her second
wish was that her father would stop drinking all those beers and yelling at
her mother, her brother, and her. Her third wish was to not feel so scared
all the time. I responded that I could help her with the first and the third
wish but that the second one was more difficult because her dad was not

                                      96
                          The Therapeutic Process



the one coming to my office to play with me, she was. She agreed that
made some sense.
     As she continued to explore my office this first session, I invited her to
play, and it soon became clear that she did not know how even to begin.
I suggested we make up a story in the sand tray together, but when we
tried this, Daisy would just put one or two figurines in the sand, say one
sentence, and then become stuck. She moved from one activity to the next
without settling. As we tossed the ball to each other I was saddened, but
not surprised, to notice her poor motor skills.
     Toward the end of our first session I noticed that Daisy had a bossy
way of relating to me, which actually made me want to finish the session
before our 50 minutes were up. She asked me to get things from the shelf
when she was sitting at the table instead of getting up and getting them
herself. If I said that she could do it herself, she responded that she did
not want to but instead wanted me to do it for her. When it was time to
clean up after an activity, she told me to do it while she started looking
for the next thing to do. I gently told her that we were both responsible
for cleaning up. She reluctantly helped but did it so slowly that I ended
up doing most of the cleaning myself. Because it was our first session, I
told myself this was something we would slowly work on; if this was her
opening style with a total stranger, I could only assume it was a pervasive
pattern in her life.
     After our first session I reflected on what I had observed in Daisy’s
play (or rather, lack of play) and her lack of gross motor skills and body
awareness, along with the uncomfortable feeling I was left with. Given
the myriad issues that had been mentioned in the referral and that I had
observed during the session, I decided to take a somewhat more directive
approach than with most other clients, working mostly with the issue she
mentioned as her first wish: to be able to play like the other children. My
hope was that we would then also be able to address some of her anxiety,
her lack of social skills, and then, if and as she started to feel a better sense
of herself, to build what we could call self-esteem.
     As we started to work together, I scheduled her sessions when there
was no recess, which meant we had the playground at our disposal. I
brought a jump rope and a ball. We would toss the ball while we checked

                                       97
                              Gestalt Therapy



in on how her week had been, and then we started practicing with the
jump rope. Daisy had never tried it before even though this was a popular
activity during recess among the girls in her class. Her poor self-esteem
became evident immediately: She told me she could not do it, so she was
not even going to try. I told her that everyone starts from not knowing
how to jump rope and that no one but me would see if she could not do
it. I asked her how she would feel if she could jump rope like the girls in
her class, to give her the chance to refocus on a positive feeling. She agreed
to try, with little success, but with me as the most enthusiastic cheerleader
she could ever have. As we took turns jumping, I asked what she could tell
herself as she practiced to make her feel better about herself. She came up
with, “Never give up, keep trying.” As we continued our work together,
that became our mantra, a sentence Daisy started using in different situ-
ations outside our sessions to help her get over her impulse to give up as
soon as something got a little bit more difficult.
      We also used the playground to do other physical experiments because
Daisy was longing to be able to climb the jungle gym. As anticipated, her
anxiety was high, and I helped her learn to use her breathing and her
attention to focus on her body, tracking (not fixing) how her anxiety felt.
She said it was like butterflies in her stomach, so I proposed she try pictur-
ing the butterflies flying out of her stomach when she exhaled, taking her
anxiety with them. With practice this was something else that helped her,
and we slowly started progressing.
      With her obesity, her stamina for physical activities was limited, so our
sessions were usually split between a more active first half outside and the
second half in the playroom. I would follow Daisy’s lead during this part
of the session but gently tell her how I felt about her way of treating me
when I felt pushed around. My intention was to show her that I would not
leave her but that I had feelings about how I was treated—that is, I was
not a nonentity; we were both people with feelings, and she was having an
impact on me. I told her I absolutely needed her to help clean up before
moving on to the next activity, something she quickly got better at. She
liked art, and as she drew I would ask her questions to help her elaborate on
what she was drawing or painting: What happened next? How did the dog
feel? What did the boy want to tell his mom? Open questions such as these,

                                      98
                         The Therapeutic Process



in the context of our relationship and her sense of my real interest, began
to offer a reparative field where her imagination could grow.
     As Daisy’s play slowly began to give me a sense that she was stretching
and using her imagination and creativity, we were able to start to play in
the dollhouse with the puppets and sometimes in the sand tray. I used my
sense of being in relation to her as my guide for working with her, and then
I used the relational Gestalt stance of reflecting back my own reactions: I
wanted her to be able to state what she wanted and direct the play, but if
my body began to feel reactive, I allowed myself to listen and give voice to
it. For example, I would make a comment about how I was starting to feel
left out and as if she just wanted to be the one deciding everything, which
did not make it fun to play with her. If she was telling my puppet to do
something scary, I would state as the puppet that I felt scared and anxious,
giving her the chance to be in the comforting role, counseling me to take
a deep breath to let the butterflies fly away.
     As we continued finding our way to greater contact together, Daisy
slowly began to change outside our sessions as well. Her teacher reported
that she was doing better academically, and she participated more in the
classroom activities. I could observe on the playground how she started
slowly, step by step, to join in with the other girls, first on the outside but
after a few months making a best friend. It was a delight to see the two girls
“connected at the hip” during recess, playing on the playground or sitting
on a bench just talking. Daisy started expressing how much she liked com-
ing to school and how it had become a refuge from her home life. Mean-
while, not from lack of trying on my part, family life had not changed for
Daisy, and my sense was that it likely would not. Her parents had turned
down all the invitations for collateral sessions with a family therapist. At
least Daisy and I, in almost a full school year, had together created one part
of her life where she felt safe and happy.
     During the following 2 years before Daisy moved on to middle school
she and I would check in from time to time—a few times about issues
with other girls and sometimes just for her to have someone to share her
successes with. As with many of the clients in this school-based program,
Daisy did not just need to be seen and heard when things were not going
well; she needed as much for her successes to be seen and heard. Providing

                                      99
                              Gestalt Therapy



this kind of “mirroring field,” lacking in Daisy’s family as in so many oth-
ers, had served to put Daisy back on a path of her own development. She
transitioned to middle school with more capacity to weather the even
heavier developmental storms and challenges ahead.


         JASON: NEGOTIATING THE THERAPIST’S
                  OWN SHAME ISSUES
As a gay man who came of age, painfully and courageously, in the 1970s
and 1980s, Jason was well-acquainted with shame as an experience and
shaming as a dynamic—both were actively dealt to him by others and
then later on, as will almost inevitably happen after heavy early sham-
ing, as a learned contact adaptation, a stuck self-contacting style. I (GW)
reflected and we experimented and talked about this harsh way of relating
to himself and others as a reflexive and protective habit (“I’ll beat up on
myself before you can do it”) and also as a sad child’s way of bringing the
critical parents and others closer and feeling less alone (“I’m like you; we’re
close because we both beat up on me”). He had never suffered physical or
sexual abuse at home (although he did experience both outside the home
as a teenager), but the disapproval, even revulsion, from his father about his
“sissiness” (his father’s word) had long hung over his life. The effect of all
this had been a profound sense of self-shame and “wrongness” holding him
back from moving ahead in relationships and career. After several years of
therapy, Jason had made profound changes in both these areas of life, and
he was well able to talk about his own issues of shame.
     We had talked from the beginning about the profound experiment he
was conducting—a first for him after a series of gay therapists—by engag-
ing in the intimate process of therapy with a straight man, thus inviting all
kinds of assumptions and projections on his part about me, my attitudes
about sexuality in general and his sexuality in particular, and his anticipa-
tion of revulsion on my part (like his father’s) at hearing about his specific
sexual preferences and fantasies. To have his sexuality seen, affirmed, and
celebrated by an older man with a different sexual identity from his own
was transformational to Jason. On the strength of it, he was able to experi-
ment outside therapy with critical conversations with his elderly father,

                                     100
                         The Therapeutic Process



asking him point-blank why he had been so hard on Jason in his younger
years; his father, despite being in the early stages of dementia, was still able
to answer that he had seen his own role as requiring him to “toughen up”
Jason, partly protectively and partly for reasons, his father confessed, that
“I just don’t know myself.” Jason had tears in his eyes as he told me of the
flood of affirmation he felt from this moment of frankness, regret, and
respect between two very different men. I had tears in my eyes listening to
him, silently thanking the universe and his father for finding the resources
to come forward and meet him in that healing way. Contact, as we can see
from this brief moment, does not have to be in agreement with what may
have been desired; it does not have to be perfect and without flaws to be
transformational—it only has to be authentic, generous-hearted, and a
direct person-to-person meeting.
     Meanwhile, Jason was changing his life. He moved out of an unaf-
firming, non-nourishing relationship into exploring others that were new
and different, and he moved out of assistant jobs into full management,
where he was able to hold his own in a new way in contact, and at times
conflict, with a diverse and challenging range of people. Thus, it took me
by surprise when he came in one day in a deep funk. “Same old, same old,”
he lamented. “Nothing ever changes—I’ve got the same old issues and
problems I had before I ever started this whole process. I’m insecure, I’m
not at ease with people, I don’t get respect, I’m not attractive. I’m hopeless,
and I just better give up.”
     Instead of resonating with this wave of shame and then perhaps inquir-
ing about the triggers for it, I reminded Jason instead how much better he
had been feeling for some time now. He countered that he always fell back,
that all his work had been for nothing. I reframed by telling him that he
was meeting some of the same issues, but he was meeting them in a much
more demanding context, taking on much more bold and challenging
situations than he was able to before, even if these new challenges were
sometimes daunting. His hopelessness only deepened. And so it went,
back and forth, in a kind of spiraling-down argument, where each reassur-
ance from me was met with more self-blaming and shaming and finally a
kind of despair. At some point I snapped out of it and broke it off, appeal-
ing to the “contact consultant” we always have with us in the session: the

                                      101
                               Gestalt Therapy



client him- or herself. What was I doing here and now, I inquired, that was
contributing to this downward spiral? Where was I missing him? Jason’s
first response (now he moved to reassure me) was that it was not me at all,
it was him. I had been nothing but supportive and available; he was the
one who was just too defective to make use of all this support.
     What had happened to worsen such a sharp decline? I moved to take the
contact sequence apart. “You came in feeling bad,” I reviewed, “and I moved
immediately into what must have felt like trying to talk you out of it.” “No,
no, you were really nice,” Jason protested weakly. “Yeah, nice,” I said, reach-
ing deeper, “but still sort of telling you why you shouldn’t be feeling what
you were feeling—something you’ve had more than enough of in your life
already, in too many ways. All I can come up with right now”—I went on
reaching deeper into myself—“is that something about your coming in that
way must have triggered a feeling in me that I’m not doing enough. If you’re
feeling that low, after all this therapy, then I must not be much of a therapist;
I should be doing more.” “You could say I’m acting like your father used to,”
I went on. “You were a kid, you had a problem—and if you told him about
it, you had two problems.” For the first time, Jason’s breathing slowed and
deepened; he even hazarded a smile. “So if you’re having a hard time, I’m a
failure, and then you have to start reassuring me. Somehow your shame is
triggering mine, and if I’m not in touch with that, it turns into your prob-
lem.” From there, by finding and owning the problem in my own process,
we could both open up and return to considering his.
     “Fixing,” reassuring, and even positively reframing at certain moments
are all delicate moves that can easily break the contact, positioning the ther-
apist as the sharply defined expert and making whatever is happening in
the room into the client’s problem. Thus, meeting shame with “you really
shouldn’t be feeling that way” is always potentially isolating and always
risks sounding like “you should just get over it”; to that extent it can only
be reshaming. At times, in our heartfelt distress in the face of our client’s
distress, we can easily fall into this “contact trap,” all the more easily if some
shame feelings of our own (“I’m inadequate to this task; I’m not doing
enough here”) are triggered, and we are not fully aware of it. The cure for
this problem is taking simple ownership of these feelings, modeling that
the therapist can make a mistake, miss a cue, or have an issue, and still be

                                       102
                          The Therapeutic Process



all right, still be whole, and still be committed and available to the client.
In fact, I am all the more available at that point, because I have taken back
the responsibility that is mine, which is something Jason never got from
his own father until near the end.
     As with every intervention in Gestalt, there is no “one size fits all,” no
universal application of any particular specific move. With a client with
less self-coherence or less history between us, I could have “owned” the
same problem inside my mind while sharing much less of myself. I might
simply say, for example, “I think I didn’t stop to fully receive what you
were feeling and telling me before I moved into some action. Let’s go back,
and with your help we’ll try that again.” The particular move is created
for the here-and-now moment out of the present contact situation, but it
derives from the general Gestalt principle that we shift from the content
to the contact process and share that shift with as much or as little per-
sonal transparency as serves that client at that time as best we can judge it.
Always remember at least to consider asking the client how the exchange
went, how it felt, what hopes or fears or feelings it confirmed or—at times
productively—contradicted.


        ADRIANA: SHAME AND THE IMPORTANCE
                   OF COMMUNITY
Gestalt perspective, as we have seen, is founded on the unique creativity of
each human being and on our deep interconnectedness to our social field
of belonging, interaction, challenges, and meanings. These two qualities—
creative uniqueness and deep relationality—define us as human beings. In
Gestalt perspective it is impossible, ultimately, to reduce us only to our social
group of belonging and meaning, and it is equally impossible to extract
us wholly from that socially codetermined human process of cocreation
and coconstruction of behavior, self-definition, and meaning making. We
are never completely independent of our social reference groups, and we
are never just “the same as” those groups (or any one group or subset of
those groups). Our essential nature and need to belong in some meaning-
ful way and our inherent nature and need to generate a unique experi-
ence and unique responses are both givens of our nature. Human nature,

                                      103
                              Gestalt Therapy



experience, and behavior emerge from the dynamic interplay of these
two inherent dimensions, both social and individual, neither an isolated
individual nor just a “cog” in a social machine, but something more com-
plexly emergent out of this dynamic. These are fundamental principles
of Gestalt perspective on human behavior and human experience and of
Gestalt therapy theory and method.
     Especially when working with clients from a different culture than
our own, the Zen concept of shoshin—beginner’s mind—having an open-
ness, eagerness, and lack of preconceptions on any topic—in this case,
our client’s world of cultural meanings and allegiances—is useful even
when we believe we know the client’s culture well. We may make use of
our general knowledge of the client’s culture but at the same time keep
our openness to the individual in front of us with our phenomenological
stance, which tells us that we cannot know how the other person is feeling or
what he or she is thinking until we enter fully into that exploratory dialogue
that is the essence of therapy. We attune to an emotional resonance—joy,
sadness, anger, grief, excitement, fear, quiet pride, or muffled despair—
which becomes full empathy only by joining with that dialogic knowing
that comes from an intimate conversation based on true exploration, true
openness to the pains or riches, the shocks and the hidden, perhaps heal-
ing, connections we find through discovering with the client her or his
inner world of meanings.
     In the following case example, 11-year-old Adriana and her family
of Mixtec ethnicity, originally from the region stretching from Oaxaca
to Puebla in Mexico, faced a crisis that both shook the family’s cohesion
and threatened (in their view) their essential membership in their own
primary cultural group. Their culture was not a textbook stereotype of
Hispanic, Catholic, or even first-generation Hispanic. Nor was it Mexican,
again an assumptive generalization (including well-intentioned texts that
sometimes give generic descriptions). The literature tells us that Mixtec is
a culture (again, this is an assumption that we cannot know is true in this
specific case until we engage in a dialogue with the client to see whether
it holds true for her) in which the sense of community welfare and well-
being is so strong as to override the individual’s or even the particular
family’s interest. This tendency becomes even stronger when members

                                     104
                        The Therapeutic Process



of this Mesoamerican group immigrate to the United States, where they
may be a looked-down-on minority even within a larger disadvantaged
population of Mexican and other Hispanic first-generation immigrant
workers. Catholic faith is likely to be strong, and with that there may be
a tension between the pressure to conform to strong norms of behavior
and a duty to protect and care for children in the disordered and relatively
unregulated social environment in which these particular families find
themselves.
     Within this complex dynamic setting, the family came into the clinic
in crisis. They had just discovered through their medical clinic that unbe-
knownst to anyone, including Adriana herself, she was pregnant and only
3 months from full term. Adriana was completely unable to account for
how this had happened. Sheltered and emotionally young for her age, she
was unable to name who the father might be; it was clear that she did not
even know how babies were made. In her confused, minimally articu-
late way, she was quite adamant that she had not experienced any violent
assault. Because she could not name any possible father, and because she
spent little time on her own outside school, the family had been told that
their daughter would have to be removed from the home, where she was
likely unsafe—at least pending an investigation by social services.
     The first thing that stood out about the family was their strong sense
of shame about this situation. Adriana’s parents did not believe that their
innocent 11-year-old girl had done anything to “lead any man on,” as they
expressed it; they did not question Adriana’s account that she honestly
did not know how it had happened. Even so, a pervasive sense of shame
hung over the whole family, including Adriana herself, a shame that made
it difficult for the parents to participate in the investigation into who had
been her abuser and was now the biological father of her child.
     There was no question in their minds that the baby, when it arrived,
would be placed for adoption. The question was where Adriana would go
in the meantime. She could not stay at home pending the conclusion of
the investigation into her abuser’s identity and whether she was safe from
further incidents in the family home. The recommendation of social ser-
vices that she be placed with some other family member—a grandmother
or an aunt (both of which she had in the community)—filled the parents

                                    105
                               Gestalt Therapy



with something like terror. Placing the girl with a relative would neces-
sarily mean telling that person the reason and that would mean that their
whole community would inevitably come to know about it. Adriana was
therefore placed in foster care, but she was allowed to spend time with her
mother and younger sister whenever possible.
     In some other cultural setting the parents’ reaction might be inter-
preted by the therapist as uncaring: Why should this young, naïve girl not
be placed with a known and trusted extended family member for the dura-
tion of what to her must be a confusing, at times frightening, ordeal? It
was essential to understand that, for this family, already feeling as isolated
and embattled as they did in the larger Hispanic and Anglo community
around them, the idea of the violation of their own small community’s
strict Catholic rules and norms around sexuality was not just a question
of disapproval or malicious gossip; they felt the family’s very survival to
be at stake. A breach of their own community norms of this kind, they
were convinced, would mean the end of not just the parents’ but also their
children’s ability to live, work, worship, survive, and belong in a hostile
and alien larger society.
     This kind of understanding can never come from texts and programs
about the content of cultural diversity in various communities. Powerful
nuances and overriding emotions such as these can be appreciated and
worked with only through the kind of dialogue Gestalt (along with some
other methods) supports and advocates—itself based on those fundamen-
tal Gestalt precepts that we have been emphasizing in this book: Behavior
is mediated by personal meanings, which are a complex emergent creation
out of cultural, personal, and situational factors and dynamics; a client’s
inner world of meanings (as well as our own, ultimately) becomes known
more clearly to therapist and client alike through a process of open explo-
ration, experimenting, and dialogue.
     After the first visit at the clinic, the therapist offered to see Adriana at
school. Many of the clients at the agency were seen at their school during
the school day, and each school in the district even had a therapy room set
up for this purpose. The parents emphatically declined this arrangement,
insisting that the mother would take Adriana to the agency, even though
that meant driving from their small community to the larger town in the

                                      106
                         The Therapeutic Process



area, picking Adriana up at the foster home and taking her to the agency,
rearranging work schedules, and paying for gas with money they did not
have. All this so that the people in their community would not know that
Adriana was receiving services and start to ask questions. They realized all
too well that when a child is pulled out of class for appointments, confi-
dentiality is always questionable.
     In addition, the parents absolutely refused to meet with investigators
or others at their home, even though both of them worked full time. The
therapists involved were convinced that the parents were not trying to hide
anything except the whole situation from their own community. The same
issue came up in relation to the sheriff ’s investigation of the case as well.
Viewing these challenges in this more contextual, closely attentive cross-
cultural way, the therapists on the case went to work to “psychoeducate”
social services and sheriff alike on the particular, uniquely complex situa-
tion of the family and their small Mesoamerican refugee community, in the
context of the very different, much more disorderly, and even dangerous
context they were in (including in some areas, gang activity of two and even
three generations’ standing). After some persuasion and advocacy on the
part of the family therapist, the sheriff ’s department was willing to meet
the family at the fire station, the closest official building in this rural area
for interviews, instead of at the home as they would ordinarily have done.
     Adriana asked whether her mother might bring her 2-year-old sister
to her therapy sessions. Adriana explained that she felt “too lonely” in the
playroom without anyone from her family there with her; at the same time
the toddler was so young that her presence was not inhibiting to the thera-
peutic conversation. As we built our relationship and that conversation,
Adriana explored for the first time her own notions about what life (i.e.,
middle school, her next big upcoming step) might hold and what her own
needs, dreams, and desires might be. We could view this creative flexibility
around the parameters of the therapy hour as another example of cultural
sensitivity by the therapist, or we could see it as simply an enactment of
our Gestalt principle of building support for emergent new contact. Either
way, where new contact boundaries, new life challenges, new kinds of life
experiments are occurring, Gestalt theory points us toward conditions
of support facilitating the new adaptations life will require. In Adriana’s

                                      107
                               Gestalt Therapy



case, some of those needed new supports involved the therapy sessions,
whereas others involved, as we have seen, a deep openness on the part of
the therapists to listen to this family and respond creatively, empathically,
and inventively to the contextual supports that promised the most protec-
tion, healing, and care even when those arrangements differed from what
we might have assumed if we simply viewed the family as “immigrant
Hispanic.”
     Adriana returned home after her recovery from childbirth; the inves-
tigation concluded with the clarification and DNA confirmation that her
assailant was her older brother. This brother was sent to Mexico to live
with the grandparents, which permitted Adriana’s return, and the baby was
given up for adoption as planned. The next year, she went to middle school,
which was a natural transition to a different, larger group, opening new
challenges and possibilities for learning about herself, her thoughts and
feelings, her voicing of her own opinions and desires, including her begin-
ning reflections, as she crossed into early teen years, on her and her family’s
place in their culture. She continued in therapy on her journey of self-
discovery, self-awareness, and the articulation of that grounded, authentic
voice of her own experience, which is one of the best protections we can
build against possible future victimization or abuse. In her own time, in
the years ahead, Adriana will continue to make her own meanings of the
demands of community and family and the duty she may come to feel she
owes to herself to create a life that feels as right and fulfilling as possible to
her, hopefully including her own synthesis of all those meanings and their
various “pulls.”


                              CONCLUSION
In this series of seven case extracts and discussions—two teenagers, an adult
with trauma issues, a couple facing a new stage of life, a young child with
multiple problems, an instance of therapist shame in a long-term therapy
situation, and finally, a family for which diversity, as it is called in general
psychotherapeutic terms, came to the forefront—we hope we have been able
to give you a flavor of how Gestalt therapy principles work “on the ground”
in a wide range of situations, across a wide diversity of ethnic backgrounds,

                                       108
                         The Therapeutic Process



with wide variation in age, sexual orientation, marital and family status and
situation, and socioeconomic and educational class. With one client we
shared a great deal of our own “process,” and with another little or none.
With some we spent more time, as with Carlos, for example, talking about
the client’s world, while still using our here-and-now contact and relation-
ship in the therapy room as a clarifying reference and a grounding place
to return to. Yet, with others we might have done something that looked,
from the outside at least, like the reverse of this—spending much more of
our time focused on the living experiment of our own relational contact in
the present situation while making references to other experiences past and
present as clarifying references and comparison points.
     We are always focused on our own experience as a source of data
and dialogue points and the way the client’s experience is organized in
the relationship, both inside and in overt behavior and both “here in
the room together” and “out there in the world.” Our wider point is that
Gestalt therapy is never a recipe or a standard set of procedures, nor is the
therapist–client relationship just a preliminary stage to “build trust” for
the “real therapy” to come. Rather, the therapy is a kind of active dialogic
inquiry and exploration with the client into her or his practiced capacities
and new experiments in (co-)self-organization of relationship, experience,
and meaning. Where are these processes and capacities blocked, stunted,
or repetitive in ways that do not serve the client? And where are they well-
integrated and free enough from anxiety and dissociation to permit ongo-
ing growth of complexity and deeper meanings and, hopefully, increased
participation and satisfaction in living? When we are engaged in this col-
laborative inquiry (which is, as we have said, Lewin’s action research in clini-
cal application), taking apart integrated sequences and styles of contacting
in the service of a new integration that serves creativity, connection, and
greater depth in living and experiencing, we are practicing Gestalt. This atti-
tude and this practice can then often be integrated usefully with the insights
and practices of other methods. We hope that if you, the reader, have a pri-
mary identification with another theory family and practice methodology,
you may still find many points of intersection and usefulness in the theory
story we have told so far and the living cocreative sequences we have shared
in the cases here.

                                      109
                                               5

                                 Evaluation




I  n this chapter, we take a closer look at the issue of evidence-based out-
   come research, in terms of the specific research showing Gestalt therapy
to be effective and the extensive research base examining the relationship
as the healing factor in psychotherapy, a factor which is the fundamental
principal of relational Gestalt therapy.


              EFFECTIVENESS OF PSYCHOTHERAPY
The good news, both for practitioners and clients of therapy and counseling,
is that psychotherapy is generally and broadly effective across an extensive
range of populations covering a wide spectrum of problems and diag-
nostic categories (for an extensive summative discussion, see Gaudiano &
Miller, 2013). An accumulation of large metastudies, some of them covering
hundreds—or in a few cases thousands—of other studies, have confirmed


http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/14527-005
Gestalt Therapy, by G. Wheeler and L. Axelsson
Copyright © 2015 by the American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.


                                               111
                              Gestalt Therapy



that psychotherapy, in contrast to no formal clinical intervention, clearly
makes a positive difference in many people’s symptoms, suffering, behav-
ior, and lives (American Psychological Association, 2012; Gaudiano &
Miller, 2013; Lambert, 2001).
      These, among many other studies, show the solid research foundations
of psychotherapy, but these general conclusions on the efficacy of psycho-
therapy raise more specific issues: What is it about psychotherapy specifi-
cally that accounts for its effectiveness? What are the positive factors that
most influence outcome? Is it theory or a particular methodology (i.e., is
one school or approach superior to others or some others)? Or is it some-
thing else, some characteristic of the therapist, for instance, that most pre-
dicts good outcomes—age or years of experience, say, or particular degrees
or something more qualitative in the process?
      Large metastudies have examined the factors that most influence the
outcomes of therapy. Wampold (2001), for example, reported the follow-
ing summative findings (which are sustained in numerous other metastud-
ies, such as those cited here as well as in Gaudiano & Miller, 2013):
77 Psychotherapy is indeed effective.
77 Type of treatment was not found to be a predictive factor.
77 Neither the theoretical bases of the techniques used nor the strictness
   of adherence to those techniques were found to be predictive factors.
77 The alliance between the patient and the therapist (e.g., positive and
   trusting feelings toward the therapist, motivation and collaboration of
   the client, and empathic response of the therapist) was found to be a
   key predictive factor.
     This does not mean (as Gaudiano & Miller, 2013, emphasized) that
no particular methods have been associated with outcome effectiveness.
On the contrary, outcome effectiveness has been associated with many dif-
ferent methods, including Gestalt therapy. However, a point that is some-
times overlooked (or perhaps even deliberately obscured, in the interests
of promoting or excluding some methods from payment authorization)
is that a given method associated with positive outcomes does not in itself
demonstrate that (a) it is the method itself that accounts for the effective-
ness or (b) that some or many other methods may not be equally effective

                                     112
                                Evaluation



(conceivably even more so, with certain populations or presenting prob-
lems). Indeed, we can say that if it were only method that made the dif-
ference, we might expect online or workbook therapy, even without the
presence of another person, to show much stronger outcome effectiveness
than it does, but this is not the thrust of the research cited earlier, which
emphasizes relational factors.
     In general, attempts to discriminate relative effectiveness between or
among different schools have been much less successful (Luborsky et al.,
2002; Miller, Wampold, & Varhely, 2008). None of this detracts from the
legitimate interest and duty of providers, payer sources, and policymakers
to try to be sure that the interventions they are sponsoring and/or paying
for are empirically validated. But it is clear that the methodological chal-
lenges in this research area are considerable and that the complexities (and
at times, limitations) in examining specific variables, especially theoreti-
cal and methodological variables, are huge and often underestimated or
completely misunderstood by relevant authorizing agents.


          EFFECTIVENESS OF GESTALT THERAPY
Where does this leave the evidence-based outcome status of Gestalt ther-
apy, one of those many methods for which outcome research is sparse?
The challenges of determining adherence to a core Gestalt practice meth-
odology are especially daunting for a method that explicitly prizes creativ-
ity and experiment and explicitly makes use of the authentic, present (and
thus variable) “felt” relational experience between therapist and client in
the therapy session. In this book we have emphasized that Gestalt is not
a fixed method in any protocol or step-by-step sense; rather, it is a set
of principles and understandings about how human experience becomes
coherent and works, how we orient relationally in a cosubjective field,
and how we experiment, learn, and above all, create as a unique species
and in our own unique experiences, relationships, and lives. Given these
principles, goals, and values, how can we assess which therapists or which
behaviors are or are not “Gestalt-adherent” so as to compare outcomes by
method or other variable (Stevens, Stringfellow, Wakelin, & Waring, 2011;
Strümpfel, 2006)?

                                    113
                             Gestalt Therapy



     We propose a two-part answer to this question. First, we note the out-
come research, cited earlier, that surveyed a range of methods including
those labeled as person-centered, interpersonal, relational, or present- or
problem-centered and that was broadly and meaningfully coextensive with
a Gestalt approach. These studies and metastudies show clear positive
benefit for these interpersonal approaches to a degree comparable with
the more researched behaviorally focused methods. More work is needed
to demonstrate that all the terms are validly coextensive with each other
and with relational Gestalt therapy, but we believe this could be done and
would result in meaningful groupings of results for the “relational and
experiential” therapies.
     Research on the efficacy of Gestalt therapy has shown that it is equal,
and in some aspects superior, to other therapy methods such as cogni-
tive behavior therapy (CBT). Strümpfel (2006) completed a meta-analysis
comparing Gestalt therapy (as a stand-alone method and in combination
with focused-expressive psychotherapy and process oriented psychother-
apy) with CBT. The results showed no statistically significant difference
between the methods when looking at the overall level of treatment. When
investigating some of the subcategories that were part of the studies, one
significant difference was found: Patients treated with Gestalt therapy
were found to have a greater improvement in interpersonal problem-
solving skills.
     Azar and Asadnia (2013) conducted a study with female college stu-
dents with poor sleep quality, comparing treatment with CBT and with
Gestalt group therapy. Students receiving treatment showed significant
improvement in their sleep quality compared with the control group, but
there was not a significant difference between the group that received CBT
and the group that received Gestalt group therapy.
     A research project completed in the United Kingdom used the clinical
outcomes in routine evaluation (CORE) system. This system is the most
widely used approach for auditing, evaluating, and measuring outcomes
for psychotherapy and counseling services in the United Kingdom, with
about 50,000 client results saved in the CORE National Research Data-
base. A total of 135 clients treated by Gestalt therapists participated in
the study. When comparing the results from these clients using the CORE

                                    114
                                Evaluation



method to assess effectiveness of treatment, Gestalt therapy appeared to
be as effective as other modalities (Stevens et al., 2011).
     The work cited earlier showed that the strongest factor cluster in pre-
dicting positive therapeutic outcome is not level or years of experience or
choice of method (or adherence to that method), but a recurrent cluster of
factors relating to the qualities of the relationship in the therapist–client
contact and process. These factors include alliance, empathy, goal con-
sensus and collaboration, congruence and genuineness, active openness
to client feedback, repair of ruptures, and the like (Norcross, 2011; Stiles,
Barkham, Mellor-Clark, & Connell, 2008; see also Wampold, 2001). These
findings do not mean that training, theoretical knowledge, professional
experience, diagnostic capacity, and other such factors are not important;
rather, they cannot substitute for the more overriding relational factor: the
capacity to enter into and conduct a relationship with another person in a
way that makes him or her feel seen, understood, supported in her or his
goals, and generally less alone with the problems and situations that have
been distressing or hindering her or him in the universal quest that all of
us share, dealing with the challenges short and long term that come up in
the course of living, and where possible, moving beyond just coping to
achieve a sense of connectedness, satisfaction, and meaning in life.
     Take, for instance, the quality of alliance, which has been described
and measured and which was identified as one of the strongest predictors
of treatment success (e.g., Wampold, 2001). Bordin (1994) suggested that
alliance in the early stages of treatment is built principally on a positive
emotional bond between therapist and client (e.g., trust, respect, liking),
their ability to agree on the goals of the treatment, and their establishment
of a mutual consensus on the tasks that form the substance of the specific
therapy (e.g., homework, Socratic dialogue, free association). Alliance
may then be rated from three separate perspectives: client, therapist, and
observer, with client and observer ratings being both quite similar and also
better predictors of outcome than the therapist’s evaluation. Although the
difference among the perspectives in the meta-analysis of Norcross (2011)
was not found to be statistically significant, the cautionary message to
therapists is clear: We may be naturally biased in our evaluation of our
therapeutic effectiveness.

                                    115
                               Gestalt Therapy



     Likewise, the quality of empathy can be described more behaviorally
and has been shown repeatedly to be another of the key predictors of
therapy effectiveness. Empathy is the capacity to “enter into” or attune
to the feelings the client is experiencing and to communicate that attun-
ement to the client. In this volume we have discussed this quality in several
instances as the capacity to “show up” in a personal and genuine way, as,
for example, when we allow ourselves to register in our body and emotions
the states the client is experiencing and reporting (or at times, experienc-
ing but not reporting, which can become the basis for sensitive inquiry in
Gestalt therapy, as, for example, by saying, “I feel a sinking feeling in my
stomach as you talk about this—or a tightness in my throat, a burning in
my eyes, etc.—is that how you feel it too?”). Communicating this to the
client is also key: It is the client’s perception of how empathic the therapist
is that predicts outcome better than either the therapist’s or an observer’s
perception of therapist empathy (Bohart, 2002).
     This leads us to a third qualitative relational descriptor, one that is per-
haps less intuitively understood than alliance and empathy: congruence.
By congruence we mean that the therapist’s interventions and responses
are both consonant with those of the client (i.e., empathic, in the sense
described earlier) and self-congruent; they convey a sense of the thera-
pist as an integrated person with embodied states and named emotional
expressions that are consonant with her or his other verbal expressions
(“The words and the music match up,” as one of our clients put it) and
with other manifestations of personality, such as opinions, style, and even
dress and setting decor (to the extent that the therapist may have been able
to personalize it, depending on the setting). As clients, we “spin stories”
about our therapists, based at times on the most minimal signs and clues
(indeed, in Gestalt, we would insist that this kind of “projective” activity
is inherent and necessary to our social orientation as human beings). This
research has shown that trust in therapy is fostered—as in other kinds of
relationships—when the sources of information and speculation about
the other person produce a coherent picture we can count on and relax
into (so that even surprises, when they come, stand out against a more
stable ground and enrich rather than undermine the relationship). Here,

                                      116
                                Evaluation



too, Norcross (2011), along with many others, identified congruence in
this sense as one of the strongly significant predictors of effectiveness
in therapy.
     This brings us to the second part of our answer to the question of the
effectiveness of Gestalt therapy. In Gestalt therapy, relationship building
is not just preliminary to therapy or an early stage of therapy; it is the
heart of the therapy, and one might rightly say that in Gestalt, relationship
building and the exploration of all the issues it involves constitutes the
therapy. In other words, these qualitative relational dimensions of the thera-
peutic process, which have emerged again and again over the past 4 decades
of empirical outcomes research in psychotherapy as strong—perhaps the
strongest factors in therapeutic effectiveness (e.g., Smith & Glass, 1977;
Stiles et al., 2008; as well as more contemporary research: Stevens et al.,
2011)—are actually the meat of Gestalt theory and method and the heart
of Gestalt therapist training.




                                     117
                                               6

                 Future Developments




E    very living thing depends on the twin dynamic principles of conserva-
     tion and change. Together, these two poles define life: Without change,
an organism has no new input and nourishment and soon withers and
dies. Without conservation, the organism has no flexible boundary and no
criteria of selection and soon disperses into the wider environment. These
are basic Gestalt psychology principles, and they are inherent to any pro-
cess of life, including change, growth, contact, and the in-and-out flow of
mutual nourishment that distinguishes us and also embeds us in a wider
shared field. Restoring the balance between the old and the new, stability
and new learning, established “ground” and new “figure” is the restoration
of growth, which is the central aim of Gestalt therapy.
     These same living principles apply to theories and methodologies as
well. Without the capacity to take in and digest new needs and conditions
in our ever-changing field, a theory becomes a fossil, just a cookbook on


http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/14527-006
Gestalt Therapy, by G. Wheeler and L. Axelsson
Copyright © 2015 by the American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.


                                               119
                            Gestalt Therapy



the shelf, with little application to the here-and-now world. Without a
strong basis in core principles, a theory does not offer any foundation for
further growth. In this volume we have offered you an account of Gestalt
therapy that is not a cookbook but that rests on a vital foundation of core
principles that can continue to generate and accommodate new growth in
the fertile creative tradition of Lewin, Goodman, the Perlses, and genera-
tions of Gestalt teachers and writers since that time, a number of whom
we cited throughout Chapter 3.
     What lies ahead? We believe that in the coming years Gestalt theory
and method will continue to evolve in three lively, burgeoning areas:
(a) neuroscience and the ongoing research revolution in interpersonal
neuro­biology (Siegel, 2012), further expanding and refining our under-
standing of the healing effects of relational therapy and how to support
and enhance those effects; (b) the treatment of trauma informed by this
revolution and the growing knowledge base offered to Gestalt and other
methods on nervous system activation, on relational processes and effects
at a nervous system level, and on healing from trauma; and (c) the appli-
cation of these ideas and practices, based on a relational field model, to
community, educational, and lifelong development issues and especially
to the ever-growing needs in the areas of child development, early child-
hood intervention, and parent education and support areas and issues,
taking our therapy practices beyond the therapy room and into our shared
world of public programs and policy. Next, we briefly take a deeper look
at each of these areas in turn.


          THE NEUROSCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION
Recently researchers have begun to understand some of the ways in which
our cognitive and emotional experiences and patterns have a neuro-
biological substrate. That substrate, we know now, is mostly not fixed at
birth but becomes shaped and patterned through the relationships we
have all through life, especially during our first years of development
(Panksepp, 2009). We can now see the dichotomy of “nature versus nur-
ture” as a false one. For human beings, as evolutionary biologist Paul
Ehrlich (2000) put it, nature is nurture.

                                   120
                           Future Developments



     Not only is the long-standing core principle of Gestalt—that life is about
taking up relationships, and therapy has to do with restoring balance and
flow in that natural contact process—being validated almost daily by new
research in neuroscience and interpersonal neurobiology (Siegel, 2012),
but we are also learning more all the time about how that happens, in
ever-greater detail. Thus, not only are we strengthened and heartened (and
joined more and more) as relational Gestalt therapists in our insistence on
the key function of the therapist–client relationship in healing, but we are
also guided in our practices to become ever-more skilled in supporting a
greater healing presence and impact. Today more than ever it is important
for therapists to stay abreast of these new findings as they apply to our field,
as part of our own quest to learn how to better use therapeutic attunement
and the coconstruction (with the client) of those facilitative environments
for lasting growth in our clients’ relationships and lives.
     Another aspect in which neuroscience supports relational Gestalt
therapy is the strong emphasis on the therapist’s presence in the room,
as a relational environment of meeting, holding, and regulating, an area
we will see develop even further in the future to provide better treatment.
At the edge of this learning, for many therapists, is attending to our own
arousal state as part of that relational environment. This means body
awareness as well as a clear knowledge of and sensitivity to our own issues
and triggers for reactivity. Our Gestalt tradition of moving beyond just
“story content” to felt, embodied, and relational experience in the present
moment means that we are well-positioned to adopt the applications of
this research explosion and integrate them into our living practices and
relationships in the therapeutic setting.
     Given this, it is disturbing to note that the current trend in train-
ing programs for therapists is to have minimal or no requirements for
trainees to engage deeply in the therapeutic process as clients. In our view,
a relationship with a mentor therapist, who may evolve into a mentor con-
sultant over time, is one of the most essential training prerequisites for
psychotherapists. We believe this is true for any theory and method and
for Gestalt work in particular, based as it is on creativity, individual dif-
ference and deep belonging, the power of embodied affect, and the goal
of increased capacity for ever-more complex wholes of meaning and

                                      121
                             Gestalt Therapy



relationship. To imagine embarking on that complex work without a deep
voyage through one’s own history and capacities for contact, complexity,
and creativity makes no sense and may in fact be a path toward rigidity
or damage to the self and others. Key is the relational stance. Because we
build relationship by inquiring deeply into the phenomenology of our cli-
ent’s world (and thereby learning more about our own), we need a strong
base of contact capacity ourselves to act as the “holding relationship” for
our client’s development.
     A fuller Gestalt articulation of developmental theory, drawing on
neuroscience to emphasize the way earlier patterning becomes encoded
and then governs later development, supports our differential focus on
particular areas of a person’s life that are moving and changing, in contrast
to those that are stuck in old pattern reactions. Such a theory development
helps us to understand the developmental history of each capacity in turn,
in terms of the kinds of support that were present when that particular
area was first becoming stuck or (to use a common developmental image)
arrested. This kind of view also helps therapists see what supports are
needed for the client to be able to relax the too-rigid reactive pattern of
those challenges and resume a path of growth and change in that area.
     Neuroscience has already taught us that our brains develop physi-
cally through relational process and that these relationally based patterns
will set a “template” for how we continue to select, integrate, and use new
experience and learning throughout life. It is not just a matter of cogni-
tive processing: Extensive neuroscientific research around regulation has
shown how the structure and regulation of our nervous system develop
and are affected to a large degree by relationships in our lives. As J. R.
Schore and Schore (2008) pointed out, contemporary attachment theory
has now become, through research, a regulation theory.


                      TRAUMA TREATMENT
Research in neuroscience also influences our work involving strong emo-
tional activation, the treatment of trauma, and the regulation of the
nervous system (and coregulation, in the course of relational therapy).
Today in psychotherapy we have moved beyond the time when explosive

                                    122
                            Future Developments



emotional discharge for its own sake was accepted uncritically as a positive
and healing event. This does not mean that expressing strong emotions
does not have a crucial place in therapy; we believe it does. But that expres-
sion should be contextualized by a deeper understanding on the thera-
pist’s part of the dynamics of the brain and nervous system. The question
is one of balance and support; it is the therapist’s role to support the client
in experimenting safely to find the right balance at any specific moment
between strong expression and well-integrated containment (with thera-
pist support, especially in the early stages of trying out a “deeper dive” into
unfamiliar emotional expression).
       Siegel (2012) wrote, “One’s thinking or behavior can become disrupted
if arousal moves beyond the boundaries of the window of tolerance” (p. 254).
From a relational Gestalt point of view, a person who breaks through his or
her window of tolerance will have a limited ability to make any kind of flex-
ible contact with his or her environment. More likely, the client will have to
revert to a “fallback” contact pattern, something older and more rigid that
manages the too-stressful arousal—likely the kind of learned dysfunction
that has caused problems in her or his life and was a reason bringing him
or her to therapy. The risk is also that the pattern of feeling out of control
and helpless will once more be reinforced by hyperarousal. This does not
mean we have to avoid strong feelings in therapy (or in life); rather, we must
work with the client collaboratively, in constant communication, to try to
stay within that “therapeutic window,” the client’s optimal learning zone
of the moment, the zone of arousal in which the client can experience and
still manage and process highly charged emotional and traumatic material
(Resneck-Sannes, 2011).
       This also means making sure that these expressions of strong emotion
are followed by completion, recovery (a quieting of the arousal state), and
integration. The new learning takes place in the integration stage, in which
a broader background of experience and emotions becomes attached to
and integrated with this more disruptive experience and the client can
find and make new meanings about events, feelings, relationships, and
possibilities in his or her life. As Klopstech (2005) pointed out, a cathartic
experience is not in itself healing but may have the potential to be healing
if it is followed by an integration into the self, significant relationships, and

                                      123
                              Gestalt Therapy



everyday life. As further research in the neuroscience of learning reveals
more about how new learning happens, we believe relational Gestalt ther-
apy is well-positioned to continue to profit from this new knowledge.
     A direct outgrowth of this new research in neuroscience is a transfor-
mation in our understanding and treatment of recovery and healing from
trauma (experiences, at times assaultive, which have overwhelmed and
to some extent disabled the full integration of our capacities at a nervous
system level). More recently this understanding has included the key idea
of developmental trauma (van der Kolk, 2005), which extends the idea of
lasting traumatic effects to include experiences that may not be specific or
violent assaults but that can be a larger childhood history and pattern of
abuse, traumatic events, and/or neglect.
     We have seen, especially in Chapter 4, that these developments in
neuroscience have already started to inform our work with clients who are
dealing with symptoms of trauma, as, for example, in the case of Diana.
With clients who have a trauma history (early or recent abuse trauma
or developmental trauma), the issue of regulation of the nervous system
becomes even more important. In Diana’s case, for example, this meant
offering attuned relational support for her to regulate and relax her panic
or “freeze” response enough to discover and develop her more empower-
ing “fight” response after years in which freeze was the only reaction her
nervous system could support and access.


               BEYOND THE THERAPY SESSION
As we have emphasized all through this volume, in the relational field Gestalt
model we can never fully, usefully view the person, the emotion, or the
behavior outside a larger relational and whole-field context. In the Gestalt
perspective, we are all part of a unified web of relationships: What affects the
field in one place affects it (and us) in other places and ways as well.
     Thus, as we see in the cases of Carlos, Daisy, and Adriana, we often have
to think and practice outside the box of the therapy room, drawing on the
settings and resources of the greater community. Especially when working
with children and teenagers, who developmentally are more embedded in
their immediate field, our ability to influence the people surrounding the

                                      124
                           Future Developments



client is key to promoting greater change. Thus, for example, in Gestalt
work with children and adolescents especially, we may find ourselves talk-
ing with teachers and other providers, designing in-class or at-home strat-
egies, giving homework to individuals and couples, and in general taking
a “field view” of the client’s life—potentially at every age. As the stigma
against therapy lessens in our society, it becomes easier to extend the
therapy outside the therapy room, and with our strong grounding in field
theory and the notion that to promote change we have to modify supports
in a person’s field, going out into the community to support the client is
one of the natural next steps we foresee in the development of relational
Gestalt therapy.
     In this way we can see where some of the older, more rigid boundaries
between therapy and counseling and coaching, community and organiza-
tional work, and advocacy are loosening in ways we see as generally positive.
As we expand on these modalities of supporting our clients, we open up to
different interventions, all of which support each individual client in her or
his field to promote the change he or she is seeking in therapy and in life.
     As Lewin (1951) reminded us, by the terms of the basic Gestalt psy-
chology model of awareness and perception, we can never actually take in
everything; we naturally have to make boundaries of relevancy to frame
any situation and attempt to understand it and intervene. Field-relational
theory helps us to remember that the larger field is always there, always
conditioning and constraining options in thinking and behaving, often
in ways that we are not immediately aware of. Thus, as relational Gestalt
therapists (and others), we all benefit from the reminder to step back, look
at the client and her or his situation more widely, and take in underlying
present factors that are affecting the client’s life and our relational process
in therapy. My health and best functioning, like that of my clients, can
never be completely separated from the supportive or unsupportive con-
ditions of the wider field—socioeconomic, cultural, environmental, and
relational at many levels. Thus, therapists are called on more today than
ever before to be advocates, public spokespeople, and activists in the ways
that are most natural and available to us—in speaking and writing, in our
communities, and in public policy debates on the allocation of support
and resources in society.

                                     125
                             Gestalt Therapy



     An outstanding example of a new and innovative approach to the
integration of psychotherapy, public health, and community activism is
the work of The Relational Center (TRC) in Los Angeles (http://www.
relationalcenter.org). On the basis of the Gestalt relational model in com-
bination with public narrative work, TRC uses a pioneering training and
empowerment approach to bring low-fee and no-fee mental health and
community-building services to an underserved and marginalized urban
population. In addition, they also train professionals to apply the model in
other venues in several countries (see Fairfield, 2013; Ganz, 2009).




                                    126
                                               7

                                  Summary




A     ll through these chapters we have presented a Gestalt model that is
      not a recipe or a set of techniques but a fundamental methodology
for working with people in psychotherapy and (with appropriate modi-
fications) in a wide range of other settings and modalities as well. The
model is based on relationship, creative growth, embodied emotional
experience, and a new understanding of support, and it is grounded in the
rich century-long tradition of Gestalt psychological research. That under-
lying research tradition established a set of fundamental assumptions
about our cognitive and emotional process that, as we have argued here,
have long since become foundational in the basic organizing paradigm for
understanding human process in contemporary psychology across many
different fields. From those principles comes our understanding of the
selective and constructive process model of perception, cognition, and
learning, principles that at the broadest level underlie today’s emergent


http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/14527-007
Gestalt Therapy, by G. Wheeler and L. Axelsson
Copyright © 2015 by the American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.


                                               127
                             Gestalt Therapy



fields of cognitive neuroscience and interpersonal neurobiology. These
burgeoning new fields, in turn, are now setting the agenda for the ongoing
evolution of our wider field and our relational Gestalt model.
     As we established in Chapters 2 and 3, an additional foundational
principle of Gestalt psychology is field theory: All our perceptions (and we
ourselves) are in and of the field, both our inner and outer field of experi-
ence. We are not external observers of our experiential field; rather, we are
coparticipants in that field, making subjective interpretations and mean-
ings. This also means, as we have pointed out, that we view the dichotomy
between inner and outer as an oversimplification because we know today
that what is viewed as the inner world (of thoughts, feelings, values and
beliefs) is both a subjective construction and a reflection of our past and
present relational experiences, whereas our outer field is not an objec-
tive picture of “what’s there” but an interpretation conditioned by prior
assumptions and selective biases that color and constrain our perceptions.
Thus, both the concepts of inner and outer worlds of experience have to
be relativized; the two realms of subjective experience interpenetrate and
codetermine each other more than we generally realize, and our behavior
emerges out of a whole interpreted field of perception.
     If our actions and ways of relating and contacting our environment
are too heavily conditioned by past relationships and learning, not taking
enough account of what is new and different in our current situation (and
in our current available supports and resources), we view the world and
organize our behavior from what we have been calling all through these
chapters a fixed Gestalt. Most often it is this repetitive, unfulfilling pro-
cess that leads the client to seek out therapy. The therapeutic relationship
makes the “safe emergency” of therapy safe enough to relax some of these
reactive patterns so that the client can begin to experience and experiment
with new feelings, new behaviors, and new ways of living and relating to
the world.
     Throughout this volume—and especially in Chapter 4—our intention
has been to give you, the reader, a sense of how relational Gestalt therapy
unfolds and can lead to experiment and lasting change in the therapy room
and beyond. The use of a present-centered model that regards the here-
and-now relationship in the room as authentic and real, we believe, best

                                    128
                                  Summary



serves the transfer of those new experiences in therapy to the ongoing chal-
lenges of the rest of life.
     As we have discussed, a strong common thread in all the case narratives
in Chapter 4, and one of the hallmarks of relational Gestalt therapy, is the
therapist’s use of self. The therapist is not a detached observer but a fully
engaged participant and observer—while we set aside our own issues and
agenda in the service of the client, we share selectively from our own present
experience in the session, recognizing that whatever happens in any rela-
tionship has elements of cocreation, in which both participants contribute
and assent to (or in dire cases may have been coerced or have submitted to)
what happens between them. As therapists (and simply as people), we know
how difficult it can be for our clients (or for us ourselves) to see their and
our role in creating or at least inviting the painful difficulties we may get
into, recurrently and often mystifyingly, in particular kinds of situations and
relationships or in life in general. By understanding the present relational
process in this way, we open up a whole additional dimension of useful
“real-time” data for the client—namely, information about how the client
is affecting the field of supported relational possibilities—which is always,
in this model, a cocreation of both parties.
     An additional linking theme that cuts across the chapters and the case
narratives is relational Gestalt therapy’s focus on the key Gestalt concept
of support. Support is all those conditions (inner and outer, as we have
sharply relativized those terms) that facilitate a given experience or behav-
ior and/or inhibit other possible experiences and behaviors in a situation.
In the process we have called into question our strongly individualistic
Western culture, where drawing support from “outside the self ” can be
viewed as problematic dependency, even weakness and danger. In contrast,
contemporary Gestalt therapy rests on a radically transformed understand-
ing of the dynamics of support and a new articulation of a Gestalt theory
of change based on these relational field dynamics.
     Because the message of this Gestalt change theory, we believe, is one
of the most important takeaways of this book (and of the Gestalt model
for practitioners of every methodology today), we repeat it here: Behavior
and experience are integrated constructions in an organized, subjective
context of perceived and felt supports (and inhibitions, which we can view

                                     129
                             Gestalt Therapy



as constraints or negative supports). This articulation of change theory
emerges out of the “mapping” Lewin (1936, 1951) was talking about, as a
metaphor for our integrated process: What is my situation (as I perceive
it)? Where am I trying to go? What am I trying to cope with or avoid? In
relation to that, what and where are my supports for going toward my
intention (or avoiding a fear)? On the basis of this map, Gestalt change
theory tells us that for any change to be effective and sustainable, there
must be a corresponding change in the underlying field conditions of
support. Whatever my experience and my behavior, it will be based on
this subjective map, a map of supports (including the negative or aversive
features of that field; a negative support for a particular experience or
course of action is at the same time a support for going a different way).
Stated like this, the theory of change sounds self-evident, like any true
observation about our behavior and process, but we believe that if you
keep this in mind in the therapy hour, you will find the difference it can
make to be profound.
     Given these nonrigid and flexible ways of working in relational
Gestalt therapy, research based on this theory can become a challenge,
but as we pointed out in Chapter 5, the branch of research we suggest
is the one focusing more on the processes of therapy: the relational fac-
tors. The research done on these relational factors (alliance, empathy,
goal consensus and collaboration, congruence and genuineness, active
openness to client feedback, repair of ruptures, and the like) shows that
they are the measurable empirical variables that affect the outcome of
therapy the most.
     With that as a base, we hope that by this point you have a good feel,
as well as a theoretical understanding, of how relational Gestalt therapy
is used and practiced today. Because this is a discussion about Gestalt, we
add explicitly here that the articulation of theory and methodology we
have given you (although widely shared among leading teachers, writ-
ers, and practitioners of our generations of Gestalt therapy and related
applications today around the world) is still just that: an articulation of
our interpretive understandings, informed now by a combined half cen-
tury between us of interactive dialogue with our colleagues, students, and
especially our clients, both in Gestalt and widely in enriching conversation

                                    130
                                 Summary



with advocates of many other methods and views. Although still agreeing
on a common set of theoretical assumptions and attitudes as a shared
base, others might articulate these points differently, with the unique
creative foci and emphases from their life and professional experiences,
needs, and primary concerns. That kind of creative difference is taken as
a healthy given in Gestalt theory and work.
     We are all eclectic therapists today, in that we draw from the rich cor-
nucopia of methods and techniques for dealing with diverse particular
populations, particularly challenging problems, and widely varying prac-
tice settings that characterize our world. As we do this, we try (sometimes
awkwardly) to relate those gifts and insights to our “home” theories and
methodologies—those particular theoretical perspectives whose assump-
tions and values stand up best to our reflection and scrutiny and that
feel most deeply congruent with our own basic beliefs and values about
human nature, human relationships, and human process. Because Gestalt
therapy rests on Gestalt psychology, a system that was built on inquiry
about human process at the most basic level (before being applied to ther-
apeutic and systemic issues and problems), we find it particularly useful in
sorting through this eclectic therapy landscape in today’s diverse, complex,
multi-problem world. In this way our necessary eclecticism becomes an
informed choicefulness, as we contextualize the different techniques and
approaches on offer with regard to how they serve and support attuned
relationship, full presence and contact, free experiment, and support in
relation to particular clients at particular times.
     Over the past half century, Gestalt therapy has had a deep and per-
vasive influence on most other major schools of psychotherapy, spurring
more present focus, more authenticity and contact in the client–therapist
relationship, greater attention to support, and more focus on challenge,
growth, client strengths, and what today is often termed positive psychol-
ogy. This influence has not been one-way; over these same years, Gestalt
has gained greatly from the psychodynamic and cognitive behavior
schools in the areas of attachment theory, developmental theory, narra-
tive theory, attention to unexamined beliefs and their constrictive role in
behavior and experience, and the study of creativity. This rapprochement
does not mean that meaningful differences between and among the major

                                    131
                            Gestalt Therapy



schools of psychotherapy do not still exist or are unimportant. Rather,
each orientation represents a unique center of understanding or point of
view on human nature and human process. Whatever school or method
you identify most closely with, now or in the future, we hope that through
this volume you have gained an insight into the many riches of relational
Gestalt, together with particular insights and practices you can apply to
any method or mode you find yourself working in.
     Once again, we wish you courage and heart for the work you are
doing, now and in the future, and blessings for your journey.




                                   132
                  Suggested Readings




Clemmens, M. C. (2005). Getting beyond sobriety: Clinical approaches to long-term
   recovery. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.
Frank, R. (2001). Body of awareness: A somatic and developmental approach to
   psychotherapy. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.
Frank, R., & La Barre, F. (2010). The first year and the rest of your life: Movement,
   development and psychotherapeutic change. New York, NY: Routledge, Taylor
   & Francis.
Hycner, R., & Jacobs, L. (1996). The healing relationship in Gestalt therapy:
   A dialogic-self psychological approach. Highland, NY: Gestalt Journal Press.
Jacobs, L., & Hycner, R. (Eds.). (2009). Relational approaches in gestalt therapy.
   New York, NY: Routledge, Taylor & Francis.
Kepner, J. I. (1987). Body process: A Gestalt approach to working with the body in
   psychotherapy. New York, NY: Gardner Press.
Kepner, J. I. (1996). Healing tasks: Psychotherapy with adult survivors of sexual
   abuse. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Lee, R. G. (2008). The secret language of intimacy: Releasing the hidden power in
   couple relationships. New York, NY: Routledge, Taylor & Francis.
Lee, R. G., & Harris, N. (2011). Relational child, relational brain: Development
   and therapy in childhood and adolescence. New York, NY: Routledge, Taylor &
   Francis.
Lee, R. G., & Wheeler, G. (1996). The voice of shame: Silence and connection in psycho-
   therapy. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Levine Bar-Yoseph, T. (Ed.) (2005). The bridge: Dialogues across cultures. Metairie,
   LA: Gestalt Institute of New Orleans Press.
McConville, M. (1995). Adolescence: Psychotherapy and the emergent self. San
   Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

                                         133
                               Suggested Readings



McConville, M., & Wheeler, G. (Eds.). (2001). The heart of development: Gestalt
   approaches to working with children, adolescents and their worlds: Vol. II.
   Adolescence. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.
Melnick, J., & Nevis, E. (2013). Mending the world: Social healing inter-
   ventions by gestalt practitioners worldwide. New York, NY: Routledge Taylor
   & Francis.
Mortola, P. (2006). Windowframes: Learning the art of gestalt play therapy the
   Oaklander way. New York, NY: Routledge Taylor & Francis.
Nevis, E. (Ed.). (1987). Organizational consulting: A gestalt approach. New York,
   NY: Routledge Taylor & Francis.
Nevis, E. (Ed.). (1993). Gestalt therapy perspectives and applications. New York,
   NY: Gardner Press.
Oaklander, V. (1988). Windows to our children: A gestalt approach to children and
   adolescents. Highland, NY: Gestalt Journal Press.
Oaklander, V. (2007). Hidden treasure: A map to the child’s inner self. London,
   England: Karnac Books.
Perls, F. S., Hefferline, R., & Goodman, P. (1994). Gestalt therapy: Excitement and
   growth in the human personality. New York, NY: Gestalt Journal Press. (Original
   work published 1951)
Polster, E., & Polster, M. (1974). Gestalt therapy integrated: Contours of theory and
   practice. New York, NY: Vintage.
Polster, E., & Polster, M. (1999). From the radical center: The heart of gestalt therapy.
   Cleveland, OH: Gestalt Institute of Cleveland Press.
Stoehr, T. (Ed.). (1994). Crazy hope and finite experience: Final essays of Paul
   Goodman. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Stoehr, T. (1994). Here, now, next: Paul Goodman and the origins of gestalt therapy.
   Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.
Ullman, D., & Wheeler, G. (2009). Cocreating the field: Intention and practice in the
   age of complexity. New York, NY: Routledge Taylor & Francis.
Wheeler, G. (1991). Gestalt reconsidered: A new approach to contact and resistance.
   New York, NY: Gardner Press.
Wheeler, G. (2000). Beyond individualism: Toward a new understanding of self,
   relation, and experience. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.
Wheeler, G. (2002). The developing field: Toward a Gestalt developmental model.
   In G. Wheeler & M. McConville (Eds.), The heart of development: Gestalt
   approaches to working with children, adolescents, and their worlds: Vol. 1. Child-
   hood (pp. 37–84). Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press/GestaltPress.
Wheeler, G. (2005). Culture self and field: A gestalt guide to the age of complexity.
   In T. Levine (Ed.), The bridge: Dialogues across cultures (pp. 43–68). Metairie,
   LA: Gestalt Institute Press.


                                          134
                             Suggested Readings



Wheeler, G., & McConville, M. (Eds.). (2002). The heart of development: Gestalt
   approaches to working with children, adolescents and their worlds: Vol. 1.
   Childhood. Hillsdale NY: Analytic Press.
Yontef, G. M. (1993). Awareness, dialogue and process. Highland, NY: Gestalt
   Journal Press.
Zinker, J. (1977). Creative process in gestalt therapy. New York, NY: Random House.




                                       135
                             References




Allport, G. (1954). The nature of prejudice. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
American Psychological Association. (Producer). (2012). Three approaches to
   psychotherapy with a female client [DVD]. Available from http://www.apa.org/
   pubs/videos/4310889.aspx
Axelsson, L. (in press). Gestalt-based trauma recovery with couples. In M. Kraus,
   A. Roberts, & G. Wheeler (Eds.), The couple in the field: Gestalt relational field
   therapy with couples. New York, NY: Routledge Taylor & Francis.
Azar, F. S., & Asadnia, S. (2013). Efficacy of cognitive behavior therapy and gestalt
   therapy on poor sleep quality among college female students with headache.
   Journal of Education, Psychology and Social Sciences, 1, 15–24.
Bateson, G. (1979, September). It takes two to know one. Paper presented at the
   meeting of the Esalen Summer Teacher Talk Series, Big Sur, CA.
Beisser, A. (1970). The paradoxical theory of change. In J. Fagan & I. Shepard
   (Eds.), Gestalt therapy now: Theory, techniques, application (pp. 77–80). Palo
   Alto, CA: Science and Behavior Books.
Bloom, D. (2009). A quest for gestalt therapy group process: Group process as self
   process. Studies in Gestalt/Dialogical Bridges, 3, 25–38.
Bohart, A. E. (2002). Empathy. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships
   that work (pp. 89–108). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Bordin, E. S. (1994). Theory and research on the working alliance: New direc-
   tions. In A. O. Horvath & L. S. Greenberg (Eds.), The working alliance: Theory,
   research, and practice (pp. 13–37). New York, NY: Wiley.
Boring, E. (1950). A history of experimental psychology. New York, NY: Appleton-
   Century-Crofts.



                                        137
                                   References



Bowlby, J. (1994). En trygg bas—Kliniska tillämpningar av bindningsteorin [A
   secure base—Clinical applications of bonding theory]. Stockholm, Sweden:
   Bokförlaget Natur och Kultur.
Brentano, F. (1988). Philosophical investigations on space, time, and the continuum.
   London, England: Croom Helm.
Clemmens, M. C. (2005). Getting beyond sobriety: Clinical approaches to long-term
   recovery. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.
Cozolino, L. (2010). The neuroscience of psychotherapy: Healing the social brain.
   New York, NY: Norton.
Ehrenfels, C. (1890). Ueber gestaltqualitäten [On gestalt properties]. Viertel-
   jahrsschrift für wissenschaftliche Philosophie, 14, 242–292.
Ehrlich, P. (2000). Human natures: Genes, cultures, and the human prospect.
   Washington, DC: Island Press.
Ellis, W. (Ed.). (1938). A source book of Gestalt psychology. London, England:
   Routledge Kegan Paul. doi:10.1037/11496-000
Fairfield, M. (2013). The relational movement. British Gestalt Journal, 22,
   22–35.
Feder, B., & Ronall, R. (Eds.). (1980). Beyond the hot seat. New York, NY: Brunner/
   Mazel.
Frank, R. (2001). Body of awareness: A somatic and developmental approach to
   psychotherapy. Cambridge, MA: GestaltPress.
Freud, A. (1937). The ego and the mechanisms of defense. London, England:
   Hogarth Press.
Freud, S. (1965). New introductory lectures on psychoanalysis. New York, NY:
   Norton. (Original work published 1933)
Freud, S. (2005). On murder, mourning and melancholia. London, England: Penguin.
Ganz, M. (2009). Why David sometimes wins: Strategy, leadership and the Califor-
   nia agricultural movement. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Gaudiano, B. A., & Miller, I. W. (2013). The evidence-based practice of psycho-
   therapy: Facing the challenges that lie ahead. Clinical Psychology Review, 33,
   813–824. doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2013.04.004
Gergen, K. J. (2011). Relational being: Beyond self and community. New York, NY:
   Oxford University Press.
Gibson, J. (1950). The perception of the visual world. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Goldstein, K. (1939). The organism. Boston, MA: American Book Company.
Goldstein, K. (1940). Human nature in the light of psychopathology. Cambridge,
   MA: Harvard University Press. doi:10.4159/harvard.9780674492103
Goodman, P. (1951). Novelty, excitement and growth (Vol. 2). In F. H. Perls,
   R. Hefferline, & P. Goodman, Gestalt therapy: Excitement and growth in the
   human personality. New York, NY: Julian Press.


                                        138
                                   References



Goodman, P. (1962). Compulsory miseducation. New York, NY: Horizon.
Henle, M. (1961). Documents of Gestalt psychology. Berkeley, CA: University of
   California Press.
Hrdy, S. B. (2009). Mothers and others: The evolutionary origins of mutual under-
   standing. Cambridge, MA: Oxford University Press.
Husserl, E. (1990). On the phenomenology of the consciousness of internal time.
   Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer. (Original work published 1928)
Jacobs, L., & Hycner, R. (Eds.). (2009). Relational approaches in gestalt therapy.
   New York, NY: Routledge, Taylor & Francis.
James, W. (2007). Principles of psychology. New York, NY: Cosimo. (Original work
   published 1890)
Kant, I. (1983). The critique of pure reason. North Clarendon, VT: Tuttle. (Original
   work published 1781)
Kepner, J. I. (1987). Body process: A gestalt approach to working with the body in
   psychotherapy. New York, NY: Gardner Press.
Kepner, J. I. (1996). Healing tasks: Psychotherapy with adult survivors of sexual
   abuse. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Klopstech, A. (2005). Catharsis and self-regulation revisited: Scientific and clini-
   cal considerations. Bioenergetic Analysis, 15, 101–133.
Koehler, K. (1947). Gestalt psychology. New York, NY: Liveright.
Koffka, K. (1924). Introduction. In W. Ellis (Ed.), A source book in Gestalt psychol-
   ogy (pp. xii–xiv). London, England: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Koffka, K. (1935). Principles of Gestalt psychology. New York, NY: Harcourt, Brace
   & World.
Köhler, W. (1938a). Physical gestalten. In W. Ellis (Ed.), A source book in
   Gestalt psychology (pp. 17–54). London, England: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
   doi:10.1037/11496-003
Köhler, W. (1938b). Simple structural functions in the chimpanzee and in the
   chicken. In W. Ellis (Ed.), A source book in Gestalt psychology (pp. 217–227).
   London, England: Routledge & Kegan Paul. doi:10.1037/11496-018
Korzybski, A. (1994). Science and sanity. New York, NY: Institute for General
   Semantics.
Lambert, M. (2001). Research summary on the therapeutic relationship and psy-
   chotherapy outcome. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, Training, 38,
   357–361. doi:10.1037/0033-3204.38.4.357
Lee, R. (1996). Shame and the gestalt model. In R. Lee & G. Wheeler (Eds.), The
   voice of shame: Silence and connection in psychotherapy (pp. 3–21). San Fran-
   cisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Lee, R. (2004). The values of connection: A relational approach to ethics. Hillsdale,
   NJ: Analytic Press.


                                        139
                                  References



Lewin, K. (1918). Kriegslandschaft [War landscape]. Zeitschrift für Angewandte
   Psychologie, 12, 440–453.
Lewin, K. (1936). Principles of topological psychology. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
   doi:10.1037/10019-000
Lewin, K. (1951). Field theory in social science. New York, NY: Harper & Brothers.
Lichtenberg, P. (1990). Community and confluence: Undoing the clinch of oppres-
   sion. Cambridge, MA: GestaltPress.
Luborsky, L., Rosenthal, R., Diguer, L., Andrusyna, T. P., Berman, J. S., Levitt,
   J. T., . . . & Krause, E. D. (2002). The Dodo bird verdict is alive and well—
   mostly. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 9, 2–12. doi.org/10.1093/
   clipsy/9.1.2
Marrow, A. (1969). The practical theorist: The life and work of Kurt Lewin. New
   York, NY: Basic Books.
McConville, M. (1995). Adolescence: Psychotherapy and the emergent self. San
   Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Melnick, J., & Nevis, S. M. (1994). Intimacy and power in long-term relationships:
   A gestalt therapy-systems perspective. In G. Wheeler & S. Backman (Eds.), On
   intimate ground: A gestalt approach to working with couples. San Francisco, CA:
   Jossey-Bass.
Miller, S., Wampold, B., & Varhely, K. (2008). Direct comparison of treatment
   modalities for youth disorders: A meta-analysis. Psychotherapy Research, 18,
   5–14. doi.org/10.1080/10503300701472131
Nevis, E. C. (1987). Organizational consulting: A gestalt approach. Cleveland, OH:
   Gestalt Institute of Cleveland Press.
Norcross, J. C. (2011). Psychotherapy relationships that work: Evidence-based
   responsiveness. New York, NY: Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/acprof:
   oso/9780199737208.001.0001
Oaklander, V. (2006). Hidden treasure: A map to the child’s inner self. London,
   England: Karnac Books.
Panksepp, J. (2009). Brain, emotional systems and qualities of life: From animal
   model of affect to implications for psychotherapeutics. In D. Fosha, D. Siegel,
   & M. Solomon (Eds.), The healing power of emotion: Affect neuroscience, devel-
   opment and practice. New York, NY: Norton.
Parlett, M. (1992). Reflections on field theory. British Gestalt Journal, 1(2),
   69–81.
Parlett, M. (in press). Future present. New York, NY: Routledge Taylor & Francis.
Pavlov, I. (1897). The work of the digestive glands. London, England: Griffin.
Perls, F. S. (1947). Ego hunger and aggression: A critique of Freud’s theory and
   method. London, England: Allen & Unwin.
Perls, F. S. (1969). In and out the garbage pail. Moab, UT: Real People Press.


                                       140
                                     References



Perls, F. S., Hefferline, R., & Goodman, P. (1951). Gestalt therapy: Excitement and
    growth in the human personality. New York, NY: Julian Press.
Perls, L. (1992). Living at the boundary. Gouldsboro, ME: The Gestalt Journal
    Press.
Polster, E., & Polster, M. (1974). Gestalt therapy integrated: Contours of theory and
    practice. New York, NY: Vintage.
Polster, E., & Polster, M. (1999). From the radical center: The heart of gestalt therapy.
    Cleveland, OH: Gestalt Institute of Cleveland Press.
Reich, W. (1945). Character analysis. New York, NY: Farrar, Straus & Giroux.
Resneck-Sannes, H. (2011). Psychobiology of affects: Implications for a somatic
    psychotherapy. In V. Heinrich-Clauer (Ed.), Handbook bioenergetic analysis
    (pp. 429–440). Giessen, Germany: Psychosozial-Verlag.
Roberts, A. (1999). The field talks back: Field theory, constructivism and the
    retrieval of experience. British Gestalt Journal, 8, 35–46.
Russell, B. (2004). History of western philosophy. London, England: Routledge.
    (Original work published 1946)
Schore, A. N. (2003). Affect regulation and the repair of the self. New York, NY: Norton.
Schore, A. N. (2009). Relational trauma and the developing right brain: the
    neurobiology of broken attachment bonds. In T. Baradon (Ed.), Relational
    trauma in infancy (pp. 19–47). London, England: Routledge.
Schore, J. R., & Schore, A. N. (2008). Modern attachment theory: The central role
    of affect regulation in development and treatment. Clinical Social Work Jour-
    nal, 36, 9–20. doi:10.1007/s10615-007-0111-7
Siegel, D. (2010). The mindful therapist: A clinician’s guide to mindsight and neural
    integration. New York, NY: Norton.
Siegel, D. (2012). The developing mind: How relationships and the brain interact to
    shape who we are. New York, NY: Guildford Press.
Smith, M. L., & Glass, G. V. (1977). Meta-analysis of psychotherapy outcome
    studies. American Psychologist, 32, 752–760. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.32.9.752
Spagnuolo Lobb, M. (2013). The now-for-next in psychotherapy: Gestalt therapy
    recounted in post-modern society. Milan, Italy: FrancoAngeli.
Stevens, C., Stringfellow, J., Wakelin, K., & Waring, J. (2011). The UK gestalt psy-
    chotherapy CORE Research Project: The findings. British Gestalt Journal, 20,
    22–27.
Stiles, W. B., Barkham, M., Mellor-Clark, J., & Connell, J. (2008). Effectiveness
    of cognitive-based, person-centered, and psychodynamic therapies in UK
    primary-care routine practice: Replication in a larger sample. Psychological
    Medicine, 38, 677–688. doi:10.1017/S0033291707001511
Stoehr, T. (Ed.). (1994a). Crazy hope and finite experience: Final essays of Paul
    Goodman. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass/GestaltPress.


                                          141
                                    References



Stoehr, T. (1994b). Here now next: Paul Goodman and the origins of gestalt therapy.
   San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass/GestaltPress.
Stolorow, R. D., Atwood, G., & Orange, D. (2002). World of experience: Inter­weaving
   philosophical and clinical dimensions in psychoanalysis. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Strümpfel, U. (2006). Therapie der Gefühle—Forschungsbefunde zur Gestaltthera-
   pie [Therapy of emotions—Research findings on gestalt therapy]. Bergisch
   Gladbach, Germany: Verlag Andreas Kohlhage.
Tronick, E. (2007). The neurobehavioral and social-emotional development of
   infants and children. New York, NY: Norton.
Ullman, D. (2005, October). Kurt Lewin: Bridging the gorge between psychology and
   social activism. Paper presented at The Roots of Gestalt II, Antwerp, Belgium.
van der Kolk, B. (2005). Developmental trauma disorder: Toward a rational diagno-
   sis for children with complex trauma histories. Psychiatric Annals, 35, 401–408.
van der Kolk, B. (2006). Traumatic stress: The effects of overwhelming experience on
   mind, body and society. New York, NY: Guildford Press.
Wampold, B. (2001). The great psychotherapy debate: Models, methods and find-
   ings. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Wertheimer, M. (1912). Experimente studien ueber das sehen von bewegungen
   [Experimental studies in the perception of motion]. Zeitschrift fur Psychologie
   mit Zeitschrift fur Angewandte Psychologie, 61, 11–38.
Wertheimer, M. (1925, December). Über Gestalttheorie [About gestalt theory].
   Paper presented at the meeting of the Kant Society, Berlin, Germany.
Wertheimer, M. (1938). Gestalt theory. In W. Ellis (Ed.), A source book in gestalt
   psychology (pp. 1–11). London, England: Routledge Kegan Paul. doi:10.1037/
   11496-001
Wertheimer, M. (1945). Productive thinking. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
   Press.
Wheeler, G. (1989). Love, work, and play: Essays in gestalt work with children.
   Cambridge, MA: GestaltPress.
Wheeler, G. (1991). Gestalt reconsidered: A new approach to contact and resistance.
   New York, NY: Gardner Press/GestaltPress.
Wheeler, G. (1996). Self and shame: A new paradigm for psychotherapy. In R.
   Lee & G. Wheeler (Eds.), The voice of shame: Silence and connection in psycho-
   therapy (pp. 23–60). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Wheeler, G. (1997). Self and shame: A Gestalt approach. Gestalt Review, 1,
   221–244.
Wheeler, G. (2000). Beyond individualism: Toward a new understanding of self,
   relation, and experience. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.
Wheeler, G. (2003). Contact and creativity: The gestalt cycle in context. In
   M. Spagnuolo Lobb & N. Amendt-Lyon (Eds.), Creative license: The art of


                                         142
                                   References



   gestalt therapy (pp. 163–178). Wien, Austria: Springer-Verlag. doi:10.1007/
   978-3-7091-6023-7_14
Wheeler, G. (2004). Spirit and shadow: Esalen and gestalt. In G. W. Shuck &
   J. J. Kripal (Eds.), On the edge of the future: Esalen Institute and the human
   potential movement. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Wheeler, G. (2008). The age of complexity: Paul Goodman in the 21st century—
   A critical assessment. Gestalt Review, 10, 206–227.
Wheeler, G. (2011). Who are we? Narrative, evolution and development: Our
   stories and ourselves. In R. Lee & N. Harris (Eds.), Relational child, relational
   brain: Development and therapy in childhood and adolescence (pp. 5–54). New
   York, NY: Routledge Taylor & Francis.
Wilson, C. M., & Oswald, A. J. (2005). How does marriage affect physical and
   psychological health? A survey of the longitudinal evidence. Bonn, Germany:
   Institute for the Study of Labor.
Wilson, D. S. (2007). Evolution for everyone: How Darwin’s theory can change the
   way we think about our lives. New York, NY: Delacorte Press.
Wundt, W. (2009). Principles of physiological psychology. New York, NY: General
   Books. (Original work published 1904)
Wysong, J., & Rosenfeld, E. (1982). An oral history of gestalt therapy. Highland, NY:
   Center for Gestalt Development.
Yontef, G. M. (1993). Awareness, dialogue and process. Highland, NY: Gestalt Jour-
   nal Press.
Young, J. (1999). Cognitive therapy for personality disorders: A schema-focused
   approach. Sarasota, FL: Professional Resource Press.
Zaretskii, V. (2009). The zone of proximal development: What Vygotsky did not
   have time to write. Journal of Russian and East European Psychology, 47(6),
   70–93. doi:10.2753/RPO1061-0405470604
Zinker, J. (1978). Creative process in gestalt therapy. New York, NY: Random House.




                                        143
                                     Index




Action, 29, 39–43                           Bloom, D., 52, 58
Action research, 22, 109                    Bordin, E. S., 115
Active perception, 19                       Boundaries (Gestalt law of
Activism, 125                                     perception), 18, 125
Addiction, 58
Adjustment, creative, 43                    Case studies. See Therapeutic process
Adolescence, 58                             Case Western Institute, 52
Affect, 68                                  Catharsis, 123–124
Aggression, oral, 27                        CBT (cognitive behavior therapy),
Alliance, therapeutic, 112, 115                    32–33, 114
Anthropology, 50                            Chair work
Asadnia, S., 114                               empty-chair work, 37–38
Associationism                                 two-chair work, 40–41
    criticisms of, 12–15, 20                Change
    history of, 10–15                          paradoxical approach to, 42
Associative chains, 11–12
                                               in relational field model, 67–68
Atomism, 10–11, 13, 14
                                            Change theory, 129–130
Attachment theory, 79–80, 122, 131
                                            Character armor, 42
Attention, 13–14
                                            Clemmens, M. C., 58
Authenticity. See also Congruence
                                            Clinical outcomes in routine
    in psychotherapy, 68
                                                   evaluation (CORE) system,
    therapist, 33
Awareness, 38–39, 72–73                            114–115
Azar, F. S., 114                            Closure (Gestalt law of perception), 18
                                            Cognition
Bateson, Gregory, 96                           early psychological research on, 11
Biology                                        Gestalt approaches to, 14–15
   evolutionary, 59                         Cognitive behavior therapy (CBT),
   neuro-, 121                                     32–33, 114

                                      145
                                          Index



Confluence, 46                                    Emotions
Congruence, 115–117. See also                        balancing of, 123
       Authenticity                                  importance of, 35–37
Consciousness, 38–38                                 of therapists, 34
Conservation, 30                                  Empathy, 58, 115, 116
Contact                                           Empty-chair work, 37–38
   final, 48–49                                   Enactment, 39
   full, 56                                       Encounter groups, 26
   as integral to Gestalt theory, 56–57           Esalen Institute, 50
   overview, 29                                   Ethics, 58
   and patient resistance, 45                     Evaluation of Gestalt therapy, 111–117
   styles of, 35–36                                  and effectiveness of psychotherapy
   therapy as analysis of, 30                                in general, 111–113
Contact cycle model, 53–56                           as evidence-based treatment,
Contiguity (Gestalt law of                                   113–117
       perception), 18                            Evidence-based treatment, Gestalt
Continuity (Gestalt law of                               therapy as, 113–117
       perception), 18                            Evolutionary biology, 59
CORE (clinical outcomes in                        Experimentation (therapeutic tool),
       routine evaluation) system,                       39–43
       114–115
Couples therapy                                   Feder, B., 52
   case study, 88–96                              Field theory, 58
   research on, 57, 58                            Figure-ground integration, 55
Creativity, 57, 58                                Final contact, 48–49
Cycle of experience model. See                    Fixed Gestalt, 128
       Contact cycle model                        Formal experiments, 40
                                                  Formalism, 9–10
Darwin, Charles, 10                               Frank, R., 52
Defenses, 45–50                                   Freud, Sigmund
Development, in relational field                      legacy of, 28
      model, 61                                       on mental health, 43
Developmental trauma, 59–60, 124                      on neurosis, 30
Dialogue, 58                                          and oral aggression, 27
Dyadic process, 57–58                             From, Isadore, 51
                                                  Full contact, 56
Ego function, 51                                  Future developments in Gestalt
Ego Hunger and Aggression (Fritz Perls                   therapy, 119–126
       and Laura Perls), 27                           and neuroscientific revolution,
Egotism, 48–50                                               120–122
Ehrenfels, C., 15                                     and relational field model,
Ehrlich, Paul, 120                                           124–126
Embodiment, 37–38, 58                                 trauma treatment, 122–124


                                           146
                                           Index



Gaudiano, B. A., 112                                  definition of ego function
Genuineness, 115                                             provided by, 51
Gestalt Institute of Cleveland (GIC),                 and embodiment, 37
       52–57                                          and experiments in therapy, 40
“Gestaltists,” 9                                      on Freudian patients, 45
Gestalt laws of perception, 18–19                     on full contact, 56
Gestalt psychology, 9–28                              on function of therapy, 31
   and associationism, 10–14                          on gestalts of understanding, 32
   development of therapy based                       and ideal of health, 43
           on, 26–27. See also Gestalt                importance of personal history
           therapy                                           to, 44
   early applications of, 22–26                       and patient resistance, 46–49
   early practitioners of, 14–21                      retirement of, from clinical work,
   and scientific psychology, 10                             50
Gestalts                                              and “safe emergency” concept,
   defined, 18                                               36–37, 91
   fixed, 128                                      Group dynamics, 22
   subjective construction of, 23                  Group Dynamics Lab (Massachusetts
   of understanding, 32                                   Institute of Technology), 26
Gestalt theory. See Theory behind
       Gestalt therapy                             Health
Gestalt therapy, 29–69                                in Gestalt theory, 43–44
   active nature of, 29, 39–43                        in relational field model, 60–61
   early history of, 27–28                         “Here-and-now,” 68–69
   forms of awareness in, 38–39,                   History. See Gestalt psychology
           72–73                                   History of Gestalt therapy, 9–28
   impact of, 68–69                                   associationism, 10–14
   psychological theory behind, 3–4                   development of, 26–27
   research on outcomes of, 113–117                   early applications, 22–26
Gestalt Therapy: Novelty, Excitement,                 early practitioners, 14–21
       and Growth (Paul Goodman,                      scientific psychology, 10
       Ralph Hefferline & Fritz Perls),            Hycner, R., 58
       28, 50, 51
GIC (Gestalt Institute of Cleveland),              Idealism, 9–10
       52–57                                       Individualistic culture, 67, 129
Goal collaboration, 115                            Informal experiments, 40
Goodman, Paul                                      Interaction, principles of, 13
   on analytic interpretations, 34                 Interactionist field models, 56
   and balance between conservation                Interdependence, 49
           and spontaneity, 30                     Interpersonal psychotherapy, 114
   and client’s contact patterns, 35, 36           Interpretation, with perception, 19–20
   and creation of Gestalt therapy,                Intersubjectivity, 58
           27–28                                   Intimacy, 90–92, 95


                                            147
                                        Index



Introjection, 32, 46–47                         Neurosis, 30
I–thou relationship, 58                         Nevis, E. C., 57
                                                Nevis, S. M., 57–58
Jacobs, L., 58                                  New York Institute for Gestalt
James, William, 12–14, 19, 21, 58                      Therapy, 51–52
                                                Norcross, J. C., 115, 117
Kepner, J. I., 58
Klopstech, A., 123                              Oaklander, Violet, 96
Koffka, Kurt, 15                                Oral aggression, 27
Köhler, Wolfgang von, 15                        Organizational psychology, 57
                                                Outcome research, 111–117
Laws of perception, 18–19                         on Gestalt therapy, 113–117
Lee, R., 58                                       on psychotherapy, 111–113
Leipzig psychology labs, 10–11
Lewin, Kurt                                     Paradoxical approach to change, 42
    and action research, 109                    Parlett, M., 58
    and boundaries, 125                         Patients
    and change theory, 129–130                     agency of, 69
    contributions of, 22–27                        resistance of, 45–50, 57
    on figure-ground integration, 55               role of, in Gestalt therapy, 30–31
    founding of National Training               Pattern recognition, 17
           Labs by, 52                          Pavlov, I., 11, 16
    on human interdependence, 49                Perception
    on perception, 19                              early psychological research on,
    on present-centered work, 44                            11, 13
    relational themes broached by, 51              Gestalt approaches to, 14–17, 128
Lichtenberg, P., 52                                and interpretation, 19–20
Lifespace, 24                                   Perls, Fritz
                                                   on analytic interpretations, 34
Mapping, 24, 25, 130                               and balance between conservation
Maturity, 48–49                                             and spontaneity, 30
McConville, M., 58                                 and client’s contact patterns, 35, 36
Melnick, J., 57–58                                 and creation of Gestalt therapy,
Mental health, 43–44                                        27–28
Mental mapping, 24, 25, 130                        and embodiment, 37
Miller, I. W., 112                                 and experiments in therapy, 40
Multiculturalism, 55                               on function of therapy, 31
                                                   on gestalts of understanding, 32
National Training Labs, 26, 52                     and ideal of health, 43
Nervous system, 66, 122, 124                       importance of personal history
Neurobiology, 121                                           to, 44
Neurological arousal, 73                           and patient resistance, 46–50
Neuroscience, 120–122                              retirement of, from clinical work, 50


                                         148
                                        Index



Perls, Laura, 27, 49, 51                        Rupture repair (therapeutic
Person-centered psychotherapy, 114                   relationship), 115
PFC (prefrontal cortex), 59
Phenomenology, 10                               “Safe emergency” concept, 36–37, 63,
Philosophy of mind, 9–10                                91, 128
Planned experiments, 40                         Schema theory, 32–33
Play, 43                                        Schore, A. N., 122
Political oppression, 52                        Schore, J. R., 122
Polster, E., 57                                 Scientific psychology, 10
Polster, M., 57                                 Selective attention, 13–14
Positive psychology, 131                        Selective inattention, 47
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD),           Self-theory, 58–60
        84. See also Trauma                     Sensitivity training, 26
Prefrontal cortex (PFC), 59, 66                 Sexuality, 100
Prejudice, 52                                   Shame, 58, 63–66, 100–108
Presence, therapist, 62–63                      Shoshin (Zen concept), 104
Present-focused psychotherapy,                  Siegel, D., 123
        44–45, 114, 128–129                     Similarity (Gestalt law of perception),
Principles of interaction, 13                           18
Process. See Therapeutic process                Söderberg, Hjalmar, 79
Projection, 47                                  Spagnuolo Lobb, M., 58
Psychotherapy                                   Spirituality, 58
   effectiveness of, 111–113                    Spontaneity, 30, 40
   impact of Gestalt theory on,                 Stimulus–response (S–R) bond, 11–13
            68–69                               Strümpfel, U., 114
PTSD (posttraumatic stress disorder),           Support, 63–66
        84. See also Trauma                         and awareness techniques, 39
                                                    defined, 129
Realism, 10                                         field conditions of, 91
Reich, Wilhelm, 28, 42                              and health, 60
Relational field model, 57–68                       and shame, 63–66
   creation of, 51                                  sources of, 79
   and health, 60–61                                types of, 44
   and presence, 62–63                          Systems constellation work, 58
   and self-theory, 58–60
   support and shame in, 63–66                  T-groups, 26
   theory of change in, 67–68                   Theory behind Gestalt therapy, 29–69
   whole-field context in, 124, 125               awareness, focus on, 38–39
Relational psychotherapy, 114                     contact cycle model, 53–57
Resistance, patient, 45–50, 57                    embodiment, focus on, 37–38
Retroflection, 48                                 emotional experience, focus on,
Roberts, A., 58                                          35–37
Ronall, R., 52                                    experimentation, role of, 39–43


                                         149
                                       Index



Theory behind Gestalt therapy (continued)      The Relational Center (TRC), 126
  Gestalt Institute of Cleveland, 52–57        Trauma
  goals of therapy, 43–44, 61                     case study, 84–88
  history, role of, 44–45                         developmental, 59–60, 124
  New York Institute for Gestalt                  future directions for research,
         Therapy, 51–52                                  122–124
  ongoing developments, 50–51                     relational approaches to treatment
  patient’s role, 30–31                                  of, 58
  present-centered work, role of,                 and shame, 66
         44–45                                 Trauma disorders, 66
  relational field model, 57–68                TRC (The Relational Center), 126
  resistance, 45–50                            Trust, 85–86
  therapeutic relationship, 33–35              Two-chair work, 40–41
  therapist’s role, 31–33
Therapeutic process, 71–109                    Ullman, D., 58
  Adriana (case study), 103–108                Unconscious, 38
  Arminda and Sam (case study),
         88–96                                 Values, 25
  Carlos (case study), 79–84                   Van der Kolk, B., 84
  Daisy (case study), 96–100
  Diana (case study), 84–88                    Wampold, B., 112
  and forms of awareness, 72–73                “War Landscape” (Kurt Lewin), 22
  Jason (case study), 100–103                  Wertheimer, Max, 15
  Marie (case study), 74–78                    Wheeler, G., 58
Therapeutic relationship, 33–35, 58,           Wundt, Wilhelm, 10, 11, 14
      112, 115
Therapists                                     Yontef, G. M., 58
  presence of, 62–63
  role of, in Gestalt therapy, 31–33,          Zinker, J., 57
         68–69, 129




                                        150
                 About the Authors




Gordon Wheeler, PhD, is a licensed psychologist with many years’ experience
writing, teaching, training, and practicing using a contemporary field-
relational Gestalt therapy model. He is the author or editor of numerous
books and articles in the field, most recently, CoCreating the Field: Inten-
tion and Practice in the Age of Complexity (with Deborah Ullman, 2009). Dr.
Wheeler is on the visiting faculty of many Gestalt training institutes around
the world, and is long-time president of the Esalen Institute in Big Sur, Cali-
fornia, where he also served for some years as CEO. Together with Nancy
Lunney Wheeler, he teaches Gestalt Relational Constellations widely around
the world. His private practice of coaching, counseling, psychotherapy,
and consulting is located in Santa Cruz, California. He can be contacted at
gordon.wheeler@esalen.org.

Lena Axelsson, PsyD, was educated and received her Gestalt training in
Sweden, moving to the United States in 2000. Following 4 years living and
studying at Esalen Institute in Big Sur, California, she completed her doc-
toral work at Ryokan College, where her dissertation was The Use of Relational
Gestalt Therapy Informed by Neuroscience in the Treatment of Single Event and
Developmental Trauma. After serving for several years as a clinician and a
clinical supervisor at Pajaro Valley Prevention and Student Assistance
Center, working with troubled young people and families in a diverse
population, Dr. Axelsson entered private clinical practice with children,

                                     151
                            About the Authors



adolescents, adults, couples and families. In addition to her clinical Gestalt
training, she has also trained extensively with Peter Levine in Somatic
Experiencing. She presents regularly at conferences and in training ses-
sions on Gestalt-based multicultural work, as well as on single event and
developmental trauma and the neuroscientific basis of contemporary
Gestalt-based trauma and recovery work. Dr. Axelsson presents as well
as part of the faculty of the Esalen Institute Evolution of Gestalt Sym-
posium Series (selected proceedings published in the GestaltPress book
series). Her forthcoming work on this topic as applied to couples work will
appear in The Couple in the Relational Field (Eds. M. Kraus, A. Roberts, &
G. Wheeler, in press). Dr. Axelsson lives in Santa Cruz, California, where she
practices as a member of an integrative medical health team. Her special
interests include hiking, running, and the diverse cuisines of Europe and the
Americas. She can be contacted at lena.axelsson@comcast.net.




                                     152
           About the Series Editors




Jon Carlson, PsyD, EdD, ABPP, is distinguished professor, psychology and
counseling at Governors State University and a psychologist at the Wellness
Clinic in Lake Geneva, Wisconsin. Dr. Carlson has served as editor of several
periodicals including the Journal of Individual Psychology and The Family Jour-
nal. He holds Diplomates in both family psychology and Adlerian psychology.
He has authored or coauthored 175 journal articles and 60 books, including
Time for a Better Marriage, Adlerian Therapy, Inclusive Cultural Empathy, The
Mummy at the Dining Room Table, Bad Therapy, The Client Who Changed
Me, Their Finest Hour, Creative Breakthroughs in Therapy, Moved by the Spirit,
Duped: Lies and Deception in Psychotherapy, Never Be Lonely Again, Helping
Beyond the Fifty Minute Hour, Psychopathology and Psychotherapy, How Mas-
ter Therapists Work: Effecting Change From the First Through the Last Session
and Beyond, and On Being a Master Therapist: Practicing What You Preach.
He has created over 300 professional trade video and DVDs with leading
professional therapists and educators. In 2004 the American Counseling
Association named him a “Living Legend.” In 2009 the Division of Psycho-
therapy of the American Psychological Association (APA) named him “Dis-
tinguished Psychologist” for his life contribution to psychotherapy, and in
2011 he received the APA Distinguished Career Contribution to Education
and Training Award. He has received similar awards from four other pro-
fessional organizations.




                                     153
                       About the Series Editors



Matt Englar-Carlson, PhD, is a professor of counseling at California
State University–Fullerton. He is a fellow of Division 51 of the American
Psychological Association (APA). As a scholar, teacher, and clinician,
Dr. Englar-Carlson has been an innovator and professionally passion-
ate about training and teaching clinicians to work more effectively with
their male clients. He has more than 30 publications and 50 national
and international presentations, most of which are focused on men and
masculinity and diversity issues in psychological training and practice.
Dr. Englar-Carlson coedited the books In the Room With Men: A Case-
book of Therapeutic Change and Counseling Troubled Boys: A Guidebook
for Professionals and was featured in the 2010 APA-produced DVD Engag-
ing Men in Psychotherapy. In 2007, he was named Researcher of the Year
by the Society for the Psychological Study of Men and Masculinity. He
is also a member of the APA Working Group to Develop Guidelines for
Psychological Practice With Boys and Men. As a clinician, he has worked
with children, adults, and families in school, community, and university
mental health settings.




                                  154
