                      THE ROUTLEDGE HANDBOOK
                           OF PANPSYCHISM




           “This book provides a rich and novel discussion of one of the most exciting (and hardest) issues
           in philosophy, namely the nature of consciousness, by taking seriously panpsychism. It contains
           a large variety and number of quality contributions, both from a historical and a contemporary
           perspective, which makes it a book of reference indispensable for anyone interested in the field.
           A great read and an inspiring contribution to the philosophical debate about the nature of
           consciousness.”
                                                             Jiri Benovsky, University of Fribourg, Switzerland

           “The rise to prominence of panpsychism is a response to a growing disillusionment with orthodox
           physicalism. If you want to know the history, strengths and weaknesses of this surprising revival of
           an ancient metaphysics, this wide-ranging collection is an excellent place to start.”
                                                      Howard Robinson, Central European University, Hungary

Panpsychism is the view that consciousness – the most puzzling and strangest phenomenon in the entire universe –
is a fundamental and ubiquitous feature of the world, though in a form very remote from human consciousness.
At a very basic level, the world is awake. Panpsychism seems implausible to most, and yet it has experienced a
remarkable renaissance of interest over the last quarter century. The reason is the stubbornly intractable problem
of consciousness. Despite immense progress in understanding the brain and its relation to states of consciousness,
we still really have no idea how consciousness emerges from physical processes which are presumed to be entirely
non-conscious.
    The Routledge Handbook of Panpsychism provides a high-level comprehensive examination and assessment of the
subject – its history and contemporary development. It offers 28 chapters, appearing in print here for the first time,
from the world’s leading researchers on panpsychism. The chapters are divided into four sections that integrate
panpsychism’s relevance with important issues in philosophy of mind, philosophy of science, metaphysics, and even
ethics.

 	1.	    Historical Reflections
  	2.	   Forms of Panpsychism
 	3.	    Comparative Alternatives
	4.	     How Does Panpsychism Work?

   The volume will be useful to students and scholars as both an introduction and as cutting-edge philosophical
engagement with the subject. For anyone interested in a philosophical approach to panpsychism, the Handbook will
supply fascinating and enlightening reading. The topics covered are highly diverse, representing a spectrum of views
on the nature of mind and world from various standpoints which take panpsychism seriously.

William Seager is Professor of Philosophy at the University of Toronto Scarborough. He works primarily in
the philosophy of mind and consciousness studies; his most recent book is Theories of Consciousness (2nd edition;
Routledge, 2016).
                   ROUTLEDGE HANDBOOKS IN PHILOSOPHY




Routledge Handbooks in Philosophy are state-of-the-art surveys of emerging, newly refreshed, and
important fields in philosophy, providing accessible yet thorough assessments of key problems,
themes, thinkers, and recent developments in research.
   All chapters for each volume are specially commissioned, and written by leading scholars in
the field. Carefully edited and organized, Routledge Handbooks in Philosophy provide indispensable
reference tools for students and researchers seeking a comprehensive overview of new and exciting
topics in philosophy. They are also valuable teaching resources as accompaniments to textbooks,
anthologies, and research-orientated publications.

ALSO AVAILABLE:                                   THE ROUTLEDGE HANDBOOK OF
                                                  PHILOSOPHY OF THE CITY
THE ROUTLEDGE HANDBOOK OF
                                                  Edited by Sharon M. Meagher, Samantha Noll, and
EMERGENCE
                                                  Joseph S. Biehl
Edited by Sophie Gibb, Robin Hendry, and Tom
Lancaster                                         THE ROUTLEDGE HANDBOOK OF
                                                  PANPSYCHISM
THE ROUTLEDGE HANDBOOK OF
                                                  Edited by William Seager
THE PHILOSOPHY OF EVIL
Edited by Thomas Nys and Stephen de Wijze         THE ROUTLEDGE HANDBOOK OF
                                                  EMOTION THEORY
THE ROUTLEDGE HANDBOOK OF
                                                  Edited by Andrea Scarantino
SOCIAL EPISTEMOLOGY
Edited by Peter Graham, Nikolaj Jang Lee, David   THE ROUTLEDGE HANDBOOK OF
Henderson, and Miranda Fricker                    PHILOSOPHY OF RELATIVISM
                                                  Edited by Martin Kusch

For more information about this series, please visit: www.routledge.com/Routledge-Handbooks-
in-Philosophy/book-series/RHP
THE ROUTLEDGE HANDBOOK
     OF PANPSYCHISM



      Edited by William Seager
                          First published 2020
                              by Routledge
               52 Vanderbilt Avenue, New York, NY 10017
                            and by Routledge
        2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
   Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
                          © 2020 Taylor & Francis
The right of William Seager to be identified as the author of the editorial
material, and of the authors for their individual chapters, has been asserted
 in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and
                             Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or
utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now
known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in
any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing
                             from the publishers.
    Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or
registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation
                         without intent to infringe.
             Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
            A catalog record for this book has been requested
                     ISBN: 978-1-138-81713-5 (hbk)
                     ISBN: 978-1-315-71770-8 (ebk)
                             Typeset in Bembo
                          by Apex CoVantage, LLC
                              CONTENTS




Notes on Contributors                                           viii
Preface to the Handbook                                          xi


  1	 Introduction: A Panpsychist Manifesto                        1
     William Seager


PART I
Historical Reflections                                          13

  2	 Plato and Panpsychism                                      15
     Daniel Dombrowski

  3	 Abhidharma Panprotopsychist Metaphysics of Consciousness   25
     Monima Chadha

  4	 Spinoza’s Panpsychism                                      36
     Martin Lin

  5	 Many-Minded Leibniz’s Many Minds                           44
     Graeme Hunter

  6	 Panpsychism in the 19th Century                            53
     David Skrbina

  7	 William James, Pure Experience, and Panpsychism            66
     Andrew Bailey




                                              v
                                        Contents


  8	 Overcoming the Cartesian Legacy: Whitehead’s Revisionary Metaphysics    78
     Pierfrancesco Basile

  9	 Russell’s Neutral Monism and Panpsychism                                87
     Donovan Wishon

10	 Panpsychism Reconsidered: A Historical and Philosophical Overview       103
    David Skrbina


PART II
Forms of Panpsychism                                                        117

11	 Beyond Cosmopsychism and the Great I Am: How the World
    Might be Grounded in Universal ‘Advaitic’ Consciousness                 119
    Miri Albahari

12	 Living Cosmos Panpsychism                                               131
    Freya Mathews

13	 Cosmopsychism, Micropsychism and the Grounding Relation                 144
    Philip Goff

14	 The Crux of Subjectivity: The Subjective Dimension
    of Consciousness and Its Role in Panpsychism                            157
    Michael Blamauer

15	 Anomalous Dualism: A New Approach to the Mind-Body Problem              168
    David Bourget


PART III
Comparative Alternatives                                                    181

16	 Subjective Physicalism and Panpsychism                                  183
    Robert J. Howell

17	 Panpsychism: A Cognitive Pluralist Perspective                          192
    Steven Horst

18	 Neutral Monism Reborn: Breaking the Gridlock Between Emergence
    and Inherence                                                           204
    Michael Silberstein

19	 Panpsychism and Non-standard Materialism: Some Comparative Remarks      218
    Daniel Stoljar


                                           vi
                                      Contents


20	 Panpsychism and Russellian Monism                             230
    Torin Alter and Sam Coleman


PART IV
How Does Panpsychism Work?                                        243

21	 Can We Sum Subjects? Evaluating Panpsychism’s Hard Problem    245
    Luke Roelofs

22	 Panpsychism Versus Pantheism, Polytheism, and Cosmopsychism   259
    Yujin Nagasawa

23	 The Argument for Panpsychism From Experience of Causation     269
    Hedda Hassel Mørch

24	 A Quantum Cure for Panphobia                                  285
    Paavo Pylkkänen

25	 Panpsychism’s Combination Problem Is a Problem for Everyone   303
    Angela Mendelovici

26	 What Does “Physical” Mean? A Prolegomenon to Physicalist
    Panpsychism317
    Galen Strawson

27	 Strawson on Panpsychism                                       340
    Terry Horgan

28	 Idealism and the Mind-Body Problem                            353
    David Chalmers


Index374




                                          vii
                          CONTRIBUTORS




Miri Albahari teaches philosophy at the University of Western Australia. She works in comparative
philosophy, on the epistemology and metaphysics of mystical states.

Torin Alter is Professor of Philosophy at The University of Alabama. He writes mostly on
consciousness and the mind-body problem

Andrew Bailey is Associate Professor in Philosophy, and Associate Dean (Research & Graduate Studies)
for the College of Arts at the University of Guelph, Ontario, Canada. He works on the philosophy of
consciousness, embodied cognition and the ethics of AI, as well as the thought of William James.

Pierfrancesco Basile is Lecturer in Philosophy at the University of Bern and at the KSA Luzern,
Switzerland. His last book is Whitehead’s Metaphysics of Power: Reconstructing Modern Philosophy
(Edinburgh UP, 2017).

Michael Blamauer worked for several years in the field of philosophy of mind with special focus
on panpsychism, notably editing The Mental as Fundamental: New Perspectives on Panpsychism (Ontos,
2011).

David Bourget is Associate Professor of Philosophy and Director of the Centre for Digital Philosophy
at the University of Western Ontario. He has published a number of articles on consciousness, its
role in the mind, and its place in nature.

Monima Chadha teaches philosophy at Monash University in Australia. She works in cross-cultural
philosophy with special interest in Abhidharma Buddhism.

David Chalmers is University Professor of Philosophy and Neural Science and Co-Director of the
Center for Mind, Brain, and Consciousness at New York University.

Sam Coleman is Reader of Philosophy at the University of Hertfordshire. His main interest is
in reconciling scientific accounts of matter and the brain with what we glean from the personal
perspective.


                                                viii
                                              Contributors


Daniel Dombrowski is in the Philosophy Department of Seattle University. Among his many
publications is the book Rethinking the Ontological Argument: A Neoclassical Theistic Response (Cambridge
UP, 2006).

Philip Goff is a philosopher and consciousness researcher at Durham University and author of
Galileo’s Error: Foundations for a New Science of Consciousness (Pantheon, 2019). His research focuses on
how to integrate consciousness into our overall theory of reality.

Terry Horgan is Professor of Philosophy at the University of Arizona. He has published (often
collaboratively) in philosophy of mind, philosophy of cognitive science, metaphysics, epistemology,
and metaethics.

Steven Horst is Professor of Philosophy at Wesleyan University. He is the author of four books,
including Beyond Reduction (Oxford UP, 2007), Laws, Mind, and Free Will (MIT, 2011), and Cognitive
Pluralism (MIT, 2016).

Robert J. Howell is Dedman Family Distinguished Professor and Chair of the Philosophy
Department at Southern Methodist University. His work mostly concerns the nature of subjectivity,
the self, and the mind.

Graeme Hunter is Emeritus Professor of Philosophy at University of Ottawa and Research Professor
of Philosophy at Dominican University College. He works for the most part on philosophers of the
Early Modern Period.

Martin Lin is Professor of Philosophy at Rutgers University in New Brunswick, New Jersey. His
research concerns metaphysics and philosophy of mind in the early modern period.

Freya Mathews is Adjunct Professor of Environmental Philosophy at Latrobe University, Australia.
She has taught and published very widely in the field of environmental philosophy, particularly in
ecological metaphysics.

Angela Mendelovici is Associate Professor of Philosophy at the University of Western Ontario.
She has written numerous works on consciousness, intentionality, and the relationship between the
two, including her recent monograph, The Phenomenal Basis of Intentionality (Oxford UP, 2018).

Hedda Hassel Mørch is associate professor of philosophy at Inland Norway University of Applied
Sciences. She was previously a postdoc at Center for Mind, Brain and Consciousness at New York
University and University of Oslo.

Yujin Nagasawa is H.G. Wood Professor of the Philosophy of Religion at the University of Birmingham,
UK. He is the author and editor of many books including God and Phenomenal Consciousness (Cambridge
UP, 2008) and Consciousness in the Physical World (with Torin Alter; Oxford UP, 2015).

Paavo Pylkkänen is Vice Dean of Research of the Faculty of Arts and Head of Department of
Philosophy, History and Art Studies at the University of Helsinki, where he has worked as Senior
Lecturer in Theoretical Philosophy. He is also Associate Professor in Theoretical Philosophy at the
University of Skövde, Sweden. His research areas are philosophy of mind, philosophy of science, and the
foundations of quantum theory. He is the author of Mind, Matter and the Implicate Order (Springer, 2007).


                                                   ix
                                            Contributors


Luke Roelofs is a postdoctoral researcher at New York University, working on social cognition and
the metaphysics of consciousness. His new book, *Combining Minds* (Oxford UP, 2019), address
the combination problem for panpsychism.

William Seager is Professor of Philosophy at the University of Toronto Scarborough. His most
recent book is Theories of Consciousness (2nd ed; Routledge, 2016).

Michael Silberstein is Professor of Philosophy at Elizabethtown College and Affiliated Faculty in
the philosophy department at the University of Maryland, College Park, where he is also a faculty
member in the Foundations of Physics Program and a Fellow on the Committee for Philosophy and
the Sciences. His most recent book is Beyond the Dynamical Universe: Unifying Block Universe Physics
and Time as Experienced (Oxford UP 2018).

David Skrbina is a senior lecturer in philosophy at the University of Michigan at Dearborn. His
research interests include panpsychism, philosophy of technology, and environmental philosophy.
His books include Panpsychism in the West (revised edition, MIT Press, 2017), The Metaphysics of
Technology (Routledge, 2015), and most recently, The Jesus Hoax (Creative Fire Press, 2018).

Daniel Stoljar is Professor of Philosophy at the Australian National University in Canberra and a
Fellow of the Australian Academy of the Humanities. He is the author of Ignorance and Imagination:
The Epistemic Origin of the Problem of Consciousness (Oxford UP, 2006), Physicalism (Routledge, 2010),
and Philosophical Progress: In Defense of a Reasonable Optimism (Oxford UP, 2017).

Galen Strawson holds the President’s Chair of Philosophy at the University of Texas at Austin. His
books include Freedom and Belief (Oxford UP. 1986), The Secret Connexion (Oxford UP, 1989), Mental
Reality (MIT Press, 1994), Selves (Oxford UP, 2009), Locke on Personal Identity (Princeton UP, 2011),
and The Subject of Experience (Oxford UP, 2017).

Donovan Wishon is Associate Professor of Philosophy at the University of Mississippi. He is the
author of a number of papers on Bertrand Russell’s theories of mind, matter, language, and knowledge,
and his coedited volume Acquaintance, Knowledge, and Logic (with Bernard Linsky) received the 2016
Bertrand Russell Society book prize.




                                                  x
       PREFACE TO THE HANDBOOK




Roughly speaking, panpsychism is the view that mentality is a fundamental feature of the world
which exists ubiquitously throughout the world. The relevant kind of mentality is the most puz-
zling and strangest phenomenon in the entire universe: consciousness. The fundamental form of
consciousness posited by panpsychism is presumably very remote from that of human consciousness
and possessed of a primitive and unutterably simple nature. At a very basic level, the world is awake.
    Mostly people intuitively find panpsychism implausible, but sometimes for bad reasons. For
example, panpsychism does not imply that everything is conscious because not everything is a funda-
mental entity. Most things in the world are composite beings. Whether a particular composite being
is conscious or not depends on the ‘mental chemistry’ which binds or transforms the fundamental
consciousness of its constituents into more complex forms of consciousness. Some things, like us or
our brains, have the right chemistry. Rocks do not. One of the major philosophical problems facing
panpsychism – the so-called ‘combination problem’ – is to understand how mental chemistry works,
or even to understand how it is so much as possible in the first place.
    Still, panpsychism remains implausible to most. Yet it has experienced a remarkable renaissance of
interest over the last quarter century. The reason for the rebirth of serious engagement is the intrac-
table problem of consciousness. Despite immense progress in understanding the brain and its correla-
tional relation to states of consciousness, we still really have no idea how consciousness could emerge
from physical states and processes which are presumed to be entirely nonconscious in their funda-
mental nature. As Thomas Huxley famously quipped in 1876 ‘how it is that anything so remarkable
as a state of consciousness comes about as a result of irritating nervous tissue, is just as unaccountable
as the appearance of the Djinn, when Aladdin rubbed his lamp’. But somehow the physical world
performs this feat on a regular basis. This suggests that consciousness is somehow a ‘way of being
physical’. My current experience is telling me something – something quite extraordinary – about
the nature of the physical being I am. In the absence of belief in magical eruptions of metaphysically
discontinuous properties, an almost inevitable line of thought drives us toward panpsychism.
    Thinking about panpsychism brings together a host of core issues in the philosophy of mind, the
philosophy of science, metaphysics, and even ethics. This book aims to introduce and explore such
issues from a wide diversity of viewpoints.
    I give a broad philosophical introduction to panpsychism and its place in current debates about
consciousness and its place in nature in the initial chapter of this book, ‘A Panpsychist Manifesto’.
    Here I will very briefly introduce the handbook itself. The goal of the handbook is to pro-
vide a high-level comprehensive examination and assessment of panpsychism – its history and


                                                   xi
                                        Preface to the Handbook


contemporary development. It will be useful both to students and scholars as both an introduction
and cutting-edge philosophical engagement. For anyone with a lively intellect interested in a philo-
sophical approach to things, the handbook should supply fascinating and enlightening reading. As
noted, the topics covered are highly diverse, representing a spectrum of views on the nature of mind
from various standpoints which take panpsychism seriously.
    The handbook is divided into 28 chapters roughly sorted into a number of themes. The first is a
set of historical reflections ranging from Ancient Greek philosophy, Buddhist thought, Early Modern
philosophy to the rich period for panpsychism of the 19th and early 20th centuries.
    The second section deals broadly with various forms of panpsychism. These encompass distinct
kinds of consciousness which might form the basic building block of a panpsychic view of the uni-
verse as well as different ways that panpsychism might describe the world, notably in the distinction
between micropsychism (which assigns primitive mental aspects to elementary physical entities) to
cosmopsychism (which takes the entire universe to be the fundamental conscious entity).
    Next, in the third section, panpsychism faces up to a number of critical alternatives which are
distinctive for taking panpsychism seriously and confronting their preferred doctrine directly with
it. These include less well-known approaches such as subjective physicalism and cognitive pluralism,
as well as the better known alternatives of neutral monism and the modern rebirth of Russellian
monism.
    In the final section, the chapters provide a variety of viewpoints on how panpsychism would or
could actually work or be articulated in a more precise form. These chapters consider, for example,
the question of how or whether individual subjects of experience could be ‘summed’ or ‘combined’
into more complex subjects, whether quantum mechanics can help fund a panpsychic outlook,
whether causation itself can underpin some form of panpsychism and the core question of the real
nature of the infamous combination problem.
    The handbook also contains two ‘keynote’ articles. One is by Galen Strawson, who has long been
one of the most forceful advocates for the intelligibility and possible intellectual benefits of panpsy-
chism. He provides a close examination of the relation between panpsychism and our understanding
of the physical, the issue which is at the heart of panpyschism. The second is by David Chalmers, who
played a large role in the rebirth of interest in panpsychism at the end of the 20th century with his
famous invocation of the ‘hard problem’ of consciousness and has since done much to deepen our
understanding of panpsychism. His paper examines a comprehensive set of forms of idealism, the
connection with panpsychism, and considers the question whether idealism is the natural endpoint
beyond panpsychism for those moved by the seeming intractability of the problem of consciousness.
    I would like to thank all the contributors to the handbook who took my editorial interventions
in good spirit and waited patiently for the publication to come together. I also thank the team at
Routledge who have shown understanding and patience across a long gestation period, and who
were always fully supportive, not least – to my mind – in tracking down the beautiful Emily Carr
painting which graces the handbook’s cover.




                                                  xii
                                  1
                            INTRODUCTION
                             A Panpsychist Manifesto

                                           William Seager




The world is awake. That can stand as a slogan for panpsychism: the view that I will understand here
as holding that consciousness is fundamental and ubiquitous in nature. This does not mean that eve-
rything is conscious. Whether a particular non-fundamental entity is conscious will depend upon the
arrangement of its fundamental constituents given some presumed laws of ‘mental chemistry’1 which
govern the emergence of complex forms of consciousness. So in bare outline panpsychism presents
a familiar picture of fundamental features interacting in ways to generate more complex forms, it’s
just that the catalog of the fundamental includes consciousness. Nor does panpsychism entail that
sophisticated, high-level, human-like consciousness is ubiquitous. The term ‘consciousness’ is notori-
ously hard to define and the victim of multitudes of more or less well motivated (re)definitions. I aim
for a minimal conception. For contrast, compare this expansive notion of consciousness, plucked
merely for illustrative purposes from Aaronson (2016): ‘displaying intelligent behavior (by passing
the Turing Test or some other means) might be thought a necessary condition for consciousness’.
On the minimal conception, consciousness does not at all require that ability to pass the Turing test.
Feeling pain (or any other sensation) alone is sufficient for consciousness; consciousness implies only
sentience. It’s worth noting this because there is a somewhat pernicious ambiguity lurking here, that
between a property and the evidence we have for ascribing it. Although still inaccurate, Aaronson’s
dictum is closer to the truth if we change the final phrase to ‘a necessary condition for the ascription
of consciousness’. But note that we can have theoretical reasons for ascribing a property without there
being any direct observational evidence for the ascription. So, the kind of minimal consciousness in
question is not ‘self-consciousness’ or ‘transcendental subjectivity’, or awareness of the self as a subject,
or awareness of one’s own mental states, or the ability to conceptualize one’s own mental states as
such. Consciousness is simply sentience, or the way things are present (to the mind).
    It is undeniable that panpsychism is intuitively implausible. It is frequently subject to derision by
philosophers, being labeled ‘absurd’ (Searle 2013) and ‘ludicrous’ (McGinn 1999: 97). Even sympa-
thizers have qualms. Thomas Nagel worries that panpsychism carries the taint of ‘the faintly sicken-
ing odor of something put together in the metaphysical laboratory’ (1986: 49). Such denigrations
stem from a certain confidence – misplaced I think – in our pre-existing conception of the nature of
the physical world and a rather strange lack of confidence in our conception of subjective conscious-
ness. We think we know what matter is, and we think we thereby know that it just is not the kind of
thing which is or could be intrinsically conscious. In fact, though commonplace the former belief is
demonstratively mistaken, which leaves open the status of the latter claim.



                                                     1
                                             William Seager


    This is not a new thought. In one form or another it dates back at least to 19th-century writers
such as Ernst Mach and William James, and in the early 20th century to Bertrand Russell and Arthur
Eddington. The basic idea that the nature of matter is not obvious just from our daily interactions
with material objects forms the core of Noam Chomsky’s intriguing but somewhat obscure views
on the mind-body problem, seemingly leading to Chomsky requiring/expecting a physical-science
revolution before consciousness can be understood as a natural phenomenon (see 2000: ch. 4). The
staunch anti-panpsychist John Searle sometimes also suggests the need for a revolution in science
in order to understand how consciousness is a ‘biological phenomenon’, likening the situation to
that of physics prior to the introduction of the electromagnetic field (1992: 101 ff.). Searle’s claim
that there is no special problem of consciousness because of the ‘biological powers’ of the brain has
always struck me as, therefore, rather strange and one wishes he would explain, not in the details that
can be left to science, but just the general mechanism of emergence by which the biological gener-
ates consciousness which would then reveal to us where to look for the neurological details. There
is considerable recent work devoted to understanding the nature of the physical (see e.g. Montero
2009; Wilson 2006) and much current interest in the associated doctrine of Russellian Monism (see
e.g. Alter and Nagasawa 2015). This idea is forcefully expressed in defense of panpsychism in the
work of Galen Strawson (see e.g. 2006, 2003 and Strawon’s chapter in this volume).
    In the face of this natural antipathy, consideration of the philosophical advantages of panpsychism
is the best way for it to gain sympathy. The primary motivator for panpsychism is the problem of
consciousness. Over the last fifty years we have witnessed staggering advances in our knowledge of
the brain and our ability to observe it in action. As we enter into the search for the elusive neural cor-
relates of consciousness there are truly remarkable developments in mapping the relations between
states of consciousness and neural activity.
    Perhaps the most astonishing example of our growing knowledge, which is now underpinning
practical clinical interventions, is the work of Adrian Owen, who investigates people diagnosed as
being in a profound vegetative state. Such patients are incapable of making any overt behavioral
response which could signal residual consciousness and have been regarded as completely uncon-
scious. Owen has found that a disturbing number of such patients are in fact ‘locked in’ – fully
conscious but cut off completely from their bodies. Using real-time functional MRI, Owen is able
to interact with supposedly vegetative subjects by asking them to imagine various activities, such as
playing tennis, or walking around their home. It is possible to identify the (no doubt partial) neural
correlates of what the subject is imagining and thus open up a channel of communication. Owen is
currently working on non-MRI solutions which patients will be able to use outside his laboratory,
perhaps even at home.2 This is what we can do now. There is little doubt that our ability to discover
and track neural correlates of conscious states will expand enormously over the next decades.
    Nonetheless, the infamous ‘explanatory gap’ (see Levine 1983) between the physical states of the
brain and consciousness remains. Finding neural correlates does not show us how the brain manages
to generate or realize consciousness and thereby solve David Chalmers’s ‘hard problem’ (see his 1995,
1996). It seems likely that we will in the near future discover deeper and much more specific neu-
ral signatures of conscious states, perhaps involving neural synchronization or distinctive neural or
subneuron dynamical activity associated with consciousness. That too won’t reveal how conscious-
ness is produced by the brain: these mechanisms are only more fine-grained correlations. There is a
problem of principle here.
    Why is that? As hinted previously, the core of the problem is the apparent mismatch between
the nature of the physical world as we understand our fundamental theories to have revealed and
the subjective, ‘what it is like’ aspect of minimal conscious experience. It feels like something to be
awake and this just seems utterly foreign to how we regard and, for many, how we ought to regard
the material world.



                                                    2
                                              Introduction


    I take it that physics provides our scientific understanding of that world at the most fundamental
level. However, its theories are perpetually provisional and the more or less background metaphysical
pictures which they both suggest and spring from have a distressing history of being radically over-
turned by those of newer theories. And yet it is undeniable that we have accumulated knowledge.
This is possible because the metaphysical picture which lurks within or behind our physical theories
is not essential to their use and need not be preserved across scientific revolutions, even as explana-
tory and predictive power is retained and expanded. What is preserved is the relational or structural
systems which physical theory maps out and by which it is confirmed and becomes predictively
successful.3 These structures are all, ultimately, relations between observable quantities for which
we have labels such as ‘mass’, ‘electric charge’, ‘momentum’, etc., all definable in terms of observable
motion. Over centuries of development, physical theory has become successively more complex (for
example, many kinds of charge beyond that of electric are now recognized) but all new hypotheses
link to the relations between observable quantities, albeit sometimes indirectly.
    It is unsurprising that nowhere in this system do we find subjectivity, nor in the development of
physics is there any need to posit a subjective aspect to nature. The explanatory gap is exactly the
problem of how a world which is supposed to be completely described at the fundamental level by
a science which has no place or need for subjectivity nonetheless somehow includes the subjective
aspect of the world we call ‘consciousness’.
    The problem has been recognized for a very long time. In 1714 Leibniz expressed it with his ‘mill
argument’ in the Monadology:

    Imagine there were a machine which by its structure produced thought, feeling, and percep-
    tion. We can imagine it as being enlarged while maintaining the same relative proportions,
    to the point where we could go inside it, as we would go into a mill. But if that were so,
    when we went in we would find nothing but pieces which push one against another, and
    never anything to account for a perception . . . perception, and everything that depends on
    it, is inexplicable by mechanical principles.
                                                                 (1714/1989: 215, my emphasis)

Note that Leibniz makes the anti-structuralist point that the causal organization of the mill, or the
brain, cannot provide an explanation of the appearance of consciousness even if it is correlated
with it.4
    Leibniz was targeting the so-called ‘mechanical philosophy’ which, roughly speaking, asserted that
the material world was, as Newton put it, such that ‘God in the Beginning form’d Matter in solid,
massy, hard, impenetrable Particles, of such Sizes and Figures, and with such other Properties, and
in such Proportion to Space, as most conduced to the End for which he form’d them’ (1730/1979,
Query 31). Of course, Newton did not stop with this characterization but left the strict mechanical
view behind by adding that ‘these Particles have not only a Vis inertiæ, accompanied with such pas-
sive Laws of Motion as naturally result from that Force, but also that they are moved by certain active
Principles’. Gravity is but one example of such ‘principles’, which he also called ‘Powers, Virtues, or
Forces’.5 Newton expected a scientific chemistry to emerge in time based upon them.
    A philosophically purified version of mechanism was much later articulated by C. D. Broad
which can stand as the mechanistic ideal, whose essence is:

(a)	 a single kind of stuff, all of whose parts are exactly alike except for differences of position and
     motion;
(b)	 a single fundamental kind of change, viz, change of position . . .
(c)	 a single elementary causal law, according to which particles influence each other by pairs . . .



                                                   3
                                             William Seager


(d)	 a single and simple principle of composition, according to which the behavior of any aggregate
     of particles, or the influence of any one aggregate on any other, follows in a uniform way from
     the mutual influences of the constituent particles taken by pairs.
                                                                                         (1925: 44–5)

This vision is so ethereal that nothing like it has ever been seriously entertained. But the actual
mechanical worldview and its successors for a couple of centuries of furious and spectacularly suc-
cessful development can be seen as implicitly inspired by this pure vision. It expresses well a picture
of the world – let’s call it ‘LEGO® world’ – formed of a very large number of very small parts which
are metaphysically independent of each other, have individual identities (albeit ones of very little
interest) but which can interact by local causation. The familiarity we have with things like this, think
marbles or, indeed, LEGO bricks, is what funds confidence in our conception of matter or the physi-
cal and makes it seem intuitive and almost obvious . . . and very distant from subjectivity.
    The mechanical world view leveraged this picture into an intuitive positive conception of the
nature of matter: it came in chunks akin to the small particles we are familiar with in ordinary expe-
rience: impenetrable, capable of motion and – thanks ultimately to God’s decree – observant of the
fundamental rules or laws of nature which governed how these pieces interacted (e.g. conservation
of energy). Exactly how and why these material units are ‘forced’ to obey the laws of nature remained
(and remains) somewhat obscure. Perhaps the laws’ power is just a primitive metaphysical fact which
links properties with the appropriate level of modal force. Perhaps the laws somehow follow from
the causal powers of the fundamental entities of the world. Maybe the laws are a mere catalog of
universal regularities, or meta-regularities across a set of possible worlds (the ‘nomologically possible
worlds’). Perhaps the laws are an imposition of the conscious mind which ‘imposes’ them upon an
intrinsically chaotic universe (we find laws of nature because we could not exist in those regions of
possibility that were ‘too’ chaotic; a kind of anthropic Kantianism).
    In any case, this conception of matter excluded consciousness as one of its properties (except
perhaps if God directly and miraculously ‘superadded’ it to a material system6) and, in any case, there
was no need to posit consciousness to generate all the forms and activities in which matter could
participate. As to these forms, we now know that LEGO world is capable of implementing a Turing
machine so such a world could at least simulate anything which can be computed (ignoring specula-
tive hyper-computational devices), including quantum mechanics. Such a simulation might be very
slow but one should not confuse the simulation runtime with the time internal to the simulation.
Perhaps, so to speak, it might take seconds of simulation time to compute one yoctosecond of inter-
nal simulation time, but we can suppose that the simulation lives in an eternal and spatially infinite
world so there is no principled limitation here (we can suppose the physics of the simulation world
is unconstrained by anything except its being a LEGO world). Presumably, our entire universe, or at
least the observable universe, can thus be simulated given that the number of possible initial condi-
tions (the degrees of freedom of the big bang) is finite (which seems to be implied by current theory,
e.g. the holographic principle and possible theories of quantum gravity).
    So the LEGO world conception is in fact a spectacularly powerful one and it is based upon an
intuitively attractive conception of the nature of matter. One reason panpsychism seems weird to
people is that they have implicitly absorbed something like the mechanistic view of the material
world and its conception of the nature of the physical. But notwithstanding the power of the LEGO
world picture, its positive conception of the physical was exploded in the first half of the 20th cen-
tury. Matter does not form the ‘LEGO world’ imagined by the early mechanists. It turns out that
matter is nothing at all like ‘matter’ was supposed to be.
    Of course, it is quantum mechanics that has revealed this to us. This lesson is perhaps the num-
ber one thing that quantum mechanics is ‘trying to tell us’. Quantum entanglement seems to hint
that nature is holistic and that a world of independent material parts is merely a kind of emergent


                                                   4
                                               Introduction


approximation. This has been noted many times by physicists beginning almost from the birth of
quantum mechanics:

•	   Erwin Schrödinger: a particle certainly is . . . not a durable little thing with individuality (1952:
     241).
•	   Hans Primas: the idea . . . that the material world is . . . structured by some kind of interacting
     ‘elementary systems’ is in sharp contradiction [with] quantum mechanics (1998: 88).
•	   Basil Hiley: quantum phenomena require us to think in a radical new way, a way in which we
     will have to ultimately give up both the notion of particles and fields (1999: 116).
•	   David Bohm: the entire universe must, on a very accurate level, be regarded as a single indivis-
     ible unit in which separate parts appear as idealizations permissible only on a classical level of
     accuracy of description (1951: 167).

Our best quantum theory asserts that fundamental reality is composed not of material particles at all
but rather strange universal fields, the temporary excitations of which can appear to our experiments
as particle-like apparitions. These fields appear to exist in an extremely (infinite?) high-dimensional
space which cannot be directly identified with the space and time of experience.
    But despite the radical revision required by the quantum mechanical picture of the world, our
new physics has no need to add consciousness to the quantum fields to generate the physical phenom-
ena and structure that we can observe.7 The structures and systems of relations amongst the physical
attributes of the world are generated from the purely physical fundamental features posited by physics
with no hint of intrinsic subjectivity. So the great revolution in physics occasioned by the discovery
of quantum mechanics has not by itself closed the explanatory gap and solved the hard problem of
consciousness. In fact, as noted, some aspects of quantum physics, most famously the nature of obser-
vation or measurement, may suggest a fundamental role for consciousness8 but, even if it is real, it is a
role which figures outside of the system described by physical theory, breaking the law which governs
the evolution of the quantum state.
    The end of LEGO world and the mechanistic, or neo-mechanistic, picture of the world means we
have lost any viable positive conception of the fundamental nature of matter. What we are left with is
nothing more than the relational structure linked to observables, which physics maps out for us with
such stunning success. It is thus also the case that there is no direct impediment to the panpsychist
hypothesis stemming from an acceptable positive conception of the nature of the physical.
    Lacking an explanation of consciousness in physical terms and lacking any conception of material
reality beyond the structural, the panpsychist steps into the opening and suggests that perhaps the
fundamental reality of the physical world itself partakes of some aspect of subjective consciousness.
Again, this does not mean that quantum field particle states are reflecting about their own exist-
ence, enjoying a rich inner life akin to our own (though some vast multi-particle states are, namely
ourselves). But minimal, unsophisticated and unreflective consciousness is much more common than
its opposite, as witnessed by the host of pretty clearly conscious animals, some of which must have
extremely limited forms of awareness. All the panpsychist needs to posit is that some form of subjec-
tivity, some kind of primitive feeling, is at the foundation of the physical world.
    No positive conception of the physical precludes this posit, since we have no such conception.
The hypotheses of physics, of course, make no mention of consciousness but this is no surprise given
the structuralist constraints of physical science. But, roughly speaking, something beyond structure is
needed to make reality concrete. This point was perhaps made most precisely and forcefully by Max
Newman (1928) in his critique of Russell’s attempt at a purely structural account of science. Given
any system of entities, a merely abstract specification of structure as, say, sets of ordered n-tuples, is
revealed to be already present (sets exist if their members do). Something has to ‘select’ a certain struc-
ture as ‘real’ or concrete and, obviously, this ‘something’ has to go beyond simply additional relational


                                                    5
                                             William Seager


structure. This point should not be over interpreted. It does not imply the return of objects in the
sense of independent units with persistent and genuine individuality. It is simply the requirement that
some form of concrete reality is needed to, so to speak, realize what are otherwise pure abstractions.9
Why not, asks the panpsychist, let the one nonstructural reality we are already acquainted with and
for which we do have a positive conception, namely our own subjectivity, stand as this foundation?
    I will concede that this sort of consideration does not make panpsychism exactly plausible. It
strikes many as beyond strange to think of the world as awake and kind of ‘humming’ with a primi-
tive consciousness suffused throughout it as if there was an extra dimension of basic subjectivity.
Many or most would still prefer a physicalist metaphysics. But it seems to me that, at bottom, there
are only two alternatives which abide with standard physicalism.10
    The first is emergentism. Like the word ‘consciousness’, the term ‘emergence’ is fraught with
ambiguity. The minimal sense of the notion is simply that of a system having properties which are
not possessed by its parts. Familiar and uncontroversial examples abound: the liquidity of water, the
vortex structure of a tornado or hurricane. Commonplace but more exotic and controversial forms
are things like the collective intentionality of groups or nations. In any case, the world is awash in
emergence: almost everything you could think of has properties which are not shared by the fun-
damental physical entities postulated by physics. But this sort of standard or conservative emergence
based upon complexity does not engender an explanatory gap. When vast numbers of hydrogen and
oxygen atoms, for example, get together just right (and noting that these atoms, and their constituent
nucleons are themselves emergent entities of the same sort) we get liquid water, which is a remark-
able substance whose complexities are still not fully understood, although we do more every day
with ‘ab initio molecular dynamics simulations’ of critical temperatures, density changes and the like
(see e.g. Morawietz et al. 2016). Such efforts reveal that there is no doubt about the general route
from oxygen and hydrogen to the properties of water. From one point of view, this should not be at
all surprising. The properties of water at issue are themselves purely structural and a natural target for
the structure-based systems explored by more fundamental physics.
    On a much grander level, we have learned a tremendous amount about the emergence of the
classical world from its quantum underpinnings via decoherence (see the canonical text Joos et al.
2003) and the rise of effective field theory, understood via the renormalization group procedure,
which reveals why the world is amenable to our theoretical descriptions even if we can be quite
sure that these descriptions are in themselves incomplete and ultimately inaccurate. Thus quantum
field theory itself is regarded as a merely empirically adequate emergent within a delimited sector
of nature: ‘we have learned in recent years to think of our successful quantum field theories . . . as
“effective field theories”, low-energy approximations to a deeper theory that might not even be
a field theory’ (Weinberg 1995: xxi). Note that from the structuralist viewpoint the prospect of
potentially radical theoretical transformation is not a big problem. The predictive and explanatory
successes of field theories remain since the structure they revealed remains after theory change.
    Let’s group this widespread and internally quite diverse form of emergence under the term of
‘conservative emergence’. Its twin hallmarks are first, that there is an intelligible route from the con-
stituents of a system, broadly conceived to include everything from atoms to field states to theoretical
structures, to its emergent properties, even if complexity will often preclude precise predictions of
exact values of the emergent features; and second, that the emergent features will be largely describ-
able and explicable in terms of their own proprietary laws, albeit always subject to potential interfer-
ence from the more fundamental submergent underpinnings. It is an amazing fact about our world
that it is structured by a hierarchy of relatively autonomous emergent domains (of course, if it were
not, we would not be here).
    The emergence of subjectivity presents a problem of an entirely different order and seems to
call for more than conservative emergence. Ever more complex calculations of the behavior of ever



                                                    6
                                              Introduction


more complicated physical systems will not get us to consciousness, even if it should prove possible
to model the behavior of human beings, say via sophisticated computational neural simulations.
There is no intelligible route from the relational structures found in our physical science to the
intrinsic property of subjectivity. We are thus left with a radical emergence in which subjectivity
simply appears at some, seemingly arbitrary, point in the physical development of the universe rather
like Locke’s fantasy of God directly ‘superadding’ consciousness to matter. Although logically pos-
sible, such a radical emergence is entirely at odds with the whole point of the physicalist enterprise.
Furthermore, there is no reason to think that a radically emergent feature is itself physical in nature;
quite the opposite in fact, given that all the physical features we know are either fundamental or
conservative emergents that arise from assemblages and interactions of, ultimately, the fundamental
features of the physical world.
    Absent emergence, the second alternative is denial. Perhaps there is nothing more to the world
than the relational structures posited by physics, along with all the conservatively emergent out-
growths of basic physical processes. There are two immediate problems with such a heroic response.
The first is that we are left in ignorance about the underlying nature of matter. I suppose the best
physicalist reply is that this is simply an unavoidable and fundamental limitation to our knowledge,
regrettable perhaps but not such as to recommend endorsing panpsychism over epistemic humility
(see Langton 1998; Lewis 2009).
    The second problem seems much more serious: denying the reality of subjective experience is a
desperate measure and one of dubious coherence. The immediately most obvious argument for the
incoherence of the position is very simple:

1.	 If consciousness is an illusion then it merely seems that it exists.
2.	 But if anything seems to exist, that seeming is a state of consciousness.
3.	 Therefore consciousness (states of consciousness) exists.

The most developed ultra-eliminativism about experience itself is that of Daniel Dennett which
attempts, cleverly but ultimately unsuccessfully, to work around this argument. Dennett proposes
that we suffer an illusion that subjective experience exists but that this illusion is a purely cognitive
‘thought-illusion’ which can be explained in terms of a science of entirely nonconscious intentional
states (see e.g. Dennett 1991; for criticism see Seager 2017). Dennett exploits the fact that the term
‘seems’ has both an experiential and epistemic sense (contrast ‘the sun seems to be rising’ versus ‘it
seems that Trump will irreparably harm America’). The latter sense does not immediately demand
any experiential component, which is why Dennett can say without falling into immediate contra-
diction that ‘[t]here seems to be phenomenology. . . . But it does not follow from this undeniable,
universally attested fact that there really is phenomenology’ (1991: 366).
    Of course, this line of attack requires some explication of a purely cognitive, non-experiential
theory of thought content which Dennett has attempted to supply with his theory of intentional
stances. A particularly sophisticated deployment of this account leads to what he calls the method
of heterophenomenology. Applying it to those misguided enough to believe in consciousness,
heterophenomenology

    involves extracting and purifying texts from (apparently) speaking subjects, and using those
    texts to generate a theorist’s fiction, the subject’s heterophenomenological world. This
    fictional world is populated with all the images, events, sounds, smells, hunches, presenti-
    ments, and feelings that the subject (apparently) sincerely believes to exist in his or her (or
    its) stream of consciousness.
                                                                              (Dennett 1991: 98)



                                                   7
                                             William Seager


The basic problem with this approach, as I see it, is that it fairly obviously has a tacit dependence on
the experience and consciousness of the notional ‘researcher’ who is performing the heterophenom-
enological exercise.
    One way to see this is to take an epistemological route. Following the old path of Descartes, let
us each ask ourselves whether we know that something exists, or that something is happening right
now. It is evident that we have access to a realm of data which by itself guarantees that yes, indeed,
something exists. But the relational structures of physics cannot provide that guarantee since their
existence is not a certainty: what is certain is the realm of subjective experience. If we posit that
this realm does not exist, then we are left with the disturbing possibility that, given how things are
now, nothing at all exists. If anything is clear it is that that thought is self refuting as soon as it is
consciously thought. We do have access to a realm of immediately available and unassailable self-
knowledge, albeit of a quite limited form (which limitations Descartes also emphasized). Denying
this is to undermine the claim that we can know we are thinking at all, or indeed, that we know that
anything exists. It is much more plausible that consciousness exists than that we cannot unassailably
assert certain propositions which we understand.
    Granting that conscious experience exists (as if this were a concession!) does not entail panpsy-
chism. We can retain an epistemic humility about the underlying nature of the material world along
with the – in this context now somewhat puzzlingly assertive – denial that it involves subjectivity.
And we can always retain the hope that a conservatively emergent path from neuroscience (or else-
where in the sciences) will illuminate the generation of consciousness by a world bereft of funda-
mental subjectivity. But the former view is not mandatory and there is not the slightest hint of how
the latter might be accomplished.
    Panpsychism promises to integrate our scientific and ‘personal’ view of the world and do so in a
way that respects both the completeness of the physical picture of the causal structure of the world it
investigates and the role of consciousness itself. The price to pay is admission of subjectivity into the
foundation of the world as one of its fundamental features.
    Needless to say, panpsychism faces many problems beyond its initial air of implausibility. But these
are problems which can be philosophically explored, analyzed and perhaps solved. For example, one
might wonder why, if panpsychism is true, we see no sign of subjectivity at the fundamental physi-
cal level (electrons do not seem to be experiential subjects). But in fact the only direct revelation of
subjectivity is in our own experience and the panpsychist interprets this as evidence, that ‘conscious-
ness . . . provides a kind of “window” on to our brains’ thereby revealing ‘some at least of the intrinsic
qualities of the states and processes which go to make up the material world’ (Lockwood 1989: 159).
The fact that very simple physical systems do not exhibit complex behavior should not be surprising
but it’s hardly clear that this shows they lack a subjective aspect.
    The most vexing difficulty facing panpsychism is the so-called ‘combination problem’ (see James
1890/1950: ch. 6; Seager 1995), which is the issue of how the primitive foundational aspect of
subjectivity postulated by the panpsychist builds itself into the sophisticated and rich forms of con-
sciousness which creatures like us enjoy. This is not the place to discuss this in detail. Suffice to say
that recent work has offered a variety of possible approaches to the combination problem (see many
of the papers in Brüntrup and Jaskolla 2016, especially Chalmers 2016 and Goff 2016, and many
of the chapters in this volume). Some of these approaches use the reasonably familiar relation of
co-consciousness, some use a relation of phenomenal blending, some devise a notion of phenom-
enal bonding and some develop the idea that primitive experiential aspects ‘fuse’ into new forms,
superceding the originals. It is also possible to re-orient the problem by adopting a radical holism,
in which the single fundamental entity is the universe as a whole. Panpsychism then becomes what
is called ‘cosmopsychism’, and the combination problem becomes the ‘de-combination’ problem.
This somewhat Spinozistic view is as yet little explored but see Goff (2017) as well as the chapters
of Albahari and Goff in this volume. All of these ideas face serious objections, but they all stand as


                                                    8
                                                   Introduction


potential answers to the combination problem. The point here is that the combination problem is
one that can be addressed fruitfully. It is not a showstopper.
    Philosophical exploration and development of the panpsychism is possible and has already proved
fruitful. Panpsychism is a viable solution to the traditional mind-body problem and addresses the
more modern specific problem of consciousness. We can throw off the shackles of an outmoded and
falsely restrictive conception of the physical and declare that the world is awake.


                                                      Notes
	 1.	 This term goes back to John Stuart Mill (see 1843/1963: 108–9); see also Nagel (1979).
	 2.	 Owen has written a beautiful and fascinating popular exposition of his work entitled Into the Gray Zone
      (2017); a scholarly presentation of methods and results can be found in Owen (2008).
	 3.	 For philosophical discussion of scientific structuralism, the doctrine that science provides only knowledge
      of structural or relational features of reality see French (2014).
	4.	Leibniz’s celebrated solution to the mind-body problem, the pre-established harmony (1695/1997)
      between the material and mental realms, predicts the existence of neural correlates of consciousness. Leibniz
      (1696/1997) provides an interesting discussion of the three possible relations between matter and conscious-
      ness: causal, miraculous and harmony.
	 5.	 Newton’s acceptance of such perhaps ‘occult’ powers was anathema to strict mechanists who denied both
      action at a distance and hoped for a physics based solely upon interparticle collision. Leibniz himself, along
      with several other luminaries, attempted to develop vortex-based accounts of planetary motion which
      avoided Newtonian gravitation with some incomplete success (see Aiton 1972).
	6.	 Something Locke famously asserted was within the power of God and to which Leibniz agreed,
      though according to him it could be accomplished only via an objectionable ‘perpetual miracle’ (see
      1704/1996: 67).
	 7.	 It may need to add consciousness to the picture in order to get determinate observations, but that is an
      extra feature that has always seemed unscientific. Very few, but not zero, physicists believe that the solution
      to the measurement problem essentially involves consciousness (see McQueen (2019) for a popular level
      philosophical discussion).
	 8.	 The specific idea that measurement requires the intervention of a conscious observer appears in somewhat
      veiled ways in Bohr and von Neumann. It is explicitly advanced in London and Bauer (1939/1983) and
      Wigner (1962). A modern proponent is Henry Stapp (e.g. 1993).
	 9.	 For discussion of the subtleties of Newman’s objection to Russell see Demopoulos and Friedman (1985);
      see also van Fraassen (2007) and the radical pro-stucturalist discussion in Ladyman et al. (2007).
	10.	 There are non-physicalist alternatives to panpsychism. Idealism, for example, retains defenders and has
      sparked some renewed interest in recent philosophy (see e.g. Foster 2008; Pelczar 2015; Chalmers’s paper in
      this volume). Various forms of dualism are further alternatives that still have a few defenders (see e.g. Rob-
      inson 2004; Lavazza and Robinson 2014). Arguing for panpsychism over such non-physicalist views cannot
      be undertaken here, but roughly speaking it is panpsychism’s ability to integrate with the scientific view of
      the world and provide a solution to the problem of mental causation that are its main advantages.


                                                  References
Aaronson, Scott (2016). ‘The Ghost in the Quantum Turing Machine’. In S. Barry Cooper and Andrew Hodges
   (eds.), The Once and Future Turing. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 193–296.
Aiton, Eric (1972). The Vortex Theory of Planetary Motions. London: Macdonald.
Alter, T., and Nagasawa, Y. (eds.) (2015). Consciousness in the Physical World: Perspectives on Russellian Monism.
   Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bohm, David (1951). Quantum Theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Broad, C. D. (1925). Mind and Its Place in Nature. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Brüntrup, G., and L. Jaskolla (eds.) (2016). Panpsychism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chalmers, David (1995). ‘Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness’. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 2 (3):
   200–19. (Reprinted in J. Shear (ed.), Explaining Consciousness. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 9–32, 1997).
Chalmers, David (1996). The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chalmers, David (2016). ‘The Combination Problem for Panpsychism’. In G. Brüntrup and L. Jaskolla (eds.),
   Panpsychism. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 229–48.


                                                         9
                                                    William Seager


Chomsky, Noam (2000). New Horizons in the Study of Language and Mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University
   Press.
Demopoulos, William, and Friedman, Michael (1985). ‘Bertrand Russell’s the Analysis of Matter: Its Historical
   Context and Contemporary Interest’. Philosophy of Science, 52 (4): 621–39.
Dennett, Daniel (1991). Consciousness Explained. Boston: Little, Brown & Co.
Foster, John (2008). A World for Us: The Case for Phenomenalistic Idealism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
French, Steven (2014). The Structure of the World: Metaphysics and Representation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Goff, Philip (2016). ‘The Phenomenal Bonding Solution to the Combination Problem’. In G. Brüntrup and
   L. Jaskolla (eds.), Panpsychism. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 283–304.
Goff, Philip (2017). Consciousness and Fundamental Reality. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hiley, Basil (1999). ‘Active Information and Teleportation’. In D. Greenberger, W. Reiter, and A. Zeilinger
   (eds.), Epistemological and Experimental Perspectives on Quantum Physics. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
James, William (1890/1950). The Principles of Psychology, vol. 1. New York: Henry Holt and Co. (Reprinted in
   1950, New York: Dover, ed.X. (Page references to the Dover edition.)).
Joos, Erich, Dieter Zeh, H. et al. (2003). Decoherence and the Appearance of a Classical World in Quantum Theory.
   Berlin: Springer-Verla.
Ladyman, James, Ross, Don et al. (2007). Everything Must Go: Metaphysics Naturalized. Oxford: Oxford University
   Press.
Langton, Rae (1998). Kantian Humility: Our Ignorance of Things in Themselves. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lavazza, A., and Robinson, H. (eds.) (2014). Contemporary Dualism: A Defense. London: Routledge.
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm (1695/1997). ‘New System of the Nature of Substances and Their Communication,
   and of the Union Which Exists Between the Soul and the Body’. In R. Woolhouse and R. Francks (eds.),
   Leibniz’s ‘New System’ and Associated Contemporary Texts. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 7–36.
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm (1696/1997). ‘Letter to Basnage’. In R. Woolhouse and R. Francks (eds.), Leib-
   niz’s ‘New System’: And Associated Contemporary Texts. Oxford: Oxford University Press, Clarendon Press,
   pp. 62–4. (See C. I. Gerhardt (ed.) Die philosophischen schriften von Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, vol. 4. Berlin:
   Weidmann, 1880, p. 496ff ).
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm (1704/1996). New Essays on Human Understanding. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
   sity Press. ( J. Bennett and P. Remnant (trans. and ed.). Although this work was not published by Leibniz it
   was an essentially complete work, composed around 1704–5).
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm (1714/1989). ‘Monadology’. In Roger Ariew and Daniel Garber (eds.), G. W. Leib-
   niz: Philosophical Essays. Indianapolis: Hackett, pp. 214–24.
Levine, Joseph (1983). ‘Materialism and Qualia: The Explanatory Gap’. Pacific Philosophical Quarterly, 64: 354–61.
Lewis, David (2009). ‘Ramseyan Humility’. In David Braddon-Michell and Robert Nola (eds.), Conceptual
   Analysis and Philosophical Naturalism. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, Bradford Books, pp. 203–22.
Lockwood, Michael (1989). Mind, Brain and the Quantum. Oxford: Blackwell.
London, Fritz, and Bauer, Edmond (1939/1983). ‘The Theory of Observation in Quantum Mechanics’. In
   J. Wheeler and W. Zurek (eds.), Quantum Theory and Measurement. Princeton: Princeton University Press,
   pp. 217–59. (Originally published as ‘La théorie de lobservation en mécanique quantique’. In Actualités scien-
   tifiques et industrielles, no. 775, Paris: Heinemann, 1939.).
McGinn, Colin (1999). The Mysterious Flame: Conscious Minds in a Material World. New York: Basic Books.
McQueen, Kelvin (2019). ‘Does Consciousness Cause Quantum Collapse?’. Philosophy Now URL=https://
   philosophynow.org/issues/121/Does_Consciousness_Cause_Quantum_Collapse.
Mill, John Stuart (1843/1963). A System of Logic, vol. 7–8 of The Collected Works of John Stuart Mill. Toronto:
   University of Toronto Press.
Montero, Barbara (2009). ‘What Is the Physical?’ In B. McLaughlin, A. Beckermann, and S. Walter (eds.), The
   Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 173–88.
Morawietz, Tobias, Singraber, Andreas et al. (2016). ‘How van der Waals Interactions Determine the Unique
   Properties of Water’. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113 (30): pp. 8368–73. www.pnas.org/
   content/113/30/8368.abstract.
Nagel, Thomas (1979). ‘Panpsychism’. In Mortal Questions. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 181–95.
   (Reprinted in D. Clarke, Panpsychism: Past and Recent Selected Readings. Albany: SUNY Press, 2004.).
Nagel, Thomas (1986). The View from Nowhere. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Newman, M. (1928). ‘Mr. Russell’s Causal Theory of Perception’. Mind, 37: 137–48.
Newton, Isaac (1730/1979). Opticks, or, a Treatise of the Reflections, Refractions, Inflections and Colours of Light. New
   York: Dover, ed.X.
Owen, Adrian M. (2008). ‘Functional Neuroimaging of the Vegetative State’. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 9 (3):
   235–43.



                                                          10
                                                 Introduction


Owen, Adrian M. (2017). Into the Gray Zone: A Neuroscientist Explores the Border Between Life and Death. New
    York: Scribner.
Pelczar, Michael (2015). Sensorama: A Phenomenalist Analysis of Spacetime and Its Contents. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
    versity Press.
Primas, Hans (1998). ‘Emergence in Exact Natural Science’. Acta Polytechnica Scandinavica, 91: 83–98.
Robinson, William (2004). Understanding Phenomenal Consciousness. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Schrödinger, E. (1952). ‘Are There Quantum Jumps? Part II’. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 3
    (11): 233–42.
Seager, William (1995). ‘Consciousness, Information and Panpsychism’. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 2 (3):
    272–88. (Reprinted in J. Shear (ed.), Explaining Consciousness. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997.).
Seager, William (2017). ‘Could Consciousness Be an Illusion?’ Mind and Matter, 15 (1): 7–28.
Searle, John (1992). The Rediscovery of the Mind. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Searle, John (2013). ‘Can Information Theory Explain Consciousness’. New York Review of Books, January 10:
    54–58.
Stapp, Henry (1993). ‘A Quantum Theory of the Mind-Brain Interface’. In Mind, Matter and Quantum Mechanics.
    Berlin: Springer, pp. 145–72.
Strawson, Galen (2003). ‘Real Materialism’. In L. Anthony and N. Hornstein (eds.), Chomsky and His Critics.
    Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 49–88. (Reprinted with new postscript, in T. Alter and Y. Nagasawa (eds.), Con-
    sciousness in the Physical World: Perspectives on Russellian Monism. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015,
    pp. 161–208.
Strawson, Galen (2006). ‘Realistic Monism: Why Physicalism Entails Panpsychism’. Journal of Consciousness Stud-
    ies, 13 (10–11): 3–31. (Reprinted in A. Freeman (ed.), Consciousness and Its Place in Nature. Exeter: Imprint
    Academic, 2006.).
van Fraassen, BasC. (2007). ‘Structuralism(s) About Science: Some Common Problems’. Proceedings of the Aristo-
    telian Society Supplementary Volume, 81 (1): 45–61.
Weinberg, S. (1995). The Quantum Theory of Fields, vol. 1: Foundations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wigner, Eugene (1962). ‘Remarks on the Mind-Body Problem’. In I. Good (ed.), The Scientist Speculates. Lon-
    don: Heinemann, pp. 284–302. (Reprinted in J. Wheeler and W. Zurek (eds.), Quantum Theory and Measure-
    ment. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1983, pp. 168–81.).
Wilson, Jessica M. (2006). ‘On Characterizing the Physical’. Philosophical Studies, 131 (1): 61–99.




                                                       11
        PART I

Historical Reflections
                      2
           PLATO AND PANPSYCHISM
                                    Daniel Dombrowski




                                        1. Introduction
David Ray Griffin’s 1998 book Unsnarling the World Knot: Consciousness, Freedom, and the Mind-Body
Problem alludes to a rope metaphor from Schopenhauer to the effect that the key philosophical
problem since the 17th century (the mind-body problem) is, on prevailing assumptions, unsolvable.
One can highlight several prominent philosophers of mind to illustrate why we have been tied in
a ‘world knot’: William Seager has claimed that we have no idea whatsoever how consciousness
‘emerges’ from matter (1991: 195). Jaegwon Kim has held that we have reached a ‘dead end’ regard-
ing the mind-body problem (1993: 367). Colin McGinn has alleged that we will never be able to
understand the emergence of consciousness from the brain (1991: 1–2, 7). John Searle has suggested
that most of mainstream philosophy of mind is ‘obviously false’ (1992: 3). And Galen Strawson has
maintained that only a ‘revolutionary’ new way of thinking will enable us to respond adequately to
the mind-body problem (1994: 92, 99). Although Daniel Dennett is a bit more optimistic regarding
a solution to the mind-body problem on prevailing assumptions, even he has portrayed consciousness
as a ‘mystery’ (1991: 21).
    Some philosophers of mind think that panpsychism is the type of revolutionary thinking men-
tioned by Strawson that will enable us to unsnarl the world knot. In the context of the present
chapter, however, Thomas Nagel’s phrasing may be a bit more helpful when he says that ‘radical’
speculation is needed in order for such an unsnarling to be successful (1986: 10). I am taking the
etymology of the word ‘radical’ seriously in that it comes from the Latin radix for ‘root.’ That is,
contemporary panpsychists are offering an oxymoronic radically new approach to the mind-body
problem as well as revitalizing an ancient solution to it. It is not often noticed in contemporary
debates in philosophy of mind that panpsychism may very well be part of a philosophia perennis that
goes back to Plato.
    The spirit of the present chapter is captured well in a quotation from Josiah Royce, who once
suggested that:

    Whenever I have most carefully revised my . . . standards, I am always able to see . . . that
    at best I have been finding out, in some new light, the true meaning that was latent in old
    traditions. . . . Revision does not mean mere destruction.
                                                                                    (1908: 11)



                                                 15
                                           Daniel Dombrowski


    When the questions are asked, how can experience arise out of, and act back upon, nonexperi-
ence?, or, how can consciousness arise out of, and act back upon, nonconsciousness?, the two major
responses since the time of Descartes have been in terms of some form of dualism or some form of
materialism. Indeed, the debate between dualists and materialists since the time of Descartes can be
seen as entrenched.
    But the situation is not as hopeless as it seems. This is due in part to the fact that some major phi-
losophers of mind (e.g., Seager 1999; Strawson 2006) have moved toward panpsychism since the time
when Griffin’s book was published. The apparently entrenched character of the dualism–materialism
debate should not prevent us from appreciating Plato’s influence on Aristotle, Aristotle’s influence on
Leibniz, and the Leibnizian character of contemporary debates regarding panpsychism. For example,
the whole point to Aristotelian and Thomistic hylomorphism was to suggest that matter without
form and form without matter are the results of abstraction in that concrete reality is populated by
‘formbodies’ or ‘mindbodies’ or ‘soulbodies,’ to coin terms that try to capture the nondualistic char-
acter of hylomorphs. The Aristotelian idea that mind is, in a manner, all things is a protest against the
view that mind is what is left over when one abstracts away from either behavior or matter. Rather,
matter in motion just is mind in some fashion, hence, on one plausible reading of Aristotle, panpsy-
chism is implicitly affirmed.
    Leibniz is explicitly a panpsychist in his Monadology, but Leibniz’s similarity to Aristotle is not
often noticed. Newton insisted that an active principle had to be operative in nature, and not ex
machina as in Descartes. But Leibniz thought that Newton did, in fact, unwittingly fall victim to
use of the ex machina device. Leibniz’s own defense of something fundamentally active in nature
was seen by him as a return to Plato and Aristotle, specifically to the ideas that physical existents
were characterized by kinesis (motion) and dynamis (dynamic power). It even makes sense to claim
that an account of the universe as dynamic and vibratory would have surprised Plato less than it
would Newton (see Whitehead 1978: 94). And Kant appears to rebuke those who ridicule Leibniz’s
panpsychism because, if we had to state what physical reality is in itself, we would have to follow
Leibniz (1900: Part 1, Ch. 1).
    I am obviously not doing justice to the rich history of panpsychism in this brief introduction. But
I am trying to militate against the famous (or infamous) quip allegedly made by Quine that there
are two quite different reasons why people enter philosophy: to do philosophy or merely to do his-
tory of philosophy. I am arguing that these two are not mutually exclusive. That is, thinking about
the mind-body problem is historical thinking via major figures like Plato and Descartes, whether
philosophers of mind realize it or not. Regarding the mind-body problem in general, and regarding
panpsychism in particular, the following well-known quotation from Alfred North Whitehead seems
most appropriate: ‘The safest general characterization of the European philosophical tradition is that
it consists of a series of footnotes to Plato’ (Whitehead 1978: 39). In the present chapter I will be
relying especially on the thought of Whitehead, Charles Hartshorne, and other process philosophers
who have been quick to notice the panpsychist dimension of Plato’s thought.


                                 2.  Some Panpsychist Passages
What does it mean to explain the world, in general, and human nature, in particular? On a Platonic
basis such an explanation would seem to be in terms of either: (a) soul or (b) matter; or (c) both
soul and matter. The second option would have been anathema to Plato. Further, there is consider-
able well-known evidence in Plato’s dialogues in favor of the third option, leading many scholars
to think of Plato as some sort of dualist. But the issue is complicated and not merely because of the
understandable difficulty involved in determining Plato’s own views in his dialogues. That is, there
is also evidence in favor of the claim that the first, panpsychist option may be the best clue we have
to understanding Plato’s overall view. The main purpose of this chapter is to explore this option. In


                                                   16
                                          Plato and Panpsychism


the course of this exploration I will also touch on the relationship between soul and Platonic forms
as well as the importance of the World Soul in several of Plato’s later dialogues. The forms and the
World Soul make Plato’s view somewhat unique in the history of panpsychism.
     An initial passage to consider can be found at Epinomis 983d, where Plato’s presumed spokesper-
son (the Athenian) suggests that soul is the universal cause of body. A key question is: how close do
such passages take us to the claim that Plato was a panpsychist? His view seems to have been, at first
glance at the Phaedrus (245e, also 246b, 275b) and Laws (896a, also 895c, 896d, 898d, 899a–b), that
souls initiate change and transmit it to others, whereas bodies merely receive and transmit change. That
is, soul is defined in terms of self-motion in the Phaedrus and Laws and, as a result, has a certain sort
of ontological priority to body, a priority that is found in the Epinomis as well. (On the authenticity
of the Epinomis as an epilogue to Plato’s Laws, see Crombie 1962: 12, 329.)
     For metaphysical or cosmological purposes, psyche is used by Plato to refer to experiencing, think-
ing, remembering, feeling, etc., and only for ethical or religious purposes does he use the term to
refer to an enduring entity behind these processes. The dynamism of soul is evidenced in the new
concrete reality that exists at each moment. Plato is well aware of the fact that the transition from
motion to rest and from rest to motion does not occupy much of a stretch of time but occurs in an
instant (exaiphnes – Parmenides 156). It is not illegitimate to infer that it is this self-moving, processual
character of soul in Plato that is crucial in the effort to understand the relationship between soul
and body.
     An understandable mistake that could be made at this point would be to conclude that in Plato’s
dialogues soul is active whereas body is passive. But in the Republic it is clear that the degree of
affective and cognitive adequacy in soul is due to the reliability of the influence it receives from
the object that is experienced or known. This point enables us to see that it would indeed be a
mistake to claim that in Plato souls are strictly active. In fact, one of the most obvious of the soul’s
powers is its ability to receive influence from others, as in perception. As one moves up the famous
divided line in the Republic (509d–511e), what one finds is increasing adequacy of apprehension of
the world due to an increasing ability of soul to receive influence from the reality apprehended:
from imagination (eikasia), to belief (doxa), to hypothetical knowledge (dianoia), to the highest level
of awareness (noesis).
     The point of the present chapter is not to claim that Plato has to be viewed as a panpsychist, but
rather that one does not have to view him as a dualist, as is commonly assumed. A key passage to
consider in the effort to make intelligible the panpsychist tendency in his thought is Sophist 247d–e
(also see 249a, 249d), where Plato’s presumed spokesperson (the Eleatic Stranger) says the following:

     I suggest that anything has real being that is so constituted as to possess any sort of power
     either to affect anything else or to be affected, in however small a degree, by the most insig-
     nificant agent, though it be only once. I am proposing as a mark to distinguish real things
     that they are nothing but power.

Whitehead goes so far as to say that in this passage can be found the height of Plato’s genius as a
metaphysician (Whitehead 1967: 120). Being is here defined as power or dynamis, which is not acci-
dentally the root of our word ‘dynamic,’ specifically the power to affect, or the power to be affected
by, others. I take it that the ‘or’ (eite) in the preceding quotation does not refer to mutual exclusivity
between influence and being influenced, hence ‘and’ (kai) might have better expressed the point.
Further, the words ‘nothing but power’ in the preceding quotation might be better phrased in terms
of the capacity for dynamis.
    Plato’s dialogue style betrays this idea. One does something with (not to) one’s dialectical partner.
This makes the dialogue style a good model for the general nature of reality. As opposed to authori-
tarian dictation, in dialectic it will not suffice to suggest that to speak and be heard are admirable,


                                                     17
                                            Daniel Dombrowski


whereas to listen and to hear are not. Plato makes this point explicit in at least one dialogue, the
Gorgias (508a). We will also see that to speak of the supreme soul (i.e., the World Soul) as persuading
other souls is to presuppose that each lesser soul has the power to be moved.
     Plato hints at the panpsychist position (in which only concrete singulars feel, and in which the
abstract is real only in the concrete, thus soul is the inclusive type of reality) when he indicates that
soul is coincident with every action and passion. But no ancient Greek thinker was in a position to
fully understand the difference between singulars and aggregates in the smaller parts of nature. That
is, there is a vast difference between soul as such or soul as a generic principle, on the one hand, and
animal soul (including human soul), on the other. It is the lack of self-motion in everyday inanimate
things that has caused materialists or dualists to suppose that the microscopic parts of these things also
lack self-motion (see Hartshorne 1983: ch. 2–3).
     In Plato’s dialogues we learn that soul is the universal cause (aitias tou holou – Epinomis 988d), that
it is (metaphysically rather than chronologically) prior to body (presbyteras e somatos – Laws 892a), that
bodies are derived from soul (soma de deuteron te kai hysteron – Laws 896c), that we receive our being
from soul (Laws 959a), and that soul is the primary source of all things (psychen genesin hapanton einai
proten – Laws 899c). So although Plato could not fully understand the full significance of panpsy-
chism in that he lived over two thousand years before the discovery of cells and other microscopic
centers of power, it would be a mistake to think that he was totally ignorant of such significance
by defending dualism simpliciter. (Also see Philebus 28d, 29a-31b; and Timaeus 30b–c, 31a, 40b–e,
69c–70e, 77b.)
     William Lane Craig offers in formal outline something like the following argument (in abbrevi-
ated form), which indicates why the definition of soul in terms of self-motion is crucial in the effort
to understand the panpsychist tendencies in Plato’s thought. That is, a version of Craig’s reconstruc-
tion of Plato’s thought can be used not only to understand Plato’s theology, but also to understand
his flirtations with panpsychism:

a.	 Some things are in motion.
b.	 There are two kinds of motion: communicated motion and self-motion.
c.	 Communicated motion implies self-motion: (i) because things in motion imply a self-mover
    as their source of motion, otherwise there would be no starting point for the motion; and (ii)
    because things moved by another imply a prior mover.
d.	 If all things were at rest, only self-motion could arise directly from such a state: (i) because a
    thing moved by another implies the presence of another moving thing; (ii) but this contradicts
    the hypothesis that all things are at rest.
e.	 Therefore, the source of all motion is self-motion or soul
                                                                                     (Craig 1980: 4).

To say that there are strong grounds for thinking that Plato was a panpsychist is to say that self-
motion is pervasive in Plato’s cosmology, including the self-motion of, or self-motion in, plants, stars,
the sun, and earth. That is, we would be wrong to assume that it is only human or animal souls that
are capable of self-motion.
    Although he finds the animism or panpsychism in Plato’s dialogues (especially, the Phaedrus, the
Timaeus, and the Laws/Epinomis) odd, Crombie emphasizes the importance of this aspect of Plato’s
thought. The self-motion of soul has not only intellectual, but also spiritual, significance in Plato’s
thought, as Crombie sees things, in that it is part of the effort to counteract the physicalist reduction-
ism of the newly found atheists. The fact that Crombie himself does not find mechanism problematic
is evidence in favor of the claim that he can be seen as an independent observer of Plato’s animism
or panpsychism (see Crombie 1962: 325–40).



                                                    18
                                         Plato and Panpsychism


                                     3.  The Forms and Soul
Two additional topics need to be considered in order to understand Plato’s engagement with panpsy-
chism. First, something has to be said about the relationship between soul and the forms in Plato.
If the forms are seen as having causal power (and there is textual evidence that Plato viewed forms
in this manner), then this might mean that whereas bodies can be moved by other moved things or
by self-moved souls, souls can also be moved by the motionless forms. Yet if the forms are items in
divine psyche, then soul in some sense is fundamental for metaphysical speculation and hence Plato
came quite close to panpsychism. That is, panpsychism is compromised if too much emphasis is
placed on forms or abstract objects as having causal power of their own or as having agency.
    It is common to hear that the forms are ‘independent,’ even of the divine soul. It must be admitted
that there are several passages in Plato’s dialogues that support this interpretation. But if ‘X is inde-
pendent of Y’ has any sharp meaning it must be that X could exist even if Y did not, which implies
that Y is contingent. If X stands for the forms and Y for divine soul, then the nonexistence of God is
being taken as possible. But this result conflicts with the treatments of divine soul in both the Timaeus
and Book Ten of the Laws. It also conflicts with Plato’s anticipation of the ontological argument (see
Dombrowski 2006). That is, if God’s existence is not contingent in Plato, then not only are the forms
envisaged by divine soul, they could not lack this status. Both the forms and God are everlasting on
Plato’s view and as a result there can be no real independence of one from the other. God always
exists as the ideal knower in Plato and the forms are the objects such an ideal knower would know. In
different terms, on the extradeical view (where the forms have some sort of curious existence apart
from both matter and soul) panpsychism is threatened, but on the more defensible intradeical view
(where forms are items in divine psychical process) panpsychism is preserved.
    It can be said that the greatest problem in Plato’s metaphysics does not concern the theory of
forms, but rather concerns the problem of how to sufficiently grasp the functions of soul as both
receptive and creative. There are also the related problems of understanding internal and external
relations in soul and how to come to terms with the way that soul interacts with body. Plato’s analy-
sis of becoming remains incomplete, because if knowing something is to change that something, as
Plato sometimes indicates, then past events go on changing when we think about them. Plato prob-
ably flirted with this idea (that knowing something changes it) as a reaction to the opposite view that
the past completely determines the present, in souls as well as in bodies. The self-motion of soul must
mean that soul originates change, which is at least compatible with the view that necessary, although
not sufficient, causal conditions are inherited from the past. Soul does not merely transmit tendencies
from the past, nor just receive them, as in bodies.


                                        4.  The World Soul
Second, it is difficult to understand the topic of panpsychism in Plato without a consideration of his
cosmology, dominated as it is by the concept of a World Soul. The concept of soul as self-moving
or self-creative sheds light on Platonic theodicy in the sense that the lack of complete order in the
world is explained by there being many souls that can get in each other’s way. These many self-active
agents imply indefinitely great if not complete disorder unless there is a supreme Soul to persuade
the many lesser souls to conform to a cosmic plan. But they cannot completely fit such a plan for then
they would not be self-determined.
   The meaning of God as the World Soul having power over us is intelligible only if we see the
World Soul as a self-moved mover of others who is also partially moved by these other self-movers.
Such a God can rule the world only in the sense that such a soul sets optimal limits for free action.
The divine can control the changes in us by inspiring us with novel ideas, hence by molding the



                                                   19
                                           Daniel Dombrowski


divine life itself God presents us at each moment with a partly new ideal. But such a God is not
omnipotent because omnipotent power would be a monopoly of power over the powerless, which
is at odds with the aforementioned Platonic view that being is power.
    The doctrine of the World Soul appears in at least five of Plato’s later dialogues (Statesman, Phile-
bus, Timaeus, Laws, Epinomis), indicating its importance to Plato. To help explicate both the charac-
teristics of the World Soul and the implications of the World Soul for panpsychism in Plato, three
levels of psyche can be distinguished.
    P1 is psyche at the microscopic level of cells and atomic particles, where contemporary biology
and physics can be seen to have vindicated Plato’s forays into panpsychism. Reductionistic material-
ism in its various manifestations and determinism have faded, on the contemporary panpsychist view
(see Griffin 1998), as reality in its fundamental constituents itself seems to have at least a partially
indeterminate character of (Platonic) self-motion. That is, the sum total of efficient causes from the
past does not supply the sufficient cause to explain the behavior of the smallest units of becoming
in the world. Plato was wiser than he knew. Little did he realize that in 20th–21st-century science
universal mechanism might give way to ubiquitous self-motion.
    P2 is psyche per se, which involves feeling of feeling, found in animals and human beings, where
central nervous systems enable ‘higher’ organisms as wholes to feel just as the constituent parts show
at least prefigurements of feeling at a local level. And feeling is localized. Think of a knife stuck in
the gut of any vertebrate or of sexual pleasure. P2 consists in taking these local feelings and collecting
them so that an individual as a whole can feel what happens to its parts, even if the individual partially
transcends the parts. If the reader thinks that all of this is foreign to Plato, it should be noted that in
the Republic (462c–d) Plato makes it clear that if there is pain in one’s finger (note, not the whole
hand), the entire community (pasa he koinonia) of bodily connections is hurt. The organized whole
of the individual is such that when one part is hurt there is a feeling of pain in the human being as
a whole (hole) who has the pain in the finger. Of course, Plato’s treatment of localized pain was not
based on cell theory, but on obvious phenomenological evidence symbolized in the Republic by pre-
cisely localized intense pain in a finger rather than in an arm or a hand. Panpsychism helps us to bet-
ter understand how, when one has pain in one’s finger, the pain is in one sense mine and in another
sense not mine. Further, there was some sort of dim awareness among the ancient Greeks of nerves
(neura), which were significant parts of the ancient scientific view of the world (see Solmsen 1961).
    P3 is divine psyche. If I am not mistaken, the following four-term analogy takes us to the heart of
Plato’s view of both panpsychism and the World Soul:

     P1 : P2 :: P2 : P3

The universe is a societal organism (a World Soul), of which one member (the Demiurge) is preemi-
nent, just as human beings are societies of cells (neura or ‘nerves’), of which the mental part is
preeminent.
    Because an individual must, to maintain integrity, adapt to the environment, mortality is implied.
But if we imagine the World Soul we must not consider an environment external to divinity, but an
internal one: the world body of the World Soul (including the demiurgic divine mind). This cosmic,
divine animal (zoon – Timaeus 30c) has such an intimate relation to the divine body that there must
also be ideal ways of perceiving and remembering the bodily parts such that the World Soul can
identify the microindividuals (P2) that are included. We can only tell when cells in our finger have
been burned by the fire. We cannot identify the microindividuals as such.
    Although the evidence in Plato’s dialogues is somewhat unclear as to how matter could consist
of multitudinous souls of extremely subhuman kinds, he had at least a glimmering that it was the
multiplicity of souls that made general order possible (due to the persuasive influence of the World
Soul on lesser souls) and absolute order impossible (due to the self-moving power of each soul). Each


                                                    20
                                          Plato and Panpsychism


new divine state in the life of the World Soul harmonizes itself with both its predecessor and with
the previous state of the cosmos. This is analogous to a human being harmonizing itself with its previ-
ous experience and bodily state, but with a decisive difference. The human soul must hope that its
internal and the external environment will continue to make it possible for it to survive, whereas the
World Soul has no such problem in that there is no external environment for the World Soul. But
the differences between the World Soul and the human soul (the World Soul knows the microindi-
viduals included within the divine life and the World Soul has no external environment) should not
cloud the important similarities (the fact that self-change is integral to soul at all levels and the fact
that the soul-body analogy used to understand the World Soul-world body helps us to better grasp
the relationship between a human soul and the besouled parts of a human being). The autokinesis of
soul at all levels (P1, P2, and P3) is precisely what enables Platonic panpsychism to avoid the bifurca-
tion of the world (and the reductionistic reaction to such bifurcation) that has dominated philosophy
since the time of Descartes.
    The most important similarity lies in the fact that one’s bodily cells (or neura) are associated, at a
given moment, with one as a conscious supercellular singular, just as all lesser beings are associated
with the society of singulars which in the Timaeus is called the divine animal or the World Soul. In
a way, all talk of the World Soul short of strict univocity contains some negativity, in that God does
not exist, know, love, etc. exactly as we do. With regard to the divine body, however, almost all the-
ists in the Abrahamic religions have allowed this negativity to run wild by completely denying the
divine body. This is perhaps why the World Soul strikes many or most contemporary readers as odd.
    It did not strike Plato as odd, however. In fact, according to Plutarch, all of the ancient philoso-
phers, except for Aristotle and the atomists, believed that the world was infused with a divine, animal
soul (Plutarch III 1870: 133). In two passages in Plato’s later dialogues (Theaetetus 176b–c; Timaeus
90a–d; also see Republic 500c–d) it is suggested that the goal of human soul is to become as much like
divine soul as possible (homoiosis theoi kata to dynaton). This is possible because the World Soul and
our souls are remotely akin, just as our souls are remotely akin to souls vastly inferior to our own,
although these latter are at least proto-sentient centers of self-moving power. This homoiosis doctrine
is at once metaphysical/cosmological, intellectual, moral, and aesthetic (from the Greek aisthesis, feel-
ing). Plato’s view strikes some people as odd (see Annas 1999; Mohr 1985) on the assumption that
divinity necessarily involves otherworldliness or escape from this world. But belief in panpsychism
and the related idea of a World Soul does not involve a flight beyond the natural world of becoming
if the World Soul just is that world when considered as an integral, besouled whole.


                                            5. Conclusion
It should now be clear why it is not necessary to view Plato as some sort of dualist. Scholars have
always noticed the importance of psyche in the mesocosmos (P2). But they have paid insufficient
attention to the macrocosmic significance of soul in Plato (P3). We are parts (P2) of the World
Soul or of what is seen in the Timaeus as the divine animal (P3). This should give us a clue regard-
ing the analogous part-whole relationship between the microcosmic parts (P1) that constitute us as
mesocosmic wholes (P2). This clue has also largely been ignored by scholars, which perhaps explains
why it is often assumed without argument that Plato was a dualist. The aforementioned four-term
analogy actually runs both ways. Just as P3 helps to explain why there is a universe or a cosmos, in that
the World Soul brings together what would otherwise be the scattered multiplicity of the bodily, so
also there is a sort of cosmos or wholeness of an individual life (P2). That is, bodily life is permeated by
besouled, dynamic power, hence it is a mistake to think of soul in Plato as having a sort of epiphe-
nomenal existence hovering above body.
    As was mentioned earlier, there is evidence in Plato’s dialogues that is supportive of the claim
that he can be viewed as a panpsychist. This evidence includes the ideas that: only soul is capable of


                                                    21
                                            Daniel Dombrowski


self-motion; soul is the universal cause of body; soul is the only initiator of change in the universe;
soul is both active and passive in the dynamic power it exhibits; and bodies are derived from soul,
hence soul is metaphysically prior to body. The problem of how life (or consciousness) arises out of
lifeless (or unconscious) matter is not one that even comes up on the basis of this evidence in that
the dynamic power of being goes all the way down, on the view of Plato I am explicating in the
present chapter.
    On the panpsychist view, each event is a dynamic subject for itself and an object for others, hence
no event is simply a subject or simply an object, contra dualism or materialism. That is, reality is char-
acterized by the dynamic power in subjects that become objects. Interpreting Plato as a panpsychist
thus enables us to better come to grips with a key feature of several of his later dialogues, which sug-
gests that being has both an ‘in itself ’ dimension and an ‘in relation’ character. Psyche, defined by Plato
as self-motion, is required in order to understand the very dynamism of the world. This is because
inactivity is inimical to soul, even when its amphibious qualities are taken into consideration: soul
has one foot in the eidetic realm of changeless forms and one foot in the instantial camp of dynamic
nature. Only soul has the right sort of contact to link up both the forms and ubiquitous flux. Indeed,
the Greek physis, which is usually translated into English as ‘nature,’ might more accurately be trans-
lated as ‘process,’ as Whitehead argues (1967: 150).
    Granted, Plato is his own worst enemy in the sense that he did a very good job in providing
evidence for the widespread thesis that he was a dualist. But three disparate positions are clearly
defended in ancient philosophy by Plato and others which, when put together by later thinkers, can
lead to a credible version of panpsychism: (1) Plato’s discovery in the Sophist of the metaphysical
concept that being is dynamic power to both exert influence on, and to be influenced by, others; (2)
his definition of psyche in the Phaedrus and Laws in terms of self-motion, a definition that is amplified
by Aristotelian kinesis; and (3) the Epicurean belief that ultimate reality is atomic in character, a belief
that is amplified by the ancient Greek discovery of neura, as detailed by Solmsen (1961).


                             6.  Postscript: Skrbina’s Interpretation
It will be helpful to see the extent to which the view of Plato presented in this chapter agrees with
the magisterial study of the history of panpsychism authored by David Skrbina (2005), who agrees
that there is something problematic in the familiar conclusion that Plato was a dualist. There is also
something problematic in seeing the forms as the ultimate realities in Plato, as we have seen previ-
ously in defense of the intradeical interpretation of the relationship between the forms and divine
soul. It must be admitted, however, as Skrbina notes, that Plato can also be read as something of a
reverse epiphenomenalist. Epiphenomenalism consists in the belief that body is the fundamental
reality, whereas mind has some sort of shadowy reality that derives from the body. The reverse epi-
phenomenalism in Plato noticed by Skrbina, however, has mind as the fundamental reality, whereas
the body has a shadowy sort of reverse doppelganger existence derived from mind, as found, say, in
the famous myth of the cave in the Republic (see Skrbina 2005: 6, 10, 14).
    Skrbina thinks that the best interpretation of Plato is that he was a panpsychist, especially when his
later dialogues are considered. (Things get confusing, however, when Skrbina claims that the Stoics
were the first panpsychists. I assume that this is a typographical error and that what Skrbina wanted
to say was that the Stoics were the first pantheists – 2005: 21.) Perhaps the biggest contribution that
Skrbina makes to the view of Plato as a panpsychist is his argument that a belief in a panentheistic
(not pantheistic) World Soul is different from a belief in panpsychism and that one could commit
to a belief in a World Soul without committing to panpsychism in that to speak of soul/mind as
a single universal being leaves open the question as to whether soul/mind is attributable to each
thing in itself. Skrbina and I are in agreement that Plato can profitably be seen as both a defender of
a panentheistic (literally, all is in God) World Soul and a panpsychist, given the proliferating pluralism


                                                    22
                                             Plato and Panpsychism


of psyche in Plato (Skrbina 35, 39). However, Skrbina is for some unstated reason reluctant to view
the World Soul in theistic terms.
    Four arguments for panpsychism in Plato (and other ancient Greek philosophers) are detected
by Skrbina. First, there is an argument from indwelling power in things (based on the evidence pro-
vided by things being capable of self-motion and being possessive of other sorts of dynamic power).
Second, there is an argument from continuity (apparently based on the idea that we can notice vari-
ous levels of dynamic power in the universe and have a sense that such powers are not to be found
solely in human beings). Third, there is an argument from first principles wherein soul/mind is not
derivative or incidental, but central and primary. And fourth, there is the well-known argument
from design that has exerted a huge influence on the history of philosophy, an argument wherein
the self-motion of divine soul is transmitted to other besouled beings throughout the cosmos. These
arguments, far from striking ancient philosophers as odd, would have had a family resemblance to the
hylozoism or animism or panpsychism of the presocratic philosophers. In fact, the first philosophers
who defended the idea of matter without feeling were the atomists, on Skrbina’s interpretation. That
is, what would have struck most ancient thinkers as odd would be the unfeeling atoms (atomoi apa-
theis) of Leucippus and Democritus (Skrbina 2005: 25–8, 33, 40).
    From the preceding it would be legitimate to conclude that I see a great deal of compatibility
between my own view of Plato’s panpsychism and Skrbina’s view, contra the interpretation of Plato
as a dualist, as found, say, in Guthrie (1962–81: 4, 420). Or again, whereas Plato did tend toward
dualism in his middle period, in his later dialogues he tended toward panpsychism, although I would
add that there are prefigurements of panpsychism in the middle dialogues (as in Ion 533–536, where
the magnetic power of lodestones is discussed) and faint traces of dualism in the later dialogues. But
Skrbina is surely correct about the tendency toward panpsychism in the later dialogues, as in Philebus,
where soul is the cause of all things and where there are living presences in nature (896d, 899b).
This tendency in Plato is both noticed and affirmed by Plotinus (Ennead VI. 7, 11). Indeed, Skrbina
insightfully goes so far as to say that ‘There appear to be no passages in the late dialogues that explic-
itly deny the panpsychist conclusion’ (2005: 44, also 34–5, 42–3).


                                                Works Cited
Annas, Julia (1999). Platonic Ethics, Old and New. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Craig, William Lane (1980). The Cosmological Argument from Plato to Leibniz. New York: Barnes and Noble.
Crombie, I. M. (1962). An Examination of Plato’s Doctrines, vol. 1. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Dennett, Daniel (1991). Consciousness Explained. Boston: Little, Brown.
Dombrowski, Daniel (1991). ‘Hartshorne and Plato’. In Lewis Hahn (ed.), The Philosophy of Charles Hartshorne.
   LaSalle, IL: Open Court.
Dombrowski, Daniel (2005). A Platonic Philosophy of Religion: A Process Approach. Albany: State University of
   New York Press.
Dombrowski, Daniel (2006). Rethinking the Ontological Argument: A Neoclassical Theistic Response. New York:
   Cambridge University Press.
Griffin, David Ray (1998). Unsnarling the World Knot: Consciousness, Freedom, and the Mind-Body Problem. Berke-
   ley: University of California Press.
Guthrie, W. (1962–81). History of Greek Philosophy, 6 vols. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hartshorne, Charles (1983). Insights and Oversights of Great Thinkers: An Evaluation of Western Philosophy. Albany:
   State University of New York Press.
Kant, Immanuel (1900). Dreams of a Spirit-Seer. Trans. Emmanuel Goerwitz and Frank Sewell. New York:
   Macmillan.
Kim, Jaegwon (1993). Supervenience and Mind. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Leibniz, Gottfried (1991). Discourse on Metaphysics and Other Essays. Trans. Daniel Garber and Roger Ariew.
   Indianapolis: Hackett.
McGinn, Colin (1991). The Problem of Consciousness. Oxford: Blackwell.
Mohr, Richard (1985). The Platonic Cosmology. Leiden: Brill.


                                                        23
                                              Daniel Dombrowski


Nagel, Thomas (1986). The View from Nowhere. New York: Oxford University Press.
Plato (1977). Platonis Opera. Ed. John Burnet, 5 vols. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Plato (1999). The Collected Dialogues of Plato. Ed. Edith Hamilton and Huntington Cairns. Princeton: Princeton
    University Press.
Plutarch (1870). Plutarch’s Morals. Ed. William Goodwin. Boston: Little, Brown.
Royce, Josiah (1908). The Philosophy of Loyalty. New York: Macmillan.
Seager, William (1991). Metaphysics of Consciousness. London: Routledge.
Seager, William (1999). Theories of Consciousness. London: Routledge.
Searle, John (1992). The Rediscovery of the Mind. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Skrbina, David (2005). Panpsychism in the West. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Solmsen, Friedrich (1961). ‘Greek Philosophy and the Discovery of Nerves’. Museum Helveticum, 18: 150–67,
    169–97.
Strawson, Galen (1994). Mental Reality. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Strawson, Galen (2006). Consciousness and Its Place in Nature: Does Physicalism Entail Panpsychism? Exeter: Imprint
    Academic.
Whitehead, Alfred North (1967). Adventures of Ideas. New York: Free Press.
Whitehead, Alfred North (1978). Process and Reality. Ed. David Ray Griffin and Donald Sherburne, corrected
    edition. New York: Free Press.




                                                        24
                           3
                      ABHIDHARMA
                    PANPROTOPSYCHIST
                     METAPHYSICS OF
                     CONSCIOUSNESS
                                        Monima Chadha

Panpsychism refers to a variety of doctrine that asserts that mental features are ontologically fun-
damental and ubiquitous. This definition in terms of mental features is not standard, but I think it
will prove to be useful. The term ‘mental features’ is suitably ambiguous: it is neutral on whether
mental features are restricted to phenomenal features or comprise non-phenomenal features as well
and also on whether mental features are substances, or objects, or properties or some entirely new
kind of thing hypothesised by physicists or contemplated by metaphysicians. To claim that mental
features are ontologically fundamental separates out panpsychism not only from physicalism but also
from eliminativism. Again, to claim that they are ubiquitous separates out the doctrine from Carte-
sian dualism and neutral monism. However, this fails to rule out idealism as a variety of panpsychist
views. I think rightly so, as idealism is a version of panpsychism, indeed its most popular version in
the nineteenth century (Seager and Allen-Hermanson 2015). The revival of panpsychism in recent
times is not a version of idealist metaphysics; far from it. Most contemporary panpscyhists accept that
the material and mental features are ontologically fundamental. Some, like Galen Strawson (2006),
go so far as to claim that panpsychism is entailed by ‘real physicalism’ or ‘realistic materialism’. Much
more needs to be said to give a precise specification of panpsychism but this brief characterisation
will suffice for my purposes here. I do not intend to give a precise answer to the question as to what
is panpsychism; rather my interest here is to explore what Buddhist views of the mind have to offer
to contemporary debates on panpsychism.
    Contemporary interest in panpsychism is driven by the intractablilty of the “hard problem” (Chal-
mers 1996). Reductive physicalism is no longer the only game in town, even scientifically minded
philosophers are willing to pursue other paradigms as live options. As a methodological approach,
reductive physicalism, or the so-called orthodox naturalism of “eliminating or locating” ( Jackson
1998: 5) non-physical features of the world in the physical, has given way to liberal naturalism
(Strawson 1985). Liberal naturalists in philosophy of mind seek to explain consciousness without the
metaphysical constraints of physicalism and of any ontological limitations on sorts of things that con-
stitute the basic furniture of the world. Panpsychism as a prominent example of the liberal naturalist
approach has the license to introduce a different kind of metaphysics to replace the current physicalist
ontology and its settled categories. Panpsychists should not be restricted by ontological categories
like those of substances, properties, atoms, subjects of experience and so on. Contemporary panpsy-
chists, for example Nagel (1998) and Strawson (1999), contend that our current conceptions of mind
and body, mental and physical are radically inadequate and in need of revision. In light of this, it


                                                   25
                                            Monima Chadha


could be useful to look at philosophical traditions other than our own Western tradition, particularly
at traditions that have grappled, and continue to grapple, with cognate problems. I believe that the
ancient Indian Buddhist tradition, and its contemporary philosophical forms, is quite germane here
for several reasons.
    First, Buddhist philosophy contains a wealth of material that is relevant to the concept of con-
sciousness and that of mind. Panpsychists, and analytic philosophers more generally, can find valuable
insights in it. However, Buddhist philosophy, and classical Indian philosophy more generally, is not
easily integrated into mainstream Western philosophy because their interests (specifically, soterio-
logical aims) and languages are foreign to contemporary philosophers and have been ignored for a
very long time. It is only in the last decade or so that scholars, with the requisite philosophical train-
ing and knowledge of the relevant languages, have successfully extracted discussions of consciousness
and mind from classical Buddhist sources and situated them in the corresponding contemporary
philosophical debates (Dreyfus 2011; Thompson 2014; Ganeri 2012; Chadha 2015; Garfield 2015).
Secondly, what makes the Buddhist tradition especially attractive to panpsychism as well as liberal
naturalism is because its metaphysics is radical and revisionary in that it lacks a self and any other
persisting entities. Thirdly, and most importantly, the reason in its favour is that panpsychism seems
to have a natural affinity with Buddhism more generally as both views emphasise that the mental is
almost a universal feature of living beings. This statement is possibly true but only because it is vague
and imprecise. Buddhist philosophers will complain that Buddhist metaphysics contains a variety of
views about the nature of mind, some of which clearly are not panpsychist. Garfield (2015), for exam-
ple, argues that Buddhist texts can be of great use to contemporary physicalism since they contain
insights that can be used to respond to the famous conceivability argument, in favour of dualism, for
the possibility of zombies. Panpsychists will complain that ‘almost’ is not a part of the literal mean-
ing of panpsychism. My response is that my interest is in elucidating a panpsychist Buddhist view of
consciousness to explore ways of strengthening and enriching contemporary panpsychist positions in
important ways by drawing on Buddhist thought. My response to the Buddhist is that there is no one
view that qualifies as the Buddhist view of consciousness. Therefore, what I shall be exploring here
is a Buddhist view of consciousness and this should answer any concerns of Buddhist philosophers.
My focus will be on the Abhidharma Buddhist tradition, which flourished in the first millennium
AD in India, and whose stated aim is to give an account of conscious experience. In particular, I want
to draw attention to the view of consciousness defended by Sautrāntika-Yogācāra School, or what is
commonly called the Buddhist Logic School (Siderits 2007: 208). This view is originally proposed
by Vasubandhu in his formulation of the Sautrāntika doctrine in the Abhidharmakośa-bhāsya, and later
modified by rich insights from Yogācāra philosophers like Asanga, Dignāga and Dharmakīrti. The
challenge for them is to give an account of conscious experience in the absence of self and indeed all
other persisting and substantial entities. I will show that the Sautrāntika-Yogācāra view of conscious-
ness presents a plausible version of panpsychism. And, that it can address some longstanding concerns
about panpsychist theories, especially the combination problem. Furthermore, recent neuroscientific
studies of Buddhist meditation practices give us some independent, some would say empirical, rea-
sons to think that these views of the mind are plausible.
    The plan of this chapter is as follows. In section 1, I present the Sautrāntika-Yogācāra view of
consciousness. In section 2, I argue that this view, as a version of panprotopsychism, has the potential
to offer an adequate solution to a major challenge that continues to plague various panpyschist views:
the combination problem. To be clear, my aim is not to offer an Abhidharma Buddhist solution to
the combination problem, but only to show how a panprotopsychist view might explore solutions
to the combination problem. In his papers (Chalmers 2015, 2016) Chalmers lists various versions
of panpsychism and the combination problem. These two papers together chalk out a conceptual
map carving out the logical space into a set of locations, positions, or places occupied by various
panpsychist views and the solutions to the combination problems explored by their advocates. One


                                                   26
                                 Abhidharma Panprotopsychist Metaphysics


of the tasks of this chapter is to place the Abhidharma Buddhist view on this conceptual map as a
first step in exploring an Abhidharma Buddhist-inspired solution to the combination problem. This
is interesting because it offers an insight into what protophenomenal properties look like and how
we may try to overcome the non-phenomenal/phenomenal gap which would be the most serious
combination problem threatening panprotopsychist views.


                      1.  Sautrāntika-Yogācāra Model of Consciousness
The Sautrāntika-Yogācāra is part of the Indian Abhidharma tradition in Buddhist philosophy. Like
all other Buddhist schools, the Abhidharma schools endorse the no-self doctrine. In fact, the most
important Sautrāntika-Yogācāra philosopher Vasubandhu endorses a really strong version of the no-
self view: the no-subject view (Chadha 2015). The challenge for the Abhidharma philosophers to
explain the phenomenology of experience in a selfless, or more precisely for Sautrāntika-Yogācāra
in a subjectless world.
    The Abhidharma analysis of experience reveals that what we experience as a temporally extended,
uninterrupted, flow of phenomena is, in fact, a rapidly occurring sequence of causally connected
events each with its particular discrete object; much the same way a rapidly projected sequence of
juxtaposed discrete images is perceived as a movie. Sentient experience is explained in terms of
mental and physical processes (skandhas) that arise and cease in a causal sequence.1 The distinctive
contribution of the Ābhidharmikas is that they reduce the time scale of sequential mental and physi-
cal processes and regard them as discrete momentary events or dharmas (Ronkin 2005: 66–78). These
discrete momentary events (dharmas) exist only for an instant or moment (ksana), where a moment
                                                                                    ˙ ˙
is the limit of time. There are various opinions regarding the duration of a moment. Vasubandhu
says that there are sixty-four moments in the time that it takes for a healthy man to snap his fingers
(Abhidharmakośabhāyam 3.85b-c); others even say that billions of mind moments elapse in the time
it takes for lightning to flash or eye to blink. These discrete momentary events or ‘dharmas’ are the
only existents, and they alone are objects of knowledge. Abhidharma produces a complete account
of reality in terms of this single category of ultimately real entities. In this Section, I first explain the
Sautrāntika doctrine of nature of dharmas and then explain how they combine to constitute con-
scious experiences.
    The Sautrāntika view of the nature of dharmas and the constitution of conscious experiences
from the basic dharmas arises as a result of a series of critiques of the early Abhidharma Sarvāstivāda
doctrine. Vasubandhu rejects the distinction between substance and attributes (Pruden 1988: 1348).
It is wrong to think of dharmas as substances, since substances are independent existents. How-
ever, according to the Buddhist doctrine of dependent origination (Pratītyasamutpāda) there are no
independent existents; everything that exists is conditioned by its causes. Furthermore, dharmas are
not universals, for Vasubandhu argues against the existence of universals (2.41a). Also, dharmas are
not composite entities: they are simple, without spatial or temporal parts. Vasubandhu argues that
medium-sized physical objects that we normally regard as real like jars, heaps, streams, persons, etc.,
are composites or aggregates of dharmas. These composites, he argues, do not exist in the ultimate
sense, they are real only with reference to conception (prajñapti-sat); only dharmas exist in the ultimate
sense (paramartha-sat) (6.4). But, then, one may ask: what are these dharmas, these ultimate constitu-
ents of reality? The Sautrāntikas have very little to say on this. They claim that dharmas are of two
kinds: conditioned and unconditioned.2 Among the conditioned dharmas, there are material (rūpa)
and mental (citta, caitta, etc.) dharmas. Material dharmas (rūpa) are in space, but consciousness ‘not hav-
ing a mass, is not situated in a place’ (1.43a–b).
    Contemporary Buddhist philosophers have proposed that the best way to understand a dharma is
to think of it as ‘an elementary quality or event or condition’ (Goodman 2004: 393) or ‘a thin prop-
erty’ (Ganeri 2001: 99); a ‘trope’ as in contemporary analytic philosophy: e.g., the particular white of


                                                     27
                                             Monima Chadha


this wall rather than whiteness as such. Tropes, like physical objects, are particulars, as they are located
in a particular time and space, though not necessarily so. They can be individuated as primitive par-
ticulars without spatio-temporal dimensions (Maurin 2014). They are unlike universals, in that they
are not wholly present in each instance although they point to groups of identical things. However,
in some sense, they share features with universals, in that they are ‘ways objects are’.3 Trope theorists
believe that both particulars and universals can be understood as aggregates or sets of tropes. So, for
example, we can think of Vasubandhu as an aggregate of Vasubandhu’s colour, Vasubandhu’s shape,
Vasubandhu’s logical acumen, etc. and similarly we can think of intelligence as bundle of Vasuband-
hu’s intelligence, Asanga’s intelligence, Udayana’s intelligence, etc. Likewise, the Abhidharma would
analyse the middle-sized mental and physical objects as aggregates of dharmas. Thus, we can think of
mental dharmas as tropes that have temporal dimensions only.4
    Such a trope-theoretic interpretation of dharmas has been used to reconstruct an Abhidharma
account of the physical world (Goodman 2004) as well as of the conscious experience (Ganeri 2012)
by an appeal to the notion of Humean supervenience (Lewis 1986: ix). Humean supervenience is the
view that everything supervenes on spatio-temporal distribution of intrinsic properties. Weatherson
(2015) offers a useful picture to understand this thesis. Imagine that the world is like a giant video
monitor. The facts about a monitor’s appearance supervene, plausibly, on intrinsic qualities of the
pixels, together with facts about the spatial arrangement of the pixels. However, I want to steer away
from Humean supervenience in offering a reconstruction of conscious experiences for two reasons:
(a) dharmas are not necessarily physical, and for this reason (b) they are also not necessarily spatial
entities (see Pruden 1.43 a–b previous). Thus, Humean supervenience, which necessarily involves
intrinsic properties instantiated at spatio-temporal points, is not suited to an Abhidharma analysis.
My own reconstruction will use the notion of dharma-clusters, vertical causation and supervenience.
    There is intense debate about whether the Ābhidharmika philosophers arrived at this view
through logical analysis or through introspection. Ganeri favours the former in suggesting that it is
best to think of dharmas as proto-intentional (proto-cognitive and proto-affective) psychologically
primitive processes that combine to constitute conscious experiences (2012: 130). Dreyfus seems to
favour the latter though with an important qualification. He notes that “the Abhidharma analysis
of the mental is a description of the complexity of the components of mental processes as they are
phenomenologically available, not an analysis of the ontological basis of mental processes, a basis that
is not readily available to the kind of analysis central to its project” (Dreyfus 2011: 119). Dharmas can
be thus thought of as the basic components of mental and physical processes, basic in the sense that
they cannot be further analysed into more basic phenomenologically available components. Drey-
fus adds the qualification that this should not be taken to mean that dharmas are directly given in
introspection, for they may only be available to those who have had appropriate mental training, for
example in mindfulness meditation. Note, however, that these two views are not mutually exclusive:
we can think of dharmas as basic components that can be arrived at either through logical analysis or
through mindfulness meditation training or through both; in fact Vasubandhu, in his magnum opus
Abhidharmakośa, endorses precisely this dual route.
    For Buddhist epistemology generally, sensory perception is the paradigm of conscious experience.
According to most Abhidharma schools, sensory perception is always intentional, and is brought
about by an interaction among the sense faculties (e.g., eye), the corresponding type of consciousness
(e.g., visual consciousness) and their appropriate sense objects (e.g., form, colour, etc.). There are six
kinds of consciousness: five corresponding to the sensory organs and the sixth the mental aware-
ness (awareness of thoughts, feelings, etc.). Conscious experience, according to the Ābhidharmikas,
is always directed at objects, i.e., it is of something. In this the Abhidharma philosophers agree with
phenomenologists that intentionality is an essential feature of consciousness. What distinguishes the
Abhidharma view is its analysis of object-directedness involving five universal mental features that
accompany every conscious mental state. The role of these mental features in conscious experience


                                                    28
                                Abhidharma Panprotopsychist Metaphysics


becomes obvious if we take into account the fact that the mere coming together of an object and
sense faculty is not sufficient for a conscious experience to arise. A cognitive event is initiated by
contact, which the Ābhidharmikas describe as a relation between a sense faculty and sense object
giving rise to a sensory consciousness. Such sensory consciousness, according to these philosophers,
is always associated with affect or feeling. The object may be felt as pleasant or unpleasant or neutral,
but it is never sensed without arousing feeling. Perception is the mental factor which plays the role
of discerning or discriminating the object by distinguishing it from other things. Furthermore, each
conscious state is also goal-directed in that it is always associated with volition or an intention to act.
This together with feeling is responsible for determining the ethical quality of consciousness, that is
to say, whether it decreases or increases suffering. Attention is the mental factor that is responsible
for orienting consciousness towards its object, in that it guides other mental features towards the
object of consciousness (Thompson 2014: 38). The senses always process a steady stream of sensory
impressions; some clusters of these impressions generate a representational form of the object when
attention directs the universal mental features towards it. Attention thus is necessary but not sufficient
for conscious experience. Representational forms of experience are created by the interplay of these
five mental features and occasionally involve some other associated mental factors. The Abhidharma
has a long list of these occasional mental factors; indeed, there are significant disputes on exactly
how many there are. A few of these occasional features are: anger, greed, mindfulness, compassion,
wisdom, etc. Each of these features when accompanying a conscious state has the ability to affect the
way we see objects and thus contribute to its representational form. Ganeri explains this succinctly:

     The great elegance and attraction of the [Abhidharma] theory lies in the fact that simulta-
     neously it recognises the irreducibility of the phenomenal character of experience, it admits
     the joint contribution of sensation and conceptualisation in the constitution of experience,
     it acknowledges that experience is, as it were, saturated with affect, that appraisal is built
     into the fabric of experience, it maintains that every experience has, as a basic ingredient,
     a capacity or tendency to combine in various ways with various others, and it makes the
     attention intrinsic to experience.
                                                                                      (2012: 127)

    The Yogācāra account of mind adds two further consciousnesses to the six kinds of conscious
states accepted by the Abhidharma schools mentioned earlier. These are the basic or storehouse con-
sciousness (ālaya-vijñāna) and the afflictive mentation or ego-consciousness (klista-manas). The first is
                                                                                   ˙˙
a constant and neutral baseline consciousness that serves as repository of all basic habits, tendencies,
and karmic latencies accumulated by the individual. The doctrine of basic consciousness is in large
part an attempt to show that there is mental continuity within a lifetime and across lifetimes despite
the dharma ontology in which there is no enduring substance.5 The ego-consciousness, on the other
hand, is an innate sense of self arising from the apprehension of basic consciousness as being a self
(Dreyfus and Thompson 2007: 97). This self, however, is not an ontological reality: it is merely a
conceptual fabrication resulting from the (mis)apprehension of basic consciousness.
    In addition to these two new kinds of consciousnesses the Abhidharma-Yogācāra philosopher
Dignāga introduces the notion of ‘self-awareness’ in Pramānasamuccaya, his seminal work. He defines self-
                                                          ˙
awareness as a mode of awareness that provides immediate, non-conceptual access to how things sub-
jectively appear to the mind. Dignāga was the first to articulate the idea that consciousness requires
reflexive awareness. In Buddhist philosophy of mind the term “consciousness” does not stand for a
faculty or a mysterious property of physical matter or non-physical substance. Consciousness is sim-
ply a conscious state, which for the Buddhist-Abhidharma philosopher is composed of a complex
network of conscious momentary atoms (dharmas). Reflexive awareness can be understood as a kind
of mental perception. It is “mental” in the sense that it is independent of the five external senses and


                                                    29
                                            Monima Chadha


it is “perception” in that it is an immediate and therefore non-conceptual awareness. And, insofar as
it is a perception, self-awareness is a means of valid cognition (pramāna). Dharmakīrti explains this
                                                                            ˙
idea by appeal to a representational theory of perception: perception of an object is mediated by the
direct apprehension of the mental representation that reveals an aspect (ākāra) of the object (Dreyfus
1997). Although the form of an object is produced by a causal link between the object and a sense
organ, the form itself is a feature of the experience, not a feature of the object of experience. This is
the unique Buddhist view that the representational form of the object is also the phenomenal form
of the experience. That is to say, the mediating representation is Janus-faced. Dignāga’s dual-aspect
theory can be brought in to explicate this further. On this view perception is a cognitive episode that
grasps an object, e.g., a glass of wine. This perception in its arising is associated with a pleasant feel-
ing which is immediately grasped as what-it-is-like for me to perceive the glass of wine. Thus, this
single cognitive episode must involve two aspects: the objective form and the subjective form. The
first that is the objective form (grāhyākāra) is the representation of the external object and the second
that is the subjective form (grāhakākāra) is the grasping or holding of this representational or objec-
tive form. The phenomenal form that reveals itself in self-awareness. Dharmakīrti expresses this by
saying that when we are aware of something we are simultaneously aware of the awareness (PV, III:
266).6 Basic consciousness and reflexive self-awareness are essential to explain full-bodied conscious
experience, whereas ego-consciousness plays the role of explaining away the imaginary self. Let me
use an example to lay out the details of the Yogācāra-inspired account of conscious experiences.
    Consider a present conscious experience of having a coffee. The dharmas that constitute aroma,
colour, warmth, etc., are simultaneously provided by various sense consciousnesses. But there are
countless many other coffee-relevant dharmas available in the basic consciousness that have resulted
from previous encounters with coffee, for example, dharmas of taste, the caffeine rush associated with
drinking coffee, the smell of freshly roasted coffee beans, the sweetness of added sugar, the desire
for coffee, etc. The conscious experience of coffee does not arise in the first moment of sensory
contact with the coffee; rather, this sensory contact sets off a chain of horizontal and vertical pro-
cesses that might, depending on the availability of universal and occasional mental factors, result in
the production of the representational form of the coffee. The presentation of coffee gives rise to
sensible qualities that constitute aroma, color, warmth, and so on. These sensible qualities horizontally
cause contiguous corresponding (aroma, color, warmth, etc.) dharmas in the next moment. At the
same time they vertically cause processes in the basic consciousness, which activate coffee-relevant
dharmas (for example, desire to drink coffee, taste, the accompanying rush of caffeine, sweetness of
sugar, etc.). These vertical activations produce new horizontal series. At a unique and propitious
moment when all the relevant dharmas are co-present together with the requisite universal mental
features (and other occasional mental factors) the representational form of the coffee is produced.
Intention, although itself a universal mental feature and thus a dharma has a double role: it binds
together the relevant dharmas to produce the representational form the object.7 Attention too in
the same way has a double role: it transforms this representational form into a phenomenal form.
For these Abhidharma philosophers, conscious attention is top-down and conscious phenomenon,
though intentional, may be partly unconscious. Conscious attention is what explains the for-me-ness
of an experience. In other words, the production of the phenomenal form, which encompasses the
subjective and the objective aspects, coincides with the awareness of the coffee and the awareness of
the perception of the coffee. To summarize: a conscious experience of coffee and the awareness of
that experience are simultaneously produced as a result of the production of the phenomenal form
of the object, which supervenes on co-temporal dharmas that are vertically present at that moment.
    There is evidence to suggest that such a picture of conscious experience is empirically plausible.
Our sensory system constantly receives multiple inputs, which are usually perceived as a stream.
Thus, perception is regarded as a continuous process. However, there is scientific evidence to believe
that perception consists of discrete mind moments. Recently Baumgarten et al. (2015) have shown


                                                    30
                                  Abhidharma Panprotopsychist Metaphysics


that neuronal oscillation cycles define discrete perceptual moments which constitute the basis for a
discontinuous and periodic nature of somatosensory perception exactly as the Abhidharma believed.
Furthermore, it makes sense if a brain/mind embeds within it what Varela et al. (2001) called a
brainweb, a massive parallel distributed system of highly specialized processors. The “global neuronal
workspace model” for conscious access imposes a temporal granularity on neural states in a stream
of consciousness. This framework postulates that, at any given time, many modular cerebral networks
are active in parallel and process information in an unconscious manner. Information is consciously
represented when the neural population that represents it is mobilized by top-down attentional
amplification into a brain-scale state of coherent activity (in Buddhist terms, the transformation
of representational form into the phenomenal form) that involves neurons distributed throughout
the brain. Global Workspace Theory (Baars 1988; Dehaene and Naccache 2001) suggests that con-
sciousness does not make more information available; it just makes the representation available to
multiple networks to cooperate and compete in solving problems. There is no central processor or
subject that is conscious of the information. The representation itself is conscious merely because
of its salience in the cerebral networks. This completes my account of Sautrāntika-Yogācāra view of
conscious experiences.


        2.  What Kind of Panpsychist View Is Offered by Sautrāntika-Yogācāra?
The foregoing section was meant to give the reader a sense of the panpsychist flavour of the
Sautrāntika-Yogācāra analysis of conscious experience. The fact that mental dharmas are part of
the basic furniture of the world, along with physical dharmas, naturally leads to the conclusion that the
Sautrāntika-Yogācāra view is a version of panpsychism or panprotopsychism (Chalmers 2015). If we think
that conscious states supervene on collections of present mental dharmas which are best thought of as
proto-conscious or proto-intentional features as the result of logical analysis, then we favor the pan-
protopsychist option. Alternatively, if we hold that mental dharmas are potentially phenomenologi-
cally available as they can be discerned as such by experts who have mastered the art of mindfulness
meditation, then we favour the panpsychist option. For my purposes here, I shall concentrate on the
panprotopsychist option as it is more amenable to analytic philosophy. The panpsychist interpreta-
tions requires the inculcation and perfection of meditation skills which is too much to expect from
ordinary folk and philosophers.
    The Abhidharma phenomenology is unique in that it presents an analytic method to discern, list,
and classify the momentary mental dharmas. It advances a model of mind, of mental states – conscious
experiences, thoughts, etc. – in delineating the components of mentality and how they interact to
produce conscious experiences. However, it is not a fixed list. Different Abhidharma thinkers and
traditions offer different lists and leave open the option that the list may be expanded and reclassified
by later thinkers. Chalmers (2015) notes that we must wait for a full panprotopsychist theory to get
clear about the nature of protophenomenal properties. As a version of the panprotopsychist view, the
Sautrāntika-Yogācāra gives us some idea of what protophenomenal properties could be like. More
generally, Abhidharma philosophies offer detailed lists of the sort of mental features that constitute
conscious experiences.
    Mental dharmas are best understood as entities that play a constitutive role in the production of
conscious states. They are classified into types according to the role they play in the constitution of conscious
experiences and thoughts. The Abhidharma does not provide a fixed and final list of types of dharmas
as a result of the reductive analysis. Rather each of the traditions offers a list of irreducible elements
but these lists are open ended and not immune to revision. The Theravāda school of Abhidharma
introduced a system of eighty-two dharma types, the Sarvāstivāda school, on the other hand, adopted
a system of seventy-five basic types of dharmas. The teaching of Abhidharma is a kind of therapy for
those who are confused about the nature of reality. To begin with the Abhidharma teaching focuses


                                                       31
                                            Monima Chadha


on ridding oneself of the false sense of self that is imposed on what really exists. Once we discharge
the enduring sense of selfhood in favor of a dynamic system of constantly changing and interrelated
dharmas, we undermine the fruitless activity of trying to grasp and fix the world of experience. The
reexamination of basic features that constitute the world of experience through proliferating lists is
itself a method for challenging our yearning for a fixed and stable sense of the world (Heim 2014).
On this reading the Abhidharma view tells us that the variety of experience is explained by a rela-
tively small number of dharma types. This is in agreement with what physics tells us about the basic
ingredients of the world. Not only this, the fact that the Abhidharma attitude is that these lists are
open-ended and revisable and that there is no “fixed” number of basic ingredients that describe the
experiential world once and for all is very much in agreement with what we may call the scientific
attitude.
    Furthermore some of these mental features are universal in that they accompany every mental
state; others are occasional mental features that accompany some thoughts. The occasional features
are further classified into those that accompany “good” mental states, those that accompany “bad”
mental states, and yet others that are indeterminate in that they accompany “neutral” states. The
qualifications “good”, “bad”, etc., may seem odd to contemporary Western philosophers, but it must
be remembered that in the Buddhist way of thinking most conscious experiences and thoughts are
said to contribute to, and thus be responsible for, moral agency and actions. The moral quality of
the mental state is determined by the quality of the constituting dharmas: “Good” mental dharmas,
e.g. the feeling of compassion, the intention of sharing, etc., result in good mental states. “Bad”
mental dharmas, greed, anger, etc., on the other hand, result in bad mental states. The Buddhists have
a very simple way of measuring good, bad and neutral. That which reduces suffering is good, that
which increases suffering is bad, and that which does not alter the suffering is neutral. Apart from
these morally loaded dharmas, the Abhidharma lists also include: sensuous properties like redness,
roughness and mellowness, etc.; feelings like joy, pride, etc.; intentions like good, bad, etc.; kinds of
attention, meta-attention, calmness, lightness of body; and, so on. This very brief description is by no
means a complete census of the many mental features that can be involved in conscious awareness.
The task here is to give the reader a sense in which protophenomenal properties contribute to, and
play a role in, the constitution of phenomenal properties. Protophenomenal properties determine the
nature and character of phenomenal properties; they are not merely structural properties.
    At this point, I want to turn my attention to the nature of combination among the dharmas. It is
plausible to say that dharmas can combine with one another, but a lot turns on whether the rules for
this combination are laws of nature (a posteriori, metaphysically contingent) or inherent in the nature
of the combining things (a priori, metaphysically necessary). Panprotopsychism has an advantage over
emergentism provided that the rules of combination are of the latter type (a priori and necessary),
otherwise the view cannot be differentiated from emergentism. We have already mentioned that
the Abhidharma ontology includes the following universal mental factors which must accompany
all conscious experience: contact (sparśa), feeling (vedanā), perception (samjñā), intention (cetanā)
                                                                                ˙
and attention (manasikāra). The last two – intention and attention – are special factors. Intention,
although itself a dharma, is characterised in the Theravāda as something that through its activity
brings together the other mental features to produce the objects of experience as representational
forms (Heim 2014: 105). Representational forms as objects of experience do not mirror the world
out there; rather they are actively constructed by the cooperation of mental factors and external
objects. Attention is what leads the mind to its object. An analogy used by Buddhaghosa suggests
that attention is like a coachman, it drives other mental factors to an object (ibid.). Attention is what
gives rise to the phenomenal form of the object or the subjective aspect of the experience. Reflexive
awareness then provides the principle that ties together the subjective aspects of experience to give
rise to the self-conscious states (Ganeri 2012). The important point to note here is that intention,
attention and self-awareness are essential and intrinsic features of experience itself. Thus according


                                                   32
                                Abhidharma Panprotopsychist Metaphysics


to the Buddhist panprotopsychist, Abhidharma theories of the rules for combination are inherent in
the nature of the combining things, thus they are metaphysically necessary and a priori. This ensures
that Buddhist panprotopsychism is not vulnerable to the sort of objections that may be raised against
the emergentists.
     Panprotopsychism has some advantages over its rivals. Chalmers, for example, notes that in con-
trast to other panpsychist views, panprotopsychism does not need to posit subjects or proto-subjects
at the bottom level. But it does suffer from the especially difficult combination problem that he
labels the “non-phenomenal/phenomenal gap.” This version of the combination problem, like the
corresponding problems for other versions of panpsychism, is spelt out by means of a conceivability
argument. The weight of the argument rests on the existence of protophenomenal zombies: beings
that share our protophenomenal properties (and also all the physical properties) but can still be with-
out phenomenal consciousness. Chalmers admits that the conceivability of protopanpsychist zombies
is less obvious than the possibility of panpsychist zombies (2015). The foregoing Buddhist account
gives us some idea about the protophenomenal elements that constitute phenomenal states of con-
scious awareness. This random list might lead one to question whether panprotopsychist zombies are
really conceivable, a suspicion strengthened by the Abhidharma explanation of subjectivity without
a self. As noted earlier, the Buddhist account does not accept that the usually unargued assumption
that having a conscious experience necessarily entails a subject of experience, a subject for whom it
is, somehow or other, like to have this experience. On this Buddhist account subjectivity is accounted
for by the fact that conscious states are reflexively self-aware, they are not states of awareness in virtue
of being owned or had by a subject of experience. Reflexivity is the very nature of consciousness; it
defines what it is to be conscious. The no-self thesis is a corollary not only of the denial of persist-
ing entities, but also of the denial of a substantialist metaphysics of independently existing entities.
This very minimal metaphysics of momentary dharmas, property-particulars, eliminates the subject
of experience completely. There are no subjects and no streams of experiences; only synchronically
unified experiences. Such a denial of subjects of experience at the level of microexperiences and
macroexperiences is much more radical than contemplated by Western philosophers, with the pos-
sible exception of Hume. This view of continually evolving causal series of momentary tropes has no
room for the so-called non-subject/subject gap that is offered as a basis to argue for the plausibility
of existence of panprotopsychist zombies.
     Someone may object8 that the Abhidharma are not really defending a no-subject view, rather they
are only denying an eternal, metaphysically fundamental, incorruptible soul substance. Those who
are concerned about the combination problem do not have such a subject in mind. The objection
is as follows: let the subject be whatever it is that accounts for the subjectivity of conscious states. If
reflexive awareness is what accounts for the subjectivity of conscious states and reflexive awareness
is itself a dharma, then we do need to combine subjects after all. I think the Abhidharma must at this
juncture claim that not all mental dharmas are reflexively aware and thus should be treated as sub-
jects. The point is that reflexive awareness is triggered by the presence of attention. When you have
attention, a phenomenal form is generated, which in turns triggers the dharma of reflexive awareness
giving rise to a conscious momentary event. But there is only one of these for any conscious expe-
rience. There are further questions about the unity of consciousness at a time and over time. The
Abhidharma, like all the other Buddhists, deny diachronic unity. Synchronic unity, they claim, can
be explained by appeal to storehouse consciousness (for details about how such an account works
see Chadha 2015).
     Chalmers, however, suggests another justification which may help us to conceive protopanpsychist
zombies: the nonquality/quality gap. But even this route is blocked by our Buddhist panprotopsy-
chists: protophenomenal properties are not obviously nonqualitative properties. Protophenomenal
properties range from what we straightforwardly conceive of as sensuous properties (e.g., redness)
and feelings (e.g., pleasure, pain) or emotions (e.g., shame, fear) to mental faculties (e.g., attention),


                                                    33
                                                     Monima Chadha


powers or dispositions (e.g., wisdom, concentration) and bodily properties (e.g., balance). On this
Buddhist picture, I suggest, it is better to think in terms of degrees of consciousness, which in turn
translates into degrees of qualitative or phenomenal awareness. The difference between phenom-
enal and protophenomenal properties is that of degree, not of kind. In other words, there is no
unbridgeable nonquality/quality gap. Rather, what we have are the manifest and unmanifest states
of conscious awareness. The unmanifest are not such that they cannot be consciously discerned but
only that they are in the background of our manifest awareness. For example, in watching a beautiful
sunset while walking on a rocky beach, I am manifestly aware of the beautiful red colour but there
is a subtle unmanifest awareness of bodily balance in the background. The latter comes to the fore
if I trip while walking. As already said, conscious awareness is an interplay of many different features
and the intensity and character of the protophenomenal features determines the character of the
phenomenal states.
    This should give the reader an idea of the Abhidharma Buddhist view of consciousness and
what it offers to the contemporary discussion of panpsychism. As I said before, my aim here has not
been to present the Abhidharma Buddhist solution to various versions of the combination problem.
I am only suggesting that these Buddhists ideas are worth exploring further if we are serious about
investigating the solution space available to the panpsychists in addressing the combination problem.


                                                           Notes
1	 .	 Skandhas are aggregates of dharmas (1.7a-b).
 	2.	 The unconditioned dharmas are constituents of meditative states and liberation and are thus beyond the scope
            of this paper.
  	3.	 The idea that dharmas are tropes has been suggested in Mark Siderits (1997) and has also been developed by
            Ganeri (2001). Ganeri’s focus is on an interpretation of Dignāga.
   	4.	 The talk about tropes is useful from a panpsychist point of view; it keeps the metaphysics of substance and
            universals at an arm’s length. Mental dharmas as protophenomenal parts are just elements of reality. The
            Abhidharma philosophers, and Buddhists more generally, do not want to ascribe to a substance metaphysics
            or a realism about universals.
    	5.	 Ālaya-vijñāna is posited in what Schmithausen (1987: 12, 18) calls the “initial passage” in the Basic Section of
            the Yogācārabhūmi. It is described as an unmanifest consciousness that persists within the material sense facul-
            ties during the highest meditative state (nirodha samāpatti, literally translated as the “attainment of extinction,”
            signifying the extinction of perception and feeling). The later sections of the Yogācārabhūmi also offer other
            proofs for the existence of ālaya-vijñāna, some of which aim to provide a fix for the problem of karmic con-
            tinuity. However, it is important to note that ālaya-vijñāna is one of a number of fixes proposed to deal with
            this problem.
     	6.	 Dharmakīrti’s Pramānavārttika is referred to as PV in accordance with the standard practice.
      	7.	 Intention here is not˙ to be understood as in contemporary Western philosophy as a state formed on the basis
            of belief-desire reasoning but rather as a dharma, a proto-conscious event that accumulates, organises, and
            rallies together other dharmas for the production of an object of a resulting conscious event.
       	8.	 As does Luke Roelofs in personal communication.


                                                       References
Baars, Bernard J. (1988). A Cognitive Theory of Consciousness. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Baumgarten, T. J., Schnitzler, A., and Lange, J. (2015). ‘Beta Oscillations Define Discrete Perceptual Cycles in
   the Somatosensory Domain’. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 112
   (39): 12187–92.
Chadha, M. (2015). ‘The Problem of the Unity of Consciousness: A Buddhist Solution’. Philosophy East and
   West, 65 (3): 746–64.
Chalmers, David (1996). The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory. New York: Oxford University
   Press.
Chalmers, David (2015). ‘Panpsychism and Panprotopsychism’. In T. Alter and Y. Nagasawa (eds.), Consciousness
   in the Physical World: Essays on Russellian Monism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.


                                                              34
                                   Abhidharma Panprotopsychist Metaphysics


Chalmers, David (2016). ‘The Combination Problem for Panpsychism’. In G. Brüntrup and L. Jaskolla (eds.),
    Panpsychism. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 229–48.
Dehaene, S., and Naccache, L. (2001). ‘Towards a Cognitive Neuroscience of Consciousness: Basic Evidence and
    a Workspace Framework’. Cognition, 79: 1–37.
Dreyfus, G. (1997). Recognizing Reality: Dharmakirti’s Philosophy and Its Tibetan Interpretations. Albany: State Uni-
    versity of New York Press.
Dreyfus, G. (2011). ‘Self and Subjectivity: A Middle Way Approach’. In M. Siderits, E. Thompson, and D. Zahavi
    (eds.), Self, No-Self? Perspectives from Analytical, Phenomenological, and Indian Traditions. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
    versity Press, pp. 114–44.
Dreyfus, G., and Thompson, E. (2007). ‘Asian Perspectives: Indian Theories of Mind’. In M. Moscovitch, E.
    Thompson, and P. Zezalo (eds.), The Cambridge Handbook of Consciousness. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
    sity Press.
Ganeri, J. (2001). Philosophy in Classical India. New York: Routledge.
Ganeri, J. (2012). The Self: Naturalism, Consciousness and the First-Person Stance. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Garfield, Jay L. (2015). Engaging Buddhism: Why It Matters to Philosophy. New York: Oxford University Press.
Goodman, C. (2004). ‘The Treasury of Metaphysics and the Physical World’. Philosophical Quarterly, 54 (216):
    389–401.
Heim, M. (2014). The Forerunner of All Things: Buddhaghosa on Mind, Intention, and Agency. New York: Oxford
    University Press.
Jackson, Frank (1998). From Metaphysics to Ethics: A Defence of Conceptual Analysis. Oxford and New York:
    Oxford University Press.
Lewis, David K. (1986). On the Plurality of Worlds. Oxford: Blackwell.
Maurin, A-S. (2014). ‘Tropes’. In E. N. Zalta (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Fall edition. http://
    plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2014/entries/tropes/.
Nagel, Thomas (1998). ‘Conceiving the Impossible and the Mind-Body Problem’. Philosophy, 73 (285): 337–52.
Pruden, L. (1988). Abhidharmakośabhāyam English Translation of Poussin, Louis de la Vallée., 1923–1931/1980.
    L’Abhidharmakośa de Vasubandhu, 6 vols. Bruxelles: Institut Belge des Hautes Études Chinoises and Berkeley:
    Asian Humanities Press.
Ronkin, N. (2005). Early Buddhist Metaphysics: The Making of a Philosophical Tradition (Oxford Centre for Bud-
    dhist Studies Monograph Series). London and New York: Routledge-Curzon.
Seager, William, and Allen-Hermanson, Sean (2015).‘Panpsychism’. In E. N. Zalta (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia
    of Philosophy, Fall edition. http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2015/entries/panpsychism/.
Schmithausen, L. (1987). Ālaya-vijñāna: On the Origin and Early Development of a Central Concept in Yogacara Phi-
    losophy. Tokyo: The International Institute for Buddhist Studies.
Siderits, Mark (1997). ‘Buddhist reductionism’. Philosophy East and West, 47 (4), 455–478.
Siderits, Mark (2007). Buddhism As Philosophy. Indianapolis: Hackett.
Strawson, Galen (1999). ‘The Self ’. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 4 (5–6): 405–28. (Reprinted in S. Gallagher
    and J. Shear (eds.), Models of the Self. Thorverton: Imprint Academic, 1999.
Strawson, Galen (2006). Consciousness and Its Place in Nature: Does Physicalism Entail Panpsychism? Ed. A. Freeman.
    Exeter: Imprint Academic.
Strawson, P. F. (1985). Skepticism and Naturalism: Some Varieties. London: Methuen and New York: Columbia
    University Press.
Thompson, Evan (2014). Waking, Dreaming, Being: Self and Consciousness in Neuroscience, Meditation, and Philosophy.
    New York: Columbia University Press.
Varela, F., Lachaux, J-P., Rodriguez, E., and Martinerie, J. (2001). ‘The Brainweb: Phase Synchronization and
    Large-Scale Integration’. Nature Reviews – Neuroscience, 2: 237.
Weatherson, B. (2015). ‘Humean Supervenience’. In B. Loewer and J. Schaffer (eds.), Blackwell Companion to
    David Lewis. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.




                                                         35
                         4
              SPINOZA’S PANPSYCHISM
                                             Martin Lin




Spinoza is a panpsychist. For him, mentality is a pervasive and fundamental feature of the natural
world. But he also believes the much stronger claim that every single physical thing – plants, rocks,
stars, donkeys, the organs of a human body, etc. – has a mind. This is because he identifies each of
God’s ideas with a mind. Because God is omniscient and has an idea of each physical thing whatso-
ever, each physical thing has a mind. Why does he believe this and what does it mean?
    Before we try to answer this question, it will be useful to review some basic features of Spinoza’s
metaphysics. To begin with, Spinoza thinks that there is only one fundamental being or substance,
which he identifies with God or Nature (1p141). That is, Spinoza naturalizes God or, alternatively,
deifies nature. (Henceforth I will use ‘Nature’ with a capital ‘N’ to indicate this substance.) Nature
is something that is “in itself ” (1d3). By this, Spinoza means that there is nothing more fundamental
than Nature in terms of which the existence of Nature can be understood. Nothing explains the
existence of Nature, either causally or metaphysically, but the nature of Nature itself. For this reason,
Spinoza says that Nature is self-caused (1p11 and 1p11d). Nature is also conceived through itself
(1d3). That is, thinking about Nature does not require thinking about any other thing. Nature is con-
ceptually self-contained. Spinoza thinks that these features entail that there can be only one Nature
and it is infinite, eternal and necessary.
    Nature, the one infinite substance, can be thought of in infinitely many ways. These ways of
thinking about Nature are called ‘attributes’ and they express its essence (1d4). For reasons that are
obscure, Spinoza thinks that we know only two of these attributes, thought and extension. ‘Exten-
sion’ is Spinoza’s word for the physical. Leaving aside the unknown attributes, we can think about
Nature as both mental (thinking) and physical (extended). Nature can be conceived under either
attribute. The important point for our purposes is that Nature thinks. It has ideas, which constitute
its thoughts. Nature is also physical. Bodies of all sorts (particles, human bodies, stars, etc.) are modes
of Nature conceived physically. What does Nature think about? It thinks about itself conceived of
physically. That is, its ideas represent its modes of extension including bodies.
    It is important to emphasize that Nature conceived of as thinking is the very same thing as Nature
conceived of as extended. Thought and extension are not two essential properties of this nature.
Rather, they are different ways of thinking about the very same essence of the substance (2p7s). Thus,
Spinoza is a conceptual dualist but not a metaphysical one. How can Nature be thought of in two
different ways without those ways implying a metaphysical difference? The answer is that these dif-
ferent ways of conceiving do not say different things about Nature. Their contents are identical. They
merely express those contents in a different format or present them differently. Because both thought


                                                    36
                                           Spinoza’s Panpsychism


and extension are equally fundamental, Spinoza is neither a materialist nor an idealist. Nature can be
completely and accurately represented as either mental or physical.
    Spinoza thinks that there is only one fundamental thing but that there are many derivative things.
His terms for these non-fundamental beings are modes (1d5). Cabbages, kings, shoes and ships are all
modes of nature. So too are the human body and mind (2d1 and 2d3).
    The correct metaphysical analysis of these modes is a controversial matter. Many readers of Spinoza
think that they are properties of Nature. In this chapter, I will proceed on the basis of an interpreta-
tion according to which modes are Nature insofar as it satisfies certain conditions. This should be
understood on the model of a wave, which is a medium insofar as it oscillates, or a fist, which is a hand
insofar as it is clenched. Bodies are thus like waves on the oceans of extension and minds are like waves
on the oceans of thought. Modes so conceived are not properties. We can see this by considering the
following example. The ocean insofar as it oscillates (a subject insofar as it satisfies some condition) is
noisy. But the expression of the ocean insofar as it oscillates does not refer to a property. We can see
this by considering the falsity of the statement the property of oscillation is noisy. Not only is this state-
ment false but any statement that attributes the property of being noisy to a property is also false. And
thus, generalizing from this case, we can conclude that any expression of the form x insofar as φ doesn’t
refer to a property but rather an object. Minds and bodies are modes and so, on this construal of modes,
they are objects. Such objects as waves, fists, and dents are obviously derivative objects. We can say that
they are constituted by the subjects that, in virtue of satisfying some condition, determine them to
exist. Although I will proceed on the basis of this interpretation, none of my conclusions depend upon
it. Those who prefer alternative interpretations are free to substitute them in what follows.


                               1.  Mind in the Seventeenth Century
Spinoza’s philosophy of mind is in many respects a response to a revolution introduced by Descartes.
According to Descartes, the mind and body are two distinct substances that have nothing in com-
mon. Among the characteristic features of the mind are consciousness, simplicity, and being the cause
of intelligent action. Mind is also the substance in which perceptions and volitions inhere.
    The nature of body is three-dimensional Euclidean extension. Individual bodies are regions of
three-dimensional extension that are capable of motion and rest. Because we can clearly and dis-
tinctly conceive of minds existing independently of bodies, Descartes concludes that the mind and
body are distinct substances.
    On this picture, the physical world is cleanly separated from the mental world insofar as they play
no role in metaphysically constituting one another. Causal connections do, however, run between
the mental and the physical. Inputs from the physical world causally explain sense perceptions in the
mind. Outputs from the mental world causally explain the bodily motions that constitute intelligent
action. Thus Descartes endorses mind-body substance dualism with causal interaction.
    Many seventeenth-century philosophers who are otherwise sympathetic to Descartes’s innova-
tions in the philosophy of mind reject mind-body interaction. How can two substances with nothing
in common causally interact? For many post-Cartesian philosophers, the answer is that they can’t.
Fire heats because it is hot. Donkeys beget donkeys because they are donkeys. Similarity is required
for causation.
    Spinoza is among those philosophers who are sympathetic to the Cartesian notion that mind and
body are dissimilar but is hostile to interaction. Spinoza is hostile to the idea of interaction because
there are no connections between the concepts of two things that have nothing in common. There
must be, however, connections between the concept of an effect and the concept of its cause. There-
fore, two things with nothing in common cannot causally interact.
    It is not an easy thing to deny mind-body interaction because there are many correlations between
the mental and the physical that strongly suggest interaction. When I want a beer and believe that


                                                     37
                                              Martin Lin


there is beer in the fridge, I get up and walk over to the fridge. When you kick my shin, I experience
pain. What explains the tight correlations that exist between mind and body such as these? Spinoza’s
answer to this question, his parallelism doctrine, is also the basis of his panpsychism.


                                  2.  The Parallelism Doctrine
In proposition 7 of part 2 of the Ethics, Spinoza says:

    The order and connection of ideas is the same as the order and connection of things.

This means that the mental realm and the physical realm are causally isomorphic. For every body there
is an idea that represents it and for every idea there is a body represented by it. Moreover, there is a
one-to-one mapping from causal relations between bodies to relations between ideas and vice versa.
    The reason Spinoza believes the parallelism doctrine is most clearly expressed in the following
passage (2p7s):

    Before we proceed further, we must recall here what we showed viz. that whatever can be
    perceived by an infinite intellect as constituting an essence of substance pertains to one sub-
    stance only, and consequently that the thinking substance and the extended substance are
    one and the same substance, which is now comprehended under this attribute, now under
    that. So also a mode of extension and the idea of that mode are one and the same thing, but
    expressed in two ways. Some of the Hebrews seem to have seen this, as if through a cloud,
    when they maintained that God, God’s intellect, and the things understood by him are one
    and the same. Therefore, whether we conceive nature under the attribute of Extension, or
    under the attribute of Thought, or under any other attribute, we shall find one and the same
    order, or one and the same connection of causes, i.e., that the same things follow one another.

That is, the parallelism follows from the fact that modes of thought and modes of extension are iden-
tical but conceived of differently. If they are identical, then they cannot differ with respect to their
causal structure. This raises difficult questions about Spinoza’s denial of mind-body interaction but
they fall outside of the scope of this chapter.


                                    3.  Spinoza’s Panpsychism
Recall that for every body, there is an idea that represents it. Human minds are ideas of human bodies.
These ideas are in Nature conceived of as a thinking thing. The human mind is thus Nature’s idea
of our body. Spinoza thinks that there is nothing special about the human mind. Just as the human
mind is Nature’s idea of the human body, the idea of any body whatsoever is the mind of that body.
Spinoza writes:

    For the things we have shown so far are completely general and do not pertain more to
    man than to other Individuals, all of which, though in different degrees, are nevertheless
    animate. For of each thing there is necessarily an idea in [Nature], of which [Nature] is the
    cause in the same way as [it] is of the idea of the human Body. And so, whatever we have
    said of the idea of the human Body must also be said of the idea of any thing.
                                                                                        (2p13s)

   This means that not only do human beings have minds, but also every part of the human body
has a mind and every non-human body has a mind. In the case of non-human organisms that are


                                                   38
                                         Spinoza’s Panpsychism


reasonably complex, this result is more or less intuitive. Many people think that chimpanzees, dol-
phins, and even cats have minds. Perhaps more controversially, many people think that even less
complex vertebrates have minds of some sort. But Spinoza extends the realm of the minded further
to include invertebrates, plants, and even what we would classify as inanimate objects such as stars,
planets, and tiny particles of matter. As the preceding text attests, Spinoza himself does not think that
there are any truly inanimate objects. Everything has a mind, that is, is associated with an idea that
represents it, and is to some degree alive.


                                     4.  Degrees of Mentality
Spinoza’s thesis that each body has a mind, no matter how simple it is, raises several difficult ques-
tions. The first pertains to the relationship between the mind and intelligent behavior. In his Dis-
course on the Method, Descartes (1985: 140; AT VI: 56–7) claims that our evidence for mentality
comes from intelligent behavior. According to Descartes, if some system can respond appropriately
to an unlimited set of circumstances, then the causes of the behavior of that system are mental.
For example, in competently using language, human beings can understand infinitely many novel
sentences and in turn, can respond with infinitely many novel sentences. Thus we have evidence
that human beings other than ourselves have minds. But if a system fails to exhibit such intelligent
behavior, we have no evidence of mentality and attributing a mind to it would be unjustified. This
is a plausible idea. Spinoza, on the other hand, attributes minds to systems that do not exhibit any
intelligent behavior such as stones, tiny particles of matter, and stars. What could justify him in
doing so?
    Another difficulty stems from Spinoza’s commitment to attributing minds to bodies that lack the
degree of internal structure that we associate with mentality. For example, we observe a tight cor-
relation between mental activity and the human central nervous system, which is very complex. We
don’t observe a tight correlation between mental activity and any much simpler system. This strongly
suggests that only physical systems with a high degree of internal complexity can have minds. Spi-
noza, however, is committed to attributing minds to any bodies whatsoever, no matter how simple
they may be. How could he argue for the plausibility of such attributions despite the observed cor-
relation between complexity and mentality?
    Two final difficulties come from Spinoza’s claim that not only the human body, but also every
part of the human body has a mind that is a part of my mind. Every atom, every cell, every organ
composing my body has a mind. What is more, each of these minds is a part of my mind. The first
difficulty is that I seem to be unaware of a great deal that happens in my body. For example, my
pancreas is currently producing insulin. If my pancreas has a mind and that mind is part of my mind,
why am I unaware of this? The second difficulty concerns how these various minds can compose a
greater mind, viz., my own mind. This is a difficult question because, it is plausible to think, under no
circumstances do human minds ever compose greater minds of which they are parts. This strongly
suggests that minds in general do not compose.
    Spinoza is aware of these problems. His response to the problems relating to intelligent action and
complexity is to claim that all bodies are “to some degree” “animata” (1p13s). The word animata is
generally translated as animate and although Spinoza does believe that all bodies are animate to some
degree, I think the word is also meant to resonate with animus, which Spinoza uses as a synonym for
mind (mens) (see for example 2a3). Thus, Spinoza is saying that all bodies to some degree are alive
and have a mind.
    The notion that the mental comes in degrees is crucial to Spinoza’s claim that mind is pervasive
throughout nature. It is more plausible to claim that stones and plants have minds if they have minds
only to a very low degree than if minds are attributed to them without qualification. But what does
it mean for mind to come in degrees?


                                                   39
                                               Martin Lin


    Part of Spinoza’s account of what it means for bodies to be animate to different degrees is given
in the following text:

    I say this in general, that in proportion as a Body is more capable than others of doing
    many things at once, or being acted on in many ways at once, so its Mind is more capable
    than others of perceiving many things at once, And in proportion as the actions of a body
    depend more on itself alone, and as other bodies concur with it less in acting, so its mind is
    more capable of understanding distinctly. And from these [truths] we can know the excel-
    lence of one mind over the others.
                                                                                           (2p13s)

Spinoza thinks that some minds are more capable of perceiving many things at once than others are
and also that some minds understand things more distinctly than other minds do. He claims that the
ability of the mind to perceive many things at once is proportional to its body’s ability to do many
things at once and the ability of the mind to understand things distinctly is proportional to the extent
to which the actions of the body depend upon the body alone.
    Why does Spinoza think that the mind’s ability to perceive many things at once is proportional
to the body’s ability to do many things at once? The answer is found in Spinoza’s account of sense
perception and complex individuality. According to him, the primary content of the idea of the body,
i.e., the mind, is the body itself. But when the body interacts with the external world, the state of the
body depends not just on the nature of the body but also on the nature of the external causes that
affect it. In this way, by representing the body, it represents a state of the body that carries informa-
tion about the external world. The body’s ability to acquire states that encode information about the
external world depends upon its ability to do many things. To see why, we need to look at Spinoza’s
account of complex physical things like human bodies.
    A complex body such as the human body is defined by a pattern of motion that obtains between
its parts. Such a body survives the changes it undergoes just in case the pattern of motion and rest that
characterizes it is preserved. So if environmental inputs alter the motions of the parts of a complex
body, that body survives the resulting changes so long as these new motions are incorporated into
the body in such a way that its overall pattern of motion and rest is preserved.
    There are various ways in which encounters with external causes may be survived. A stone,
for example, pursues a very simple strategy. It does one thing in response to all external causes: its
parts remain bonded together and communicate the motions introduced in a more or less uniform
way. Most significantly, it does not respond differentially to the way in which causal inputs from
the environment are structured. For this reason, its states don’t carry very much information about
its external causes. But a human body pursues a much more complex strategy. In the response to
external stimuli, it responds very differently depending on the structure of the stimuli. For example,
while the stone is indifferent to anything but the total energy of the wave produced by the handclap,
the human body responds differently depending on how that energy is structured. Wavelength, fre-
quency, and amplitude all matter to the human body but not to the stone.
    In this way, Spinoza explains the seeming lack of mentality on the part of bodies that do not
possess complex internal structure. Very simple bodies encode very little information about their
external causes and thus the minds associated with them perceive very little about the external causes
of their states. Very complex bodies encode much more information about their external causes and
so the minds of those bodies perceive much more about their external environment.
    Let us now turn our attention to the claim that the more actions depend upon the body alone, the
more the mind understands distinctly. Spinoza thinks that causal responsibility is a degreed notion.
This is intuitively plausible. Suppose that by myself I cannot lift an object that weighs one hundred
pounds because I can only generate enough force to lift ninety pounds. I fully exert myself and you


                                                   40
                                        Spinoza’s Panpsychism


help by contributing the force needed to go from ninety to one hundred. There is a clear intuitive
sense in which I am doing more of the work than you. If through resistance training I go from an
ability to lift ninety pounds to an ability to lift ninety-nine pounds, then the next time we lift the
weight together, and I fully exert myself, then I have contributed even more of the work (I have
adapted this example from Della Rocca 2008: 115).
    Spinoza thinks that most human behavior is partially explained by environmental inputs. This is
clearly the case where sense experience guides action because sense experience requires environ-
mental inputs. Spinoza also thinks that our cognitive behavior is purely rational only when environ-
mental inputs do not explain it in any way. Spinoza is a rationalist who thinks that sense experience
is the source of error and confusion, so we are at our cognitive best when our thinking is free from
the influence of sense experience. We engage in rational thinking fully divorced from sense percep-
tion when we are doing pure mathematics and when we engage in pure philosophical reasoning. But
although we are not perfectly rational when environmental inputs help determine our thoughts and
behavior, we can still be more or less rational, depending upon how much our own nature contrib-
utes to the explanation of what we do and think. The more it contributes, the more rational we are.
    Spinoza relates structural complexity to power: the power of acting of a body and the correlative
power of thinking of a mind are a function of complexity. Human beings are more capable of rational
thought than, for example, fish or worms because our bodies and minds are so much more complex
than theirs. Stones too have minds, but their bodies are even less complex than worms, and so they
are, for all intents and purposes, incapable of rational thought. These conclusions help minimize the
implausibility of attributing minds to creatures that lack the structural complexity that is correlated
with mindedness.
    This also helps to solve the problem of how Spinoza can attribute minds to bodies that don’t
exhibit intelligent behavior. Because Spinoza associates power with complexity, very simple bodies
do not have much power of acting just as their minds do not have much power of thinking. The
minds of such creatures are nothing more than mute representations that generate few effects. How-
ever, when such representations join together to form complex wholes, new powers of thought are
generated. And as a consequence of the parallelism doctrine, new powers of action in the body are
also generated. Intelligent behavior is characteristic only of such complex bodies.
    It is sometimes alleged that Spinoza needs a distinction between (1) minds that are subjects of
conscious experience and those that are not, and (2) ideas that are conscious and those that are
not (see for example Wilson 1999: 133). The first distinction is needed because it is implausible to
ascribe consciousness to, for example, stones because they lack the structural complexity that we
associate with consciousness. The second distinction is needed because Spinoza is committed to the
claim that the human mind contains an idea of every part of its body. But I am unaware of the action
of my pancreas and many other events occurring in my body. Thus, if I have ideas that represent
these things, they must be unconscious. It is further alleged that Spinoza has no way of consistently
making out any such distinctions.
    It is true that Spinoza cannot distinguish between conscious and unconscious minds, and con-
scious and unconscious ideas, but he has a related distinction that may serve just as well: he distin-
guishes degrees of consciousness.
    Spinoza links power and complexity to consciousness. Consider the following passage:

    [H]e who, like an infant or child, has a Body capable of very few things, and very heavily
    dependent on external causes, has a Mind which considered solely in itself is conscious of
    almost nothing of itself, or of God, or of things. On the other hand, he who has a Body
    capable of a great many things, has a Mind which considered only in itself is very much
    conscious of itself, and of God, and of things.
                                                                                       (5p39s)


                                                  41
                                               Martin Lin


We have already encountered the claim that a mind is more capable of perceiving more things at
once and is more excellent the more powerful its body is. Here the claim is extended to conscious-
ness as well. The more powerful a body is the more conscious its mind is (see Garrett 2008).
    Spinoza’s remarks on consciousness are sketchy at best, but perhaps he could be read as describ-
ing a kind of functional account of consciousness. A powerful bodily state entails, by virtue of the
parallelism, a powerful idea. An idea that is powerful contributes more to the determination of the
mind’s future states. That is, the idea contributes more to reasoning. This could be likened to a kind
of access consciousness: an idea is conscious to the degree that it contributes to determining the
direction of thought and contributes content to it. It seems, however, less compelling as an account
of phenomenal consciousness.
    Because Spinoza links structural complexity with power and power to consciousness, stones are,
due to their structural simplicity, conscious to only a very minimal degree. Likewise, thoughts about
my pancreas do not determine my other thoughts to any appreciable degree. This suggests that they
have only a very small amount of power. Consequently, they will be the subjects of only the dim-
mest conscious awareness. Thus, while Spinoza does not have the resources to draw a line between
conscious and unconscious states and entities, he can place entities and states on a spectrum of
consciousness.
    The last problem we have to consider is how minds can compose minds. Recall that the human
mind is just Nature’s idea of the human body. Spinoza tells us that the human mind is not special
in this regard and that we can consider Nature’s idea of any body as the mind of that body. But the
human body is composed of simpler bodies, each of which is represented by an idea in Nature’s
mind. Thus we must conclude that each idea of each part of the human body is a mind. The human
mind is a complex mind each part of which is itself a mind.
    This might be regarded as implausible. To see why, consider the putative fact that human minds
never join together to form more complex superhuman minds. Indeed it’s very difficult to see how
that could ever happen in principle. This could be taken as evidence for the principle that minds
don’t compose minds.
    But if we look at the details of how Spinoza thinks that simpler minds compose more complex
minds, the account is not as implausible as it might first appear. To begin with, it must be empha-
sized that the human mind is not a substance, as it is for Descartes. Instead, Spinoza holds that it is a
collection of ideas. In this way, it is not entirely dissimilar to the bundle theory of the mind familiar
from Hume. The difference between the bundle theory and Spinoza’s theory is that Spinoza adds the
further claim that the ideas in the bundle compose a single complex idea. Thus, although it is strictly
speaking correct to say that every part of the body has a mind, it’s a bit misleading because Spinoza
is deflating the mind not inflating ideas. The notion of a complex idea that is composed of simpler
ideas is much more familiar (think of psychologically real complex concepts composed of simpler
concepts), than the idea of complex minds composed of simpler minds. Spinoza just assimilates the
latter to the former.
    Moreover, Spinoza denies the claim that human minds don’t compose with other minds to form
more complex minds. Indeed, he repeatedly asserts that the human mind is part of the infinite intel-
lect which is the mind of the totality of finite corporeal creatures. Thus Spinoza clearly believes that
his claim that the human mind has parts that are themselves minds is not in conflict with any general
principles prohibiting minds from composing.


                                           5. Conclusion
Spinoza believes that each body – every animal, plant, particle, and star – has a mind. Moreover, every
complex body composed of simpler bodies has a complex mind composed of simpler minds. And
just as bodies are modes of extended nature, minds are modes of thinking nature. Minds are thus


                                                   42
                                             Spinoza’s Panpsychism


Nature’s ideas of the body. This view might seem to conflict with four plausible claims: (1) minds
are possessed only by creatures capable of intelligent behavior; (2) minds are associated only with
creatures with complex bodies; (3) we are unconscious of many things that happen in our bodies;
and (4) minds do not compose. Spinoza responds to (1)–(3) with an account of degrees of power of
thinking, which he associates with structural complexity. He is thus able to claim that although crea-
tures incapable of any appreciable intelligent action and lacking structural complexity have minds
with very little power of thinking. And because he arguably has a functionalist account of conscious-
ness, many ideas/minds will have very low levels of consciousness. With respect to (4), he assimilates
minds to ideas and thus the claim that minds compose is no more implausible than the claim that
ideas compose. Because many thoughts are complex, this is not implausible at all.


                                                     Note
	1.	 All citations from Spinoza are from Spinoza (1925). Most English translations are from Spinoza (1985), with
     occasional modifications. The citation method to the Ethics is to Book + Element + additional material (if
     any). For example, ‘1p13s’ refers to Book 1, Proposition 13’s scholium; ‘1d3’ refers to Book 1, Definition 3.


                                                 References
Della Rocca, Michael (2008). Spinoza. London: Routledge.
Descartes, René (1985). Philosophical Writings, vol. 1. Ed. and Trans. J. Cottingham, R. Stoothoff, D. Murdoch.
   Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (The ‘AT’ page reference is to Oeuvres de Descartes, C. Adam and
   P. Tannery (eds.), Paris: 1897–1910 and 1964–1978; Paris: Librairie Philosophique, J. Vrin (1996).).
Garrett, Don (2008). ‘Representation and Consciousness in Spinoza’s Naturalistic Theory of the Imagination’.
   In C. Huenemann (ed.), Interpreting Spinoza. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 4–25.
Spinoza, Baruch (1925). Spinoza Opera. Ed. C. Gebhardt, 4 vols. Heidelberg: Carl Winter.
Spinoza, Baruch (1985). The Complete Works of Spinoza. Ed. and Trans. Edwin Curley, vol. 1. Princeton: Prince-
   ton University Press.
Wilson, Margret (1999). ‘Objects, Ideas, and Minds: A Comment on Spinoza’s Theory of Mind’. In her Ideas and
   Mechanism. Princeton: Princeton University Press.




                                                       43
                      5
             MANY-MINDED LEIBNIZ’S
                 MANY MINDS
                                         Graeme Hunter




William Seager and Sean Allen-Hermanson (2015) begin the “Panpsychism” article in the Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy with a rough, but useful, taxonomy of a wide “range of possible positions”
they classify as versions of panpsychism. The upshot for the key term, “mind” is that panpsychist
accounts of it are distributed along three different continua. Mind can be anything from:

1.	 (a) Fully conscious to (b) unconscious,
2.	 (a) the only thing going (Idealism) to (b) something that resists explanation in non-mentalistic
    terms,
3.	 Ubiquitous: [Everything (a) is one (= Idealism), or, at least, (b) has one] to (c) rare.

Leibniz easily fits into this taxonomy. His alphanumeric panpsychic identifier is: 1a–b/2b/3b.
   Thus, for Leibniz:

1a–b. What I will call “minds” (subject to later clarification) can take every form from fully conscious
       (God) to devoid of consciousness (what Leibniz calls “simple substances” or “bare monads”).
  2b.	 Minds are the forms of bodies and in human beings they are the substantial substrate of all those
       famously recalcitrant properties like consciousness, intentionality, freedom, moral obligation,
       and purpose, which refuse to be explained within the physical paradigm of matter in motion.
       (Leibniz believes that physics can’t even explain its own laws of motion without bringing in
       something like mind.)
  3b.	 Finally, minds are ubiquitous, not to the extent that every real thing is a mind (Idealism), but to
       the extent that every real thing has a mind, or at least something like a mind (Leibniz’s distinc-
       tive hylomorphism).

   That is a rough outline of what I take to be Leibniz’s view of mind. It needs a bit of refining
though, and even when refined much about it will remain controversial. In this chapter I would like
to address and remove three interesting points of controversy.


                         1.  Does Leibniz Have a Concept of “Mind?”
It is not obvious that Leibniz had any concept falling within the range of what contemporary
anglophone philosophers mean by “mind.” Though he wrote philosophy fluently in three languages,


                                                   44
                                 Many-Minded Leibniz’s Many Minds


none of those languages was English. He wrote in French to those who could understand it, because
French was fashionable, particularly for diplomats like himself; in Latin to those who did not read
French, or in writings that were primarily academic; and in German to German speakers who were
not primarily academics. These three languages furnish Leibniz with nine different terms, each of
which, in some circumstances, we translate as “mind.” None, however, is semantically equivalent to
“mind” as we use the word colloquially, let alone to its technical use in contemporary philosophy
of mind. Finally, none of the nine terms at Leibniz’s disposal is semantically equivalent to any of the
others, though they all, together with “mind,” occupy overlapping semantic fields.
    In French there are “âme” and “esprit,” which roughly correspond to “soul” and “spirit” in
English. No French word gets closer to what contemporary anglophone philosophers mean by
“mind,” which obviously leaves a big gap between it and them. The French terms are etymologically
and historically laden with religious, spiritualistic, or parapsychological connotations, from which
philosophers purposely keep the English term free.
    Contemporary French practitioners of philosophie de l’esprit become aware of the gap when they
try to engage with the work of their anglophone counterparts. They may either stipulate definitions
for the available French terms, turning them by fiat into semantic equivalents of “mind,” or they may
put to work the French adjective “mental,” more about which to follow (see, e.g. Engel 1994: 1–3;
Fisette et Poirier 2000: 1, 13).
    Leibniz, on the other hand showed no hesitation in using “âme” and “esprit” to designate the
non-corporeal components of his ontology. He welcomes, and for theological purposes exploits, the
historical, spiritual and religious connotations with which contemporary philosophers of “mind”
seldom wish to be involved.
    Leibniz almost never resorts to the French adjective “mental.” In the seven volumes of his philo-
sophical writings edited by C.I. Gerhardt, comprising roughly 3500 pages, there are only five occur-
rences of ‘mental’, four of which are attributed to the character representing Locke in Leibniz’s
Nouveaux essais.1 The fifth occurs in an article Leibniz sent to the Journal des savants in 1696 (GP
IV: 502). All five occurrences seem to mean the same, as do his occasional uses of the Latin adjec-
tive “mentalis.” Both are predicated of things whose existence is only “apparent” or “phenomenal.”2
    There is nothing, then, in Leibniz’s French writings to suggest he possessed anything like our
contemporary concept of “mind,” or would have found it useful.
    Not many of Leibniz’s German writings are of interest in connection with his philosophical psy-
chology, but the German language itself is. In addition to “Seele” and “Geist” (which are fairly close
counterparts of “âme” and “esprit” respectively) German has “Gemüt,” and Leibniz makes use of it
in some of his more popular writings. Like “mind,” “Gemüt” refers to our mental faculties and is free
of spiritual connotations. In casual German its meaning can be indistinguishable from mind, as when
Leibniz tells a philosophical layman that human souls (menschliche Seelen) are a species of the genus
of rational Gemüter (GP 1: 53).3
    However, unlike “mind” in its post-Cartesian philosophical sense, “Gemüt” is not characterized
first and foremost by discursive thinking, but instead by feeling, in the sense of receptivity to stim-
uli. “Fühlende Seele” (“feeling soul”) is the first substitute for “Gemüt” proposed by the Wahrig
Deutsches Wörterbuch (1971). And that is the way Leibniz uses it throughout an early essay on peace
of mind called Gemütsruhe (GP 7: 95–7). The subject of that essay, Leibniz writes, is “the enliven-
ing and inward excitement of the Gemüt, bringing us the highest and most enduring delight of our
lives.”4 You might get away with “mind” as a translation for “Gemüt” in that passage, though, given
the popular nature of the text, “heart” would be preferable, because Leibniz is clearly discussing our
affective capacity.
    Feeling is very important for Leibniz, whether or not he is writing in German. Monads (as he
comes to call all souls, spirits and Gemüter) are “windowless,” meaning incapable of interaction either
with bodies or with other immaterial beings (except for God) and hence each one, if it is to be in


                                                  45
                                               Graeme Hunter


contact with its world, must feel (empfinden) everything in every part of the world, though each must
generate its feelings from its own resources in the form of perceptions. In a verse epitome of his
philosophy Leibniz defines Geist wholly in terms of “Empfindlichkeiten” (feelings or sensibilities).5
    German practitioners of Philosophie des Geistes therefore face problems analogous to those their
French counterparts meet when it comes to translating anglophone philosophy of mind. Peter Bieri,
in a collection of anglophone philosophers of mind in translation, solves the problem summarily by
adopting the German adjective “mental” as a “technical term” (Bieri 1981: 4). Its virtual absence
from colloquial and conversational German facilitates its being pressed into technical service as a
referent for the “non-physical.” Two further advantages also recommend it: first, it is the same as the
English adjective “mental” that anglophone philosophy associates with “mind.” Secondly, it connects
with the Cartesian res cogitans, which Descartes of course equates with the Latin mens.6 Thus, the
adjective “mental” serendipitously furnishes French, German and English philosophy of mind with
a common term. Unfortunately, though, as pointed out previously, Leibniz’s infrequent uses of this
term do nothing to link his notion of the mental with ours.
    A more promising avenue would be to explore the impact of the Cartesian “mens” on Leibniz’s
Latin writings. In Latin, “anima,” and occasionally “animus,” occupy similar semantic territory to
“âme” and “Seele,” while “spiritus” does the job of “esprit” and “Geist.” But “mens” is a different
story. Part of Descartes’ contribution to philosophical psychology was to liberate the word “mens”
from its association with semantically related Latin terminology, particularly with “anima” and “ani-
mus.” As he tells Mersenne, “in good Latin ‘anima’ means air, or breath from the mouth, which,
I think has been carried over into the meaning of ‘mens,’ which is why I said it is often taken for a
corporeal thing.”7 Descartes’ determination to avoid that confusion provides an excellent motive for
keeping “mens” separate from “anima,” even if it is Hobbesian materialism, rather than spiritualism,
which Descartes is here concerned to sideline.
    Strangely, though, Descartes allows the related word, “animus,” to stand as a synonym for “mens”
in his canonical introduction of “res cogitans” in Meditation II.8 Later he finds it necessary to explain
what he meant. He tells Hobbes that he only put “mens” and “animus” together because they are
both colloquially (vulgo) taken to refer to something endowed with thought (AT 7: 174). And to
Bourdin, who insists on thinking of “animus” as something corporeal, Descartes recommends that he
try to get it through his thick head that for Descartes there are only two kinds of things: corpus and
mens, i.e., body and mind (AT 7: 487).
    Though Leibniz is a careful reader of Descartes, the Cartesian use of “mens” is not a significant
influence. Leibniz is much more concerned with expanding the meaning of “mens” than with limit-
ing it. A pure Cartesian conception of “mens” may pop up from time to time in his early writings,9
but soon the word becomes enriched with the meanings and connotations of “entelechy,” “soul,”
“spirit,” “monad” and the rest. Nor is Leibniz consistent in the terms he picks to designate different
patches of this wide semantic field. He varies his vocabulary not only according to context, but also
according to the language he is using and especially, in his many correspondences, according to the
preferred philosophical vocabulary of his correspondent.10 Notwithstanding the surface variation in
terminology, however, a consistent doctrine underlies it.
    Leibniz provides a valuable snapshot of his mature philosophical psychology in 1710 after his
secretary, Rudolph Christian Wagner, asks him to explain what he thinks about the “nature of the
soul” (animae natura). The term “anima,” Leibniz tells Wagner, has both a broad and a narrow sense.11
    Broadly construed, “anima” denotes a vital principle (principium vitale) or a principle of internal
action . . . existing in a monad (principium actionis internae in . . . monade existens). This internal action,
which Leibniz considers to be the most basic characteristic of any real being, is what he calls “percep-
tion” (perceptio), defined as internal representation of what is external (repraesentatio externi in interno).
    In this broad sense, Leibniz tells Wagner, soul (anima) may be attributed not only to animals but
to all percipient things. Readers familiar with Leibniz will know that the other percipient things are


                                                      46
                                   Many-Minded Leibniz’s Many Minds


not just men and angels, who are higher than animals in the great chain of being, but also a vast range
of beings stretching down from animals, through plants, to entities which, though unaware of their
perceptions, are yet percipient, and always something more than bare matter (nuda materia). These
lowest beings, which he elsewhere calls by such names as “simple substances” and “bare monads,”
contain some principle of organization and perceptive activity which he often calls, as he does in the
letter to Wagner, a primitive entelechy (Entelechia primitiva).
    In a strict sense, however, “anima” applies only to the nobler form of life (species vitae nobilior)
enjoyed by animals, whose perceptions involve sensation, attention and memory. But “mens,” Leibniz
continues, is something nobler still: it is a rational soul (anima rationalis). This picture is constant in
Leibniz’s mature (post 1686) thought, though the terminology in which he expresses it varies. In the
closing sections of the Monadology (1714), as in other late French writings, reasonable souls (mentes)
become known as “esprits.”
    Having thus carefully set out his terms, Leibniz is able to offer Wagner a lapidary summary of his
philosophical psychology: mind is rational soul; soul is sensate life; life is a perceptive principle.12 In
so saying Leibniz implies that minds, in addition to their rationality, have the powers characteristic
of lower-order souls as well. Here he reflects the Aristotelian and Scholastic traditions, according to
which the rational soul also has powers of sensation, self-motion and self-nourishment.13 But Leib-
niz’s conception goes beyond theirs.
    As mentioned, Leibniz is always trying to import content into his notion of mind. His ambition is
to reconcile as many as possible of the divergent views of his predecessors. To his late correspondent,
Nicolas Rémond, he describes his project this way:

     I have tried to unearth and re-combine the truth buried and scattered among the opinions
     of the different philosophical sects, and I believe I threw in something of my own just to
     advance things a little. The subjects I have been studying since childhood have all contrib-
     uted to this project.
                                                                                   (GP 3: 606)14

His early childhood studies, he tells Rémond, were Aristotle and the Scholastics, to which, he says,
Plato and Plotinus also contributed something, as did other ancient schools he encountered later.
Then, in his teenage years, he encountered the moderns, particularly Descartes. Leibniz’s drive to
understand and incorporate led him to the characteristically broad notion of soul we have already
seen him to have.“This [path of education] is what brought me back to the entelechies,” he continues,

     from the material to the formal, and led me at last to understand, after some corrections
     and improvements, that monads, or simple substances, are the only true substances. . . . This
     is what Plato and the later Academicians and even the sceptics glimpsed, though these
     epigones of Plato used the insight less effectively than Plato did.

Leibniz’s attempt to deepen, reconcile and unify Western philosophy ultimately gives us the mon-
adological metaphysics we associate with his name. In one of his fine phrases he describes it as “a kind
of perennial philosophy (GP 3: 624 ff.).15
   The upshot of this brief survey of his thought is that Leibniz had nothing corresponding to our
modern concept of mind. Unlike current German or French philosophers of mind, however, he did
not regret its absence. Had he wanted it, “mens” and “esprit,” would have provided him with all or
most of what “mind” contains, though in his usage both have also religious, spiritual, and teleological
dimensions that contemporary philosophers of mind regard as unscientific, and zealously disregard.
   Leibniz’s instinct went in the opposite direction. He loads his own notion of mens/esprit with as
many traditional connotations as it can bear, because it takes such a laden notion, he thinks, to be the


                                                    47
                                             Graeme Hunter


bearer of science itself. “Incorporeal natures” animae in the broad sense, supply the necessary founda-
tions even for physics and mathematics.16 Philosophers today who have begun to suspect that minds
could never have arisen in the physical world, if the mental had not been there from the beginning,
are thinking Leibniz’s thoughts after him.


                                  2.  Leibnizian Hylomorphism
My calling Leibniz a hylomorphist will raise a red flag for some readers. Many Leibniz scholars, per-
haps still a majority, think him an idealist. It is true that Leibniz could continue to be a panpsychist
on the Seager and Allen-Hermanson taxonomy, even if he turned out to be an idealist, but still it is
preferable to know which kind of panpsychist he really is, especially because hylomorphism organ-
izes Leibniz’s thought in a more plausible way than idealism does. What draws people to Leibniz’s
philosophy are its three striking dimensions of breadth, depth and systematicity. What frequently
disenchants these same readers is what they see as his three lapses into fantasy: his idealism, his denial
of the possibility of interaction, and his optimism.
    “Optimistic, orthodox, fantastic and shallow,” were the words Bertrand Russell used to describe
these aspects of his thought, which Russell tried to airbrush away as merely a “popular” philosophy,
meant to win the approval of “princes and princesses” and to distract their attention from a far more
interesting private philosophy which was logical and Spinozistic (Russell 1946: 604).17
    Russell’s “two philosophies” account has not stood up well to scrutiny, but if we are to regard
Leibniz’s idealism, denial of interaction, and optimism as bona fide parts of his philosophy, then it
becomes all the harder to swallow. Leibniz’s admirers therefore ought to hope he is a hylomorphist. If
he is, one their three stumbling blocks goes away. And maybe two! Although I only have space for a
quick sketch of Leibniz’s hylomorphism, I will try to indicate how it also helps demystify the second
“fairy tale” aspect of Leibniz’s philosophy, the denial of interaction.
    Donald Rutherford speaks for what may still be a majority view when he says that in “Leibniz’s
late writings” “material things do not form part of his fundamental ontology,” and only “monads and
their individual modifications” exist (Rutherford 1995: 143).18 A seemingly definitive proof-text for
this idealist picture can be found in Leibniz’s late correspondence with the Dutch polymath Burcher
de Volder. There he says:

     When the subject is considered accurately, we have to say that in nature (rebus) nothing but
     simple substances are found, and in them perceptions and appetites.
                                                                                    (GP 2: 270)19

However Glenn Hartz has shown, I think definitively, that a huge amount of what Leibniz says in
his later writings leans toward realism, in the sense of including among the most fundamental things
in nature some that are neither minds nor mind-dependent (Hartz 2007: 6). Hartz does not con-
clude that Leibniz is a realist or a hylomorphist, however, but that he is a “theory dualist,” meaning
that Leibniz considers both realism and idealism to be explanations of the world, without affirming
either as true of it. “[B]oth can be held rationally,” Hartz says on Leibniz’s behalf, “so long as they are
regarded as mere hypotheses” (Hartz 2007: 155).
    Though it is true that Leibniz appears to endorse idealism at least as often as realism, I cannot see
theory-dualism as the best interpretive response. Hartz’s irenic intention does not outweigh a reader’s
disappointment at having to conclude that, when Leibniz offered systematic accounts of the world,
he was never aiming at the truth.
    Hartz says defenders of realism inevitably “make a hash of ” of Leibniz’s idealist side (Hartz 2007:
155). This chapter will be an exception, though, if only because it will not have time to consider the
idealist side.20


                                                    48
                                    Many-Minded Leibniz’s Many Minds


     Leibniz is a hylomorphist because he follows Aristotle in thinking that mind is the form of the
body. “Our body is the matter,” he tells Arnauld in 1687, “and our soul the form of our substance.”
Then he adds, “the same holds of other corporeal substances” (GP 2: 119).21 Living bodies of all kinds
act as they do, Leibniz says, because of “a soul, or form analogous to soul, or a first entelechy, or a prim-
itive force for acting, which is a law inscribed in it, impressed upon it by divine decree” (GP 4: 512).22
     The many terms with which Leibniz clothes his notion of soul in such passages suggest that he is
not just taking over Aristotle’s definition of soul. The dynamic character he adds to it ripples through
all his thought. In physics the form of the body reveals itself as vis viva or “living force”; in psychology
it is appetite, the restless generator of perceptions; in public life it is the I of our character, by which we
inscribe our unique signature upon the world. Finally, beyond our material existence in the world,
our soul is the immortal spirit that fits or unfits us for the City of God.
     “Entelechy” is an Aristotelian term meaning literally “having a plan within.” It is our first-order
substantial form, but it does not account for the plans we make and execute for our own reasons. We
plan; we choose; we act. But we owe our ability to do these things to a first-order primordial entel-
echy within us. “All actions of bodies are mechanical and independent of souls” (GP 4: 540), Leibniz
reminds us. But our ability to act in the ways we do must itself be explained by our soul or form.
     Leibniz’s hylomorphism does not reify the soul, but neither does it completely naturalize it. Soul
is the form a body takes. Or even better: soul is the form which, at God’s command, takes a body,
enabling it to act in certain ways. Its most elementary appearance is as force in physics itself. In his
“New System of the Nature of Substances” Leibniz calls force:

     a mid-point between power and action, which includes an effort, an activity (acte), and
     entelechy. . . . That is why I consider it to be constitutive of substance, being the origin of
     action, which is [a substance’s] character.
                                                                                        (GP 4: 472)

I think it reasonable to regard this picture as a form of hylomorphism, though I realize that I have
not said nearly enough to prove that it is so. If I am right, though, hylomorphism frees Leibnizian
metaphysics of one of its fantastical features, idealism.
    Leibniz’s views on interaction also become a little more tractable on this account. The appearance
of interaction is not merely in the mind. Body A really does push body B. But A does not com-
municate its force to B, an idea of which, as Hume famously said, “we cannot form the most distant
conception.”23 Instead, “no body suffers the impact of another except in virtue of a motion already
within it, arising out of its own resources (de son propre ressort)” (GP 4: 476). When A pushes B, each
body draws on its own force to accommodate itself to the changes in the other. The appearance of
interaction is preserved and can be treated as real for the purposes of calculating its physical effects,
yet without introducing paradox into metaphysics. The same thought adapted to the communica-
tions of mind and body avoids the impasse of Cartesian dualism. Leibniz calls that application of his
doctrine “pre-established harmony.”24


                       3.  Does a Panpsychist Interpretation of Leibniz
                                Have Direct Textual Support?
The Leibnizian hylomorphism I have just sketched fits naturally in the continuum of theories recog-
nized as panpsychic in Seager and Allen-Hermanson’s taxonomy. There is no obvious call for direct
textual evidence of his panpsychism as such. However it would be wrong to ignore a paper by the
Leibniz scholar, Andreas Blank (2000), which claims that support of that kind is lacking.
   In the English summary that precedes his paper, Blank states his main contention as follows: “The
interpretation of Leibniz’s theory of simple substances as a philosophy of panpsychism has no direct


                                                      49
                                             Graeme Hunter


support from Leibniz’s texts.” It is unclear here (and in Blank’s paper) whether he is only defending
the weak thesis that panpsychism can’t be attributed to Leibniz on the strength of what he says about
simple substances alone, or the stronger thesis, that what Leibniz says about simple substances makes
it difficult or impossible to attribute panspychism to him.
    Blank’s weaker thesis may be true without affecting what I have argued here. I made no claim that
the ubiquity of what Leibniz loosely calls souls, namely simple substances, guarantees that souls in a
stricter sense (e.g., minds or spirits) are also present everywhere.
    However, my account would be in trouble if the stronger thesis were true. Does what Leibniz says
about simple substances preclude any interesting reading of Leibniz as a panpsychist?
    First, a terminological clarification: Blank uses the term “Seele” in his paper, and “soul” in his
English summary, for what Leibniz means by the Latin “anima” and the French “âme.” I shall use
the word “soul” when reporting Blank’s words, and I’ll use other terms, as appropriate, when stating
Leibniz’s views or my own.
    Blank’s argument depends on two factual claims I will not dispute. The first is that an ontological gap
exists between the powers of simple substances and those of souls. Simple substances produce complete
representations of the world from their own resources, but lack what Blank calls the “second-order
perceptions” (Blank 2000: 121)25 of sensation, awareness and memory. Souls are equipped with both.
    The ontological gap he is referring to can be presented as follows: if all Leibnizian substances were
ordered according to the principle of least change, beginning with those with the least perceptive
ability and ending with those who have most, the passage from least to greatest would not be gradual
at all points. Between the most complex simple substance, S, and the simplest of minds endowed
with “second-order perceptions,” M, there would be a jump, an ontological gap. There would be
no intermediate beings between S and M. Leibniz scholars find that problematic, because Leibniz
is always assuring us that there are no jumps in nature (see, e.g., GP 2: 186; GP 3: 529; GP 4: 399).
    It is tempting to try to explain this gap away by appeal to Leibniz’s doctrine of “petites” (or
subconscious) perceptions,26 or by appeal to his more general views about continuity in nature. But
Blank is successful, I think, in showing that neither doctrine can close this gap.
    Blank’s second factual claim, then, is that Leibniz’s principle of continuity, as applied to the great
chain of being, holds only for possible kinds of substances, not for those that exist in the actual world.
In other words, logically speaking, there could have been creatures in the gap between S and M, but
in fact there are none.
    That there is an ontological gap, and that we can’t explain it away, are factual claims I will not
contest. But what significance does Blank’s conclusion have for my claim that Leibniz, as I have previ-
ously described him, is a panpsychist? None that I can detect. Whether the gap between S and M can
be filled by actual substances with intermediate substantial forms is an interesting question internal
to Leibniz’s metaphysics, but not determinative of whether or not he can be called a panpsychist.
    Blank’s point might still pose a challenge, however, if we were to apply his finding about the
ontological gap to the corresponding “explanatory gap,” which some philosophers of mind say arises
when we look for a naturalistic evolutionary account of the origin of mental powers such as con-
sciousness, beginning from a physicalistic starting point.
    At first it might appear that naturalistic evolutionary explanations get a leg up in Leibniz’s meta-
physics. They are allowed to start from mind-like simple substances instead of from material bodies.
But there is still that troublesome gap between S and M. The jump is still too great to figure in a
wholly naturalistic explanation of how simple substances evolved into souls.
    It is of course pleasant to speculate about how Leibniz would answer that question. But we can
only conjecture. It’s not his question. He holds that everything was created by God at the beginning
of time, all living things preformed in their first ancestors’ seed. Each individual of each generation
develops (literally unfolds) according to what is prescribed by the entelechy given it by God at the



                                                    50
                                          Many-Minded Leibniz’s Many Minds


beginning of time (CD §81).27 All the beings that will ever be ensouled have been so from the begin-
ning. No evolutionary explanation is required.
    For that preformationist picture, entailing the ubiquity of the mental, there is, pace Blank, tex-
tual warrant. Though Leibniz never offered an evolutionary account of the human mind, he is
still the ancestor of those thinkers today who suspect there can be no physicalistic and naturalistic
account of it.
    There is nothing, for Leibniz, that does not owe its type of existence either to mind itself, or to
something resembling mind. Not even physics, he thinks, can be understood without considerations
of regularity and purpose that presuppose and anticipate the mental (see e.g., DM §12; GP 4: 508).
“Thus, entelechies must be everywhere,” he tells Bayle, “and it is to have a small idea of nature’s
Author (who multiplies as much as possible these little worlds), if we associate them only with
human bodies. In fact it is impossible that they not be everywhere” (GP 4: 557; compare also “De
ipsa natura” §12, GP 4: 504 ff.).


                                                           Notes
	 1.	 In order of occurrence, they are: NE 2.12.7 (2x); NE 2.29.8; NE 4.5.1.
	 2.	 See NE 2.12.7, “en quelque façon mentale ou de phénomène;” GP 2: 486 “. . . de Relationibus censeo, . . .
                    relationem communem utrique esse rem mere mentalem.”
   	 3.	 Letter to Johann-Friedrich, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg, May 21, 1671.
   	 4.	 “Die Gemüths Ruhe ist eine belustigung des gemüths und innerliche vergnügung verursachende in uns
                    die höchste und beständigste wollust unsers lebens” (GP 7: 95). In my translation I read “verursachend” for
                    “verursachende.”
   	 5.	 Cited in Mahnke (1966: 17).
   	 6.	 E.g.: “sum ergo praecise tantum res cogitans, id es, mens” AT 7: 27. We must remember, however, that
                    “mens” becomes “esprit” in the French translation: AT 9: 21.
   	 7.	 To Mersenne, April 24, 1641, AT 3: 362.
   	 8.	 AT 7, 27: “sum igitur praecise tantum res cogitans, id est mens, sive animus, sive intellectus, sive ratio.”
   	 9.	 E.g. GP 1: 11: “res cogitans seu men[s]”; GP 4: 171: “Mentem voco ens cogitans.”
   	10.	 As he tells his correspondent Burcher de Volder, GP 2: 232: “[M]ihi animus est notionem quaerere quae
                    conveniat caeteris quoque et hominum usui consentiat.”
    	11.	 All citations from this letter are taken from GP 7: 528f.
     	12.	 “mens est anima rationalis, ita anima est vita sensitiva, et vita est principium perceptivum” GP 7: 529.
      	13.	 Comp. Aristotle, De anima, 415a; Aquinas, Summa Theologica 1a q76 a4.
      	14.	 To Rémond, January 10, 1714.
       	15.	 To Rémond, August 26, 1714.
        	16.	 For a brief statement to this effect, see DM §23; for a full presentation see “De ipsa natura sive de vi insita
                    actionibusque Creaturarum, pro Dynmaicis suis confirmandis illustradisque,” GP IV: 504–16.
         	17.	 Russell had developed this view already in his influential book A Critical Exposition of the Philosophy of Leib-
                    niz (Russell 1900). For a discussion of some of the limitations of this approach see Hunter (1993).
          	18.	 R. M. Adams makes the most thorough case for an idealist reading in Adams (1994).
           	19.	 To de Volder, June 30, 1704.
            	20.	 In Hunter (2010: 581–4), I discuss an alternative to “theory pluralism” in a little more detail.
             	21.	 To Arnauld, Sept 1687.
              	22.	 “De ipsa natura . . . [materiam] . . . primam esse mere passivam, sed non esse completam substantiam;
                    accedereque adeo debere animam, vel formam animae analogam, sive entelecheian ten proten, id est . . . vim
                    agendi primitivam, quae ipsa est lex insita, decreto divino impressa.”
	23.	 Hume, Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, 4.2.
 	24.	 See e.g., NE 2.2.28: “je soutiens que les âmes ne changent rien dans la force ni dans la direction des corps;
                    que l’un serait aussi inconcevable et aussi déraisonnable que l’autre, et qu’il se faut servir de l’harmonine
                    préétablie pour expliquer l’union de l’âme et du corps” (trans: “I maintain that souls change nothing either
                    in the force of the direction of bodies, the one being as inconceivable and unreasonable as the other, and
                    that we have to resort to pre-established harmony to explain the union of soul and body.”).
  	25.	 “Perzeptionen zweiter Stufe.”



                                                              51
                                                Graeme Hunter


	26.	 By means of which some apparent gaps can be bridged, such as that between consciousness and uncon-
       sciousness in animals and in human beings. See Blank (2000: 121).
 	27.	 For more on this doctrine of Leibniz’s see Catherine Wilson (1997).


                                               Bibliography
Adams, R. M. (1994). Leibniz: Determinist, Theist, Idealist. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.
Bieri, Peter (ed.) (1981). Analytische Philosophie des Geistes. Königstein/Ts: Hain.
Blank, Andreas (2000). ‘Leibniz und die panpsychistische Deutung der Theorie der einfachen Substanzen’.
    Studia Leibnitiana, 32 (1): 117–25.
Descartes, René (1996). Oeuvres. Ed. Charles Adam and Paul Tannery, 11 vols. Paris: Vrin. (Abbrev. “AT”).
Engel, Pascal (1994). Introduction à la philosophie de l’esprit. Paris: La Découverte.
Fisette, Denis et Poirier, Pierre (eds.) (2000). Philosophie de l’esprit. Paris: Vrin.
Hartz, Glenn (2007). Leibniz’s Final System: Monads, Matter and Animals. London and New York: Routledge.
Hunter, Graeme (1993). ‘Russell Making History: The Leibniz Book’. In A. Irvine and G. A. Wedeking (eds.),
    Russell and Analytic Philosophy. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, pp. 397–414.
Hunter, Graeme (2010). ‘Leibnizian Materialism’. Dialogue, 49: 573–88.
Leibniz, G. W. (1978). Die Philosophischen Schriften. Ed. C. I. Gerhardt. Hildesheim: Olms (Abbrev: “GP”). (Note:
    Works available in many editions and translation with common section-markers are identified according to
    the following key: CD = “Causa dei,” an appendix to the Theodicy; DM = Discours de métaphysique = Discourse
    on Metaphysics; NE = Nouveaux essais = New Essays on Human Understanding).
Mahnke, Dietrich (1966). Unendliche Sphäre und Allmittelpunkt. Stuttgart: Frommann.
Russell, Bertrand (1900). A Critical Exposition of the Philosophy of Leibniz. London: George Allen and Unwin.
Russell, Bertrand (1946). History of Western Philosophy. London: George Allen and Unwin.
Rutherford, Donald (1995). ‘Metaphysics: The Later Period’. In Nicholas Jolley (ed.), Cambridge Companion to
    Leibniz. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 124–75.
Seager, William, and Allen-Hermanson, Sean (2015).‘Panpsychism’. In E. N. Zalta (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia
    of Philosophy. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2015/entries/panpsychism/. (Note this is not the latest
    version of the article, which has since been substantially updated.).
Wilson, Catherine (1997). ‘Leibniz and the Animalcula’. In M. A. Stewart (ed.), Studies in Seventeenth Century
    Philosophy. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.




                                                       52
                           6
                   PANPSYCHISM IN THE
                     19TH CENTURY
                                          David Skrbina




Upon its reemergence in the Italian naturalism of the Renaissance, panpsychism rapidly assumed a
position of prominence in Western philosophy and by the early 1800s was a significant aspect of
the metaphysical thinking of many prominent philosophers (for a detailed history, see Skrbina 2017).
It was during the 19th century, however, that panpsychism witnessed a true resurgence. Primarily
in Germany and Great Britain, the view became something of a mainstream idea in philosophy.
Drawing from both the history of philosophy and the newly emerging sciences, philosophers found
increasing reason to promote new variations on the panpsychist theme. In the present chapter, I cite
some of the major figures of that time and give an outline of their views.


                                         1. Schopenhauer
Of its many prominent advocates, panpsychism was perhaps the most central to the work of Arthur
Schopenhauer. His Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung (1819/1969) – completed when he was only
30 years old – is a landmark in the history of philosophy.1 At nearly 1200 pages in length in its final
edition, it’s a monumental, highly detailed work, and yet the basic thesis is simply stated. Reality is
comprehensible in two distinct but related ways. First there is the sense in which everything is known
only as a mental image or impression, in the mind of the perceiver. When perceiving a given thing,
what is presented in the mind is not the thing in itself but a representation of it as constituted by the
sense impressions. When holding a red rose, for example, what one perceives is not the rose itself but
a collection of colors, scents, and tactile sensations. What is known is only an idea or representation
of a thing, not the thing-in-itself. The world, to the perceiver, is idea. This aspect is well-known;
it was implicit in Descartes and Kant, and fully articulated in the idealism of Berkeley. The second
way of conceiving of the world is deduced from human introspection. Our own body is obviously
a material object, and we know it, in the first sense, as an object like any other. But we also know it
in another way – from ‘the inside,’ as it were. Our mental lives offer many aspects to us: emotions,
pains, pleasures, memories, beliefs, and so on. These things are primarily sensory, and thus related to
our bodily perceptions. But most fundamentally, says Schopenhauer, is the fact that we know desire.
Wanting, urging, striving, seeking . . . these are at the core of our bodily existence. We want food,
drink, and sex. We desire and strive for material goods. We have myriad bodily urges, many of which
we struggle to control. Desire is the foundation of our material being. For Schopenhauer, all these
appetitive qualities are compressed into the word ‘will.’ Will, therefore, constitutes the essence of the
human body, the thing-in-itself of our biological organism.


                                                   53
                                               David Skrbina


    The argument is brought to a completion by acknowledging that the human body is simply an
object like every other in the world. It’s comprised of matter; it has an atomic structure; it produces
ideas or representations in the mind of a perceiver; it is subject to the same natural laws as everything
else. The human body, in its ontological construction, is not fundamentally different from any other
object. Therefore, if the human body is essentially will, then so too is everything. Thus Schopenhauer
reasons that all things, in themselves, are just will. Material objects are both, and at once, idea from
the outside and will from the inside. As he says, “this world is, on the one side, entirely representation,
just as, on the other, it is entirely will” (1819/1969: 4).
    He takes pains to emphasize the ontological nature of his theory. It’s not that things have a will or
exert will – they are will. Material things are literally “objectifications of will,” that is, physical mani-
festations, solidifications, or embodiments of it. This is clearly evident with the human body: “the
whole body is nothing but objectified will” (100). Individual body parts are specific manifestations
of different aspects of will, and bodily movements – whether voluntary or involuntary – are in reality
motions of the will. But this holds for all material objects, since all are constructed on the same plan.
    If everything in nature is objectified will, then this must hold true down to the smallest particles
and to the most elemental forces. Natural forces must, indeed, be the simplest and purest manifesta-
tion of will. And in fact, says Schopenhauer, this is precisely what we see. “The most universal forces
of nature exhibit themselves as the lowest grade of the will’s objectification” (130). He elaborates:

     [C]ontinued reflection will lead [one] to recognize the force that shoots and vegetates in
     the plant, indeed the force by which the crystal is formed, the force that turns the magnet
     to the North Pole, the force whose shock [results] from the contact of metals of differ-
     ent kinds, . . . and finally even gravitation, which acts so powerfully in all matter, pulling
     the stone to the earth and the earth to the sun; all these he will recognize as . . . the same
     according to their inner nature. He will recognize them all as that which . . . is called will.
                                                                                               (110)

The idea that all things are will, and express a kind of striving or desiring, is clearly reminiscent of
Spinoza’s conatus theory, and of his generally panpsychist outlook in which “all things are animate
in varying degrees” (Ethics 2p13S). Unsurprisingly, Spinoza was a major influence in Schopenhauer’s
thinking.2 We find the same themes elaborated in his later works. In On the Will in Nature (1836) he
writes, “generally every original force manifesting itself in physical and chemical appearances, in fact
gravity itself – all these in themselves . . . are absolutely identical with what we find in ourselves as
will” (1836/1992: 20). Even though he finds in inorganic nature “absolutely no trace of a conscious-
ness of an external world,” yet in such things as “stones, boulders or ice floes” we see that “they are
affected by an influence from without . . . which one can accordingly regard as the first step toward
consciousness” (82). And plants, though likewise lacking true consciousness, experience “an obscure
self-enjoyment” and “a feeble analogue of perception.”
    Panpsychism, and the notion of the world as will, is also central to Schopenhauer’s final major work,
Parerga and Paralipomena. In a notable passage, he decries the “fundamentally false contrast between
mind3 and matter” (1851/1974: 104). To the extent that one can speak of mind or matter in the real
world, mind must be equally attributable to both organic and inorganic objects. Any two material
objects, such as – to use his example – the human body and a stone, have internal qualities that are of
necessity alike. Both are ruled by laws of nature, both are material, and both are thus describable in
the same metaphysical terms. Where in one case we find mentality, so must we find it in the other:

     Now if you assume in the human head a mind, . . . you must also concede to every stone
     a mind. . . . In short, we can attribute matter to every so-called mind, but also mind to all
     matter, whence it follows that the contrast is false.
                                                                                            (106)


                                                     54
                                    Panpsychism in the 19th Century


   Throughout his writings, Schopenhauer provides the first articulation of the so-called intrinsic
nature argument for panpsychism.4 Science, as a mechanistic philosophy, can only perceive exter-
nal manifestations of force, mass, motion, and so on. What things are, in themselves, is completely
unknown to mechanics:

    At bottom . . . [mechanistic] etiology does nothing more than show the orderly arrange-
    ment according to which the states or conditions appear in space and time. . . . But in this
    way we do not obtain the slightest information about the inner nature of any one of these
    phenomena. . . . The force itself that is manifested, the inner nature of the phenomena that
    appear in accordance with those laws, remain for it an eternal secret, something entirely
    strange and unknown.
                                                                                  (1819/1969: 97)

   And again later in Parerga, he writes that the mechanistic, scientific account of nature

    is restricted to determinations of space and time. . . . But as soon as we go, even in mechan-
    ics, beyond the pure mathematical . . . we are already face to face with manifestations that
    to us are just as mysterious as are thinking and willing in man; and thus we are confronted
    with that which is directly unfathomable.
                                                                                             (106)

Unfathomable, that is, by science. With a true metaphysics, we can see that this “inner nature” is
precisely the will; and that perceived matter is nothing other than the will objectified.


                                             2. Fechner
Gustav Fechner was, in a sense, the antithesis of the pessimist Schopenhauer. Fechner adopted a
vibrant, exuberant, life-enhancing perspective on the world. His worldview was intimately and
openly linked to his panpsychist philosophy, perhaps more so than with any other major philosopher.
He was also a first-rank scientist and mathematician. He virtually invented the science of psycho-
physics, and discovered ‘Fechner’s Law’: the principle that the perceived strength of a sensation is
proportional to the logarithm of the intensity of the stimulus.
    Fechner’s panpsychism was marked by his conception of the world as composed of a hierarchy
of minds or souls (Seele). There are souls ‘below’ us, such as in plants, and there are souls ‘above’ us,
in the Earth, the stars, and the universe as a whole. Humans are surrounded, at all levels of being, by
varying degrees of soul. This is Fechner’s “daylight view” – the human soul at home in an ensouled
cosmos. This he contrasted to the then-standard materialist “night view” – humans alone, isolated
points of light in a universe of utter blackness.
    Consider separately his discussions of the ‘lesser’ (subhuman) and ‘greater’ (superhuman, or col-
lective) minds. The former consists almost entirely of a discussion of plants, of which Fechner had
no doubt that they possessed minds. The primary basis for this view was a continuity argument, or
analogy with human beings, though he employed at least four other arguments for panpsychism. The
Continuity argument appears repeatedly in his book Nanna (1848). For example:

    If we take a cursory glance at some of the outstanding points, is not the plant quite as well
    organized as the animal, though on a different plan, a plan entirely of its own, perfectly
    consonant with its idea? If one will not venture to deny that the plant has a life, why deny
    it a soul? For it is much simpler to think that a different plan of bodily organization built
    upon the common basis of life indicates only a different plan of psychic organization. . . .


                                                   55
                                                David Skrbina


     [W]hether it be a plant or an animal, the complexity of structure and process is so com-
     pletely analogous, except that the cells are differently arranged.
                                                                         (1848/1946: 168–9)

Why are plant-souls important? Because they are the most direct indicators of the overall panpsychic
nature of the world. As Fechner explained in On the Soul-Question:

     [B]elief in the plant soul is just a little instance of the general situation . . ., for in this whole
     question the least and the greatest things are closely connected. . . . I considered that in the
     little soul of the plant I had found a little handle by which faith in the greatest things could
     be more easily hoisted to the big pedestal.
                                                                                   (1861/1946: 138–9)

   Perhaps more important than Fechner’s elaborations on the plant-soul was his discussion of, in
the words of William James, the “superhuman consciousness” – the mind of society, of the Earth,
of the stars, and of the cosmos. Fechner was the first scientist-philosopher to seriously examine
these possibilities and to regard them as actual features of reality. James gives an excellent summary
of the view:

     In ourselves, visual consciousness goes with our eyes, tactile consciousness with our skin. . . .
     [T]hey come together in some sort of relation and combination in the more inclusive
     consciousness which each of us names his self. Quite similarly, says Fechner, we must sup-
     pose that my consciousness [and yours, though] they keep separate and know nothing of
     each other, are yet known and used together in a higher consciousness, that of the human
     race. . . . Similarly, the whole human and animal kingdoms come together as conditions of
     a consciousness of still wider scope. This combines in the soul of the earth with the con-
     sciousness of the vegetable kingdom, which in turn contributes . . . to that of the whole
     solar system, and so on from synthesis to synthesis and height to height, till an absolutely
     universal consciousness is reached.
                                                                                    (1909: 155–6)

Here we have a view of mind as a nested hierarchy, reaching from the lowest forms to the greatest.
It is, as James said, “A vast analogical series, in which the basis of the analogy consists of facts directly
observable in ourselves” (156).
    Fechner’s view was a pure pluralist panpsychism, and very close to that of James – sufficiently
so that James was compelled to strongly emphasize the point that all these levels of hierarchy in the
world possess, individually, their own minds. Elaborating on Fechner, he explains:

     The vaster orders of mind go with the vaster orders of body. The entire earth . . . must
     have . . . its own collective consciousness. So must each sun, moon, and planet; so must the
     whole solar system. . . . So has the entire starry system as such its consciousness.
                                                                                          (152–3)

    Fechner used a variety of arguments to defend his panpsychist claims. Earlier I cited a number
of arguments by continuity, but he made use of at least four other techniques: (1) In-Dwelling Pow-
ers: plants have the power to take ‘dead matter’ and make it living, and in this sense they have more
“vital force” than do animals. “Out of raw earth, water, air, and decaying substances the plant makes
glorious forms and colors” (1848/1946: 184). (2) Non-Emergence: the Earth must be sentient, because
“animate beings cannot arise from inanimate” (1861/1946: 156). (3) Design: the cosmos creates


                                                      56
                                     Panpsychism in the 19th Century


ensouled beings in order to attain full and complete enjoyment of existence. (4) Theological: Fechner
admits that there is an element of faith involved here: “however we begin it or however we end, we
shall not be able to discover and impart any exact proofs” (135). He notes that even in traditional
theology, the Spirit of God is everywhere: “If one concedes a God who is at once omnipresent,
omniscient, and omnipotent, then in a certain sense the universal animation of the world by God is
already admitted” (1848/1946: 163–4).
    In the end, Fechner made clear that his entire philosophical system was no mere poetic or roman-
tic vision. It was not wishful thinking. It was intended as a metaphysical truth about reality. As he said
in On the Soul-Question: “All this is not metaphorical, is not an hypothesis: it is a simple and literal
statement of how things are” (1861/1946: 153).


                    3.  Lotze, Clifford, and Other Scientist-Philosophers
Among German scientist-philosophers, Fechner was the outstanding proponent of a panpsychic
worldview, but others held the same outlook, including Hermann Lotze. Lotze’s chief work, Micro-
cosmos (1856–64), is a comprehensive study on mind and matter. He prefaces the discussion by
describing the antipathy between the philosophies of “mechanical science” on the one hand and
what he calls the “Philosophy of the Feelings” on the other. The mechanist philosophers sought to
describe everything in terms of forces and laws, but they overlooked the fact that such things “are not
the ultimate components of the threads that weave the texture of reality” (xii). Later in the work he
introduces a dual-aspect theory in which all matter has “a double life, appearing outwardly as matter,
and as such manifesting . . . mechanical [properties, while] internally, on the other hand, moved men-
tally” (150). He speaks of this inner soul- or mental-life as being an “absolute indivisibility” (157), and
proceeds to draw analogies between the soul and the indivisible atoms of matter.
    Lotze’s panpsychism is founded on the principle of the indivisibility of the atom. Matter as “infi-
nitely divisible extension” is “an illusion” (354); rather, it consists of point-like atoms structured in a
cohesive pattern by their respective forces. It is precisely this point-like nature of the atom that allows
us to see it as a single unifying center of experience, with its own psychic life:

     The indivisible unity of each of these simple beings [atoms] permits us to suppose that in it
     the impressions reaching it from without are condensed into modes of sensation and enjoy-
     ment. [As a result,] no part of being is any longer devoid of life and animation.
                                                                                           (360)

Like the ancient Greeks, Lotze accepted that motion is ultimately attributable to such a psyche: “We
must . . . in general allow and maintain that all motion of matter in space may be explained as the
natural expression of the inner states of beings that seek or avoid one another with a feeling of their
need” (363).
   In the end, panpsychism is not simply some abstract theory of metaphysics. For Lotze, it is the
“beauty of the living form [that] is made to us more intelligible by this hypothesis” (366). And this, he
says, is precisely why we must accept the view. Science itself neither wants nor needs panpsychism –
rather, it’s needed to satisfy the human spirit, to make the nature of the human soul comprehensible.
   Not long after Lotze’s primary work appeared, panpsychism began to gain attention in England.
The physicist and philosopher William Kingdon Clifford argued that science had bridged the gap
between organic and inorganic by describing the same atomic particles and same laws at work in
each (1874/1903). This development naturally suggested a similar possible bridge between physics
and consciousness. He concluded that mind was an active principle in nature, but because it was
essentially non-physical, it had to function in a separate plane of existence. The physical and the
mental thus operated as parallel systems: “the physical facts go along by themselves, and the mental


                                                    57
                                             David Skrbina


facts go along by themselves” (53).5 Clifford then applies a non-emergence argument in making his
case for panpsychism. As we move down the chain of living organisms,

    it is impossible for anybody to point out the particular place . . . where [absence of con-
    sciousness] can be supposed to have taken place. . . . [E]ven in the very lowest organisms,
    even in the Amoeba . . . there is something or other, inconceivably simple to us, which is of
    the same nature with our own consciousness. . . . [Furthermore] we cannot stop at organic
    matter, [but] we are obliged to assume . . . that along with every motion of matter, whether
    organic or inorganic, there is some fact which corresponds to the mental fact in ourselves.
                                                                                          (60–1)

Echoing Fechner, he notes that his doctrine “is no mere speculation, but is a result to which all the
greatest minds that have studied this question in the right way have gradually been approximating
for a long time” (61).
    Clifford later expanded on his views, advocating a monist philosophy in which the basic constitu-
ent of reality is “mind-stuff.” Neither mind nor consciousness, mind-stuff is rather the elements that
combine together to form “the faint beginnings of Sentience.” Mind is thus viewed as composed
of ‘mental atoms’ that combine in an analogous manner as physical atoms do: “A moving molecule
of inorganic matter does not possess mind, or consciousness; but it possesses a small piece of mind-
stuff ” (1878: 65). Intelligence and volition emerge only in higher-level complexes of mind-stuff, but
elementary feelings are present in all things, at all levels.
    At about the same time, Clifford’s compatriot, Samuel Butler, was developing panpsychist ideas of
his own. He discussed them in his 1880 book Unconscious Memory. Like many other thinkers of the
time, Butler noted that scientists had determined that the nature of the organic is the same as the
inorganic; vitalism was largely disproved, organic matter was shown to be identical with inorganic,
and the same forces were everywhere present – the standard view to this day. The logical conclusion,
then, was that certain core characteristics of the living must inhere, in some form, in the non-living.
As he says, “if we once break down the wall of partition between the organic and inorganic, the
inorganic must be living and conscious also, up to a point” (22). He continues:

    [I]t is more coherent with our other ideas, and therefore more acceptable, to start with
    every molecule as a living thing . . . than to start with inanimate molecules and smuggle
    life into them; . . . what we call the inorganic world must be regarded as up to a certain
    point living, and instinct, within certain limits, with consciousness, volition, and power of
    concerted action.
                                                                                             (23)

    At the conclusion of the book he offers this view as a useful and even morally enlightened per-
spective: “I would recommend the reader to see every atom in the universe as living and able to feel
and to remember, but in a humble way” (273). That a moral perspective is engendered by panpsy-
chism is perhaps not obvious: “True, it would be hard to place one’s self on the same moral platform
as a stone, but this is not necessary; it is enough that we should feel the stone to have a moral platform
of its own” (275). Butler is thus one of the few modern commentators to cite the moral relevance of
panpsychism. His statements show early signs of an ecological value system, one in which objects
of nature have intrinsic moral worth.6 Back in Germany, Ernst Mach’s philosophical writings began
to emerge in the early 1880s. An Austrian physicist known more for his scientific advances than his
philosophy, he nonetheless made substantial contributions to the philosophy of science, and he was
an early contributor to the field of logical positivism. For Mach, the aim of science was to predict
and describe, and only secondarily to ‘explain.’ In his epistemology, he was strongly empiricist. He


                                                   58
                                     Panpsychism in the 19th Century


eventually developed a neutral monistic philosophy in which the primary substance of existence was
neither mental nor physical but rather something that he called “sensations.” This realization led him
to a panpsychist conception of reality.
   In his Science of Mechanics (1883) Mach articulated this view: “Properly speaking the world is not
composed of ‘things’ . . . but of colors, tones, pressures, spaces, times, in short what we ordinarily call
individual sensations” (1883/1974: 579). The view that ‘all is sensation’ is an interesting and novel
development; it superficially resembles Berkeley’s idealism, except that there is no observing mind
involved. A more accurate description of his view may be that of an ontological pansensism – not of
the usual form in which all things have the power to sense, but rather that they constitutionally are
themselves sensations.
   If Mach was less than clear on the details of his pansensism, he was unambiguous about his monist
ontology and its panpsychist implications. He notes that both mechanistic monism and “animistic”
monism are inadequate worldviews:

     Both [the mechanical and animistic mythologies] contain undue and fantastical exaggera-
     tions of an incomplete perception. Careful physical research will lead . . . to an analysis of
     our sensations. We shall then discover that our hunger is not so essentially different from
     the tendency of sulphuric acid for zinc, and our will not so greatly different from the pres-
     sure of a stone, as now appears. We shall again feel ourselves nearer nature, without its being
     necessary that we should resolve ourselves into a nebulous and mystical mass of molecules,
     or make nature a haunt of hobgoblins.
                                                                                               (560)

Clearly Mach is sensitive to the close association between his view and animism, and he wants to
make nature sensate without introducing personal spirits. He seems to draw inspiration from Scho-
penhauer – note the comparison between ‘will’ and ‘pressure of a stone’ – and we know from his
other writings that he was highly influenced by Fechner. His unique form of pansensism led the
way for the soon-to-follow developments of James (radical empiricism) and Whitehead (process
philosophy).
    Another important thinker of the time was Ernst Haeckel. As among the first to see the philo-
sophical implications of the newly emerging theory of evolution, he established himself as the lead-
ing German Darwinist. He developed a panpsychic and even pantheistic monism in which both
evolution and the unity of all natural phenomena played a major role.
    Haeckel was explicitly panpsychist by 1892: “One highly important principle of my monism
seems to me to be, that I regard all matter as ensouled, that is to say as endowed with feeling (pleas-
ure and pain) and motion” (1892: 486). He offers here one argument for panpsychism, namely that
“all natural bodies possess determinate chemical properties,” the most important being that of
“chemical affinity.” This affinity, Haeckel argues, can only be explained “on the supposition that
the molecules . . . mutually feel each other” (483). Elsewhere he employs evolution on behalf of a
continuity argument, claiming that evolution shows “the essential unity of inorganic and organic
nature” (1895: 3). Evolutionary monism strikes at the heart of both the religious worldview and the
mechanical philosophy. “Our conception of Monism . . . is clear and unambiguous; . . . an immaterial
living spirit is just as unthinkable as a dead, spiritless material; the two are inseparably combined in
every atom” (58).
    Haeckel’s most famous work was The Riddle of the Universe (1899). Here he arrived at a neutral
monist position in which his ultimate reality was “substance” which possessed two attributes or
manifestations, matter and energy. Matter corresponded to ‘body’ and energy to ‘spirit,’ and the two
aspects were then united in a parallel manner. All living creatures, for Haeckel, possess “conscious
psychic action”; the inorganic world also possesses an inherent psychic quality, though he takes care


                                                    59
                                              David Skrbina


to emphasize that this is unconscious rather than conscious mentality. This applies even to the atoms:
“I conceive the elementary psychic qualities of sensation and will, which may be attributed to atoms,
to be unconscious” (179).
    Finally, Haeckel’s The Wonders of Life (1904) is primarily an elaboration of his earlier ideas. In
this work, though, he refers to himself for the first time as a hylozoist. He notes: “Monism is
best expressed as hylozoism, in so far as this removes the antithesis of materialism and spiritual-
ism (or mechanism and dynamism)” (88). And he here proposes a third fundamental attribute to
his “substance”; in addition to matter and force, he adds “psychoma” or “general sensation.” This is
his response to charges that mere matter and force/energy are not in themselves ‘psychic’ enough
to account for mind. He summarizes his view thusly: “(1) No matter without force and without
sensation. (2) No force without matter and without sensation. (3) No sensation without matter and
without force” (465).


                               4.  Leading American Panpsychists
Physician and psychologist Morton Prince explored the philosophy of mind in his 1885 book The
Nature of Mind and Human Automatism. Following Clifford, he proposes “mind stuff ” as the ‘thing-in-
itself ’ of material objects. This view – a form of idealist monism – is offered as a contrast to mecha-
nistic materialism: “matter is no longer the dead and senseless thing it is popularly supposed to be”
(1885/1975: 163). Evolution suggests the unity of all phenomena. As a consequence, “the whole
universe . . . instead of being inert is made up of living forces; not conscious [but] pseudo-conscious.
It is made up of the elements of consciousness” (164).
    Shortly thereafter, Josiah Royce developed his system of objective or absolute idealism. In his
Spirit of Modern Philosophy (1892) he proposed a theory of the Universal Self – Logos, or World-
Spirit, or God – as the cosmic mind which is the reality behind all physical phenomena. He combines
this notion with a dual-aspect view of matter, roughly along Schopenhauerian lines.
    As with many other thinkers of the time, Royce saw in evolution grounds for viewing all physi-
cal objects as subject to the same metaphysical principles. Humans unquestionably possess an inner
mental life; hence so too does everything. This is the “relation of the inorganic world to our human
consciousness” (1892/1955: 419). He explains:

     The theory of the ‘double aspect,’ applied to the facts of the inorganic world, suggests at
     once that they, too, in so far as they are real, must possess their own inner and appreciable
     aspect. . . . In general it is an obvious corollary of all that we have been saying.
                                                                                          (419–20)

        [W]e know that there is no real process of nature that must not have, known or unknown
     to us, its inner, its appreciable aspect. Otherwise it could not be real.
                                                                                        (426–7)

Royce counsels the reader not to view this as mere animism or anthropomorphism. It’s simplistic and
misleading to presuppose that “stones or planets” have anything like a human inner life: “it is not ours
to speculate what appreciative inner life is hidden behind the . . . lifeless things of the world” (427).
    Royce’s final articulation of panpsychism came in The World and the Individual (1899–1901)
where he asks the reader to “suppose that even material nature were internally full of the live and
fleeting processes that we know as those of conscious mental life” (213). He concludes that the
mental aspect of nature exists, but that it operates at a vastly different, and slower, time scale than our
human consciousness, and therefore we cannot perceive it. He writes,



                                                    60
                                      Panpsychism in the 19th Century


     we have no right whatever to speak of really unconscious Nature, but only of uncommuni-
     cative Nature, or of Nature whose mental processes go on at such different time-rates from
     ours that we cannot adjust ourselves to a live appreciation of their inward fluency.
                                                                                          (225–6)

    The “very vast [mental] slowness in inorganic Nature,” such as in a rock or the solar system, is no
less extant that our own mentality. Time scale is entirely arbitrary; slower is not lesser. The mind in
nature is fully conscious. Hence a mental life is to be found everywhere in nature:

     Where we see inorganic Nature seemingly dead, there is, in fact, conscious life, just as surely
     as there is any Being present in Nature at all. And I insist, meanwhile, that no empirical
     warrant can be found for affirming the existence of dead material substance anywhere.
                                                                                               (240)

    C. S. Peirce, known primarily for his pragmatism, logical philosophy, and semiotics, ventured into
metaphysics in an important series of articles published in Monist between 1891 and 1893. The first
of these, “The Architecture of Theories,” addresses “the brick and mortar” of any viable metaphysical
system: the relation of mind to matter. Dualism is no longer tenable for Peirce, and thus he concludes
that some form of monism must be true. The version he favors involves the notion of “hylopathy” –
the view that all matter ‘feels.’ Standard monisms, such as neutralism or materialism, fail to fully
account for mind in a naturalistic way. We are thus left with an objective form of idealism:

     The one intelligible theory of the universe is that of objective idealism, that matter is effete
     mind, inveterate habits becoming physical laws.
                                                                                 (1891/1992: 293)

Pierce is here referring to his “cosmogonic” thesis in which the universe originates in a condition of pure,
chaotic feeling. It then becomes progressively “crystallized” into matter as this mind undergoes a kind of
solidification, via the process of patterns of recurrence that Peirce calls “habits.” Mind is thus at the core
of reality. It exists in varying stages of solidification seen in one sense as matter, in another as mind.
    He briefly returns to panpsychism in “The Law of Mind,” where he observes that “tychism must give
birth to an evolutionary cosmology . . . and to a Schelling-fashioned idealism which holds matter to be
mere specialized and partially deadened mind” (1892a/1992: 312). At the end of the essay he reiterates
that “what we call matter is not completely dead, but is merely mind hide-bound with habits” (331).
    Peirce’s most important article was the last in the series, “Man’s glassy essence.” Here he begins
with a look at physics and chemistry, moving on to a discussion of primitive life forms and the pro-
toplasm inside all living cells. Of all its properties, the most important one is that “protoplasm feels”
(1892b/1992: 343) and it furthermore exhibits all essential mental qualities. This sensitivity and sen-
tience are inferred, Peirce tells us, by analogy: “[T]here is fair analogical inference that all protoplasm
feels. It not only feels but exercises all the functions of mind” (343). The analogy is based on such
properties as the sensitive reaction to the environment, ability to move, to grow, to reproduce, and so
on. And yet protoplasm is simply complex chemistry, a particular arrangement of molecules. Feel-
ing cannot be accounted for by mechanistic laws; therefore, we are “[forced to] admit that physical
events are but degraded or undeveloped forms of psychical events” (348). Peirce then presents his
own dual-aspect theory of mind:

     [A]ll mind is directly or indirectly connected with all matter, and acts in a more or less
     regular way; so that all mind more or less partakes of the nature of matter. . . . Viewing a



                                                     61
                                               David Skrbina


     thing from the outside, . . . it appears as matter. Viewing it from the inside, . . . it appears as
     consciousness.
                                                                                                  (349)

    The dynamic sensitivity of protoplasm necessarily results in an enhanced capability for feeling:
“nerve-protoplasm is . . . in the most unstable condition of any kind of matter; and consequently,
there the resulting feeling is the most manifest.” Again, this sort of sensitivity is a general property of
matter: “Wherever chance-spontaneity [i.e. unstable sensitivity] is found, there, in the same propor-
tion, feeling exists.” Peirce thus effectively introduces a new argument for panpsychism, based on the
correlation between a specific physical characteristic – dynamic sensitivity – and a mental quality,
feeling. All matter is dynamic to a greater or lesser degree, and thus all must be associated with an
‘interior’ that feels. Like the evolutionary argument, this approach incorporates elements of continu-
ity and non-emergence. To these it adds a reference to the indwelling power of dynamical systems.
Clearly Peirce was only sketching out his views here, and certainly the lack of a developed theory
of dynamical systems restricted his ability to articulate himself. With the advent of chaos theory
and nonlinear dynamics in the late 20th century, we now have new ways of expanding on Peirce’s
insight.7 Finally, Peirce recognized that his generalized theory of mind applied not only to lower-
order systems but also to those significantly larger and more comprehensive than the human being.
People who interact strongly with each other produce a true group mind that is of like nature to all
mind. Personhood or personality results when the lower-order minds are “in close enough connec-
tion to influence one another” (350). He continues: “there should be something like personal con-
sciousness in [collective] bodies of men who are in intimate and intensely sympathetic communion.”
In other words, the degree of interaction and participation determines the degree of mind. Peirce
adds that these ideas “are no mere metaphors. . . . [T]he law of mind clearly points to the existence
of such personalities.”


                                              5. Nietzsche
Panpsychism in the writings of major philosophers is always controversial. In most cases, it’s either
denied or ignored by the experts. But we find something different in the work of Friedrich Nietzsche.
In his case, scholars dispute whether he even articulated a panpsychist worldview; and if he did,
whether he actually believed it. The evidence, however, is clear and decisive; Nietzsche did articulate
and endorse a form of panpsychism, from his late 20s through the end of his life. Already in 1872
he observed “that the impact, the influence of one atom upon another is likewise something which
presupposes sensation” (1979: 35) – indicative of an early orientation toward panpsychism.
     Among Nietzsche’s central metaphysical claims is the theory of ‘will to power’ (der Wille zur
Macht). Appearing in his unpublished notebooks as early as 1876, the phrase shows up repeatedly
in his various writings right until the very end. But its precise meaning is a matter of dispute. At a
minimum, it seems to express Nietzsche’s belief that all human motivation and actions are, at root,
strivings for power of some sort. And he is clear that all living things likewise act on behalf of, or seek,
power. The final extension of will to power to the inorganic world, however, generates much debate;
it’s here that panpsychism becomes explicit. I refer to this as the ‘ontological will to power’ thesis.
     In much the same manner as Schopenhauer, Nietzsche suggests in several passages that things are,
in themselves, will to power. The large majority of these appear in the notebooks, and many have
been reproduced in the posthumous book The Will to Power (1906). Only in two instances did he
publish explicitly ontological references to will to power. And only in one – in Beyond Good and
Evil – does he give anything like an extended argument.
     Consider the following passages. These are among his first clear ontological references, and all
date from 1885. For example:


                                                     62
                                    Panpsychism in the 19th Century


     The victorious concept “force” . . . still needs to be completed: an inner will must be
     ascribed to it, which I designate as “will to power,” i.e. as an insatiable desire to manifest
     power. . . . [O]ne is obliged to understand all motion, all “appearances,” all “laws,” only as
     symptoms of an inner event, and to employ man as an analogy to this end.
                                                                               (1906/1967: § 619)

Elsewhere he casts it in terms of causation and forces. “There is absolutely no other kind of causality
than that of will upon will. Not explained mechanistically” (§ 658). And yet more explicitly:

     “Attraction” and “repulsion” in a purely mechanistic sense are complete fictions: a word.
     We cannot think of an attraction divorced from an intention. The will to take possession of
     a thing or to defend oneself against it and repel it – that we “understand.”
                                                                                        (§ 627)

Section 655 remarks on “the will to power in every combination of forces,” and observes that “the
entire distinction” between the organic and the inorganic “is a prejudice.” If all this appears vague,
we have the strikingly explicit statement in section 1067: “This world is the will to power – and nothing
besides! And you yourselves are also this will to power – and nothing besides!”
    The following year he published Beyond Good and Evil. Among the more interesting passages is this:

     Granted finally that one succeeded in explaining our entire instinctual life as the develop-
     ment and ramification of one basic form of will – as will to power, as is my theory . . . [then]
     one would have acquired the right to define all efficient force unequivocally as: will to power.
     The world seen from within, the world described and defined according to its “intelligible
     character” – it would be “will to power” and nothing else.
                                                                                (1886/1973: § 36)

The passage is clear and explicit, but unfortunately Nietzsche elected to cast it in provisional and
conditional terms, leading some to argue that he never really endorsed the view. But seen in light
of his many other passages, over many years, it’s clear that he was making a positive metaphysical
claim here.
    In 1887, a passing comment appears in On the Genealogy of Morals. In the Second Essay he makes
reference to “the theory that in all events a will to power is operating” (§ 12).8 But unfortunately
there is no elaboration. Two notebook entries of the time, however, express a related sentiment: if
all extant things are will to power, and they continually express this will, then they are, in a sense,
alive: “Being – we have no idea of it apart from the idea of ‘living’ – How can anything dead ‘be’?”
(1906/1967: § 582). And again: “ ‘Being’ as universalization of the concept ‘life’ (breathing), ‘having
a soul,’ ‘willing, effecting,’ ‘becoming’ ” (§ 581).
    In Nietzsche’s final working year, 1888, we find several relevant passages in Will to Power:

•	   A quantum of power is designated by the effect it produces and that which it resists. . . . [E]very
     atom affects the whole of being. . . . That is why I call it a quantum of ‘will to power’ (§ 634).
•	   My idea is that every specific body strives to become master over all space and to extend its force
     (– its will to power) and to thrust back all that resists its extension (§ 636).
•	   [My theory would be] that all driving force is will to power, that there is no other physical,
     dynamic or psychic force except this (§ 688).
•	   The will to accumulate force is special to the phenomena of life, to nourishment, procreation,
     inheritance – to society, state, custom, authority. Should we not be permitted to assume this will
     as a motive cause in chemistry, too? – and in the cosmic order? (§ 689).


                                                   63
                                                     David Skrbina


•	   [L]ife is merely a special case of the will to power (§ 692).
•	   [T]he innermost essence of being is will to power (§ 693).

The evidence thus shows that Nietzsche did seriously entertain the ontological, panpsychic thesis of
will to power for most of his productive life. Published statements are rare, but the repeated notebook
entries show that he continued to find value in the idea. He surely would not have continued to
remark on the ontological thesis if at any point he found it to be irrelevant or untrue.
    Nietzsche’s untimely demise in 1900 not only brought the century to a close, it marked the end
of perhaps the golden age of panpsychism in the West. It is true, there would be major panpsychist
philosophers working into the 20th century, most notably James, Bergson, Whitehead, and in a less
explicit manner, Russell. But overall the movement was on the decline. Scientific materialism and
logical positivism would drive out classical metaphysics, and panpsychism along with it.
    Fortunately this would be a temporary condition. The positivist stranglehold on philosophy has
lessened in recent decades, and at least since the mid-1990s, the way has become clear for a renewed
examination of panpsychism. Once again, as before, it is considered a viable and respectable approach
to understanding the nature of mind.


                                                         Notes
1	 .	 Garvey (2006), for example, rates it among the top 20 books of all time.
 	2.	 Along with Aristotle, Plato, Goethe, and Kant, Spinoza is among the most-cited individuals in the book.
  	3.	 Reading ‘mind’ for Geist.
   	4.	 Recently this argument has become known as “Russellian,” but in fact Schopenhauer articulated it more
            than 100 years earlier.
    	5.	 This is closely aligned with Spinoza’s parallelism. But Spinoza goes further and views the two parallel
            sequences as identical; see Ethics (2p7).
     	6.	 For a recent discussion of this subject, in light of panpsychism, see Skrbina (2013).
      	7.	 For one such analysis, see Skrbina (2009b).
       	8.	 “als mit der Theorie eines in allem Geschehn sich abspielenden Macht-Willens.” Geschehn may be read as ‘happen-
            ings’ or ‘occurrences.’


                                                   Bibliography
Butler, S. (1880/1910). Unconscious Memory. London: Longmans, Green.
Clifford, W. K. (1874/1903). ‘Body and Mind’. In Lectures and Essays, vol. 2. London: Macmillan.
Clifford, W. K. (1878). ‘On the Nature of Things in Themselves’. Mind, 3 (9): 57–67.
Fechner, G. (1848/1946). ‘Nanna, or on the Soul-Life of Plants’. In R. Lowrie (trans.), Religion of a Scientist. New
    York: Pantheon.
Fechner, G. (1861/1946). ‘On the Soul-Question’. In R. Lowrie (trans.), Religion of a Scientist. New York:
    Pantheon.
Garvey, J. (2006). The Twenty Greatest Philosophy Books. London: Bloomsbury.
Haeckel, E. (1892). ‘Our Monism’. Monist, 2 (4).
Haeckel, E. (1895). Monism as Connecting Religion and Science. Trans. J. Gilchrist. London: A. and C. Black.
Haeckel, E. (1899/1929). The Riddle of the Universe. Trans. J. McCabe. London: Watts.
Haeckel, E. (1904). The Wonders of Life. Trans. J. McCabe. London: Watts.
James, W. (1909/1996). A Pluralistic Universe. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press.
Lotze, R. H. (1856–64/1971). Microcosmos. Trans. E. Hamilton and E. Jones. Edinburgh: T&T Clark.
Mach, E. (1883/1942). The Science of Mechanics. Trans. T. McCormack. London: Open Court Publishing.
Nietzsche, F. (1886/1973). Beyond Good and Evil. Trans. R. Hollingdale. London: Penguin.
Nietzsche, F. (1887/1967). On the Genealogy of Morals. Trans. W. Kaufmann. New York: Random House.
Nietzsche, F. (1906/1967). The Will to Power. Trans. W. Kaufmann and R. Hollingdale. New York: Random House.
Nietzsche, F. (1979). Philosophy and Truth. Ed. D. Breazeale. New York: Humanities Press.
Peirce, C. (1891). ‘The Architecture of Theories’. Monist, 1 (1). (Reprinted in N. Houser and J. W. Kloesel (eds.),
    The Essential Peirce, vol. 1. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1992.).


                                                            64
                                       Panpsychism in the 19th Century


Peirce, C. (1892a). ‘The Law of Mind’. Monist, 2 (2). (Reprinted in N. Houser and J. W. Kloesel (eds.), The
    Essential Peirce, vol. 1. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1992.).
Peirce, C. (1892b). ‘Man’s Glassy Essence’. Monist, 3 (1). (Reprinted in N. Houser and J. W. Kloesel (eds.), The
    Essential Peirce, vol. 1. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press, 1992.).
Prince, M. (1885/1975). ‘The Nature of Mind and the Human Automatism’. In The Origins of Psychology, vol. 1.
    Alan Liss.
Prince, M. (1904). ‘The Identification of Mind and Matter’. Philosophical Review, 13 (4): 444–51.
Royce, J. (1892/1955). Spirit of Modern Philosophy. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Royce, J. (1898/1915). Studies of Good and Evil. New York: Appleton.
Royce, J. (1899–1901). The World and the Individual. New York: Macmillan.
Schopenhauer, A. (1819/1969). The World as Will and Representation. Trans. E. F. Payne, vol. 1. New York: Dover.
Schopenhauer, A. (1836/1993). On the Will in Nature. Trans. E. F. Payne. Oxford: Berg.
Schopenhauer, A. (1851/1974). Parerga and Paralipomena. Trans. E. F. Payne, vol. 2. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Skrbina, D. (2009a). ‘Panpsychism in History’. In D. Skrbina (ed.), Mind That Abides. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Skrbina, D. (2009b). ‘Minds, Objects, and Relations’. In D. Skrbina (ed.), Mind That Abides. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Skrbina, D. (2013). ‘Ethics, Eco-Philosophy, and Universal Sympathy’. Dialogue and Universalism, 23 (4): 59–74.
Skrbina, D. (2017). Panpsychism in the West (revised edition). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Strong, C. (1904). ‘Dr. Morton Prince and Panpsychism’. Psychological Review, 11 (1): 67–9.




                                                       65
                             7
                       WILLIAM JAMES,
                      PURE EXPERIENCE,
                      AND PANPSYCHISM
                                          Andrew Bailey


William James (1842–1910) did not write very extensively about panpsychism. In all his voluminous
published writings the topic is discussed in only half a dozen places (and the position is mentioned
approvingly, but with no discussion, in a few others).1 In his lecture notes and unpublished manu-
scripts there is somewhat more exploration of the idea of panpsychism, but still James’ investigation
of the theme there is relatively limited.
    This relative reticence is quite surprising. The prospect of panpsychism – as James construed it – is
intimately connected to issues that were of deep and often lifelong interest to James, and what’s more
he appears to have been increasingly aware of this as his thoughts developed from the 1890s onwards.
These issues include the status of metaphysical monism versus dualism, and of a broadly ‘empiricist’
temper to human thought as opposed to a ‘rationalist’ one; the possibility of free will; the nature of
the self, and its relation to God or the absolute; and the evidence for ‘psychical’ or supernatural phe-
nomena such as telepathy, extrasensory perception, or communication with the dead.
    James’ lack of extensive overt attention to the issue is also surprising because panpsychism was
very much a ‘live option’ at the time he was writing. James read, was influenced by or sympathetic
to, and responded to, such panpsychist (in one way or another) authors as Charles A. Strong (1903),
Henri Bergson (1907), Morton Prince (1904), Gustav Fechner (1861), William Kingdon Clifford
(1874, 1878), Ernst Haeckel (1893), Josiah Royce (1892), and Gerardus Heymans (1905).
    Why, then, was James – not an author to shy away from speculation, or one unwilling to follow
a suggestive train of thought to see where it led – relatively silent on the topic of panpsychism? The
answer, I suggest, is that panpsychism, while attractive or even necessary to him, gave James diffi-
culties: the dualist or idealist forms of panpsychism that seemed to be available to him were not a
good fit with – indeed, appeared to directly contradict – some of the central tenets of the pluralist
radical empiricism that he was developing. As a result, James must have found himself reluctant to
clearly state an allegiance to panpsychism in any of the various forms in which it was then under-
stood. Yet, something panpsych-ish was evidently appealing to James’ intellectual sensibilities, and
was even something that might solve some of the remaining difficulties he felt with his radical
empiricism. The result, I will argue here, is that we can trace in James’ writings a unique form of
panpsychism – or perhaps better a panprotopsychism – that does not resemble the leading (dualist
or idealist) panpsychisms of his day nor is it a form of the perhaps somewhat more modern neutral
monist forms of panpsychism, but is something else again.
    I will begin by summarizing James’ account of consciousness and its place in his metaphysics
of pure experience. Although there is interpretive disagreement over whether James’ account of


                                                   66
                             William James, Pure Experience, and Panpsychism


experience is consistent or complete, either over the span of his writings or in its final form, I shall
ignore that controversy here. My own view is that, at least in its broad strokes, a unified picture of
the mind and its place ‘in’ the world can be seen emerging from James’ writings, and that his later
positions are consistent with and amplify his earlier views rather than rejecting them (Bailey 1998).
    At the core of James’ stance on consciousness is his close attention to the scope and limits of what
is delivered through experience – his ‘radical empiricism’ has its roots in even the earliest of James’
work on psychology. In addition, a common thread in his work on consciousness is the rejection of
various dualities both within conscious experience and between consciousness and everything else;
this compulsive blurring of ontological lines leads ultimately to James’ metaphysics of ‘pure experi-
ence’ – which is not a monism but a cheerful pluralism.
    According to James, “[t]he first and foremost concrete fact which everyone will affirm to belong
to his inner experience is the fact that consciousness of some sort goes on” (1892: 140).2 That is, states of
consciousness exist, and – James asserts – form the basic data of the science of psychology. This posi-
tive thesis, however, is coupled with a well-known deflationary stance towards consciousness: while
James is keen to assert that “thought goes on” (1890: 225), his view is that this is pretty much all
that is delivered through introspection. He presents the following well-known list of what we know
about consciousness from the first-person (1890, Chapter IX):3

1.	   Every thought is part of a personal consciousness;
2.	   Within each personal consciousness thought is always changing;
3.	   Within each personal consciousness thought is sensibly continuous;
4.	   Thought always appears to deal with objects independent of itself; and
5.	   Thought is selectively attentive.

Consciousness, as we actually experience it, amounts to nothing more than a sequence of thoughts
characterized by these five aspects: indeed, “I believe that ‘consciousness,’ when once it has evapo-
rated to this estate of pure diaphaneity, . . . is on the point of disappearing altogether. It is the name
of a nonentity” (1904a: 477).
    Here, according to James, is what consciousness isn’t: It isn’t a container through which thoughts
pass – it is the flux-like stream of thought itself and is natively selective. It isn’t a soul or ego behind
or within our experience; that is, we have no empirical, introspective evidence for such a thing. It
isn’t even identifiable as “a kind of impalpable inner flowing” (1904a: 479), the residuum postulated
by the neo-Kantians of James’ day even after they had abolished the dualism between knower and
known.

      It seems as if consciousness as an inner activity were rather a postulate than a sensibly given
      fact, the postulate, namely, of a knower as correlative to all this known; and as if ‘sciousness’
      might be a better word by which to describe it. But ‘sciousness postulated as an hypothesis’
      is practically a very different thing from ‘states of consciousness apprehended with infallible
      certainty by an inner sense.’
                                                                                         (1892: 400)

    Furthermore, according to James, careful attention to the deliverances of introspection reveals that
(a) we have no direct evidence that the stream of thought is a different kind of substance than the
rest of the world; and (b) we have no direct evidence for any kind of duality between content and
consciousness. Although we may suppose that we perceive our mental life

      as a sort of interior current, active, light, fluid, delicate, diaphanous, so to speak, and abso-
      lutely opposed to whatever is material . . . I believe . . . that this sort of consciousness is a


                                                     67
                                               Andrew Bailey


     pure chimera, and that the sum of concrete realities which the word consciousness should
     cover deserves quite a different description.
                                                                              (1905b: 56–60)

And although we may suppose that conscious thought is made up of content plus a mode of pres-
entation of that content,

     [e]xperience, I believe, has no such inner duplicity; and the separation of it into conscious-
     ness and content comes, not by way of subtraction, but by way of addition – the addition,
     to a given concrete piece of it, of other sets of experiences. . . . [A] given undivided portion
     of experience, taken in one context of associates, play[s] the part of a knower, of a state of
     mind, of ‘consciousness’; while in a different context the same undivided bit of experience
     plays the part of a thing known, of an objective ‘content.’
                                                                                         (1904a: 480)

    The remaining dualism – “since [experience] can figure in both groups simultaneously we have
every right to speak of it as subjective and objective both at once” (1904a: 480) – is not a mysteri-
ous or a metaphysical dualism. “[I]t becomes verifiable and concrete. It is an affair of relations, it falls
outside, not inside, the single experience considered, and can always be particularized and defined”
(1904a: 480).
    Yet, for all of his emphasis on experience as a stand-alone phenomenon whose nature can be fully
grasped without resort to relations to things outside of itself – either a knower/attender/valuer or
a set of extra-mental referents – James was no idealist. On the other hand, he was not a materialist
either. Although consciousness is clearly not for James a separate substance from the physical, nor is
it to be identified with the physical; and this is true of James’ thought even during the period he was
writing his Principles of Psychology.

     Although we affirm that the coming to pass of thought is a consequence of mechanical
     laws . . . we do not in the least explain the nature of thought by affirming this dependence,
     and in that latter sense our proposition is not materialism.
                                                                                         (1892: 13)

    James lists many attributes of consciousness which he considers not to be predicable of the physi-
cal. For example, he dwells at some length on the fact that consciousness is unique in that it can have
‘ends’ or ‘interests’ (1878). Considered merely physically, the reactions of our brain

     cannot be properly talked of as ‘useful’ or ‘hurtful’ at all. . . . All that can be said of them is
     that if they occur in a certain way survival will as a matter of fact be their incidental conse-
     quence. The organs themselves, and the rest of the physical world, will, however, all the time
     be quite indifferent to this consequence, and would quite as cheerfully, the circumstances
     changed, compass the animal’s destruction.
                                                                                              (1890: 98)

   This has the additional consequence that the fundamental character of consciousness, for
James, is as a ‘fighter for ends.’ It is not purely cognitive – rather, cognition is subservient to ends
(1890: 141).
   Other central examples of non-physical predicates, for James, are the property of ‘knowing’ or
‘reporting’ and of being ‘personal.’ In addition, all sorts of things are true of ‘mental objects’ (that fire



                                                     68
                              William James, Pure Experience, and Panpsychism


may play over them and not affect them, that they only came into existence moments ago) that are
false of their corresponding ‘physical’ counterparts, and vice versa (1904a: 482).
    So, according to James, the raw data of science is experience and what experience pre-theoretically
reveals is that we have mental lives – a “personal consciousness” – but that this mental life is no more
and no less than the constant flux of a “stream of consciousness.” This flux is both thinner than we
assume, containing within itself no evidence of things beyond itself (such as an ego) but also richer
than we might have noticed because it has ‘built in’ many relations that we tend wrongly to treat as
external to, or superposed on, experience.

    Every examiner of the sensible life in concreto must see that relations of every sort, of time,
    space, difference, likeness, change, rate, cause, or what not, are just as integral members of
    the sensational flux as terms are, and that conjunctive relations are just as true members of
    the flux as disjunctive relations are.
                                                                                   (1909a: 279–80)

There is nothing about experience to show that it is ‘made of ’ something other than whatever makes
up the material world, yet there remains a clear distinction – revealed within experience – between
the physical and the mental. What, then, is the relationship between mind and world?

    My thesis is that if we start with the supposition that there is only one primal stuff or mate-
    rial in the world, a stuff of which everything is composed, and if we call that stuff ‘pure
    experience,’ then knowing can easily be explained as a particular sort of relation towards
    one another into which portions of pure experience may enter. The relation itself is a part
    of pure experience; one of its ‘terms’ becomes the subject or bearer of the knowledge, the
    knower, the other becomes the object known.
                                                                                      (1904a: 478)

   Thus James introduces his notion of ‘radical empiricism’ – that the most fundamental stuff is
not matter, nor mind, but pure experience. In a sense, both consciousness and the material (non-­
experiential) world are equally unreal.

    Let the case be what it may in others, I am as confident as I am of anything that, in myself,
    the stream of thinking (which I recognize emphatically as a phenomenon) is only a care-
    less name for what, when scrutinized, reveals itself to consist chiefly in the stream of my
    breathing. . . . The entity is fictitious, while thoughts in the concrete are fully real. But thoughts in the
    concrete are made of the same stuff as things are.
                                                                                                   (1904a: 491)

    James explores and motivates this idea with an example. We see a room, which commonsensi-
cally is a physical object in space, and which commonsensically we have ‘in our mind.’ How can the
room be in two places at once: the world and the mind? It might be that what is in the mind is only
a representation of the room; but “the reader’s sense of life” knows no intervening image but seems to
see the room immediately (1904a: 481). James’ solution to this puzzle is the following: “Reality is
apperception itself. . . . Our sensations are not small inner duplications of things, they are the things
themselves in so far as the things are presented to us. . . . [T]his present actuality by which [public
things] confront us, from which all our theoretical constructions are derived and to which they must
all return . . . is homogeneous – and not only homogeneous, but numerically one with a certain part
of our inner life” (1905b: 57).



                                                        69
                                              Andrew Bailey


   The commonsensical solution to the problem, James thus urges, is to hold that the room exists
in two places at once just as a single point can be on two lines at once: if it is at their intersection.
(1904a: 481). The two ‘lines’ or processes or sets of relations are:

a.	 the reader’s personal biography, a set of mental, ‘inner,’ operations.
b.	 the history of the house of which the room is part, a train of physical operations.

That these two groups of operations are “curiously incompatible” (as James emphasizes) is a matter
of their differing contexts only, “just as the same material thing may be both low and high, or small
and great, or bad and good, because of its relations to opposite parts of an environing world” (1904a:
485). The difference between things perceived and things imagined is not a difference in kind: “It is
simply that a present object has a vivacity and a clearness superior to those of the representation. . . .
But this present object, what is it in itself? Of what stuff is it made? Of the same stuff as the repre-
sentation. It is made of sensations; it is a thing perceived” (1905b: 58).
    So what kind of ‘stuff ’ is pure experience? According to James, there are as many stuffs as there
are ‘natures’ in the things experienced. If you ask what any one bit of pure experience is made of, the
answer is always the same: “It is made of that, of just what appears, of space, of intensity, of flatness,
brownness, heaviness, or what not” (1904a: 487). What then accounts for the contrast James recog-
nizes between the mental and the physical? As we might expect given the preceding, according to
James the ‘mental’ and ‘physical’ do not differ in their natures, but only in their relations. “The general
group of experiences that act . . . comes inevitably to be contrasted with the group whose members,
having identically the same natures, fail to manifest them in the ‘energetic’ way” (1904a: 489, my italics).
Thus, the thought of a fire is hot; the mental image of a metre-stick does have extension; it is just that
the fire fails to warm my body, and the imagined metre-stick need not be in a stable ‘spatial’ relation-
ship with other mental objects. “The two worlds differ, not by the presence of absence of extension,
but by the relations of the extensions which in both worlds exist” (1904a: 489).
    But how can one bit of pure experience know another? Indeed, how can a bit of pure experience
‘know’ anything? James has this to say:

     That which exists and constitutes the portion of truth that the word ‘Consciousness’ covers
     over is the susceptibility that the parts of experience possess to be reported or known. . . .
     This susceptibility is explained by the fact that certain experiences can lead some to others
     by means of distinctly characterized intermediary experiences, in such a fashion that some
     are found to play the role of things known, the others that of knowing subjects. . . . One
     can perfectly define these two roles without departing from the framework of experience
     itself and without invoking anything transcendent. . . . The attributes subject and object,
     represented and representative, thing and thought mean, then, a practical distinction that is
     of the utmost importance, but that is of a functional order only, and not at all ontological as
     classical dualism imagines it.
                                                                                     (1905b: 63–4)

    James’ point is not that only ‘mental’ experiences are connected together such that one experi-
ence leads to another – every experience, whether functionally mental or physical, whether ‘knower’
or ‘known’, blends seamlessly into a continuum. “Sensational experiences are their ‘own others,’ then,
both internally and externally. Inwardly they are one with their parts, and outwardly they pass con-
tinuously into their neighbors, so that events separated by years of time in a man’s life hang together
unbrokenly by the intermediary events” (1909a: 285). Rather, his idea is that there is a suite of rela-
tions that characterize experiences that ‘play the role’ of knowing subjects and another that is indi-
viduative of experiences ‘playing the role’ of things known.


                                                    70
                            William James, Pure Experience, and Panpsychism


   Finally, a point that James found rather pressing, how can my point of view – my self – be accounted
for? If ‘mind’ and ‘matter’ are fundamentally (intrinsically) the same, and all the universe is pure expe-
rience, then what is it that traces ‘my’ passage through ‘the external world’? What makes an experi-
ence part of my personal consciousness? James’ response, in part, is to say that

    the world experienced (otherwise called the ‘field of consciousness’) comes at all times with
    our body as its centre, centre of vision, centre of action, centre of interest. Where the body
    is is ‘here’; when the body acts is ‘now’; what the body touches is ‘this’; all other things are
    ‘there’ and ‘then’ and ‘that.’
                                                                                         (1905a: 9)

    That is, there is a constant relation (or type of relation) that all my experiences have in com-
mon – they are all related on one way or another to the set of experiences (changing over time) that
constitute my body.
    These then, in bare outline, are some of the main points of William James’ thinking about con-
sciousness and its place in the world. How does all of this relate to panpsychism?
    James himself seems to have considered his “philosophy of pure experience” to be a stepping
stone in the direction of panpsychism proper, but not yet to be panpsychic. In the concluding section
to “A World of Pure Experience” (1904b), James writes:

    With this we have the outlines of a philosophy of pure experience before us. At the
    outset of my chapter, I called it a mosaic philosophy. In actual mosaics the pieces are
    held together by their bedding, for which bedding the Substances, transcendental Egos,
    or Absolutes of other philosophies may be taken to stand. In radical empiricism there
    is no bedding; it is as if the pieces clung together by their edges, the transitions expe-
    rienced between them forming their cement. . . . Experience itself, taken at large, can
    grow by its edges. That one moment of it proliferates into the next by transitions which,
    whether conjunctive or disjunctive, continue the experiential tissue, can not, I contend,
    be denied. . . . These relations of continuous transition experienced are what make our
    experiences cognitive. In the simplest and completest cases the experiences are cognitive
    of one another. When one of them terminates a previous series of them with a sense of
    fulfilment, it, we say, is what those other experiences ‘had in view.’ The knowledge, in
    such a case, is verified; the truth is ‘salted down.’ Mainly, however, we live on speculative
    investments, or on our prospects only. . . . In this sense we at every moment can continue
    to believe in an existing beyond. . . . The beyond must, of course, always in our philosophy
    be itself of an experiential nature. If not a future experience of our own or a present one
    of our neighbor, it must be a thing in itself in Dr. Prince’s and Professor Strong’s sense of
    the term – that is, it must be an experience for itself whose relation to other things we
    translate into the action of molecules, ether-waves, or whatever else the physical symbols
    may be. . . . This opens the chapter of the relations of radical empiricism to panpsychism,
    into which I cannot enter now.
                                                                                  (1904b: 568–9)

   The contrast that James envisions here seems to be between a doctrine where everything that
exists is both “of an experiential nature” and part of a human personal consciousness (which is
a commitment of his philosophy of pure experience), and a view which supposes that there are
experiences which are not part of a human personal consciousness – that there are experiences ‘for
themselves’ which are not part of a mind; or alternatively, experiences that are part of a personal
consciousness but not a human consciousness – perhaps the minds of plants or animals (as Fechner


                                                   71
                                             Andrew Bailey


supposed, for example) or of some superhuman consciousness. It is this latter collection of views that
James thought of as a form of panpsychism.
    Although James appears to hold open these possibilities – and we will return to his positive stance
on panpsychism shortly – there are other variants on panpsychism that he is concerned to rule out,
in large part because they seemed to him incompatible with some of the commitments of radical
empiricism.
    Perhaps most importantly, he was unwilling to adopt the view that the world is any sense fun-
damentally mental: that the mental has any sort of priority over the physical. James was quite clear
that pure experience – even though it is, after all, experiential; indeed, whenever we encounter it
(though not necessarily always), part of a personal consciousness – is not inherently mental. In fact, it
is no more closely allied to the mental than it is to the physical. Experiences “having identically the
same natures” might be either mental or physical depending on how they stand in relations to other
experiences. Furthermore, at least in James’ view, this is not merely some ersatz physical: it is the very
physical world we meet with in experience, the empirical bedrock of science. Plants, animals, rocks,
fire, gravity, the predictions of the laws of physics and chemistry – all are perfectly real, non-mental,
correspond to our best science, and are constituted by pure experience.
    Secondly, famously, James would have found unconvincing any form of panpsychism that views
personal conscious states as being compounded from simpler psychic or protopsychic atoms. James
argued in Principles of Psychology (1890) that what he called ‘atomistic hylozoism’ or the doctrine of
‘primordial mind-dust’ cannot work.

    All the ‘combinations’ which we actually know are effects, wrought by the units said to be ‘com-
    bined,’ upon some entity other than themselves. Without this feature of a medium or
    vehicle, the notion of combination has no sense. . . . In other words, no possible number of
    entities (call them as you like, whether forces, material particles, or mental elements) can
    sum themselves together. Each remains, in the sum, what it always was; and the sum itself
    exists only for a bystander who happens to overlook the units and to apprehend the sum
    as such; or else it exists in the shape of some other effect on an entity external to the sum
    itself. Let it not be objected that H2 and O combine of themselves into ‘water,’ and thence-
    forward exhibit new properties. They do not. The ‘water’ is just the old atoms in the new
    position, H-O-H; the ‘new properties’ are just their combined effects, when in this position,
    upon external media, such as our sense-organs and the various reagents on which water
    may exert its properties and be known. . . . Where the elemental units are supposed to be
    feelings, the case is in no wise altered. Take a hundred of them, shuffle them and pack them
    as close together as you can (whatever that may mean); still each remains the same feel-
    ing it always was, shut in its own skin, windowless, ignorant of what the other feelings are
    and mean. There would be a hundred-and-first feeling there, if, when a group or series of
    such feelings were set up, a consciousness belonging to the group as such should emerge. And
    this 101st feeling would be a totally new fact; the 100 original feelings might, by a curious
    physical law, be a signal for its creation, when they came together; but they would have no
    substantial identity with it, nor it with them, and one could never deduce the one from
    the others, or (in any intelligible sense) say that they evolved it. Take a sentence of a dozen
    words, and take twelve men and tell to each one word. Then stand the men in a row or jam
    them in a bunch, and let each think of his word as intently as he will; nowhere will there
    be a consciousness of the whole sentence.
                                                                                    (1890: 158–60)

   In Principles of Psychology James briefly considers the prospects for an uncompounding ‘mind
dust’ theory, which he calls polyzoism, or multiple monadism (1890: 179–80). On this view each


                                                   72
                             William James, Pure Experience, and Panpsychism


neuron – or even each atom – has its own consciousness, unconnected to all the others; the fact of
our own individual, unitary consciousness then requires a “central cell” or “arch-cell”, to which all
other neurons in the brain are subservient. But James admits this is both physiologically and meta-
physically implausible. In short, according to James, any sort of mind-dust theory – what Chalmers
calls “constitutive panpsychism” (2016) – must be abandoned.
    Other variants or components of panpsychism are also ruled out explicitly by James in his unpub-
lished writings. In his manuscript notes for his 1906–7 course at Stanford, Philosophy D, “General
Problems of Philosophy” (see James 1988), he discusses what he terms ‘weak’ panpsychism – which
he equates with epiphenomenalism – and ‘strong’ panpsychism, which he calls idealistic panpsychism.
He finds fault with both of them.
    Thus, he was opposed to the kind of double-aspect or neutral monist theory that treats the mental
as something like the ‘subjective aspect’ or intrinsic nature of the building blocks of reality while the
physical is their ‘objective aspect’ or extrinsic nature. (E.g. Schopenhauer 1859: Bk II, § 17; Peirce
1892; Strawson 2006). James’ objection to this was that it rendered the mental epiphenomenal: it
reserves all the causal or ‘active’ power for the physical and renders the mental a mere subjective
accompaniment. As is well known, James argued vehemently against such a position (1879, 1890) –
he was opposed to any view that “banishes [consciousness] to a limbo of causal inertness” (1890:
135), where it exists more like a “melody,” or a “shadow” than like a “real thing.” “It is to my mind
quite inconceivable that consciousness should have nothing to do with a business which it so faithfully
attends” (1890: 136).
    He also had qualms throughout his life about absolute idealism, and it was this that led him to
withhold his allegiance to strong or idealistic panpsychism. Part of the problem, as we have seen,
is idealism’s tendency to privilege the mental over the physical, which James rejected. His robustly
commonsense view was that consciousness is causal (and moreover causal in a way that the physical
is not – it is a chooser of ends), but that not only consciousness is causal; the physical world also exerts
causal powers, in the ways described by science. Furthermore, James was throughout his life a meta-
physical pluralist and he found himself unable to whip up real enthusiasm in himself for absolutism
or indeed any form of austere monism. (His ‘pure experience,’ recall, far from being monistic, has as
many different and diverse concrete natures as are required to account for the “blooming, buzzing
confusion” of our experienced reality: while the nature of fire as a physical phenomenon may be the
same as that of fire as a conscious experience, the nature of fire – though still ‘pure experience’ – may
be quite different from the nature of an apple or a desk.)
    James’ pluralism is rooted in his empiricism, and also in his commitment to leaving a space for
free will – for individual choices to make a difference – in the universe. “Instead of defining the parts
in light of the (unexperienced) whole, empiricism begins with the parts experienced, and proceeds
towards whatever wholes seem factually indicated” (Lamberth 1999: 194). This leaves space for
genuine novelty, and also, since our own actions influence the flux, it leaves room for genuine moral-
ity. What happens depends not on some universal telos or final cause but on the actual, piecemeal,
contingent playing out of history.
    Let us now turn away from James’ negative pronouncements on panpsychism and towards the
sources of its undeniable attraction for him. Put a bit crudely, these attractions were mainly religious
and supernatural for James, though they do also address the rather thorny metaphysical question of
how pure experience as we encounter it in our own personal consciousness is to be understood – if
it can be understood – as potentially existing apart from any human personal consciousness.
    On the question of God, James writes in A Pluralistic Universe (1909a):

     Only one thing is certain, and that is the result of our criticism of the absolute: the only way
     to escape from the paradoxes and perplexities that a consistently thought-out monistic uni-
     verse suffers from as from a species of auto-intoxication – the mystery of the ‘fall’ namely,


                                                    73
                                               Andrew Bailey


    of reality lapsing into appearance, truth into error, perfection into imperfection; of evil, in
    short; the mystery of universal determinism, of the block-universe eternal and without a
    history, etc.; – the only way of escape, I say, from all this is to be frankly pluralistic and assume
    that the superhuman consciousness, however vast it may be, has itself an external environ-
    ment, and consequently is finite.
                                                                                             (1909a: 140)

   James was interested not only in holding open a space for God (or at least something god-like)
in his metaphysics, but also in the role of ‘superhuman consciousness’ in giving us a reason to feel
at home in the universe. In the first few pages of A Pluralistic Universe, James distinguishes between
cynical and sympathetic philosophical outlooks. On the former view (which, though dualistic, is a
view James associates with ‘narrow’ empiricism and with a materialist approach to the universe),
the human ‘soul’ is foreign to the universe. On the latter, there is no sharp distinction to be made
between soul and matter – humanity is much more at home with, and integrated into, the non-
human universe. This tends towards a ‘spiritualistic’ philosophy, where there is some spiritual – and
hence soul-like – principle central to the universe.

    Materialistic and spiritualistic philosophies are the rival types that result: the former defin-
    ing the world so as to leave man’s soul upon it as a soil of outside passenger or alien, while
    the latter insists that the intimate and human must surround and underlie the brutal. This
    latter is the spiritual way of thinking.
                                                                                         (1909a: 23)

   In this context, James proposes an alliance between “the thicker and the more radical empiricism”
and the religious life.

    We are indeed internal parts of God and not external creations, on any possible reading
    of the panpsychic system. Yet because God is not the absolute, but is himself a part when
    the system is conceived pluralistically, his functions can be taken as not wholly dissimilar
    to those of the other smaller parts, – as similar to our functions consequently. Having an
    environment, being in time, and working out a history just like ourselves, he escapes from
    the foreignness from all that is human, of the static timeless perfect absolute.
                                                                                     (1909a: 138)

    In addition, James’ interest in psychical phenomena – which he had from his early years of
training as an MD right until his death (for a period he was the president of the Society for
Psychical Research) – led him to postulate that the most reasonable explanation for certain
supernatural phenomena, such as telepathy, extrasensory perception, or communication with the
dead, was the impingement of some broader cosmic consciousness upon our individual personal
consciousness.

    Every bit of us at every moment is part and parcel of a wider self, it quivers along various
    radii like the wind-rose on a compass, and the actual in it is continuously one with possibles
    not yet in our present sight. And just as we are co-conscious with our own momentary
    margin, may not we ourselves form the margin of some more really central self in things
    which is co-conscious with the whole of us? May not you and I be confluent in a higher
    consciousness, and confluently active there, tho we now know it not?
                                                                                     (1909a: 131)



                                                     74
                            William James, Pure Experience, and Panpsychism


  That is, though perhaps without lending it his full-throated support, James was clearly attracted to
what we might now call a form of ‘cosmopsychism’ ( Jaskolla and Buck 2012; Shani 2015; Goff 2017).

    Out of my experience, such as it is (and it is limited enough) one fixed conclusion dog-
    matically emerges, and that is this, that we with our lives are like islands in the sea, or like
    trees in the forest. The maple and the pine may whisper to each other with their leaves,
    and Conanicut and Newport hear each other’s fog-horns. But the trees also commingle
    their roots in the darkness underground, and the islands also hang together through the
    ocean’s bottom. Just so there is a continuum of cosmic consciousness, against which our
    individuality builds but accidental fences, and into which our several minds plunge as into
    a mother-sea or reservoir. Our “normal” consciousness is circumscribed for adaptation
    to our external earthly environment, but the fence is weak in spots, and fitful influences
    from beyond leak in, showing the otherwise unverifiable common connection. Not only
    psychic research, but metaphysical philosophy, and speculative biology are led in their own
    ways to look with favor on some such “panpsychic” view of the universe as this. Assuming
    this common reservoir of consciousness to exist, this bank upon which we all draw, and in
    which so many of earth’s memories must in some way be stored, or mediums would not
    get at them as they do, the question is, What is its own structure? What is its inner topog-
    raphy? . . . What are the conditions of individuation or insulation in this mother-sea? To
    what tracts, to what active systems functioning separately in it, do personalities correspond?
    Are individual “spirits” constituted there? How numerous, and of how many hierarchic
    orders may these then be? How permanent? How transient? And how confluent with one
    another may they become?
                                                                                      (1909b: 589)

    Where does all this leave us? I shall conclude by trying to summarize a sort of Jamesian panpsy-
chism (or, since he insists that it is not the mental that is fundamental, but ‘pure experience’ which
is neither yet potentially both mental and physical) panprotopsychism. It is, at least, a position quite
distinct from most of those that ply the main currents of the contemporary panpsychist debate.
I leave it to the reader to judge how attractive or plausible the position it is.
    For James, it is not true that the fundamental building blocks of the universe are conscious. Those
building blocks – or, in Jamesian terms, substantive parts of the flux, which is itself smoothly and
endlessly continuous – are pure experiences. But to be a pure experience, for James, is not thereby to
be conscious or in any sense self-aware or a knower. A pure experience has, intrinsically, a robust and
distinct nature – and the diversity of natures is at least as great as the diversity of our experience –
but it is in itself neither physical nor mental. It ‘becomes’ physical or mental only in virtue of being
embedded in a set of relations with other pure experiences . . . and (I take it) every pure experience
is so embedded, such that all pure experiences are either mental or physical.
    James notes that

    [C]onsciousness, however small, is an illegitimate birth in any philosophy that starts with-
    out it, and yet professes to explain all facts by continuous evolution. If evolution is to work
    smoothly, consciousness in some shape must have been present at the very origins of things.
                                                                                       (1890: 149)

And James’ ultimate philosophy satisfies this condition, not by making consciousness a sort of
‘mind-dust’ that is sprinkled on the original components of the universe, but by marking the differ-
ence between the conscious and the non-conscious by a set of relations that can be participated in



                                                  75
                                                   Andrew Bailey


naturalistically by original, non-conscious elements. No additional magic ‘glow’ is needed. Similarly,
the emergence of a personal consciousness, a self, is to be explained wholly in terms of relations (pri-
marily, relations between experiences and another set of privileged experiences that characterise a
body). This is not, though, functionalism (or at least it doesn’t seem so to me) because the what-it-is-
likeness of consciousness – the heat of fire or the taste of blackberries – is contributed by the intrinsic
nature of the pure experience. Finally, significantly, this intrinsic nature is the same as the intrinsic
nature of (objective) fire and blackberries – this is why our being related in certain ways to these
pure experiences counts as knowing, not just about how blackberries seem to us, but how they are.
    Finally, although each pure experience we encounter is, perforce, part of our personal conscious-
ness (otherwise we would not be encountering it) – even if a physical thing, it is on a trajectory
that crosses the trajectory of our conscious point-of-view – there is (for James) something attractive
about a view that answers the question: what is a pure experience when we do not encounter it?
with the suggestion: it is a part of a (pluralistic, non-absolute) cosmic consciousness. On this basis,
the universe is made a friendly, familiar place rather than an impersonal one. Is there evidence for
its truth? James hoped there was, through religious experience and through otherwise unexplained
psychic phenomena. Perhaps in this sense everything is, after all, part of a mind.


                                                      Notes
  	1.	 The key passages are as follows. Panpsychism is mentioned for the first time by James, offhand but appar-
       ently approvingly though in the same breath as idealism, in 1881’s “Reflex Action and Theism”. Chapter 6,
       “The Mind-Stuff Theory,” in Principles of Psychology (1890), although not directed at panpsychism per
       se – but rather at an atomistic, compositional theory of mind – is often taken to be a classic early expression
       of the combination problem for panpsychism. In Varieties of Religious Experience (1902) James expresses his
       own sympathy for panpsychism, and in the lecture notes for his course on philosophy at Harvard (1902–03)
       he expresses his allegiance for the first time to “pluralistic panpsychism.” The 1904–5 lectures that became
       his Essays in Radical Empiricism (1912) reconfirm this panpsychist commitment, as did his 1907–8 Hib-
       bert Lectures, published as A Pluralistic Universe (1909a). In both 1904’s “A World of Pure Experience”
       and 1905’s “The Experience of Activity” James notes that radical empiricism is related to panpsychism, but
       declines to enlarge on those connections. In “The Confidences of a ‘Psychical Researcher’ ” (1909b) he pos-
       tulates a ‘cosmic consciousness’ – a possibility he also mentions in Varieties of Religious Experience – as a
       way of explaining certain parapsychological phenomena.
	2.	 Italicized phrases in this and all the following quotations are in the original, unless otherwise noted.
 	3.	 See also James (1884) and (1892: Chap. XI).


                                                   References
Bailey, Andrew (1998). ‘The Strange Attraction of Sciousness: William James on Consciousness’. Transactions of
    the C. S. Peirce Society, 34 (2): 414–34.
Bergson, Henri (1907). L’Évolution créatrice. Paris: Félix Alcan. (Creative Evolution, trans. Arthur Mitchell. New
    York: Henry Holt, 1911.).
Chalmers, David (2016). ‘Panpsychism and Panprotopsychism’. In Godehard Brüntrup and Ludwig Jaskolla
    (eds.), Panpsychism. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 19–47.
Clifford, W. K. (1874). ‘Body and Mind’. Fortnightly Review, December. (Reprinted in Lectures and Essays, vol. II.
    London: Macmillan, 1879.).
Clifford, W. K. (1878). ‘On the Nature of Things in Themselves’. Mind, January. (Reprinted in Lectures and
    Essays, vol. II. London: Macmillan, 1879.).
Fechner, Gustav (1861). Ueber die Seelenfrage. Leipzig: C.F. Amelang. (On the Soul-Question, trans. W. Lowrie, in
    Religion of a Scientist: Selections from Gustav Th. Fechner. New York: Pantheon, 1946.).
Goff, Philip (2017). Consciousness and Fundamental Reality. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Haeckel, Ernst (1893). Der Monismus als Band zwischen Religion und Wissenschaft. Bonn: Emil Strauss. (Monism as
    Connecting Religion and Science, trans. J. Gilchrist, London: A. & C. Black, 1895.).
Heymans, Gerardus (1905). Einführung in die Metaphysik, auf Grundlage der Erfahrung. Leipzig: Barth.




                                                         76
                               William James, Pure Experience, and Panpsychism


James, William (1878/1978). ‘Remarks on Spencer’s Definition of Mind as Correspondence’. In Essays in Phi-
    losophy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, pp. 27–8.
James, William (1879). ‘Are We Automata?’ Mind, 4 (13): 1–22.
James, William (1881/1897). ‘Reflex Action and Theism’. In The Will to Believe: And Other Essays in Popular
    Philosophy. New York: Longmans, Green & Co., pp. 111–44.
James, William (1884). ‘On Some Omissions of Introspective Psychology’. Mind, 9 (33): 1–26.
James, William (1890/1950). The Principles of Psychology, vol. I. New York: Henry Holt. (References are to the
    Dover edition).
James, William (1892/1984). Psychology: Briefer Course. New York: Henry Holt. (References are to the Harvard
    University Press edition).
James, William (1902). Varieties of Religious Experience. New York: Longmans, Green & Co.
James, William (1904a). ‘Does “Consciousness” Exist?’ Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods,
    1 (18): 477–91.
James, William (1904b). ‘A World of Pure Experience’. The Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods,
    1 (20): 533–43; 1 (21): 561–70.
James, William (1905a). ‘The Experience of Activity’. The Psychological Review, 12 (1): 1–17.
James, William (1905b). ‘La Notion de Conscience’. Archives de Psychologie, 5: 17. (References are to the transla-
    tion by Jonathan Bricklin, Journal of Consciousness Studies, 12 (7): 55–64, 2005.)
James, William (1909a). A Pluralistic Universe. New York: Longmans, Green & Co.
James, William (1909b). ‘The Confidences of a “Psychical Researcher” ’. The American Magazine, 68: 580–9.
James, William (1912). Essays in Radical Empiricism. New York: Longmans, Green & Co.
James, William (1988). Manuscript Lectures. Ed. I. K. Skrupskelis. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Jaskolla, L., and Buck, A. J. (2012). ‘Does Panexperiential Holism Solve the Combination Problem?’ Journal of
    Consciousness Studies, 19 (9–10): 190–9.
Lamberth, David C. (1999). William James and the Metaphysics of Experience. Cambridge: Cambridge University
    Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1892). ‘Man’s Glassy Essence’. The Monist, 3 (1): 1–22.
Prince, Morton (1904). ‘The Identification of Mind and Matter’. Philosophical Review, 13 (4): 444–51.
Royce, Josiah (1892). The Spirit of Modern Philosophy. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Schopenhauer, Arthur (1859). Der Welt als Wille und Vorstellung, 3rd edition. Leipzig.
Shani, Itay (2015). ‘Cosmopsychism: A Holistic Approach to the Metaphysics of Experience’. Philosophical Papers,
    44 (3): 389–437.
Strawson, Galen (2006). Consciousness and Its Place in Nature: Does Physicalism Entail Panpsychism? Ed. A. Freeman.
    Exeter: Imprint Academic.
Strong, C. A. (1903). Why the Mind Has a Body. New York: Macmillan.




                                                        77
                              8
                      OVERCOMING THE
                      CARTESIAN LEGACY
               Whitehead’s Revisionary Metaphysics

                                       Pierfrancesco Basile


        We are now so used to the materialistic way of looking at things, which has been rooted
        in our literature by the genius of the 17th century, that it is with some difficulty that we
        understand the possibility of another mode of approach to the problems of nature.
                                                            —Alfred North Whitehead (SMW: 421)


                           1.  Introduction: The Language Problem
In terms of current philosophical classifications, Whitehead is an exponent of “process philosophy.”2
Philosophical denominations are difficult to pin down to a precise definition. But in this case there
is a clear-cut criterion for distinguishing between process and non-process thinkers. Common sense
takes it for granted that all activities and happenings are to be traced back to some preexisting entity.
It is Anne, we say, who let our aunt’s precious cup fall on the ground; and the falling is not a ghostly
floating occurrence: it is the falling of the aunt’s cup. In our ordinary conceptual scheme, permanent
things have priority over events. They are, to use Peter Strawson’s apt terminology, the “basic par-
ticulars” (see Strawson 1959: 38–58).
    Whitehead does not question that the commonsense view is pragmatically useful. But he takes a
revisionary approach when questions of basic ontology are at stake. At a metaphysically fundamental
level, he posits processes rather than things as the building blocks of reality. The idea that the category
of process is ontologically fundamental is not easy to understand. What kinds of processes are basic?
How is their nature to be discovered? How are permanence and stability to be accounted for in a
world whose basic elements are in constant flux? Before considering Whitehead’s answers to these
questions a word is in order concerning one major difficulty that any process philosophy has to
face. Process metaphysics effects a radical alteration of our ordinary conceptions. Such modes of
thought are very old, however, and have impressed themselves upon our language. A truly revision-
ary metaphysics must therefore not solely provide a new conceptual scheme, but also a new language
in which to articulate it (PR: 11). As Whitehead rightly notices, the ontology of enduring things is
mirrored in the subject-predicate structure of our ordinary sentences. In order to correctly express a
radically different conceptual scheme one would thus have to revise not solely the available vocabu-
lary, but grammar as well (AI: 228). This sounds like an impossible task. It is as if the revisionary
metaphysician had to attempt either an extraordinary transmutation of ordinary language or to com-
municate his worldview from within a medium that incorporates opposite theoretical commitments.


                                                    78
                                    Overcoming the Cartesian Legacy


   How is one to deal with this difficulty? Whitehead takes the only course open to him and tries
to steer a middle path, twisting ordinary language in the hope to elicit new meanings. The (almost
legendary) obscurity of his books and the queerness of his terminology are not a result of incapacity,
but the proper response to a real problem. To appeal to this feature of his writings as an argument
against his philosophy would demonstrate failure in understanding the enterprise he is engaged in,
not superior philosophical acumen.


           2.  The Inner Nature of Being: The Phenomenological Perspective
The other fundamental doctrine in Whitehead’s metaphysics is his panpsychism or, as it is also some-
times called, his panexperientialism.3 Whitehead’s new metaphysics is offered as an alternative to

    the fixed scientific cosmology which presupposes the ultimate fact of an irreducible brute
    matter, or material, spread throughout space in a flux of configurations. In itself such mate-
    rial is senseless, valueless, purposeless. It just does what it does, following a fixed routine
    imposed by external relations which do not spring from the nature of its being.
                                                                                         (SMW: 17)

    As against this view, Whitehead raises what is nowadays called the hard problem of consciousness.
The absolute heterogeneity of mind and matter prevents us from understanding how the former could
be derived from the latter. Since human minds undoubtedly exist and have originated in the course
of evolution, he argues, they must be derived from constituents that are (at least in part) themselves
mental. This is a brief yet very powerful argument, provided that one admits that philosophy can-
not rest satisfied with a mere recording of facts, but must aim at an intellectual grasp of the nature
of things. For surely, there is nothing in the concept of a purely extended bit of matter that explains
why that bit must also be endowed with experiences.4
    What does this argument tell us about the intrinsic nature of reality? The rejection of materialism
is consistent with two different views of its basic principles: (1) on one conception, such principles
are psycho-physical units, that is, they possess a mental as well as a physical side; (2) on another (ide-
alistic, or as it should perhaps better be called, mentalistic) conception, such units are purely mental,
fully resolved in their experiential doings. Whitehead explicitly favors the psycho-physical concep-
tion. Nowhere does he attempt to reduce the physical world to a phenomenal appearance in the
way sometimes suggested by Leibniz, a philosopher Whitehead greatly admired. The best way to
overcome the mind/matter dualism (the “bifurcation of nature”) that has plagued modern thought
since Descartes is not by privileging mind over matter as the idealists do, but to elaborate a novel
conception in which matter and mind are viewed as different yet mutually correlated sides of a single
event. As he puts it, the world “is not merely physical, nor is it merely mental” (AI: 190).
    Isn’t panpsychism a ludicrous view, one that should be rejected without further ado by any think-
ing person?5 Charges of intrinsic implausibility are always difficult to adjudicate. The danger is that
we condemn as absurd all views inconsistent with our longstanding prejudices. Whitehead tries to
mitigate any initial resistance we may have by reminding us that the notion of senseless matter is a
conceptual construction, a cultural product that, as such, can be subjected to criticism, revised or even
totally abandoned. Shortly before the rise of Cartesianism, he observes, even a methodologically
cautious author like Francis Bacon found it appropriate to write in his Natural History a sentence
such as the following: “It is certain that all bodies whatsoever, though they have no sense, yet they
have perception” (SMW: 41). A panpsychist view of nature, Whitehead also explains, would not
be unscientific. Appealing to a condensed version of what is nowadays called “the intrinsic nature
argument,”6 he contends that there is a division of labour between physical science and metaphys-
ics: “Science ignores what anything is in itself. Its entities are merely considered in respect to their


                                                   79
                                            Pierfrancesco Basile


extrinsic reality, that is to say, in respect to their aspects to other things” (SMW: 153). Since science
and philosophy ask different questions, there can be no incompatibility between them. A panpsychist
view of the ultimate constituents of reality is not solely coherent with science; it may even be what
is needed in order to give some content to its rather empty abstractions. The happenings in nature,
Whitehead reminds us, are always more than the theories we have ingeniously devised to handle
them: “a complete existence is not a composition of mathematical formulae, mere formulae. It is a
concrete composition of things illustrating formulae” (AI: 158).
    In spite of his explicit rejection of metaphysical idealism, Whitehead does not hesitate to draw his
metaphysical categories from an examination of his own subjectivity. Imagine you are reading a book
in your chamber when you hear someone walking along the street. The steps suddenly enter your
conscious awareness, while many of the pleasant phantasies and sensations associated with the reading
vanish. Some contents have been retained, others have been excluded. At the same time, you experi-
ence the steps as an evolving series. They seem to be arising from the past, but there is also a sugges-
tion in your present consciousness that they will continue in the immediate future. Each moment of
experience is a Janus-faced entity. It has a selective relationship with the past, while also foreshadowing
events to come. In Whitehead’s hands, this phenomenological analysis develops into the metaphysical
hypothesis that reality is made up of temporally extended quanta of feeling (actual occasions), each of
which absorbs (prehends) aspects of previous ones. Furthermore, each such occasion is conceived as a
subject that begins its life by incorporating aspects of its precursor occasion, before suffering deposition
by becoming itself a datum for a new occasion. In retrospect, an individual’s psychical life is a “chain”
of moments of experience that have become publicly available – it is a series of subjects-becoming-objects.
    The new ontology Whitehead settles for is one of serially interconnected experiential events:
“The soul is nothing else than the succession of my occasions of experience, extending from birth to
the present moment” (MT: 163). As experiences such as the hearing of sounds or our understand-
ing of a sentence wonderfully illustrate, an experience requires a timespan in which to unfold. Thus,
Whitehead concludes, each occasion must be conceived as possessing duration. Whitehead appeals to
James’s analyses in Some Problems of Philosophy to substantiate this claim:

     Either your experience is of no content, of no change, or it is of a perceptible amount
     of content or change. Your acquaintance with reality grows literally by buds or drops of
     perception. Intellectually and on reflection you can divide these into components, but as
     immediately given, they come totally or not at all.
                                                                     ( James 1911: 155; PR: 68)

    Obviously enough, not all aspects of our past are incorporated within a novel moment of expe-
rience. This leads Whitehead to conceive of a mental occasion – “a drop of experience” – as the
outcome of a genetic process that involves selection as well as integration into a novel experiential
whole. Since the occasion of mentality that constitutes a person’s mind at any one moment is the
outcome of a synthetic process, however, the question immediately arises as to the nature of the uni-
fying agent. Who is doing the synthesis? Surprisingly enough, Whitehead argues that there is literally
nothing to the genetic process than the process itself – the process already is the self. As he puts it in
a truly remarkable passage:

     the philosophies of substance presuppose a subject which then encounters a datum, and
     then reacts to the datum. The philosophy of organism [Whitehead’s own philosophy] pre-
     supposes a datum which is met with feelings, and progressively attains the unity of a subject.
                                                                                       (PR: 155)

   Whitehead uses the term “concrescence” (literally meaning growing together) to designate the pro-
cess in the course of which many feelings acquire the unity of a moment of experience. Insofar as


                                                    80
                                      Overcoming the Cartesian Legacy


it is considered as the outcome of the concrescing process, he furthermore explains, what is usually
termed “subject” should be called “superject.” The actual occasion – whose full nature consists of
both process and outcome – is therefore best characterized as subject-superject. The view is stated thus:

     It is fundamental to the metaphysical doctrine of the philosophy of organism, that the
     notion of an actual entity as the unchanging subject of change is completely abandoned.
     An actual entity is at once the subject experiencing and the superject of its experiences. It
     is subject-superject, and neither half of the description can for a moment be lost sight of.
                                                                                         (PR: 29)

   This is a perplexing doctrine. But if Whitehead is right in claiming that Aristotelian ontology
shapes our thoughts as well as our modes of expression, this is precisely the sort of notion that – at the
present stage of metaphysical inquiry – we should find it difficult to grasp as well as to articulate clearly.


               3.  Towards a Process Philosophy of Nature: Basic Principles
What about the relation between the fleeting occasions and the more “robust” objects of everyday
life? Even a mountain can be conceptualized as an event if one considers its existence within the
horizon of millennia instead of years. But surely the mountain does not exist in a flash in the way the
momentary actual occasions do. In order to account for permanence, Whitehead introduces into his
philosophy the concept of eternal object. Among the basic categories of his system, he explains, “actual
entities and eternal objects stand out with a certain extreme finality” (PR: 22). “Eternal objects” is,
roughly, Whitehead’s designation for what are traditionally called Universals which he conceives
after the guise of Aristotle as the forms of things, as existing only in rebus rather than as independent
entities. Another crucial category introduced by Whitehead to ground the possibility of permanence
in a world of flux is that of nexus, by which Whitehead means “any particular fact of togetherness”
(PR: 20) between actual occasions. The togetherness in question is “the fact of relatedness” that is
realized when an actual occasion “prehends” another one.
    A special class of nexuses is constituted when the actual occasions form a particularly cohesive
group in virtue not merely of their prehensive relationships, but because they are able to sustain and
to transmit to their successor occasions a common form (eternal object). Such nexuses are termed
“societies” and can be of two types, according as to whether they are composed by a single historic
route of actual occasions or by many such routes. The former type is called a temporal society, the lat-
ter spatiotemporal. What we are used to regarding as enduring things are really societies of occasions
of one of these two types. A fundamental physical entity like an electron or a proton, Whitehead
speculates, is a temporal society: it can be conceived as a “worm” of experiential occurrences, each
of which inherits from its predecessor a common form (PR: 91). Another example of such a society
is the human soul, which consists of a single line of inheritance. Such societies are termed “personal”
not because they have conscious mentality, but in the sense expressed by the Latin persona: each
such nexus “sustains a character” (PR: 35). Macroscopic objects such as chairs and tables are on the
contrary spatiotemporal societies. They are composed of many interacting streams that collectively
sustain a given structure over a longer period of time.
    Nature also includes living organisms – plants, the so-called “lower” and “higher” animals, and
human beings. How are we to explain the differences between them? The metaphysical moral
involved in the social analogy is simple enough: different types of enduring objects must be differ-
ently structured. On this account, what distinguishes an inert enduring object such as a rock from
a living organism such as a dog is that the latter possesses a hegemonic centre. A temporal society
with personal order (what we would familiarly term the dog’s “soul” or “mind”) exerts control over
the other parts of the larger spatiotemporal society within which it exists (the dog conceived as the


                                                     81
                                          Pierfrancesco Basile


union of his mind and the whole body). In the case of an inanimate object such as a rock, no such
dominant unit has emerged. Lower animals and plants present still a different structure; in this case,
no single dominant centre exists: many centres exert control over the organism within which they
are embedded; such organisms resemble “democracies” rather than “monarchies.”
    The division of societies into three classes – those with one dominant centre (a dog), those
with more than one (a tree), and those with none (a rock) – provides the framework within which
Whitehead addresses the mind-body problem. Within this spectrum, a human being can be viewed
as a society in which the stream of experiences that constitute the enduring self has taken some
significant amount of control over the remaining parts of the organism, especially of the brain. This
theory is basically a version of Leibniz’s theory of the mind as the body’s “dominant” or “hegemonic”
monad. It entails a non-Cartesian form of dualism in which the mind is numerically yet not quali-
tatively different from the brain. Mind and body are both societies of actual occasions – the former
being a temporal society, the latter a spatiotemporal one.
    Whitehead explains his view as follows:

    in an animal body the presiding occasion . . . is the final node, or intersection, of a complex
    structure of many enduring objects. . . . The human mind is thus conscious of its bodily
    inheritance. . . . This route of presiding occasions probably wanders from part to part of the
    brain, dissociated from the physical material atoms.
                                                                                          (PR: 109)

One may wonder why Whitehead does not identify the mind with the brain instead of representing
it, picturesquely, as “wandering” within our heads. But consider what the suggested alternative would
amount to. Whitehead conceives of each of the ultimate physical particles constituting the body as
a personal society, hence de facto as a kind of low-level mind. If the human mind were identical with
the brain, then he would have to explain how myriad lower minds could fuse into the higher mind
of a human being. He would then have to solve what in the recent literature about panpsychism has
been called the combination problem. By drawing a numerical distinction between the mind and the
brain, he is now able to sidestep this momentous difficulty.
     But there is a loose end to this solution. The view that the mind is numerically distinct from the
brain but “interacts” with its several constituents needs to be supplemented by a detailed explanation
of such an intercourse. What is needed is precisely what Leibniz declared to be impossible when he
called his monads “windowless”: to provide a theory of monadic causation, however, may turn out
to be as difficult as solving the combination problem.7
     Furthermore, Whitehead’s account remains problematic in another fundamental respect. At one
point, he provides the following description of the thinking subject:

    The simplest example of a society in which the successive nexus of its progressive realiza-
    tion have a common extensive pattern is when each such nexus is purely temporal and
    continuous. The society, in each stage of realization, then consists of a set of contiguous
    occasions in serial order. A man, defined as an enduring percipient, is such a society.
                                                                                       (AI: 205)

    How adequate is Whitehead’s explanation of the nature of the self as a single line of successive
occasions? Since each occasion is a novel creation, what grounds our identity over time? The rid-
dle of personal identity is too complex to be discussed here at any reasonable length. Nevertheless,
it is unclear whether Whitehead’s process ontology provides sufficient resources for dealing with it
appropriately. According to him, “the only strictly personal society of which we have direct discrimi-
native intuition is the society of our own personal experience” (AI: 206). But I am hardly aware of


                                                  82
                                    Overcoming the Cartesian Legacy


there being a common pattern or form that remains identical throughout all – or even only a signifi-
cant portion of – my experiential occasions. An explanation of endurance in terms of momentary
events and a recurring pattern sounds plausible with respect to objects such as electrons and protons,
but it lacks all evidence when the nature of the self is at stake.


         4.  Experience as a Physical Phenomenon: The Naturalist Perspective
As we have seen, Whitehead’s account of the actual occasion as an emergent moment of human
mentality is puzzling enough. Can it be reconciled with his further claim that actual occasions
are genuine constituents of the physical world? Whitehead forcefully argues that the Newtonian
view of time and space as great “containers” of all things has been made obsolete by both relativ-
ity theory and quantum theory (SMW: 118). Specifically, quantum theory forces us to renounce
the notion of atoms moving continuously along linear trajectories; the basic constituents of reality
make “jumps” (SMW: 129) from one spatiotemporal location to another. This suggests that the
ultimate particles are to be conceived as event-like, as occurrences rather than as continuants. Further-
more, the permanent features we observe do not have to be interpreted in terms of continuously
existing entities, but in terms of a reiteration of fundamental patterns within successive, existentially
discontinuous events:

    The discontinuities introduced by the quantum theory require revision of physical con-
    cepts in order to meet them. In particular . . . some theory of discontinuous existence is
    required. What is asked from such a theory, is that an orbit of an electron can be regarded
    as a series of detached positions, and not as a continuous line.
                                                                                   (SMW: 135)

   Relativity theory compels us to rethink another main feature of the worldview of scientific
materialism. Space and time are more closely tied than previously thought, eventually collapsing into
a unified concept, space-time. Moreover, Whitehead goes on to argue, the theory of relativity points
to an essential connection between space and time on the one hand, and the particular occurrences
of nature on the other. Although this involves a significant – and therefore very difficult – departure
from ordinary modes of thought, we must conceive space and time as abstractions from the intricate
texture of concrete natural events.

    The new relativity associates space and time with an intimacy not hitherto contemplated;
    and presupposes that their separation in concrete fact can be achieved by alternative modes
    of abstraction . . . But each mode of abstraction is yielding attention to something which is
    in nature; and thereby is isolating it for the purpose of contemplation.
                                                                                     (SMW: 118)

   As an alternative to the Newtonian view, Whitehead introduces the notion that actual occasions
are inherently spatiotemporal. While coming into being, they cumulate to form an intricate spati-
otemporal block, an ever-growing manifold of interrelated occasions. Actual occasions are not in
time or in space; rather, they constitute space-time. Whitehead means it literally when he says: “The
actualities of the Universe are processes of experience, each process an individual fact. The whole
Universe is the advancing assemblage of these processes” (AI: 197).
   This is not the place to enter further into a discussion of Whitehead’s philosophy of space and
time.8 For the purposes of the present chapter, the question to be raised is this: how can actual occa-
sions have spatio-temporal properties, if they are subjects of experience? Apparently, we are left with
two incompatible characterizations of the actual occasion. On the one hand, (1) the actual occasion


                                                   83
                                           Pierfrancesco Basile


is said to be a quantum of experience: “each actual occasion is a throb of experience including the
actual world within its scope” (PR: 190). On the other hand, (2) it is described as a spatio-temporal
quantum: “There is a spatial element in the quantum as well as a temporal element” (PR: 283).
    Can the appearance of inconsistency be dispelled? For the sake of expository simplicity, the tem-
poral and the spatial aspects of the actual occasion may be considered separately. It could be thought
that there is no special problem in conceiving of an actual occasion as temporal, since each possesses
internal duration. But Whitehead also identifies “physical time” with the successive series of dura-
tional wholes. This relegates the process of concrescence, quite mysteriously, to a pre-temporal or
non-temporal realm of existence. “The actual entity,” Whitehead says, “is the enjoyment of a certain
quantum of physical time. But the genetic process [the concrescence] is not the temporal succession”
(PR: 283). Several problems arise at once. How can a process, such as the concrescence is said to be,
fail to have a temporal dimension? How can what is not temporal, the concrescence, bring about a
temporal product, the subjectively enjoyed duration? Or is Whitehead only talking metaphorically
when he describes the concrescence as a process that issues in a definite result? These questions find
no easy answer in Whitehead’s metaphysics.9
    Analogously, it could be argued that there is an obvious sense in which our mind can be said to
be “spatial,” since we do have perceptions of voluminous things located in space. In describing actual
occasions as spatial quanta, however, Whitehead is conceiving of them as constituents of real space,
not simply as having internal spatial representations. This means that actual occasions have to be thought
of as being themselves voluminous. This must be so, it should be noted, if the natural world, of which
the actual occasions are the basic building blocks, has to be more than a phenomenal appearance. But
conceived as a quantum of experience (that is, as a subject-superject), it is truly difficult to see how
an actual occasion could be subsumed under spatial categories.
    Alternatively, one may try to make the two descriptions (1) and (2) consistent by taking them to
refer to successive phases of an actual occasion’s career. The occasion would then begin its life as a
causally open process (the concrescence); evolve creatively into a unified moment of experience (the
superject); and eventually become an object in the double sense that (a) it is “objectifed” (prehended)
by other actualities and (b) turns into a constituent of the physical world. Such a suggestion makes
the contrast between (1) and (2) less strident, but it fails as a philosophical theory. Unless our ordi-
nary understanding of space and experience are flawed in some fundamental way, that an experiential
process should issue in a spatial quantum appears to be as magical a leap as the alleged origination of
mind from merely extended matter. The heterogeneity problem arises again, only in a reversed order.


                              5.  Conclusion: Insight or Delusion?
What are we to make of all this? The metaphysician who aims at overcoming Cartesian dualism must
necessarily carve his ultimate notions from different starting points. Conceptions derived from physi-
cal science and from one’s own experience will have to be carefully balanced against one another,
changed so as to be made mutually consistent, till they will eventually converge into a few basic
notions of the highest generality. As Whitehead puts it,

    any doctrine which refuses to place human experience outside nature, must find in descrip-
    tions of human experience factors which also enter into the description of less specialized nat-
    ural occurrences. . . . We should either admit dualism, at least as a provisional doctrine, or we
    should point out the identical elements connecting human experience with physical science.
                                                                                            (AI: 185)

   Given the complexity of the enterprise Whitehead is engaged in, we cannot hope for his notion
of an actual occasion to be an easy one to grasp. This concept is one of those ultimate metaphysical


                                                   84
                                        Overcoming the Cartesian Legacy


generalities that can be fully articulated only when metaphysical knowledge has achieved full com-
pletion. To the best of my knowledge, nowhere does Whitehead suggest that he has taken anything
more than a first step in this direction.
   Still, a doubt remains: If Whitehead really wanted to overcome the Cartesian legacy, why did he
retain such terms as “experience,” “mind,” “subject,” and the like? Aren’t the objections that have just
been raised against the notion of the occasion as an experiential/physical unit simply due to the fact
that we are still thinking within the inhibiting framework set by Cartesian metaphysics and forms
of expressions? Why, then, not cut the Gordian knot and abandon all this philosophically loaded
language? In the end, Whitehead suggests, this is what we should have to do. Consider what he says
about his use of the word “feeling”:

     This word ‘feeling’ is a mere technical term; but it has been chosen to suggest that func-
     tioning through which the concrescent actuality appropriates its datum so as to make it
     its own.
                                                                                     (PR: 164)

    This is a striking passage. To say that a word has a technical sense is to say that it diverges in some
important respect from its ordinary usage. But how significant is this divergence? What we face here
is a particularly important instance of the general problem that language poses to the revisionary
metaphysician that has been discussed at the very beginning of this chapter. We sense that language
is stretched up to its breaking point when encountering a passage such as the following: “The final
facts are, all alike, actual entities; and these actual entities are drops of experience, complex and inter-
dependent” (PR: 18).
    Eventually, each reader is called upon to decide whether she or he understands what Whitehead,
here and in many other analogous places, means to convey. Does he disclose a radically new concep-
tual horizon, or is he simply talking nonsense? It lies in the nature of the case that there will be no
noncontroversial answer to this, all decisive, question.

                                                      Notes
1	 .	 See References for a guide to the abbreviations used for Whitehead’s works.
 	2.	 A brief yet comprehensive survey of this philosophical orientation is provided in Rescher (1996).
  	3.	 Whitehead did not refer to his philosophy as a form of “panpsychism;” his own preferred denomination was
             the more general “philosophy of organism.” Whiteheadians like David Ray Griffin prefer the term “panex-
             perientialism” (see Griffin 1998: 78).
   	4.	 A particularly strong version of the argument for panpsychism based upon the heterogeneity problem has
             been provided in Strawson (2006).
    	5.	 As John Searle contends in his (2004: 149–50). Even authors otherwise very appreciative of Whitehead’s
             philosophy reject this aspect of his thought. A notable example is Simons (2006).
     	6.	 This argument is discussed at some length in Seager (2006).
      	7.	 For a more elaborate discussion of this point see Basile (2010).
       	8.	 For a recent analysis see McHenry (2015).
        	9.	 These difficult issues are ably discussed in Lango (2001).


                                 References and Suggested Readings

                                              Primary Sources
Whitehead, A. N. (1920/2000). Concept of Nature. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Whitehead, A. N. (1925/1967). Science and the Modern World. New York: Free Press. [SMW]
Whitehead, A. N. (1927). Symbolism: Its Meaning and Effect. New York: Macmillan.
Whitehead, A. N. (1929/1958). The Function of Reason. Boston: Beacon.


                                                        85
                                                Pierfrancesco Basile


Whitehead, A. N. (1929/1978). Process and Reality: An Essay in Cosmology. Ed. D. R. Griffin and D. W. Sher-
  burne, corrected edition. New York: Free Press. [PR]
Whitehead, A. N. (1933/1967). Adventures of Ideas. New York: Free Press. [AI]
Whitehead, A. N. (1938/1969). Modes of Thought. New York: Free Press.


                                              Secondary Sources
Basile, P. (2009). Leibniz, Whitehead and the Metaphysics of Causation. Basingstoke and New York: Macmillan.
Basile, P. (2010).‘Materialist vs. Panexperientialist Physicalism: Where Do We Stand?’ Process Studies, 39 (2): 264–84.
Cobb, J. and Griffin, D. R. (eds.) (1977). Mind and Nature: Essays on the Interface of Science and Philosophy. Wash-
    ington, DC: University Press of America.
Christian, W. (1959). An Interpretation of Whitehead’s Metaphysics. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Emmett, D. (1966). Whitehead’s Philosophy of Organism. Westport: Greenwood Press.
Ford, L. (1984). The Emergence of Whitehead’s Metaphysics: 1925–1929. Albany: State University of New York
    Press.
Griffin, D. R. (1998). Unsnarling the World-Knot: Consciousness, Freedom and the Mind-Body Problem. Berkeley, Los
    Angeles and London: University of California Press.
Haack, S. (1979). ‘Descriptive and Revisionary Metaphysics’. Philosophical Studies, XXXV: 361–71.
Hartshorne, C. (1970). Creative Synthesis and Philosophic Method. London: SCM Press.
Hartshorne, C. (1977). ‘Physics and Psychics: The Place of Mind in Nature’. In J. Cobb and D. Griffin (eds.),
    Mind and Nature. Washington, DC: University Press of America, pp. 89–96.
Hosinsky, T. E. (1993). Stubborn Fact and Creative Advance: An Introduction to the Metaphysics of Alfred North White-
    head. New York: Rowman & Littlefield.
James, W. (1911). Some Problems of Philosophy: A Beginning of an Introduction to Philosophy. New York: Longmans,
    Green.
Kraus, E. M. (1988). The Metaphysics of Experience: A Companion to Whitehead’s “Process and Reality”. New York:
    Fordham University Press.
Lango, J. (1972). Whitehead’s Ontology. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Lango, J. (2001). ‘The Time of Whitehead’s Concrescence’. Process Studies, 30 (1): 3–21.
Leclerc, I. (1958). Whitehead’s Metaphysics. London: George Allen & Unwin.
Lowe, V. (1985/1990). Alfred North Whitehead: The Man and His Work, 2 vols. Baltimore and London: Johns
    Hopkins University Press.
McHenry, L. (2015). The Event Universe: The Revisionary Metaphysics of Alfred North Whitehead. Edinburgh: Edin-
    burgh University Press.
Nobo, J. L. (1986). Whitehead’s Metaphysics of Extension and Solidarity. Albany: State University of New York
    Press.
Rescher, N. (1996). Process Metaphysics. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Seager, W. (2006). ‘The Intrinsic Nature Argument for Panpsychism’. In A. Freeman (ed.), Consciousness and Its
    Place in Nature. Exeter: Imprint Academic, pp. 129–45.
Searle, J. (2004). Mind: A Brief Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sherburne, D. W. (1996). A Key to Whitehead’s Process and Reality. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Simons, P. (1998). ‘Metaphysical Systematics: A Lesson from Whitehead’. Erkenntnis, (XLVIII): 377–93.
Simons, P. (2006). ‘The Seeds of Experience’. In A. Freeman (ed.), Consciousness and Its Place in Nature. Exeter:
    Imprint Academic, pp. 146–50.
Strawson, G. (2006). ‘Realistic Monism: Why Physicalism Entails Panpsychism’. In A. Freeman (ed.), Conscious-
    ness and Its Place in Nature. Exeter: Imprint Academic, pp. 3–31.
Strawson, P. (1959). Individuals: An Essay in Descriptive Metaphysics. London and New York: Routledge.




                                                          86
                     9
        RUSSELL’S NEUTRAL MONISM
            AND PANPSYCHISM
                                           Donovan Wishon




        The difference between physics and psychology is analogous to that between a post man’s knowledge
        of letters and the knowledge of a recipient of letters. The post man knows the movements of many
        letters, the recipient knows the contents of a few.
                                                   —Bertrand Russell, An Outline of Philosophy (1927)


                                             1. Introduction
Bertrand Russell’s writings on neutral monism continue to exercise a profound influence on much
work on panpsychism – the view that mind (psyche) is in some way a fundamental and pervasive
(pan) feature of the physical universe. Neutral monism is the view that both mental and material phe-
nomena arise from a single kind of more basic reality (monism) which is neither mental nor material
(neutral).1 On the surface, these are two radically different accounts of the place of mind and matter
in reality. Yet many believe that Russell’s version of neutral monism has a more intimate relation to
panpsychism than its name suggests.
    So what exactly is Russell’s view? As a first pass, one can say that revolutionary advances in
twentieth-century physics and psychology convinced him that the traditional distinction between
‘mind’ and ‘matter’ is unfounded and that the subject matter of both physics and psychology con-
cerns collections of causally ordered space-time events. Some of them – ones occurring in the brains
of humans and other biological organisms – compose mental episodes such as those we experience.
At the same time, some (including those composing our minds) compose the physical systems inves-
tigated by physics, chemistry, physiology, and the rest of the natural sciences. Aside from certain of our
conscious mental episodes, our knowledge of these space-time events is indirect and limited to the
abstract structural descriptions provided by the physical sciences. We are otherwise left completely
in the dark about their underlying qualitative natures.
    Many interpret Russell’s neutral monism as ultimately constituting, entailing, or strongly suggest-
ing some form of panpsychism. After all, if the only occurrences we know otherwise than through
the abstract spatio-temporal and causal descriptions of the sciences are mental ones, and if the basic
elements2 of concrete reality share a common nature, then it is natural to conclude that they too are
mental in character. From such reasoning, Sir Arthur Eddington concludes that ‘the stuff of the world
is mind-stuff [that is] more general than our individual conscious minds; but we may think of its
nature as not altogether foreign to the feelings in our consciousness’ (1928a: 276). Yet while Russell
admits that this view could be correct, he insists that there are better grounds for thinking otherwise.


                                                       87
                                             Donovan Wishon


                               2.  Russell’s Mind-Matter Dualism
Russell is an avowed neutral monist for roughly the last half-century of his long career (Eames 1967).
However, prior to adopting the doctrine in 1918, Russell is one of its sharpest critics. In order to
understand better why he comes to embrace it, as well as the particular form his version takes, it is
worthwhile to trace the development of his early views on mind and matter.
    Influenced by his Cambridge teachers G. F. Stout, James Ward, and especially John McTaggart,
Russell is initially a devotee of absolute idealism, which had for several decades dominated the British
philosophical world. Inspired by Kant, Hegel and Leibniz, absolute idealism is the view that all human
knowledge is mediated through conceptual structures which modify and distort the raw materials
of experience, thereby obscuring the true fundamentally mind-like nature of reality. Some versions
hold that reality consists entirely of a community of immaterial conscious beings, while others hold
that all of reality is ultimately a single, indivisible conscious whole.3 In either case, absolute idealists
typically hold that the universe as we ordinarily experience and conceive of it is mere appearance
and that no truth about reality, as it is in itself, can be known without apprehending it as a whole.
    Despite this initiation into absolute idealism, Russell (alongside Moore and others) soon launches
a wide-ranging, self-proclaimed ‘revolt’ against it (1959: 54–64). A number of the ensuing philo-
sophical skirmishes concern broad issues in metaphysics, epistemology, and logic beyond the scope of
this chapter. But others focus specifically on the nature of the mind, its place in nature, and its role in
human knowledge. Here, Russell’s preliminary target is the idealist claim that all human knowledge
and experience is mediated through the distorting lenses of conceptual structures (Hylton 2003).
    Russell contends that our most basic form of experience is constituted by our direct, unmediated
awareness of elements of reality as they are independent of human thought.4 Following William
James (1890), Russell calls such direct empirical awareness ‘knowledge by acquaintance’. But unlike
many contemporary philosophers, he conceives of it as a special epistemic relation holding between
our minds and objects which are generally outside of our minds. Echoing Franz Brentano (1874),
Russell proclaims that ‘the faculty of being acquainted with things other than itself is the main char-
acteristic of a mind . . . it is this that constitutes the mind’s power of knowing things’ (1912: 66–7).
    Contrary to popular belief, Russell does not think acquaintance provides us with infallible, indu-
bitable, or comprehensive knowledge about the existence, identities, features, or nature of its objects
(Wishon 2017).5 Even our most careful acquaintance-based beliefs about objects admit of the pos-
sibility of substantial error and ignorance. Indeed, he stresses on a number of occasions that ‘all or
any of our beliefs may be mistaken, and therefore all ought to be held with at least some degree of
doubt’ (1912: 39–40, 210).6
    Russell sees acquaintance as playing several indispensable epistemic roles for our thought and talk.
Acquaintance directly presents objects to us in experience without the need for a mediating infer-
ence or conception of them. It both supplies empirical evidence about the elements of reality we
encounter and puts us in a position to attend to them, identify them, analyze them, and form some
conception of their character and features. This enables us to acquire factual knowledge about the
world in a piecemeal fashion, without any need for us to grasp it as a whole. We can also combine
our conceptions of particular objects of our experience with our general conceptions of how the
world works and thereby acquire inferential knowledge ‘by description’ of elements of reality beyond
our experience. Acquaintance is thus the fundamental enabling condition for all of our thought and
knowledge about the universe, its constituents, and its most general features.
    Russell initially believes we have sensory acquaintance with the familiar objects of common sense
and science. But a number of empirical considerations soon convince him that the qualities and rela-
tions we directly encounter in sensation (such as experienced color, shape, orientation, tone, texture,
and so on) cannot be properties of material objects. For one thing, the sensory qualities and relations
we ordinarily attribute to material objects can change based on perspective and circumstance when


                                                    88
                               Russell’s Neutral Monism and Panpsychism


those objects and their relations do not (1912: 11–18). For another, we can experience these same
sensory features while dreaming, hallucinating, or having our sense organs (or brains) directly stimu-
lated when no corresponding material objects are present (34–7, 55–6).7 In fact, given the time it
takes stimuli to travel from their sources to our sense organs, ordinary sensory experiences concern
physical objects and events only as they were in the past (52–3).
    Russell thus concludes that the immediate objects of our sensory awareness – or ‘sense-data’ as
he calls them – are concrete particulars that are external to the mind, causally dependent upon our
physiology, but not inherent in our physical environments.8 Rather, they are indirect ‘signs’ of the
material objects, features, and relations around us due to the systematic physiological effects they have
on us in various circumstances (1912: 16, 45).
    For Russell, the indirect nature of our knowledge of material objects has profound implications.
Whereas we are in a position to know without inference that objects presented in our experience
exist, we must infer the existence of material objects based upon experienced patterns of sense-data
(1912: 93–4, 207–9). Moreover, our lack of acquaintance with material objects, features, and relations
(including causal and spatio-temporal ones) leaves us in the dark about their underlying intrinsic
natures (54). In fact, he denies that we have any grounds for supposing sense-data and physical reality
resemble each other intrinsically (45, 55–6).
    Russell thus concludes that our conception of physical reality is entirely abstract and structural in
character. From experienced patterns of sense-data in egocentric space and time, we can only legiti-
mately infer the ordering or arrangement of physical objects in the ‘public’ space and time of physics
but not their intrinsic natures (1912: 45–53). In fact, even our grasp of physical spatio-temporal and
causal relations is abstract and logical in character. At best, we can only know of physical reality that
it includes such-and-such elements (the natures of which are unknown to us) standing in such-and-
such mathematically describable relations (the natures of which are unknown to us) based on their
presumed correspondence with what is presented to us in sensory experience (49–50).
    One consequence of the abstract character of physics, Russell notes, is that it allows idealists to
claim that the underlying nature of physical reality ‘must be in some sense mental’ (1912: 56). Such
a conclusion, he stresses, ‘is not to be dismissed as obviously absurd’ since both sensory experience
and science leave us ‘completely in the dark as to the true intrinsic nature of physical objects’ (58–9).
He insists ‘the truth about physical objects must be strange’ (59). Even so, Russell thinks the argu-
ments offered in support of idealism are fallacious, and so they give us no grounds to abandon our
instinctive belief that physical reality is ‘something radically different from minds and the contents of
minds’ (1912: 57–9). What is more, he thinks idealism conflicts with our introspective evidence that
our mental acts differ greatly in intrinsic character from the mind-independent objects of sensation,
memory, and conception (79). Such evidence suggests that we have no reason to think matter –
whatever its true nature might be – is anything but insentient and unthinking.


                              3.  Constructing Minds and Matter
Russell soon becomes dissatisfied with this account of our physical knowledge. For one thing, the
entire subject matter of physics would then consist of entities and relations that lay beyond all pos-
sible human experience and thus preclude direct empirical verification of scientific theories. For
another, it holds the truth of physics hostage to kinds of entities whose existence is speculative and
natures are mysterious. Lastly, it renders knowledge of physical reality dependent upon precarious
inferences from sense-data using philosophically controversial principles of reasoning.
    Seeking a firmer foundation, Russell sets out to ‘logically construct’ physics from our more secure
knowledge of sense-data together with some tentative theoretical assumptions. Presuming the conti-
nuity and simplicity of nature, he proposes the possibility of constructing physics entirely from (1) the
sense-data we experience firsthand, (2) those that others presumably experience, and (3) transitory


                                                   89
                                           Donovan Wishon


sensible qualities and relations of the same nature that are posited as making up the rest of material
reality despite not being sensed by anybody.9 In other words, he offers as a theoretically fruitful pos-
sibility a roughly ‘panqualityist’ picture according to which physical reality is composed of the same
kinds of mind-independent qualities and relations we encounter in sensory experience.10 Though
emphatically speculative, he thinks it ‘has a better chance of being true than any of its present com-
petitors’ (1915: 107). It also has the merit of implying that we have sensory acquaintance with at least
some of the mind-independent qualities, spatio-temporal relations, and causal relations that make up
physical reality.
    Soon afterwards, Russell considers the possibility of similarly constructing our self-knowledge
entirely on the basis of introspected (and remembered) thoughts, experiences, and other psychologi-
cal episodes (1918: 149–50). But he seemingly does not think this project can be wholly successful
because such logical constructions leave unexplained our introspective evidence for the relational
character of our psychological acts. Moreover, they cannot adequately account for the difference in
immediacy between what is and is not experienced, the selectiveness of attention, or egocentric and
demonstrative thought – all of which, Russell maintains, seem to require a subject who bears psycho-
logical relations to distinct objects. He thus concludes that we cannot fully divorce self-knowledge
from a commitment to the existence of a substantial self, even if it is knowable only by inference
(Papers 7: 15–32).11


                                  4.  Russell’s Neutral Monism
Despite his resistance to neutral monism, Russell becomes persuaded of its truth in 1918 (Russell
1959: 134). In particular, he becomes convinced that ‘William James had been right in denying the
relational character of sensations’ (134). He concludes that we lack introspective evidence for either
the existence of a substantial self or the relational character of mental episodes (1919: 25). He also
gains confidence that intrinsically relational mental acts are not required for explaining our various
cognitive and conative episodes. Hence, we have neither empirical nor theoretical grounds for sup-
posing that mental episodes consist of relations between subjects and objects which are typically not
mental.
    Russell thus becomes free to treat minds as constructions out of the same sensible qualities and
relations that construct matter. Following James (1904), he proposes that the transitory qualities we
experience are intrinsically neither mental nor material, but rather ‘neutral’ in character.12 They
become mental or material (or both) by being part of causal processes that are either psychological
or physical (or both). Thus, Russell argues, ‘the mental and the physical are not distinguished by the
stuff of which they are made, but only by their causal laws’ (1919: 299). He suggests that

    a sensation may be grouped with a number of other occurrences by a memory-chain, in
    which case it becomes part of a mind; or it may be grouped with its causal antecedents, in
    which case it appears as part of the physical world.
                                                                                  (1959: 139)

    Russell takes neutral monism to have a number of attractive features beyond fitting our introspec-
tive evidence. On the philosophical side, he argues that considerations of ontological continuity and
parsimony prescribe neutral monism ‘as preferable to dualism if it can possibly be made to account
for the facts’ (Papers 7: 21). But unlike idealism or materialism, neutral monism achieves such onto-
logical unity and simplicity without subordinating matter to mind or mind to matter (1927a: 10).
It also promises to avoid the issue of how minds and matter can causally interact with each other.
‘It used to be thought ‘mysterious’,’ he says, ‘that purely physical phenomena should end in some-
thing mental [such as a sensation]. That was because people thought they knew a lot about physical


                                                  90
                                Russell’s Neutral Monism and Panpsychism


phenomena, and were sure they differ in quality from mental phenomena’ (1927b: 117). On a neutral
monist view, minds and matter are composed of the same underlying ‘stuff ’ which can occur equally
as part of physical causal processes and/or psychological causal processes. Thus, what we ordinarily
regard as the effects of mind on matter or of matter on mind are simply cases in which episodes
composing a mind occur as a beginning or ending part of chains of physical causation (119).
    On the scientific side, Russell sees neutral monism as better coinciding with revolutionary
advances in twentieth-century physics and experimental psychology. New theories about the rela-
tivity of space and time, the structure of the atom, and the strange realm of quantum phenomena
forced radical revisions to traditional conceptions of matter. Russell sees physics as having dispensed
with the idea that the universe is composed of small ‘bits’ of matter located at specific points in space,
crowding out other such bits, and enduring through various changes in their features. In its place,
physics characterizes ‘matter’ as a complex, causally connected series of transitory and sometimes
overlapping occurrences unfolding within relativistic four-dimensional space-time. Thus, Russell
declares, ‘matter, in modern science, has lost its solidity and substantiality; it is becoming a mere ghost
haunting the scenes of its former splendors’ (1927b: 235).
    In the case of psychology, an increasing emphasis on empirical methodologies put similar pressure
on the traditional notion of minds as persisting immaterial substances. Behaviorists, such as Watson
(1914) and Thorndike (1911) and introspectionists, such as Wundt (1874), James (1890), and Titch-
ener (1909) alike agreed that a substantial self is not observable to careful introspection and thus lies
outside of the subject matter of a properly empirical psychology. At the same time, scientists rapidly
amassed increasing evidence of robust correlations between psychological phenomena and physi-
ological processes. Russell thus concludes that psychology, like physics, better accords with a causally
connected system of transitory occurrences than the notion of a substantial self.
    Thus buttressed by both philosophy and science, Russell advances the thesis that ‘everything in
the world is composed of ‘events’’, where an event is ‘something having a small finite duration and a
small finite extension in space; or rather, in view of the theory of relativity, it is something occupying
a small finite amount of space-time’ (1927b: 222). These events constitute the shared subject matter
(and evidential basis) of both physics and psychology – which diverge from each other only in terms
of the different causal laws and groupings of events they investigate.
    Russell thus takes neutral monism to reveal a hidden unity among the physical and psychological
sciences. He even speculates about the possibility of our developing a more fundamental unifying
science which he dubs ‘chrono-geography’ (1927b: 227). As he imagines it, such a science would
directly investigate different series of the neutral events composing the universe without, even for
practical purposes, treating some systems of them as ‘matter’ and others as ‘minds’ (227–8). Russell is
quick to emphasize, however, that the question of whether physical or psychological causal relations
can be reduced to one another, or both to something neutral between them, is largely an empirical
one (227–32).13


                                     5.  The Analysis of Matter
Russell’s adoption of neutral monism obliges him to refashion his account of matter and our knowl-
edge of it (Russell 1927a). No longer seeing sensation as a direct awareness relation between subjects
and sensible qualities and relations outside the mind, he proposes that it is simply the occurrence of
events exhibiting sensory features within a larger system of events organized by psychological causal
relations. At the same time, he insists, ‘the sensation that we have when we see a patch of colour [for
example] simply is that patch of colour, an actual constituent of the physical world, and part of what
physics is concerned with’ (1921: 142). In other words, the same sensory events that are parts of our
minds are parts of a vast system of qualitied events ordered in relativistic space-time in terms of physi-
cal causal relations.14 And without the same need to distinguish the acts and objects of sensing, he


                                                    91
                                            Donovan Wishon


replaces the term ‘sense-data’ with ‘percepts’, which strikes him as a more neutral label and does not
wrongly suggest that sensory features are located in the surrounding environment.
    In fact, Russell believes that there is compelling physical and physiological evidence that our per-
cepts are, in some sense, located in our brain. He argues that the natural sciences show that perception
involves elaborate causal processes that are typically initiated by a complex series of events in the
environment, produce relevant physiological changes in our sensory organs, and ultimately terminate
in neurological events in our brain (1927a: 320). Moreover, the sensible qualities and relations we
ordinarily ascribe to our environment become present within our experience only at the very end of
such causal processes. And these very same sensory elements can also be present in hallucinatory or
illusory experience when relevant neurological events occur in the absence of their normal interme-
diate and remote causes. From all of this, Russell draws the notorious conclusion that ‘what a physi-
ologist sees when he examines a brain is in the physiologist, not in the brain he is examining’ (320).
    Russell thus comes to regard the core epistemological problem of matter as that of explaining
how we get from the presence of percepts in our brain to our knowledge of physics. He proposes
that such knowledge rests on non-demonstrative inferences from our percepts using a number of
reasonable, but unprovable, assumptions about how they relate to events outside of our brain. Rus-
sell thinks that such inferences (and background assumptions) are ordinarily automatic, unreflective,
and ‘physiological’ in nature; they become explicit only after careful analysis by a theorist or scientist
(1927a: 190). Among other things, he argues, we assume that percepts have spatio-temporal and
causal continuity with other events in space-time, that differences in percepts result from differences
in their causes, and that different causal chains unfold along distinguishable spatio-temporal paths
(1927a: 398–402, 1948: 506–15). Against this background, we rely on the changing patterns of our
percepts to infer the existence of various systems of events outside our experience, their relative
positions in space-time, and the causal relations they bear to other events, including our percepts. In
this way, the physical sciences strive to describe the spatio-temporal and ‘causal skeleton of the world’
(1927a: 391).
    But despite the incredible achievements of the natural sciences, Russell insists that they leave
us completely in the dark about the intrinsic natures of the events they describe. In fact, the only
exceptions to our otherwise complete ignorance in this respect are the qualities and relations of
certain percepts and other psychological events in our brain. Hence, he says, ‘as regards the world in
general, both physical and mental, everything that we know of its intrinsic character is derived from
the mental side, and almost everything that we know of its causal laws is derived from the physical
side’ (1927a: 402). Russell thus urges caution when speculating about the intrinsic nature of events
outside the brain. They might greatly resemble the qualities of our percepts, but they might also be
‘totally different in strictly unimaginable ways’ (1959: 13). Turning received wisdom on its head, he
declares that ‘physics is not mathematical because we know so much about matter, but because we
know so little’ (1927b: 125).


                                     6.  The Analysis of Mind
Russell’s analysis of matter constitutes only part of his overall neutral monist project. Russell sees it
as equally important for providing an empirically and theoretically adequate analysis of minds and
our knowledge of them. The core of his view is that ‘minds’ are complex systems of qualitied space-
time events organized by psychological causal relations. A proper analysis of mental phenomena,
then, requires accurate descriptions of these causal relations. But since naïve introspection is limited,
unreliable, and easily biased, they must be investigated using careful experimental methods and con-
trols (1921: 223–6). Russell’s analysis thus incorporates various branches of experimental psychology,
including behaviorist psychology, psychoanalysis, gestalt psychology, abnormal psychology, percep-
tual psychology, and self-observational psychology, among others.15


                                                   92
                                Russell’s Neutral Monism and Panpsychism


    Russell argues that the widespread belief in ‘an impassable gulf ’ between mind and matter is
deeply rooted in erroneous doctrines about the essential characteristics of mental phenomena (1921:
9–10). The most notable of these mistakes is the popular belief that ‘consciousness’ is the most cen-
tral feature of mentality (11). This is problematic because there is no reason to think that there are
classes of mental episodes that never occur unconsciously (288). Furthermore, he asserts, many who
think ‘consciousness’ is essential to mind carelessly run together very different senses of the term.16
Specifically, ‘conscious experiences’ are variously described as psychological episodes that possess
special intrinsic qualities, episodes that supply direct awareness of objects, and/or episodes that are
themselves objects of direct awareness (112–13). Russell contends that each notion requires its own
analysis and that none constitutes the ultimate essence of the mind.
    Of the three notions, Russell initially devotes the least attention to whether consciousness is a
special kind of intrinsic quality. In part, this simply reflects his long-standing opposition to ascribing a
mental nature to the sensory qualities and relations we encounter. But he also objects that (1) minds
are composite systems of elements rather than a simple kind of stuff possessing a quality unique only
to it, and (2) our ignorance of other events precludes us from knowing whether their intrinsic quali-
ties radically differ from, or closely resemble, those of our conscious episodes (1921: 113, 134–6).
    Russell sees more promise in defining ‘conscious experiences’ as episodes which make us aware
of something else. But as he no longer thinks such awareness is direct, he contends that it involves
external causal relations between our mental episodes and the objects and features in our environ-
ment. The relation of episodes of awareness to their objects is roughly akin to that of uncles to their
nephews: ‘a man becomes an uncle through no effort of his own, merely through an occurrence
elsewhere’ (1921: 113). Specifically, qualitied events constitute episodes of objectual awareness in
virtue of their bearing the right causal relations to remote space-time events and occurring as part
of a system of events exhibiting a marked degree of (1) sensitivity and (2) ‘mnemic’ responsiveness
(1927b: 171).
    A system ‘is ‘sensitive’ to a certain feature of the environment if it behaves differently according to
the presence or absence of that feature’ (1921: 260).17 By this measure, ‘iron is sensitive to anything
magnetic’ (260). Scientific instruments are designed so that changes in their sensitive components
serve as signs of causally related features which are remote, otherwise unobservable, and/or useful to
measure.18 Similarly certain events in the nervous systems of humans and other biological organisms
reliably signal the presence or absence of various distal features to which they are sensitive (131–6).
And while scientific instruments can be more reliable and accurate, humans and higher animals are
sensitive to a greater variety of stimuli, can respond using information pooled from different sources,
can increase some sensitivities through practice, and are often sensitive to stimuli that, in normal
circumstances, are useful for promoting their biological and/or individual purposes.19
    Episodes constitute objectual awareness only if they also occur in the right way within a system
displaying a pronounced degree of ‘mnemic’ responsiveness. Systems possess this characteristic just in
case their responses to stimuli tend to be shaped considerably by earlier episodes in their biographies.
Accordingly, mnemic responses are ones whose ‘proximate cause consists not merely of a present
event [the stimulus], but this together with a past event’ (Russell 1921: 85). Russell notes that this
characteristic can be present in ‘dead matter’ (such as when steel is magnetized), but argues that it
occurs more frequently in humans, animals, and plants, and plays a more central (and often biologi-
cally advantageous) role in their behavior (78). Notable examples of mnemic phenomena include
acquired habits, images ‘copied’ from sensations, psychological associations, non-sensational elements
in perception, and memories, among other things (79–82, 198–203, 285–6).
    Mnemic causal relations are also crucial components of various other paradigmatic ‘mental’ char-
acteristics. First, they distinguish sensations (qualitied episodes caused by external stimuli and result-
ing in certain mnemic responses) from images (qualitied episodes caused by other internal episodes
that only sometimes result in further ones) (1921: 150–1). Second, they unify events in small regions


                                                    93
                                             Donovan Wishon


of space-time into ‘perspectives’ and different perspectives along continuous space-time paths into
mental biographies or ‘minds’ (129). Third, systems organized in these ways also exhibit subjectiv-
ity – ‘the characteristic of giving the view of the world from a certain place’ – based on how they are
situated with respect to other events in space-time (296). And fourth, it is precisely when qualitied
episodes bear the right mnemic relations to others within the same subjective mental biography that
they are transformed from mere happenings into ‘experiences’ (129).
    On Russell’s neutral monist analysis, there are three different ways we can achieve ‘self-consciousness’
regarding our occurrent mental episodes. Most primitively, we in some sense ‘feel’ our sensory epi-
sodes and their qualities simply by experiencing them – that is, merely by having them occur in
the right way within our subjective mental biography (Russell 1921: 139–42). Second, we can also
‘notice’ such episodes when they produce memory images in us that are sensitive to them, resemble
them in some way, and are accompanied by feelings we might express as ‘this is occurring’ or ‘this
occurred’ (1921: 288–9). And third, we can ‘notice’ our mental images by associating them with
other episodes in our mental biography with the same (or roughly similar) contents (290–1).
    Russell takes all of this to show that ‘consciousness is far too complex and accidental to be taken
as the fundamental characteristic of mind’ (1921: 292). And the same goes for other mental phe-
nomena, such as belief, desire, memory, intelligence, volition, and so on, which are likewise wholly
composed of qualitied events and various mnemic causal relations (300). But while he takes these
naturalistic analyses to support neutral monism, some see a distinctly panpsychist strain in them.


                                    7.  A Case for Panpsychism?
Russell’s neutral monism has a long history of being closely associated with panpsychism. Most inter-
preters merely note that it has certain elements that make it consistent with panpsychist readings,
which Russell acknowledges. But some take him to endorse positions that either constitute or imply
some form of panpsychism.20 This sentiment is often fueled by his own early descriptions of his
project as an attempt to construct matter from sensations and ‘constituents analogous to sensations’
and later remarks that these elements more closely resemble ‘mental’ events than traditional ‘matter’
(1921: 306, 1927a: 388). So, it is easy to see why some interpret Russell’s view as an idiosyncratic
form of phenomenalism or idealism (1921: 306).21 Nevertheless, such readings conflict with both
his explicit disavowals of phenomenalist and idealist theories and his repeated insistence that mind as
well as matter is composed of intrinsically neutral qualitied elements.22
    Even so, many argue that Russell’s neutral monism collapses, in one way or another, into a form
of panpsychism. The most common argument holds that panpsychism is the most reasonable result
of epistemic, explanatory, and metaphysical theses Russell accepts. First, it accepts his repeated claims
that the only intrinsic qualities we know other than merely descriptively are those of our own mental
episodes. Second, it adopts his view that we ought to use a number of non-demonstrative principles
(or postulates) when reasoning from our best empirical evidence to theories about the nature of
reality, especially his preference for theories exhibiting greater simplicity, uniformity, and compre-
hensiveness.23 And third, it agrees with him that these considerations favor whichever form of stuff
monism (but pluralism about particulars) best fits our evidence and scientific theories.
    However, critics contend that panpsychism, rather than neutral monism, best satisfies these desid-
erata. For if our empirical evidence for intrinsic qualities is restricted solely to mental phenomena,
and we are to prefer the most parsimonious and comprehensive theory that fits this evidence, then
we should conclude that the intrinsic nature of the stuff science describes abstractly and structur-
ally is also mental or experiential in character.24 Many panpsychists further insist that the intrinsic
qualities of mental episodes cannot be continuous with those of elements devoid of any mental,
experiential, or experience-involving character.25 In fact, some argue, if our empirical evidence for



                                                    94
                                Russell’s Neutral Monism and Panpsychism


intrinsic qualities is exhausted by those of an experiential nature, we might wonder why we should
ever suppose there to be ones of any other kind.
   Many of these elements are present in Sir Arthur Eddington’s review of The Analysis of Matter.
Indeed, he begins:

     Russell’s neutral stuff is intended to be the common basis of mental and physical manifesta-
     tions, but approaching it through the physical manifestations we reach only the symbolic
     scheme of its structure, whereas approaching through the mental manifestations we reach a
     ‘concrete’ statement of its nature.
                                                                                     (1928b: 95)

Thus, in Eddington’s estimation describing the basic stuff of the world as ‘mind-stuff ’ is preferable to
neutral stuff. In his 1928 Gifford Lectures, he again makes roughly the same point:

     It is sometimes urged that the basal stuff of the world should be called ‘neutral stuff ’ rather
     than ‘mind-stuff ’, since it is to be such that both mind and matter originate from it. . . . [But
     this] implies that we have two avenues of approach to an understanding of its nature [when
     in actuality] we have only one approach, namely, through our direct knowledge of mind.
                                                                                       (1928a: 280)

And given that our mental episodes are our only source of knowledge of intrinsic character, he urges,
‘It seems rather silly to prefer to attach it to something of a so-called ‘concrete’ nature inconsistent
with thought, and then to wonder where the thought comes from’ (259).
     Charles Hartshorne similarly presses Russell on the basis of his (alleged) admission that ‘no neutral
qualities are known to us, . . . and no qualities of dead matter, but only the qualities of mental events
which are located in the brain’ (1937: 222). If this is so, Hartshorne surmises, Russell’s allegiance to
neutral monism is seemingly based on materialistic prejudice, obstinate agnosticism about the quali-
ties of inorganic events, and a cavalier positing of ‘an absolutely unimaginable meaning for the word
‘quality’’ (221–2).
     And there are other ways one might derive panpsychism from Russell’s neutral monism. For
instance, Skrbina points out that Russell regularly describes a broad range of both organic and
inorganic phenomena in strikingly mentalistic terms (2007: 178–9). As noted previously, a key com-
ponent of his analysis of objectual awareness is something’s being ‘sensitive’ to features of the environ-
ment. And this, he acknowledges, is a characteristic present to some degree not just among biological
organisms but also in stones, pieces of iron, scientific instruments, and perhaps everything in nature.26
Similarly, even mundane inorganic phenomena such as magnetized iron and steel, unwound rolls
of paper, and watercourses exhibit mnemic reactions – responses in which something’s behavior
is the joint result of past and present stimuli.27 At various points, Russell also ascribes ‘subjectivity’
to photographic plates, ‘intelligence’ to calculating machines, ‘habit-memory’ to gramophones, and
rudimentary forms of ‘thought’ to river beds.28 He even entertains the remote possibility that the sun
is ‘intelligent’ or that atoms have ‘a kind of limited free will’.29 It is altogether unsurprising that many
suspect him of being a panpsychist.


                              8.  Russell’s Case for Neutral Monism
Though Russell would agree with panpsychists that mental phenomena are likely present to some
degree wherever there is biological life, he takes the overall evidence to suggest that mind is neither
a ubiquitous nor fundamental feature of the universe. In some cases, he admits that his grounds for



                                                    95
                                              Donovan Wishon


preferring neutral monism to panpsychism or idealism are somewhat weak. But in other cases, he
takes the considerations favoring neutral monism to carry a good deal of weight.
   For starters, Russell holds that neutral monism better accords with our instinctive, commonsense,
and scientifically informed belief that minds are relatively rare occurrences in the universe. While he
readily admits that our preconceptions about reality are often misguided and rooted in prejudice, he
thinks our most basic beliefs still deserve provisional assent in the absence of stronger arguments to
the contrary. Conversely, he sees little attraction in attempts to ‘humanise the cosmos’ or to ascribe to
mind ‘a cosmic importance which it by no means deserves’ (1959: 12, 97). For his own part, Russell
reports,

     I accept without qualification the view that results from astronomy and geology, from
     which it would appear that there is no evidence of anything mental except in a tiny frag-
     ment of space-time, and that the great processes of nebular and stellar evolution proceed
     according to laws in which mind plays no role.
                                                                                     (1959: 12)

    Russell also holds that neutral monism better accounts for the continuity mental phenomena
appear to have with the rest of the universe. By his lights, panpsychists and idealists too hastily
account for such continuity by ascribing primordial mental aspects to the basic elements of nature.
Russell contends that ‘observations of the differences between living and dead matter coupled with
inferences based on analogy or its absence’ suggest that this is a remote possibility (1948: 246–7).
In fact, given the great differences in structure and behavior between the biological organisms to
which we ordinarily ascribe minds and most physical phenomena, he thinks it more likely that most
physical occurrences – especially those too simple to exhibit mnemic responses – are wholly devoid
of mentality (246–7).
    Russell believes that the continuity of mind with the rest of nature is more likely due to their
being wholly composed of simpler qualitied elements and causal relations that are not intrinsically
mental. Russell intends from the very start for his analysis of mind to be fully naturalistic in this sense.
These motivations are plain in his first manuscript notes on the topic: ‘I was anxious [as a dualist] to
rescue the physical world from the clutches of idealism. . . . But if I could rescue the so-called ‘mental’
world from him too! Then the reason for making a gulf between the mental and the physical would
disappear’ (Papers 8: 255). To these ends, his neutral monism sets out to ‘reduce everything cognitive
to ‘pure natural events’’, and in this respect ‘its bias or flavour is materialistic’ (254). In later writings,
Russell even describes his theory as a form of ‘non-materialist naturalism’ (Papers 10: 371–5).30
    Russell thinks that an analysis of mind must account for two different sorts of continuity in nature.
Firstly, it should emphasize the evidence of mental continuity among humans and the rest of the
biological domain, including animals, plants, and even the simplest unicellular organisms.31 Russell
argues that ‘from the protozoa to man there is nowhere a very wide gap either in structure or in
behavior . . . [and so] it is a highly probable inference that there is also nowhere a very wide mental
gap’ (1921: 41). Indeed, he is inclined to ascribe varying degrees of cognition, conation, and feeling
to all animals, ‘learning’ and ‘habit-memory’ to plants and animals, and goal-directed environmental
sensitivity and responsiveness in even the simplest organisms.32 He even entertains the possibility that
‘each cell in the body has its own mental life, and that that only selections from these mental lives go
to make up the life we regard as ours’ (1927b: 231).
    Secondly, such analyses must accord with mounting scientific evidence for the continuity of bio-
logical life and mind with the plethora of inanimate phenomena in the universe. As Russell sees it,
‘the evidence, though not conclusive, tends to show that everything distinctive of living matter can
be reduced to chemistry, and therefore ultimately to physics’ (1948: 46). And this goes equally for
the mental characteristics of biological organisms, thus suggesting that ‘mind is merely a cross-section


                                                      96
                                Russell’s Neutral Monism and Panpsychism


in a stream of physical causation’ (1927b: 156). But while the basic ingredients of mental phenom-
ena (including qualitativity, subjectivity, sensitivity, and mnemic responsiveness) are plentiful in the
inorganic domain, it is only when they combine in sufficiently complex causal systems that life and
mentality result (1948: 50).
    Russell arguably comes to see this as the most pressing challenge for panpsychism and idealism:
that all mental phenomena (including consciousness, sensation, memory, thought, volition, person-
ality, and so on) are composed of more basic elements whose natures are not intrinsically mental.
Indeed, he says, ‘I think ‘mental’ is a character, like ‘harmonious’ or ‘discordant’, that cannot belong to
a single entity in its own right, but only systems of entities’ (1927b: 161). Russell reiterates this point
on several occasions, including as a rejoinder to Eddington:

     Professor Eddington disagrees with neutral monism, and holds instead to the doctrine of
     ‘mind-stuff ’, although he is careful to explain that this need not be either mind or stuff.
     I disagree with this doctrine, because I hold that mentality is a form of organization, not a
     property of individual events, just as, say, democracy is a property of a community and not
     of an individual citizen.
                                                                   (Papers 10: 53–4; Papers 10: 62)

    But if mentality can only be exhibited by the right kinds of complex systems, then it presumably
cannot be an ultimate or pervasive feature of the universe. Moreover, Russell stresses, ‘it must not be
assumed that part of a mental state must be a mental state’ (1927a: 320).
    Russell simply does not share the conviction of panpsychists and idealists that mental phenomena
cannot be wholly composed of elements that themselves are not intrinsically experiential in nature.
This strikes him as pure metaphysical dogma, as introspection shows us nothing about our mental
episodes which precludes them from being systems of neutral qualities and relations. Indeed, while
Eddington and Hartshorne are correct that we can experience the intrinsic qualities of our mental
episodes, it does not follow that these qualities are themselves intrinsically mental. For our introspec-
tive evidence is equally compatible with the view that such episodes and their qualities become
‘mental’ or ‘experiential’ only due to extrinsic causal relations they bear to other such elements. For
the same reason, the charge that neutral monism appeals to an illegitimate and incomprehensible
notion of ‘quality’ is baseless.
    Russell holds that panpsychism and idealism often rest on misconceptions about the intimacy
and comprehensiveness of our introspective knowledge. As he sees it, many panpsychists ascribe to
our introspective ‘knowledge’ of percepts a directness which applies instead only to our ‘experience’
of them (Papers 10: 53 and 61–2). In actuality, while we directly ‘feel’ such episodes simply by their
occurring in the right way within our mental biography, any thoughts or judgments about them
require our ‘noticing’ them via causally mediated images. As a result, our cognitive grasp of our
experiences and their features lacks the transparency, security, and comprehensiveness many presume
it to have. And this goes for Eddington, who ‘is very well aware how little physics tells us about the
physical world, but being no psychologist he somewhat exaggerates what psychology [and introspec-
tion] can tell us about the mental world’ (53).
    As for himself, Russell reports, ‘I am prepared to admit that we are nearer to knowing about our
own minds than about anything else, because the causal chain from an event to my knowledge of it
is shorter when it is in my own brain than when it is anywhere else’ (Papers 10: 53). But even though
our introspective beliefs track certain features of our mental episodes with a high degree of reliability
and accuracy, it does not follow that they fully capture the nature of such episodes or their features,
even in ideal circumstances. So although ‘we know the intrinsic character of the mental to some
extent’, we can still have many misconceptions and a good deal of ignorance about our experiences
and their qualities (1927b: 238). Panpsychists such as Eddington thus cannot simply assume that


                                                    97
                                               Donovan Wishon


the intrinsic characters of the ‘phenomena he regards as mental’ are essentially and fundamentally
experiential (Papers 10: 62). In fact, Russell thinks our introspective evidence strongly suggests that
our experiences have imperceptible parts and structure that outrun our capacities for introspective
discrimination (1927a: 281–3 and 386).33 And while they could turn out to be more rudimentary
mental elements, he thinks such speculations go beyond our introspective evidence and what is most
reasonable to infer from it.
   Russell’s overall attitude concerning panpsychism is particularly clear in his ‘Mind and Matter’
(1956). In this late paper, he considers the question: ‘What is the difference between things that
happen to sentient beings and things that happen to lifeless matter?’ (142). His reply is that lifeless
objects ‘move and undergo various transformations, but they do not ‘experience’ these occurrences whereas
we do ‘experience’ things that happen to us’ (142, emphasis added). These remarks are important
both because he expressly denies that inorganic systems are sentient and because the italicized parts
are Russell’s late additions to the chapter’s page proofs, presumably included precisely to forestall
panpsychist readings of his neutral monism.34


                                               8. Conclusion
Much more can be said about Russell’s neutral monism, its history, and the arguments he offers for
it and against panpsychist and idealist alternatives. What is plain is that the relationship between
Russell’s theory and contemporary versions of panpsychism is a complicated one. On one hand, his
analysis of matter has a number of features attractive to panpsychists. Among them are its claims that
the physical sciences only provide abstract descriptions of the causal and spatio-temporal structure of
the natural world, that all of its basic elements share the same kind of intrinsic character, and that the
only such characters with which we are acquainted are certain qualities and relations of our mental
episodes.
    On the other hand, Russell’s analysis of mind is largely at odds with panpsychism. For even though
it ascribes features such as qualitativity, subjectivity, sensitivity, and mnemic responsiveness to many
different organic and inorganic systems, only the first of these features can be exhibited by individual
events as opposed to systems of them. Moreover, none of these features are to be interpreted in a
mentalistic way in their most basic forms. On Russell’s view, experience and mentality only result
when the right combinations of these features are exhibited by sufficiently complex causal systems,
such as in the case of humans, animals, plants, and other biological organisms.
    Russell’s neutral monism thus should not be of interest to contemporary philosophers of mind
only for its landmark treatment of matter. It also offers a remarkably sophisticated naturalistic account
of the mind that both gives a central place to the experimental results of physics, biology, and
psychology and anticipates a number of widely accepted contemporary philosophical theories by
roughly a half-century. It also directly challenges some of the core epistemological, metaphysical, and
methodological assumptions behind panpsychism in ways that go well beyond the so-called ‘incredu-
lous stare’. In particular, philosophers today would do well to give more attention to Russell’s argu-
ments concerning the scope and limits of introspective knowledge, the imperceptible complexity of
our conscious episodes, and the grounds for thinking that the intrinsic qualities of our experiences
are themselves intrinsically experiential.35


                                                     Notes
	 1.	 Stubenberg (2018) notes that neutral monism is sometimes understood in other, conflicting, ways.
	 2.	 I am here using ‘basic elements’ in a way that is intended to be neutral about whether they occur at the
      microlevel of particles, macrolevel of humans and animals, and/or at the cosmic level of the entire universe
      as a whole.


                                                       98
                                        Russell’s Neutral Monism and Panpsychism


	 3.	 McTaggart 1921 and 1927 is of the former kind while Bradley 1893 is (arguably) a case of the latter. For
                            more on absolute idealism and/or its influence on Russell, see Hylton 1990; Griffin 1991; McDaniel 2016;
                            Candlish and Basile 2017; Guyer and Horstmann 2018; Levine 2018.
	 4.	 The following is based on Russell’s 1911, 1912, and his posthumously published 1913 manuscript (Papers 7).
	 5.	 See Gandon 2017 for a similar discussion about Moore.
	 6.	 See Proops 2014, 2015; Linsky 2015; Wishon 2017, 2018.
	 7.	 For more on Russell’s views about sensation, hallucination, imagination, and dreams, see Carey 2015.
	 8.	 While Russell grants that sense-data might be mental, he sees no good reason to give up our ‘instinctive’
                            belief that they are not. Arguably, Russell views them as concrete particulars that are neither mental nor
                            material (Quinton 1972; Wishon 2017). But Pears (1967: 33–4) thinks they are events in the nervous system
                            and Landini (2011: 238–9) argues that they are transitory physical particulars that are signs of the four-
                            dimensional continuants of physics.
	 9.	 See Russell 1914a, 1914b, 1915, and posthumously published 1912 ‘On Matter’ (Papers 6: 80–95).
	10.	 It is not a pure panqualityism, however, as there are mental subjects and acts above and beyond the sense-data
                            and ‘unsensed sensibilia’ composing physical reality. Also, we should not presume that the posited sensible
                            qualities and relations must be ones that humans can experience.
 	11.	 Russell thinks these considerations also pose a grave challenge to neutral monism (1918: 86–7 and 153). See
                            Pincock 2018 and Wishon 2018.
  	12.	 Russell credits the term ‘neutral stuff ’ to Henry Sheffer rather than James, who preferred to describe the
                            basic stuff as ‘pure experience’. His other influences include Mach (1886) and the American New Realists.
   	13.	 For more on Russell’s changing views on causation and our knowledge of it, see Eames 1989 and Bostock
                            2012. See Maclean 2014 for more on whether Russell views such causal relations as mental, physical, or
                            neutral.
    	14.	 Landini offers a conflicting reading of Russell’s neutral elements according to which they ‘are without
                            intrinsic phenomenal character’ (2011: 297), though see Stubenberg (2018) for a plausible response.
     	15.	 The behaviorist elements of Russell’s analysis of mind are well-known. See Blackwell 1989; Hatfield
                            2003; Kitchener 2004; Landini 2011; Pincock 2018. But his use of other branches of psychology is rarely
                            mentioned.
      	16.	 Russell unfairly includes Stout (1896 and 1899) among those making this mistake.
       	17.	 Russell’s analysis of objectual awareness is rarely recognized for anticipating more recent naturalistic theo-
                            ries of content. Notable exceptions are Baldwin 2001; Stevens 2006a, 2006b; Kitchener 2007; Levine 2009;
                            Landini 2011.
        	18.	 See Russell 1921: 255–61, 1927b: 47, 70, 225, 1940: 13, 1959: 19, 103.
         	19.	 See Russell 1921: 46, 259–61, 1927b: 47–8, 75–6.
          	20.	 See Eddington 1928a; Hartshorne 1937; Popper and Eccles 1977; Skrbina 2007; Coleman 2009; Strawson
                            2017, this volume. Note that Coleman 2017 defends a panqualityism that closely resembles Russell’s neutral
                            monism.
           	21.	 See Savage and Anderson 1989; Maxwell 1972; Strawson 1994; Brüntrup 2017.
            	22.	 See Russell 1921: 10, 1927a: 388, 1959: 107, and Papers 9: 32.
             	23.	 See Russell 1927a: 10, 1959: 103–4, and Papers 8: 147.
              	24.	 See Strawson 2017, this volume and Goff 2016, 2017.
               	25.	 See Russell 1921: 40, 90, 1935: 203, 1948: 215, 1959: 15, and Papers 9: 284, Hartshorne 1937; Strawson
                            2017, this volume; Goff 2016, 2017.
                	26.	 See Russell 1935: 131 and footnote 26 above.
                 	27.	 See Russell 1921: 78, 1927b: 237–8, 1935: 132, 1956: 153–5.
                  	28.	 See Russell 1921: 130–1, 166, 1956: 155, 1959: 183.
                   	29.	 See Russell 1927b: 241, 1948: 247. He does, however, take the former possibility to be ‘of the order of ‘pigs
                            might fly’’ and the latter to be one expressed ‘more or less fancifully’.
                    	30.	 There are longstanding debates about whether Russell’s ‘neutral monism’ develops into a form of physical-
                            ism. See Banks 2014; Bostock 2012; Landini 2011; Pincock 2018; Stubenberg 2015, 2018; Wishon 2015.
                     	31.	 See Russell 1921: 40, 1927b: 161, 1935: 202–4, 1948: 160, 1959: 95.
                      	32.	 See, for instance, Russell 1921: 40–4, 51–7, 64–5, 77–90, 167, 259–61. He cautions against assuming that
                            other organisms have mental lives closely resembling our own:
         If you pick up a mossy stone which is lightly embedded in the earth, you will see a number of small
         animals scuttling away from the unwonted daylight. . . . Such animals are sensitive to light, in the sense
         that their movements are affected by it; but it would be rash to infer that they have sensations in any way
         analogous to our sensations of light.
                                                                                                          (1921: 44)


                                                                 99
                                                  Donovan Wishon


	33.	 Russell mentions at least two ways we might infer our experiences have imperceptible parts and structure
        (1927a: 281–3, 386). First, we do so from so-called ‘phenomenal continua cases’ in which we cannot discern
        differences between qualities a and b, nor b and c, but we can do so regarding a and c, thereby suggesting that
        b is distinct from both a and c even though we cannot discern it to be so. Second, if indiscernible experiences
        lead to different results in the same circumstances, we might infer they have imperceptible parts just as we do
        with analogous cases in natural science. See Wishon 2017 for more on Russell’s treatment of phenomenal
        continua cases.
 	34.	 My thanks to the Bertrand Russell Archives at McMaster University for providing me access to these page
        proofs.
  	35.	 I thank Galen Strawson, Leopold Stubenberg, Bernard Linsky, Nick Griffin, Sandra Lapointe, Ken Black-
        well, Gülberk Koç Maclean, Matt Duncan, Kevin Morris, David Beisecker, Barbara Montero, Aaron Gra-
        ham, David Harmon, and Celine Geday for helpful discussions at various stages of writing this chapter.
        I also thank the University of Mississippi for support during my Spring 2019 sabbatical leave. Finally, I give
        special thanks to William Seager for his immense patience and helpful editorial guidance, without which
        this chapter would not have been completed.


                                                    References
Baldwin, T. (2001). ‘Russell on Memory’. Principia: An International Journal of Epistemology, 5 (1–2): 187–208.
Banks, E. (2014). The Realistic Empiricism of Mach, James, and Russell: Neutral Monism Reconceived. Cambridge:
   Cambridge University Press.
Blackwell, K. (1989). ‘Portrait of a Philosopher of Science’. In C. W. Savage and C. A. Anderson (eds.), Minnesota
   Studies in the Philosophy of Science, 12: 281–93.
Bostock, D. (2012). Russell’s Logical Atomism. New York: Oxford University Press.
Bradley, H. (1893). Appearance and Reality. London: George Allen and Unwin.
Brentano, F. (1874). Psychologie vom empirischen Standpunkt. Leipzig: Verlag von Dunckner und Humblot.
Brüntrup, G. (2017). ‘Emergent Panpsychism’. In G. Brüntrup and L. Jaskolla (eds.), Panpsychism: Contemporary
   Perspectives. New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 48–71.
Candlish, S., and Basile, P. (2017). ‘Francis Herbert Bradley’. In E. Zalta (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philoso-
   phy, Spring edition. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2017/entries/bradley/.
Carey, R. (2015). ‘Seeing, Imagining, Believing: From Problems to Theory of Knowledge’. In D. Wishon and
   B. Linsky (eds.), Acquaintance, Knowledge, and Logic: New Essays on Bertrand Russell’s the Problems of Philosophy.
   Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications, pp. 107–27.
Coleman, S. (2009). ‘Mind Under Matter’. In D. Skrbina (ed.), Mind That Abides: Panpsychism in the New Millen-
   nium. Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins Publishing, pp. 83–107.
Coleman, S. (2017). ‘Panpsychism or Neutral Monism: How to Make Up One’s Mind’. In G. Brüntrup and
   L. Jaskolla (eds.), Panpsychism: Contemporary Perspectives. New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 249–82.
Eames, E. R. (1967).‘The Consistency of Russell’s Realism’. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 27: 502–11.
Eames, E. R. (1989). ‘Cause in the Later Russell’. In C. W. Savage and C. A. Anderson (eds.), Minnesota Studies
   in the Philosophy of Science, 12: 264–80.
Eddington, A. (1928a). The Nature of the Physical World. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. (Citations from
   2012 Cambridge University Press edition.).
Eddington, A. (1928b). ‘The Analysis of Matter: By Bertrand Russell’. Journal of Philosophical Studies, 3 (9): 93–5.
Gandon, S. (2017). ‘Sidgwick’s Legacy? Russell and Moore on Meaning and Philosophical Inquiry’. Journal for
   the History of Analytical Philosophy, 6 (1).
Goff, P. (2016). ‘Bertrand Russell and the Problem of Consciousness’. In S. Leach and J. Tartaglia (eds.), Con-
   sciousness and the Great Philosophers. London: Routledge, pp. 185–91.
Goff, P. (2017). Consciousness and Fundamental Reality. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Griffin, N. (1991). Russell’s Idealist Apprenticeship. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Guyer, P., and Horstmann, R. P. (2018). ‘Idealism’. In E. N. Zalta (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
   https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2018/entries/idealism/.
Hartshorne, Charles (1937). Beyond Humanism: Essays in the New Philosophy of Nature. New York: Willett,
   Clark & Co.
Hatfield, G. (2003). ‘Behaviourism and Psychology’. In T. Baldwin (ed.), Cambridge History of Philosophy, 1870–
   1945. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 640–8.
Hylton, P. (1990). Russell, Idealism, and the Emergence of Analytic Philosophy. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Hylton, P. (2003). ‘The Theory of Descriptions’. In N. Griffin (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Bertrand Russell.
   Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 202–40.


                                                         100
                                   Russell’s Neutral Monism and Panpsychism


James, W. (1890). The Principles of Psychology, vol. 1. New York: Henry Holt.
James, W. (1904). ‘Does Consciousness Exist?’ Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific Methods, 1 (18):
   477–91.
Kitchener, Richard F. (2004). ‘Bertrand Russell’s Flirtation with Behaviorism’. Behavior and Philosophy, 32 (2):
   273–91.
Kitchener, Richard F. (2007). ‘Bertrand Russell’s Naturalistic Epistemology’. Philosophy 82 (1): 115–46.
Landini, G. (2011). Russell. New York: Routledge.
Levine, J. (2009). ‘From Moore to Peano to Watson: The Mathematical Roots of Russell’s Naturalism and
   Behaviorism’. The Baltic International Yearbook of Cognition, Logic, and Communication, Volume 4: 200 Years of
   Analytical Philosophy: 1–126.
Levine, J. (2018). ‘Russell and Idealism’. In R. Wahl (ed.), The Bloomsbury Companion to Bertrand Russell. New
   York: Bloomsbury Academic, pp. 17–58.
Linsky, B. (2015). ‘Acquaintance and Certainty in The Problems of Philosophy’. In D. Wishon and B. Linsky (eds.),
   Acquaintance, Knowledge, and Logic: New Essays on Bertrand Russell’s the Problems of Philosophy. Stanford, CA:
   CSLI Publications, pp. 65–85.
Mach, E. (1886). Beiträge zur Analyse der Empfindungen. Jena: Verlag von Gustav Fischer.
Maclean, G. K. (2014). Bertrand Russell’s Bundle Theory of Particulars. New York: Bloomsbury.
Maxwell, G. (1972). ‘Russell on Perception: A Study in Philosophical Method’. In D. F. Pears (ed.), Bertrand
   Russell: A Collection of Critical Essays. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, pp. 110–46.
McDaniel, K. (2016). ‘John M. E. McTaggart’. In E. N. Zalta (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. https://
   plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2016/entries/mctaggart/.
McTaggart, J. (1921). The Nature of Existence, vol. I. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McTaggart, J. (1927). The Nature of Existence, vol. II. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Pears, D. (1967). Bertrand Russell and the British Tradition in Philosophy. London: Fontana.
Pincock, C. (2018). ‘Neutral Monism’. In R. Wahl (ed.), The Bloomsbury Companion to Bertrand Russell. New
   York: Bloomsbury Academic, pp. 312–33.
Popper, K., and Eccles, J. C. (1977). The Self and Its Brain: An Argument for Interactionism. London: Springer-Verlag.
Proops, I. (2014). ‘Russellian Acquaintance Revisited’. Journal of the History of Philosophy, 52 (4): 779–811.
Proops, I. (2015). ‘Certainty, Error, and Acquaintance in The Problems of Philosophy’. In D. Wishon and B. Linsky
   (eds.), Acquaintance, Knowledge, and Logic: New Essays on Bertrand Russell’s the Problems of Philosophy. Stanford,
   CA: CSLI Publications, pp. 45–63.
Quinton, A. (1972). ‘Russell’s Philosophy of Mind’. In D. F. Pears (ed.), Bertrand Russell: A Collection of Critical
   Essays. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, pp. 80–109.
Russell, B. (1911). ‘Knowledge by Acquaintance and Knowledge by Description’. Proceedings of the Aristotelian
   Society, 11: 108–28. Also in Papers 6.
Russell, B. (1912). The Problems of Philosophy. London: Williams and Norgate.
Russell, B. (1914a). Our Knowledge of the External World. London: Open Court.
Russell, B. (1914b). ‘The Relation of Sense-Data to Physics’. Scientia, 16: 1–27. Also in Papers 8.
Russell, B. (1915). ‘The Ultimate Constituents of Matter’. The Monist, 25: 399–417. Also in Papers 8.
Russell, B. (1918). ‘The Philosophy of Logical Atomism’. Reprinted in D. Pears (ed.), The Philosophy of Logical
   Atomism. Peru, IL: Open Court, 1985. Also in Papers 8.
Russell, B. (1919). ‘On Propositions: What They Are and How They Mean’. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society,
   Supplementary Volume, 2: 1–43. Also in Papers 8.
Russell, B. (1921). The Analysis of Mind. London: George Allen and Unwin.
Russell, B. (1927a). The Analysis of Matter. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, and Trubner. (Citations from 1954
   Dover edition.).
Russell, B. (1927b). An Outline of Philosophy. London: George Allen and Unwin. (Citations from 1993 Rout-
   ledge edition.).
Russell, B. (1935). Religion and Science. London: Thornton Butterworth. (Citations from 1997 Oxford University
   Press edition.).
Russell, B. (1940). An Inquiry into Meaning and Truth. London: George Allen and Unwin.
Russell, B. (1948). Human Knowledge: Its Scope and Limits. London: George Allen and Unwin. (Citation from
   1992 Routledge edition.).
Russell, B. (1956).‘Mind and Matter’. In Portraits from Memory. London: George Allen and Unwin. Also in Papers 11.
Russell, B. (1959). My Philosophical Development. London: George Allen and Unwin. (Citations from 1993 Rout-
   ledge edition.).
Russell, B. (1984). The Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell, Volume 7: Theory of Knowledge, the 1913 Manuscript. Ed.
   E. R. Eames and K. Blackwell. London: George Allen and Unwin. [Papers 7].


                                                        101
                                                 Donovan Wishon


Russell, B. (1986). The Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell, Volume 8: The Philosophy of Logical Atomism and Other
    Essays 1914–19. Ed. J. G. Slater. London: George Allen and Unwin. [Papers 8].
Russell, B. (1988). The Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell, Volume 9: Essays on Language, Mind and Matter 1919–26,
    Ed. J. G. Slater with the assistance of B. Frohmann. London: Unwin Hyman. [Papers 9].
Russell, B. (1992). The Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell, Volume 6: Logical and Philosophical Papers 1909–13. Ed.
    J. G. Slater with the assistance of B. Frohmann. London: Routledge. [Papers 6].
Russell, B. (1996). The Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell, Volume 10: A Fresh Look at Empiricism 1927–42. Ed.
    J. G. Slater with the assistance of P. Köllner. London: Routledge. [Papers 10].
Russell, B. (1997). The Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell, Volume 11: Last Philosophical Testament 1943–68. Ed.
    J. G. Slater with the assistance of P. Köllner. London: Routledge. [Papers 11].
Savage, C. W., and Anderson, C. A. (1989). ‘Introduction’. In C. W. Savage and C. A. Anderson (eds.), Minnesota
    Studies in the Philosophy of Science, 12: 3–23.
Skrbina, D. (2007). Panpsychism in the West. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Stevens, G. (2006a). ‘Russell’s Re-Psychologising of the Proposition’. Synthese, 151 (1): 99–124.
Stevens, G. (2006b). ‘On Russell’s Naturalism’. The Bertrand Russell Society Quarterly, 130.
Stout, G. F. (1896). Analytic Psychology, 2 vols. New York: Macmillan.
Stout, G. F. (1899). A Manuel of Psychology. New York: Hinds and Noble.
Strawson, G. (1994). Mental Reality. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Strawson, G. (2017). ‘Mind and Being: The Primacy of Panpsychism’. In G. Brüntrup and L. Jaskolla (eds.),
    Panpsychism: Contemporary Perspectives. New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 75–112.
Strawson, G. (2019). ‘What Does “Physical” Mean? A Prolegomenon to Physicalist Panpsychism’. In this volume.
Stubenberg, L. (2015). ‘Russell, Russellian Monism, and Panpsychism’. In T. Alter and Y. Nagasawa (eds.), Con-
    sciousness in the Physical World: Perspectives on Russellian Monism. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 58–90.
Stubenberg, L. (2018). ‘Neutral Monism’. In E. Zalta (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. https://plato.
    stanford.edu/archives/fall2018/entries/neutral-monism/.
Thorndike, E. L. (1911). Animal Intelligence. New York: Macmillan.
Titchener, E. B. (1909). ‘The Psychology of Feeling and Attention’. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and Scientific
    Methods, 6 (3): 64–77.
Watson, J. (1914). Behavior: An Introduction to Comparative Psychology. New York: Henry Holt.
Wishon, D. (2015).‘Russell on Russellian Monism’. In T. Alter and Y. Nagasawa (eds.), Consciousness in the Physi-
    cal World: Perspectives on Russellian Monism. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 91–118.
Wishon, D. (2017). ‘Russellian Acquaintance and Frege’s Puzzle’. Mind, 126 (502): 321–70.
Wishon, D. (2018). ‘Russell on Introspection and Self-Knowledge’. In R. Wahl (ed.), The Bloomsbury Companion
    to Bertrand Russell. New York: Bloomsbury Academic, pp. 256–85.
Wundt, W. (1874). Grundzüge der physiologischen Psychologie. Leipzig: Engelmann.




                                                        102
                10
     PANPSYCHISM RECONSIDERED
            A Historical and Philosophical Overview

                                          David Skrbina




Perhaps no position in the history of philosophy is at once as neglected, as misunderstood, and yet as
potentially important as panpsychism. Denigrated or ignored for most of the 20th century, panpsy-
chism is now of resurgent interest. It is being reexamined and reconsidered as a potentially fruitful
approach to mind generally, and specifically as a potential resolution to the long-standing question of
emergence. Panpsychism has far-reaching philosophical implications, affecting such diverse areas as
metaphysics, epistemology, and ethics. The time is right to revisit this venerable, seminal, surprising,
and challenging approach to philosophy of mind.
     Though the concept is ancient, the term ‘panpsychism’ comes to us from the work of Ital-
ian philosopher Francesco Patrizi, and his Nova de universis philosophia of 1591. The word derives
from pan (‘all’) + psyche (‘mind’ or ‘soul’). Broadly conceived, it is the notion that all things possess
some degree of mind, consciousness, or subjectivity. In principle this reaches down to the smallest
physical ultimates, and upward to the cosmos as a whole. It admits of a surprisingly wide variety of
interpretations.
     One way to begin clarifying the concept is to say what panpsychism is not. First, it is not ani-
mism – which is the view that spirits or souls inhabit all natural entities. Animism is most widely
cited with respect to indigenous or archaic cultural traditions, and has a quasi-religious connotation.
Suffice to say that philosophical panpsychism has little connection with such traditional animism.
Modern panpsychists take a much more abstract and analytical view of mind and tend to avoid dis-
cussion of any quasi-spiritual entities.
     Secondly, panpsychism is not hylozoism – the view that all things are alive (hyle [‘matter’] + zoe
[‘life’]). The term ‘hylozoism’ appeared in the 17th century and was used to refer to certain ancient
Greek views in which life adhered in all things. But in ancient times, of course, the notion of life
was poorly understood. We can see, for example, how early thinkers might have viewed a lodestone
as alive since it had the power to move small bits of metal. Or how rubbed amber might be seen as
living, given that it attracted scraps of paper or cloth. Over the centuries, as people gained a better
understanding of the mechanisms of life, hylozoism generally ceased to be an active theory.
     Interestingly, though, it never completely died out. A handful of 19th-century philosophers
claimed to be hylozoists, including Ernst Haeckel and Friedrich Paulsen. Josiah Royce wrote about
an “appreciative inner life [that] is hidden behind the describable but seemingly lifeless things of the
world (1892/1955: 427). Later he remarked that “where we see inorganic Nature seemingly dead,
there is, in fact, conscious life” (1899: 240). Francis Bradley concurred: “we cannot call the least por-
tion of Nature inorganic” (1893/1930: 240). Into the 20th century, John Haldane (1932, 1934) argued


                                                  103
                                              David Skrbina


that all matter was alive, as did Wilfred Agar (1943). Even as late as 1982, the physicist-­philosopher
David Bohm claimed that “in a way, nature is alive . . . all the way to the depths” (1982: 39). Apart
from these few cases, however, hylozoism is rarely cited in recent literature.
    Thirdly, panpsychism is not pantheism – the view that the universe is God. Like panpsychism,
pantheism has a long and noble legacy. Found in rough form in Plato,1 the originating conception of
pantheism is generally attributed to the Stoic philosophers, and it was notably resurrected by Spinoza
in the mid-1600s. But it has no necessary connection to panpsychism; the fact that all things are
enminded, even the universe as a whole, does not entail divinity. Confusion here is understandable,
though, given that virtually all major pantheists in history – Plato, the Stoics, Spinoza – were also
panpsychists.
    Apart from these three terms, we find in the literature a handful of other related concepts: pan-
biotism, pansensism, panentheism, panexperientialism. I myself have coined and employed the term
‘hylonoism’ (Skrbina 2009a). And other variants exist.
    Panpsychism, then, is not spiritism, life, or god. It’s not mythological, and it’s not supernatural.
The ‘psyche’ of panpsychism is mind, subjectivity, experience – not soul. Panpsychism is a serious,
rational, naturalistic, and far-reaching conception of mind.


                                1.  Panpsychism as Meta-Theory
Panpsychism occupies a unique status in philosophy of mind, if only because of its conceptual stand-
ing. It’s a theory, not of mind, but of what things have mind. It does not necessarily attempt to explain
what one means by ‘mind’ – though many panpsychists do this. It does not necessarily attempt, or
promise, to resolve any of the long-standing mind-body problems. It does not necessarily assume a
representationalist or intentional stance. It does not necessarily address any of the many issues sur-
rounding qualia, or supervenience. Panpsychism is neither monist, dualist, nor pluralist. It’s not a
theory of mind at all; it is, rather, a meta-theory. It simply holds that, however one conceives of mind,
all things – suitably defined – possess it.
    This is important because certain modern-day critics argue that panpsychism cannot deliver on
its “promises.” Or they claim that it offers “no solution.” Or that it is “empty.” Or worse. In fact,
panpsychism holds only as much value as the underlying theory of mind. Virtually every conven-
tional theory is formally open as to the extent of mind. Most contemporary thinkers grant mind or
mentality to the so-called higher animals, at least. Many go further. Some extend mind outside the
physical body, to (unspecified) external devices and objects. Panpsychism simply says: Extend mind
to all things. It’s a potential adjunct to nearly any current conception.
    As such, proponents of panpsychism must adopt a different approach than ordinary philosophers
of mind, if they are to mount a viable defense. Empirical data is problematic here, if not impossible.
Scientific analyses are arguably inapplicable. Defenders must therefore argue indirectly: from plausi-
bility, or parsimony, or first principles, or evolutionary continuity. In the following I will outline some
general categories of panpsychist arguments, from an historical standpoint.


                                 2.  The Question of Emergence
One of the strongest arguments for panpsychism today springs from the intrinsic weakness of its
main competitor: emergentism. Nearly every modern-day philosopher of mind is an emergentist.
They believe that, in the distant past, mind did not exist. Today, it does. Ergo, it must have emerged,
in an absolute sense, from an organic milieu that was devoid of mind. Yes, they say, this must have
happened; admittedly, they are not sure when or how, but self-evidently, it must have occurred. In
any case, no further need for philosophers to ponder the matter. This is a question for paleontology
or physiology, not philosophy. No important philosophical issues attach to it – or so they believe.


                                                   104
                                         Panpsychism Reconsidered


    Panpsychists reply: Not so fast. When spelled out, the emergentist position is found to be rife with
problems, questions, and profound implications.
    Let’s recount the emergentist position a bit more carefully. They believe, explicitly or implicitly,
that there was a point in the past history of the Earth – say, a few hundred million years ago – when
there were no mind-bearing organisms in existence. Before Homo sapiens, before mammalian life,
before any ‘higher animals’ at all, there were no experiencing beings on the planet. Biology ran
strictly on unthinking, unperceiving, unfeeling instinct. There was no sadness, no happiness, no pain,
no joy – anywhere at all on Earth. Hunger merely triggered a biological reflex to seek out food.
A quenched thirst felt like nothing – rather, it was like the fuel gauge on a car: one drank, the needle
‘rose,’ the body was sated. When fleeing a predator, there was nothing at all like a sensation of fear;
organisms simply ran, hid, or fought back. Sexual intercourse was in no sense enjoyable, but strictly
a physical act that perpetuated the species.
    Then, at some crucial point in organic evolution, the first enminded creature appeared. That is,
suddenly appeared. Some first select species – and indeed, some first individual organism – suddenly
‘felt’ the world. Suddenly, the light bulb went on. Suddenly, for the first time in the known universe,
an entity actually experienced reality. Pleasures and pains actually felt a certain way. Fear, happiness,
anger, jealously . . . these actually now meant something. For the first time ever, it was something to be
like a living organism (Nagel 1974).
    How, panpsychists ask, did this miracle happen? How could it be that, two parental organisms –
that were not ‘slightly’ enminded, or ‘proto’ enminded, but completely and utterly devoid of mind –
could give birth to an offspring that, for the first time ever, experienced the world? Was it a genetic
fluke? An abnormality? A naturalistic miracle? And the same miraculous event must then have
occurred over and over again, countless times, to many different sets of unminded parents. And then,
later, to many other species – if we accept that enmindedness extends beyond our own. The end
result is that, today, we and – a few? a hundred? a thousand? – other species actually experience pain
and pleasure, actually feel things, and thus are true ontological subjects.
    The miraculous nature of such an event is hard to overestimate. Mind came from that which
was utterly devoid of mind. Enminded children came from utterly unminded parents. Mentality,
subjectivity, qualia, suddenly appeared, like a bolt from the blue, having never existed in the known
universe. This is called brute emergence. Panpsychists say that’s a miracle, and that miracles don’t
exist. Mind could never have emerged from no-mind. Therefore, it was there all along. And if it was
there all along, panpsychism obtains.
    Now, it’s clear that this is not to say that nothing emerges. Emergence happens all the time, and it
always has. In fact, nearly everything that we see around us emerged. Every structured being in the
universe – animals, plants, rocks, planets, stars – all, at some point, did not exist; now they do; therefore
they did indeed emerge.
    But not everything can plausibly do so. Time, for instance, seems inconceivable to have ever
emerged from a timeless cosmos. So too with space; we simply cannot conceive how spatiality could
have come into being in a universe that was non-spatial. Time and space must have always existed,
everywhere. They are ‘pan’ qualities of reality. Other entities likely fall into this non-emergent cat-
egory. Mass/energy may be one. And certain subatomic qualities, like spin, charge, and quantum
state, may be the same. Panpsychists add one more item to the list: mind. Experientiality, subjectivity,
qualia . . . the emergence of such things is inconceivable, from a universe utterly without them. If
they did, it’s a true miracle. Panpsychists prefer a rational, naturalistic, and non-miraculous universe.
And in such a universe, mind must have always been present.
    In addition to this historical emergence problem, there are two other forms. One is what we may
call the phylogenic question: Among the organisms living today, which ones possess mind? Nearly
everyone grants awareness and experience to the so-called higher animals, at least. And yet no one
feels competent to define these fortunate creatures. Primates, dolphins, and whales? Surely. Dogs and


                                                    105
                                               David Skrbina


cats? Probably. But mice? Goldfish? Earthworms? Fruit flies? Jellyfish? Amoeba? Sponges? We can
see the problem. Again, conventional philosophers can declare this a non-issue, or simply relegate
it to those exploring the fringe topic of ‘animal minds.’ But from a perspective of understanding
the ontology of mind, we need to know: Where can we draw the line? And how can we justify
drawing it there? And if we can’t justify it, perhaps the line does not exist. Perhaps all life, at least, is
experiential.2
    The third form of the emergence problem is ontogenic. Consider a developing human fetus.
When, in the span of those nine months, does the fetus suddenly acquire a mind? For the emergen-
tist, a fertilized egg is utterly mindless, whereas a newborn infant (presumably) is fully experiential.
So the emergentist must ask, At what point in the process does the light suddenly switch on? But any
answer he gives will be deficient. Is it on at 12 weeks? If so, why not at 11 weeks and 6 days? What
magic happens when the fetus grows from, say 500 million cells to 500 million plus one? This is
clearly ridiculous. The emergentist has no plausible and defensible answer. The panpsychist thus has
the stronger case: No sudden switch happens. There is no one magic cell that turns on the light. The
fetus is enminded and experiencing from Day 1 – even if at an extremely low level. For that matter,
so are the unfertilized egg and every individual sperm cell.
    The bottom line seems quite clear: One is either an emergentist, or one is a panpsychist. I gen-
erally try to avoid black-and-white distinctions, but this one is fairly clear cut. There is no middle
ground. Either the early Earth – and the early universe – was mindless, or it wasn’t. If we claim that
it was originally mindless, we have an obligation to explain the miraculous, brute emergence of the
experiencing subject. If we cannot explain it, the panpsychist case becomes all the stronger.
    Now, all this is not to say that panpsychists don’t have their own version of an emergence prob-
lem: the so-called combination problem. If, say, our individual cells are experiential, how do their
lesser minds relate to our one, unified, higher-order mind? Do they compose it? If so, how does this
work? Do they exist in parallel? Do we then in fact have many minds in our bodies? If so, why don’t
we sense this? And in any case, where does our higher-level mind come from? These are important
problems that the panpsychist must address. But I emphasize: These are lesser-order problems than that
posed by brute emergence. It is intrinsically more difficult to explain the absolute appearance of some
quality, than to explain how it complexifies. If one must have problems, one generally prefers that
they are at least tractable. The complexifying, combinatorial nature of mind is a riddle, but we have
analytic methods to address it. Brute emergence of mind is a miracle, and little more can be said.


                              3.  Standard Arguments: Pro and Con
Panpsychism has been an active theory in philosophy from the very beginning. The first philosopher,
Thales (ca. 600 BC), was a panpsychist, and it was sustained through the pre-Socratics, Plato, Aristotle,
the Stoics, and perhaps the Epicureans. It subsided during the early Christian era, but even then, the
neo-Platonists held to a loose form of panpsychism, as did St. Francis. It was revived in the Renais-
sance by the Italian naturalists, who were in turn followed by Spinoza and Leibniz. Some two dozen
major philosophers defended forms of panpsychism in the 18th and 19th centuries, and into the 20th
we find it articulated by the likes of Bergson, James, Whitehead, and Russell, among many others.
    Looking across the millennia, we find a recurring set of core arguments for panpsychism. Here
I will briefly summarize ten of these, and list a few of their more prominent defenders. Needless to
say, these are generally not analytic arguments. Nonetheless, important thinkers have found merit
in them, and we owe it to ourselves to at least understand their reasons for holding such a view.
Naturally, this categorization involves a fair amount of interpretation. Many individuals put forth
more than one of these arguments. And some of them clearly overlap. I cannot elaborate here, but
some of these individuals are examined in detail in the present volume, and in my own works (2003,
2009b, 2017).


                                                    106
                                       Panpsychism Reconsidered


 (1)	 Indwelling Powers. All material objects exhibit certain powers or abilities that can plausibly be
      ascribed to some mind-like quality. Typically these relate to motion, energy, or self-preservation.
      Originated by Thales, attributable to such diverse thinkers as Heraclitus, Spinoza, and Fechner.
 (2)	 Continuity. There is a metaphysical and ontological continuity among all objects; in humans,
      this accounts for our mind or soul; therefore all things possess something analogous to it. Origi-
      nated by Anaximenes, attributable to the Stoics, Schopenhauer, Peirce, Whitehead.
 (3)	 Design. The ordered, complex, and persistent nature of physical objects suggests the presence of
      an intrinsic mentality. Originated by Plato, attributable to Patrizi, Maupertuis, Fechner.
 (4)	 Non-Emergence. As explained previously; sometimes called the ‘genetic’ argument. Originated
      by Epicurus, attributable to Campanella, William Clifford, and Teilhard de Chardin. Modern,
      analytic version of this argument presented by Galen Strawson.
 (5)	 Theological Argument. God is mind and spirit; God is omnipresent; therefore mind also is omni-
      present. Originated by Campanella, attributable to Henry More and Fechner.
 (6)	 Authority. The sheer number of prominent panpsychists in history suggests that the view has
      credibility. The intuitions of great minds cannot be discounted. Originated by Bruno, attribut-
      able to Clifford, Paulsen, Hartshorne.
 (7)	 Naturalized Mind. If the human mind is not to be considered an eternal mystery or a divine
      miracle, it must be fully integrated into the natural world, and nothing does this better than
      panpsychism. Attributed to Hartshorne, David Ray Griffin, and recent process philosophers.
 (8)	 Greater Virtue. Panpsychism has a number of beneficial consequences for ethics, the environ-
      ment, and society generally. It is a positive, generous, and expansive approach to mind. Prag-
      matically, it works to the benefit of all. Attributable in diverse ways to such thinkers as Plato,
      Campanella, Fechner, Paulsen, and others.
 (9)	 Last Man Standing. The nature of mind and its relation to the body is generally a very dif-
      ficult question. Every mind-body theory has major, unresolved problems. But when carefully
      thought through, panpsychism is the least problematic, and hence the most plausible view.
      Formulated by Hartshorne and Griffin, and lately appealed to by Strawson.
(10)	 Intrinsic Nature. Our knowledge of the physical world is extrinsic – that is, based on observa-
      tion and physical relations. Science provides wonderfully detailed theories about these relations
      but tells us nothing about any possible intrinsic or ‘inner’ nature of material things. However,
      our own first-hand experience suggests that something experiential or mind-like resides at the
      inner core of existence. This suggests that all things, intrinsically, are mind-like or experien-
      tial. Anticipated by Leibniz and Kant, developed by Schopenhauer and Nietzsche, and made
      explicit by Russell. Today this approach is known as ‘Russellian.’

   By contrast, panpsychism has come in for criticism throughout the years, though not always of a
high caliber. Due to its unconventional nature, it is more susceptible to jest and ridicule than most
philosophical positions. But of course, such things do not qualify as valid counterarguments. To
simply mock a panpsychist position, or to launch ad hominem attacks against a proponent, is to do
nothing to refute the thesis. And we furthermore know that many times in history the apparently
‘absurd’ or ‘outrageous’ thesis has proven to be true. The following are a few examples of philo-
sophical critiques launched at panpsychism over the years. I begin with a sampling of the polemical,
superficial, and dismissive remarks, followed by the more serious arguments that have been presented.
   For most of history, few felt compelled to challenge panpsychism. For reasons that are not entirely
clear, we have virtually no recorded critiques prior to the 17th century; and even then, we find only
indirect attacks for the next three centuries. In fact it was not until the early 1900s that philosophers
began to specifically target panpsychist views for criticism. In the 1920s, for example, Yale philoso-
pher Charles Bennett worried about the ethical implications: “Put me in a world where all is in
some sense (however obscure) spirit . . . and you embarrass me strangely. Now I no longer feel free


                                                  107
                                                David Skrbina


to treat any part of the material world merely as means” (1922: 89). In the 1950s, Wittgenstein gave
short shrift to the view: “Can anyone imagine a stone’s having consciousness?” he asked; from an
analytical perspective, “such image-mongery is of no interest to us” (1953: 119). Two decades later
Madden and Hare (1971: 23) wrote that panpsychism is “an unmitigated disaster in the eyes of a
great majority of contemporary philosophers.”
   Amidst a critical analysis of dualism, Geoffrey Madell (1988: 3) remarked that

     the sense that the mental and the physical are just inexplicably and gratuitously slapped
     together is hardly allayed by adopting either a panpsychist or a double aspect view of the
     mind, for neither view has any explanation to offer as to why or how mental properties
     cohere with physical.

It’s true that most panpsychists take mind as a brute fact of existence. But all metaphysical theories
accept certain things as brute; why this counts against panpsychism is unclear. Gerald Edelman (1992:
212) briefly cited panpsychism as the “most extreme form” of attempts to “make mind and con-
sciousness direct properties of matter.” This whole approach to mind, for Edelman, is “spooky and
mystical.” It has no value to a rigorous scientific mind: “Most good physicists are hardly committed
to notions of panpsychism.”
    Psychologist Nicholas Humphrey occasionally dabbles in philosophy of mind, and he too is quick
to dismiss panpsychism. It is “one of those superficially attractive ideas that crumble to nothing as
soon as they are asked to do any sort of explanatory work” (1992: 203). He is aware of the demand
that, within a strictly materialist worldview, consciousness must, at some point, have suddenly and
dramatically arisen from an utterly unminded material substrate. Panpsychists, as we saw, view this
putative event as an inexplicable miracle. But Humphrey is unfazed: “consciousness quite suddenly
emerged” at some unknown point in evolutionary history, he says confidently. Indeed, he is willing
to designate the time before this monumental event as “BC”: “before consciousness.”3
    Colin McGinn has repeatedly trash-talked panpsychism. He calls it “metaphysically and scien-
tifically outrageous,” and then asks, “Are we to suppose that rocks actually have thoughts and feel-
ings . . .?” (1997: 34). Elsewhere he mocks the idea that consciousness is omnipresent by comparing
it to the claim that “Elvis is everywhere” (1999: 95). As he sees it, panpsychism entails that “electrons
and stars . . . literally feel pain, see yellow, think about dinner.” It is “very hard to take . . . the theory
seriously,” precisely because “it is empty.” More recently McGinn has declared the view to be “a
complete myth, a comforting piece of utter balderdash” (2006: 93), adding: “Isn’t there something
vaguely hippyish, i.e. stoned, about the doctrine?” To his credit, he has also articulated some precise
counterarguments; I examine those later.
    John Searle is another prominent foe, who famously remarked that panpsychism is “absurd” and
“breathtakingly implausible” (1997: 48). “There is not the slightest reason to adopt panpsychism,” he
adds (50). He repeated the same thought some years later. “Consciousness cannot be spread across
the universe like a thin veneer of jam” (2013) – as if this were the view of current panpsychists. One
cannot call the view false, he says; in fact, “it does not even get up to the level of being false. It is
strictly speaking meaningless.”


                                       4.  Substantive Critiques
Once we set aside the jokes, superficial remarks, and ad hominem attacks, we find a handful of serious
counterarguments to panpsychism. I offer a relatively detailed discussion of the first – the combina-
tion problem – and then cite some representative views for the others.
    (1) The combination problem. For centuries it has been recognized that there is a poten-
tially serious problem if one considers the possibility that mind exists simultaneously at both


                                                     108
                                         Panpsychism Reconsidered


higher and lower scales of being. If, for example, the cells that make up an animal are presumed
to be sentient or conscious in any fashion, a question immediately arises: How do the minds of
the cells relate to, or perhaps constitute, the mind of the whole organism? If the lesser minds are
distinct, why are we not aware of competing subjects within ourselves? If the lesser minds consti-
tute or compose ‘our’ mind, how, exactly, does this work? It seems impossible to imagine how, for
example, a billion individually sentient neurons could give rise to a singular and unified sense of
consciousness at all.
    And there are other issues. Our neural cells, for example, are themselves composed of smaller
structures like molecules, atoms, and subatomic particles. Does each level of organization possess its
own mind? If so, then any complex being is a nested hierarchy of vast mental complexity.4 Nietzsche
believed this to be the case; he held that “our body is but a social structure composed of many souls”
(1886/1973: § 19). And furthermore, does the nesting process continue ‘upward,’ that is, to higher
orders of being? To a social mind? A global mind? Or a cosmic mind? Is the universe a vast cos-
mopolis of enminded beings?
    Needless to say, this situation poses, if not a ‘problem,’ then at least a very large question for any
panpsychist. Perhaps the first to recognize, and criticize, panpsychism on this basis was Ralph Cud-
worth. He criticized the materialist “hylozoick atheists,” of whom Spinoza was the leading culprit,
writing as follows:

     Moreover, this hylozoick atheism was long since, and in the first emersion thereof, solidly
     confuted by the atomic atheists, after this manner: if matter as such had life, perception,
     and understanding belonging to it, then of necessity must every atom or smallish particle
     thereof, be a distinct percipient by itself. From whence it will follow that there could not
     possibly be any such men and animals as now are, compounded out of them, but every man
     and animal would be a heap of innumerable percipients, and have innumerable perceptions
     and intellections. Whereas it is plain that there is but one life and understanding, one soul
     or mind, one perceiver or thinker in everyone.
         And to say that these innumerable particles of matter do all confederate together – that
     is to make every man and animal, to be a multitude or commonwealth of percipients and
     persons, as it were, clubbing together – is a thing so absurd and ridiculous, that one would
     wonder, the Hylozoists should not choose to recant that their fundamental error of the life
     of matter, than seek shelter and sanctuary for the same, under such a Proteus.
         For though voluntary agents and persons, may many of them, resign up their wills to
     one, and by that means have all but as it were one artificial will, yet can they not possibly
     resign up their sense and understanding too, so as to have all but one artificial life, sense,
     and understanding. Much less could this be done by senseless atoms, or particles of matter
     supposed to be devoid of all consciousness or animality.
                                                                                (1678/2011: 290)

    Less than a century later, Diderot acknowledged the problem but found it to be no real obstacle
to establishing the existence of a collective mind. Referring to a swarm of bees, he wrote that “the
cluster is a being, an individual, an animal of sorts.” Tight interaction – “continual action and reac-
tion” – is sufficient to establish the unity of the collective mass. “It seems to me that contact, in itself,
is enough” (1769/1937: 67, 76).
    In one of his early writings, Kant made a passing reference to the combination problem. Reflect-
ing on Leibniz’s panpsychism, he wrote,

     Everybody recognizes [that] even if a power of obscure conception [i.e. perception or
     intelligence] is conceded to . . . matter, it does not follow thence that matter itself possesses


                                                    109
                                              David Skrbina


     power of conception, because many substances of that kind, united into a whole, can yet
     never form a thinking unit.
                                                                            (1766/1900: 54)

The same thought recurred in his Critique of Pure Reason (1781), in which he argued that material com-
posites are possible and occur via simple aggregation but that this is not possible with mental substances:

     Every composite substance is an aggregate of several substances, and the action of a compos-
     ite, or whatever inheres in it as thus composite, is an aggregate of several actions or acci-
     dents, distributed among the plurality of the substances. . . . But with thoughts, as internal
     accidents belonging to a thinking being, it is different. For suppose it be the composite that
     thinks: then every part of it would be a part of the thought, and only all of them taken
     together would contain the whole thought. But this cannot consistently be maintained.
     For representations (for instance, the single words of a verse), distributed among differ-
     ent beings, never make up a whole thought (a verse), and it is therefore impossible that a
     thought should inhere in what is essentially composite. It is therefore possible only in a
     single substance, which, not being an aggregate of many, is absolutely simple.
                                                                                      (1781: A352)

Mental combination, it seems, is impossible, on Kant’s view.
    William James is well known for addressing the combination problem, and for his evolving opin-
ion of it. Early in his career, he viewed it as an insurmountable problem, at least for any ‘mind stuff ’
theory of consciousness. The very notion of lower-order mental subjects, or mind-atoms, com-
pounding into more complex minds is “logically unintelligible” because such entities would have to
combine upon some non-mental basis (1890/1950: 149–55). His mature thinking, however, reversed
this view. In A Pluralistic Universe (1909) James dedicates an entire chapter to “the compounding of
consciousness.” Here he recalls his earlier thinking with disdain:

     Twelve thoughts, each of a single word, are not the self-same mental thing as one thought
     of the whole sentence. The higher thoughts, I insisted [earlier], are psychic units, not com-
     pounds. . . . The theory of combination, I was forced to conclude is thus untenable.
                                                                                              (189)

    “For many years I held rigorously to this view,” he writes. Now, though, he realizes that it “is almost
intolerable. . . . It makes the universe discontinuous” (206). If analytic logic drives one to believe in
isolated minds, “so much the worse for logic.” Hence his final view: “the self-­compounding of mind
in its smaller and more accessible portions seems a certain fact. . . . Mental facts do function both
singly and together, at once” (292). Composition of minds is an evident truth; any so-called combi-
nation problem does not exist.
    But the issue retains force even to the present. McGinn (2006) calls it the ‘derivation problem.’
Physical or spatial combination yields many possibilities, but “there is no analogous notion of combi-
nation for qualia . . . you can’t put qualia end-to-end” (96). Thus, he says, “we cannot envisage a small
number of experiential primitives yielding a rich variety of phenomenologies; we have to postulate
richness all the way down, more or less.” And this, he implies, is unacceptable. Lycan makes a similar
point: high-level mental properties “must be a function of the mental properties inhering in their
subjects’ ultimate components. How could that be?” We cannot even imagine “in what way a mental
aggregate [could] consist of a host of smaller mentations” (2011: 362).
    Perhaps. But then again, all theories of mind and body yield outcomes that are presently “hard
to imagine.” It’s true that the panpsychist needs to explain the emergence of complex mind from


                                                   110
                                        Panpsychism Reconsidered


simpler mind, but as I stated earlier, this emergence problem is much more tractable than the miracu-
lous, brute emergence of mind from no-mind. Our current concepts in physics, in fact, give us some
models by which to conceive panpsychist emergence – field theory, for example, in which distinct
fields combine, overlap, and sum up to larger, more complex fields. Quantum physics may provide
yet other options, including superposition. Any of these is preferable to imagining the unimaginable:
mind, consciousness, and experience emerging from that which is utterly without.
    (2) Brute emergence. Perhaps, says the critic, brute emergence is not so inconceivable after all.
To this most difficult question, Paul Edwards (1972) has a “simple answer” – essentially, reductive
materialism combined with epiphenomenalism. The strong or brute emergentist need simply claim
that matter, at some sufficient level of complexity, causes the appearance of mind, but that this same
mind has in turn no causal effect back on the material substrate. “Granting that awareness is not a
physical phenomenon, it does not follow that it cannot be produced by conditions that are purely
physical” (27). But what these special and unique conditions are, he does not say. And his theory
naturally implies that human minds are epiphenomenal as well – something that few philosophers
accept.
    Karl Popper (1977) also defends brute emergence. Solidity, he says, radically emerges when a
liquid is cooled. Hence radical emergence is no miracle at all. And when a child grows into an adult,
its mind correspondingly grows in complexity, but this does not imply that the food the child eats,
and uses to build its brain, is itself enminded or proto-mental. The unminded food particles, when
properly integrated into a nervous system, do in fact yield consciousness. Hence, once again, brute
emergence is clearly possible. But of course, all this is just an assertion: it must happen, and therefore
it does. This is question-begging.
    As I noted earlier, Humphrey too accepts the thesis of radical emergence. Feedback loops, he
says, have an all-or-nothing quality. And the nervous system is a kind of complex feedback loop.
“Hence, we may guess that, as the sensory loops grew shorter in the course of evolution and
their fidelity increased, there must have been a threshold where consciousness quite suddenly
emerged” (1992: 205–6). A “guess,” however, is not a rational argument. It would take much more
theorizing, backed by some considerable indirect empirical evidence, before such a thesis could
be accepted.
    (3) Inconclusive analogy. Also known as the ‘not mental’ objection. This is functionally a
response to both the continuity and intrinsic nature arguments mentioned previously, and was first
raised by Edwards. Continuity panpsychists attempt to make a comparison between organic and
inorganic things, but “the analogies are altogether inconclusive” (1972: 28). Edwards grants that such
things as atomic structure, hierarchical organization, persistence, and laws of physics may be common
to all material objects, but he argues that we have no reason to associate these with mental properties.
A similar argument is discussed by Seager (1995) and Lycan (2011), who cast it in terms of intrinsic
natures. Lycan briefly cites two objections: First, “what grounds the assumption that the ultimate
constituents of the physical world must have intrinsic properties at all?” (360). Perhaps, he suggests,
extrinsic relationships and properties are all there are to such particles. Second, even if we decide that
they must have some intrinsic nature, why assume it is mental, or conscious?
    But panpsychists have a ready reply: Mind and experience is the most basic fact of human exist-
ence, and physicalism still must account for it. At present, it cannot. It’s plausible that physicalism
is inherently unable to this, since it has access only to the ‘outsides’ of things – their properties and
relationships. And yet we know, on the ‘inside,’ that mind exists. Our inner nature certainly seems to
be mental, and it’s very likely that the same holds for the higher animals, at least. But then we cannot
justify stopping anywhere along the phylogenetic chain, and hence panpsychism obtains.
    (4) Not testable. Also known as the ‘no signs’ objection. Edwards (1972: 28) states that there can be
no empirical evidence for panpsychism, hence it is unverifiable, hence non-scientific.“It would prob-
ably be pointless to try to ‘prove’ that panpsychism is a meaningless doctrine.” McGinn (1999: 96–7)


                                                   111
                                             David Skrbina


says, “regular matter gives no sign of having such mental states: things simply do not behave as if they
are in pain or want a drink of water.” Furthermore,

    physicists have discovered no reason to attribute sensations and thoughts to atoms and stars.
    They get on perfectly well without supposing matter in general to have mind ticking away
    inside it. If electrons have mental properties, these properties make no difference to the laws
    that govern electrons.
                                                                                        (1999: 97)

Paul Churchland (1997: 213) remarks that “modern atomism’s experimental and explanatory suc-
cesses” are vast and well-documented, whereas that of panpsychism “is approximately zero.” Modern
science can explain chemical elements, formation of stars, evolution, functioning of the nervous
system – on and on. “At present panpsychism can do none of these things. Not even one. . . . No
pressing explanatory job exists for it to do.” And likewise for Lycan: “panpsychism’s most obvious
liability is the absence of scientific evidence” (2011: 361).
    In principle, however, this is little different than arguing that neuro-chemical transactions in the
brain are sufficient to explain human behavior, and that we therefore have no need to posit the exist-
ence of a mind. At a physical level, brain action can – theoretically – account for everything we do.
As with humans, it’s unreasonable to demand “tests” or “signs” of subjectivity.
    5) Supervenience. McGinn asks, “Are the [experiential] properties of particles supervenient on
their non-[experiential] properties or not?” This is the standard view of reductive materialists; mind
supervenes on the brain. Either way that the panpsychist answers this question, says McGinn, he runs
into trouble. If not, then two particles could be physically identical and yet have radically different
experiential states. But this leads back to the ‘no signs’ problem, and it suggests epiphenomenal-
ism (see next). If particle minds do supervene on their physical properties, “it will be hard to avoid
accepting that there is emergence there – that combining the [non-experiential] properties in that way
gives rise to the [experiential] properties” (2006: 94–5).
    6) Epiphenomenalism. “A more worrying difficulty for the panpsychist is the threat of epiphe-
nomenalism,” says Lycan (2011: 362). Physics is causally closed, and thus any putative atomic minds
have no causal role to play. “They are brought into existence only to do nothing at all.” This is an a
priori ‘no signs’ problem – not only are there no signs of mentality, there can never be any signs. The
panpsychist, of course, can simply respond that epiphenomenalism holds for all minds, human and
atom alike. This may be distasteful to some, but there is no logical problem in holding such a view.
    7) Irrelevance. As a final counterargument, some ask: What’s the point of positing atomic minds
if we do not, and cannot, have any conception whatsoever of what they are like? “What kinds of
[experiential] properties do particles have?” asks McGinn (2006: 95). Presuming that atomic minds
somehow contribute to or compose our high-level mental states, “they are going to have to be rich
and wide-ranging: not just sensory states but also emotional states, conative states, and cognitive
states.” But such things are inconceivable. We cannot simply postulate their existence. “This is a game
without rules and without consequences,” he says. Lycan (2011: 363) makes a similar point. “What
sorts of mental properties in particular do the smallest things have?” To presume the existence of
sensory or intentional states is “ludicrous.” “How could [an atom] see, hear, or smell anything? What
would be the contents of its beliefs or desires?”
    In sum, these counterarguments generally raise valid and important points. But none of them
are insurmountable. In large part, they are calls for details. In order to be more widely accepted,
panpsychists need to articulate a clear theory of mind and justify its universal extent. They need to
delineate precisely which objects are enminded, and in what way. And they need to clearly dem-
onstrate the philosophic payoff – conceptually, metaphysically, ethically – in accepting the truth of
panpsychism.


                                                  112
                                        Panpsychism Reconsidered


   On the other hand, some critics seem to be terminally dissatisfied. Either they have ruled out
panpsychism a priori, and thus no case, no matter how compelling, can win them over; or they make
outrageous and impossible demands of the thesis. A good example of the latter is Churchland. He
closes his short critique with the following:

    Unless panpsychism constructs . . . theoretical proposals and testable hypotheses, and unless
    it achieves some systematic successes in experimental predictions and technological control,
    it will continue to appear to be . . . a theoretical hangover from a less knowledgeable time.
                                                                                     (1997: 212)

Is it reasonable to demand of any theory (or meta-theory) of mind that it yield “testable hypoth-
eses,” “experimental prediction,” and “technological control”? Surely not. Such things apply only to
mechanistic conceptions; if these are prerequisites for acceptable solutions, the space of possibilities
becomes absurdly small.
    The following point must be emphasized: When it comes to the mind, we are faced with an array
of difficult propositions. Every theory has significant, unresolved problems, open issues, or distasteful
implications. This is striking, given that the mind is the one thing in this universe with which we are
most intimately acquainted – precisely because we are that thing. Matter is much more poorly under-
stood; we know its extrinsic, functional, and structural nature, but really nothing more. We presume
that there is nothing mental about matter, but this is sheer presumption, and a baseless one at that.
As Strawson (2015: 203) emphasizes, “There is no evidence – there is precisely zero evidence – for
the existence of non-experiential reality.” The famed causal closure of physics says nothing against
experiential matter. Matter can follow all its usual deterministic or quantum laws, without infringing
one iota on experiential or even intentional qualities. Epiphenomenalism may hold after all. Or, as
I have argued elsewhere, the causal closure of the physical may be mirrored by the causal closure of
the mental (Skrbina 2014: 240).
    In the end, a strong case can be made that panpsychism is in fact the most plausible, the most
reasonable, and hence the most likely true conception of mind. Strawson puts the point well:

    One should, I believe, endorse the thesis of the theoretical primacy of panpsychism. According
    to this thesis, unprejudiced consideration of what we know about concrete reality obliges
    us to favour some version of panpsychism . . . over all other positive substantive theories of
    the intrinsic non-structural nature of reality. . . . In its strongest form, the thesis is not just
    that it would take extraordinarily hard work to justify preferring any substantive metaphysi-
    cal position that isn’t panpsychist. . . . It’s rather that it can’t be done.
                                                                                          (2015: 203)

This is a remarkably forceful assessment. Panpsychism, he says, should be considered the default con-
ception of mind – only to be displaced on the (highly unlikely) possibility that it can be rationally
demonstrated to be false. We have good reason to accept it, and none to dispute it.
    Yet this will hardly impress panpsychism’s critics. Mainstream philosophers of mind are explicitly
or implicitly committed to mechanistic materialism and brute emergence of mind, and they are loath
to give them up. This suggests an interesting situation: that we have the makings of a classic paradigm
shift. Often it happens, in science and in philosophy, that the majority viewpoint on some contro-
versial topic becomes entrenched and cannot be dislodged by rational argumentation. Despite the
growing strength of a new opposing view, the majority clings tenaciously to its traditional position.
Nothing will dissuade them. And yet the opposing view grows in strength and numbers, typically
among the younger members of the discipline. In the end, the majority never changes their minds;
they simply die off. And then the new view ascends to prominence.


                                                   113
                                                 David Skrbina


    Perhaps something of the sort will happen here. In this case, of course, it is not something that is
‘new,’ but rather something renewed – rediscovered, refurbished, reexamined. From the 16th through
19th centuries, panpsychism was a commonplace, even dominant position in philosophy. It was
articulated in different ways by many of the leading thinkers of the day. With the coming of analytic
philosophy and logical positivism in the early 20th century, panpsychism was driven down, and then
largely forgotten for nearly a century. Only in the 1990s did the panpsychist movement reawaken.
With skepticism growing about the viability of mechanistic materialism, and with the ongoing fail-
ure to resolve mind-body problems within this dominant paradigm, the time may be approaching
where panpsychism is once again accorded a large degree of respect. It may once again be accepted
as a true and naturalistic account of the mind.


                                                     Notes
1	 .	 “This world . . . is a blessed god” (Timaeus 34b). See also Timaeus (55d, 92c).
 	2.	 There are obvious implications here for environmental ethics and animal rights. As I stated earlier, panpsy-
        chism has important ethical consequences. For one approach, see my (2013).
  	3.	 In a particularly striking example of an ad hominem attack, Humphrey issued a public diatribe in 2011
        against Galen Strawson, calling him “not only an intellectual ass but unscholarly and lazy too.” “His ideas
        about panpsychism have made him a laughing stock,” wrote Humphrey; hence we must “consign him to the
        nursery.” See Skrbina (2017: 295).
   	4.	 Leibniz’s monadology proposed something very close to this view.


                                                Bibliography
Agar, W. (1943). A Contribution to the Theory of the Living Organism. Melbourne, Australia: Melbourne University
   Press.
Bennett, C. (1922). ‘Review of Volonte et Conscience’. Philosophical Review, 37: 86–90.
Bohm, D. (1982). ‘Nature as Creativity’. ReVision, 5 (2): 35–40.
Bradley, F. (1893/1930). Appearance and Reality. Gloucestershire: Clarendon Press.
Churchland, P. (1997).‘Panpsychism: A Brief Critique’. In C. Butler (ed.), History as the Story of Freedom. Amster-
   dam: Rodopi, pp. 211–16.
Cudworth, R. (1678/2011). ‘The True Intellectual System of the Universe’. In W. Uzgalis (ed.), The Correspond-
   ence of Samuel Clarke and Anthony Collins. Peterborough, ON: Broadview, pp. 285–92.
Diderot, D. (1769/1937). ‘D’Alembert’s Dream’. In J. Steward and J. Kemp (trans.), Diderot: Interpreter of Nature.
   London: Lawrence and Wishart.
Edelman, G. (1992). Bright Air, Brilliant Fire. New York: Basic.
Edwards, P. (1972). ‘Panpsychism’. In Encyclopedia of Philosophy. New York: Macmillan.
Haldane, J. B. S. (1932). The Inequality of Man. London: Chatto & Windus.
Haldane, J. B. S. (1934). ‘Quantum Mechanics as a Basis for Philosophy’. Philosophy of Science, 1: 78–98.
Humphrey, N. (1992). A History of the Mind. London: Chatto & Windus.
Hutto, D. (2000). Beyond Physicalism. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
James, W. (1890/1950). Principles of Psychology. New York: Dover.
James, W. (1909/1996). A Pluralistic Universe. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press.
Kant, I. (1766/1900). Dreams of a Spirit-Seer. New York: Macmillan.
Kant, I. (1781/1965). Critique of Pure Reason. New York: St. Martin’s.
Lycan, W. (2011). ‘Recent Naturalistic Dualisms’. In A. Lange et al. (eds.), Light Against Darkness. Göttingen:
   Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, pp. 348–63.
Madden, E., and Hare, P. (1971). ‘The Powers That Be’. Dialogue, 10 (1): 12–31.
Madell, G. (1988). Mind and Materialism. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
McGinn, C. (1997). The Character of Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
McGinn, C. (1999). The Mysterious Flame. New York: Basic.
McGinn, C. (2006). ‘Hard Questions’. In A. Freeman (ed.), Consciousness and Its Place in Nature. Exeter: Imprint
   Academic, pp. 90–9.
Nagel, T. (1974). ‘What is It Like to Be a Bat?’ Philosophical Review, 83 (4): 435–50.
Nietzsche, F. (1886/1973). Beyond Good and Evil. Trans. W. Kaufmann. New York: Penguin.



                                                       114
                                           Panpsychism Reconsidered


Partridge, E. (1984). ‘Nature as a Moral Resource’. Environmental Ethics, 6 (2): 101–30.
Popper, K., and Eccles, J. (1977). The Self and Its Brain. Berlin: Springer.
Royce, J. (1892/1955). Spirit of Modern Philosophy. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Royce, J. (1899). The World and the Individual. New York: Macmillan.
Seager, W. (1995). ‘Consciousness, Information, and Panpsychism’. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 2 (3): 272–88.
Searle, J. (1997). ‘Consciousness and the Philosophers’. New York Review of Books, 44 (4).
Searle, J. (2013). ‘Can Information Theory Explain Consciousness?’ New York Review of Books, 60 (1).
Skrbina, D. (2003). ‘Panpsychism as an Underlying Theme in Western Philosophy’. Journal of Consciousness Stud-
    ies, 10 (3): 4–46.
Skrbina, D. (2009a). ‘Minds, Objects, and Relations’. In D. Skrbina (ed.), Mind That Abides. Amsterdam: Benja-
    mins, pp. 361–82.
Skrbina, D. (2009b). ‘Panpsychism in History’. In D. Skrbina (ed.), Mind That Abides. Amsterdam: Benjamins,
    pp. 1–32.
Skrbina, D. (2013). ‘Ethics, Eco-Philosophy, and Universal Sympathy’. Dialogue and Universalism, 23 (4): 59–74.
Skrbina, D. (2014). ‘Dualism, Dual-Aspectism, and the Mind’. In A. Lavazza and H. Robinson (eds.), Contempo-
    rary Dualism. London: Routledge, pp. 220–44.
Skrbina, D. (2017). Panpsychism in the West, revised edition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Strawson, G. (2006). ‘Realistic Monism: Why Physicalism Entails Panpsychism’. In A. Freeman (ed.), Conscious-
    ness and Its Place in Nature. Exeter: Imprint Academic, pp. 3–31.
Strawson, G. (2015). ‘Postscript to “Real Materialism” ’. In T. Alter and Y. Nagasawa (eds.), Consciousness in the
    Physical World. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 201–8.
Wittgenstein, L. (1953). Philosophical Investigations. New York: Macmillan.




                                                      115
       PART II

Forms of Panpsychism
                     11
           BEYOND COSMOPSYCHISM
             AND THE GREAT I AM                                                           




             How the World Might be Grounded in
              Universal ‘Advaitic’ Consciousness

                                            Miri Albahari

       Manifestation needs time and space, but the source of [personalised] consciousness was
       there before manifestation took place.
                                                                           (Maharaj 1985: 86)

       It is because consciousness is unborn and undying that the millions of forms get created
       and destroyed; it is a continuous process. . . . Please understand that . . . you are the form-
       less, timeless unborn. It is because of your identification with the body as an entity that
       your consciousness, which is universal consciousness, thinks that it is dying. Nobody is
       dying, because nobody was born. . . . Only that in which consciousness manifests itself
       is limited and created and destroyed. The total potential of consciousness remains. It is
       unlimited.
                                                                              (Maharaj 1994: 32–3)


                                           1. Introduction
In 1946, Aldous Huxley proceeded to collate what he took to be evidence for an ‘inexhaustible’ and
‘perennial’ theme first expressed in writing 25 centuries ago and subsequently recurring from within
the ambit of many religious traditions, including those of Christian mysticism, Taoism, Hinduism
and Buddhism. This theme, says Huxley, expresses a metaphysics that:

    recognises a divine Reality substantial to the world of things and lives and minds; the psy-
    chology that finds in the soul something similar to, or even identical with, divine Reality;
    the ethic that places man’s final end in the knowledge of the immanent and transcendent
    Ground of all being – the thing is immemorial and universal.
                                                                                      (1946: 9)

The core ideas have arguably found their most explicit articulation within the Advaita Vedanta tradi-
tion, whose Upanisadic origins owe their particular formulation to 8th-century figure Adi Sankara,
and whose philosophy has found expression in the words of recent figures acclaimed to have awoken
to its ultimate reality (the opening quotes by Nisargadatta Maharaj are from such a figure). From the




                                                    119
                                              Miri Albahari


body of Advaitic writings can be extrapolated four main tenets which, following Huxley, I allude to
as the ‘Perennial Philosophy’:

1.	 All that appears as concrete reality – the spatio-temporal universe with its furniture of tables,
    pebbles, stars, atoms, cats, human beings – is fundamentally grounded in ‘universal conscious-
    ness’, which is beyond the subject/object division, beyond the bounds of space and time, com-
    pletely self-subsistent.
2.	 Universal consciousness forms the common backdrop to all individual conscious experience.
3.	 What inhibits full direct realisation of our conscious nature as identical to universal conscious-
    ness as ground of all being is the sense of being a separate self, or ‘I’. The self is a cognitive illu-
    sion that makes the nature of consciousness appear intrinsically confined to the focal perspective
    of a personal subject.
4.	 It is possible, via meditation techniques, to eliminate the illusion of self, such that one fully,
    directly and non-discursively realises one’s fundamental grounding as universal consciousness.
    While post-realised perception continues to nominally operate via a subject/object framework,
    there is no longer an identity with the confines of a subject. The realisation involves a permanent
    transformative experience that axiologically and noetically forms the apex of human potential,
    unleashing native capacities for boundless happiness, benevolence and compassion.

Taken together these four tenets, expounding a form of idealism, would be extraordinary if true. Yet
there has been no real investigation or defence of the Advaitic/Perennialist position within Western
philosophy.1 While a notion of universal consciousness was expressed through variants of some-
times pantheistic absolute idealism prevalent in the latter part of the 19th century (e.g. in Bradley),
such consciousness was never linked to any radically transformative experience or methodology
that would make it fully and non-discursively available to the human mind.2 And while universal
consciousness has found a recent revival in a non-pantheistic variant called ‘cosmopsychism’, the
consciousness, bestowed to the cosmos, is again not generally touted as epistemically fully available
to humans.3 Cosmopsychism also differs from Perennialism by virtue of the fact that universal con-
sciousness, as with many idealist predecessors, is usually cast as belonging to a fundamental cosmic
mind or subject which directly experiences or somehow grounds our conscious lives as its objectual
content.4 (We can take ‘subject’ to mean ‘conscious focal perspective’; and ‘object’ to broadly mean
anything a subject can focus on within its perspective – more later). By contrast, Perennialism casts
universal consciousness as (1) beyond any duality between subject and object – ‘Advaita’ literally
means ‘non-dual’ – (2) not attributable to the cosmos; it grounds it, so is beyond space and time, and
(3) fully and non-discursively available to the human mind via deep transformative experience.
    While Western philosophy has developed notions of universal consciousness, the field has also
independently harboured some excellent scholarly accounts of Advaita Vedanta, which sometimes
compare it to the writings of other traditions and thinkers.5 But to my knowledge there has yet to
be a serious Western philosophical attempt to bring the ideas of Advaita Vedanta and universal con-
sciousness together, through fully investigating or defending the four Perennialist pillars as a stand-
alone metaphysical system.6 By sketching a metaphysical outline for the Perennialist position, partly
in response to difficulties raised by the cosmopsychic alternative, this chapter attempts to redress the
balance.
    As addressing all four tenets is well outside the scope of a single chapter, I will be endeavouring to
sketch an outline for tenets 1 and 2 – that the world is grounded in a non-dual universal conscious-
ness that forms the background to our own conscious experience. Tenets 3 and 4 will nevertheless
serve to constrain the kind of outline that can be sketched. Universal consciousness must be con-
strued in a way that makes it possible to be humanly experienced; the story has to make psychological
as well as logical sense. With this in mind, the chapter will proceed as follows. Section 1 will set


                                                    120
                               Beyond Cosmopsychism and the Great I Am


out what I think are some serious troubles for cosmopsychism and some of its idealist predecessors.
I will close by suggesting that these troubles can be overcome by a Perennialist approach, which will
bring its own challenges. Section 2 will attempt to make conceptual sense of a universal ‘non-dual’
consciousness. Section 3 will sketch the outline of a metaphysical model for how the appearance of
concrete objects could be grounded in such consciousness. I will conclude with some cautionary
remarks about the limits of discursive thought in relation to Perennialist claims about grounding.


                                2.  Troubles for Cosmopsychism
This anthology is testament to the fact that panpsychism has made a revival. Its most prevalent ver-
sion is the pluralist view that consciousness belongs fundamentally to the micro-physical ultimates,
perhaps qualifying their categorical nature. The most intractable difficulty with the position, in
what is known as the ‘combination problem’, asks how micro-subjects, in virtue of their conscious
properties, could combine to form macro-subjects such as ourselves. Nothing about their individual
phenomenal natures seems to necessitate the fact that, when combined in a particular way, they will
form a larger unitary subject; it seems an utter mystery.7 It is largely in response to this difficulty
that a successor to absolute idealism has resurfaced in the form of cosmopsychism. Strictly speaking,
cosmopsychism is not fully-fledged idealism, as consciousness does not ground the cosmos; rather,
it characterises the deep intrinsic nature of this fundamental material entity (so is compatible with
Russellian monism). The prevailing versions, like most of their predecessors, also take their funda-
ment to be a conscious subject of experience that grounds our own conscious perspectives and their
contents.
    Two such recent proponents of cosmopsychism, Philip Goff (2017) and Itay Shani (2015), see
a natural ally in Jonathan Schaffer’s (2010) priority monism. For Schaffer, the cosmos exists as the
sole fundamental concrete entity that grounds all other less basic entities, which can be considered
parts of, or abstractions from, the unified whole. While grounding is a topic unto itself, it can for
these purposes be thought of as a relation of metaphysical dependence between facts, whereby the
grounded facts hold in virtue of the more fundamental grounding fact(s). According to Goff, when
the inner nature of the cosmos is considered to be a conscious perspectival subject, it yields a ground-
ing relation that solves the combination problem, or its reverse, which I think is best termed the
‘decombination problem’: how a whole conscious unity can coherently decombine into, or neces-
sitate, smaller conscious unities.8 Goff proposes that the fundamental cosmic subject contains within
its unified conscious field each of our perspectives and their conscious experiences as its abstractable
parts, just as our own conscious field contains various sensory experiences as parts. To take a toy
example, if subject A experiences pain, and B experiences redness, and C has an experience of buzz-
ing, then each of these subjects has their experience in virtue of fact that the fundamental cosmic
subject S has a unified experience to its overarching perspective, involving pain-to-perspective-A,
red-to-perspective-B and buzzing-to-perspective-C. This way of grounding each subject and all
their experiences in the cosmic consciousness appears to satisfy what Goff, adapting Armstrong, calls
the ‘free lunch constraint’ for a theory of fundamental reality, on which the less fundamental facts
(in this case, those of the smaller subjects) are satisfactorily explained by the fundamental fact (the
cosmic subject) – in this instance, by being intuitively nothing over and above it. Through each of
us inheriting our subjecthood directly from the conscious field of the cosmic subject that contains
them, the decombination problem is averted.
    Central to this argument, as Goff notes, is the fact that even if we cannot actively imagine one
conscious mind set up to subsume the perspectives of smaller conscious minds, the scenario reveals
no contradiction or a priori incoherence. But I contend that further probing does reveal the sce-
nario to be incoherent. The critique originates in two objections made by William James (1909) in
The Pluralistic Universe towards the prevalent 19th-century idealism. While his objections target an


                                                  121
                                               Miri Albahari


absolute subject that is omniscient and eternal, I will suggest that they can be redirected, with dev-
astating effect, towards Goff ’s position. The decombination problem that each objection exemplifies
re-appears.
    James’s first objection, which I’ll call the ‘epistemic problem’, is as follows:

     we experience ourselves ignorantly and in division. We indeed differ from the absolute not
     only by defect, but by excess. Our ignorances, for example, bring curiosities and doubts
     by which it cannot be troubled, for it owns eternally the solution of every problem. Our
     impotence entails pains, our imperfection sins, which its perfection keeps at a distance.
                                                                              (1909: Lecture V)

    The epistemic problem arises from furnishing the ‘absolute’s’ epistemically all-encompassing per-
spective with content that also belongs to its smaller relatively ignorant perspectives. The ignorance
owed to a subject’s finite nature generates mental content, such as fear of mortality, that cannot be
coherently ascribed to an absolute in the know. In reply, Goff is likely to point out that far from
being omniscient, the conscious cosmos may well be a ‘blobby mess’ to which predicates like ‘intel-
ligent’ or ‘rational’ don’t apply. But the core of the epistemic problem does not disappear. Consider
Fiona’s intense and pervasive fear that she will be annihilated upon death, a fear whose first-personal
character is partly owed to its mind-dominating nature. Goff ’s cosmic subject must directly experi-
ence not only Fiona’s intense fear of dying but also Fred’s overwhelming excitement at his impend-
ing reincarnation. Yet qualifying just a fraction of the cosmic mind, it’s hard to envisage how each
emotion could, from the personal cosmic perspective, retain their defining first-personal characters
as intense and dominating, and hence as those particular emotions. It is also difficult to conceive of
how the cosmic subject could first-personally harbour what would, to its singular conscious perspec-
tive, be the mass of everyone’s contradicting beliefs and identities, e.g. ‘there is only one life’, ‘there is
more than one life’, ‘I am Fiona’, ‘I am Fred’.9 These epistemic considerations make Goff ’s subject-
grounding scenario not only unimaginable, but I suggest, incoherent.
    James’s second objection, which I’ll call the ‘perspective problem’ is as follows:

     It is impossible to reconcile the peculiarities of our experience with our being only the
     absolute’s mental objects. . . . They are there only for their thinker, and only as he thinks
     them. How, then, can they become severally alive on their own accounts and think them-
     selves quite otherwise than as he [the absolute] thinks them? It is as if the characters in
     a novel were to get up from the pages, and walk away and transact business of their own
     outside of the author’s story.
                                                                                (1909: Lecture V)

   The perspective problem trades on the idea that the specific perspectival character and content of
thoughts and experiences is determined by and available only to their thinker as they are thought up.
But Goff ’s scenario requires that our seemingly unique perspectives also exist as mental objects for
the conscious cosmos. The lurking incoherence is made more explicit in a version of the perspective
objection by Sam Coleman (2014), discussed at length by Shani. Like James’s version, it doubles as
a variant of both the decombination and combination problem through insisting that perspectives
cannot, as a matter of logical fact, survive being subsumed by a larger perspective. In summarising
Coleman’s objection, Shani writes:

     He asks us to imagine two micro-subjects, Red and Blue, such that Red sees only red,
     while Blue seems only blue. Red and Blue combine, in turn, to form a macro-subject, call
     it Mac, which integrates the phenomenal worlds into a single perspective. The problem,


                                                     122
                                Beyond Cosmopsychism and the Great I Am


     says Coleman, is that Red’s and Blue’s perspective do not survive as points of view within
     Mac’s unified perspective. For example, Red’s take on the world is that of seeing red, to the
     exclusion of all else, but Mac’s perspective defies this condition: it may contain seeing blue,
     in addition to seeing red, or it may simply consist of seeing purple . . . the original perspec-
     tives have disappeared from sight.
                                                                                         (2015: 401)

    While Goff ’s subject-grounding scenario seems clearly impaled on this objection, reinforcing
its incoherence, Shani, whose cosmopsychism is also theoretically committed to Schaffer’s priority
monism, believes that he has a way out. He responds to the perspective problem by evoking a notion
of partial grounding. If A only partially grounds B, A does not fully ground and thereby entail B, as
it does on Goff ’s position; rather, B’s features are intelligibly traceable, in part, to A (2015: 403–6).
To see how this is employed to solve the problem, I need to say more about the outline of Shani’s
rich and nuanced position. The cosmic absolute is a vast conscious plenum that operates by what he
calls the ‘lateral duality principle’, whereupon the absolute has a concealed as well as revealed nature.
Concealed to our perspective is the absolute’s subjective interiority – its first-person perspective –
a dynamic and sentient sea of consciousness (or as he calls it, ‘endo-phenomenological expanse’)
whose constant creative activity is revealed to us as its outer expressions in our familiar physical
environment. Embedded in this environment are quasi-independent patterns that emerge and co-
evolve like vortices on an oceanic plenum, some of which are subjects of experience (2015: 410–14).
    Each such concrete perspective, although anchored in the absolute, has, as localised interference
patterns, its own interiority (with perspectival thoughts, perceptions etc.) whose specific character
is concealed from all other perspectives, including that of the absolute. Yet the global sentient and
perspectival nature of the absolute’s conscious field – its unifying ‘light’, as it were – imparts sentience
(generalised what-it-is-likeness) and perspectivality (a first-personal perspective to whom the con-
tents are presented) to the smaller subjects. So while these generic structural features of our conscious
lives are, as on Goff ’s view, directly inherited from the shared medium of the absolute’s conscious
field, the specific hidden interiority to our conscious life is intelligibly explained, via partial ground-
ing, as localised patterns in this sentient medium, avoiding the perspective (and epistemic) problem
(2015: 425–7). The free lunch constraint appears to be met, and the decombination problem averted.
    But if he avoids this problem, he falls into the trap of another. As with Goff ’s view, the absolute
is stipulated by Shani to be a subject of experience who is aware of various contents as its objects.
He correctly notes that part of what it means to be a conscious subject is for any contents within its
field of consciousness to be disclosed to its first-personal perspective (2015: 426) – what Dan Zahavi
(2005) calls their first-person givenness or for-me-ness. At the same time Shani wants to insist that
the contents of our conscious fields, while embedded within the absolute’s field of consciousness, are
hidden to the absolute’s perspective. But he cannot have it both ways. If our conscious perspectives
and their contents are to be embedded within – and illuminated by the sentience of – the absolute’s
conscious field, then, given that the absolute is a subject, our contents (and perhaps perspectives)
must also, by definition, be first-personally revealed to the absolute’s perspective. This then either
contradicts his claim about hidden contents, forcing his position back to what we can collectively call
the ‘incoherent contents objection’ (with its epistemic and perspective problems) or it forces him to
abandon the claim that the absolute is actually a subject of experience (that must be aware of what
is in its field of consciousness).
    A possible way out, following Freya Mathews (2011), might be to deploy a psychoanalytic analogy,
insisting that those aspects of the cosmic subject that ground smaller conscious subjects are as part of
it entirely unconscious and thus closed off to its perspective. But now it is not clear how Mathews
meets the free lunch constraint, by which the generic conscious features of the smaller subjects are
supposed to be adequately explained by their unconscious cosmic ground. Goff ’s and Shani’s scenarios,


                                                    123
                                             Miri Albahari


assuming coherence of initial set-ups, did better in satisfying this constraint, our conscious subject-
hood straight-forwardly inheriting its generic features, sentience and perspectivality, from the con-
scious cosmic field. By renouncing what might be called ‘grounding by inheritance’, cosmopsychists
such as Mathews have to rely on what so far look to be far less obvious solutions to the decombina-
tion problem.10
    The cosmopsychists (along with many of their idealist predecessors) are thus left in a fix. They
can, as Goff and Shani do, initially avoid the decombination problem by proposing a variant of
grounding by inheritance. But then they are forced to either give up on the cosmos being a subject
of experience or have the decombination problem resurface in the form of incoherent contents, with
its epistemic and perspective problems. Or, they can, as Mathews does, give up grounding by inherit-
ance, thereby preserving the cosmos as a subject of coherent experiential content. But then lacking
the free lunch delivered through grounding by inheritance (and short of plausible alternatives) they
are back to the decombination problem. Could the cosmopsychist renounce the prevailing assump-
tion that cosmic consciousness must qualify a subject – as Nagasawa and Wager (2016) do? They
might, but without coherent exposition of what such consciousness could amount to, the position
borders on vacuous.
    It is here that Advaita Vedanta and other mystical traditions, rich in accounts of people having
allegedly experienced subjectless consciousness, can offer a way forward. In its absolute form, this
universal consciousness does not belong to any subject or the cosmos; it is beyond subject/object
duality, and grounds all manifestation. As any contents that might arise within it are not presented as
objects to a grand subjective perspective, incoherence of content (with its epistemic and perspective
problems) is avoided. Indeed, insofar as it is not framed as a puzzle about how a universal subject could
entail smaller subjects, the decombination problem does not arise. But the Perennialist is left with the
formidable task of explaining just how such non-dual consciousness could coherently ground our
individual conscious perspectives and their contents – as well as the objects that we take to be our
mind-independent environment.
    The goal of the remaining sections is thus twofold: first, to offer a conception of universal con-
sciousness that could be an experienceable non-dual grounding-base, and then to schematically show
how such consciousness could conceivably ground what appears to us as spatio-temporal objects – a
task that may, in the end, stretch the notion of grounding beyond its normal range of application.
Rather than a full-blown defence, the following should be seen as the preliminary but critical exer-
cise of clarifying just what would, or could, be argued for, if one were to philosophically defend a
Perennialist metaphysics.


                 3.  Preparing the Ground With Non-Dual Consciousness
To be a non-dual grounding-base, universal consciousness must at the very least be (i) intrinsi-
cally unconfined to subject/object structuring and (ii) spatio-temporally unbound, while being (iii)
humanly experienceable as such. What follows is the first step towards an exercise in its conceivability,
with an account of how our experience could come to seem to partake in such consciousness.
    I have already mentioned that a conscious subject is by definition the locus for a first-personal
perspective on the world, such that its contents are disclosed to its viewpoint within a structured
field of awareness. I will now draw upon my earlier work to say more about how the phenomeno-
logical structure of a subject can, arguably, be construed (Albahari 2006: 7–10, Albahari 2009). The
conscious subject, I suggest, has two discernible components: (a) ‘witness-consciousness’ and (b) a
focal perspective. Witness-consciousness denotes that aspect of consciousness which exemplifies a
sense of present-moment being, and is sentiently luminous, knowing, intransitive and reflexive.11
When directed at objects, witness-consciousness does not take a view from nowhere but appears
from a focal, localised perspective whose circumscribed field, whether waking or dreaming, presents


                                                  124
                               Beyond Cosmopsychism and the Great I Am


for humans as structured by psycho-physical and spatio-temporal parameters. Objects are witnessed
attentively or inattentively, as they come and go from the field. An ‘object’, for these purposes, is
broadly anything discrete that such a subject could pointedly attend to: physical objects, people, per-
ceptions, thoughts, etc. While a subject’s witness-consciousness can be intransitively aware of its own
presence, it can never pointedly attend to itself as something discrete; it is not an object.
     My strategy will be to suggest that perspectivality (component b) depends upon witness-­
consciousness (component a) being aware of objects, such that without the apprehension of objects
there could be no subject (a+b): no perspectival lens through which witness-consciousness could
form a focal point with a structured field of awareness. If we can conceive of a scenario where
witness-­consciousness, or something like it, is nevertheless present, perhaps as a sense of pure
unstructured being, then this would give us a way in which to conceive of consciousness intransi-
tively experiencing itself in its primal ‘non-dual’ mode, if it is indeed primal. I say ‘something like
it’ as witness-consciousness normally presents as directional and object-oriented; without objects it
would lack directedness. Yet while unfamiliar to most in this capacity, it would still exemplify pure
intransitive awareness, and I’ll refer to this mode as ‘conscious awareness’.
     To get a handle on how this may work, we need to first be clearer on how the presence of objects
could phenomenologically furnish witness-consciousness with the psycho-physically, spatio-temporally
structured field of a human perspectival subject. If we look to our current experience, we can begin
to break it down in this way. Consider what directly cues us into the sense of being an embodied
creature occupying a specific region in an external spatio-temporal world. It will involve awareness
of an array of multi-modal perceptual cues – or perceptual-like cues if dreaming – visual, auditory,
tactile, etc., setting external parameters on the boundaries of our experience. Without such cues
could we have any inkling of such a world? Now consider what phenomenologically cues us into a
thicker sense of ourselves as being in – and making sense of – this world. While harder to introspec-
tively discern, cognitive objects are likely to play a central role. Thoughts, memories, emotions, inten-
tions etc. conceivably help impart a sense of bounded coherence and identity around the embodied
internal viewpoint from which all the various cues are experienced. (Note that it is not being claimed
that these objectual cues tell the whole story about how we come to perceive the world; the idea is
rather to make sense of what may be their immediate role in the phenomenological fabric of our
experiencing the world right now).
     Now imagine entering what I will call the ‘Cognisensory Deprivation Tank’. Each conscious
perceptual input – sight, sound, proprioception etc. – snuffs out one by one. Next, all conscious cog-
nitive input, attentive or inattentive, goes too, eventually leaving no perceptions, thoughts, memories,
imaginings, or emotions. But with the exit of each perceptual and cognitive input, it is conceivable
that witness-consciousness, although increasingly less populated with objects, remains no less sharp
or present. Extrapolating to the point whereupon all objects that cue us into a spatio-temporal,
psycho-physical perspective vanish, it is conceivable that ‘we’ are left not in a coma-like vacuum, but
rather with pure and unstructured conscious awareness. Beyond the scope of (structured) imagina-
tion, such awareness may amount to pure subjectivity: an undiluted sense of luminous being or
presence – normally diluted and refracted through the structured filters of cognisensory experience.
In the absence of any cues to create inner (self ) or outer (world) boundaries, or to mark the passage
of time, such objectless awareness, if actively present, could well be experienced as boundless, that is
to say: non-dual, unbound by spatial or psychological parameters, and temporally unbounded – not
coming or going. If, as Maharaj says in the opening passage, its default nature is in fact the unmani-
fest ground of all being, metaphysically prior to space, time and manifestation, then it might well by
default apprehend its nature as such – intransitively, intuitively and non-discursively.
     According to many mystical traditions, such a mode of non-dual (objectless and subjectless) con-
sciousness, known in Advaita Vedanta as nirvikalpa samadhi, is not merely speculative, but attainable in
highly advanced stages of meditation. Determining its psychological possibility is not the mission of


                                                  125
                                             Miri Albahari


this chapter, but it is encouraging to encounter what might turn out to be ‘empirical’ evidence. This
is not to say that the thought (free) experiment, which sequentially and passively removes objects
from the purview of witness-consciousness, is at all accurate in conveying the meditative methods
that would elicit non-dual awareness, nor is it to say that there could in reality be such non-dual
conscious experience (perhaps consciousness requires objects), or that if there were to be such expe-
rience it would be veridical. The thought experiment is rather meant to help us make sense of how
non-dual consciousness, if indeed the ground of all being, might conceivably be experienced as such
by humans, in its pure and native form.
    Suppose that there was the genuinely direct apprehension of non-dual awareness, in say, a medi-
tative mode. A return to bifurcated experience, I surmise, would elicit a profound alteration. The
experient could never again harbour the sense – or, as the traditions say, the illusion – of consciousness
being fundamentally restricted to the ‘shape’ of a subject, with each person’s consciousness assumed
numerically distinct. Having experienced pure consciousness as the ultimate ground of all being,
they will have come to lose all identity as a solid, separate self, such that they now cognise the world
very differently. It is as if a person were from birth to be confined to a square room, and having not
experienced any different, assumed space to be fundamentally constricted to the dimensions of that
room. Upon release into open air, they could never again view space in that confined way, even after
a return to the room prompts its old appearance as square shaped.
    A conception of universal non-dual consciousness as timeless ground of all manifestation can be
reinforced via a further reflection. This locates within our experience what appear to be opposing
intuitions about the present moment, suggesting that their full reconciliation requires those intui-
tions to be sourced in non-dual awareness. The first intuition invites us to consider those elements
within experience that signal ‘right now’. While it is common to think of now as dynamic and flow-
ing (eliciting a moving spotlight analogy in the philosophy of time literature) there is also, I suggest,
an element to our experience of now that seems unmoving, not arising or passing away, and in this
sense conceivably timeless (incapable of coming or going) backing the intuition ‘it’s always now’.12
To which aspect within experience does this element of unmoving nowness seem most naturally
owed – subject or object? Clearly not the objects that come and go. It seems owed, rather, to that
which observes the flow of objects – the subject – and in particular, its modus operandi of witness-­
consciousness. The conceivably timeless aspect within our experience of the present is subjective.
    Turning to the second, opposing intuition: it is commonly supposed that the now or present
moment we experience is not confined to our individual perspectives but is fundamentally objec-
tive. Were we – and indeed all organisms – to vanish, the present would continue to be. While we
can think of this objective present as involving a flow of objects, is there a way to render objective
that unmoving, subjective and conceivably timeless aspect of now that seems sourced in witness-
consciousness? There is, but only if we allow that such consciousness is not intrinsically confined to
subjects’ perspectives but is essentially non-dual. Carried in our minds as an unmoving sense of pres-
ence, conscious awareness will be both subjective and objectively universal, grounding the arising of
all objects as well as subjects. While not conclusive, such reflections help pave the way to conceiving
of a universal non-dual consciousness as the timeless ground for all manifestation.


                   4.  Grounding the World in Non-Dual Consciousness
It now remains to make sense of how non-dual universal consciousness could ground what appears
to us as the spatio-temporal, psycho-physical world of objects, mental and physical. Taking the
setup for the previous thought experiment as our first clue, ‘mind-independent’ objects are fittingly
construed as complex arrays of sensory and cognitive imagery. But rather than being sourced purely
from within an individual’s private perspective, amounting to a form of solipsism, the cognisensory
imagery that frames each subjective perspective will emanate from the non-dual conscious ground


                                                  126
                                Beyond Cosmopsychism and the Great I Am


that can be considered its material cause. How might this emanation be construed in a way that both
accounts for the appearance of multiplicity, while not ‘conditioning’ the unconditioned ground,
such as by casting the appearances as temporal events efficiently caused by it? A promising tactic
will be to treat all distinguishing aspects of the emanation somewhat analogously to how we would
the projective contents of a dream, allowing that there is no subject who is dreamer. The condition-
ing descriptors (spatial, temporal, qualitative, efficiently causal, etc.) will be properly applied to the
multi-perspectival content within the ‘dreamscape’ rather than to any relation between the ground
and content. Our imagery-filled perspectives are thus somehow the contents of a timeless projec-
tive emanation from the non-dual ground of pure consciousness (further implications of which are
visited in the conclusion).
    The content of the projective emanation will manifest as numerous, inter-connecting subject-
object poles: each a finite and unified conscious perspective that is furnished with structured inten-
tional imagistic content, however simple or complex (e.g. atom or human). Following F. H. Bradley,
I refer to these subjects as ‘finite centres’.13 The subjective character and content of each finite centre,
besides partaking in unifying conscious awareness from the timeless absolute, will be determined by
the subject’s own disposition for other objects – themselves either subjects or aggregates of subjects – to
appear to it in a particular way, along with the dispositions of other objects – subjects or aggregates – to
appear to the subject in a particular way. In turn, that subject will be disposed to appear as a particular
object (or aspect) to other finite centres.
    I base my discussion of dispositionality upon the pioneering work of C. B. Martin (2008), on
which I will present some bare bones before saying more about its adaptation to the Advaitic account.
For Martin, objects are propertied regions of space-time, itself a substance. Each property is ontologi-
cally identical to both a disposition and a quality, which, like a duck-rabbit drawing, can be regarded
with emphasis on one aspect or the other. A disposition can manifest in an infinite variety of ways,
but how or whether it manifests will depend upon the co-presence of other ‘reciprocal disposition
partners’ that it teams up with. For example, even if a sample of water were never to come into con-
tact with salt, its properties have

     the directedness of a dispositionality as solvent for salt and not gold . . . for the mutual mani-
     festation of a coming into a solution of salinity. And salt has a directedness and disposition-
     ality as soluble in water and not aqua regia, even without the existence of water, for that
     same mutual manifestation of a coming into a solution of salinity.
                                                                                             (2008: 88)

    As well as being dispositional, a property such as wateriness is qualitative, itself the mutual mani-
festation of further reciprocal disposition partners such as the atomic properties of hydrogen and
oxygen, which are, in turn, the manifestations of subatomic disposition partners. Qualities are either
mental (e.g. sensory qualia) or non-mental (e.g. extensional), serving as the concrete side of a prop-
erty that anchors the disposition to space-time. At any point, what manifests is “the tip of a disposi-
tion iceberg” (2008: 4), its deeply rooted lines of dispositionality or “power-net” always outrunning
the manifestation. Causality occurs without time lag insofar as the co-presence of relevant disposi-
tion partners (e.g. match, striking, oxygen, etc.) involves an immediate manifestation (a bursting into
flame).
    For Martin, then, the double nature of a property is dispositional and qualitative, occurring in the
mind-independent substratum of space-time. On the proposed Advaitic variant, the substratum, if
we can call it that, is not space-time, but non-dual awareness, and each ‘arising’ is not a property, but
a finite centre. Each centre, no matter how simple or complex, has a dispositional and subjective – as
opposed to just qualitative – nature, the subjective nature being the appearance of objects to the per-
spective of a subject. The subject is not an empty perspective but must always co-arise with objects


                                                    127
                                              Miri Albahari


that lend to it a structured spatio-temporal viewpoint. Conversely, objects can never arise without
the perspective of a subject that is aware of them; there are no purely mind-independent objects.
    Filling in from before, the subjective character of each conscious projection will depend upon
three factors, which are usefully emphasised rather than ontologically distinct. First, it will depend
upon the native sense of conscious present-momentness bestowed by the common unifying ground.
Second, upon its own disposition, as an arising subject, for other objects, whether themselves subjects
or aggregates of subjects, to appear to it in a particular way. To the housecat, a book will appear very
differently than to a literate human. If an atom is a subject, another atom will appear to it very differ-
ently, perhaps as primitive buzzing, than to a scientist peering at it through a microscope. Third, the
internal subjective character will depend upon the manifesting dispositions of other objects – finite
centres or their aggregates – that appear to it as various structured qualities. To the human perspec-
tive a housecat, a book and a magnified atom will be disposed to present very different appearances.
    Each finite centre will in turn be disposed, in tandem with other finite centres, to appear as, or
contribute to the appearance of, a variously qualitied object to other subjects; they will be recipro-
cal disposition partners for a mutual manifestation. While a given mutual manifestation is likely
to involve a great many finite centres, it can be individuated by the unified appearance of various
objects to a specific subject. Each object within that subject’s purview will of course itself be either
a finite centre or aggregate of such centres; the manifestations will thus intersect. An aggregate is an
arbitrary grouping of finite centres into an object which, for pragmatic reasons, a subject may treat as
a disposition partner. I have been supposing that atoms and animals are finite centres, while tables and
toasters are not, and it will be a challenge to arbitrate the principles that sort finite centres from mere
aggregates. But mutual manifestations will always be the direct upshot of finite centres, at whichever
level of complexity they naturally occur.
    The conference is ending. Each philosopher’s complex perspective, which takes in the sight of a
green table, will anchor a mutual manifestation that envelopes a wide array of finite centres. Con-
tinuing to suppose that atoms rather than tables are among the direct partnerings, when conference-
goers exit the room they will not leave behind an ‘Edenic’ veridical mind-independent green table,
nor a Lockean or Cartesian primary-qualitied substance, nor a watchful Berkeleian God (or Abso-
lute) to keep the table existent in its mind, nor solipsistic nothingness, nor a Kantian noumenal some-
thing about which nothing can be said, nor a Martinian buzz of qualitative/dispositional properties
arising from space-time, nor atomic particulars with inner conscious or qualitative natures. There
will just be each of the inside perspectives of the dispositionally arising micro-subjects, appearing to
one another as simple objects as they partake in the shared ground of non-dual awareness.


                                            5. Conclusion
Much more needs saying on how the inter-connecting finite centres could help comprise the appear-
ance of the spatio-temporal world with which we are familiar. But as indicated, care must be taken
to not overstep boundaries of what can be said about the position. Readers may have noted that
the absolute non-dual consciousness somewhat resembles Kant’s noumenal ‘subject’ insofar as it is
unconditioned by descriptors of space, time, quality and relation (see Kant 1787/1929: A404). A key
difference is that the Perennialist/Advaitic noumenon is not just a transcendental ground for the
possibility of experience, but can be humanly experienced in its pure unconditioned form as ground
of all being. But just as with Kant’s position, such descriptors can only be properly applied to the
world as experienced or conceived of from within the inter-locking perspectives of each conscious
centre, and from which those descriptors originate. A purely external ‘objective’ account of how the
absolute consciousness grounds its projections, insofar as it would draw upon such descriptors, will
never be possible. Aside from its most general statement as a bare transcendental fact, accounts of
grounding will only be expressible as relative rather than ultimate truths, structured by perspectival


                                                   128
                                    Beyond Cosmopsychism and the Great I Am


limitations of the system. Perhaps paradoxically, it must be with this proviso that any defence of the
Perennialist metaphysic is to make sense.14


                                                         Notes
	 1.	 Ken Wilber is an exception, although his emphasis is on developing a meta-theoretical ‘neo-Perennialist’
         framework into which different disciplines (including philosophy) can be integrated and understood, rather
         than on explaining or justifying the Perennial Philosophy within the field of philosophy itself. For an exam-
         ple of his schema, see his (2006).
	 2.	 German idealists such as Schelling and Hegel might seem to have come close in the notion of intellectual
         intuition – acts of non-discursive apprehension that grasp an absolute that is beyond the subject/object dis-
         tinction. But according to Frederick Beiser, their concept of the absolute “excludes its description as either
         subjective or objective” (2002: 5), and must be interpreted as something neutral, even though the subjective
         could be exemplified in its “highest manifestation, expression or embodiment” (2002: 6). While also beyond
         subject/object duality, the Perennialist absolute is nevertheless the nature of pure subjectivity whose appre-
         hension involves not (merely) an act of intellectual intuition but a radically transformed mode of cognition.
	 3.	 Itay Shani has however recently defended a version of cosmopsychism which he says bears some resem-
         blance to Vedic views of universal consciousness, claiming that view “leaves room for the idea that there are
         non-ordinary conditions under which this epistemic barrier breaks down, opening a gate to the realisation
         that one’s own self is not as separate an entity as one would imagine” (2015: 427). Yet, as this paper will
         imply, in continuing to construe perspectivality as fundamental to both our own minds and universal con-
         sciousness, his model lacks the essential non-dual underpinning that could enable the barrier to break down.
	 4.	 An exception is Nagasawa and Wager (2016) whose cosmopsychism “does not assume that the cosmos is a
         subject of experience exemplifying experiential content”. However, they provide little exposition of how
         they do construe the consciousness.
	5.	 See for example Eliot Deutsch (1969), David Loy (1997), Bina Gupta (1998), and Wolfgang Fasching
         (2011). Advaita Vedanta sometimes alludes to the absolute as ‘Self ’, but being aperspectival, it is not a subject
         of the sort described in this paper.
	 6.	 While Bernardo Kastrup presents an innovative metaphysics that goes beyond cosmopsychism, it still falls
         prey to subject/object dualism insofar as the fundamental universal consciousness (“That Which Experi-
         ences”) forms a subjective perspective harbouring a “stream of inner experiences” as objects (2016: 4).
	 7.	 There are other versions of the combination problem, many alluded to in this volume. For a good survey,
         see also Chalmers (2015, 2017).
	 8.	 While the term ‘combination problem’ is owed to William Seager, the term ‘decombination problem’ has
         been used informally by Itay Shani and Luke Roelofs. There have been other terms, but I find this the
         most apt.
	 9.	 David Chalmers has suggested in conversation that the demonstratives could be experienced by the cosmos
         in a global non-contradictory manner (‘this is Fred’, ‘this is Fiona’, etc), which would ground the local
         indexical facts (‘I am Fred’, ‘I am Fiona’, etc). However, this departs from Goff ’s subject-grounding scenario,
         insofar as the cosmos no longer experiences the subsumed states in their original ‘felt’ format. It thus pre-
         sents the mystery of how the cosmos would experience all the unfolding indexical facts embedded in its
         conscious field: would there be some mode of extrasensory perception?
	10.	 Following Kastrup (2016), one might alternatively suggest that absolute consciousness, like a broken mirror,
         is fragmented into our separate conscious perspectives, a model of Dissociative Identity Disorder providing
         the story about ground. But then it is hard to retain any sense in which the Absolute qua conscious subject
         remains an all-encompassing conscious unity rather than plurality.
 	11.	 Evan Thompson (2015: 14, 17–18) has nicely expounded on most these aspects of consciousness, defining
         ‘luminosity’ as the “power to reveal, like a light”, allowing objects to appear to it; ‘knowing’ as “the abil-
         ity to apprehend whatever appears” and ‘reflexiveness’ as self-revealing. ‘Intransitive’ depicts its luminous,
         self-revealing character as non-objectual. For a more explicitly Advaitic take on witness-consciousness, see
         Gupta (1998: 17–18) and Fasching (2011).
  	12.	 What about dreamless sleep and anaesthesia, when consciousness seems suspended? Again it is arguably
         quite conceivable – and indeed part of Advaitic lore – that while the higher cognitive functions of our
         conscious lives go into repose, the pure knowing/being aspect remains present, so is conceivably timeless.
         For an excellent discussion of consciousness during dreamless sleep, see Thompson (2015: 231–71).
   	13.	 Bradley’s ‘finite centre’ is the immediate and durationless locus for first-personal and bounded indexical
         experience – the raw data out of which we construct durational conceptions of ourselves and the world of


                                                           129
                                                   Miri Albahari


      objects (Bradley 1914: 410–14; Mander 2011: 112–13). In this respect his notion comes close to what I wish
      to convey here.
	14.	 Sincere thanks to Itay Shani, David Chalmers, Christian Lee, Luke Roelofs, Philip Goff, Nin Kirkham, Sam
      Baron, Sonia Albahari, Kieran Golby and the audience at Wollongong University for their helpful feedback.
      It should be noted that this paper was written in 2015 and the idealist metaphysic sketched in Section 3, that
      I now call ‘Perennial Idealism’, has been developed a lot further in Albahari (forthcoming).


                                                   References
Albahari, Miri (2006). Analytical Buddhism: The Two-Tiered Illusion of Self. Basingstoke: Macmillan.
Albahari, Miri (2009). ‘Witness-Consciousness: Its Definition, Appearance and Reality’. Journal of Consciousness
   Studies, 16 (1): 62–84.
Albahari, Miri (forthcoming). ‘Perennial Idealism: A Mystical Solution to the Mind-Body Problem’, Philosophers’
   Imprint.
Beiser, Frederick (2002). German Idealism: The Struggle Against Subjectivism. Cambridge MA: Harvard University
   Press.
Bradley, F. H. (1914). Essays on Truth and Reality. Oxford: Clarendon Press, Oxford University Press.
Chalmers, D. J. (2015). ‘Panpsychism and Panprotopsychism’. In T. Alter and Y. Nagasawa (eds.), Consciousness in
   the Physical World: Essays on Russellian Monism. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 246–77.
Chalmers, D. J. (2017). ‘The Combination Problem for Panpsychism’. In G. Brüntrup and L. Jaskolla (eds.),
   Panpsychism: Contemporary Perspectives. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 179–214.
Coleman, S. (2014). ‘The Real Combination Problem: Panpsychism, Micro-Subjects and Emergence’. Erkennt-
   nis, 79: 19–44.
Deutsch, Eliot (1969). Advaita Vedanta: A Philosophical Reconstruction. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Fasching, Wolfgang (2011). ‘ “I am the Nature of Seeing”: Philosophical Reflections on the Indian Notion of
   Witness-Consciousness’. In M. Siderits, E. Thompson, and D. Zahavi (eds.), Self, No Self? Perspectives and
   Analytical, Phenomenological, & Indian Traditions. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Goff, Philip (2017). Consciousness and Fundamental Reality. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gupta, Bina (1998). The Disinterested Witness: A Fragment of Advaita Vedanta Phenomenology. Evanston, IL: North-
   western University Press.
Huxley, Aldous (1946). The Perennial Philosophy. London: Fonatana Books.
James, William (1909). A Pluralistic Universe: Hibbert Lectures at Manchester College on the Present Situation in Phi-
   losophy. New York: Longmans, Green & Co. (Online edition produced by Felicia Urbanski, David Starner,
   Nicolas Hayes and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team. www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/11984.).
Kant, I. (1787/1929). Critique of Pure Reason. Trans. N. K. Smith. London: Macmillan.
Kastrup, Bernardo (2016). ‘On Why Idealism Is Superior to Physicalism’. www.scribd.com/doc/295795222/
   On-Why-Idealism-is-Superior-to-Physicalism-Bernardo-Kastrup.
Loy, David (1997). Non-Duality: A Study in Comparative Philosophy. New York: Humanity Books.
Maharaj, Nisargadatta (1985). Prior to Consciousness: Talks With Nisargadatta Maharaj. Ed. J. Dunn. Durham, NC:
   The Acorn Press.
Maharaj, Nisargadatta (1994). Consciousness and the Absolute: The Final Talks of Nisargadatta Maharaj. Ed. J. Dunn.
   Durham, NC: Acorn Press.
Mander, W. J. (2011). British Idealism: A History. Oxford: Clarendon Press, Oxford University Press.
Martin, C. B. (2008). The Mind in Nature. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mathews, Freya (2011). ‘Panpsychism as Paradigm’. In M. Blamauer (ed.), The Mental as Fundamental. Frankfurt:
   Ontos, pp. 141–55.
Nagasawa, Yujin, and Wager, Khai (2016). ‘Panpsychism and Priority Cosmopsychism’. In G. Brüntrup and
   L. Jaskolla (eds.), Panpsychism. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 113–29.
Schaffer, Jonathan (2010). ‘Monism: The Priority of the Whole’. Philosophical Review, 119: 31–76.
Shani, Itay (2015). ‘Cosmopsychism: A Holistic Approach to the Metaphysics of Experience’. Philosophical Papers,
   44 (3): 389–437.
Thompson, Evan (2015). Waking, Dreaming, Being: Self and Consciousness in Neuroscience, Meditation and Philosophy.
   New York: Columbia University Press.
Wilber, Ken (2006). ‘From the Great Chain of Being to Postmodernism’. www.kenwilber.com/writings/
   read_pdf/32.
Zahavi, D. (2005). Subjectivity and Selfhood: Investigating the First-Person Perspective. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.




                                                        130
               12
   LIVING COSMOS PANPSYCHISM1
                                         Freya Mathews




                                  1.  Introducing Panpsychism
According to the view that I am calling panpsychism, mind is a fundamental aspect of matter. That
is to say, although mind cannot exist independently of matter, matter also cannot exist independently
of mind. Mind is a part of what matter most fundamentally is. There is in this sense no ‘brute mat-
ter’; the purely externalized ‘stuff ’ proposed by classical physics has no correlate in reality. Whether
the ‘inner’ properties hereby ascribed to matter are characterized in terms of intentionality, agency,
teleology or more overtly psychological characteristics, such as consciousness, apperception, phe-
nomenality, sentience, conativity, subjectivity or spirit, they cannot be captured in purely extensional
terms. Such a view of the nature of reality may be theorized in a variety of very different ways,
from Leibniz’s monads, W. K. Clifford’s ‘mind stuff ’, Whitehead’s ‘prehending’ particles and Williams
James’ ‘mind dust’ to the self-active universes of Spinoza, Schelling and David Bohm, to the intel-
ligent life-systems of Gregory Bateson, or the scenario of nature-as-agent adopted by environmental
philosophers such as Val Plumwood. (For a review of panpsychist streams in the history of ideas, see
Skrbina 2005). All these philosophers argue that mentality, in some sense, is a fundamental aspect of
materiality, and that the world around us has a depth dimension, inaccessible to observation, as well
as an observable structure: it is a psychically textured terrain of embodied subjects or intelligences
rather than a flat manifold of purely externalized entities.
    This type of view has a long history, not only in Western thought but in many other traditions
as well. In the West it was very much in abeyance throughout the 20th century, as metaphysics itself
had fallen into disrepute as an academic discipline. But it has recently started popping up again in
a variety of discursive contexts. Although one can distinguish between several different contempo-
rary streams of panpsychist thought, my main aim here is to discuss the significance of panpsychism
within environmental philosophy.


                                 2.  Environmental Philosophy
Over the last four decades, environmental philosophers have argued that the environmental crisis
produced by industrial development on a global scale is the result of an anthropocentric outlook that
permeates the Western tradition and in particular science and its epochal offshoot, modern civiliza-
tion. Anthropocentrism is the expression, in the moral sphere, of the dichotomization of categories
such as the human and the non-human, or culture and nature, where such dichotomization in turn


                                                  131
                                             Freya Mathews


rests on a strict dualism of mind and matter: mind is the province of the human; matter sans mind
is the province of nature. Without mental attributes, material things or systems cannot matter to
themselves and therefore it does not matter, morally speaking, what happens to them. If mentality is
the exclusive province of humans, then only humans intrinsically matter – only humans are entitled
to moral consideration in their own right. The non-human realm – the realm of mere matter – is
valuable, and hence morally considerable, only insofar as it serves human purposes. We humans can
accordingly use nature as we see fit.
    Environmental philosophers mostly agreed that it would be necessary to restore mentality to
nature if nature were to become a legitimate object of moral concern and consideration in its own
right. They differed however in their various understandings of mind and also in the scope they
assigned to the term, nature. For some, nature was understood in strictly biological terms; it was
considered by others under its cosmological aspect. In the following section I shall review three ver-
sions of environmental panpsychism: the new animisms; mind-in-nature type views or panpsychism-
without-consciousness; and cosmological or ‘living cosmos’ panpsychism.


                         3.  Environmental Versions of Panpsychism

                                        3.1.  New Animisms
New animists tend to borrow their ontology from pre-scientific, often Indigenous, worldviews,
attributing mental status to biological entities, such as organisms and populations, and to ecologi-
cal systems, such as vegetation communities, in something like the way pre-scientific cultures often
attributed spirit to trees, groves, springs, rivers, forests, animals and such like. In adopting the term
animism, however, new animists are sometimes at pains to mark their difference from earlier, colonial
conceptions of animism by pointing out that in Indigenous cultures conceptions of mentality were
not drawn from a human paradigm but rather included the human as a minor subset of a prior realm
of mind construed as co-extensive with nature (Rose 2013). Mind, in other words, was paradigmati-
cally the kind of mentality distributed so variously, with such multi-functionality, right across nature
rather than the kind of reflexive, language-centred consciousness we find in ourselves.
    Rather than seeking to provide a theoretical account of this prior realm of mind however, new
animists are generally happy to leave the actual metaphysical underpinnings of their position rela-
tively unexamined, asserting that their goal is not to explain the world, via appeal to fully theorized
metaphysical categories, but to institute new protocols for being in the world. These protocols are,
again, generally inspired by modalities exemplified in Indigenous, often hunter-gatherer, societies. In
terms used by Graham Harvey (2005), a prominent proponent of the new animism, we are to treat all
things in the world as persons. To treat them as persons is not to impute dualistically conceived spirits
or souls to them, as 19th-century anthropologists supposed that animists did, though it is indeed to
see things as alive. Being alive, however, may be defined more in terms of due protocols than in terms
of theoretical conditions that things must satisfy in order to count as alive. To treat things as persons
is to treat them personally, where this means negotiating with them in matters that concern them.
Harvey compares living in an animist world to walking down a crowded street: one does not simply
plough through the crowd, mowing down whomever happens to be in the way; rather, one weaves
in and out, giving way to someone here, being given way to by someone else there. One negotiates
the crowd instinctively and pragmatically, without needing to deliberate. A principle of respect for
the personhood of other people underlies this negotiation, though such respect need not in any way
be sentimentalized: to respect the personhood of others in a crowd does not imply that one likes
them or is obliged to care for them.
    The new animist viewpoint provides a rich basis for ecological practice, and has been widely
embraced by pagans, wiccans and other practitioners of nature spirituality. It has also inspired


                                                  132
                                       Living Cosmos Panpsychism


ecological philosophers and theorists such as David Abram, Patrick Curry and Deborah Bird Rose.
Personally, I also find this new animism appealing and I acknowledge its contribution to ecologi-
cal ethics in a contemporary context. I am happy to adopt and follow its protocols. However, from
within the reference frame of the Western episteme, such animism does leave certain philosophical
questions unaddressed: which entities can count as alive, in the animist sense? In many animist cul-
tures rocks, for example, may count as inspirited but human artifacts, such as tables or cars, do not.
Why so? And how can entities, such as hills, mountains, woods, streams or springs, which are often
invested with an animist principle, count as living things when their identity is clearly nominal? Such
things are often part of other, more extensive landforms or systems rather than clearly individuated
entities or systems in their own right. In any case, what is it about animate things that entitles them
to be treated with respect, as persons? Moreover, in animism there does seem to be a localism that,
though a healthy counterpoint to the tendency of Western colonial thought to universalize its own
self-serving assumptions, nevertheless perhaps overlooks the spiritual significance of the larger uni-
verse – a question to which I shall return later.


          3.2.  Mind-in-Nature Views or Panpsychism-Without-Consciousness
Not all environmental philosophers are content merely to borrow Indigenous protocols in the man-
ner of the new animists. Some have tried to provide theoretical analyses of mind that could address
the kinds of questions animism sets aside. While at least one of these philosophers, namely Val
Plumwood (2009), does describe herself as a philosophical animist, others eschew both animism
and panpsychism as labels while nevertheless developing outlooks that infuse nature with mind. The
form of mentality attributed to nature however is often distinguished from consciousness, if con-
sciousness is defined as experience in the inner, subjective, introspectively accessible or phenomenal
mode that is the distinctive mode of mind in humans and certain animals.
    I shall call such a view of mind-in-nature, panpsychism-without-consciousness, and in this section
I shall examine Plumwood’s version of it.2
    Plumwood’s panpsychism revolves around the logical category of intentionality. The roots of her
account lie in a work she partly (though cryptically) co-authored with her then husband, Richard
Routley, entitled Exploring Meinong’s Jungle and Beyond, a thousand-page tome addressing the riddle
of intensionality in logic.3
    To track Plumwood’s view, let us start with an explanation of this riddle. There are aspects of
nature that, while not indicative of mind in the sense of consciousness, nevertheless express proper-
ties that are not, and cannot be, manifest to observers. These aspects are not, in other words, part of
the extensional order of nature, accessible to ordinary empiricism; they cannot be fixed by ostensive
reference. Such aspects include the causal powers and dispositions of things, where a disposition is the
tendency of a thing to behave in a particular way in particular circumstances. Powers or dispositions
cannot be observed in the way that ordinary empirical properties, such as shape, size and colour, can.
At the level of appearance all that indicates the presence of a causal power is the fact that whenever
event E1 occurs in certain specified circumstances, it is followed by event E2. It may be inferred from
observations of this type that there is something in the first event – a certain power – that causes the
second, since otherwise why would the second event invariably be predictable or even occur? This
power itself however is not observable; it is not manifest in the appearances but is hidden and can
only ever be inferred from the appearances, just as the presence of mind in sentient beings is hidden
to observers and can only ever be inferred from appearances. Whatever is hidden but ascribable to
things in this way, whether it pertains to thought or merely to matter, logically belongs to the realm
of the intensional.
    Intensionality is puzzling to logicians because it does not fit the extensionality of their semantical
model, a semantics designed to corroborate an empiricist epistemology and a reductive materialist


                                                   133
                                             Freya Mathews


or mechanistic metaphysic. The semantical model in question is extensional in the sense that the
meaning of a term is generally given by its extension, the class of referents the term picks out. So,
for instance, the meaning of the term ‘red’ is given by the class of all red things. We learn what ‘red’
means by having red things pointed out to us. We cannot however learn what the expression ‘the
causal power of billiard balls to move other billiard balls’ means by having such causal powers pointed
out to us. Causal powers cannot be pointed out because they are not empirically manifest. Even the
class of all instances of billiard balls moving other billiard balls does not constitute the extension of
the expression, ‘the causal power of billiard balls to move other billiard balls’, because causality pre-
sumably involves an element of necessity: billiard balls do not just happen to set other billiard balls
in motion; there is, or at least seems to be, a certain necessity in such causal sequences. Necessity,
together with other modal properties, such as possibility and contingency, categorically goes beyond
the appearances: we cannot directly observe the necessities, contingencies or possibilities of a thing’s
nature. The meaning of modal terms accordingly also cannot be given extensionally.
    In order to explain how modal terms can be meaningful, given that they do not conform to
the extensional approach, logicians resort to the apparatus of possible world theory. The meaning
of modal concepts is then explained by reference to events not only in the actual world but also in
possible worlds. So, to revert to billiard balls, when we say that billiard ball A possesses the causal
power to move billiard ball B in specified circumstances, we mean that in all possible worlds in which
A strikes B in the circumstances in question, B will be set in motion. It is the holding of this par-
ticular sequence of events across all worlds, or across all worlds in which the first event occurs, that
indicates the presence of necessity. This is an example of the lengths to which logicians have to go to
provide a semantical analysis of intensional concepts: the meaning of such concepts cannot be ‘read
off ’ the appearances in the way the meaning of straightforwardly empirical concepts can.
    However, as Richard Routley pointed out, the hidden or non-manifest aspects of the world indi-
cated by intensional terms are not rare and exceptional. Physics is full of them, inasmuch as many
of its variables can only be defined dispositionally or via laws of nature which are implicitly modal.
When we turn to the sphere of living organisms, the biosphere, such properties abound: telos, pur-
pose and goal directedness; all these properties of living things and systems are hidden in the inten-
sional sense (Routley 1980: 781–9).
    Intensionality then afforded a way to affirm hidden aspects of nature that could not be accounted
for by reference to the externalities exclusively countenanced by mechanism. But nor could this
mysterious aspect of things be equated with full-fledged mentality, insofar as mentality was taken to
connote the psychological capacity for consciousness. Intensionality, Routley argued, was an ‘inter-
mediate’ category, situated in between the two Cartesian categories of mind and matter and permeat-
ing thought and nature indifferently (Routley 1980: 768).
    Why intensional phenomena ought to be regarded as loci of moral considerability however
remained a further question. The fact that sticks and bits of clay and old scraps of plastic are invested
with causal powers, for instance, and fall under laws of nature, and that causal powers and laws of
nature have modal and hence intensional properties does not on the face of it show why moral
significance should attach to them. Plumwood (1993) clarified the argument when she shifted the
emphasis from intensionality to intentionality.
    Intentionality was a category originally introduced within phenomenology as the indicator
of the mental: the occurrence of intentional phenomena served to mark the mental off from
the non-mental or purely material. Intentionality was defined by Franz Brentano as the prop-
erty of directedness, of pointing beyond what was given. This, Brentano explained, was a peculiar
logical characteristic of psychological phenomena – they did not exist merely ‘in themselves’, as
a lump of matter does, but were always ‘about’ something else, something beyond themselves. So
in our psychological life we think about, say, cats or theories or the future or our own potential;
we feel grudges towards people; we believe in gods or ghosts; we have percepts of sticks or stars.


                                                  134
                                       Living Cosmos Panpsychism


For Brentano, it was this mysterious ‘aboutness’ or directedness-towards-something-beyond-itself,
rather than awareness or consciousness per se, that distinguished the mental from the merely mate-
rial. Intentionality is clearly an instance of intensionality, inasmuch as it shares in the hiddenness,
the crypticness and the ungivenness, of the intensional, but it was understood by Brentano only to
occur in mental contexts.
    As a concept which is explicitly invoked as a marker of mind but which marks mind in a non-­
psychological way, intentionality served Plumwood’s purpose very well. She pointed out that research
in logic had attempted, by applying the test of intentionality, to demonstrate a categorical distinction
between mental and merely material phenomena but had consistently failed to do so: intentional
phenomena persistently turned up in nature as well. Properties such as growth, flourishing, function
and self-directedness, for example, possess the quality of pointing beyond the given that Brentano
had characterised as intentional; hence, they cannot be extensionally defined, any more than psycho-
logical phenomena can. In other words, the properties that characterise mind also turn up in nature,
and these properties cannot be reductively analysed in terms of the purely extensional – despite
the best efforts of logicians. The attempt to restrict analysis to extensional forms of discourse was,
Plumwood observed – in line with Richard Routley’s earlier argument – the corollary, in logic, of
mechanism in science, and the failure of this program signaled the failure of mechanism. The mind-
like cannot be dispelled from nature.
    This argument, which delivered what Plumwood (1993) explicitly described as a weak form
of panpsychism (weak in that it eschewed consciousness), went some way towards answering the
question why intensional phenomena ought to be regarded as morally significant. Since intentional
phenomena, as markers of mind, were morally significant, and since intentional phenomena could
no longer be sharply distinguished from intensional ones, intensional phenomena might be seen as
sharing in the moral significance of the intentional. But Plumwood strengthened the case for moral
considerability by selecting a particular subset of the intentional, namely, the teleological – properties
such as growth, flourishing, function and self- directedness – as the marker of moral status. All beings
and systems with such teleological properties may be said to possess a good or interest of their own
and a capacity to direct their own unfolding in response to the conditions of their life.
    In finding a basis for moral significance in the teleological aspects of nature, Plumwood joined
what was by then a host of other environmental philosophers (Taylor 1986; Johnson 1993; Rodman
1983). What made her approach distinctive was the way she arrived at teleology through intentional-
ity, an argument for teleology more subtle and less dubious than most.
    I have detailed Plumwood’s argument here because it offers a careful account of how forms of
mentality without consciousness are dispersed throughout nature. She insisted that panpsychism must
take this ‘weak’ form based on intentionality rather than consciousness because ‘strong’ panpsychism,
by which she meant the kinds of panpsychism that ascribe consciousness to everything, is still captive
to mind-matter dualism (Plumwood 1993 and personal communication). It is captive to dualism, she
thought, inasmuch as it uncritically accepts as universal the human-derived phenomenal notion of
mind defined by dualism, and merely extends that outward into the rest of nature.
    Teleocentric versions of panpsychism, such as Plumwood’s, do indeed go a long way towards estab-
lishing strong foundations for environmental ethics. They generally emanate in a kind of multi-species
ethic with which I personally am deeply in sympathy. But I am not sure that panpsychism-without-
consciousness is as far as we can go in our investigation of mind in nature. When Plumwood points
out that there is more even to basic physics than sheer externality, she is suggesting that the cat-
egories of physics are already more mysterious than a purely extensional approach allows. But she
is not suggesting that our knowledge of reality can exceed physics. In this respect, her account of
mind in nature, like versions of panpsychism found in contemporary philosophy of consciousness,
fails ultimately to challenge the exclusive authority of Western science to set the parameters of our
understanding of reality.


                                                  135
                                             Freya Mathews


   For a position that seeks to preserve consistency with science while nevertheless exceeding both
the explanatory reach of science and the horizons of possible experience staked out by science, we
need to move up to the cosmological level.


                      3.3.  Cosmological or Living-Cosmos Panpsychism
The primary question addressed by cosmological panpsychism is simply the foundational question
of metaphysics itself: what is the nature of reality at large and what is our relation to it – where this
is arguably the primordial question of all philosophy. The history of cosmological panpsychism is
thus interwoven, albeit in a minor key, with the entire history of philosophy. It is beyond the scope
of the present chapter to detail this history; suffice it to say that the most notable exponents of the
kind of tendency I am associating with cosmological panpsychism in the Western tradition include
pre-Socratics such as Empedocles and Parmenides, and, in the modern era, Spinoza and certain of
the German Romantics, such as Fichte, Schelling and Schopenhauer as well as 19th-century thinkers
such as C. S. Peirce. One prominent cosmological panpsychist of the 20th century is David Bohm.
    Philosophy in this grand style – addressed to ultimate questions about the nature of reality and our
own place in the larger scheme of things – was radically out of fashion throughout much of the 20th
century, both in analytical philosophy and in continental philosophy. If I may be permitted a quick
personal aside, I can provide firsthand testimony to this historical fact. As a student in the 1970s, I was
drawn to philosophy by a deep sense of affinity with Spinoza; I wanted to become a philosopher in
the Spinozist tradition. But when it came time to embark on a doctoral thesis at the University of
London, I found that my keenness to tackle the kinds of questions Spinoza had explored had to be
filtered through an elaborate lens of logic and semantics. My thesis became a study of the metaphysical
foundations of modal logic – the logic of possibility, contingency and necessity – and took the form of
a critique of possible world theory, the then-fashionable semantic apparatus for the analysis of modal
statements. (Shades of the Routleys’ focus on the riddle of intensionality here!) Eventually I found a
home for my metaphysical speculations in the new and still quite marginal discourse of environmental
philosophy, in which, as I have mentioned, panpsychist tendencies were already in evidence.
    Now that metaphysics has regained a certain respectability however, one can perhaps pursue the
idea of cosmological panpsychism with a little more confidence. Excitingly, several new versions of
this view have recently appeared within the context of philosophy of consciousness (Shani 2015;
Jaskolla and Buck 2012; Nagasawa and Wager 2016). Here however I would like to outline and
extend the view developed in my own earlier work as its implications for environmental thought
were always core to its purpose: my premise was always that the malaise of modern civilization, as
manifested in the environmental crisis, is, au font, a metaphysical one.
    Cosmological panpsychism, as I understand it then, is a response to basic questions of metaphysics,
including the following. Why does the universe – the observable world, as represented by physics –
exist? Why is it a universe, a unity, i.e. why does it cohere, hang together, in the way that it does?
Why is space – the frame of physics – unbounded yet unbroken, an indivisible wholeness, a field-like
manifold? Why does it not break up, granulate, fragment, and hence cease to be the field that it is,
the ground for physical existence?4 Why is the frame of physics space? To such questions, physics
of course has no answers. It cannot explain why there are laws that hold physical structures together
and thereby guarantee the overall cohering of things. From the viewpoint of physics, this cohering
is ad hoc, contingent; there is nothing in the nature of physicality per se that appears to underpin it.
    Cosmological panpsychism, however, offers answers to these questions. As soon as an inner, sub-
jectival dimension – the sense of self-presence accessible to introspection – is seen as integral to
the nature not merely of matter but of physicality per se, which is to say, the entire field of spatio-
temporal existence in its totality, then the necessity of this cohering of physical existence into a unity,



                                                   136
                                        Living Cosmos Panpsychism


a universe, an indivisible manifold such as that of space-in-time, is explained.5 Subjectivity is itself,
by its very nature, field-like, holistic, internally interpermeating, indivisible, unbounded. One’s sub-
jectivity cannot plausibly be constituted atomistically, as an aggregate of discrete units of experience
or even as a continuum of point-like experiences. If mind is as primal as physicality in the overall
scheme of things then, if it is immanent in physicality per se, and mind is understood as the innerness,
the sense of self-presence or subjectivity subtending consciousness, then physicality must reflect the
indivisible nature of mind. Physicality must exhibit the same field-like structure as mind.
    Of course, the question might be pushed further back: we might ask why mind, in turn, is neces-
sarily indivisible and field-like. Granted, if reality has an inner, subjectival dimension and subjectivity
is field-like then reality must itself be field-like, but why is indivisibility or field-likeness inherent in
the nature of subjectivity in the first place? In answer to this question, I would suggest that the field-
likeness of mind is tied up with the self-evident field-likeness of meaning – the intrinsically interleav-
ing and over-layering and interpermeating nature of meaning – and thereby with the constitution of
experience through meaning. The kind of holistic internal indivisibility that confers unity on mind,
in other words, is tied up with the necessary indivisibility of meaning. Subjectivity is the medium
for a tissue of meanings that cannot be pulled apart without ceasing to be meaning – and without
subjectivity thereby ceasing to exist. To the extent that meaning is the very stuff of mind then, the
structure of mind must partake of the interpermeation and indivisibility that is characteristic of
meaning. This is not to say that we might not identify or describe individual experiences by abstract-
ing them from the field of experience – as this sense datum or that itch, this moment of elation or
that insight into the nature of, say, number. It is just that such experiences cannot actually exist in
isolation from the entire field of the subject’s experience, and this field-like structure of subjectivity
is a function of meaning.
    In speaking of the field-like structure of subjectivity as a function of meaning, I am using the
term ‘meaning’ not technically in a semantic or symbolic sense but in a more fundamental sense, to
indicate the basic condition of things mattering – of things having relevance, significance, value. In
other words, I am using ‘meaning’ in the sense of meaningfulness, the meaningfulness that we impute
to life itself when we ponder ‘the meaning of life’. And meaningfulness in this sense must ultimately
be referenced to beings with an interest in their own existence. In my book, The Ecological Self,
I termed such beings selves: a self is any entity, human or otherwise, that is systemically organised to
maintain itself in existence by its own reflexive efforts.6 Selves are thus defined by such interests: they
have a constitutive interest in self-maintenance and self-increase. It is relative to the interests of such
selves that things in the environment – particular objects, circumstances – assume significance, rel-
evance, value. If there were no selves in the world, everything would just be what it is – nothing that
occurred would matter more or less than anything else, so nothing would be meaningful. Specific
meanings – the meanings of specific words or gestures, for instance – develop out of this underly-
ing meaningfulness: ‘I’, ‘you’, ‘dog’, ‘run’, ‘red’ all develop, as discriminations, against this background
of interests. If nothing mattered to us, there would be no reason to make the semantic discrimina-
tions we do make – or indeed any semantic or perceptual discriminations – in the first place. In
the absence of beings with interests, it is hard to see how reality could be considered determinately
differentiated in itself at all, since all possible discriminations would co-exist in a kind of singularity:
in the absence of selves, and hence in the absence of discrimination, there could be no determinable
entities nor hence could there be any fixed spatio-temporal intervals between entities. Without fixed
spatio-temporal intervals, no metric for either space or time could even in principle be defined. It
would follow that no extension in either space or time would exist. Might not then such a state of
non-discrimination in fact be what the term ‘singularity’ implies? Not so much an originary state of
infinite compression as simply reality considered logically under its undiscriminated aspect? But here
I am jumping ahead – I shall return to this point later.



                                                    137
                                                Freya Mathews


    To see the universe as a whole as having a subjectival aspect inextricable from its physical aspect,
then, is to see it as structured by meaning or meaningfulness in the present underlying sense. And
to see it as structured by meaningfulness is to regard it as mattering to itself – as constituting a self-
realizing system in its own right, with an interest in its own self-existence and indeed its self-increase.
To regard the universe in this way is thus to view it too as a kind of self – a very special, sui generis self,
indeed, but a self nonetheless, self-actualizing, self-preserving and self-expanding – a Self. (It is not
hard to appreciate that a view of the universe as self-actualizing, self-preserving and self-expanding
is by no means incongruent with contemporary cosmology.)
    From the viewpoint of such a cosmological version of panpsychism, the empirical world, as
charted by physics, is the outward appearance of an inner field of subjectivity, indeed of conativity,
where by ‘conativity’ I mean precisely the will or impulse of a self to realize and increase its own
existence.7 Such a cosmological Self, being essentially conative, will be self-creating and in this sense
its existence will be necessary. Panpsychism on a cosmological scale thus offers an answer to the ques-
tion of why a universe exists. And, as a cosmological subject imbued with an inner, subjective sense
of itself, this universe will, as I have already explained, cohere as an indivisible unity, where such unity
and indivisibility will be manifested in the lawlikeness that ensures the spatiotemporal coherence of
reality under its outer, physical aspect. However, although the universe, under both its outer and inner
aspects, coheres as a unity, it also undergoes self-differentiation. In Spinozist and Einsteinian style, its
field-like fabric ripples and folds locally to form a dynamic manifold of ever-changing, finite ‘modes’;
viewed from the outside, these modes appear as the empirical particulars observable by ourselves and
described by physics; viewed from the inside, they constitute a texture of ever-unfolding impulse,
will, felt force. This universe is thus both a psychophysical unity and a manifold of psychophysical
differentia. Amongst its differentia, there are some which are themselves organized as nested self-
realizing systems or selves. These include organisms and perhaps higher-order living systems, such
as ecosystems and biospheres. This set of finite selves represents a tiny but significant subset of the
wider, ever-changing set of differentia. Selves are significant, amidst the vast array of other differentia,
because they represent real (because self-realizing) though relative (because not substantivally dis-
crete) loci of subjectivity and conativity in their own right. It is from the perspective of such finite
selves that reality can be said to present an ‘outward’ appearance.
    In sum, cosmological panpsychism may be articulated via a cluster of core categories: selfhood,
defined as the status possessed by self-realizing systems; conativity, the impulse towards self-existence
and self-increase that informs the self; reflexivity, the capacity of a system to reference itself; subjectivity,
the felt sense of self-presence that underlies consciousness; and meaningfulness, the basis for making
the discriminations that organize experience, where such discriminations in turn become the basis
for thought and language in selves with the capacity for such modalities of consciousness. Selves are
always relationally configured through ceaseless exchange with other selves and systems, up through
indefinite levels of organization. In this sense, the impulse to reach out for ‘the other’ (where such
reaching out may take the form of appetite, desire or communicativity) is always the flip side of the
conative drive towards self-existence and self-increase.
    Relative to the universe as a whole, qua ultimate Self or Self-realizing system, there are of course
no exterior selves or systems via exchange with which it can relationally configure itself. It is this
which occasions the need for cosmic Self-differentiation. Interaction with (real though relative)
finite selves constellated through Self-differentiation on the part of the cosmic Self offers the only
opportunity of exchange for such a Self. Since communication represents an essential horizon of
self-realization and self-increase for any system structured ab initio, as this universe is, by meaning,
exchange with finite selves may take communicative form. The cosmos as Self then is seen as capable
of and as actively seeking communicative engagement with its finite modes, or at any rate with those
of them capable of such engagement. It is the cosmos under this communicative aspect that I call
the ‘living cosmos’.


                                                      138
                                        Living Cosmos Panpsychism


    Though the living cosmos appears to its finite modes as extended in observable space, it does
not experience itself as so extended. In itself, reality is prior to the discriminations of finite selves
that select out from the flux of its self-actualizing activity those determinations that allow for
metrics of both space and time to be established. Since this self-activity of reality is an expression
of its conativity, it will be purposeful rather than arbitrary or merely chaotic in its felt form – its
felt dynamics will cohere seamlessly around primal purpose. But from the perspectives of finite
selves constellating within those felt dynamics – selves shaped by their own specific conativities
but not necessarily attuned to the enfolding purpose of the whole – the self-activity of reality will
appear vastly variegated and differentiated. Spinoza’s distinction between natura naturans (nature
as self-active and self-realizing, viewed under its undifferentiated, unitive, pre–spatially-extended
aspect) and natura naturata (nature as the order of causally related finite modes organized deter-
ministically in space) may serve to clarify this point. Natura is of course in both these instances one
and the same; it is just nature viewed, in the case of natura naturans, from the perspective of itself
as a whole; while in the case of natura naturata, it is nature viewed from the perspective of a finite
mode. Spinoza illustrates this distinction by analogy with a circle also viewed under two different
aspects (The Ethics, Part 2, Note to Prop VIII). Any circle formally contains an infinite number of
equal rectangles. From the perspective of the figure as a whole, the set of infinite rectangles would
appear as a simple unity – the circle: the rectangles would blend and cancel one another to describe
a circumference. But if the figure is viewed from within, from the perspective of any one of the
internal rectangles, it will appear not as a simple unity – which is to say, as a circle – but as a very
large set of pointy particulars, because the rectangle from which the figure is viewed will not be
observable to itself and hence the set of rectangles required for that figure to resolve into a circle
will not be complete.
    Similarly, from the viewpoint of the living cosmos itself, its own self-activity will be transparently
suffused with its conative purpose, but from the viewpoint of finite modes this primal purpose may
have become scattered, like light, into millions of points of individual conativity.
    As a wellspring of the felt force of experience, unbounded and field-like in its quality, fired into
coherence by self-purpose though in no way in itself located or extended in space, the living cosmos
may be potentially subjectively present in its diffuse entirety to each of its finite modes. It may be for
this reason that the universe can manifest locally, in instances of communicative engagement with
individuals, wherever individuals with the capacity and inclination so to engage occur.
    To see reality from this perspective is to take a step not merely from the descriptive realm of
science but even from the realm of ethics (the province of teleocentric philosophies) to that of spir-
ituality: as a responsive presence enfolding us, reality invites us not merely to recognize our moral
obligation to all selves or life-systems but also to configure our existence in accordance with the
larger meanings congruent with its own conativity. In other words, we may expect to discover in the
fabric of reality a normative grain or intimation of how to live. Since reality owes its overall make-
up to its conative ends – those pertaining to its self-realization and self-increase – patterns expres-
sive of those ends will inevitably recur throughout the externalized realm of causally conditioned
nature (natura naturata). In the context of life on earth, we find such patterns in the inexhaustible
regenerativity and renewability of life, but also in a tendency towards ever-increasing differentiation
and communicativity across and within all forms of life. Elsewhere I have identified the principle
discernible in these patterns as that of conativity modulated by a logic of least resistance, where the latter
may be understood as a logic of accommodation to our life-environment (Mathews 2011). If our
own destinies are to be consistent with the primal conativity of the cosmos, we need to conform to
these patterns of accommodation, regenerativity and communicativity.8
    In pre-agrarian societies, in which peoples lived by hunting and gathering in close association
with and attunement to ecological systems, this normative grain in the fabric of reality was readily
discerned and enshrined as Law. Law was explicitly acknowledged – and is still acknowledged today


                                                     139
                                            Freya Mathews


by peoples who have managed to preserve Indigenous ways of life – as inhering in the land. As Hob-
bles Danaiyarri, a Mudbura man of Yarralin in the Northern Territory of Australia explained it to
anthropologist, Deborah Bird Rose: ‘Everything come up out of ground – language, people, emu,
kangaroo, grass. That’s Law’ (1996: 9).
    This Law is not merely the result of blind or mechanical natural selection, but emanates from the
meanings, the stories, that underlie those natural processes. Aboriginal people refer to this meaning
dimension that inheres in the manifest or empirical world as Dreaming, and stories that translate
those meanings into the language of humans, as Dreamings. As another of Rose’s informants, Mus-
solini Harvey, a Yanyuwa man from the Gulf of Carpentaria, told her:

    The Dreamings made our Law or narnu-Yuwa. This Law is the way we live, our rules. This
    Law is our ceremonies, our songs, our stories; all of these things came from the Dream-
    ing . . . our Law is not like European [l]aw which is always changing – new government,
    new laws; but our Law cannot change, we did not make it. The Law was made by the
    Dreamings many, many years ago and given to our ancestors and they gave it to us. . . . The
    Dreamings are our ancestors, no matter if they are fish, birds, men, women, animals, wind
    or rain. It was these Dreamings that made our Law. All things in our country have Law, they
    have ceremony and song.
                                                                                     (1996: 26)

Just as Law in this sense does not equate to man-made European laws so it in no way equates to
the descriptive, quantitative ‘laws of nature’ encoded in science and strictly formulated on the ‘fact’
side of the presumed fact-value dichotomy in terms of which science so emphatically defines itself.
Rather, Law consists of adaptive and prescriptive guidelines derived from close collaboration with
living systems together with poetic attunement to narratives immanent, as Dreamings or as the very
Dreaming itself, in the realm of matter.
    In the context of Law, understood not as a rational postulate, in the manner of ethics, but as a
palpable, enfolding normativity that makes itself felt to us as the very meaning of our existence,
inextricable from our deepest attachments, ‘environmental ethics’ is transformed from a rational duty,
external to our own interests, to a whole-hearted inclination to take care of the cosmos. Indeed it
becomes our deepest taproot, a new dimension of love that turns us definitively on our metaphysical
and motivational axis.
    The religions that accompanied the rise of agrarian civilizations retain a memory of Law in this
original sense – a law of accommodation to the needs of others in the interests of a larger whole. ‘Do
unto others’ remains the moral touchstone of all major religions. But agrarianism, setting society as
it did at a remove from nature, led to a new, ever-increasing reliance on human artifice and a new
ethos of domestication and dominion with respect to the rest of life. The ‘others’ intended by the
injunction, ‘do unto others’, progressively contracted to the exclusively human, till most religions
eventually became arch vehicles of anthropocentrism. However, living-cosmos panpsychism, with its
recognition of normativity in the fabric of reality, may be seen as a metaphysical underpinning for
the centrality of this law of accommodation – whether in the form of Dharma, Covenant, Dao (Way)
or Sharia (also Way) – in the configuration of religion, while also insisting upon its application to
all living things.
    The communicativity of reality, according to living-cosmos panpsychism, is not necessarily a given
of our experience but may need to be activated via practices of address or invocation. Responses to
such address may be manifested through serendipitous conjunctions or synchronistic arrangements
of circumstances. From this perspective, the ‘language’ the world speaks, when it does speak, is a
poetic – concretised and particularized – one. For example, in relevant invocational settings, it may



                                                 140
                                       Living Cosmos Panpsychism


take the form of a bush burning on a mountain, a raven participating discreetly in a funeral ceremony,
a butterfly alighting on a dead woman’s breast, a message bird appearing out of nowhere to show
the way, lightning punctuating a ritual performance with apposite displays. All such ‘signs’, whether
occurring in religious contexts or not, may be seen as instances of a vast poetic repertory, a repertory
of imagery, of meaning conveyed through the symbolic resonance of things. It is in such language
then that our invocations may need to be couched, since it is in such language that the world is able
to respond: it is able to speak things. For things to acquire poetic resonance however, they generally
need to be framed within a narrative context, which is why religious and spiritual traditions, and the
liturgies which express them, generally rest on and are defined by founding narratives. In Indigenous
societies, invocations are likewise shaped by Dreaming stories. But the efficacy of invocation need
not necessarily be confined to either religious or Indigenous contexts.
    When the living cosmos responds, in person as it were, to our poetic address, in terms referenced
to the particular idiom of our invocation, we feel so intimately and extravagantly blessed, so moved
and shaken on our metaphysical moorings, that our allegiance henceforth will be first and foremost
to this cosmos itself, generally under its local aspect, the place or physical context which provides
the lexicon of revelation. Love of world in this sense becomes our deepest attachment. It replaces
self-love as the root of our motivation.
    Wherever communicative engagement with reality is activated in this way, we might speak of a
‘poetic order’ – an order of poetic revelation – unfolding alongside the causal order ordained by sci-
ence. Such a poetic order, or order of meaning, will exceed the causal order but in no way contradict
it. We may call this poetic order, and the practice of participating in it, ontopoetics. Ontopoetics opens
up a world of potential new meaning and experience hidden within the world already so familiar to
us from science (Mathews 2017).
    In closing, I would like to suggest that living-cosmos panpsychism makes sense of much religious
experience without either acquiescing in supernatural ontologies on the one hand or contradicting
science on the other. Indeed, it explains both the normative core of religion while also throwing
light on certain of the questions that challenge the ultimacy of science. Why space? Why coherence?
Why unity? Nonetheless, the prime affinity of living-cosmos panpsychism lies with neither religion
nor science but with those Indigenous ontologies of Law and Land that religion and science left
behind. In Australian Aboriginal thought, mind is, as it is in living-cosmos panpsychism, primordial;
human consciousness is just a single mode of this universally distributed and diversely embodied
mind (Viveiros de Castro 1998; Rose 2013; Mathews 2003). This stands in stark contrast to the way
in which, in Western scientific and religious thought, mind has been seen as paradigmatically instan-
tiated in humans, other entities being either devoid of it or attributed with it only to the degree they
are perceived as resembling us (Rose 2013). From the viewpoint of living-cosmos panpsychism, the
latter view gets things not merely wrong but precisely back to front, for this very property we claim
so exclusively for ourselves is in fact the condition for spatiotemporal existence per se. In the form of
primordial conativity, mind is the first property reality must possess if physics itself is to be possible.
And in possessing it, the living cosmos also grounds a normative Law which is as immanent in its
fabric as are space and time.
    Although Kant has in no way figured in the development of the present account of living-cosmos
panpsychism and does not usually find himself in the company of Indigenous thinkers, he may have
approved. The quest of his life, etched on his tombstone, was to reconcile ‘the starry heavens above’
with ‘the moral law within’. He intuited that the two were somehow fused at the root (along with
beauty, figured in his Third Critique as forms of coherence). But his philosophical system allowed for
no exploration of this mystery. Perhaps the ‘singularity’ I have here called the living cosmos is the
noumenon in which the starry heavens and the moral law, and indeed the beauty that emanates from
coherence, intelligibly inhere.



                                                   141
                                                      Freya Mathews


                                                           Notes
1	 .	 Several passages in this article have been adapted from Mathews (2015) and Mathews (2017).
 	2.	 Space forbids discussing a second thinker in this category worth mentioning: Gregory Bateson (see his 1979).
  	3.	 At that time Plumwood was writing under the name of Val Routley.
   	4.	 There are theories in physics which do ascribe a sub-particle foamlike or granular structure to space. For
            a recent discussion of these, see Ferreira 2014. But these are not inconsistent with the perfect macro-level
            cohering of space as the frame for physical processes.
    	5.	 I have elsewhere introduced a distinction between the two terms, ‘subjective’ and ‘subjectival’ (Mathews
            1991). ‘Subjective’ refers to the felt quality of experience, ‘subjectival’ to the capacity for having such experi-
            ence. An example might illustrate why the distinction is important. To speak of ‘the subjective nature of real-
            ity’ implies that reality is mind-dependent i.e. that it is ‘in my mind’, where this suggests idealism. To speak
            of ‘the subjectival nature of reality’, however, implies that reality itself has the capacity for experience, where
            this suggests panpsychism.
     	6.	 Self in this sense can be defined in terms of autopoietic theory, as it is in the work of Humberto Maturana and
            Francisco Varela; but this notion of self-realization as the essence of self goes back at least as far as Spinoza.
      	7.	 The notion of conativity thus represents a further articulation of teleology, but in the present context teleol-
            ogy is defined on a cosmological scale and in terms much more connotative of feeling than the versions of
            teleocentrism examined earlier.
       	8.	 To the question, how can finite selves depart from these patterns if they are themselves part of the conative
            unfolding of the living cosmos?, I would reply that the same faculty of reflexivity which enables us to com-
            municate with reality in the ways I describe in this chapter – where such forms of communicativity do them-
            selves contribute to the self unfolding of the cosmos – inevitably also enables us to reflect upon and hence
            deviate from our conditioned, ecological responses to life situations, where, in other species, such ecological
            responses exhibit patterns of cohering.


                                                       References
Bateson, Gregory (1979). Mind and Nature: A Necessary Unity. New York: Dutton.
Castro, Eduardo Viveiros de (1998). ‘Cosmological Deixis and Amerindian Perspectivism’. The Journal of the
    Royal Anthropological Institute, 4 (3): 469–88.
Ferreira, Pedro G. (2014). The Perfect Theory: A Century of Geniuses and the Battle Over General Relativity. London:
    Little, Brown.
Harvey, Graham (2005). ‘Animist Manifesto’. Accessed August 14, 2017. www.earthboundpeople.com/wp-con
    tent/uploads/2015/03/An-Animist-Manifesto-Graham-Harvey-2012.pdf.
Jaskolla, L. J., and Buck, A. J. (2012). ‘Does Panexperiential Holism Solve the Combination Problem?’ Journal of
    Consciousness Studies, 19: 190–9.
Johnson, Lawrence (1993). A Morally Deep World: An Essay on Moral Significance and Environmental Ethics. Cam-
    bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mathews, Freya (1991). The Ecological Self. London: Routledge.
Mathews, Freya (2003). For Love of Matter: A Contemporary Panpsychism. Albany: SUNY Press.
Mathews, Freya (2011). ‘Towards a Deeper Philosophy of Biomimicry’. Organization and Environment, 24 (4):
    364–87.
Mathews, Freya (2015). ‘Environmental Philosophy’. In N. Trakakis and G. Oppie (eds.), A History of Philosophy
    in Australia and New Zealand. Dordrecht: Springer Publishing, pp. 543–91.
Mathews, Freya (2017). ‘Panpsychism: Position Statement’, ‘First Response’ and ‘Second Response’. In G. Oppie
    and N. Trakakis (eds.), Philosophies of Religions: Multi-Faith Dialogues. London: Routledge.
Nagasawa, Y., and Wager, K. (2016). ‘Panpsychism and Priority Cosmopsychism’. In G. Brüntrup and L. Jaskola
    (eds.), Panpsychism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Plumwood, Val (1993). Feminism and the Mastery of Nature. London and New York: Routledge.
Plumwood, Val (2009). ‘Nature in the Active Voice’. Australian Humanities Review, 46: 113–29.
Rodman, John (1983). ‘Four Forms of Ecological Consciousness Reconsidered’. In D. Scherer and T. Attig
    (eds.), Ethics and the Environment. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, pp. 82–92.
Rose, Deborah Bird (1996). Nourishing Terrains: Australian Aboriginal Views of Landscape and Wilderness. Canberra:
    Australian Heritage Commission.
Rose, Deborah Bird (2013). ‘Val Plumwood’s Philosophical Animism: Attentive Interactions in the Sentient
    World’. Environmental Humanities, 3: 93–109.



                                                             142
                                         Living Cosmos Panpsychism


Routley, Richard (1980). Exploring Meinong’s Jungle and Beyond. Departmental Monograph 3. Canberra: Philoso-
   phy Department, Research School of Social Sciences, Australian National University.
Shani, Itay (2015). ‘Cosmopsychism: A Holistic Approach to the Metaphysics of Experience’. Philosophical Papers,
   44 (3): 389–437.
Skrbina, David (2005). Panpsychism in the West. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Taylor, Paul (1986). Respect for Nature. Princeton: Princeton University Press.




                                                     143
                  13
            COSMOPSYCHISM,
          MICROPSYCHISM AND
        THE GROUNDING RELATION
                                            Philip Goff


Panpsychism is the view that consciousness is fundamental and ubiquitous. The most promising form
of panpsychism is constitutive panpsychism, which we can define as follows:

    Constitutive panpsychism – O-consciousness (the ‘ordinary’ or ‘organic’ consciousness we pre-
    theoretically associate with humans and other animals) is not fundamental but is grounded
    in a more fundamental form of consciousness which is ubiquitous throughout nature.1

Constitutive panpsychism is most commonly construed as a ‘bottom-up’ view:

    Constitutive Micropsychism – All facts – including the facts about o-consciousness – are
    grounded in consciousness-involving facts at the micro-level.2

However, there is increasing attention being given to the ‘top-down’ version of constitutive panpsychism:

    Constitutive Cosmopsychism – All facts – including the facts about o-consciousness – are
    grounded in consciousness-involving facts concerning the universe.3

   People still have a giggle when they hear about conscious electrons or the consciousness of the
universe. But those who are genuinely interested in finding a place for consciousness in the natural
world ought to appreciate that there is a case to be made for the view. We can see the contemporary
mind-body problem as the following dilemma:

1.	 There are strong empirical reasons for doubting dualism: If there were fundamental mental prop-
    erties in or associated with the brain that regularly impacted on the physical processes that gov-
    ern behaviour, then this would show up in our neuroscience. We would find physical changes
    in the brain that have no physical cause. The fact that we don’t find brain events that can’t be
    explained in terms of physical laws constitutes a strong and ever-growing inductive case against
    dualism (Papineau 2001; Goff 2019).
2.	 There are strong philosophical reasons for doubting physicalism: The physical facts about my body
    and brain can wholly account for my conscious experience only if those physical facts neces-
    sitate the facts about my conscious experience. If the physical facts about my brain necessitate



                                                  144
                                     Cosmopsychism, Micropsychism


     the facts about my conscious experience, then there is no possible world in which there is a
     functioning body and brain physically identical to my own but in which there is no conscious-
     ness. And yet there is good reason to think that such a world is conceivable, in the sense of being
     rationally coherent, and this gives us good reason to think that such a world is possible (Chalm-
     ers 2009; Goff 2017, 2019).

By offering a non-physicalist reduction of human consciousness, constitutive panpsychism offers
hope of avoiding this dilemma altogether. Of course, there are thoughtful and challenging objections
to constitutive panpsychism but anyone who rejects the view simply because ‘it’s a bit weird’ is not
serious about the project of trying to find out what reality is really like.
    A crucial element in the definition of constitutive panpsychism is the grounding relation. In this
chapter I want to get clearer on what constitutive panpsychism is by examining what the grounding
relation is. I will try to show that constitutive micropsychism and constitutive cosmopsychism involve
very different conceptions of the grounding relation, and that as a result the constitutive micropsy-
chist but not the constitutive cosmopsychist is committed to a deflationary view of ­o-consciousness.
I conclude on the basis of this that cosmopsychism is the more plausible form of constitutive panpsy-
chism. I will only be concerned here with constitutive forms of panpsychism, and so in what follows
I will refer to constitutive micropsychism simply as ‘micropsychism’ and constitutive cosmopsychism
simply as ‘cosmopsychism’.


                                      1.  What Is Grounding?
From the 1930s onwards there was great deal of hostility to the project of metaphysics in analytic
philosophy. At some point in the 1970s, with no explanation as to why it had become acceptable,
people started doing metaphysics again, and today most departments in the analytic tradition have
active engagement with the subject. More recently many analytic metaphysicians have gravitated
towards the use of an extremely traditional vocabulary, involving primitive notions such as essence and
fundamental being (Lewis 1983; Fine 1994; Sider 2012). One such primitive notion which has received
a great deal of attention in the literature is the grounding relation (Schaffer 2009; Rosen 2010).
   The grounding relation is taken to be a non-causal explanatory relation that holds between facts. The
prima facie need for such a relation is given by reflection on examples:

•	   There is a party at Jane’s in virtue of the fact that Rod, Jane and Freddy are reveling at Jane’s.
•	   The rose is red in virtue of the fact that the rose is scarlet.
•	   There is a table at location L in virtue of the fact that atoms are arranged table-wise at L.

The italicised phrase in the preceding examples seems to express an explanatory relationship: the
party exists because Rod, Jane and Freddy are revelling, the rose is red because it’s scarlet. But this
explanatory relationship is not causal: Rod, Jane and Freddy’s revelling does not bring into being a
new entity – the party – that floats above their heads; the scarlet colour does not secrete redness as
the liver secretes bile. Hence we seem to have a non-causal but explanatory relationship; and this we
call ‘grounding’.
    What more can we say about grounding relationships? Intuitively in cases of grounding the prod-
uct is nothing over and above the producer: we want to say that there is ‘nothing more’ to the fact that
there is a party than the fact that certain people are revelling, or that the former ‘wholly consists’ in
the latter. Indeed, this seems to be what distinguishes grounding relationships from causal relations;
for in causal relations new individuals and properties are brought into being, e.g. conception pro-
duces a child, match striking produces fire.



                                                   145
                                                Philip Goff


   How can some fact X be ‘nothing over and above’ some other fact Y? A natural first thought
would be that this is because X and Y are one and the same fact, i.e. they are identical. Thus, it is
natural to try to analyse ‘nothing over and above’ talk in terms of identity:

     The Identity Analysis (of ‘nothing over and above’ talk) – X is nothing over and above Y iff X
     is identical with Y.

However, the previous examples of grounding are not plausibly construed as cases of identity, at least
if we assume:

     The Necessity of Identity – If X is identical with Y then X could not possibly exist without Y.

The Necessity of Identity is extremely plausible. For X to be identical with Y is for X and Y to be
one and the same thing; and nothing can exist without itself.
   Why does the acceptance of the Necessity of Identity lead to the falsity of the Identity Analysis?
Call the fact that there is a party at Jane’s ‘the party fact’ and the fact that Rod, Jane and Freddy are
revelling ‘the RJF fact’. The party fact could exist without the RJF fact, e.g. if Rod and Freddy leave
and their revelry is replaced by that of Ken and Clare. It follows by the Necessity of Identity that
the party fact cannot be identical with the RJF fact. Hence the Identity Analysis fails, at least in this
case and any other case in which the fact that is grounded could obtain in the absence of the fact
that grounds it.
   We now seem to be left with a prima facie paradox. It’s hard to make sense of the idea that X is
not identical with Y and yet X is nothing over and above Y. It seems almost tautological that if X is not
Y then X is something more than Y. Thus, to make sense of the grounding relation we need to give
some account that removes this prima facie paradox by clarifying how we can have nothing-over-
and-above-ness obtaining between non-identical facts. I call this the ‘free lunch constraint’ on an
adequate theory of grounding.4
   There seem to me two options for satisfying the free lunch constraint, which lead to two dis-
tinct forms of the grounding relationship. I will consider each of these in turn in the following two
sub-sections.


                                1.1.  Grounding by Truthmaking
One influential way of making sense of ‘nothing over and above’ talk, developed by John Heil
amongst others, focuses on truthmaking (Heil 2003; Cameron 2008, 2010; Horgan and Potrč 2008).
In Heil’s view, a great error in twentieth century metaphysics was the Quinean orthodoxy of reading
off ontology from the entities quantified over in the sentences we take to be true. In this framework,
avoiding an ontological commitment to Xs requires avoiding quantifying over Xs, or at least analys-
ing sentences involving quantification over Xs into sentences not involving quantification over Xs.
Contra this Quinean tradition, Heil thinks that ontology should focus not on the entities quanti-
fied over in our truths, but on the entities that serve as truthmakers for such truths. By holding for
example that truths about tables are made true by states of affairs involving particles being arranged
in certain ways – arranged ‘table-wise’ as philosophers tend to say – we avoid an ontological com-
mitment to tables.
    Proponents of the truthmaking approach often talk as though non-fundamental entities do not
exist, saying for example that ‘in reality’ there are no tables, only table-wise arrangements of particles.
But if the view is that table-wise arrangements of particles make it true that there are tables, we seem
on the face of it to have a contradiction. If it is true that there are tables then there are tables, which
is obviously inconsistent with there being no tables.


                                                   146
                                      Cosmopsychism, Micropsychism


    Suppose the truthmaker theorist avoids this contradiction by accepting that tables fully exist. It
now becomes hard to see how truthmaking can help us to make sense of the thesis that the table is
‘nothing over and above’ the fact that particles are arranged table-wise (or whatever ‘nothing over
and above’ thesis we happen to be focusing on). We are wanting clarification of the relationship
between two facts in concrete reality – the fact that there is a table and the fact that particles are
arranged table-wise – and it’s not clear how mentioning a relationship between one of those facts
and an abstract proposition (or a linguistic sentence) helps with this. Perhaps we could say that the
fact that particles are arranged table-wise makes true the proposition <there is a table>, and that the
existence of the table somehow arises from the truth of that proposition. But this gets the priority
between being and truth the wrong way round: propositions are representations of reality, and hence
their truth is dependent on what facts obtain in reality rather than vice versa.
    The only way I can see around these difficulties for the truthmaker approach is to combine it with
what we might call ‘metaphysical elitism’. According to the metaphysical elitist, not all objects and
properties are equals: some are metaphysically privileged, part of Reality as it is in and of itself. Theodore
Sider is a prominent proponent of this view (Sider 2012). On his version the privileged structure
of reality is captured in the ‘Book of the World’: the true and complete description involving only
concepts which ‘carve nature at the joints’. All other truths have ‘metaphysical truth-conditions’, i.e.
specified in the metaphysically privileged language (i.e. the language involving only terms which
carve nature at the joints) and satisfied by metaphysically privileged facts.
    Combining the truthmaker account with metaphysical elitism provides a way of avoiding the
contradiction of saying that tables don’t exist even though <tables exist> is true: it is false in the
metaphysically privileged language that ‘tables exist’ but it is true in a common or garden language
like English that ‘tables exist’. Tables exist, but they are not part of the metaphysically privileged
structure of reality; tables are not part of Reality as it is in and of itself. This yields a clear sense in
which tables are ‘nothing over and above’ facts about particles: facts about tables do not add to the
metaphysically privileged structure of reality.
    Some may be suspicious of the idea of a primitive notion of metaphysical privilege, and so I have
provided an appendix in which I try to demystify the idea. To briefly summarise, it is plausible that we
have a basic, simple notion of existence or reality – the notion we employ when we ask whether God
exists, for example – and this is the notion we are ultimately interested in as theorists of reality. We can
call this notion of existence ‘basic’ or ‘privileged’. However, we use existence language for all kinds of
purposes and these extended uses create a secondary notion of existence. Things that exist in this sec-
ondary sense are mere shadows cast by the structure of our language. Parties ‘exist’ in a sense, but only
in the sense that we use talk of parties ‘existing’ to express facts about people revelling. Parties do not
‘exist’ in the sense of existence we are interested in when we are trying to find out what Reality is like.5
    Thus, although truthmaker grounding gives us a good sense in which grounded facts are
nothing over and above grounded facts, it does so at the cost of giving a deflationary account of
non-­fundamental individuals and properties. On the truthmaker + metaphysical elitism approach
to grounding (which is in my view the only plausible version of truthmaker grounding) non-­
fundamental individuals and properties ‘exist’ in the lightweight sense that talk of their existing plays
a role in ordinary language. But they do not ‘exist’ in the sense we are interested in when we conduct
metaphysical enquiry into the nature of Reality.6 At best talk of their existence plays the role of com-
municating facts about the privileged existence of some other kinds of thing.


                                 1.2.  Grounding by Subsumption
I turn now to the second way in which I believe we can make sense of ‘nothing over and above’ talk.
    Philosophers tend to think that facts about big things are grounded in facts about little things: the
table exists and is the way it is because its smallest bits exist and are the way they are. Sam Coleman


                                                    147
                                               Philip Goff


calls this view ‘smallism’ (Coleman 2006). However, over the last decade or so Jonathan Schaffer has
conducted a rigorous and wide-ranging defence of a view he calls ‘priority monism’, which turns
smallism on its head. For the priority monist, facts about little things are grounded in facts about big
things: the smallist bits of the table exist and are the way they are because the table as a whole exists
and is the way it is. Ultimately all facts are grounded in facts about the biggest thing: the universe.
According to priority monism the universe is the one and only fundamental thing.
    A distinctive form of the grounding relation obtains in the context of priority monism. Schaffer
characterises it as follows:

    the monist may offer a general conception of the partialia as abstract, in the etymologically
    correct sense of being a partial aspect. Wholes are complete and concrete unities. Parts may
    be conceived of as aspects of wholes, isolated through a process that Bradley describes as
    “onesided abstraction.” The priority of the one whole to its many parts is thus of a piece
    with the priority of the substance to its modes, both being instances of the general priority
    of the concrete entity to its abstract aspects.
                                                                                       (2010: 47)

I call this ‘grounding by subsumption’, which we can define as follows:

    X grounds by subsumption Y iff Y is a partial aspect of X

This is not an incredibly helpful definition, as the notion of ‘subsumption’ and the notion of an
‘aspect’ are closely inter-defined. However, I think we can get a grip on the notion of grounding by
subsumption by reflecting on instances of it. I will briefly outline three:


                    1.2.1.  Grounding by Subsumption Between Experiences
Consider your total determinate conscious experience right now. In some sense it has ‘parts’: visual
experience of colours, auditory experience of sounds, emotional experience of joy as you read this
stimulating text. One might suppose that the whole experience is a bundle of these smaller experi-
ences, tied together with the relation of co-consciousness. However, another option, to my mind
more natural, is to suppose that the whole experience is more fundamental, subsuming the smaller
experiences as aspects. Bayne and Chalmers (2003) defend such a view.


         1.2.2.  Grounding by Subsumption Between a Substance and Its Properties
In the previous quotation Schaffer alludes to the fact that grounding by subsumption offers an attrac-
tive model of the relationship between an object and its properties. There is an old and well-known
difficulty, known in more recent philosophy as ‘Bradley’s regress’, of how to account for the rela-
tionship between an object and its properties without involving oneself in vicious regress. Suppose
we start with the aim of accounting for the connection between a ball and its red colour. A natural
starting assumption is that we should explain the connection between the ball and redness in terms
of the relation of instantiation that holds between them. But now the question is: what connects the
ball to the instantiation relation? If we need a relation to connect the ball to redness, then surely we
also need a relation instantiation* to connect the ball to the instantiation relation that connects it to
redness. And if we need a relation of instantiation* to connect the ball to the instantiation relation
that connects it to redness, surely we also need a relation of instantiation** to connect the ball to
the relation of instantiation* that connects it to the instantiation relation that connects it to redness.



                                                   148
                                     Cosmopsychism, Micropsychism


And so on ad infinitum. The ultimate explanation of the connection between the ball and its colour
is continually deferred and never given.
    A promising way around this difficulty, defended by D. M. Armstrong and C. B. Martin among
others, is to suppose that at the fundamental level we find not objects and properties somehow ‘glued
together’, but rather objects-having-properties (you have to say it really quickly!), also known as states
of affairs (Martin 1980; Armstrong 1997). The state of affairs of the ball-being-red is a unity more fun-
damental than either the ball or its redness; both the ball and its redness exist as aspects of that more
fundamental unity. When God created the world, she didn’t create electron E, an instance of negative
charge, and then glue them together. Rather she created e-having-negative-charge; both the electron
and the instance of negative charge being aspects of that more fundamental unity.
    (Rather than thinking of the view in terms of states of affairs, I prefer to construe it in terms of
propertied objects. On such a view, rather than creating the state of affairs of electron-e-having negative
charge, God created a specific negatively-charged-electron, a fundamental unity that subsumes a given
instance of negative charge.7 Which view one goes for depends on whether one thinks the world is
fundamentally made up of facts or things.)


      1.2.3.  Grounding by Subsumption Between Substantival Space and Its Regions
The central debate in the philosophy of space is between substantivalists and relationists. Substan-
tivilists believe that space (or space-time) is a fundamental kind of thing in its own right: the great
container in which all material objects are held. Relationists believe that at the fundamental level
there are only material objects, related in various complex ways: facts about space are grounded in
facts about material objects and the relationships they bear to each other.
    How should the substantivilist construe the grounding relationship between space (or space-time)
and its regions? I suppose one might adopt a kind of ‘spatial atomism’, according to which space as a
whole is built up of its very small regions of space. But it is much more natural, or at least an option,
to suppose that the whole of space is fundamental and that the regions of space are aspects subsumed
within that unity.
    Grounding by subsumption is a primitive notion but I think it is one that we can get a grip
on through reflection on the preceding examples. And grounding by subsumption gives us a clear
understanding of how it can be that (a) X is not identical with Y, and yet nonetheless (b) X is noth-
ing over and above Y. My current red experience is nothing over and above my total conscious expe-
rience because my current red experience is one aspect of my total visual experience. The redness
of the ball is nothing over and above the state of affairs of the ball’s-being-red because the redness
is one aspect of that state of affairs. A specific region of space is nothing over and above space as a
whole because that region is one aspect of the whole of space. In each case, the reality of the whole
subsumes the reality of the aspect.
    We can now note a crucial difference between the two forms of grounding we have consid-
ered. Accounting for nothing-over-and-aboveness via grounding by truthmaking essentially involves
committing to a deflationary view of non-fundamental entities or properties. For on the truth-
making account non-fundamental properties and entities are ‘nothing over and above’ fundamental
properties and entities, in the sense that they do not add to the metaphysically privileged structure of
reality; all and only fundamental entities are part of Reality as it is in and of itself. Non-fundamental
objects and properties are mere shadows cast by the structure of our language.
    In contrast, accounting for nothing-over-and-aboveness via grounding by subsumption need not
involve a commitment to a deflationary view of non-fundamental entities or properties. My current
red experience is ‘nothing over and above’ my current total experience in the sense that it is an aspect
of that total experience; the total experience subsumes the red experience within its being. And



                                                   149
                                              Philip Goff


therefore we do not need to deny that the red experience participates in the privileged structure of
reality in order make sense of its ‘not adding’ to the total experience; we can consistently hold that
both the total experience and its various aspects are parts of Reality as it is in and of itself.
   There are other proposals in the literature for how to account for nothing-over-and-aboveness
in the absence of identity; I have argued elsewhere that none is satisfactory.8 And given the prima
facie paradoxical character of nothing-over-and-aboveness in the absence of identity – how can X be
not Y and yet nothing more than Y? – it does seem that some account is required which removes this
paradoxical character. Thus, I will tentatively suppose in what follows that grounding must be one or
other of the two forms I have outlined here.


                           2.  Micropsychism and Cosmopsychism
Micropsychists attribute very basic consciousness to fundamental micro-level entities, perhaps elec-
trons and quarks. They then take facts about o-consciousness, i.e. the kind of consciousness we
associate with humans and other animals, to be nothing over and above facts about the basic con-
sciousness of micro-level entities. Clearly we cannot make sense of this grounding claim in terms of
grounding by subsumption: my mind and its consciousness are not aspects of the consciousness of
any micro-level entity. Thus, this grounding claim must be made sense of in terms of grounding by
truthmaking. I therefore interpret the micropsychist position as follows:

    Truthmaker micropsychism – The metaphysically privileged structure of reality consists entirely
    of facts involving micro-level entities instantiating very basic forms of consciousness, and
    perhaps certain other properties. These facts make true all other propositions, including
    propositions concerning o-consciousness, e.g. <Bill is feeling anxious>. Neither o-minds
    nor o-states of consciousness participate in the metaphysically privileged structure of real-
    ity. They are mere shadows cast by the structure of our discourse; just as sentences assert-
    ing the existence of parties merely communicate facts about people reveling, so sentences
    concerning how Bill is feeling and thinking merely serve to communicate facts about the
    consciousness of the micro-level entities in Bill’s brain.

    Micropsychism so construed is not a very plausible view. When I ask whether there is a party I am
interested in whether people are reveling. But when I ask what it’s like to be Bill I’m not interested
in anything more fundamental than the o-subject that is Bill’s conscious mind and its conscious states.
This would be disputed by analytic behaviourists and functionalists, who hold that the function of
propositions concerning consciousness is to convey information about behavioural functioning. Few
people working on the mind-body problem these days accept this kind of view, and if you do accept
this kind of view then you’re going to have no motivation for trying to make sense of panpsychism.
But once we deny analytic functionalism, there doesn’t seem to be any other way of analyzing the
truth-conditions of propositions concerning o-consciousness in more fundamental terms.
    It could be claimed that the truth-conditions of propositions concerning o-consciousness are
not a priori accessible, as the reference of concepts referring to conscious states is determined by
facts outside of our grasp. This is roughly the view defended by physicalists who endorse the ‘phe-
nomenal concept strategy’ (Loar 1990; Papineau 1998; Diaz-Leon 2010). However, as in the case
of analytic functionalism, endorsing the phenomenal concept strategy entails losing the motivation
for panpsychism. If the truth-conditions of propositions about consciousness are not a priori acces-
sible, then there can be no a priori grounds for denying that those truth-conditions concern purely
physical properties. Of course, I do not take myself here to have given any reason to doubt the phe-
nomenal concept strategy – I have tried to do this at length elsewhere (Goff 2011, 2015, 2017). But
panpsychism is a view one is attracted to because one is persuaded of the philosophical case against


                                                 150
                                     Cosmopsychism, Micropsychism


physicalism with which I started this chapter; such a philosopher has already rejected the phenom-
enal concept strategy.
    Perhaps there is some way of construing micropsychism other than the truthmaking account
I have given previously. However, this would require formulating some other account of grounding,
an account that incorporates some other way of making sense of o-conscious minds being ‘nothing
over and above’ facts about micro-level minds. I have found nothing like this in the literature so far,
although to be fair the nature of the grounding relation has not thus far been much discussed in the
panpsychism literature.
    In the absence of some such alternative we should interpret micropsychism as I have construed it
above. I submit that so construed it should be rejected. We can put the argument as follows.

   The Absence of Analysis Argument:
1.	 The metaphysical truth-conditions of propositions about o-consciousness are a priori accessible.
2.	 If micropsychism is true, then the metaphysical truth-conditions of propositions about
    ­o-consciousness concern micro-level conscious entities.
3.	 It is not plausible that there are a priori accessible metaphysical truth-conditions of propositions
     about o-consciousness that concern micro-level conscious entities.
4.	 Therefore, micropsychism is false.

   I turn now to cosmopsychism. Cosmopsychism (in its constitutive form) is a combination of
priority monism – discussed previously – and panpsychism. On this view the universe considered
as a whole is a conscious subject of some kind. All entities and properties, including o-conscious
minds and their conscious experiences, are aspects of the conscious universe. The conscious universe
subsumes all things in its being.
   Thus, cosmopsychism entails the possibility of subject-subsuming subjects, i.e. conscious subjects that
are aspects of other conscious subjects. Such a thing can seem hard to make sense of. Certainly we
cannot imagine such a thing by using our perceptual and/or introspective faculties. But nor can we
imagine in this way a four-dimensional object, and we nonetheless take four-dimensional objects to
be coherent.
   The cosmopsychist can plausibly attribute our difficulty positively conceiving of a subject-­
subsuming subject to the fact that we don’t fully grasp the nature of conscious subjects. Contra
Descartes, there is no reason to think that the essential nature of a subject of experience is entirely a
matter of its being a subject of experience. And indeed we have a couple of reasons for thinking that
there is more to the nature of a conscious subject than its consciousness:

•	   Conscious subjects have causal powers, and yet the categorical nature of a conscious state does
     not seem to essentially involve causal power, as evidenced by the fact that epiphenomenalism
     is coherent. Therefore, if conscious subjects are causally efficacious, they must instantiate some
     non-phenomenal categorical nature that is involved in grounding the subject’s causal powers.9
•	   If conscious subjects are material, then they are spatially extended. Yet Descartes was arguably
     correct that we cannot conceive of a Cartesian ego (i.e. creature whose nature is exhausted by
     consciousness) extended in space. Mere consciousness doesn’t seem to be the kind of property
     that can, on its own, be ‘spread out’ through space.10 This gives us reason to think that there must
     be some other nature to the conscious subject that is involved in grounding its spatial extension,
     some nature that ‘thickens out’ the subject and its consciousness.

I don’t think these considerations point us to the idea that a conscious subject has other properties –
extension and causal powers – that are distinct from and, as it were, sit alongside its consciousness. For
this would entail that consciousness itself was epiphenomenal and lacked extension. Rather I think


                                                   151
                                                Philip Goff


 they point us to the supposition that there is a more expansive property, call it consciousness+, that
 subsumes consciousness as one aspect, enfolding conscious and non-conscious aspects in a single uni-
 fied property. If we grasped the nature of consciousness+ we would understand that it is an essentially
 extended, causally efficacious property; as it is we grasp only one aspect of that property.
     Will we ever come to grasp the non-phenomenal aspects of consciousness+? I am cautiously
 pessimistic. We know about the causal structure of matter through the way it impacts on our senses,
 and we know about (some of ) the phenomenal properties instantiated by matter through direct
 acquaintance (i.e. we acquainted with the phenomenal properties instantiated by our own brains).
 But we don’t seem to have a faculty through which to access the non-phenomenal categorical nature
 of matter. Derk Pereboom (2011, 2015) has speculated that we might reach a conception of such
 properties through theoretical imagination. Whilst I don’t have an argument to conclusively rule this
 out, it seems to me about as likely as the possibility of a blind scientist imagining her way to a positive
 conception of phenomenal red. Certainly such a thing has no precedent in natural science, which has
 no interest in the non-phenomenal categorical nature of matter.
     It is frustrating to be stuck with a theory which entails our (probably permanent) partial igno-
 rance of the nature of matter. But I don’t think the fact that a theory has this implication gives us
 any reason to doubt its truth. If we are the products of natural selection rather than intelligent design,
 then we should not expect to be blessed with the capacity to discover the complete fundamental
 nature of reality. In fact, we should be surprised we’ve got as far as we have. The success of natural
 science in the last five hundred years has caused many to be optimistic concerning the human capac-
 ity to unearth the secrets of nature. Such optimism is dampened when one appreciates that, from
 Galileo onwards, the physical sciences have focused exclusively on mapping the causal structure of
 matter. The fact that we have had great success working out how matter behaves does not give us a
 reason to think that we will one day uncover its intrinsic nature.11
     The crucial advantage of cosmopsychism, as opposed to micropsychism, is that it does not require
 a deflationary view of o-subjects and their experiences. According to cosmopsychism my conscious-
 ness is an aspect of the consciousness of the universe; this is consistent with supposing that my con-
 sciousness is part of the metaphysically privileged structure of reality. Similarly, the cosmopsychist
 claim that my conscious mind (the substance rather than the property) is an aspect of the cosmic
 mind is consistent with the claim that my conscious mind is part of Reality as it is in and of itself.
 There is no inconsistency in holding that both a whole and its aspects are privileged.
     The micropsychist can account for the o-consciousness facts being nothing over and above the
 fundamental facts only if she holds that o-subjects and o-consciousness are mere shadows cast by the
 structure of our discourse. The cosmopsychist need not suppose this: facts about o        ­ -consciousness
 are subsumed within the fundamental facts about the conscious universe, and this accounts for the
­o-consciousness facts being nothing over and above the fundamental facts about the conscious universe.
     In summary, I believe that micropsychism is, whilst cosmopsychism is not, reliant on a deflationary
 account of facts concerning human and animal experience, and that because of this the former is a
 much less plausible view than the latter. If we want to take advantage of the theoretical benefits of
 constitutive panpsychism, then we should embrace cosmopsychism.


                      3.  Appendix: Demystifying Metaphysical Elitism
Some will be suspicious of the use of primitive notions in metaphysics which don’t seem to have
any analogue outside of metaphysics, such as the notion of ‘metaphysical privilege’ employed in this
chapter. In response to this kind of worry, Sider tries to make the notion of metaphysical privilege
‘earn its keep’ by demonstrating its theoretical utility. However, Schaffer has persuasively argued that
Sider fails to do this. Sider invests in a non-comparative notion of privilege – concepts either carve
nature at the joints or they don’t – whereas it is a comparative notion of privilege that seems to be


                                                    152
                                     Cosmopsychism, Micropsychism


needed for the theoretical uses to which Sider wants to put this notion, for example, in accounting
for laws of nature and the determinacy of reference (Schaffer 2014).
    In what follows, I will try to demystify the notion of a metaphysically privileged notion of exist-
ence. I start from the idea that we have a primitive notion of ‘basic existence’: the kind of existence
at play when we ask whether God or Platonic entities exist, the kind of existence we predicate of the
fundamental entities in our metaphysical system. This simple notion of existence cannot be defined
in more fundamental terms: we can say that for something to exist in this sense is for it to be ‘real’ or
to be ‘part of the world’, but these are just different ways of saying the same thing.
    Some philosophers may be suspicious of simple concepts, preferring a holistic view in which all
concepts are inter-defined. There is not space to properly defend this here, but I find the holistic
view hard to make sense of, especially when we appreciate that the circle of definition must eventu-
ally loop back on itself. Imagine a simple language which contains only four terms ‘X’, ‘Y’, ‘Z’ and
‘R’, which are defined as follows:

1.	 Xs are not identical to Ys and Ys are not identical to Zs.
2.	 Xs are things that bear the R relation to Ys, Ys are things that bear the R relation to Zs, and Zs
    are things that bear the R relation to Xs.
3.	 The R relation is the relation that Xs bear to Ys, Ys bear to Zs, and Zs bear to Xs.

It seems clear that descriptions involving such terms could yield no positive understanding of reality
beyond its bare structure. And the problem would not be addressed by expanding the number of
terms. The language can yield no positive understanding of reality (beyond its structure) precisely
because its terms are inter-defined. In order to understand what X, Ys and Zs are I need to know
what relation R is; in order to understand what the R relation is I need to know what the Xs, Ys and
Zs are. The cognitive buck is continually passed and nothing is ultimately grasped.
    However, there are some primitive concepts involved in the preceding simple language: existence,
numerical identity, negation, and the idea of a relation. It is because of the involvement of these con-
cepts that the above language has the potential to provide information about the bare structure of a
world. But now imagine that even these terms themselves are inter-defined. In so far as we can make
sense of this, the result would be the elimination of any positive understanding of reality.
    For these reasons I cannot see how we can avoid a foundationalist picture of our conceptual
scheme. This does not mean returning to the dead end of logical atomism attempted in Wittgen-
stein’s Tractatus. Most of our concepts are rough and ready, vague, and have extensions determined
by factors outside of our cognitive grasp. However, in so far as we have positive understanding of real-
ity, that understanding must be built up out of simple concepts. And there are many plausible candi-
dates: the modal notions of possibility and necessity (understood in their unqualified senses), number,
identity, property, relation, and perhaps nomic notions such as causation or law of nature. The most
general such simple concept, without which any understanding of reality would be impossible, is the
simple notion of existence itself. This simple property I call ‘basic’ or ‘privileged’ existence.
    One use of the verb to be and related expressions in natural language is to express basic exist-
ence. However, existence language is used in a much broader way. Consider the sentence ‘There is
a party at John’s.’ We don’t use this sentence to state that there is some entity – a party – that has
basic existence. We don’t want to say that there is something – a party – that ‘exists’ in the way God
‘exists’ (if she does) or fundamental particles ‘exist’ (if they do). Rather we use that sentence to state
that certain people are revelling. This is not to deny that the fact that there are people revelling may
involve things that do have basic existence; the point is simply that the sentence does not assert the
basic existence of a party.
    Why do we use existence language in this much broader way? Because it is extremely useful.
Perhaps in a society of metaphysicians it would be good to restrict uses of the verb to be only to


                                                   153
                                                   Philip Goff


expressions of basic existence; we would then have the language Cian Dorr dubbed ‘Ontologese’
(Dorr 2005). But metaphysics is by no means our primary aim in communication, and hence it
would be senseless (and indeed practically impossible) to limit the use of existence talk in this way.
    The fact that we use existence talk in a way that is broader than the way a community of metaphy-
sicians would use it entails that the meaning of the word ‘existence’ (and related terms) in ordinary
English is much broader than the meaning of the word ‘existence’ in Ontologese. The Ontologese
sentence ‘There is a party’ is a bad translation of the English sentence ‘There is a party’. In Onto-
logese the word ‘existence’ expresses basic existence; in English ‘existence’ sometimes expresses basic
existence – in sentences asserted the ‘existence’ of God and fundamental particles – and sometimes
expresses another notion, let us call this other notion ‘secondary existence’ or ‘existenceS’.
    We can understand what secondary existence is by reflecting on the use of existence talk in dif-
ferent contexts. We use the sentence ‘There is a party’ to express the fact that people are revelling;
hence, for a party to existS is for it to be the case that there are people revelling. We use the sentence
‘There is a table at location L’ to state that there is a certain table-ish pattern of penetration resistance
among certain regions of space; hence, for a table to existS is for the regions of space in question to
instantiate a table-ish pattern of penetration resistance (resulting, for example, in my coffee cup not
falling to the ground when I ‘put it down on the table’).12 Reflection on such cases tells us all there
is to know about what secondary existence is.
    As metaphysicians we are not only interested in what things exist, but in their properties and rela-
tions. Things don’t just exist, they exist in ways. And thus if we have a notion of basic existence, we
also have a notion of forms of basic existence, or the ways in which things basically exist (both intrinsic and
relational). I take the notion of a form of basic existence to be equivalent to what – following David
Lewis (1983) – analytic philosophers call a ‘natural property’.
    Just as not all uses of existence language express basic existence, so not all predications express
forms of basic existence. I am inclined to think that determinate forms of consciousness are forms
of basic existence; if this is correct then predications of determinate consciousness express forms of
basic existence. But the sentence ‘Either Bill has determinate conscious state X or Bill has determi-
nate conscious state Y’ does not ascribe to Bill a form of basic existence; rather it claims that either
Bill has form of basic existence X or he has form of basic existence Y. Just as extended uses of the
language of existence create a secondary notion of ‘existence’, so extended uses of predication create
a secondary notion of ‘property’. As theorists of Reality we are interested not in properties per se,
but in forms of basic existence.
    By bringing together the metaphysically privileged sense of ‘existence’ and the metaphysically
privileged sense of ‘property’ we reach a quite general notion of metaphysically privileged ‘Reality’
or the ‘World-As-It-Is-In-And-Of-Itself ’. Sometimes metaphysicians are interested in the shadows
cast by our concepts, especially when those concepts hold deep significance for us (such as the con-
cepts of knowledge, ethics or causation). But the primary focus of metaphysics is Reality itself.

                                                     Notes
	 1.	 The term ‘constitutive panpsychism’ is from Chalmers (2015), although I define it slightly differently here.
	 2.	 Galen Strawson (2006) defines ‘micropsychism’ in a slightly different way, in order to capture the difference
      between those who think that some micro-level entities are conscious and those who think all are. I am inter-
      ested here in a different distinction – that between top-down and bottom-up conceptions of ­panpsychism –
      and my definition of ‘micropsychism’ reflects this.
	 3.	 Shani (2015), Nagasawa and Wager (2016), Goff (2017), Albahari (this volume).
	 4.	 The name is inspired by David Armstrong’s term ‘the ontological free lunch’ (introduced in Armstrong
      1997: 12–13).
	 5.	 My characterisation of the notion of privileged existence is not exactly the same as Sider’s.
	 6.	 As metaphysicians we may also be interested in giving an account of things that have secondary existence.
      For example, Humean metaphysicians may want to give an account of causation, despite denying that causal


                                                       154
                                           Cosmopsychism, Micropsychism


        facts participate in the privileged structure of reality. The point of such activity is to analyse concepts that are
        significant to human beings and should be distinguished from the project of trying to understand Reality as
        it is in and of itself.
	 7.	 Lowe 2000 defends a view close to this.
	 8.	 Goff (2017: ch. 2). In fact I outline in that chapter a form of grounding – grounding by analysis – that
        sounds different from grounding by truthmaking. As I’m now thinking about these matters, the combina-
        tion of truthmaking and metaphysical elitism is not inconsistent with grounding by analysis, rather the
        former offers us a deeper account of the latter. Why think a deeper account of grounding by analysis is
        required? I think there’s a deep intuition that certain entities, e.g. parties, exist in a lightweight sense and
        metaphysical elitism captures this.
	 9.	 I am assuming that causal powers are grounded in categorical properties. I argue for this in Goff (2017: ch. 9).
	10.	 This point is defended in more detail in McGinn (1995).
 	11.	 I have argued this point in more detail in Goff 2019: ch. 1).
  	12.	 I outline this analysis of macro-level material objects such as tables in more detail in 2.2.2 of Goff (2017).
        Strictly speaking, it is an analysis of table-shaped objects, as plausibly a material object can be a table only if
        it was designed to be one or is treated as one. I also offer in 2.2.2 a way of analysing higher-level physical
        natural kinds.


                                                     References
Albahari, M. (forthcoming).‘Beyond Cosmopsychism and the Great I Am: How the World Might Be Grounded
   in Universal “Advaitic” Consciousness’. In W. Seager (ed.), Routledge Handbook of Panpsychism.
Alter, T., and Nagasawa, N. (eds.) (2015). Consciousness and the Physical World. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Armstrong, D. (1997). A World of States of Affairs. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bayne, T. J., and Chalmers, D. J. (2003). ‘What Is the Unity of Consciousness?’ In A. Cleeremans (ed.), The Unity
   of Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 23–58.
Cameron, R. (2008).‘Truthmakers and Ontological Commitment: Or, How to Deal with Complex Objects and
   Mathematical Ontology Without Getting into Trouble’. Philosophical Studies, 140: 1–18.
Cameron, R. (2010). ‘Quantification, Naturalness and Ontology’. In A. Hazlett (ed.), New Waves in Metaphysics.
   New York: Macmillan, pp. 8–26.
Chalmers, D. J. (2009). ‘The Two-Dimensional Argument Against Materialism’. In B. P. McLaughlin & S. Wal-
   ter (eds.), Oxford Handbook to the Philosophy of Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chalmers, D. J. (2015). ‘Panpsychism and Panprotopsychism’. In Alter and Nagasawa, pp. 246–76.
Coleman, S. (2006). ‘Being Realistic: Why Physicalism May Entail Panexperientialism’. Journal of Consciousness
   Studies, 13 (10–11): 40–52.
Diaz-Leon, E. (2010). ‘Can Phenomenal Concepts Explain the Epistemic Gap?’ Mind, 119 (476): 933–51.
Dorr, C. (2005). ‘What We Disagree About When We Disagree About Ontology’. In M. E. Kaledron (ed.),
   Fictionalism in Metaphysics. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 234–86.
Fine, K. (1994). ‘Essence and Modality’. Philosophical Perspectives, 8: 1–16.
Goff, P. (2011). ‘A Posteriori Physicalists Get Our Phenomenal Concepts Wrong’. Australasian Journal of Philoso-
   phy, 89 (2): 191–209.
Goff, P. (2015). ‘Real Acquaintance and Physicalism’. In P. Coates and S. Coleman (eds.), Phenomenal Qualities:
   Sense, Perception and Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 121–46.
Goff, P. (2017). Consciousness and Fundamental Reality. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Goff, P. (2019). Galileo’s Error: Foundations for a New Science of Consciousness. New York: Pantheon, London:
   Rider.
Heil, J. (2003). From an Ontological Point of View. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Horgan, T., and Potrč, M. (2008). Austere Realism: Conceptual Semantics Meets Minimal Ontology. Cambridge, MA:
   MIT Press.
Lewis, D. (1983). ‘New Work for a Theory of Universals’. Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 61 (4): 343–77.
Loar, Brian (1990/1997). ‘Phenomenal States’. Originally published in J. Tomberlin (ed.), Philosophical Per-
   spectives 4: Action Theory and Philosophy of Mind. Atascadero, CA: Ridgeview, pp. 81–108. (Reprinted in
   substantially revised form in N. Block, O. Flanagan and G. Guüzeldere (eds.), The Nature of Consciousness:
   Philosophical Debates. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 597–616).
Lowe, E. J. (2000). ‘Locke, Martin and Substance’. Philosophical Quarterly, 50 (201): 499–514.
Martin, C. B. (1980). ‘Substance Substantiated’. Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 58: 3–10.
McGinn, C. (1995). ‘Consciousness and Space’. In T. Metzinger (ed.), Conscious Experience. Paderborn: Ferdi-
   nand Schöningh, pp. 149–64.


                                                           155
                                                    Philip Goff


Nagasawa, Y., and Wager, K. (2016). ‘Panpsychism and Priority Cosmopsychism’. In G. Brüntrup and L. Jaskolla
    (eds.), Panpsychism. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 113–29.
Papineau, D. (1998). ‘Mind the Gap’. Philosophical Perspectives, 12 (S12): 373–89.
Papineau, D. (2001). ‘The Rise of Physicalism’. In C. Gillett and B. Loewer (eds.), Physicalism and Its Discontents.
    Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 3–36.
Pereboom, D. (2011). Consciousness and the Prospects of Physicalism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pereboom, D. (2015). ‘Consciousness, Physicalism and Absolutely Intrinsic Properties’. In Alter and Nagasawa,
    pp. 300–24.
Rosen, G. (2010). ‘Metaphysical Dependence: Grounding and Reduction’. In B. Hale and A. Hoffman (eds.),
    Modality: Metaphysics, Logic, and Epistemology. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 109–36.
Schaffer, J. (2009). ‘On What Grounds What’. In D. Chalmers, D. Manley, and R. Wasserman (eds.), Metameta-
    physics. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 347–83.
Schaffer, J. (2010). ‘Monism: The Priority of the Whole’. Philosophical Review, 119 (1): 31–76. (Reprinted in
    P. Goff (ed.), Spinoza on Monism. New York: Macmillan, pp. 9–50, 2012).
Schaffer, J. (2014). ‘Review of Sider’s Writing the Book of the World’. Philosophical Review, 123: 125–9.
Shani, I. (2015). ‘Cosmopsychism: A Holistic Approach to the Metaphysics of Experience’. Philosophical Papers
    Volume, 44 (3): 389–437.
Sider, T. (2012). Writing the Book of the World. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Strawson, G. (2006). ‘Realistic Materialism: Why Physicalism Entails Panpsychism’. Journal of Consciousness Stud-
    ies, 13 (10–11): 3–31.




                                                       156
                    14
         THE CRUX OF SUBJECTIVITY
        The Subjective Dimension of Consciousness
               and Its Role in Panpsychism

                                       Michael Blamauer


I will start this chapter with a confession: I am a panpsychist – a full-blown panpsychist who holds
that consciousness is a fundamental as well as ubiquitous property of our universe. I believe that every
concrete thing in our world has both mental and physical properties. However, even though I am a
full-blown panpsychist, I am also a skeptical one and often worry about the problems of this meta-
physical, far-from-common-sense, position. But whenever someone asks me why I am a panpsychist
at all, I always give the same answer: It’s because I am convinced that panpsychism is the best theory
at hand to explain how subjective experience fits into the materialist metaphysics of our world.
    The subjective dimension of consciousness plays a central role in the arguments for panpsychism,
and most of the problems I think about, when I think about problems of panpsychism, relate to
this issue. Curiously, it is this subjective nature of consciousness that not only constitutes the core of
the arguments for panpsychism, but is also a source of support for the most prominent arguments
against it. That is why I think focusing on the ambiguous role of subjectivity in the arguments for
and against panpsychism will provide a good sketch of what I call “the crux of subjectivity”. And
I find this very conducive not only to deepening the understanding of the whole theory but also
to opening new perspectives and thus helping lead to possible solutions for related problems. Eve-
rything I state in the following won’t be particularly original or new to the mainstream discussion.
I will simply shift the focus to a particular point that seems to me worth emphasizing when it comes
to panpsychism.
    In what follows, I outline the crux of subjectivity for panpsychism in four major steps followed
by a summary at the end: (1) By exposing the mind-body problem I will pave the way to an anti-
reductionist position on consciousness; (2) I will map the dimension of subjectivity; (3) I will sketch
its role in two major arguments for panpsychism; (4) I will illustrate why subjectivity is also at the
core of two hard problems for panpsychism; (5) I will give a short synopsis and present two attempts
toward dealing with the concerns outlined in section 4.


                           1.  Mind and Body: What’s the Problem?
As previously mentioned, panpsychism is discussed mainly as a metaphysical theory about the rela-
tionship of mind and body. However, it is a theory about the nature of our universe as well. As I am
primarily interested in questions within the Philosophy of Mind, and in the mind-body problem
in particular, the focus of this chapter lies on the first, narrower meaning of panpsychism. To see its
relevance as a valuable theory of the mind-body relationship it is necessary to provide a short sketch


                                                   157
                                            Michael Blamauer


of the problem. So, what is the crux of the relationship of mind and body and why is panpsychism
attractive at all?
    The crux is easily stated: mind and body do not reduce to each other, which means that the
existence of the one does not entail the existence of the other. However, we as human beings expe-
rience ourselves as a unity of both mind and body. But let me get a bit more technical. To me it
is self-­evident and unquestionable that consciousness exists, as is evidently warranted by everyday
experience (which is the reason I ignore those philosophical positions that deny the existence of con-
sciousness in general). If we take a look at the current discussion, we find – roughly speaking – two
distinct positions that say something about the relationship of mind (or consciousness) and matter
(or body). On the one hand, we have those who take consciousness to be a derivative phenomenon,
who are mostly reductive materialists. And on the other hand, we have those who take it to be a
fundamental phenomenon. The latter are in the majority of cases dualists, mostly property dualists.
    Now, for reductive materialists the fundamental features of the world are physical features because
even mental properties are identified with certain functional roles that logically supervene on physi-
cal states and are as such merely physical features.1 In strict contrast, dualists, or non-reductionists in
general, reject the possibility of reduction of the mind via identification, be it with functional roles
or physical states or whatever. They argue that the ontology of physics (or any other ontology) does
not entail the existence of consciousness or mental properties. To make their point they mostly use
a priori strategies that reveal the independent variability of mental and physical properties, which
should demonstrate their ontological distinction.2 Now, if the facts of consciousness, or the mind,
and the facts of physics, or the body, are ontologically distinct, then we have two fundamentally
different ontologies, both irreducible to each other. Here we touch upon the crux: we have two
fundamentally different kinds of phenomena, which nevertheless stand in a somewhat lawful relation
to each other, as warranted by our everyday experience (e.g. when someone takes aspirin to cure her
headache and it works, or when someone experiences the delicious, subtle flavor of this red physical
substance called wine on her tongue). Of course, these laws must be fundamentally different to the
yet-known natural laws of physics as they correlate not only physical to physical phenomena, but
the fundamentally different phenomena of consciousness and the material world. Thus, these laws
must be additional to the laws of physics and therefore expand our current physical worldview (see
Chalmers 1996: ch. 4). In order to see how panpsychism comes into all this I will dig somewhat
deeper into dualism.
    For the sake of argument and because it is the most widely accepted version of dualism in the
current debate, I will expose one serious problem with property dualism to get a better grip on the
dynamics that will lead us to panpsychism. Dualists commonly rely on a basic set of three assump-
tions to which, more or less, all the major arguments against reductive materialism lead: (1) Physical
properties are fundamental3; (2) Phenomenal properties are fundamental; and (3) Fundamental laws
relate physical and phenomenal properties to each other.
    Of course (nomen est omen) the dualist divides the universe into two fundamentally different
kinds of things: One the one hand, there exist things which are definitely conscious and on the other
hand, there are things which are definitely not conscious. She holds that only things with a specific
physical (or functional) setup are able to instantiate consciousness, which is thereby taken to be an
emergent property of certain, otherwise physical, systems. This is, I would say, essential to the dualist
position since otherwise it would turn into a variety of panpsychism, since the fundamental mental
properties would be ubiquitous in the same way physical properties are. This is of course what prop-
erty dualists commonly tend to avoid. Now, if a phenomenon is fundamental in the aforementioned
sense, it does not depend on (is not deducible from) other facts, say physical ones, which is why it is
often referred to as the paradigmatic example of a “strongly emergent” phenomenon (cf. Chalmers
2006: 244).



                                                   158
                                          The Crux of Subjectivity


    Strongly emergent phenomena are obviously “brute facts” as there is no intelligible path which
leads one from the underlying facts to the sudden coming-into-existence of the phenomenon. In
his famous paper, Galen Strawson (2006) lengthily argued against the concept of strong, or brute
emergence. He argued that it has no explanatory power whatsoever when it comes to the generation
problem of consciousness. However, I will not now head into this argumentative direction, but rather
focus on another aspect of the problem of emergence. I will argue that the strategy of restricting the
range of consciousness leads to quite absurd consequences when it comes to the generation problem
and the idea of an ontogenetically (as well as phylogenetically) smooth development of mental fea-
tures, which makes it difficult to think of the phylogeny of human organisms, especially as conscious
subjects, as a smooth process of insensible gradation.4
    The crux lies – or so I will show – in the phenomenology of consciousness itself, which is why
I find it highly productive to go into more detail about what we are talking about when we talk
about consciousness. I do this in the following section in order to later pick up the central theme
again and argue why the property dualist would be better of as a panpsychist.


         2.  What We Are Talking About When We Talk About Consciousness
Consciousness is generally a rather problematic term when it comes to philosophical positions
because it naturally resists any attempt to precisely define it. The reason for this is consciousness’s self-
recursive structure. And it seems as if the situation gets even more confusing when we try to fix the
meaning of the term regarding other species. For example, when we talk about a dog being aware of
the bone in front of him or the cat being conscious of the mouse in the hole, we do so according to
our “human” consciousness. However, in the debate of the last, say 30 years, a rather generally recog-
nized characterization has established itself, following Nagel’s (1974) original formulation that there
is “something it is like” to be conscious. This formulation has succeeded in the discussion because
it seems to catch some magical, unseizable aspect of conscious experience by not referring to any
further capacities such as cognition or language, and hence it is not principally restricted to humans,
but applicable to other species as well. Let me outline some essential characteristics of Nagel’s for-
mulation in order to gain a clearer picture of that notion before elaborating on what I take to be the
intrinsic nature of consciousness, which I labeled the “subjective dimension”.
    When we use the formulation of “what it is like” as a kind of reference to what we mean, when
we speak of “being conscious”, we commonly equate this formulation with the special “phenomenal
quality” of conscious experience, i.e. some exclusive feeling or quality that pervades every experien-
tial episode. Thus, to say that the white rabbit is conscious is to say that there is a special phenomenal
quality that characterizes the rabbit’s current state of being. For example, if someone stabs the rabbit
with a knife, the rabbit is conscious of it by feeling intense pain (paired with other feelings such
as fear, maybe paired with internal visualizations as well). Referring to the phenomenal quality of
an experiential episode when using the formulation of “what it is like” is state-of-the-art and it is
widely held that the essence of consciousness lies in this phenomenal quality, exclusively accessible
to only one point of view. However, holding that the essence of consciousness lies in this special and
exclusive phenomenal quality is misleading and obscures the true nature of consciousness rather than
elucidating it.
    In the following I will try to expose why it is not so much the phenomenal quality of an expe-
riential episode that renders it conscious, but rather the subjective presence of the quality as such. I will
argue that this intrinsic subjective character, the subjective presence, is the essence of what qualifies
an experiential episode as a conscious episode. If there is something it is like to be in a particular state
of being, then there is something it is like (for a subject of experience) to undergo, to live through it.
Thus, I will try to shift the focus from the particular quality of the experience to the unique “way”



                                                    159
                                             Michael Blamauer


the experience is present, namely (taking the previous example), in the case of the white rabbit,
uniquely as the white rabbit’s one.
    To get a better grip on the distinction between the two aforementioned fundamental aspects of
conscious experience and to make my main point a little clearer, let me dive a little more deeply into
the distinction between (a) the phenomenal quality of an experience (or its ‘phenomenal character’)
and (b) its being-for-a-subject-of-experience (or its ‘subjective character’).5
    The phenomenal quality of an experience characterizes it as just the experience it actually is (in
contrast to qualitatively different experiences). For example, the rabbit which is stabbed with the
knife will quite certainly feel pain. However, there may be rare cases in which the rabbit feels pleasure
in such situations. It is not only that the rabbit’s different experiential episodes can differ qualitatively,
but that there will also be a difference between the rabbit’s phenomenal quality and the ones of other
subjects of experience. To provide a further example: While the wine tastes delicious to me, it may
taste horrible to someone else (who e.g. has previously swallowed a mint). As already stated, most
philosophers who use the phrase “what it is like” to characterize the nature of consciousness focus
only on the subjectively given qualities (which are not objectively explainable or reducible), i.e. they
focus primarily on the phenomenal character of consciousness. I have pointed out in other papers
(2011a, 2011b, 2011c, 2012a, 2012b, 2013a, 2013b) that such a shortened and one-sided understand-
ing of the nature of consciousness might easily lead someone to bark up the wrong tree when it
comes to finding an appropriate theory of consciousness, which is why I have tried to stress that one
should focus not so much on the phenomenal aspect of experiences, but rather on their subjective
dimension.
    By subjective dimension (or subjective character) of an experience I mean the “being-
for-a-subject-of-experience” of the aforementioned phenomenal qualities. This “being-for-
a-subject-of-experience” is the essence of what makes an experience an experience at all. For a
start – I confess – I derive this fact from my experiences in the way I am acquainted with them
in everyday life: If there is something it is like to be in a state of whatever (pain, pleasure, different
experiences), then, necessarily, there is something it is like for me to be so. This is a rather strong
claim – I know – and one which is widely rejected, because it is so difficult to grasp the meaning
of “subject-of-experience”, especially with respect to the universal applicability of the “what it is
like” formulation. Being a “subject” is commonly associated with having complex cognitive abilities,
which are generally restricted to human animals, maybe with the minor exceptions of chimpanzees,
magpies, rats, pigs, and other “more intelligent” species. But, this cognitive conception of “subject” is
not what I mean by “subject-of-experience”.
    Let emphasize once more the difference between the qualitative aspect, i.e. phenomenal qualities,
vs. the subjective dimension of experience. First of all, and quite roughly put: The subjective dimen-
sion of experience is characterized not by any kind of contents of my experience; rather it touches
the being of experience itself. Experiences can differ in various ways, depending on their particular
contents: The feeling of pain is qualitatively different from the sensations you get while swallowing
chocolate or having an orgasm or watching a movie or listening to Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony
or everything at once. However, there is an aspect of experience that is equal to all experiences, an
aspect that unites rather than discriminates between the various experiences, namely that experi-
ences have to manifest themselves first-personally in order to be experiences at all. I call this the
“manifestation aspect (of experience)”, which I will attempt to illustrate in the following.6
    In contrast to physical facts, which are accessible not only and exclusively to one person, but to
many persons, even at the same time, facts of consciousness are private. It is essential to experiences
that there is something it is like to undergo them and this is only possible if they “manifest” them-
selves first-personally. Experiences have their very being in being exclusively present to one subject:
their essential being is first and foremost their subjective manifestation. The following example will
quite vividly illustrate what I mean by this. More or less everybody knows what it is like to feel pain,


                                                    160
                                         The Crux of Subjectivity


be it a toothache, headache, joint pain, or the pain you experience when you accidentally cut your
finger with a knife. Now, imagine the rather bizarre situation of visiting a doctor, describing your
symptoms, and having her reply that you should stop worrying because everything you’ve just told
her about your pain is merely an illusion, and in truth you are not in a state of pain at all. I am pretty
sure you would look for another physician.
    This situation is so bizarre because of the impossibility of being wrong about myself feeling pain:
what appears to me to be pain is pain. If I feel pain then there is pain present and it is impossible to be
wrong about my own state of feeling. Vice versa, if someone denies feeling pain, then there is no pain
present. Experiences have their very being in their appearing for/to a subject-of-experience: Their
first-personal manifestation is likewise our direct acquaintance with them, which is why subjective
experiences are generally indubitable. This special kind of direct acquaintance with our experiences,
this being immediately conscious of our experiences, is the very aspect of experience that funda-
mentally separates the first-personal ontology of consciousness from the third-personal ontology of
physics. And it provides the basis for most of the arguments against materialism, such as the zombie-
argument or the explanatory-gap argument. For example, when I taste a cold, clear and transparent
liquid, thinking it is water and am told afterwards that it is not H2O but XYZ, I was wrong about
the content’s being (in this case, that I tasted water). But I definitely was not wrong about the experi-
ence’s being: I tasted a cold, clear and transparent liquid because I was immediately and indubitably
aware of it by having the experience. This is even more obvious in cases where the content’s being
is strictly tied to its appearance, as in the aforementioned case of pain. In this case, the subject can-
not coherently deny the existence of the phenomenal quality due to its immediate and indubitable
presence in her experience. It is simply impossible to err about the existence of an experience from
a first-person perspective, irrespective of all other physical facts, because it is perfectly conceivable
(and, I assume, therefore possible) that subjective awareness exists (I am in pain and I am certain of
this fact) without the realization of the adequate physical state of the body. I think this is what the
hard problem is all about.
    Here is the point in a nutshell: If consciousness is primarily a dimension of experience with a
first-person ontology, then its nature lies not so much in some kind of special phenomenal quality
or qualities, but rather in the subjective, i.e. first-personal manifestation of the experience. By this
I mean that talking about an exclusive kind of quality of experience only makes sense if we think of
these qualities as being subjectively manifest: they have to be present to a subject-of-experience in
order to exist. Without their subjective manifestation they lose their first-personal character and turn
into third-person phenomena (see my 2013a). Thus, intrinsic subjectivity is essential to conscious-
ness, because even if phenomena with a third-person ontology may or may not exist, regardless of
whether they are present to anyone, experiences have to manifest themselves subjectively in order
to be at all.
    This, in the current debate, widely neglected aspect of consciousness is crucial to the arguments
against a dualist position. Now, let me return once more to property dualism and point out some of
its quite severe problems in order to establish the basis for arguing why panpsychism is a much more
elegant and coherent theory of consciousness.


                     3.  Problems With Property Dualism Revisited or:
                             Why the Panpsychist Is Better Off
Dualists divide the world – roughly said – into two parties: conscious and non-conscious things.
However, there are also a large number of things which are – following the dualist credo – both
conscious, i.e. having experiences, and consisting of non-conscious parts. As mentioned previously,
I think most of the dualists agree that not only do human beings have a body and a mind, but also
a number of other species as well, such as primates, dogs, cats, horses, cows, pigs, etc. (the list would


                                                   161
                                            Michael Blamauer


be quite long). However, at some particular point, dualists must define a border between conscious
and non-conscious things.
    As I see it, property dualists have just two possibilities of executing this division of the world:
Either they accept a smooth transition from the non-conscious to the conscious sphere, a vague bor-
der so to speak, or they simply define a sharp border, a leap from the non-conscious to the conscious
sphere. In the following I will provide a short sketch of both strategies in order to show at the end
of the section that neither of them are adequate.
    The common conception of the ontogenesis of a human being is a smooth process of insensible
gradation. However, the conception is the same for the phylogenesis of the human (and other) spe-
cies as a whole. As mentioned, there is quite a large set of beings for the dualist, consisting not only
of non-conscious parts, but also having experiences, i.e. which are composites of both parties. Of
course, dualists, in order to avoid the “threat of panpsychism” (see Chalmers 1996: 154) must claim
that conscious beings gain the ability to experience at a later onto- or phylogenetic state of their
development: The ability to experience depends on the complexity of the being’s nervous system.
They hold that consciousness – as a metaphysically fundamental feature – supervenes naturally on
physical or functional states and at a certain stage of physical/functional complexity (seen from a
phylogenetic as well as an ontogenetic perspective); consciousness “slowly”, i.e. gradually, fades in.7
    Now, the problem with this conception is that at some particular point of development, the being
is in a borderline state between being conscious and being non-conscious, or rather, being conscious
and not conscious at the same time. The reason for this is that there is at least one state in the develop-
ment of the nervous system’s architecture during which it is metaphysically indeterminate whether
or not consciousness supervenes. Such fuzzy states of consciousness are of course impossible in view
of its intrinsic subjective nature. In the previous section I put my finger on this point: Experiences, in
order to be experiences, need to manifest themselves subjectively, i.e. first-personally. Obviously, the
first-personal manifestation of an experience can never be indeterminate. It is impossible for a feel-
ing to be present and not-present at the same time. Even the slightest feeling can only be coherently
called a feeling if it manifests itself first-personally, i.e. is present to a subject-of-experience.
    Another minor objection concerns the scientific status of the exposed considerations. Let me
illustrate this objection with the following example: Imagine a system becoming more and more
complex (like the aforementioned ontogenesis of a human being from the fertilization of the egg to
the stage of a foetus in the third month). Let’s assume that during this developmental process con-
sciousness “fades in” at some particular point, starting with a very slight or dull feeling. However – as
argued before – if it is a feeling, even a very dull one, it has to manifest itself subjectively in order
to be one. Now, if the dualist tries to avoid a strong correlation (due to problems I will explain in
the next section), she must abandon the idea of precise psychophysical laws governing the relation
between the mind and the body. Thus, these laws cannot be precise in range because they describe
only a fuzzy segment in the development of the foetus’s nervous system at which point it randomly
starts to feel and experience. This fuzzy segment contains a range of different states with (even only
slightly) different functional complexity where consciousness is sometimes instantiated and some-
times not (we have already ruled out the possibility of both being the case). Such a scenario would
of course turn property dualism into a non-theory in that it claims that consciousness is fundamental
but allows pure randomness to decide which systems are conscious and which are not. This is the
main reason why most of the dualists take consciousness to be the prime example of a strongly
emergent phenomenon.
    Let me address some problems with this account in the following. In order to avoid the aforemen-
tioned problems concerning impossible borderline-conscious states, dualists would have to define
precise psychophysical laws governing the instantiation of consciousness. They would have to define
one, and only one, particular condition of otherwise physical systems (i.e. a certain functional archi-
tecture of a system) at which consciousness is instantiated. In contrast, all other systems lacking this


                                                   162
                                         The Crux of Subjectivity


certain condition would not instantiate consciousness. Thus, they would have to define a sharp
border between non-conscious systems and those which are able to experience. Of course, in that
consciousness is a fundamental feature (i.e. not reducible to its non-conscious parts), it must be taken
as an “strongly emergent” feature because both aspects of the system (being conscious and being
physical) are fundamentally different.
    Now, to make my point, let me present a case where the assumption of such precise psycho-
physical laws leads to quite odd consequences regarding the claim that these laws should be consid-
ered fundamental. Again, imagine the development of a foetus’s brain from the first cell to exactly
the degree of complexity at which consciousness arises. By reaching the required nervous system’s
architecture the foetus abruptly starts to experience, i.e. the first dull feeling manifests itself first-­
personally. Due to the requirement of precision of the psychophysical laws governing the instantia-
tion of this first manifestation of experience, the slightest decrease of complexity of the nervous
system e.g. substitution of a single isolated cell, makes it switch abruptly from being conscious to
being non-conscious. Thus, whether or not the foetus is able to experience depends on the altera-
tion of a single cell, which, of course, renders the psychophysical laws extremely arbitrary. This arbi-
trariness of course makes consciousness quite an arbitrary feature as well, which otherwise stands in
rather sharp contrast to the property dualist’s claim that consciousness, as well as the laws governing
its instantiation, should be considered fundamental.8
    Now, if the considerations about the “manifestation aspect” of consciousness are correct, they
present a problem for all those positions which hold that consciousness is a metaphysically funda-
mental feature – and in light of the preceding, especially for property dualists. The reason is that all
these positions distinguish things that are clearly conscious from things that are clearly not conscious.
And – as I have tried to demonstrate – any attempt to precisely specify a system’s state in order to
meet the demands of such a sharp cut-off point would lead to highly arbitrary results. Now, to my
mind, the only alternative position, which not only avoids the demonstrated problems by holding on
to the fundamentality of consciousness, but which is also in line with a modest naturalistic worldview,
would be a kind of panpsychistic monism. For now, I take the aforementioned problems of property
dualism to be sufficient for even considering panpsychism as a viable doctrine. So why would the
panpsychist be better off?
    Panpsychists consider mental properties to be on par with physical properties, having similar
characteristics. As such, they assume them to be ubiquitous in the same way as physical properties
are. Besides their paradigmatic ubiquity, mental properties – like physical ones – are taken to be
intrinsic properties, i.e. properties that are ontologically constitutive of higher-level properties of
the same kind. This allows the panpsychist to sidestep the necessity of postulating arbitrarily defined
leaps within the developmental process of beings from their non-conscious to their conscious stages.
William Seager once suggested understanding mental properties as Lewisian, perfectly natural, prop-
erties, i.e. as properties that have the feature of composing when they aggregate.9 For example, if a
thing has the property of carrying a particular charge, then this charge is the result of totalling the
particular charges of all its components. The same is true of a being’s property of having a particu-
lar mass: this property is the result of the composition of the being’s entire components having a
particular mass. In this panpsychistic framework, higher-level forms of consciousness (instantiating
not only dull feelings, but also specific cognitive features) are compositions of lower-level mental
properties of elementary particles. This avoids the aforementioned problems of emergence and the
definition of a sharp cut-off point, guarantees a smooth developmental process of a being’s con-
sciousness, and meshes perfectly well with a modest materialist framework. However, if it were that
easy, then we would have found a rather elegant theory of consciousness with panpsychism – even
though we would have to partly revise, or even reverse, our common scientific view of the world.
But there are still two quite persistent problems for panpsychism, which I am going to discuss in
the next section.


                                                   163
                                            Michael Blamauer


                     4.  Panpsychism and Subjectivity: Again a Problem
As we have seen, dualists face problems that panpsychists are able to sidestep: in a panpsychistic
framework, consciousness is a truly fundamental property (not an arbitrarily emergent one) and
smooth progress in the development of conscious beings (beings which have both properties: mental
and physical ones) is guaranteed. These problems of dualism are related to the nature of conscious-
ness: the intrinsic subjective character of experience, i.e. the aspect of first-personal manifestation of
experience. However, it is exactly the crux of subjectivity which causes not only the dualist quite a
headache, but the panpsychist as well, which I will illustrate in the following paragraphs.
    The first minor concern revolves around the principle of universal composition. If having an expe-
rience presupposes its first-personal manifestation (which means nothing but the “being present” of
this experience for a subject-of-experience) then, necessarily, every composition of low-level mental
properties entails a higher-level subject-of-experience. Of course, one can easily guess some of the
bizarre consequences of such a scenario. The universal definition of the principle of composition
implies that every composite thing is a subject of experience, be it a molecule, a table, a dog, or a human
brain; or be it a composite of all these beings. For all of these composites their experiences manifest
themselves first-personally in a way that it is somehow for this composite to be in this particular con-
dition. Thus, following the universal character of composition, the number of subjects-of-experience
would increase tremendously and in ways which are quite far away from our basic intuitions about
what a subject-of-experience is. This of course poses no logical impossibility, but it would demand a
rather radical revision of our current commonsense picture of the world and its inhabitants.
    The second, more demanding, problem of panpsychism is also strongly related to the intrinsic
subjective nature of experience. It is the well-known composition or combination problem. In a
nutshell, it is based on the problem of making sense of higher-level subjects-of-experience, like you
and me, in terms of compositions of lower-level subjects-of-experience. In contrast to the afore-
mentioned concerns regarding the principle of universal composition, the composition problem is
a logical one. In his critique of so-called “mind-dust”-theories, William James was one of the first
philosophers to address this problem.10 The crux lies in the logical incomprehensibility of the idea
of subjects summing.
    Given that panpsychism is true and that fundamental particles have experiences, we of course try
to picture this by analogy to what it is like for us to experience. Even if we cannot simply impose
our experiential life on a fundamental particle, and we nevertheless try to strip down the idea of
experience to its fundamental, intrinsic nature, i.e. the properties that every experience has to satisfy
in order to be an experience at all, then we are still bound to at least two aspects: (1) its phenom-
enology and (2) its first-personal manifestation. Now, if we take these two aspects of experience to
be necessary properties, then the composition problem is quite obvious: how can single states of
subjective experience (e.g. of the atoms of my body) be combined to result in a higher (and even
more complex) state of consciousness (mine)? It is essential for an experience to manifest itself
first-personally, which means that an experience must be present to a subject-of-experience. Thus
experience implies a minimal kind of selfhood. Now, assuming that an atom has a specific sensa-
tion of its environment (very different from our own experience due to its lack of sense organs and
fairly different functional complexity) then – in order to be a sensation or feeling at all – it must be
subjectively manifest, which implies that even the atom has a minimal kind of selfhood. But how
can it be that my own self is the result of a combination of quadrillions of selves, all having different
manifestations of experiences? E.g. losing my arm in an accident might be a very painful and even
life-altering experience, but it will not affect my own personal identity as a subject-of-experience. It
will nevertheless be the same me, or rather I, having the experiences. And a quite similar point can
be made for the qualitative character of experiences: When I have a terrible headache, this kind of
severe pain is not entailed by some billions of atoms feeling slightly pained (see Goff 2006).


                                                   164
                                         The Crux of Subjectivity


    The combination problem also appears when we focus on the intentional character of experi-
ence, i.e. that experience is perspectival. Every conscious episode is a kind of temporal appearing and
disappearing of qualitative contents to a subject-of-experience. If every atom of my body instantiates
such a perspective, it is logically impossible that the streams of consciousness of every single atom
combine to constitute my single perspective. The reason is that the perspective of the atom is deter-
mined by the relationship of self and content, which is different not only for each atom but also for
all atoms with respect to my stream of consciousness.
    Of course, given these considerations we have to ask whether Thomas Nagel wasn’t right in his pro-
grammatic paper of 1979, where he said that panpsychism remains a rather problematic position, even
though accepting the premises that lead to it in the first place is more coherent than negating them. In
the following final section I will attempt to alleviate these concerns by offering two possible solutions
to the aforementioned problems of panpsychism and outlining viable suggestions for future research.


                                   5.  Conclusion and Outlook
I began this chapter with the confession that I am a panpsychist. I am one because I am convinced
that panpsychism is the best theory at hand concerning consciousness’s place in nature. However,
applying a cost-benefit analysis to what has been said, it seems as though we have a kind of standoff
regarding the problems of both positions. So why should we accept panpsychism rather than another
non-reductive materialist position, e.g. property dualism? My answer is: because the chances of solv-
ing the aforementioned problems of panpsychism are much greater than solving those of the dualist
position. In the following, I will address the two mentioned problems of panpsychism once again,
outlining two possible approaches toward their solution.
    Let me start with some thoughts on the problem of universal composition. The problem is
straightforward in that, with the concept of unrestricted composition, the number of subjects-of-
experience would drastically increase, bringing with it some quite counterintuitive consequences,
e.g. any possible combination of myself, my earring, my desk, and the door to my office, would entail
a subject-of-experience. To mitigate these counterintuitive consequences, we have two possible
strategies at hand. Either we revise our commonsense conception of subjects-of-experience, or we
specify the principle of composition in a way that does not affect its universal character but rather
reformulates it in a way that not in every case of composition does a new, higher-level subject of
experience arise. I focus on the second strategy as there is not much to say about the first one.
    William Seager (2010b: 175) has recently defended such a strategy of specifying the composition
principle: A composition produces a subject-of-experience when, and only when, the parts compose
themselves in a way where the subjective features become relevant. He gives a vivid analogy for such
a composition: Even though charge is a perfectly natural property, it does not necessarily follow that
every composed physical object is charged, “because positive and negative charge can cancel each
other out.” Obviously, this is quite a radical simplification. Regardless, it should merely serve as a
suggestion for a direction it might be fruitful to head in order to solve the problem. Here, further
intensive investigation of the phenomenology and structure (temporal structure, spatial structure,
qualitative structure etc.) of consciousness, especially of those features related or bound to the intrin-
sic subjective nature of experience, seems promising. Thus, in order to deal with this objection, new
ways of formulating panpsychism with respect to the subjective nature of consciousness is demanded.
    Now, if we take a look at the second, more demanding, problem for panspychism (the combination
problem), research should head into the same direction. Contrary to what I have written in previous
articles on this topic, I currently do not think this problem is unsolvable in principle, but is rather a
question of deeper, phenomenological investigation into the nature and structure of consciousness
itself. William Seager recently introduced a strategy in one of his articles, under the name of “com-
binatorial infusion”. Combinatorial infusion is a principle with which to sidestep the “composition


                                                   165
                                                Michael Blamauer


problem” by simply following the Leibnizian idea that consciousness is not an aggregate but rather
a simple whole: Mental simples can enter a certain constellation or form a certain structure, which
builds a “whole” (in contrast to a mere aggregate). In such cases, the subjective characteristics “infuse”
into the mental whole which then absorbs and thereby effaces them. Due to the effacement of the
subjective characteristics, the resulting mental whole becomes a large simple (rather than an aggregate
of many). To illustrate his idea of combinatorial infusion, Seager (2010b) applies the analogies to
phenomena of physics: “entanglement” in quantum mechanics and the classical black hole.
    Of course, these are merely approaches toward solutions of the discussed problems. However, they
point in a quite interesting direction. Despite the need for further investigation of the possible solu-
tions to these problems of panpsychism, the latter seems to remain a viable candidate for a theory of
consciousness, since it attempts to apply fundamental subjectivity to a moderately physicalist view of
the world. And this is the overall prospect: How must we proceed in order to meet all the demands
of panpsychist metaphysics by adhering to the fundamental characteristics of conscious experience?
I think the challenge lies precisely in searching for a framework that can handle the tension between
fundamental subjectivity and objectivity, unity and diversity, and which is likewise able to integrate
and combine them with the facts of our material world. There will be progress – I am a believer.11


                                                      Notes
	 1.	 For a paradigmatic outline of such a “Reduction of Mind” see Lewis (1994).
	 2.	 A good synopsis of several arguments is offered by David Chalmers (1996). See also Seager (1999).
	 3.	 For a definition of “fundamental properties” see Chalmers (1996: 126): “Fundamental features cannot be
      explained in terms of more basic features, and fundamental laws cannot be explained in terms of more basic
      laws; they must simply be taken as primitive.” I always found it necessary to expand this definition by adding
      “fundamental features do not ontologically depend on other, more fundamental features” in order to put an
      extra emphasis on the ontological dimension of fundamentality.
	 4.	 Armstrong (1968: 30–1) and Campbell (1984: 48–50) have made this point with respect to Ontogeny.
	5.	 The conceptual distinction between “phenomenal character” and “subjective character” is taken from
      Kriegel (2009) and (2011).
	 6.	 I have already made this point in Blamauer (2013a) and (2013b), calling it the “manifestation thesis”. By the
      idea of “manifestation” I roughly follow Zahavi (2005: 105 ff., 115 ff.) and Zahavi (2011: 324 ff.).
	 7.	 Chalmers (1996: 253–62) sketches such a fade-in / fade-out-scenario.
	 8.	 This point was made by William Seager against David Chalmers’s “principle of organizational invariance”,
      which can be interpreted as a principle to restrict the range of mental properties:
        It is disturbing that consciousness can be an absolutely fundamental feature of nature while being
        dependent upon particular systems satisfying purely functional descriptions. . . . No other fundamental
        feature of the world has this character, or a character even remotely like it. It is rather as if one declared
        that ‘being a telephone’ was a fundamental feature of the world, generated by a variety of physical systems
        agreeing only in fulfilling the relevant, highly abstract, behaviourally defined functional descriptions.
                                                                                                  (Seager 1995: 275)
	 9.	 Seager (2010a) therefore refers to them as “compositional properties”.
	10.	 James (1890/1998: 158, 160).
 	11.	 I am very grateful for Bill Seager’s kind invitation to contribute to this volume – it is a great honour to me.
       Furthermore, I would like to thank Luke Roelofs for his helpful comments. And, of course, I would like to
       thank my good friend and all-time favourite interlocutor in philosophical matters, Wolfgang Fasching, for
       the fruitful discussions and amicable support.


                                                   References
Armstrong, D. M. (1968). A Materialist Theory of the Mind. London: Routledge.
Blamauer, M. (2011a). ‘Wieviele Subjekte bin ich? Überlegungen zu einem Grundproblem des Panpsychism’. In
   T. Müller and H. Watzka (eds.), Ein Universum voller Geiststaub? Der Panpsychismus in der aktuellen Geist-Gehirn
   Debatte. Paderborn: Mentis, pp. 337–56.


                                                        166
                                              The Crux of Subjectivity


Blamauer, M. (2011b). ‘Taking the Hard Problem of Consciousness Seriously: Dualism, Panpsychism and the
    Origin of the Combination Problem’. In M. Blamauer (ed.), The Mental as Fundamental: New Perspectives on
    Panpsychism. Heusenstamm: Ontos, pp. 99–116.
Blamauer, M. (2011c). ‘Is the Panpsychist Better Off as an Idealist? Some Leibnizian Remarks on Consciousness
    and Composition’. EIDOS, (15): 48–75.
Blamauer, M. (2012a). ‘Does the Fundamentality of Consciousness Entail Its Ubiquity’. Filozofia, 67 (3): 243–53.
Blamauer, M. (2012b).‘Schelling’s Real Materialism’. Minerva – An Online Open Access Journal of Philosophy, (16): 1–24.
Blamauer, M. (2013a). ‘Panpsychism Without Subjectivity? – Brief Commentary on Sam Coleman’s “Mental
    Chemistry” and “The Real Combination Problem” ’. Disputatio – International Journal of Philosophy, V (37).
Blamauer, M. (2013b). ‘The Role of Subjectivity in the Continuity-Argument for Panpsychism’. Polish Journal
    of Philosophy, 7 (1): 7–18.
Campbell, K. (1984). Body and Mind. Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.
Chalmers, D. J. (1996). The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chalmers, D. J. (2006). ‘Strong and Weak Emergence’. In P. Clayton and P. Davies (eds.), The Re-Emergence of
    Emergence. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 244–56.
Goff, P. (2006). ‘Experiences Don’t Sum’. In A. Freeman (ed.), Consciousness and Its Place in Nature: Does Physical-
    ism Entail Panpsychism? Exeter: Imprint Academic, pp. 53–61.
James, W. (1890/1998). The Principles of Psychology, vol. I. Bristol: Thoemmes Press.
Lewis, D. (1994). ‘Reduction of Mind’. In S. Guttenplan (ed.), A Companion to Philosophy of Mind. Oxford:
    Oxford University Press, pp. 412–30.
Kriegel, U. (2009). ‘Self-Representationalism and Phenomenology’. Philosophical Studies, 143: 357–81.
Kriegel, U. (2011).‘Self-Representationalism and the Explanatory Gap’. In J. Liu and J. Perry (eds.), Consciousness
    and the Self: New Essays. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 51–75.
Nagel, T. (1974). ‘What Is It Like to Be a Bat?’ The Philosophical Review, 83 (4): 435–50.
Nagel, T. (1979). ‘Panpsychism’. In Mortal Questions. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 181–95.
Seager, W. (1995). ‘Consciousness, Information and Panpsychism’. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 2 (3): 272–88.
Seager, W. (1999). Theories of Consciousness: An Introduction and Assessment. London: Routledge.
Seager, W. (2010a).‘Concessionary Dualism and Physicalism’. Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplement, 85 (67): 217–37.
Seager, W. (2010b). ‘Panpsychism, Aggregation and Combinatorial Infusion’. Mind & Matter, 8 (2): 167–84.
Strawson, G. (2006). ‘Realistic Monism: Why Physicalism Entails Panpsychism’. In A. Freeman (ed.), Conscious-
    ness and Its Place in Nature: Does Physicalism Entail Panpsychism? Exeter: Imprint, pp. 3–31.
Zahavi, D. (2005). Subjectivity and Selfhood: Investigating the First-Person Perspective. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Zahavi, D. (2011). ‘Unity of Consciousness and the Problem of Self ’. In S. Gallagher (ed.), Oxford Handbook of
    the Self. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 314–33.




                                                         167
                        15
                 ANOMALOUS DUALISM
        A New Approach to the Mind-Body Problem

                                           David Bourget




A satisfactory solution to the mind-problem should answer the two following questions: (i) Are
phenomenal properties, the properties that characterize states of consciousness, physical? (ii) How do
phenomenal properties causally interact with physical properties? To a first approximation, physical-
ism and dualism are the two possible answers to the first question. Regarding (ii), there are three
kinds of views on causal interactions between phenomenal and physical properties: nomism (they
interact through deterministic laws), acausalism (they do not causally interact), and anomalism (they
interact, but not through deterministic laws). In this chapter, I explore anomalous dualism, a combi-
nation of views that has not previously been explored. I suggest that a kind of anomalous dualism,
non-reductive anomalous panpsychism, promises to offer the best overall answer to two pressing issues
for dualism: the problem of mental causation and the mapping problem (the problem of predicting
mind-body associations). I will start by charting the logical space around anomalous dualism.


                                        1.  The Logical Space
We can define physical properties as properties that fall under one of the following categories:
(i) properties of roughly the kind that have so far been uncovered by biology, chemistry, and physics;
(ii) properties that can be constituted by physical properties; and (iii) properties that actually con-
stitute physical properties (if any). By X constitutes Y, I mean that X realizes Y, grounds Y, or stands
in a determinate-determinable relationship to Y. This definition of physical properties corresponds
roughly to Chalmers’ (2015) definition of “broadly physical properties”.
    I take physicalism to be the view that everything, including phenomenal properties, is physical.
Anti-physicalism is the negation of physicalism, whereas dualism is the view that phenomenal proper-
ties are instantiated but none is physical. Anti-physicalism without dualism is quite implausible, so
the mind-body problem is typically conceived of as requiring us to choose between physicalism and
dualism. Note that, since we understand “physical” broadly, Russellian monism and functionalism
both count as kinds of physicalism.
    Issues pertaining to mental causation figure centrally in the debate between physicalists and dualists.
For present purposes, we can think of causation as a relation between events, and we can think of events
as instantiations of properties by individuals at times. There are three possible views that one might
take on any given alleged instance of causation between mental and physical events: nomism is the view
that the instance of causation is subsumed under a deterministic law of nature; anomalism is the view
that it is an instance of non-deterministic causation; acausalism is the view that denies that there is any


                                                   168
                                             David Bourget


    It is not entirely obvious how to use physical determinism to argue against dualism, but there is at
least one widely accepted way. Suppose first that mental events have physical effects.

   Mental efficacy: Some phenomenal events have physical effects.

To complete the argument, we need to assume that the effects of mental events on physical events
are not all overdetermined.

   No systematic overdetermination: The immediate effects of phenomenal events on physical
     events are not all overdetermined.

    An event is overdetermined when there are two wholly distinct events of which it is an immedi-
ate effect. By wholly distinct, I mean events that are nonidentical and not related through a relation of
constitution (as defined above).2
    Given mental efficacy and the no systematic overdetermination principle, we can infer that some
phenomenal event M has an immediate physical effect P that is not overdetermined. P’s not being
overdetermined means that there is not a second event wholly distinct from M that also has P as
immediate effect. But physical determinism requires that P is the immediate effect of a physical cause
C. So M must not be wholly distinct from C. Given our definition of “physical”, this means that M
is a physical event. Assuming that events are instantiations of properties, it follows that some mental
properties are physical properties. Therefore, dualism is false.
    Since the no systematic overdetermination principle is not a priori, one might question it. The
rationale behind it is that it is hard to see what plausible setup might guarantee the overdetermina-
tion of the effects of mental events on physical events. Overdetermination can happen, as in firing
squad situations, but no one has made it plausible that the effects of mental events on physical events
are systematically overdetermined. Without an independent justification, the hypothesis of system-
atic overdetermination is ad hoc and implausible.
    One widely overlooked reason why denying the no systematic overdetermination principle is
unattractive is that this premise is actually dispensable. It is dispensable on the assumption that mental
efficacy entails counterfactual dependence.

   Counterfactual dependence: Some physical event is counterfactually dependent on a­
     mental event.

An event A is counterfactually dependent on an event B if and only if it is the case that A would not
have occurred if B had not occurred. Even if mental efficacy didn’t entail counterfactual depend-
ence, counterfactual dependence is just as plausible as mental efficacy, so we can replace mental
efficacy by counterfactual dependence in our argument. This yields the following argument against
dualism. Take any physical event P that is counterfactually dependent on a phenomenal event M as
required by counterfactual dependence. Physical determinism implies that P had an immediate suf-
ficient physical cause C1, which itself had an immediate sufficient physical cause C2, and so on ad
infinitum (or up to a first physical event if we make an exception to physical determinism for a first
physical event). Take the event C along this chain that occurred at exactly the same time as M (we
can slice the events of the chain in whatever way is necessary to delineate such an event). If dualism
is true, C is wholly distinct from M. It follows from the standard, non-backtracking way of assessing
counterfactuals that C would have occurred even if M had not occurred.3 Since C is by hypothesis
sufficient for a chain of events leading to P, this means that P would have occurred even if M had
not occurred. This contradicts our assumption that P is counterfactually dependent on M. Therefore,
one of physical determinism, counterfactual dependence, or dualism must be false.


                                                   170
                                          Anomalous Dualism


    Denying counterfactual dependence is an option for the dualist, but it comes with a huge cost: if
counterfactual dependence is false, there is a clear sense in which the mental makes no difference to
the physical. But if mental states made no difference to the physical, we wouldn’t expect brains cre-
ated through natural selection to involve any consciousness, much less for the phenomenal properties
associated with physical properties to exhibit any sort of cohesion or “make sense”. This seems to
be a fatal objection to mind-to-matter acausalism however the relevant causal roles are understood
exactly.4
    This leaves a dualist with one possible response to the arguments from mental causation,
which is to deny physical determinism. Unlike the other responses we have considered so far, this
response has some initial plausibility. After all, physical determinism has been shown to be false by
quantum mechanics. More specifically, quantum measurements are indeterministic in two ways:
first, the outcomes of quantum measurements are probabilistic, following probability distributions
fixed by quantum states; second, when a measurement occurs, and what the measured observable
is, are not determined by anything within standard quantum theory.5 These facts are typically
ignored by philosophers of mind because the evidence from neuroscience seems to suggest that
mental activity is implemented in macroscopic neural patterns, and it is generally thought that
quantum effects are not relevant at this level of organization.6 But our understanding of the brain
remains fairly limited, and it is not hard to imagine how sub-neuronal conditions for conscious-
ness might have gone unnoticed. So, let us not prejudge this empirical question. If we limit our-
selves to assuming a limited completeness of physics that is consistent with quantum mechanics,
the following is the principle that we should use as premise as part of arguments from mental
causation against dualism:

   Completeness: For every nonrandom physical event Y, some immediately prior physical event
     X is causally sufficient for Y.

A random event is an event whose occurrence was not determined by deterministic laws of nature, for
example, the immediate outcome of a quantum measurement. I formulate the exception to deter-
minism built into completeness in terms of randomness, and not specifically in term of quantum
measurement, because I want to stay as close as possible to observation. We don’t know whether a
future, more complete physics might not drop “measurement” talk entirely in favor of a deeper char-
acterization of what is going on. What we do know is that nature occasionally exhibits fundamen-
tally indeterministic behavior that is correctly modeled by the mathematics of quantum mechanics.
    Our qualified, scientifically correct completeness claim renders invalid the arguments sketched
earlier. However, the dualist is not out of trouble yet, because the arguments can be fixed. To make
our arguments valid again, we can add a further premise that specifies that the effects of mental events
do not fall under the exception we have carved out for random physical events:

   No-randomness: The immediately physical effects of mental events are not random events.

This might seem like a somewhat ad hoc claim, but it falls out of a slightly stronger claim that seems
to be a natural, widely held view:

   Mind-to-matter nomism: The effects of mental events on physical events fall under deter-
     ministic laws.

Given mental efficacy and no-randomness, we can infer that mental events have immediate, non-
random physical effects. By the completeness principle, each of these effects has an immediate suf-
ficient physical cause. Assuming that there is no systematic overdetermination, some of the physical


                                                  171
                                            David Bourget


causes of the effects of mental events are not wholly distinct from the mental events. This leads to
the conclusion that dualism is false.
    The argument from counterfactual dependence is slightly more complicated with completeness
than with physical determinism. For simplicity, let us assume that time is discrete.7 We must consider
not just any counterfactual dependence relationship between mental and physical events, but a direct
counterfactual relationship, one that is not the result of intermediary counterfactual dependence
relationships. We can infer the existence of such relationships from counterfactual dependence: if
there is a counterfactual dependence relationship between M and P, there must be a direct counter-
factual dependence relationship between some mental event N and some physical event O, because
the mental and the physical have to interface somewhere along the chain of dependent events. Now
suppose that C is the physical event at the origin of (or far down) the chain of physical events leading
to O. We know that C exists because of completeness and no-randomness. Either C occurred after
N (the last mental event in the chain from M), or it did not. We can plausibly argue that C cannot
have occurred after N because this would mean that it occurred in the time between N and O, but
there cannot be any such time: if there was, we could discern intermediary events and counterfactual
dependence relationships between N and O. If C did not occur after N, the argument proceeds as
before: we can find a link in the chain C . . . O that is contemporaneous with N and argue from
dualism that it would have occurred even if N had not occurred, which means that O (and P) would
have occurred even if N (and M) had not occurred.
    The versions of the argument from mental causation that appeal to completeness don’t leave the
dualist many options. Completeness is too well established scientifically to be questioned on the
basis of a posteriori armchair considerations, and denying mental efficacy altogether seems absurd. As
a result, denying mind-to-matter nomism seems to be the only potentially acceptable option. The
thesis that mind-to-matter nomism is false has received some attention in the context of Davidson’s
(1970) defense of anomalous monism. There seems to be fairly widespread agreement that Davidson
at least makes a good case for doubting the existence of strict laws connecting mental and physical
events.8 Many authors have raised doubts regarding the viability of anomalous monism as an account
of mental causation, but anomalism remains fairly plausible independently of the rest of Davidson’s
view. In any case, it is far more plausible than denying completeness or denying mental causation
altogether.
    The dualist should not merely deny mind-to-matter nomism; she should also endorse mind-to-
matter anomalism. First, this is required to escape the argument from counterfactual dependence,
which only needs one instance of deterministic mind-to-matter causation. Second, if she took the
position that some but not all effects of mental events on physical events are nonrandom, she would
run the risk that some of the nonrandom events are also not overdetermined, which would allow her
opponent to use our argument from no systematic overdetermination. Overdetermination plausibly
can only occur by accident, so an “almost no overdetermination” principle is about as plausible as
our no systematic overdetermination principle. As a result, the dualist has to at least endorse the view
that deterministic causation from mental to physical events is rare. She might as well take the simpler,
more principled view that it is the nature of such causation to involve some randomness (mind-to-
matter anomalism).
    Endorsing mind-to-matter anomalism seems to be the best strategy for the dualist, but one might
worry that this response is merely an empty shell of a theory, and that it is not plausible unless there
is some reasonable way of filling in the details, of explaining how the supposed random interface
between the mental and the physical works.
    A number of theorists have argued for a relationship between quantum randomness and con-
sciousness. However, I am not aware of a “quantum theory of consciousness” that succeeds at giving
a reasonably plausible account of mental causation that is consistent with completeness, mind-to-
matter anomalism, and the totality of empirical evidence regarding the dynamics of physical systems.


                                                  172
                                          Anomalous Dualism


Some theories allow mental states to deterministically cause physical states, claiming that such causa-
tion occurs under the cover of quantum randomness (cf. Eccles 1978), which is why we have not
noticed it. This kind of view is ruled out by our arguments from completeness, as well as by empirical
evidence (Bourget 2004). Other theories are consistent with completeness but not the totality of
evidence regarding the dynamics of physical systems. According to Stapp’s (1996) view, for example,
the conscious mind acts on the body by selecting when a quantum measurement is performed and
what observable is measured. Because of a phenomenon known as the “Zeno effect”, this theoreti-
cally allows the conscious mind to control what the brain does. This is an example of a possible way
of fleshing out mind-to-matter anomalism. However, this view turns out to be inconsistent with
simple empirical observations (see Bourget 2004).
    In order for the “quantum response” to the problem of mental causation for dualism to be plausi-
ble, it has to respect the constraint that quantum measurements have very slight effects on macroscopic
systems as far as we can observe. To my knowledge, no theory that clearly respects this constraint
has been offered. However, it remains that mind-to-matter anomalism seems to be the dualist’s best
possible solution to the problem of mental causation.


                                    3.  The Mapping Problem
The previous section motivated mind-to-matter anomalism. In this section, I present a motivation
for matter-to-mind anomalism. While some authors have considered mind-to-matter anomalism,
the combination of dualism and matter-to-mind anomalism has hardly been explored.9 It seems to
be almost universally assumed that if the mind is not physical, it arises via deterministic psychophysi-
cal laws. In this section, I want to point out that it is not obvious that this assumption is correct.
    If dualism and matter-to-mind nomism were both true, the psychophysical laws that govern
matter-to-mind causation would be fundamental laws of nature. As Chalmers (1996) points out,
such a view would only be plausible if the psychophysical laws could be given a simple, general
formulation (roughly, one that fits on a t-shirt). Otherwise, the relevant psychophysical laws would
not be plausible candidate fundamental laws of nature. A canonical statement of the psychophysical
laws should also explicitly relate mental states and physical states under their mental and physical
descriptions, respectively. For example, it would not do to say simply that “a physical state gives rise
to the mental state associated with it”. A suitable statement of a psychophysical law would have to
relate full descriptions of mental states as such with physical states under their full physical descrip-
tions. Call a general, simple statement specifying which mental states (under a mental description)
occur in any given physical condition (under a physical description) a general psychophysical mapping.
Matter-to-mind nomic dualism seems to require the existence of a general psychophysical mapping,
in the sense that the former would be quite implausible if we knew that there is no such mapping
to be found. The problem of specifying a general psychophysical mapping (to the extent possible) is
the mapping problem.
    I want to suggest that we have fairly good evidence that there is no general psychophysical
mapping. Note first that the existence of psychophysical correlations does not imply the exist-
ence of a general psychophysical mapping. It could be that there is a perfect correlation between
phenomenal properties and physical properties, in the sense that the same phenomenal property is
always instantiated along with the same physical property and vice versa, yet there is no general psy-
chophysical mapping. Perfect correlation is even consistent with the absence of a finitely statable
psychophysical mapping (a minimally demanding understanding of the requirement that a general
psychophysical mapping be “simple”).
    Neuroscience has revealed numerous correlations between brain areas and types of conscious
experience and other kinds of mental activity. It has also revealed what appear to be limited map-
pings between aspects of conscious experience and certain kinds of brain activity. For example,


                                                  173
                                             David Bourget


the phenomenological color space can plausibly be mapped in a relatively straightforward way to
dimensions of activation in certain neural networks in the brain (see Churchland 1986). These
are impressive findings, but they fall far short of a general psychophysical mapping. The associa-
tions that we know exist between phenomenal properties and physical properties don’t seem to
fall under a broad pattern that suggests a general psychophysical mapping. If we were to plot the
known correlations between physical and phenomenal properties, we would see some local patterns
(as in the case of color experience), but, aside from these local patterns, the points would jump all
over the place, forming no recognizable curve that we can characterize. We have no idea how to
extrapolate a general psychophysical mapping from what we have. Such a mapping has not even
been imagined.10
    I don’t wish to diminish the accomplishments of neuroscience in any way: an extremely impres-
sive number of correlations have been found. On the contrary, my point is that the vast quantity of
correlational data that has been collected, together with the absence of a candidate general psycho-
physical mapping, makes it plausible that no psychophysical mapping is to be found. The more we
find out about psychophysical correlations, the more non-generalizable they seem.
    One philosophical theory initially seems to help with the mapping problem: representational-
ism. Representationalism is roughly the view that an experience of a quality Q is a mental state
that phenomenally represents Q.11 If we could give an account of the physical basis of phenomenal
representation, then it seems that we would have a general psychophysical mapping. Suppose that
physical relation R is the physical basis of phenomenal representation. Then it seems that we have
the following general psychophysical mapping:

   Representationalist mapping: An individual experiences quality Q just in case they stand in
     R to Q.

Suppose, for example, that R is the relation that one stands in to X just in case one has an internal
state that is cognitively integrated and “tracks” the presence of X in the world. Call representational-
ism combined with this account of R tracking representationalism. Given tracking representationalism,
it seems that we can predict what sort of experience one has in any given condition. For example, if
one stands in R to redness, then one will experience redness.
    Despite appearances, tracking representationalism does not provide a general psychophysical
mapping. A general psychophysical mapping is supposed to relate phenomenal properties under a
phenomenal description with physical properties under a physical description. Tracking representationalism
does not specify such a mapping. The problem is that “experiencing Q” and “tracking Q” cannot
at the same time be phenomenal and physical descriptions of phenomenal states and physical states,
respectively, because “Q” is couched either in phenomenal language or in physical language.
    To make the problem more vivid, consider how tracking representationalism might try to pre-
dict which mental state is associated with any given physical state. The idea is that we check which
property is tracked. If an individual is tracking Q in the right way, we can predict that the individual
is experiencing Q. The problem with this is that, when we identify what is tracked, we identify it
under a physical description, for example, “the property of reflecting electromagnetic radiation of
about 650 nm” (R650, for short). “Experiencing R650” is not a phenomenal description of the state
of experiencing red – the proper phenomenal description of that state is “experiencing red”. So the
tracking representationalist account does not make any prediction about experiencing red under a
phenomenal description. This fact is easily overlooked because we know, independently of tracking
representationalism, that the experiences we have when looking at objects that have R650 are expe-
riences of red, but this is knowledge we have above and beyond what tracking representationalism
tells us. By itself, tracking representationalism does not give the phenomenal description of the state
associated with tracking R650.


                                                   174
                                          Anomalous Dualism


   A parallel problem arises if we try to generate predictions in the mind-to-matter direction. If
tracking representationalism is true, then experiencing red is associated with tracking redness. But
“tracking redness” is not a physical description if “redness” is understood in a way that speaks to
the phenomenology (if it means what it means as part of the phenomenal description “experienc-
ing redness”). Without being given a physicalist theory of redness, which cannot be inferred from
tracking representationalism, we don’t know what is the correct physical description of redness or
tracking redness.
   The problem can be put slightly differently as follows. A solution to the mapping problem needs
to specify a function that generates predictions such as this for all physically possible conditions that
result in some conscious experience:

   X experiences redness iff X stands in R to R650

Since phenomenal and physical descriptions are distinct, the representationalist schema does not
have the right form to specify such a function. The following is the right form, where f is a function
that maps physical descriptions of physical properties to phenomenal descriptions of experienced
qualities:

   An individual experiences f(Q) just in case they stand in R to Q.

Alternatively, the positions of “Q” and “f(Q)” could be swapped and the inverse of f used. Only a
theory that fits this schema could possibly relate phenomenal descriptions with (distinct) physical
descriptions, but I am not aware of any proposed non-trivial specification of f. So far, tracking rep-
resentationalists have effectively assumed that it is the identity function.
   There are other relational views of experience that might seem to specify a general psychophysi-
cal mapping of the form of the representationalist mapping, for example, naïve realism. The very
form of that mapping guarantees that these theories do not supply a general psychophysical mapping.
   It turns out, then, that tracking representationalism and other relational theories of conscious-
ness do not specify a general psychophysical mapping. This is why I said earlier that a general psy-
chophysical mapping has not even been imagined. What we have imagined is a theory that seems to
specify a general psychophysical mapping.
   Once the apparent solution to the mapping problem offered by tracking representationalism and
similar views is set aside, the problem seems completely hopeless for matter-to-mind nomic dualism.
There is simply no discernible suitably general pattern in the known phenomenal-physical correla-
tions revealed by neuroscience or everyday observation, and there is little hope of finding any.
   This leaves the dualist with two choices regarding causation in the matter-to-mind direction:
acausalism and anomalism. Matter-to-mind acausalism would require something like a preestablished
harmony to keep mental states and physical state in sync, which is extremely implausible (especially
without theism as a supporting hypothesis). Matter-to-mind anomalism, however, effectively dis-
solves the mapping problem. On this view, there is no deterministic causation from the physical to
the mental, so we should not expect there to be a general psychophysical mapping.


                                  4.  Anomalous Panpsychism
In section 2, we saw that, despite obvious difficulties, the most reasonable approach to the problem
of mental causation for the dualist is to reject mind-to-matter nomism in favor of mind-to-matter
anomalism. The mapping problem discussed in section 3 is a challenge for dualism combined with
matter-to-mind nomism, and we have seen that matter-to-mind anomalism may be the best way
out of this problem for the dualist. Taken together, these considerations make a case for considering


                                                  175
                                               David Bourget


anomalous dualism, the kind of dualism that endorses anomalism about both mind-to-matter and
matter-to-mind causation. As far as the considerations pertaining to mental causation and the map-
ping problem are concerned, anomalous dualism seems to be the most promising dualist view.
    Even if anomalous dualism combines the best answers to the arguments from completeness and
the mapping problem, this does not mean that the view is plausible. In particular, a number of objec-
tions need to be addressed. I will consider the following objections:
    First, even if anomalous dualism is technically speaking consistent with mental efficacy, does it
not give up on a truly significant causal role for consciousness? As we noted in our discussion of
quantum theories of mental causation, quantum mechanics and the total body of evidence concern-
ing the dynamics of physical systems do not seem to leave much room for mind-caused random
effects to make much of a difference to the course of physical events. For this reason, it seems that
mind-to-matter anomalism is inconsistent with macroscopic mind-to-matter causal connections. For
example, it seems inconsistent with the fact that my conscious intention to raise my arm causes my
arm to raise. I will refer to the claim that there is macroscopic mind-to-matter causation but hardly
any observable macroscopic random events as causation without randomness.
    Second, anomalous dualism seems in tension with the existence of psychophysical correlations.
Even if neuroscience has not solved the mapping problem, it has uncovered numerous correlations
between brain activity and conscious activity: the same brain activity is always accompanied by the
same conscious activity. Call this fact the mind-brain correlation observation. It is not clear that anomalous
dualism is consistent with the mind-brain correlation observation.
    Third, if mind and matter were only randomly associated, wouldn’t our experience be a mere
“blooming, buzzing confusion”? Instead, our conscious minds seem to have some sort of internal
cohesion. Call this fact phenomenal cohesion.
    Lastly, anomalous dualism might not have the problem of specifying a general psychophysical
mapping, but is this not simply because it gives up on explaining consciousness altogether? How
could anomalous dualism explain consciousness and shed light on its place in nature without giving
us psychophysical laws that explain how phenomenal states arise and what effects they have?
    Despite appearances, anomalous dualism is at least in principle consistent with causation without
randomness, mind-brain correlations, and phenomenal cohesion. It is also easy to see how it can
be genuinely explanatory. The following picture can serve as a kind of proof of concept, though
its details are somewhat implausible. Suppose that physical and phenomenal properties are wholly
distinct, but that every physical property is “linked” to a randomly selected phenomenal property
(within certain constraints) the first time it occurs in the history of universe.12 As an example, sup-
pose that the following two constraints apply to this random linking: (i) if physical properties P and
Q are both instantiated at the time of the linking, they are linked to consistent phenomenal proper-
ties (assuming representationalism, we can say that two phenomenal properties are consistent when
their contents are consistent); and (ii) if physical property P necessitates physical property Q, then
P’s phenomenal property necessitates Q’s. Once linked, phenomenal and physical properties forever
co-occur across the universe. Suppose also that the phenomenal properties of a physical system can
in some circumstances have a random effect on the dynamics of the system. Say, for example, that
any physical system about to enter a total physical state involving physical properties associated with
inconsistent phenomenal properties randomly jumps to another physical state with a probability
determined by the physical state of the system. (Such an event could be modeled as a measurement
by quantum mechanics, but it doesn’t have to be something that we would intuitively describe as a
measurement and, conversely, events that we describe as measurements don’t have to occur in this
way). These suppositions together specify a view I am going to refer to as the random theory. This view
is a kind of non-reductive anomalous panpsychism: it combines dualism (non-reductionism) with
generalized anomalism and panpsychism, the view that phenomenal properties pervade the physical
universe. I am going to refer to this kind of view more simply as anomalous panpsychism.


                                                     176
                                          Anomalous Dualism


    The random theory is quite implausible on its face, and seriously vague and underspecified, but it
is useful to consider as a first step into the largely unexplored conceptual space of anomalous dualism
and anomalous panpsychism. I want to suggest that its principles could potentially be precisified in
a way that might yield an explanation of consciousness consistent with the mind-brain correlation
observation, phenomenal cohesion, causation without randomness, completeness, and the overall
body of evidence regarding the dynamics of physical systems.
    The mind-brain correlation observation is easiest: it only requires that the same phenomenal and
physical properties tend to occur together. The random theory is not only consistent with this fact,
but its linking principle offers an explanation for it (however intrinsically implausible it might seem
as stated).
    Phenomenal cohesion requires us to think about what would have happened over time if the
random theory were true. Let us assume that there is some principled way of delineating the physical
systems to which the random theory refers that counts properly functioning animal brains, or at least
big parts of animal brains, as whole systems.13 Under this assumption, we would expect the brains
of organisms to have evolved so that they barely ever enter physical states that have been linked to
inconsistent phenomenal properties (or at least not macroscopic states linked to inconsistent prop-
erties). Unless they had so evolved, they would be suffering from the disruptive effects of random
jumps, which would make them unstable, hence not prone to survive. Regarding simpler physical
systems (including, in the limit case, isolated particles), their having fewer phenomenal properties
(in virtue of having fewer physical properties) might explain their stability: they are not very likely
to enter inconsistent states. The final result, then, should be brains and other macroscopic physical
systems in which the potential random effects due to consciousness are largely absent, which is what
we find. We should also expect the resulting stream of experiences supported by human brains to be
generally coherent, which is what we find (phenomenal cohesion).
    In addition to predicting a certain orderliness that is consistent with what we find, the random
theory also predicts that phenomenal-physical associations should appear essentially random except
for any structure implied by the linking principle. Again, this is roughly consistent with what we find.
This is particularly interesting because no other theory even begins to explain the apparent random-
ness of mind-body correlations. Our half-baked anomalous panpsychism seems to provide not only
a proof of concept for an explanation of the ways in which consciousness is organized, but it seems
that a story along these lines could also potentially explain the ways in which it is disorganized. This
might answer the charge that anomalous dualism gives up on explanation.
    We have yet to show that anomalous dualism, anomalous panpsychism, or the random theory is con-
sistent with causation without randomness, which one might say is the main problem with these views.
    There is one important way in which the random theory illustrates the possibility of macro-
scopic effects consistent with completeness and a general lack of macroscopic quantum effects. If
this theory is true, consciousness might have played a role in structuring physical systems in the past,
progressively weeding out complex systems whose tendency to generate inconsistent experiences
makes them unstable. This requires that there were many macroscopic random events triggered by
consciousness in the past, but not that such events be common today. In this way, the random theory
illustrates the possibility that consciousness played an important causal role in the course of evolution
without making a detectable difference today.
    This addresses the need for some efficacy throughout natural evolution, but this does not fully
address the objection that consciousness has macroscopic effects that are not simply random effects.
In particular, this does not accommodate alleged causal connections such as a mental state causing a
bodily movement.
    The first thing to note here is that it is almost certain that no mental state is nomologically suf-
ficient for a bodily movement. The most that we can ask for is causal relevance, not strictly speaking
causation.


                                                  177
                                              David Bourget


    Without giving an analysis of causal relevance, it is plausible that events that stand in counter-
factual dependence relationships are in some sense causally relevant to each other. For example, had
there not been a spark, the fire would not have started. This seems to make the presence of the spark
causally relevant to the fire.
    A view along the lines of the random theory could potentially deliver just this kind of causal
relevance between mental events and bodily movements in a manner that is entirely consistent with
completeness and the general absence of macroscopic random events. To illustrate, take the following
counterfactual claim:

   Chocolate: Had you not consciously thought that there was a chocolate bar in front of you, you
     would not have reached out in the way you did at the time you did.

 If Chocolate were true, your conscious thought that there was a chocolate bar in front of you would
 be causally relevant to your reaching in the way you did, just like the spark is causally relevant to the
 fire. The random theory can potentially be precisified in such a way as to be consistent with, and
 explain, facts such as Chocolate consistently with all evidence on hand. Suppose, for example, that
 your perceptual systems were rigged in such a way that, given their input at t (a retinal image of a
 chocolate bar), they will trigger a conscious thought to the effect that there is a chocolate bar in front
 of you at a specific location L if you are not having such a thought at t. At the same time, suppose
 that your cognitive system was poised to theorize about what is in front of you in such a way that if
 you don’t consciously think that there is a chocolate bar in front of you at t, you will quickly form a
 conscious thought to the effect that there is a certain non-chocolate desert, say, lemon pie, in front of
 you at L. In sum, your brain is in such a state that, as a matter of nomologically necessity, if you are
 not having a thought that there is a chocolate bar at L at t, it will, at t+1, produce both a conscious
 thought that there is a chocolate bar at L and a conscious thought that there is lemon pie at L. Given
 that these thoughts have inconsistent contents, this setup makes the following counterfactual true:
 had you not consciously thought that there was a chocolate bar in front of you, you would have
 formed inconsistent conscious thoughts. On the random theory, inconsistent phenomenal states
 trigger random disruptions. In principle, we could flesh out the details of the case and the random
 theory in such a way that this would have prevented you from reaching at just the time you did. This
 would make Chocolate true. Of course, this example is highly contrived (I am only trying to make a
 point of principle), but, for all we know, it could be that the brain’s massively redundant architecture
 ensures that many phenomenal states cannot be altered without generating an inconsistency, which
 would underpin a kind of causal relevance for these states on the random theory.
     This kind of causal relevance could be pervasive consistently with completeness and a gen-
 eral absence of detectable macroscopic random events. This is because counterfactuals make no
 observable difference. For example, the truth of Chocolate makes no observable difference to the
 course of physical events. If the physical universe and the organisms it contains had evolved to keep
­consciousness-caused random events to a minimum as the random theory seems to predict, we
 would expect numerous counterfactuals like Chocolate to be true, which would give consciousness
 widespread causal relevance that makes no detectable difference today.
     While anomalous dualism is consistent with two important causal roles for mental events, there
 are also causal roles that it is not consistent with: it does not allow mental events to be nomologically
 necessary nor sufficient for physical events, and, intuitively, it does not allow causal oomph to pass
 from mental events to physical events in a deterministic way. One might say that these are important
 shortcomings of the view. They are perhaps shortcomings, but anomalous dualism at least succeeds
 in accommodating the core evidence regarding mental causation. We don’t have very strong reasons
 to think that causal oomph passes between mental and physical events, much less to think that the
 two kinds of event are subsumed under nomological principles. Such claims are simply not apparent


                                                   178
                                                Anomalous Dualism


to ordinary or scientific observation. The key reason mental causation must be accommodated is
not that it is directly observable, but that it seems necessary in order to make sense of the place of
consciousness in the mind and nature, in particular, of the fact that brains seem to have evolved to
make use of conscious states in some way (as noted in section 2). Anomalous dualism promises to
satisfy on this score.
    Our exploration of the random theory suggests that a view along these lines can in princi-
ple explain the apparent arbitrariness of phenomenal-physical associations while being consistent
with macroscopic mental efficacy, an evolutionary role for consciousness, the existence of numerous
mind-brain correlations, phenomenal cohesion, the completeness of physics, and a general lack of
observed macroscopic randomness. As a kind of dualism, the random theory is also consistent with
arguments against all types of physicalism (including those of Chalmers (1996) and Goff (2009)).
This makes anomalous panpsychism the only position on the mind-body problem that is not cur-
rently open to principled objections (that I know of ). Of course, the random theory is implausibly
vague and almost certainly not entirely correct. It is an open empirical question whether or not a
more precise anomalous panpsychic theory can be specified that retains the theoretical virtues of the
random theory and is consistent with everything we know or may find out in physics and neurosci-
ence. My goal in this chapter was only to try to open some new conceptual space. Even though the
random theory itself is implausible, its many virtues suggest that the overall approach of anomalous
panpsychism might deserve more investigation.14


                                                       Notes
	 1.	 Papineau (2001) makes this point and offers an excellent overview of the history of the closure problem for
       dualism. The first argument discussed below is adapted from Papineau’s discussion.
	 2.	 The “wholly distinct” qualification makes the no systematic overdetermination principle consistent with
       non-reductive physicalism and Russellian monism.
	 3.	 In assessing counterfactuals of the form “had A been the case, B would have been the case”, we must check
       whether B is the case at the nearest possible worlds at which A is the case. Importantly, the nearest worlds
       need not be worlds that are physically possible: we don’t look for worlds that have histories that explain
       A through laws like ours (this would typically require us to “backtrack” into the history of the world).
       Rather, we allow A to be the case at a world just like ours, without a suitable history, as if by miracle (Lewis
       1973, 1979). As a result, any contemporaneous or earlier fact at the actual world that is metaphysically
       compatible with A is also a fact at the nearest A worlds. In our case C is contemporaneous with M and
       metaphysically independent of it (in virtue of dualism), so the nearest M-less world is a C world.
	 4.	 One might also argue from everyday experience that phenomenal states have bodily effects. For example,
       conscious intentions seem to cause bodily movements. Some considerations in section 4 throw some doubt
       on this, but they leave untouched the argument that consciousness must do something for our brains to have
       evolved to produce cohesive streams of experience.
	 5.	 There are developments of the theory that attempt to give a physical explanation of measurement, but none
       is widely accepted.
	6.	 Sometimes, allowances are made for quantum randomness by formulating completeness as follows: the
       objective probability of every physical event is determined by a prior physical event (Yablo 1992; Bennett
       2007). This is still too strong because that a measurement will occur at any given time in a quantum system
       is not physically determined on standard interpretations. Events that could occur as a result of measurement
       don’t have any objective probability until a measurement is “decided”. If measurement is not decided by a
       physical state (which is not the case on standard QM), not every physical event has a probability fixed by a
       prior physical event.
	 7.	 We can make do without this assumption, but it requires thinking of infinite sets of events occurring within
       intervals of time rather than discrete events, which complicates parts of the argument.
	 8.	 Seager (1981) offers a rigorous defense of anomalism that refines Davidson’s arguments.
	 9.	 One notable exception is Seager (1991: 328–33).
	10.	 Chalmers’ (1996) information-theoretic proposal might be the closest that we have come.
 	11.	 For defenses of representationalism, see Byrne (2001), Crane (2003), Chalmers (2004), Pautz (2009), Bour-
       get and Mendelovici (2014), and Bourget (2019). Some representationalists suggest that a further ingredient


                                                         179
                                                   David Bourget


        might be required in addition to phenomenal representation of a content: an intentional mode or represen-
        tational manner (see Crane 2003; Chalmers 2004; Speaks 2010, 2015). I argue against such extra ingredients
        in Bourget (2015, 2017a, 2017b).
	12.	 This principle might require a sparse understanding of the relevant physical properties, for example, as natu-
        ral physical properties in Lewis’ sense.
 	13.	 Someone attracted to something like the random theory might speculate that quantum entanglement is
        what delineates systems. A number of authors have explored entanglement-based explanations of the fact
        that consciousness seems to unify contributions from different parts of a physical system (e.g. Lockwood
        1989; Penrose 1994; Seager 1995). There is a widespread misconception (among philosophers) that “deco-
        herence” virtually eliminates entanglement from the macroscopic world, but in fact the theory only predicts
        that decoherence makes entanglement unnoticeable by making the results of quantum measurement statisti-
        cally like those of classical measurements. See Schlosshauer 2005 for a relatively non-technical explanation
        of decoherence.
  	14.	 Thanks to Angela Mendelovici for her extensive feedback.


                                                   References
Bennett, K. (2007). ‘Mental Causation’. Philosophy Compass, 2 (2): 316–37.
Bourget, D. (2004). ‘Quantum Leaps in Philosophy of Mind’. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 11 (12): 17–42.
Bourget, D. (2015).‘Representationalism, Perceptual Distortion and the Limits of Phenomenal Concepts’. Cana-
   dian Journal of Philosophy, 45 (1): 16–36.
Bourget, D. (2017a). ‘Representationalism and Sensory Modalities: An Argument for Intermodal Representa-
   tionalism’. American Philosophical Quarterly, 53: 251–67.
Bourget, D. (2017b). ‘Why Are Some Experience “Vivid” and Others “Faint”? Representationalism, Imagery,
   and Cognitive Phenomenology’. Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 95 (4): 673–87.
Bourget, D. (2019). ‘Implications of Intensional Perceptual Ascriptions for Relationalism, Disjunctivism, and
   Representationalism About Perceptual Experience’. Erkenntnis, 84 (2): 381–408.
Bourget, D., and Mendelovici, A. (2014). ‘Tracking Representationalism’. In A. Bailey (ed.), Philosophy of Mind:
   The Key Thinkers. New York: Continuum, pp. 209–35.
Byrne, A. (2001). ‘Intentionalism Defended’. Philosophical Review, 110 (2): 199–240.
Chalmers, D. J. (1996). The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chalmers, D. J. (2004). ‘The Representational Character of Experience’. In B. Leiter (ed.), The Future for Philoso-
   phy. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 153–81.
Chalmers, D. J. (2015). ‘Panpsychism and Panprotopsychism’. In T. Alter and Y. Nagasawa (eds.), Consciousness in
   the Physical World: Essays on Russellian Monism. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 246–76.
Churchland, P. S. (1986). Neurophilosophy: Toward a Unified Science of the Mind-Brain. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Crane, T. (2003). ‘The Intentional Structure of Consciousness’. In Q. Smith and A. Jokic (eds.), Consciousness:
   New Philosophical Perspectives. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 33–56.
Davidson, D. (1970). ‘Mental Events’. In Essays on Actions and Events. Oxford: Clarendon Press, pp. 207–24.
Eccles, J. C. (1978). Mind and Brain. Saint Paul, MN: Paragon House.
Goff, P. (2009). ‘Why Panpsychism Doesn’t Help Us Explain Consciousness’. Dialectica, 63 (3): 289–311.
Lewis, D. K. (1979). ‘Counterfactual Dependence and Time’s Arrow’. Noûs, 13 (4): 455–76.
Lewis, D. K. (1973). Counterfactuals. Oxford: Blackwell.
Lockwood, M. (1989). Mind, Brain, and the Quantum. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Papineau, D. (2001). ‘The Rise of Physicalism’. In C. Gillett and B. Loewer (eds.), Physicalism and Its Discontents.
   Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Pautz, A. (2009). ‘A Simple View of Consciousness’. In R. Koons and G. Bealer (eds.), The Waning of Materialism:
   New Essays. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 25–66.
Penrose, R. (1994). Shadows of the Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Schlosshauer, M. (2005). ‘Decoherence, the Measurement Problem, and Interpretations of Quantum Mechanics’.
   Review of Modern Physics, 76: 1267–305.
Seager, William (1981). ‘The Anomalousness of the Mental’. Southern Journal of Philosophy, 19 (3): 389–401.
Seager, William (1991). The Metaphysics of Consciousness. London: Routledge.
Seager, William (1995). ‘Consciousness, Information, and Panpsychism’. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 2 (3): 272–88.
Speaks, J. (2010). ‘Attention and Intentionalism’. Philosophical Quarterly, 60 (239): 325–42.
Speaks, J. (2015). The Phenomenal and the Representational. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Stapp, H. P. (1996). ‘The Hard Problem: A Quantum Approach’. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 3 (3): 194–210.
Yablo, S. (1992). ‘Mental Causation’. Philosophical Review, 101 (2): 245–80.


                                                         180
        PART III

Comparative Alternatives
                      16
            SUBJECTIVE PHYSICALISM
              AND PANPSYCHISM
                                         Robert J. Howell




The past fifty or so years have had philosophers of mind talking about bats, zombies and experi-
entially deprived geniuses (Nagel 1974; Jackson 1982; Chalmers 1996). These flights of fancy have
resurrected the mind-body problem by helping us see what was so intractable about it in the first
place. Put simply, it is hard to understand how the pushings and pullings described by physics, or
even the pumpings, squishings and zaps described by biology and neuroscience, could ultimately, at
some level of description, be the same thing as the feeling of pain or the experience of redness. The
natural move, of course, is to say that pending some inconceivable revelation we should be dualists.
We should believe that the properties and states that constitute phenomenal conscious experience
escape the net of physics and therefore physicalism. There are two worries that complicate that move,
though. One is that dualism is apt to make phenomenal states epiphenomenal. Those pale pushings
and pullings explain an awful lot. It’s arguable that they explain all of the physical events there are –
including the many brain processes that underly our cognitive processes. If so, there seems to be no
unique work for phenomenal states to do. It’s a sad ontology that expands to include features of the
world that don’t do anything.
    This problem, the problem of the causal relevance of the phenomenal, is why many non-zombies
like myself nevertheless want to hold on to physicalism. Fortunately, I think, we can do so given the
second hasty move to the conclusion that physicalism is false. This move involves the inference from
the incompleteness of physics (or the physical sciences in general) to the falsity of physicalism. Physi-
calism is a metaphysical position, about what properties and things there are in the world. The view
that physics and related sciences are incomplete is ultimately an epistemic point about the ability of
those sciences to convey, via their theories, a complete grasp of the world. This opens space for a
physicalism that is immune to the traditional antimaterialist arguments


                                      1.  The Missing Option
An objective to the knowledge argument can help us see the space for our new physicalism. Accord-
ing to that argument we learn that physicalism is false – and presumably that there are extra, non-
physical properties in the world – because of the limits of what one can know by studying the
physical sciences alone. So, as the story goes, brilliant Mary has learned all the truths of physics and
the physical sciences from within a black and white room, yet she learns something new when she
goes out and sees red for the first time ( Jackson 1982). Most of us find this intuitive. But, can we



                                                  183
                                             Robert J. Howell


really conclude that there are properties that Mary needs to add to her ontology once she leaves this
room? In a famous objection, Paul Churchland thought not.

     if Jackson’s argument were sound, it would prove far too much. Suppose Jackson were argu-
     ing not against materialism, but against dualism: against the view that there exists a non-
     material substance – call it “ectoplasm” – whose hidden constitution and nomic intricacies
     ground all mental phenomena. Let our cloistered Mary be an “ectoplasmologist” this time,
     and let her know everything there is to know about the ectoplasmic processes underlying
     vision. There would still be something she did not know: what it is like to see red. Dualism
     is therefore inadequate to account for all mental phenomena!
                                                                      (Churchland 1985: 24–5)

Churchland is rightly pointing out that merely substituting some sort of psychic goo for the more
conventional physical stuff will do nothing to satisfy the intuitions behind the knowledge argument.
Churchland is wrong to think, however, that the knowledge argument would show that dualism
is false. It would only show that if the dualist held that phenomenal states could be fully grasped
objectively, in the sort of terms that could be conveyed to Mary by scientific textbooks. That is, it
only shows that a sort of “objective dualism” is false. Unfortunately for Churchland, no one holds
that view. The dualist admits that these special mental properties can only be known in a certain way,
namely by having them and (perhaps) being acquainted with them. Still, this response to Church-
land’s point helps us see that traditional dualism is really a two-sided position. On the one hand it is
a metaphysical view, that there are properties other than physical ones. On the other, though, is an
epistemological view about how those properties can be known. Traditional dualism is subjective
dualism. Objective dualism is a coherent view, but Churchland is right that the knowledge argument
could never establish it.
    The conclusion of the knowledge argument is the truth of subjective dualism, but its target is
objective physicalism. Objective physicalism is again a hybrid of a metaphysical view – that all prop-
erties are physical – and an epistemological view – that physical properties can be completely grasped
by objective methods. But just as the response to Churchland’s tu quoque involves pointing out the
nature of subjective dualism, it seems there is a view in logical space that evades the knowledge argu-
ment: subjective physicalism (Howell 2013).
    Subjective physicalism is, like the other views mentioned, a hybrid view. Metaphysically it is
physicalist: everything in the world is physical. But the epistemological side is subjectivist: not all
physical states can be fully grasped or known by objective approaches like those employed by phys-
ics. The knowledge argument fails to challenge subjective physicalism for the same reason it fails to
challenge subjective dualism.
    This sounds simple enough, and even intuitive, but it’s fair to say things are not as simple as they
appear. For one thing, there are really a number of very different positions that could rally behind this
subjective physicalist thesis. A lot will depend on what one is willing to call “physicalism.” Panpsy-
chism or Russelian Monism could both be considered “subjective physicalist” given a certain notion
of the physical. If, for example, one said that a property is physical iff it is the sort of property had by
paradigmatically physical things like rocks and carbon atoms, then many forms of panpsychism will
turn out to be versions of subjective physicalism (Stoljar 2001 presents a similar view). Everything
might well be made up of the same stuff and have the same properties as paradigmatically physical
things, yet because the roots of phenomenality are ubiquitous that stuff cannot be fully described
by objective methods. Granted, this is not your grandfather’s physicalism (unless your grandfather is
Grover Maxwell), but it shouldn’t be rejected out of hand for that reason.1
    It’s tempting to think that this sort of subjective physicalism, at least, only avoids dualism by
semantic slight of hand. This is a real worry, and it is important to be clear on what we mean by


                                                    184
                                 Subjective Physicalism and Panpsychism


“physical,” while simultaneously being clear about what hangs in the balance.2 What, in other words,
should determine what counts as “physical” in this debate? This is a difficult question, but my own
inclination is to think we should keep an eye on two different guidelines for a definition of “physi-
cal.” The first is that we need to be aware of how the term has been used in philosophical debates.
My own inclination is to say that the question of whether or not everything is physical hasn’t been
about whether there is a way to stretch our notion of the physical to cover phenomenal states. It has
been about whether phenomenal states are in some sense grounded in the sort of states and proper-
ties described by physics.3 (Note – just because physics is describing states that as a matter of fact
involve phenomenal properties doesn’t mean physics is describing those properties.) So there is a
certain historical precedent that recommends against considering things like panpsychism “subjec-
tive physicalism.” Perhaps more important, though, is that we keep an eye on the reason it seemed
important to be a physicalist in the first place. It’s not because “physical” is such a lovely word or that
“dualism” causes secular humanists to blush. It’s rather that it looks as though dualism has a difficult
time giving phenomenal properties a causal role in the world. If the new physical properties don’t
have a role to play in the world, not much has been gained. We can hardly be proud that phenom-
enal properties are allowed into the physicalist club if they still have to huddle together silently in
the coatroom.
    These two criteria, or perhaps warnings, shouldn’t keep us from looking at surprising physicalist
theses. But once we have a few on the table, they might give us a means of determining if they are
really what we are looking for. To get a handle on the different possible theses, we can look a little
more closely at the structure of a definition of physicalism. It’s helpful to think about a definition
of physicalism as involving three parts: a microphysical part, a macro-physical part, and an account
of the relation between the two (see Stoljar 2010). The microphysical part of the definition pro-
vides the criteria for what makes basic or fundamental stuff physical. But, of course, not everything
is fundamental and it might be a mistake to think that the non-fundamental should be considered
physical in precisely the same sense. The macro-physical definition tries to provide a criterion for
non-fundamental physicality. Finally, the relation between the two should attempt to explain what
relation the macro-phenomena must have to the micro-phenomena to count as physical.
    A full exploration of subjective physicalism would need to say more about just how the micro-
physical and the macro-physical are defined and just what makes them physical. For our purposes,
though, perhaps it will suffice to work with intuitive notions – the microphysical base is the type of
stuff described by basic physics (leaving open whether or not physics completely describes it) and the
macro-physical is what is composed by that stuff – tables, chairs, people and planets.4


                             2.  Varieties of Subjective Physicalism
Given the fact that physicalism can be defined distinctly for the micro and the macro, we can come
up with at least two varieties of subjective physicalism:

     Subjective Micro-Physicalism: Although all of the properties in the world, fundamental and
     otherwise, are physical, some of those fundamental properties cannot be completely grasped
     except by beings constituted by those properties.
        Subjective Macro-Physicalism: All of the properties in the world, fundamental and oth-
     erwise, are physical, and all of the fundamental physical things can be completely grasped
     by objective methods of inquiry, but there are, nonetheless, macro-physical properties that
     cannot be completely grasped except by beings who instantiate those properties.

On the face of it, subjective micro-physicalism is apt to be a form of panpsychism. (It really depends
on how widespread these objectively ungraspable fundamental properties are and how “pan”


                                                   185
                                            Robert J. Howell


panpsychism must be.) Similarly, on the face of it, subjective macro-physicalism looks like a form of
emergentism. On this view, the base is just as physics describes it but things composed by the ele-
ments of that base have properties that have to be experienced to be fully grasped.
     The situation gets more complicated, though, when one looks into what is involved in “fully
grasping,” an admittedly slippery notion. On the one hand, one might think that if one only partially
grasps a property, there is another property, which is part of the original property, that one doesn’t
grasp at all. Though this sounds paradoxical, it is actually a pretty natural line of thought that issues
in part from the analogy of “grasping.” If one doesn’t touch all of something, mustn’t there be some
part of that thing that one doesn’t touch? If one doesn’t fully grasp or understand something, surely
there is something that one doesn’t understand. That thing totally eludes ones understanding, even
if it forms a whole with something that is partially understood. One might, however, deny this. The
line of thinking I’ve just spelled out relies on a principle that one can doubt. We can call it the epis-
temic exclusion theorem:

    Epistemic Exclusion Theorem: If one doesn’t fully grasp some property F, there is necessarily
    some property G that is a part of F that one doesn’t grasp at all.

Though this seems natural enough, based on an analogy with the physical grasping of objects, I think
it should be questioned when it comes to properties.5 Properties might not divide as finely as our
understanding. I pursue this sort of view elsewhere (see Howell 2013), but the important point here
is that the different stances one can take on the epistemic exclusion theorem generates a further dis-
ambiguation of subjective physicalism that runs orthogonal to the micro-macro division. There can
be subjective physicalisms that accept subjective properties, and those that don’t.

    Subjective Property Physicalism: All of the properties in the world are physical, but there
    are some physical properties that cannot be grasped except by beings instantiating those
    properties.
       Subjective Aspect Physicalism: All of the properties in the world are physical, and can be
    given physical description, but some of those properties cannot be fully grasped except by
    beings instantiating those properties.6

The difference between Subjective Property Physicalism (SPP) and Subjective Aspect Physicalism
(SAP) is essentially whether it can be said that there is some property that physics or the objective
ways of knowing “leave out.” SPP says yes, while SAP says no. One’s stance here will be determined
by one’s acceptance of epistemic exclusion.
   One can adopt property and aspect versions of both subjective micro-physicalism and subjective
macro-physicalism, depending on whether one thinks that there are or are not properties that escape
objective description on either the micro or the macro level.
   In what follows I will sketch what I believe to be the most promising form of subjective physical-
ism, macro subjective aspect physicalism.


                 3.  Subjective Physicalism Without Emergent Properties
One way to put the difference between macro-SAP and macro-SPP is that according to macro-SPP
there really is a new property that supervenes upon the pure physical base. It is, in a sense, emergent –
only necessarily so. I personally have some question about the coherence of necessary emergence,
but I won’t rehearse them here (see Howell 2009). Macro-SAP rejects such new properties. It accepts
instead new “aspects” of properties that only appear at the macro level. Making sense of this view, in
my opinion, primarily requires discharging three dialectical responsibilities. The first is to motivate


                                                  186
                                 Subjective Physicalism and Panpsychism


the rejection of the epistemic exclusion thesis. The second is to explain what aspects are. The third
is to explain how this view is not merely a terminological variant of emergentist dualism. Achieving
this third goal, in my opinion, will require explaining how it avoids dualism’s problems with emer-
gent causation.


                       3.1.  Rejecting the Epistemic Exclusion Theorem
The epistemic exclusion theorem (EET), again, holds that if one doesn’t fully grasp some property
F, there is necessarily some property G that is a part of F that one doesn’t grasp at all. Denying this
theorem, therefore, requires that some properties can have conceptually distinguishable but meta-
physically inseparable parts that make an epistemic difference for subjects. Since these parts are not
metaphysically separable, they should not be called different properties. One might say, for exam-
ple, that equilateral-triangularity and equilangular-triangularity are two aspects of a single property.
Some features of the world that we can distinguish in language and thought nonetheless occur
together by necessity.
    It’s not easy to get one’s head around rejecting EET for properties. This is because, I think, we tend
to associate properties and concepts in such a way that the latter come to define the former. So, for
example, on what I call an intensionalist framework for individuating properties, two distinct con-
cepts can’t have the same properties as their extensions.7 The subjective physicalist should reject this
picture, however. Instead she should embrace an extensionalist framework for property individuation,
according to which properties are individuated in ways that are completely independent of the way
they appear to subjects. My preferred view is that they are individuated by causal powers (following
Shoemaker 1979). Though I think there are other possible extensionalist views, this is a promising one
that will be helpful as a sample view in what follows. According to this view, then, no two properties
completely share causal powers. If one adopts this sort of view, it isn’t obvious why one should accept
EET. Why think that our ability to conceive of the world in different ways, or our ability to group
things by similarities that strike the mind, corresponds to similarities and differences between causal
powers? The extensionalist picture doesn’t contradict EET, but it no longer makes it seem like an obvi-
ous feature of properties. If there are other reasons to reject it, we should feel free to do so.


                                      3.2.  Explaining Aspects
What, then, are aspects of properties? For the extensionalist they are those features of properties that
can be distinguished by the mind but do not possess an independent causal power. A bent plane has a
concave aspect and a convex aspect. For the intensionalist about properties, aspects are simply proper-
ties – though perhaps properties without their own causal powers, or properties that are necessarily
bound to other properties. But the intensionalist owes us a story about why we should think the
world is carved up so neatly in line with the way we think about the world. That it often seems to
do so isn’t really much of an argument, since the same argument can be given for the extensionalist
picture. The argument would only work if in the disputed cases – the cases the intensionalist calls
properties and the extensionalist does not – the intensionalist picture comes out ahead. But in fact
there are reasons to think the extensionalist comes out ahead here, for the simple reason that in many
of the disputed cases the alleged properties wind up being theoretical danglers that are difficult to
integrate into a picture of the causal world.


                        3.3  Aspects, Properties and Causal Exclusion
The extensionalist way of individuating properties, and the subjective aspect physicalism that results
from it, has the advantage when it comes to explaining how mental properties integrate with the


                                                   187
                                             Robert J. Howell


world as described by physics. For the intensionalist, there are mental properties independent of the
physical properties. Since the physical properties have the causal powers, though, the extra mental
properties are left without any causal efficacy. It’s not a coincidence that this is precisely what we
find in the debate over phenomenal consciousness. There is no work left for phenomenal properties
to do because all of the work is done by the physical properties. This not only makes it hard to see
how phenomenal properties cause our flinchings and gasps. It also makes it difficult to see how we
could know of and speak of such properties.8 The extensionalist’s verdict isn’t that there are no phe-
nomenal properties or that phenomenal properties are epiphenomenal, but rather that the exclusion
problem is a result of double counting. This double counting is the result of adopting an intensional-
ist framework of property individuation. The extensionalist picture, however, embraces the fact that
properties – individuated by their causal powers – have phenomenal aspects, but those aspects should
no more be considered additional properties than the convexity of a plane should be considered a
different property from its concavity.


                      4.  Subjective Physicalism and Mental Causation
So, the subjective aspect macro-physicalist’s picture is that all properties are physical, but some super-
venient properties have certain aspects that are only graspable by being a subject partly constituted
by those properties. Properties in general are associated with causal powers. These causal powers
provide their individuation conditions, and they constitute the descriptive domain of the physical
sciences. Those sciences are, however, incomplete – as any objective science would have to be. They
are incomplete not because they leave out properties, but because their theories cannot convey the
“what-it’s-like” aspect of things.
    How does this view fare with respect to the problem of mental causation? Every property in this
view has a causal role to play because properties are individuated by the causal powers they bestow.
The phenomenal properties are physical properties, but when we think of them as phenomenal
properties we are considering them under their phenomenal aspect. But those phenomenal proper-
ties have plenty of causal powers – they have whatever causal powers their physical aspects have.
    It is tempting to say that this way of carving things up has merely swept the problem under the
rug. Just as we could ask about Davidsonian mental events whether they were causing things in
virtue of their mental properties or their physical properties, it seems we can ask of the subjective
physicalist’s physical/phenomenal properties whether they cause things in virtue of their physical or
phenomenal aspects.9 And, it seems, the answer must be obvious: the physical aspects do all the work
and the phenomenal is left again without a role to play in the world.
    This is, however, too quick. Unlike the various properties that constitute Davidson’s thick events,
aspects of properties are necessarily co-instantiated. Because one feature does not come without the
other, we can’t give metaphysical heft to the “in virtue of ” question that asks which aspect of the
property is the reason it causes what it does. In a typical case in which one asks which of two co-
instantiated properties does the work, one can give an answer because of the truth of various coun-
terfactuals. The mass of the red brick, rather than its redness, is the reason the scale tips. This truth is
grounded in the counterfactuals that were the brick black the scale would still tip, and were the red
thing a feather the scale would not. In cases of necessary co-instantiation these sorts of counterfactu-
als aren’t available. This doesn’t merely prevent us from recognizing which property is the real cause;
the epistemic point is parasitic on the metaphysical point. In such a case there is no fact of the matter
about which is the real cause since the two features are inseparable.10 Despite the somewhat abstract
foregoing argument, the point is really quite intuitive. If the distinction between two features F and
G is merely conceptual, and whether or not something causes something else in virtue of one prop-
erty or another is a mind-independent metaphysical fact, something cannot cause something else in
virtue of F rather than G (or vice versa).


                                                    188
                                Subjective Physicalism and Panpsychism


   This, then, completes the basic case for subjective aspect macro-physicalism. It recognizes the
epistemic gains provided by phenomenal consciousness while maintaining that everything is physical.
Phenomenal properties are aspects of physical properties that must be possessed to be fully grasped,
but they are physical nonetheless and thus have all the causal powers of the physical properties they
are aspects of.


           5.  Panpsychism Without Micro-Physical Phenomenal Properties
Though this case, and the more developed case in Howell (2013), is in support of exclusive macro-
subjective physicalism, it seems likely that a similar – and perhaps even better – case can be made
in support of Micro-SAP. On this view, again, the micro-physical properties are physical, but are
nonetheless objective science would leave out their ability to compose subjects with phenomenal
states. This ability is an overlooked aspect of that microphysical property. If the preceding argu-
ments against property intensionalism are good, then the resultant picture of properties allows us to
embrace micro-physical aspects just as easily as we embrace macro-physical aspects. Given this, there
is a compelling form of subjective physicalism that is really rather close to panpsychism.
    Micro-subjective physicalism will embrace much of the story offered by macro-subjective physi-
calism. On the microphysical level there are not independent phenomenal or protophenomenal
properties. There are phenomenal or protophenomenal aspects. These are the features of physi-
cal properties that give rise, under appropriate combinations, to macro-phenomenal aspects. These
aspects are necessarily bound with the causal powers that define the fundamental properties they are
aspects of. The objective sciences, then, do not fully describe even the micro-physical or fundamental
properties of our universe. There are some aspects of those properties that can only be grasped by
subjects who are composed of those properties.
    There might seem to be a drawback to this micro-subjective physicalism in that we can’t be said
to grasp these aspects of micro-physical aspects in the same way that we grasp macro-physical aspects.
We are, after all, confronted with phenomenal experience in quite an obvious way, and we are not
confronted with anything like that when it comes to micro-physical properties. What does it mean,
then, to say that there are these subjective aspects to micro-physical properties?
    I think the right thing to say here is that though we are not acquainted with subjective micro-
physical aspects directly, we can nevertheless know of them indirectly as those aspects that give rise
to the macro aspects. The micro-physical properties don’t have feels, precisely because there are no
micro-physical subjects. But they do have subjective aspects, or proto-feels, in virtue of composing
subjects who have phenomenal experiences. Considered objectively, in terms of properties and causal
powers, physics really isn’t missing anything. Considered as a part of a system that composes a subject,
though, we have to recognize that there are features of micro-physical properties that give rise to
phenomenal experience. Focusing only on the causal powers of micro-physical properties and how
they sum won’t reveal that. Only the subjective perspective forces the protophenomenal upon us.


                6.  Is There Really a Difference Between These Two Views?
Though micro-SAP and macro-SAP appear to be different views, it is likely that they are really just
the same view considered in two different ways. They are, I think, mutually entailing.
    According to subjective aspect macro-physicalism there are aspects to properties of physical sys-
tems that cannot be fully grasped except by the systems – i.e. the subjects – that have those proper-
ties. But these properties and the systems that have them are physical because they supervene upon
the microphysical state of things. So, the microphysical particles and the way they are necessitate the
way the subjects are. Properties are partly defined by what they necessitate. If properties F and G,
for example, necessitate the existence of property H when they are in a certain configuration, this is


                                                  189
                                             Robert J. Howell


because of some feature of F and/or G. Put crudely, F and G have some form of proto-H-ness in that
they give rise, with necessity, to H. If one fully described the causal powers of F and G, and left out
the fact that they gave rise to H, one would be missing an important fact about F and G.11 So, if the
microphysical properties give rise with necessity to properties with a subjective aspect, it is partly due
to their natures. Those aspects of their natures that are relevant to phenomenality, unlike their causal
aspects, can only be grasped from the top-down. If microphysical properties have part of their nature
that can only be grasped from the top down, and by subjects who have to grasp experiences from the
inside by having them, subjective micro-physicalism is true. Thus subjective aspect micro-physicalism
seems to be entailed by subjective aspect macro-physicalism. And, of course, the entailment must go
the other way as well since part of what it means to say that microphysical properties have subjective
aspects is that they compose subjects who have properties with subjective aspects. Subjective aspect
micro-physicalism and subjective aspect macro-physicalism are just two different ways of describing
the same view.


                                           7. Conclusion
If the foregoing is true, subjective physicalism bears a family resemblance to panpsychism. Both
views recognize that there is something about the microphysical that cannot be grasped except by a
subject, and what can’t be grasped is relevant to explaining phenomenal consciousness. The differ-
ence, though, is that subjective physicalism – at least exclusive subjective physicalism – denies that
these features are properties distinct from the physical properties. Subjective physicalism views the
phenomenal aspect of things as only separable conceptually, as what might be called an epistemic
feature of the world. More traditional panpsychism, on the other hand, typically views phenomenal
or protophenomenal properties as properties in their own right that, in some way distinct from the
physical properties, constitute the building blocks of the world.
    It is worth noting one other way that subjective physicalisms (and views in their neighborhood)
more broadly resemble panpsychism. Panpsychism often gets labeled as crazy because it seems to
imply that things like rocks could be conscious. (Perhaps they aren’t; perhaps the particular com-
bination of fundamental psychic properties that compose consciousness doesn’t occur in rocks, but
nothing in principle says that it couldn’t be.) But in actuality, views that put a more epistemic spin
on the nature of phenomenal knowledge – what Chalmers (2003) calls type-B physicalism, which
roughly lines up with a posteriori physicalism – have a similar commitment. These views ultimately
claim that something about the subject’s epistemic perspective – be it the phenomenal concepts they
deploy, the acquaintance they have, or what have you – provides a certain form of knowledge of the
physical stuff that is not provided by objective science. This is what knowledge of qualitative nature
of things involves. We have this perspective on our brain states. But what in principle says that this
perspective can only be taken on brain states? Why couldn’t it in principle be taken on rocks? If there
are aspects of the physical properties that are phenomenal, why think that is limited to the physical
properties that make us up? Perhaps for various reasons we can’t take such a perspective on rocks,
but in principle there doesn’t seem to be anything special about brains when it comes to supporting
phenomenal aspects of things. If this is the case, the subjective physicalist and the panpsychist are in
similar boats once again. Since both of them agree that there is such a thing as phenomenal con-
sciousness and the stuff that makes it happen in humans is the same stuff that makes up other physical
objects, they both open up the possibility that the world has more consciousness in it than it first
appeared. The panpsychist thinks that is because everything is made up of stuff that has phenomenal
properties, and the subjective physicalist thinks that is because of an epistemic perspective that can
be adopted in certain circumstances, but in the end there might be less difference between these two
views than it first appears.



                                                   190
                                     Subjective Physicalism and Panpsychism


                                                      Notes
  	 1.	 Maxwell (1978) pointed out the viability of this strategy.
  	 2.	 See Stoljar (2010) for a more detailed discussion of the difficulties facing definitions of physicalism, and
        what hangs in the balance.
  	 3.	 Alter (2009) can be seen as arguing something similar. Others, who recommend a “via negativa” definition
        of physicalism, think similarly; see, for example, Montero (2001), Wilson (2006).
  	 4.	 See Howell (2013, Part I) for a deeper account of the story I prefer.
  	 5.	 Though if there are extended simples I suspect some object versions of this would have to be rejected as well.
	 6.	 In previous work, such as Howell (2013), I called these views exclusive and inclusive subjective physicalism.
        Since I myself couldn’t remember which was which, I thought a name change was in order.
	 7.	 A better, more regimented intensionalism would hold that two concepts whose coextension could not be
        determined a priori are not coextensive (see Howell 2013: ch. 5).
	 8.	 Chalmers (1996) makes this point clearly in discussing the paradox of phenomenal judgment.
	 9.	 See Davidson (1970), and responses by Kim (1989, 1993) and Sosa (1993).
	10.	 This response derives from that given by Bennett (2003).
 	11.	 One wouldn’t be describing F and G at all, really, since giving rise to H is a necessary feature of them. One
        would be describing F* and G*, perhaps, but not F and G (see Howell 2009).


                                                 Bibliography
Alter, Torin (2009). ‘Does the Ignorance Hypothesis Undermine the Conceivability and Knowledge Argu-
    ments?’ Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 79 (3): 756–65.
Bennett, Karen (2003). ‘Why the Exclusion Problem Seems Intractable and How, Just Maybe, to Tract It’. Noûs,
    37 (3): 471–97.
Chalmers, David J. (1996). The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory. Oxford: Oxford University
    Press.
Chalmers, David J. (2003). ‘Consciousness and Its Place in Nature’. In S. Stich and T. Warfield (eds.), Blackwell
    Guide to the Philosophy of Mind. Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 102–42.
Churchland, Paul M. (1985). ‘Reduction, Qualia and the Direct Introspection of Brain States’. Journal of Philoso-
    phy, 82: 8–28, January.
Davidson, Donald (1970). ‘Mental Events’. In L. Foster and J. Swanson (eds.), Experience and Theory. Amherst:
    University of Massachusetts Press, pp. 79–101.
Howell, Robert J. (2009).‘Emergentism and Supervenience Physicalism’. Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 87 (1):
    83–98.
Howell, Robert J. (2013). Consciousness and the Limits of Objectivity: The Case for Subjective Physicalism. Oxford:
    Oxford University Press.
Jackson, Frank (1982). ‘Epiphenomenal Qualia’. Philosophical Quarterly, 32: 127–36, April.
Kim, Jaegwon (1989). ‘The Myth of Non-Reductive Materialism’. Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philo-
    sophical Association, 63 (3): 31–47.
Kim, Jaegwon (1993). ‘Can Supervenience and “Non-Strict Laws” Save Anomalous Monism?’ In J. Heil and
    A. Mele (eds.), Mental Causation. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 19–26.
Maxwell, Grover (1978). ‘Rigid Designators and Mind-Brain Identity’. In W. Savage (ed.), Minnesota Studies in
    the Philosophy of Science, vol. 9. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, pp. 365–403.
Montero, Barbara (2001). ‘Post-Physicalism’. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 8 (2): 61–80.
Nagel, Thomas (1974). “What Is It Like to Be a Bat?” Philosophical Review, 83: 435–50, October.
Papineau, David (2002). Thinking About Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Shoemaker, Sydney (1979). ‘Identity, Properties, and Causality’. Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 4 (1): 321–42.
Sosa, Ernest (1993). ‘Davidson’s Thinking Causes’. In J. Heil and A. Mele (eds.), Mental Causation. Oxford:
    Oxford University Press, pp. 41–50.
Stoljar, Daniel (2001).‘Two Conceptions of the Physical’. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 62 (2): 253–81.
Stoljar, Daniel (2010). Physicalism. London: Routledge.
Wilson, Jessica M. (2006). ‘On Characterizing the Physical’. Philosophical Studies, 131 (1): 61–99.




                                                        191
                                    17
                               PANPSYCHISM
                    A Cognitive Pluralist Perspective

                                            Steven Horst




The aim of this chapter is to reflect upon panpsychism from the standpoint of a view I have devel-
oped elsewhere (Horst 2007, 2011, 2014, 2016) called cognitive pluralism, which is first and foremost
a thesis about the nature of understanding, but also has implications for epistemology, semantics, and
metaphysics. Many readers will be unfamiliar with cognitive pluralism, though they may be familiar
with other philosophical views that bear some similarities to it – transcendental idealism, pragmatism,
perspectival and internal realism – and so it will be necessary to introduce it at some length in sec-
tion 2. But the word ‘panpsychism’ has also served as the name of a number of otherwise very differ-
ent philosophical doctrines. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy article on panpsychism begins
by characterizing it as “the doctrine that mind is a fundamental feature of the world which exists
throughout the universe,” (Seager and Allen-Hermanson 2015) and goes on to describe a number of
historically important variations upon it. In this chapter, I shall focus on three particular strands: (1)
The view, common to animism and some forms of philosophical and scientific panpsychism, that a
wide range of specific phenomena (particularly those involving self-initiated motion and active causal
powers) are best understood in mentalistic terms, (2) Leibniz’s more general and foundational claim
that we need a fundamental ontology framed in the intentionalist terms of “perceptions and appeti-
tions” to account for active causal powers, and (3) Chalmers’ (2015) argument that an ontology that
includes “microexperiential” properties at a fundamental level is our most promising candidate for a
fundamental metaphysics.


                               1.  Positive and Critical Ontologies
Panpsychism is not the only philosophy that accords minds some type of fundamental metaphysical
role. Cartesian dualism, of course, treats minds as a distinctive type of substance characterized by
irreducibly mentalistic properties.
    Cognitivist, pragmatist, and social constructionist philosophies also accord thinking beings special
roles in the division of the world into objects, kinds, properties, and processes. Their claims, however,
are not about the inventory of the world, nor about which portions of that inventory are fundamental.
Rather they consist in distinctive ways of cashing out what it is to be an object, to have a property, etc.
In Kant’s transcendental idealism, what it is to be a (phenomenal) object is to be a possible object
of cognition for a thinking being with faculties of sensibility and understanding more or less like
our own. Phenomenal objects (with the exception of human beings) are not taken to be thinking
things in their own right or composed of mind-like parts. Nor, generally, is their existence causally


                                                   192
                                               Panpsychism


dependent upon activities of minds. What Kant’s transcendental story provides is more on the order
of a gloss upon the status of the notion of a (phenomenal) object – one that does not rest content to
treat posits about the inventory of the world as bedrock metaphysics. I have elsewhere (2007) called
this type of metaphysics and ontology, which addresses what it is to be an object (property, relation,
etc.), critical metaphysics and critical ontology, in distinction with metaphysical approaches that are con-
cerned only with the inventory of the world, which I called positive or inventory metaphysics/ontology.
    Positive ontology may further be divided into two varieties. Inclusive positive ontology is concerned
with identifying all of the objects, kinds, properties, relations, and processes that are real, regardless
of whether they are composed of or derivative from something else. Fundamental positive ontology
is concerned with the further question of which elements of this ontological inventory are in some
sense fundamental – for example, by being irreducible or not having a more basic supervenience base.
    Panpsychism, like materialism and dualism, is a thesis about fundamental positive ontology: a
thesis about what sorts of phenomena are real and not reducible to or supervenient upon something
else. Perhaps some animists believe that every real thing has a mind of its own, but philosophical
panpsychists generally claim only that some sorts of mentalistic phenomena (perhaps quite unlike
those we experience) are fundamental. But whereas the dualist holds that only a special class of things
have mentalistic properties, the panpsychist claims that they are to be found in all, or at least some, of
the simplest constituents of the universe.
    The distinction between positive and critical metaphysics is of a different sort. Critical ontology
examines the status of objects and properties, and also of unifying strategies like reduction, generally
holding that we cannot simply take ontological posits at face value, but must see how their status is
tied to the ways minds like ours conceive of the world (cognitivism) or interact with it (pragmatism).
Doing this can lead to a different perspective on the nature and prospects of fundamental positive
metaphysics, either in the form of an outright suspicion that the project of fundamental metaphysics
is problematic or at least in the form of a reconception of what the fundamental metaphysician is
actually doing.
    I shall now turn to one such approach to critical metaphysics. In the next section I shall introduce
cognitive pluralism’s core commitments as an account of how we understand the world. I shall then
discuss how such an account of understanding might shape an approach to critical metaphysics, lay-
ing the groundwork for a discussion of panpsychism from a cognitive pluralist standpoint.


                                 2.  What Is Cognitive Pluralism?
Cognitive Pluralists believe that we understand the world through the use of many mental models
of different content domains, rather than (a) through an even larger number of distinct and inde-
pendent propositional beliefs or (b) through a comprehensive and holistic worldview. The concepts
and beliefs we have about a particular domain, such as chess, are constitutively interrelated with
other concepts, beliefs, and inference patterns involved in our mental model of that domain but are
comparatively independent of those of other models. This model-based view of cognition is first
and foremost an account of cognitive architecture and of the basic units of understanding. The basic
unit of understanding is a mental model, and concepts and the semantic inferences associated with
them are derivative from models in which they appear. One has not fully understood a concept like
chess_knight or the movement rules for knights unless one has mastered a model of the entire game
of chess; but one can master chess quite independently of how one understands other domains, like
gravitation or the etiquette of restaurant dining. A model of a domain provides ways of representing
objects, states of affairs, and processes within the domain, and a framework for perceiving, reasoning
about, and interacting with them.
   Models provide idealized ways of representing their domains which are generally well suited to
perception, belief formation, inference, and the guidance of action in particular circumstances; and


                                                    193
                                              Steven Horst


in such circumstances, the model is considered “apt”. One way that models are idealized (a bracketing
idealization) is that they characterize objects in terms of a subset of their actual properties – e.g., a
gravitational model deals with mass but not charge. Models can also employ distorting idealizations,
such as treating bodies as point-masses or subjects as ideally rational decision-theoretic agents. Ide-
alization can place limits upon how well a model can be used to describe and predict real-world
behavior, which in turn has implications for which classes of cases they are aptly applied to.
    Even our best fundamental models in physics bracket aspects of the world covered by other mod-
els. Moreover, models, including scientific models, can fail to play well together by being formally
incommensurable, making incompatible assumptions, and generating divergent predictions. I have
argued (2007, 2011, 2014, 2016) that such disunities of science – and more generally of disunities
understanding, of which scientific disunities are a special case – are predictable consequences of
a cognitive architecture that provides understanding through a large number of idealized special-
purpose mental models, each employing a representational system well-suited to efficient cognition
about its target domain, but not optimized for a single comprehensive understanding of everything.
As a result, it is possible (perhaps even likely) that minds like ours may be incapable of remolding
the understanding we have of many distinct domains through many different models into a single
self-consistent system that retains all of the epistemic probity, practical utility, and explanatory power
that a set of distinct models affords.
    I have argued as well (2016) that model-based understanding also stands in a complementary
relationship with another distinct element of thinking, which I call “object-oriented cognition”.
We frame our thoughts about objects using concepts that are embedded in models, and this allows
us to make swift domain-specific inferences about them. But to think of something as an object is
not simply to think of it as the tokening of a property signified by a concept. It is to posit a mind-
transcendent thing to which that concept might aptly be applied. There is thus a kind of purely osten-
sive component to our thinking that operates together with the application of sense-giving models
and concepts. This object-oriented component of thinking has the function of tracking particulars
through changes they might undergo and changes in the ways we conceive of them.
    As a result, when we think of a thing in some concrete way – say, as a man who is sitting – there
is always a great deal more that is implicit in our thought. For example: that the selfsame thing
might change its attributes (e.g., by standing), that we might be mistaken in how we are thinking of
it (e.g., that it is a statue and not a man), that there are indefinitely many other apt ways of thinking
of it (that he is thinking, a husband, an Athenian, or weighs 180 pounds), and even that the concepts
and models we are using might prove to require adjustment or wholesale change. Moreover, we hold
ourselves normatively accountable to the object as a mind-transcendent reality in updating, expand-
ing, and revising our beliefs about it and the concepts and models we use to frame our thoughts
about it. To think of something as a real object is to think of it as having indefinitely more to it than
is contained in the content of any particular thought about it; and indeed even the sum total of ways
we are in principle capable of conceiving it do not capture the “pure that-ness” of the purely ostensive
component of object-oriented thinking.


                    3.  Cognitive Pluralism, Metaphysics, and Ontology
Cognitive pluralism is first and foremost a theory about cognitive architecture. As such, it may be
compatible with a number of different positive metaphysical positions. It is, however, possible to
pursue a metaphysics driven by its cognitivist and pluralist commitments (Cf. Horst 2007: ch. 9).
This would, first and foremost, be an exercise in critical metaphysics in the cognitivist style, sharing
some aspects of Kantianism, but also differing in some crucial respects: The cognitive pluralist can-
not assume that there are universal principles, like Kant’s categories and forms of sensibility, that are
guaranteed to apply to all objects of cognition, and this deprives him of the transcendental high road


                                                   194
                                             Panpsychism


to synthetic a priori knowledge about mathematics, substance, and causation. Cognitive pluralism also
countenances the possibility that the posits of our best models may not be susceptible to integration
into a single system that is at once comprehensive and consistent. Its approach to the transcendence
of objects – cast in terms of the complementarity of model-based and object-oriented systems – may
have significantly different implications from the Kantian division between phenomena and nou-
mena. And positing a cognitive architecture based in many idealized mental models that form the
basis for intuitive judgments opens the doors to types of cognitive illusion beyond those described in
the transcendental dialectic (Horst 2016).
    For the cognitive pluralist, inclusive ontology is driven first and foremost by the commitments
of models that prove apt. Each model has its own “internal ontology”: the types of objects, kinds,
properties, etc., provided by the concepts bound up in the model. And where a model proves apt,
this suggests a prima facie commitment to the reality of its posits, and thus to accommodating them
in our inclusive positive ontology. Our starting point in inclusive positive ontology is more or less a
commitment to the sum of the kinds of phenomena posited by the models we take to be apt. Such
commitments are, of course, defeasible. We may discover that a model is not truly apt at all and cease
to be committed to its posits. And conflicts between models may call into question our commitments
to the posits of the models involved, and this sometimes (but not always) leads to the rejection of one
model and its posits or to a reevaluation of what its aptness really commits us to.
    But even when there are not outright conflicts between models, our inclusive ontological com-
mitments can be messy. Different models may divide up the world in different ways. This object is a
chess bishop, a carved piece of wood, a body with shape and mass, etc. We are committed to there
being such kinds of things as chess bishops, game pieces, games, rules of games, people who can play
games, thoughts about states of play and movements, diagonal movements, wood, artifacts, bodies,
shapes, masses, etc. Our inclusive ontology seems to come in the form of many overlapping classes
of things – what Cartwright (1999) calls a “dappled world”. A particular individual or event may fall
into several such classes, but the classes themselves are not co-extensive.
    One of the tasks to which fundamental positive metaphysics sets itself is to try to bring some
order to this. Any project in fundamental positive metaphysics is subject to the pulls of two opposing
norms: to do justice to the posits of all of the models that seem to have proven apt, and the pursuit
of some kind of unifying strategy as a regulative ideal. Philosophers have weighed these against each
other in very different ways. Some have enshrined common sense or intuition as a litmus against
which any philosophical theory must be tested, others have assumed that the availability of some
parsimonious fundamental ontology is something on the order of a truth of reason and been willing
to deny the ontological bona fides of common sense and even scientific commitments in order to have
a tidy theory, and perhaps most fall somewhere in between.
    What attitude should the cognitive pluralist take towards such projects? I think that she should
respect the pursuit of regulative ideals for unification, but should also presume in favor of the inclu-
sive ontological commitments of models that have proven apt. There are, to be sure, often reasons
to conclude that a model is not apt after all, or that its aptness does not in fact commit us to the
ontological posits we might at first have assumed. For the most part, these take place at the level
of assessing individual models and their relations to one another, and the implications of this for
inclusive ontology. By contrast, it does not seem like a good strategy to conclude, say, that there are
no intentional states, numbers, or moral facts simply on the grounds that we can get a simpler fun-
damental theory by denying them. For one thing, to the extent that we still use models framed in
such terms, we still do have some kind of commitment to their posits. If we embrace a fundamental
theory that does them injustice, we do a kind of epistemic violence to ourselves. But there is also
another reason: we have reason to believe that when models produced by learning or evolution
afford epistemic and practical grip, they do so because they have latched onto something real, even
if the ways we conceive of their domains also carry traces of, or even reflect limits of, our cognitive


                                                  195
                                              Steven Horst


architecture. As Dennett (1981) suggests, empirical and practical success are good indicators that we
have hit upon real patterns that are not simply artifacts of the mind. By contrast, the fact that we
have an impulse to seek unifications in more fundamental theories does not provide any reason to
assume that the project can be fully carried out so far as to produce a comprehensive, well-integrated
fundamental metaphysics.
    This raises questions about what implications the aptness of a model should have for positive
ontology beyond a defeasible prima facie commitment to the posits of its internal ontology, and
what we should do when there is more than one apt model for what is in some sense the same
phenomenon. To take the case of mentalistic models, if there are apt mentalistic models for every
phenomenon, is this in itself enough to provide a case for a panpsychist conclusion? If there are both
mentalistic and non-mentalistic models available, does this undercut the warrant for panpsychist
claims in favor of an alternative positive metaphysics?
    There may be no single answer that will serve for all cases. In some cases, two models might both
preserve the same phenomena, but in different terms. In others, they might provide only partially
overlapping insights, all of which seem legitimate. In still others, it might prove possible to reduce one
model to another. While cognitive pluralism raises a distinctive set of potential issues about reduc-
tion, and I believe the prospects of reduction of the mental to the physical or vice versa to be slim,
the cognitive pluralist should not be opposed to seeking reductions where they are to be found. She
simply believes that whether they are there to be found is a second-order empirical question, and one
involving not only how the world is, but what minds like ours are capable of achieving. And with
such questions left open, we also leave open the question of whether the pursuit of a fundamental
positive metaphysics may prove to be impossible to fulfill, even if it has a certain normative status as
a regulative principle of reasoning.


                        4.  Panpsychism From a Cognitive Standpoint
One thing that a cognitivist approach can shed light upon is why mentalistic models can be appeal-
ing for such a broad range of phenomena. Contemporary readers probably underestimate the range
of phenomena for which such models have been proposed and taken seriously. It is no surprise that
members of an advanced social species would have special-purpose ways of predicting one another’s
behavior via models of species-typical mental processes, nor that these might be readily applied to
other species with physiological and behavioral similarities. But for much of our intellectual history,
many of the best thinkers also found their most promising explanations of self-initiated motion, the
development of organisms, and even forces like gravitation and electromagnetism in models that
posited either internal teleological principles or the activity of internal or external souls. Even early
modern mechanists agreed, for the most part, that matter was by nature “passive”, spurring Descartes
to attribute the cohesion and initial motion of matter to divine action, Leibniz to adopt panpsychism,
and Newton to search for a separate set of “active” principles in alchemy.
    Why is the mind so readily disposed to use mentalistic models to understand things that, upon
reflection, we might have qualms about deeming to really be mental? The answer to this question,
I think, is that (a) our minds are strongly biased to find some model that allows us to track patterns
found in experience, (b) intentional stance models are part of the developmentally normal cogni-
tive toolkit of human beings, (c) they are readily applied to phenomena that seem to exhibit self-
generated activity, and (d) without a great deal of specialized theory of a form that was not developed
until early modernity, intentional stance models are often the only resources we have that provide
such an epistemic grip.
    I say “intentional stance models” in the plural because I regard the “intentional stance” (Dennett
1981) as a characteristic style of model, which can appear in various forms and degrees of sophis-
tication. Developmental psychologists have argued that human infants already have distinct and


                                                   196
                                              Panpsychism


dissociable “core systems” for thinking about “objects” and “agents” (see Spelke and Kinzler 2007).
The “rules” for the core object and core agency systems are different, and indeed incompatible: Core
agents, but not core objects, are understood as being capable of self-initiated motion; core objects, but
not core agents, are understood to be constrained to move only through continuous paths; and only
core agents are represented as having goals. A richer understanding of beliefs and desires is developed
through early childhood into what is sometimes called “folk psychology”. At the same time, the
child also develops a “folk physics” and “folk biology”, and we can learn more sophisticated scientific
models of roughly the same domains. Even when we have learned scientific models, however, core
and folk models are still persistent and we tend to revert to them under pressure and cognitive load.
And it is quite possible that many of our more sophisticated models are developed by a bootstrap-
ping process (Carey 2011) that begins with earlier-appearing models, and which retains some of their
features by default.
    Folk physics is quite apt for understanding a wide range of simple mechanical phenomena we
encounter in everyday life. Because we use it automatically, it seems intuitively necessary that solid
objects resist interpenetration, fall when dropped, and can cause changes in motion when they col-
lide, because these principles are already encoded in models acquired in normal development. But
processes involving self-initiated motion, self-organization, or behavior suited to an end are beyond
the resources of folk physics, or indeed of scientific physics until comparatively recently. As a result,
ancient, medieval, and early modern philosophers and scientists were drawn to mentalistic and tele-
ological models, and not unreasonably so, as arguably such models provided at least limited ways of
understanding and predicting phenomena for which there were no alternative models, and thus were,
to some extent, apt.
    It is a further question, however, just what ontological posits the use of an apt model commits us
to. We might be tempted to say that such mentalistic descriptions are “merely metaphorical.” And
in a sense this is right. Their formation does involve a process of metaphorical transposition: taking
an existing model of a source domain and using it as a ready-made scaffolding for a model of a new
target domain. But the word ‘merely’ does not do justice to the complexities of metaphorical trans-
position, which Lakoff and Johnson (2003) have argued to be a powerful and ubiquitous cognitive
strategy for understanding new domains. The success of a newly formed model of the target domain
in picking out real patterns and licensing predictions does not tell us which of the ontological com-
mitments of the source model should be carried over. The model might work simply because the
two domains exhibit isomorphic functional or dynamic patterns. Or it might work because both
the source and the target domain really involve exactly the same sorts of entities and properties. And
there is also a range of possibilities in between, in which we might discover that the familiar cases
of the source domain (say, our own mental states) are actually special cases of broader classes of phe-
nomena. Even attributing mental states to non-human animals requires us to broaden our notion of
“mental states” beyond states exactly like our own, and in ways that are difficult or impossible to spell
out in detail. Perhaps Leibniz was correct that there is an even broader class, of which human mental
states are a very special case, that can really be found ubiquitously.
    The status of such models can also change as we develop different types of models that are not
cast in mentalistic terms. One crucial question here is whether the newer models capture all of the
legitimate explanatory insights of the older ones. Does a model of the mechanisms underlying pho-
totropism really explain the goal-directed character of the growth of plants? And if not, should we
reject teleological descriptions as inapt, or regard teleology as emergent from or supervenient upon
other types of processes? Teleological characterizations still seem to pick out real patterns; yet at the
same time, developmental and evolutionary models help us understand how goal-directed processes
operate in particular cases, and each type of case requires its own microexplanation. At least at the
level of inclusive ontology, models seem to cross-classify and pick out different regularities, even
though we gain greater explanatory insight by looking at the relations between multiple models of


                                                  197
                                              Steven Horst


the same particular cases. If respecting the integrity of apt models and their inclusive ontological
commitments were to drive fundamental ontology, this would seem to point to a richly pluralistic
fundamental ontology. If there is a reason to prefer a more unified and parsimonious fundamental
ontology, it must come from other sources, such as treating unification as an overriding regulative
ideal, or perhaps an intuition that fundamental properties must be ones that can be found at the level
of the simplest entities – say, those of fundamental physics.


                                 5.  Two Roads to Panpsychism
The previous section discussed why, from a cognitive standpoint, mentalistic models of various phe-
nomena have seemed attractive in their own right, on a one by one basis, and the status of the inclu-
sive positive ontological commitments such models might carry. The most influential developments
of panpsychism in philosophy, however, have been concerned with fundamental positive ontology.
Consider Leibniz’s panpsychist monadology and Chalmers’ Russellian panpsychism. These theo-
ries differ from one another in two significant ways. Most palpably, Leibniz’s framework of monads
with perceptions and appetitions would seem to be a panintentionalist view, while Chalmers’ view
is panexperientialist. But there is also an important difference in how they reach their panpsychist
conclusions. Leibniz’s approach, which we can find in his works on mechanics as well as the more
metaphysical Monadology, involves an argument that we can make sense of active dynamic powers
only in mentalistic terms. It is thus a generalization of the type of direct case for panpsychism we have
already explored with respect to mentalistic models of particular phenomena. On my interpretation
of Leibniz, we need a mentalistic framework to make metaphysical sense of any natural phenomena
with active causal powers, even in physics. Chalmers’ approach, by contrast, is more hypothetical in
character. Our best physical models are not mentalistic but mathematical and metaphysically neutral,
and positing “microexperiential” properties that are possessed by at least some fundamental physi-
cal entities does not provide better physical models. What it does, rather, is provide a framework for
explaining the “macroexperiential” properties of our own mental life in a fashion that is consistent
with mental causation and the causal closure of the universe under physical laws.


                                  6.  Leibniz’s Direct Approach
Leibniz’s route to panpsychism was based in a combination of assumptions about metaphysics and
mechanics. Leibniz accepted something very close to the Cartesian notions of thinking substance and
extended substance as the clear candidates for a fundamental positive ontology. Cartesian mechanics,
based in the idea that extension is the only essential property of matter and that all of the modes of
bodies can be cashed out in purely extensive terms, had ways of characterizing motion. But it had no
way of incorporating dynamic powers such as gravitational force or magnetism. Only God and souls
could be sources of dynamic powers. Like Newton, Leibniz was convinced that physics needed such
dynamic principles, and that matter must be purely passive. But whereas Newton’s lifelong interest
in the source of active dynamic powers led him to explore alchemy and theology, Leibniz turned to
the other side of the Cartesian dichotomy, thinking substances. If our notion of thinking substance
already supplies a way of understanding the origins of dynamic powers in intentional agency, and
indeed is the only option we possess for understanding them, we must understand the objects stud-
ied by mechanics to be (or be composed of ) substances whose essential properties are mentalistic. If
one reads only Leibniz’s scientific works, one might well conclude that the talk of “perceptions and
appetitions” is merely a vivid but misleading way of talking about passive and active causal capaci-
ties – in cognitive terms, that models of our own mental states can be transposed into the domain of
mechanics, but without any ontological commitment to states that are of the same metaphysical kind
as intentional states. But it is clear that Leibniz takes “perceptions” and “appetitions” to be broad and


                                                  198
                                               Panpsychism


basic metaphysical kinds of which our own mental states are but particularly sophisticated examples
(see Leibniz 1989).
    I classify Leibniz as a proponent of the direct route to panpsychism because he seems to be argu-
ing (1) that any viable metaphysics must posit entities with active powers as fundamental and essential
properties, (2) that mentalistic models are apt for characterizing such entities and their powers, and
(3) that only mentalistic models can be suited to this task. Even if we don’t know exactly what sorts
of properties monads other than our own souls have, they must have intrinsic capacities that must
be characterized as some sorts of perceptions and appetitions. And Leibniz assumed that the appar-
ent logical/conceptual necessity involved in (3) amounted to a metaphysical necessity rather than
an artifact or limitation of our cognitive architecture. Clearly, from a cognitive standpoint, we are
not entitled to this assumption. If indeed we “must” view phenomena in mentalistic terms, this may
simply be an artifact of the modeling resources human minds possess – a psychological necessity, not
a fact about the world.
    But even the case for psychological necessity was to come under attack. By the end of the eight-
eenth century Kant would challenge his predecessors’ assumption that matter must be regarded as
passive. In both the pre-critical Physical Monadology (1756/1986) and the late Metaphysical Foundations
of Natural Science (1786/2004), Kant argued that the basic commitments of mechanics are neither to
Cartesian extended substance nor to atomism, but to bodies exerting attractive and repulsive forces.
These forces were not to be understood in the mentalistic terms of Cartesian psychology, but as a
unique kind of posit required by mechanics and amounting to a reconceptualization of the philo-
sophical notion of matter. Not only are mentalistic models not the only way we possess of under-
standing dynamic matter, our mechanics in fact already commits us to something quite different.
    But when we turn to physics as we find it since the early twentieth century, we must note, along
with Russell (1927), that its models have become primarily mathematical in character. In the seven-
teenth century, a metaphysical notion of matter was also doing some scientific work. But today the
word ‘matter’, as used by scientists, is really more of an inclusive placeholder for various sorts of enti-
ties that appear in the theories of physicists. Our understanding of electrons and quarks is supplied
by the mathematics of theories that describe their behavior and interactions, but those theories leave
open questions about any deeper natures they might have. Perhaps in contemporary physics we have
reached a level at which the human mind is ill-suited to metaphysical thinking altogether. At very
least, the characterizations of mathematical physics leave us agnostic as to the underlying metaphysics.


                              7.  Chalmers’ Hypothetical Strategy
The idea that contemporary physical theories are primarily mathematical is one of the starting points
for Chalmers’ (2015) explorations of types of panpsychism (and panprotopsychism) he classifies as
“Russellian”. Chalmers’ argument, however, is of the hypothetical variety:

     we can understand panpsychism as the thesis that some fundamental physical entities have
     mental states. For example, if quarks or photons have mental states, that suffices for panpsy-
     chism to be true, even if rocks and numbers do not have mental states . . . we can read the defi-
     nition as requiring that all members of some fundamental physical types . . . have mental states.
                                                                              (Chalmers 2015: 246)

The kinds of mental states Chalmers is concerned with are not intentional states but conscious
experiences: “that there is something it is like to be a quark or a photon or a member of some other
fundamental physical type” (2015: 246–7). These “microexperiences” – with “microphenomenal
properties” – are probably not much like the “macroexperiences” we undergo, and we are probably
not in a position to have a clear idea of what they are like (2015: 252).


                                                   199
                                              Steven Horst


    Chalmers develops an argument for panpsychism dialectically: materialism and dualism each face
a serious problem in accounting for mental states. Materialism cannot account for the phenomenal
character of experience, while dualism cannot account for mental causation. A resolution can be
found if the fundamental entities that play the causal roles in physics also have microphenomenal
properties and these properties ground macrophenomenal properties. Here that we can see a crucial
role for Russell’s insight

    that physics reveals the relational structure of matter but not its intrinsic nature. Accord-
    ing to this view, classical physics tells us a lot about what mass does – it resists acceleration,
    attracts other masses, and so on – but it tells us nothing about what mass intrinsically is. We
    might say that physics tells us what the mass role is, but it does not tell us what property
    plays this role.
                                                                          (Chalmers 2015: 253–4)

The error of the materialist is to assume that fundamental physical theories either stipulate the
entire nature of the entities they posit or that we are obliged to read a non-mentalistic metaphysics
onto them. The Russellian view of scientific theories allows for the possibility that the functional/
dynamic roles essential to the aptness of the theories are the result of some underlying natures – what
Chalmers calls “quiddities” – that are not fully specified by the theories. The terms of the theories
specify roles, while quiddities are the properties that play these roles.
   Nothing about our physical theories prevents us from supposing that at least some fundamental
entities identified in the theories (and hence having causal powers) also have microphenomenal
properties (and hence might ground macroexperience), avoiding the problems that plague material-
ism and dualism and thus providing one reason to prefer panpsychism over these alternative meta-
physical views.
   On this view, we come to know about the basic building blocks of reality through the models
supplied by the physicists. There is nothing overtly mentalistic about these models; and even if we
were to recast them in mentalistic terms (à la Leibniz), this would not provide any advantages in pre-
diction or explanation of the phenomena in their domain, because what they are designed to capture
are causal regularities, and the role-describing mathematical formulas capture those quite well on
their own, without metaphysical commitments. Mentalistic quiddities are postulated solely in order
to account for the macroexperiential properties we experience, and in a fashion that renders psycho-
physical causation consistent with causal closure under microphysical laws. As we have no concrete
knowledge of mentalistic quiddities, this is really only a schema for such an account – a sketch of how
our understanding of macroexperiential properties might, in principle, be integrated with an under-
standing of properties of the basic constituents of the universe if we had the right sorts of models
of those properties, and if those models would allow us to derive macroexperiential properties as
“a priori entailments” – and the chief thing that recommends it is that it seems to avoid the kinds of
principled problems that have long beset materialist and dualist alternatives.
   Cognitivism takes no issue with hypotheses in general. Indeed, many models are hypothetical
in character, and the main reason for commitment to their posits lies in the fact that such models
would explain phenomena with which we are more directly acquainted. Likewise, the cognitivist
can acknowledge that it is a powerful regulative ideal to seek to unite different domains in ways that
integrate understanding.
   The peculiarity in this case is that we “have a hypothesis” only in a very schematic form. A con-
crete hypothesis would involve a concrete model of the underlying properties (microexperiences),
with which we could see how much about the things they are to account for (macroexperiences)
could be derived through something like a reduction. But in this case, not only do we not in fact
know what microexperiential properties are in their own right, we might be incapable of such


                                                   200
                                               Panpsychism


knowledge. And without such knowledge, we might be permanently debarred from knowing
whether there are, in fact, such a priori entailments.
    In one sense, this is an epistemological problem: we can posit a panpsychist fundamental metaphys-
ics, but we cannot know exactly what we are positing or test whether the posits would explain the
phenomena they are posited to explain. The cognitivist should ask:

1.	 What are we doing when we posit properties we not only do not understand but potentially
    could not understand?
2.	 What are we doing when we posit that there might be “a priori entailments” from these to other
    properties, even though they are not a priori for us?
3.	 What are we doing when we move from the epistemic level of talking about apt models and
    entailment relations between them to the metaphysical level of positing principles of fundamen-
    tal metaphysics?

The cognitive pluralist should additionally ask how features found in human cognition – particularly,
understanding through many idealized models and the problems about uniting these through reduc-
tion – affect this kind of project in fundamental metaphysics.
    On the cognitive pluralist story there is nothing odd in supposing that there are things about the
world that we do not understand. Indeed, our normative beholdenness to the object as something
that transcends our ways of representing it amounts to a tacit recognition that there might be indefi-
nitely more to any object than we have ways of modeling. For the cognitivist, a “property” may be
what we posit in the world corresponding to a concept in a model, but the cognitivist recognizes that
we now know about properties we once had no models of, and that there are presumably properties
we do not have models of now, but could develop in the future. The properties are and were in some
sense “always there”, whether we understand them or not. Moreover, she does not assume that our
minds are suited to understanding everything, and hence the notion of an “object or property we are
incapable of understanding” should not be regarded as sheer grammatical nonsense.
    What is potentially more problematic is speaking of and reasoning about the “a priori entailments”
of such properties. First, a priori entailments are not relations that hold between properties or states of
affairs, but between ways properties and states of affairs are represented using concepts, propositions,
and models. Second, such derivations can take place only when we have concrete models of the
two domains in their own right. This does not mean that we cannot speak of the potential for such
entailment relations until we have the models in hand – we can perfectly well pose the possibility
that, when we have adequate models of A and B in their own right, we will be able to derive features
of B from our model of A. But when the A-phenomena are something we are unable to understand
in their own right, we are no longer talking about something we might someday be able to do.
    Here, I have two worries, one specific to this case, the other more general. First, many philoso-
phers who have discussed phenomenological properties have held that what it is like to have a par-
ticular type of experience is knowable only to the sort of being that has them. If there is something
it is like to be a quark, it is not clear that even God (not being a quark) could know what that was
like. So there is a special problem, perhaps unique to experiential properties, about the possibility
of any being having the sort of understanding of all of them it would require to be in a position to
work out their a priori entailments.
    The second and more general worry is that this strategy involves a kind of speculative projec-
tion, not only of an ideal mind, but of what sorts of understanding such a mind would be capable
of. There is a way of doing this that may be comparatively innocent: projecting a mind that has the
familiar sorts of cognitive competences we ourselves possess but freed from performance limitations. But if
the cognitive pluralist is right, the kind of “ideal mind” envisaged here has to be unlike the kinds of
minds we know about in more fundamental ways. Our understanding comes in the form of idealized


                                                   201
                                                  Steven Horst


models of particular domains, and these have not yielded to the sorts of comprehensive reductive
integration that philosophers from Descartes to Carnap hoped for. Cognitive Pluralism was initially
introduced as a way of explaining how such disunities of knowledge could be products of a cogni-
tive architecture built around idealized domain-centered models, rather than a result of performance
limitations or a puzzling metaphysical feature of the world itself. If this is correct, to posit an “ideal
mind” that does not have such limitations is to posit a mind whose basic forms of cognition are quite
unlike our own. The problem is that we really have no idea what a mind so different from our own
would be like, or what it would be capable of. There is a danger that, in positing a mind specifically in
terms of its being able to possess such a comprehensive and integrated understanding, we are drawn
into an illusory conviction that such a mind is really possible.


                            8.  Cognitivism, Rationalism, and Realism
In the end, both direct and hypothetical approaches to panpsychism seem to depend upon rationalist
and realist assumptions which the cognitive pluralist ought to hold in suspicion. Both involve the
realist assumption that the world divides itself in ways that yield a canonical and mind-independent
set of properties. Leibniz’s direct approach involves a more conventional rationalist assumption that
minds like ours have the resources to understand the essential nature of these properties, at least in the
very broad terms of “perceptions and appetitions”. Chalmers’ hypothetical approach acknowledges
that these might be unknowable to us, but assumes that they are ideally knowable, and that an ideal
mind would be able to see how they imply macroscopic properties through a priori entailments. It is
certainly not the sort of rationalism that holds that we can know the real and fundamental natures
of things through innate ideas or without empirical investigation, and indeed Chalmers seems pessimistic
about the prospects of our having concrete understanding of quiddities. Rather, it projects a vision
of an ideal form of rational understanding, and one which lacks what the cognitive pluralist regards
as vitally important: the division of understanding into idealized models that do not seem to be
susceptible to unification through reduction into something like an axiomatic deductive system
based in fundamental properties. This, of course, is a feature shared with other fundamental posi-
tive metaphysical positions such as reductive physicalism, and such views are similarly suspect to the
cognitive pluralist.
    From a cognitive standpoint, the road to this sort of fundamental metaphysics looks something
like this. We are familiar with a powerful way in which particular things we understand can (some-
times) be unified – through a part-whole reduction in which the properties of complex things can
exhaustively be derived from those of the simplest parts. The power of such unifications is so great
that seeking such reductions serves as a kind of regulative ideal. It is an empirical question just which
portions of our understanding can be thus unified, and the empirical questions are not just about the
world, but also about our mental capabilities. Even before there had been serious attempts to find
even local reductions, philosophers were able to project what the ideal completion of such a project
might look like: an understanding of the simplest entities from which everything else we understand
could be derived. This supplied a further regulative ideal of comprehensive unification, though again
one whose feasibility depends upon empirical questions about both world and mind. And this, in
turn, allows for a schematic vision for a metaphysics in which the properties of the simplest entities
determine those of everything else. This is the kind of metaphysics that must be correct if the project
of integrating understanding in this particularly powerful and comprehensive way could be carried out to its ideal
conclusion.
    This, however, gives us little reason to believe either that some version of this schematic meta-
physical picture is correct or that the epistemological project can be carried out. In fact, disunities of
science (as well as the apparent irreducibility of mind, normativity, and mathematics) seem to suggest
that we cannot carry it out. But the advocate of fundamental metaphysics responds that this may


                                                       202
                                                Panpsychism


be due to limitations of our own minds, and projects the kind of ideal mind that would be needed
precisely in order to have the requisite forms of understanding. In short, what we start from is a real
strategy for unifying things we understand, and from there we project the kind of world and the kind
of mind that would be needed to carry out this strategy to its ideal conclusion. There is nothing
wrong with this kind of speculation, so long as we keep track of what we are doing. The danger is
more or less the danger Kant pointed out with respect to his dialectical illusions: we come to mistake
the “necessity” of what would have to be the case to ideally complete the strategy for a kind of metaphysical
necessity in its own right, and mistake the intuitive appeal of an idealized and speculative picture of
how knowledge might be unified for a trustworthy intuition about fundamental metaphysics.


                                               References
Carey, S. (2011). The Origin of Concepts. New York: Oxford University Press.
Cartwright, N. (1999). The Dappled World: A Study in the Boundaries of Science. New York: Cambridge University
   Press.
Chalmers, D. J. (2015). ‘Panpsychism and Panprotopsychism’. In T. Alter and Y. Nagasawa (eds.), Consciousness
   in the Physical World. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 246–76.
Dennett, D. C. (1981/1997).‘True Believers: The Intentional Strategy and Why It Works’. In J. Haugeland (ed.),
   Mind Design II. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Horst, S. (2007). Beyond Reduction: Philosophy of Mind and Post-Reductionist Philosophy of Science. New York:
   Oxford University Press.
Horst, S. (2011). Laws, Mind and Freedom. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Horst, S. (2014).‘Beyond Reduction: From Naturalism to Cognitive Pluralism’. Mind and Matter, 12 (2): 197–244.
Horst, S. (2016). Cognitive Pluralism. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kant, I. (1756/1986). ‘The Employment in Natural Philosophy of Metaphysics Combined with Geometry, of
   Which Sample I Contains the Physical Monadology’. In L. W. Beck (ed.), Kant’s Latin Writings, Translations,
   Commentaries, and Notes. New York: P. Lang, pp. 115–32.
Kant, I. (1786/2004). Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science. Trans. M. Friedman. Cambridge: Cambridge
   University Press.
Lakoff, G., and Johnson, M. (2003). Metaphors We Live By. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Leibniz, G. W. (1989). Leibniz: Philosophical Essays. Trans. R. Ariew and D. Garber. New York: Hackett.
Russell, B. (1927). The Analysis of Matter. London: Kegan Paul.
Seager, W., and Allen-Hermanson, S. (2015). ‘Panpsychism’. In E. N. Zalta (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of
   Philosophy. http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2015/entries/ panpsychism/.
Spelke, E. S., and Kinzler, K. D. (2007). ‘Core Knowledge’. Developmental Science, 10 (1): 89–96.




                                                     203
                   18
         NEUTRAL MONISM REBORN
                     Breaking the Gridlock Between
                       Emergence and Inherence

                                       Michael Silberstein


                                          1. Introduction
As this volume attests, radical emergence, panpsychism and neutral monism seem to be making
something of a comeback; why might this be? Presumably it is because the prospects of ‘biologi-
cal naturalism’ are dimming even among many of its former proponents. Biological naturalism says
that consciousness or subjectivity is a biological phenomena generated by the brain in the way that
liquidity is a global emergent property of a certain molecular structure. Conscious experience then,
like liquidity, is a weakly emergent property of the whole brain. John Searle (2004, 146 ff.) asserts that
given biological naturalism, the scientific study of consciousness requires two steps: first, discover the
neural correlate (NCC) of the entire field of conscious experience, and second, go from this NCC
to a discovery of its actual biological causal mechanisms.
    However, at least in certain quarters of the cognitive neuroscience of consciousness and con-
sciousness studies more generally, Searle’s program did not come to pass. Cristof Koch writes:

    Yet the mental is too radically different for it to arise gradually from the physical. This
    emergence of subjective feelings from physical stuff appears inconceivable and is at odds
    with a basic precept of physical thinking, the Ur-conservation law – ex nihilo nihil fit.
                                                                                       (2014, 2)

What exactly led to Koch’s change of heart is debatable but in the preceding passage he seems to
have had the epiphany that for conscious experience to be caused by brains and their purely biologi-
cal properties would require radical emergence, not weak emergence as Searle suggests. And Koch
seems to have sided with fans of panpsychism such as Galen Strawson (2006) who claim that radical
emergence is impossible.
   This chapter has two primary purposes – to argue against radical emergence and panpsychism,
and for an alternative: neutral monism. In the next section the ‘generation problem’ will be defined
because it is that problem that drives both radical emergence and panpsychism. And then radical
emergence and panpsychism will be defined in terms of their respective reactions to this problem. In
the following section it will be argued that both radical emergence and panpsychism are untenable.
In the final section it will be argued that only neutral monism truly defeats the generation problem
by deflating it and has many other virtues as well. The overall thrust is that we are apparently driven



                                                   204
                                         Neutral Monism Reborn


to radical emergence or panpsychism because of the standard physicalist/materialist assumptions
shared by both, that matter is fundamental, the nature of reality is therefore compositional and there-
fore that material and mental features are essentially different and distinct. Radical emergence and
panpsychism are therefore just ‘patches’ for physicalism, whereas neutral monism is the cure.


         2.  The Generation Problem: Radical Emergence Versus Panpsychism
The generation problem (GP) or hard problem is this: assuming that matter is fundamental then how
does mere insensate matter generate consciousness? For this problem to be as devastating as David
Chalmers (1996) and others allege one has to assume something like: matter is essentially non-mental.
As Barbara Montero puts it:

     Instead of construing the mind/body problem as finding a place for mentality in a funda-
     mentally physical world, we should think of it as the problem of finding a place for mental-
     ity in a fundamentally non-mental world.
                                                                                      (2010, 210)

If we take GP seriously then consciousness must be fundamental in some sense.
    Radical (or strong) emergence is the view which claims, for example, that there are brute psycho-
physical bridge laws in the actual world. Such brute bridge laws are supposed to involve nomological
necessity and pertain to the actual world only.
    Radical emergence attempts to answer GP in terms of some brute fundamental psycho-physical
bridge law or causal process. A stand-alone, one of a kind brute/fundamental law/cause is a Deus ex
Machina – ‘and then a miracle occurred’ kind of affair. That is, if matter is fundamental and essentially
non-mental then radical emergence must be like some sort of occasionalism that replaces God with
a miraculous law of nature. For those who want unity, the primary motivation for believing in physi-
calism or ontological reductionism in the first place, such psycho-physical bridge laws are deeply
disunifying no matter how you construe them. Again, such laws/causes are a very strange thing to
have the status of fundamental facts: given the right physical, functional, informational structure, etc.,
and POOF conscious experience appears! This may be explanatory for some, but it isn’t a natural or
scientific explanation, nor is it a law of nature like any other law; it’s a brute law of meta-nature, sur-
prising to not only the Mathematical Archangel but perhaps to God herself. This is a law that would
have to be tacked onto a theory of everything or quantum gravity were those ever to be achieved.
    Panpsychism also takes GP at face value and proposes the following resolution:

Whatever matter is most fundamental such as particles, fields or the quantum wave function is the
basic ‘building block’ of reality, but itself has no intrinsic physical properties (fundamental physical
properties are relational).

The physical world is ‘composed’ of or otherwise determined by basic physical entities and such fun-
damental physical entities have (however proto) an intrinsic psychical-conscious or subjective aspect.
    Therefore, there is a sense in which all physical composites have a psychical/subjective nature
however attenuated.
    Therefore, the purely physical description of the world is incomplete – consciousness or subjec-
tivity is co-fundamental with matter.
    According to panpsychism there can be no consciousness without matter (and perhaps the reverse
as well) but consciousness is an intrinsic property of matter. And the latter claim is just an axiomatic
fact about the universe, it is not explained by anything else.



                                                   205
                                              Michael Silberstein


                    3.  Why Both Radical Emergence and Panpsychism Fail
Radical emergence would have us believe that physicalism or ontological reductionism is true for
everything except consciousness, that everything else in the universe is a nomological, causal, logical
or metaphysical consequence of the fundamental physical facts. Admittedly, science is in no position
to absolutely rule out the possibility of radical emergence; the doctrine is certainly not incoherent.
However, by the lights of science given the stipulated nature of the rest of the universe, radical emer-
gence posits weird laws. Such psycho-physical bridge laws are for all practical purposes, supernatural.
    Does panpsychism fare any better than radical emergence? No. The best arguments for panpsy-
chism are generally taken to be what Seager (2009, 500) calls the ‘argument from analogy’, the
‘genetic argument’ and the ‘argument from the dispositional nature of fundamental physical proper-
ties.’ The first argument claims there is some feature of fundamental matter that is mind-like. The
second argument is really just the claim that radical emergence is impossible. The third argument
claims that fundamental physical properties are not intrinsic, that they must nevertheless possess
intrinsic properties and the only intrinsic properties are mental. Needless to say, none of these argu-
ments is decisive and they have all been heavily attacked (see Silberstein (2010), (2014) and Silber-
stein, Stuckey and McDevitt (2018)).
    The standard arguments against panpsychism are as follows (Seager 2016, ch. 13):

1.	   Combination problems.
2.	   No sign and not-mental problems.
3.	   Unconscious mentality problem – pan(proto).
4.	   Causal completeness problem

    Panpsychism may not have a generation problem but it does have several combination problems
(Chalmers 2016), namely, how do all those simple minds combine to make conscious agents such
as ourselves? If you think fundamental physical entities possess free-floating qualia then how do all
those very tiny discretized quales come together to make one of us? If you think subjective experi-
ence requires an experiencer then how do those very tiny conscious beings combine to make one
human conscious agent with a unified experiential field? The second problem says that contrary to
the argument from analogy there is absolutely no evidence that fundamental physical entities have
mental properties or minds and therefore panpsychism is simply unjustified. The third problem says
that pan(proto)psychism only makes the first problem worse because now we can’t even conceive
of what proto-mentality might be or if it’s even coherent. So it threatens to turn the combination
problem back into the generation problem. The fourth problem is that causal closure of the physical
would seem to render mental properties epiphenomenal. The point is that we never have to bring
mental properties to bear to explain the behavior of purely physical, chemical or biological systems.
    To many of us, any one of these problems is enough to reject panpsychism. Space permits present-
ing only a very general argument against any form of panpsychism here which is that panpsychism
is not a logically consistent position. According to panpsychism the only intrinsic properties of fun-
damental physical entities are psychical. But here is the problem: most theorists hold that essential
properties must be intrinsic properties because those are the only non-relational and non-contingent
properties an individual possesses. According to Robertson and Atkins (2016):

      P is an essential property of an object o just in case (1) it is necessary that o has P if o exists,
      and (2) P is an intrinsic property.
         Roughly, an intrinsic property is a property that an object possesses in isolation, while an
      extrinsic property is a property that an object possesses only in relation to other objects.



                                                      206
                                         Neutral Monism Reborn


So if the intrinsic and thus essential properties of matter are mental as panpsychism claims then it
just isn’t true as panpsychism asserts that matter is the fundamental building blocks of reality and
the physical world is composed of or otherwise determined by basic physical entities. You cannot
consistently assert that matter is fundamental or co-fundamental and that its essential properties are
mental. In short, panpsychism is not a stable position; it reduces to idealism or dualism of some sort.
    Before we move on to neutral monism let us summarize what we have learned thus far. Regard-
ing radical emergence, it is hard to see how it could be true and the GP is real. If matter is essentially
non-mental and yet there is some basic physical law that says under the right configurations of matter
that consciousness arises from it then such a law must be either impossible per the GP or beyond
naturalistic explanation. That is, if matter is fundamental and essentially non-mental then radical
emergence must be some sort of occasionalism-like view that replaces God with a miraculous law
of nature. Again, there is no other law/cause like this, making conscious experience the radically
unique exception. As for panpsychism, it is, as noted, fraught with several well-known problems,
none of which are easily discharged. Further, in the service of explaining conscious experience on
the length and time scales of embodied creatures on Earth with at least some sort of sensory appara-
tus and some sort of central nervous system, panpsychists have appealed to the very small (quantum
systems) and the very large (the universe itself ), but everything we have ever experienced tells us that
only the ‘middle porridge’ is ‘Ahhh, just right’ when it comes to the processes associated with con-
scious experience.1
    The best argument for either radical emergence or panpsychism seems to be the claim that they
are the lesser of evils with respect to the other, but there are alternatives. One thing we know for
sure, on pain of contradiction, panpsychism cannot invoke radical emergence to get out of its vari-
ous combination problems and radical emergence cannot invoke panpsychism to resolve the GP. So
what assumptions led to us to this absurd situation where we think it’s either one or the other? The
assumptions are as follows:

1.	   The generation problem is real (matter is essentially non-mental and it’s fundamental).
2.	   All fundamental entities must have intrinsic properties.
3.	   Fundamental physical entities don’t have intrinsic physical properties.
4.	   Consciousness is an intrinsic property and by elimination must be the intrinsic aspect of funda-
      mental physical entities.

Where does this leave us? Given the problems with both radical emergence and panpsychism it’s high
time to question at least some of their shared assumptions.


                                4.  Neutral Monism to the Rescue
Both radical emergence and panpsychism agree to (1) above and therefore both attempt to answer
the generation problem directly. To deflate the GP and get around the master arguments for radical
emergence and panpsychism we need another alternative. As long as matter is conceived as essen-
tially non-mental and experience is conceived as intrinsic qualia we are stuck with these problematic
views. So the alternative must reconceive matter and mind. This is exactly what, properly under-
stood, neutral monism does. Given that the key defenders of neutral monism such as William James
and Bertrand Russell also defended panpsychism at various points and given that ‘the avowed neu-
trality of neutral monism tends to slides towards some kind of panpsychism or idealism’ (Seager 2007,
28), people can certainly be forgiven for thinking that neutral monism and panpsychism may not be
completely distinct doctrines, but it is very important to see that they are distinct. As James saw very
clearly, we need to deflate the GP, not answer it directly. We need to deny that everyday conscious



                                                   207
                                             Michael Silberstein


experience is an entity – it isn’t qualia-like, it’s not intrinsic. As James notes, it is ‘intellectualism’ or
rationalism that got us into this mess in the first place and that’s what we must reject:

     Intellectualism in the vicious sense began when Socrates and Plato taught that what a thing
     really is, is told by its definition. Ever since Socrates we have been taught that reality consists
     of essences, not of appearances, and that the essences of things are known whenever we
     know their definitions. So we first identify the thing with a concept and then we identify
     the concept with a definition, and only then, inasmuch as the thing is whatever the defini-
     tion expresses, are we sure of apprehending the real essence of it or the full truth about
     it. . . . Intellectualism does not stop till sensible reality lies entirely disintegrated at the feet
     of ‘reason’.
                                                                                              (1912, 218)

Let’s start with what we actually know: everyday conscious experience appears to be intimately
related to embodied organisms with certain complex internal structures maneuvering an environ-
ment. This much radical emergence has right. As James puts it:

     The individualized self, which I believe to be the only thing properly called self, is a part of
     the content of the world experienced. The world experienced (otherwise called the ‘field
     of consciousness’) comes at all times with our body as its centre, centre of vision, centre of
     action, centre of interest. Where the body is is ‘here’, where the body acts is ‘now’; what the
     body touches is ‘this’; all other things are ‘there’, and ‘then’ and ‘that’.
                                                                                         (1912, 380)

James is defending neutral monism, which, following Stubenberg (2014), holds the following:

1.	 Mental and material features are real but in some specified sense, reducible to or constructable
    from a neutral basis in a non-eliminative sense of reduction.
2.	 The neutral basis is generally not conceived as substance.
3.	 Mental and material features are not separable or merely correlated, they are non-dual; indeed,
    they are not essentially different and distinct aspects.

Quoting James himself, here is how Stubenberg (2014) characterizes his neutral monism:

     Prior to any further categorization, pure experience is, according to James, neutral –
     neither mental nor material: ‘The instant field of the present is at all times what I call the
     ‘pure’ experience. It is only virtually or potentially either object or subject as yet. For the
     time being, it is plain, unqualified actuality, or existence, a simple that’ ( James 1904b, 23).
     Mind and matter, knower and known, thought and thing, representation and represented
     are then interpreted as resulting from different groupings of pure experience.

Let us then adopt the neutral monism of William James and Bertrand Russell as characterized herein:

     Just so, I maintain, does a given undivided portion of experience, taken in one context
     of associates, play the part of the knower, or a state of mind, or ‘consciousness’; while in a
     different context the same undivided bit of experience plays the part of a thing known, of
     an objective ‘content’. In a word, in one group it figures as a thought, in another group as
     a thing.
                                                                                ( James 1904, 480)


                                                     208
                                        Neutral Monism Reborn


    The whole duality of mind and matter . . . is a mistake; there is only one kind of stuff out
    of which the world is made, and this stuff is called mental in one arrangement, physical in
    the other.
                                                                       (Russell 1913/1993, 15)

    Things and thoughts are not fundamentally heterogeneous; they are made of one and the
    same stuff, stuff which cannot be defined as such but only experienced; and which one can
    call, if one wishes, the stuff of experience in general. . . . ‘Subjects’ knowing ‘things’ known
    are ‘roles’ played, not ‘ontological’ facts.
                                                                               ( James 1905/2005, 63)

On this view, conscious experience (subjectivity) is not an ‘add-on’, it is as much a part of the fabric
of the universe as so-called matter. The GP is a cognitive illusion generated by the inference or pro-
jection that experience is inherently or essentially mental and the ‘external’ world is inherently non-
mental. The claim that the world is carved at the joints a la physical/mental; inner/outer; subject/
object, etc., is not a datum, but rather an inductive projection.
    One way to interpret James or at least amend his view is as follows:

1.	 There is no conscious experience without a subject.
2.	 Where there are perceptions there is a perceiver and vice versa.
3.	 No subject/self without an object/world and vice versa.

So experience is inherently relational in the following sense: a conceptual or projected cut is made in
‘the stuff of experience’ between the subject and the object. In the Buddhist tradition (and in some
Hindu traditions as well) it happens when the ‘I am’ thought arises, e.g., the individual thought ‘I am
in pain now.’ In keeping with the suggested amendment to James it helps to look at a possible way
of understanding neutral monism that is inspired by Kant (1998), Husserl (2001), Heidegger (1996),
Merleau-Ponty (1962), Schopenhauer (1969), and a variety of Asian traditions such as Advaita
Vedānta (Gupta 1998). This is not the place for historical details, and important differences between
these thinkers will be glossed over. Most of them do not necessarily self-identify as neutral mon-
ists, but following Zahavi (2005) who is writing about Husserl, Merleau-Ponty and others, we can
say that for all these traditions of thought, the minimal subject and the external world (the minimal
object) self-consistently co-exist, you cannot have one without the other. There is a self-consistency
relation such that the subject and the external world are both necessary and sufficient for the other.
Following Kant’s unity of apperception and Schopenhauer’s will and representation, we can go a step
further: It is only when the subject/object cut exists that one gets a world in space and time – the
phenomenal experience of being a subject in an external world in which time is passing. So subject/
object and world in space/time are both necessary and sufficient for one another. One can of course
find similar ideas in the works of Husserl and Merleau-Ponty in their respective accounts of temporal
experience. One can also find excellent expressions of this idea in Advaita Vedānta as illustrated by
the following passage from Gupta (1998), which again echoes neutral monism:

    The goal of Advaita Vedānta is to show the ultimate non-reality of all distinctions; reality
    is not constituted of parts.
                                                                                             (1)

    When pure consciousness individuates itself into subject and object, there results knowledge –
    the distinction between ‘knower and known’. . . . In talking about Brahman [pure con-
    sciousness], it is not a subject or an object, but neither and both; the distinction is not real.


                                                  209
                                            Michael Silberstein


     Because reality is non-dual, the known and the knower come to be recognized as one:
     brahman and atman, the objective and subjective poles of experience, are nondifferent.
                                                                                          (31)

     Atman is pure distinctionless, self-shining consciousness, which is non-different from brah-
     man. It is that state of being in which all subject-object distinction is obliterated. It does not
     have a beginning or an end; it is eternal and timeless. Time only arises within it.
                                                                                                   (34)

That is, in the Vedic view time is merely the separation of rishi (knower), devata (knowing) and chan-
das (object). In transcendence, the three become one: the knower is the object and is the process of
knowing. If one has a certain analytic or Western philosophical bias, it is easy to be put off by the
Advaita Vedānta terminology, but we urge the reader to set aside that reaction and think of such
claims from a purely phenomenological perspective.
    Many of the aforementioned Western thinkers, however, make a mistake that neutral monism
corrects. Namely, they place the explanation for this grand self-consistency relation between subject/
world in space and time, in the head of individual experiencers. For Schopenhauer it is his ‘represen-
tations’, for Kant it is his ‘categories’, and for Husserl it is his ‘inner representations’ or presentations
of temporal experience. Kant famously argues that the unity of experience in time and space requires
a unity of self and vice versa, otherwise there is no manifold of successive representations. This means
that the dynamical character of thought and the world are two sides of the same coin. Kant and the
others are right that we do not experience things in time and space, but rather we experience them
temporally and spatially. But, they are wrong to say that this is an imposition of individual minds and
their categories.
    The mistake, in one form or another, which we find in both the analytic and continental tradi-
tion, is representationalism. Once we take neutral monism on board we can immediately see that
there is no need for (and no sense to) representationalism to explain the experience of space or time
(Silberstein and Chemero 2015). The point here is that subject and object co-dependently exist as
a subject-in-a-world-in-space-and-time; they are two sides of the same coin, so the agent is not
trapped behind ‘a veil of perception’ but is directly part of the world, and the external world is not
some external container onto which the subject projects a virtual reality. Given neutral monism,
(transcendental) phenomenology cannot be and should not be divorced from natural science, and
experience cannot be separated from the natural world. There is not space enough here to repeat
the argument but in Silberstein and Chemero (2012, 2015) the claim is made that enactivism, radi-
cally embodied and extended cognitive science in the dynamical systems tradition and other related
traditions goes hand-in-hand with neutral monism, i.e., mind-brain-body-environment constitute
non-linearly coupled aspects of one system. If this is true then unlike panpsychism, neutral monism
is not scientifically moribund.
    In other words, we are talking about direct realism. Again, we must take the brackets off phe-
nomenology and let it be unbound. The experience of time’s passage for example (a key focus of
Husserl and perhaps the very essence of everyday conscious experience) is neither in the head (the
subject) nor the external world (the object); the experience is fundamentally relational in that it
requires that subject/object cut be made in the neutral ‘field of pure experience’ as James calls it. It is
the self-consistency relation between subject and object that allows for the experience of time. This
relation or structure is not in anything nor located anywhere; rather it why there are things in time
and space as experienced. Given neutral monism, self/world are two sides of the same coin, therefore
the dynamical character of thought and the world are two sides of the same coin.
    Martin Heidegger wrote, ‘Human life does not happen in time but rather is time itself ’ (2002,
169) – time is interwoven with consciousness. Henri Bergson, who very famously debated Einstein


                                                    210
                                         Neutral Monism Reborn


about the nature of time, was deeply bothered by the implication of relativity theory that time was
just all in the mind. His claim, much like Heidegger’s, was that ‘We are time’. Further, ‘Bergson . . .
believed this distinction could never be absolute; that we could never establish a fixed boundary
between matter and mind’ (Canales 2015, 340). Here is the point: neutral monism does what Berg-
son wanted, ‘to turn subjective time into something objective’. Neutral monism tells us that Ein-
stein’s ‘time of the universe’ and Bergson’s ‘lived time’ are one.
    If these ideas about the unity of subject-object-world-in-space and-time, strike you as little more
than phenomenology with no naturalistic grounding in science, think again. The question of how to
explain the experience of time has now taken center stage in cognitive science and in physics (Arstila
and Lloyd 2014; Callender 2010, 2017). There are primarily two aspects of the experience of time
that science wants to explain: (1) the flow, passage or ‘woosh’ (constant change in the future direc-
tion) and (2) the specialness of the present moment or ‘nowness’. The suggestions made here about
the explanation for the experience of time are not merely phenomenology, they also have grounding
in both the recent cognitive science of time perception and in recent speculations in physics about
time. For example, the cognitive neuroscientist Marc Wittmann who studies time perception writes:

     Because I have a body, I perceive the passing of time.
                                                                                         (2016, 133)

     Temporal experience, self-consciousness, and the perception of bodily states and feelings
     are tightly bound to each other; they cannot be experienced separately.
                                                                                   (2016, 135)

     Research on consciousness inevitably shows that our concepts of self, time and body are
     interrelated. Presence means becoming aware of a physical and psychic self that is tem-
     porally extended. To be self-conscious is to recognize oneself as something that persists
     through time and is embodied.
                                                                                  (2016, 104)

Jennifer Windt (2015) notes that even in dreams phenomenal selfhood requires the experience of a
self-world boundary and phenomenal selves are always spatiotemporally situated.
    As for the physics, there are speculations about the experience of time that would support the
thinking that there is no hard and fast division between subjective and objective time. As philosopher
of physics Craig Callender notes, philosophers such as Merleau-Ponty were already onto to this idea:

     Merleau-Ponty argued that time itself does not really flow and that its apparent flow is a
     product of our ‘surreptitiously putting into the river a witness of its course’. That is, the
     tendency to believe time flows is a result of forgetting to put ourselves and our connections
     to the world into the picture. Merleau-Ponty was speaking of our subjective experience of
     time, and until recently no one ever guessed that objective time might itself be explained as
     a result of those connections. Time may exist only by breaking the world into subsystems
     and looking at what ties them together. In this picture, physical time emerges by virtue of
     our thinking ourselves as separate from everything else.
                                                                                         (2010, 65)

Callender goes on to note that this idea is taking shape as a concrete research project in quantum gravity:

     The universe may be timeless, but if you imagine breaking it into pieces, some of the pieces
     can serve as clocks for the others. Time emerges from timelessness. We perceive time


                                                   211
                                           Michael Silberstein


    because we are, by our very natures, one of those pieces. . . . Historically, physicists began
    with the highly structured time of experience, the time of a fixed past, present and future.
    They gradually dismantled this structure, and little, if any, of it remains. Reseachers must
    now reverse this train of thought and reconstruct the time of experience from the time
    of nonfundamental physics, which itself may need to be reconstructed from a network of
    correlations among pieces of a fundamental static world.
                                                                                        (2010, 65)

We have sketched out how one might explain the ‘woosh’ or experience of the passage of time, but
what about the ‘nowness’, the specialness of the present moment or the ‘presence’ James alluded to
earlier? It turns out that neutral monism has us covered there as well:

    Neutral monism has to accept a notion of ‘presence in experience’ (what James called ‘pure
    experience’). This presence is not labeled as ‘consciousness’ by the neutral monists, since
    they regard consciousness, and its subject, as a very sophisticated feature of the constructed
    mental realm. Nonetheless, presence is, I believe, what funds the hard problem of con-
    sciousness. Presence is what constitutes the ‘what it is like’ of conscious experience. This is
    quite explicit in the neutral monist’s alignment of the neutral with the qualities of experi-
    ence, and especially perceptual experience.
                                                                                (Seager 2016, 326)

One way of interpreting James is that ‘being’, ‘pure being’ or ‘being thus’ is nowness or presentness,
what some might call presence. Presentness, i.e., ‘being’, in the Western traditions of phenomenol-
ogy and existentialism is typically thought of as either bracketed experience in the phenomeno-
logical tradition or merely a qualitative experience to ultimately be explained by neuroscience in
the analytic tradition. In the traditions of existentialism, pragmatism and phenomenology, one can
find varying expressions of the idea that the ‘lived present’, ‘lived experience’ or ‘living present’
are among the most fundamental aspects of reality. Also, as we saw, in some Hindu and Buddhist
texts, presence is neither bracketed nor just a brain state, it is fundamental. When all qualitative and
intentional states have ceased, what remains is presence (nirvikalpa samadhi). There is also savi-
kalpa samadhi, in which there is still a residual sense of subject and object, whereas in nirvikalpa
samadhi, even that relation goes, and there is only what might be called ‘pure presence’. Given that
presence is fundamental, it cannot be defined in terms of other concepts, of either a material or
mental nature:

    Advaita Vedānta centrally posits the existence of a permanent ‘self ’ (atman). The self is
    characterized as the ‘witness’ (saksin) of the experiences, that is as that which is conscious
    of them – yet not in the sense of some substantial entity that performs the witnessing, but
    rather as nothing but the taking place of witnessing (consciousness) itself. . . . Synchronically
    and diachronically, manifold experiences are presented in one and the same consciousness,
    whose oneness is not reducible to some unifying relations between the experiences, but
    rather forms the dimension in which they, together with all their interrelations, have their
    existence in the first place. This presence-dimension is [my emphasis] . . . what is called atman
    (qua witness) in Advaita.
                                                                                 (Fasching 2010, 20)

Savikalpa samadhi would be direct awareness of presence. Nirvikalpa samadhi would be pure pres-
ence. Can the latter be ‘known’? If it is known, it is experienced as an object. But then it is not pure
presence. It can, though, be experienced. That is nirvikalpa samadhi. This is not awareness of, or


                                                  212
                                        Neutral Monism Reborn


consciousness of presence, this is nowness/presence itself. Whereas we generally experience time
as an endless succession of point-like ‘nows’ as a result of that subject/object cut, the idea here is
that presence is actually relatively fundamental, universal, unmoved and unchanging. To ask, ‘where
is presence’ is to miss the point that presence or pure being is a precondition for all spatiotemporal
experience, including the localization of objects and properties. Presence or nowness is the backdrop
against which change is perceived.
    Presence/pure being/pure experience/nowness/etc. may open a response to Stephen Hawking’s
question:

    Even if there is only one possible unified theory, it is just a set of rules and equations. What
    is it that breathes fire into the equations and makes a universe for them to describe? The
    usual approach of science of constructing a mathematical model cannot answer the ques-
    tions of why there should be a universe for the model to describe. Why does the universe
    go to all the bother of existing?
                                                                                            (1998, 2)

Here Hawking is playing off of John Wheeler’s famous question, ‘how come existence’? Wheeler’s
infamous answer does invoke the observations of conscious entities such as ourselves as part (only
part) of the resolution to that question. He calls this the ‘participatory universe’ hypothesis (1977).
A physicist’s observations such as their decisions about what to measure in a quantum experi-
ment like the ordinary twin-slit setup determine whether quantum systems manifest wave-like or
particle-like behavior, for example. Think of Wheeler’s cosmic delayed-choice thought experiment
in which a single photon emitted from a distant quasar can simultaneously follow two paths to
Earth, even if those paths are separated by many light-years. One photon travels past two different
galaxies, with both routes deflected by the gravitational pull of the galaxies. The real kicker is that,
as Wheeler notes, the observations astronomers make on Earth in the present decide the path the
photon took billions of years ago. The wider implication of the ‘participatory universe’ is that the
universe is a giant feedback loop with the following counterintuitive properties:

    Wheeler’s idea was more radical. He claimed that the existence of life and observers in the
    universe today can help bring the very circumstances needed for life to emerge by reaching
    back to the past through acts of quantum observation. It is an attempt to explain the Goldi-
    locks factor by appealing to cosmic self-consistency: the bio-friendly universe explains life
    even as life explains the bio-friendly universe.
                                                                    (Leslie and Kuhn 2013, 168)

    Wheeler acknowledges that the universe looks as if it existed in a definite state before we started
observing it but argues that quantum mechanics suggests otherwise. There are a number of things to
note here. Wheeler seems to say that such observations need not be made by conscious observers but
could be made by measuring devices, so consciousness as such isn’t essential. Otherwise Wheeler’s
suggestion would seem to be a variant of idealism – there is a sense here in which ‘to be is to be per-
ceived or observed’. Wheeler’s idealism or any other brand of subjective idealism raises the question
of how the universe evolved or appeared to evolve in those past spatio-temporal regions in which it
seems there were no conscious observers. For example, it certainly looks as if the Big Bang and cos-
mic microwave background radiation was there even when astronomers were not looking for it or
at it. If we are good naturalists, then unlike Berkeley we cannot invoke God to answer this question.
The vast majority of people writing about quantum mechanics do not want conscious observers to
be essential to the theory. Wheeler’s idea seems to imply some sort of anthropic principle, perhaps
even the strong one (see Barrow and Tipler 1986).


                                                  213
                                            Michael Silberstein


    Furthermore, there are interpretations of quantum mechanics such as Bohmian mechanics with
its point particles with definite position that do not license Wheeler’s inference about future events
determining a particle’s past trajectories.
    So maybe we do not want to adopt Wheeler’s particular suggestion about how individual human
observation (or that of other such conscious agents) puts the fire in the equations. It is definitely the
case that if neutral monism as described herein is true, then there is no external (objective) world
without a self or subject; indeed, the very distinction does not ultimately hold up – the ‘field of expe-
rience’ is neutral and depending on how it’s cut or ‘foliated’, it includes both subject and object. Given
neutral monism it just isn’t true that one can strip the world of space, time and matter of subjectivity
and still discuss it in sensible terms. But this is not because the external world somehow arises from the
minds of humans or God, nor because an individual conscious mind must ‘lay eyes’ on something in
some causal sense before it can be real. The subject and the external world co-arise in a transcendental
sense; the external world is not born of temporally or causally prior observation, perception or menta-
tion, e.g., the things that make up the external world are not ideas in the mind of God.
    In terms of the question of how ‘witnessing’ could be behind reality when the universe allegedly
existed for billions of years before individual conscious beings came along, it’s important to disen-
tangle the witness consciousness (in the language of Advaita Vedānta) – which we could also call
consciousness or subjectivity as such – from the consciousness of individual beings. As described pre-
viously, in Western philosophical terms the witness consciousness could be seen as the transcendental
condition for the existence of any thing or individual – for the world as experienced perhaps not for
existence simpliciter. This is not to invoke noumenal mind; given direct realism there is only the-
world-as-experienced. The fact that any particular individual becomes conscious in the conventional
sense, and becomes aware of this witness consciousness (perhaps through introspection, reasoned
argument or meditative practice) does not create this witness consciousness. It is an objective reality
that is taken to be transcendentally prior. Just as the physical world, on a conventional understanding,
existed before any individual was there to perceive it, similarly the witness consciousness was also
always already ‘there’, transcendentally prior to conscious individuals as we understand them today.
In other words, the witness consciousness is a different kind of thing from individual consciousness
as conventionally understood. It is not emergent, but logically prior and transcendental. The same
argument for a self/world cut at the level of individual consciousness can be made for the world at
large. Perceiver (subject) and perceived (object) co-exist in a self-consistent fashion as a single aspect
of the witness consciousness. So the point is that while subject and object are co-dependent and
thus relational, presence is the only remaining intrinsic feature and it also is a neutral feature that
spans both the ‘physical’ and the ‘mental’, with all that those terms imply. The poisonous ontological
dichotomies of mind/matter; inner/outer; subject/world, subjective/objective, etc., have infected
traditions as diverse as metaphysical realism, physicalism and phenomenology. Neutral monism is the
conceptual antidote.
    ‘Witnessing’ is neutral in three important respects. First, there are no qualia, no fundamental self or
I, and no categorical distinction between the mental (the subjective) and the physical (the objective).
Therefore, there is also no dualism between the qualitative and the intentional, they are all non-dual.
Second, the subject/object cut is a self-consistency relation; there is only one reality, just ‘foliated’ and
characterized in certain ways, as it were. Third, there is no ontic priority of the ‘witnessing’ over the
external world – they are co-fundamental. In other words, while it has been emphasized that there
can be no worldly phenomenal experience without the ‘witnessing’, it is also true that there can be
no ‘witnessing’ (no minimal subject) without the object, i.e., a world in space and time. It is not as if
the minimal subject exists prior in time to the external world of minds and physical objects and the
latter arises out of the minimal subject in some causal or dynamical process.
    However, one might argue that once again the problem of how to keep neutral monism from
sliding into idealism looms large. ‘To be is to be witnessed’ sounds a lot like ‘to be is to be perceived’,


                                                    214
                                           Neutral Monism Reborn


the very essence of subjective idealism. We have already suggested several ways to resist this analogy
but if for the sake of discussion one is willing to take Advaita Vedānta or certain Western traditions
seriously as a possible expression of neutral monism, then perhaps there is another worthwhile reply.
It is important to understand that in the Advaita tradition and in such Western traditions as phenom-
enology and existentialism, what is ultimately fundamental is not the witness consciousness or pure
subjectivity, but rather pure being – being itself or being thus. It is pure being that is to be identified
with the now, nowness or pure presence. For example, in the Advaita Vedānta tradition the everyday
individual conscious being such as ourselves can merge into the witness consciousness-subjectivity
itself, which in turn can merge into pure being or being itself. ‘Witness’ is a relative term for pure
presence inasmuch as it is related to something called ‘world’. However, ‘World’ and ‘witness’, ‘object’
and ‘subject’ are really just pure presence aware of itself.
    Here is the point: the Advaita Vedānta tradition of Hinduism provides us with another alternative
for what the neutral might be. In this tradition, while brahman is equated with the witness con-
sciousness (sakshi), there are varying degrees of subtlety of the witness consciousness. The blanket
term for the experience of such states is samadhi (absorption). In savikalpa samadhi, there remains
some residual sense of a distinction between witness and witnessed. But in nirvikalpa samadhi that
slips away, so there is nothing but the witness. It is no longer really ‘witnessing’ itself, it is simply being
itself (Deutsch 1969, 62 ff.). This being itself is beyond all description, concepts and predication, ‘free
from distinctions of all kinds’. The claim is that brahman is nirguna, i.e., without qualities. It is hard
to imagine anything more neutral! In the Advaita Vedānta texts it is often said therefore that brah-
man is one with yet beyond the world of space and time. Brahman is beyond the world, but it also
is the world.
    The English word ‘witness’ (especially if followed by the English word ‘consciousness’) implies
something observing something else. That concept of observation clearly implies something like
consciousness (in the conventional sense), so asserting that it is fundamental sounds like idealism.
However, if we take seriously the phenomenology of meditative states, the shift from savikalpa sama-
dhi to nirvikalpa samadhi entails that the sense of ‘observer-hood’ passes away, and one is not so much
‘witnessing’ as ‘being’. Think of this state as a kind of coalescence of mentality and materiality – and
hence as ‘neutral’ in this sense. Here the claim is that ‘being’, ‘pure being’ or ‘being thus’ is nowness
or presentness, what some might call presence. Again, when all qualitative and intentional states have
ceased, what remains is presence (nirvikalpa samadhi). Given that presence is fundamental, it can-
not be defined in terms of other concepts of either a material or mental nature. Again, this is not
awareness of, or consciousness of, presence – this is nowness/presence itself. Perceiver (subject) and
perceived (object) co-arise in a self-consistent fashion from presence. And again, do not think of this
co-arising as a causal process in time. From the perspectiveless (and experienceless experience) ‘per-
spective’ of pure being, there is no subject, nor a world in space and time, only being itself. Only from
the perspective of the witness consciousness and individual manifestations of it such as ourselves does
the world exist. This sounds plausibly like neutral monism. Again, the point here is that space-time
and matter cannot be stripped of subjectivity; the existence of our world cannot exist without the
subject, but not in the sense of subjective idealism; the subject cannot exist without the world either.
    It is understandable that some readers will be put off by the invocation of analytic, continental and
Eastern traditions of thought. It is also understandable that some readers will find the view sketched
here too much to accept, they would rather struggle with trying to patch Western physicalism or
materialism. Two points. First, we have seen that radical emergence and panpsychism are fatally
flawed, so if we accept that we are going to have to look elsewhere and face new challenges and
new questions. Second, once one does accept something like the view sketched herein and acquires
sympathy for it, it is quite alright to take advantage of the fact that certain Eastern and continental
traditions have understood that pure being and subjectivity are fundamental and have been trying
to work out the consequences of that for some time. As Seager said, neutral monism ‘knocks the


                                                     215
                                                Michael Silberstein


physical, as scientifically understood, from its perch of ontological preeminence’ (2016, 326). Perhaps
it’s time to stop patching physicalism and begin to explore the new world.2


                                                      Notes
	1.	 Of course, both strong emergence and panpsychism have responses to all these concerns and they deserve
      more critical attention. For a fully developed critique of these positions see Silberstein, Stuckey and McDe-
      vitt (2018).
 	2.	 I would like to thank William Seager for his invaluable comments and editing.


                                                   References
Arstila, V., and Lloyd, D. (eds.) (2014). Subjective Time: The Philosophy, Psychology and Neuroscience of Temporality.
   Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Barrow, J., and Tipler, F. (1986). The Anthropic Cosmological Principle. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Callender C. (2010). ‘Is Time an Illusion?’ Scientific American, 302 (6): 58–65.
Canales, J. (2015). The Physicist and the Philosopher: Einstein, Bergson, and the Debate That Changed Our Understand-
   ing of Time. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Chalmers, D. (1996). The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chalmers, D. (2016).‘The Combination Problem for Panpsychism’. In G. Brüntrup and L. Jaskolla (eds.), Panpsy-
   chism. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 229–48.
Deutsch, E. (1969). Advaita Vedānta: A Philosophical Reconstruction. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Fasching, W. (2010). ‘I am of the Nature of Seeing: Phenomenological Reflections on the Indian Notion of
   Witness-Consciousness’. In M. Siderits, E. Thompson, and D. Zahavi (eds.), Self, No Self? Perspectives from
   Analytical, Phenomenological, and Indian Traditions. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 193–216.
Gupta, B. (1998). The Disinterested Witness: A Fragment of Advaita Vedānta Phenomenology. Evanston: Northwest-
   ern University Press.
Hawking, S. (1998). A Brief History of Time. New York: Bantam Books.
Heidegger, M. (1996). Being and Time. Trans. J. Stambaugh. Albany: SUNY Press.
Heidegger, M. (2002). Supplements: From the Earliest Essays to Being and Time and Beyond. Ed. J. van Buren. Albany:
   SUNY Press.
Husserl, E. (2001). Logical Investigations. Trans. J. N. Findlay. London: Routledge.
James, William (1904). ‘Does “Consciousness’ Exist?’ Journal of Philosophy, Psychology, and Scientific Methods, 1:
   477–91. (Reprinted in Mind and Matter, 8: 131–44, 2010).
James, William (1905/2005). ‘The Notion of Consciousness’. The Journal of Consciousness Studies, 12 (7): 55–64.
   (Translation by J. Bricklin of James’s Communication made (in French) at the 5th International Congress of
   Psychology, Rome.).
James, William (1912). A Pluralistic Universe. New York: Longmans, Green and Co.
Kant, I. (1998). The Critique of Pure Reason. Trans. P. Gruyer and A. Wood. Cambridge: Cambridge University
   Press.
Koch, C. (2014). ‘Ubiquitous Minds’. Scientific American Mind: 26–9, January–February.
Leslie, J., and Kuhn, L. (eds.) (2013). The Mystery of Existence: Why Is There Anything at All? Chichester:
   Wiley-Blackwell.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1962). Phenomenology of Perception. London: Routledge.
Montero, B. (2010). A Russellian response to the structural argument against physicalism. Journal of Consciousness
   Studies, 17(3–4): 70–83.
Robertson, T., and Atkins, P. (2016). ‘Essential vs. Accidental Properties’. In E. Zalta (ed.) The Stanford Encyclope-
   dia of Philosophy, Summer edition. http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2016/entries/essential-accidental/.
Russell, B. (1913/1993). ‘Theory of Knowledge’. In E. Eames and K. Blackwell (eds.), The Collected Papers of
   Bertrand Russell, vol. 7. London: Routledge.
Schopenhauer, A. (1969). The World as Will and Representation. New York: Dover.
Seager, W. (2007). A brief history of the philosophical problem of consciousness. In P. Zelazo, M. Moscovitch,
   and E. Thompson (eds.), The Cambridge Handbook of Consciousness. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
   pp. 9–34.
Seager, W. (2009). ‘Panpsychism’. In T. Bayne, A. Cleeremans, and P. Wilken (eds.), The Oxford Companion to
   Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 500–2.
Seager, W. (2016). Theories of Consciousness: An Introduction and Assessment, 2nd edition. London: Routledge.


                                                        216
                                            Neutral Monism Reborn


Searle, John R. (2004). Mind: A Brief Introduction. New York: Oxford University Press.
Silberstein M. (2010). ‘Why Neutral Monism Is Superior to Panpsychism’. Mind and Matter, 7 (2): 239–48.
Silberstein, M. (2014). ‘Experience Unbound: Neutral Monism, Contextual Emergence and Extended Cogni-
    tive Science’. Mind and Matter (special issue entitled Naturalizing the Mind), 12 (2): 289–339.
Silberstein, M., and Chemero, A. (2012). ‘Complexity and Extended Phenomenological-Cognitive Systems’.
    Topics in Cognitive Science, 4 (1): 35–50.
Silberstein, M., and Chemero, A. (2015). ‘Extending Neutral Monism to the Hard Problem’. Journal of Conscious-
    ness Studies (special issue on Embodied and Extended Theories of Conscious Experience entitled Conscious-
    ness Unbound: Going Beyond the Brain), 22 (3–4): 181–94.
Silberstein, M., Stuckey, W. M., and McDevitt, T. (2018). Beyond the Dynamical Universe: Unifying Block Universe
    Physics and Time as Experienced. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Strawson, G. (2006). ‘Realistic Monism: Why Physicalism Entails Panpsychism’. In A. Freeman (ed.), Conscious-
    ness and Its Place in Nature. Exeter: Imprint Academic, pp. 3–31.
Stubenberg, L. (2009). ‘Neutral Monism’. In E. Zalta (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Fall 2014 edi-
    tion. http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2014/entries/neutral-monism/.
Wheeler, J. A. (1977). ‘Genesis and Observership’. In R. Butts and J. Hintikka (eds.), Foundational Problems in the
    Special Sciences. Dordrecht: Reidel, pp. 3–34.
Windt, J. M. (2015). Dreaming: A Conceptual Framework for Philosophy of Mind and Empirical Research. Cambridge,
    MA: The MIT Press.
Wittmann, M. (2016). Felt Time: The Psychology of How We Perceive Time. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Zahavi, D. (2005). Subjectivity and Selfhood: Investigating the First-Person Perspective. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.




                                                       217
                      19
             PANPSYCHISM AND NON-
             STANDARD MATERIALISM
                        Some Comparative Remarks

                                           Daniel Stoljar


                                          1. Introduction
Much of contemporary philosophy of mind is marked by a dissatisfaction with the two main posi-
tions in the field, standard materialism and standard dualism, and hence with the search for alterna-
tives. My concern in this chapter is with two such alternatives. The first, which I will call non-standard
materialism, is a position I have defended in a number of places, and which may take various forms.1
The second, panpsychism, has been defended and explored by a number of recent writers.2 My main
goals are: (a) to explain the differences between these positions; and (b) to suggest that non-standard
materialism is more plausible than panpsychism.
    I will begin by reviewing briefly why the standard views are unsatisfactory. I will then turn to our
main business, the comparison of non-standard materialism and panpsychism.


                                     2.  Standard Materialism
The project of transforming the impressionistic idea of materialism into something more tractable
is a large and surprisingly complex one. Here I will work with a formulation due to David Lewis
that starts from the assumption that any possible world, and so the actual world in particular, instan-
tiates a relatively small class of fundamental properties, where ‘fundamental’ or ‘perfectly natural’
properties are (among other things) “not at all disjunctive, or determinable, or negative. They render
their instances perfectly similar in some respect. They are intrinsic; and all other intrinsic properties
supervene on them” (2009: 204; see also Lewis 1994: 291). This assumption is certainly non-trivial,
but it is not important for us to evaluate it here. The important point is rather that if we make this
assumption, we have a natural way of stating the basic idea of materialism, as follows:

   Materialism (basic idea): all instantiated fundamental properties are physical properties.

Understood this way, materialism does not entail that all instantiated properties whatsoever are physi-
cal. It permits that many instantiated properties are non-physical, so long as those properties are not
fundamental but instead supervene on, or are necessitated by, the fundamental properties.
    If this is the basic idea of materialism, what is ‘standard’ materialism? Standard materialism (at
least as I will understand it) takes this basic idea and adds that the physical properties in question



                                                   218
                               Panpsychism and Non-standard Materialism


are standard, where by a ‘standard physical property’ I mean a property of the kind expressed by the
physical theories we currently have:

   Standard Materialism: all instantiated fundamental properties are standard physical properties.

For the standard materialist, therefore, “materialism is metaphysics built to endorse the truth and
descriptive completeness of physics more or less as we know it” (Lewis 1986a: x).
   Standard materialism faces a number of challenges but the most prominent of these is the con-
ceivability argument and similar arguments. The conceivability argument – to put it roughly but
serviceably for present purposes – proceeds from two premises. The first premise is that it is conceiv-
able that there is a world identical to the actual world in respect of fundamental physical properties,
and yet different from it in terms of the nature and distribution of certain psychological properties,
in particular those associated with phenomenal consciousness. The second premise is that if this is
conceivable it is possible. These two premises entail that standard materialism is false, since standard
materialism entails that such properties supervene on or are necessitated by the fundamental physi-
cal properties, a claim which rules out the possible world in question. Of course there are many
things to be said about the conceivability argument, but I will not go into the details here. Instead,
I will assume that, whether it is successful or not, it at least motivates the search for an alternative to
standard materialism.


                                        3.  Standard Dualism
Turning now to dualism, the basic idea here too may be formulated in the framework we have taken
over from Lewis:

   Dualism (basic idea): (a) some instantiated fundamental properties are psychological properties;
     and (b) all instantiated non-psychological fundamental properties are physical properties.

Understood this way, dualism agrees with materialism about all instantiated properties apart from
psychological ones.
   If this is the basic idea of dualism, what is ‘standard’ dualism? Well, standard dualism takes this basic
idea and adds both that physical properties are standard (in the way indicated previously) and that
the psychological properties in question are standard too, where by a ‘standard psychological prop-
erty’ I mean a property of the kind expressed by folk psychological theories of the sort we currently
have; hence a standard psychological property is for example having an itch in your toe, seeing a cup,
believing that snow is white, or wondering about your financial position:

   Standard Dualism: (a) some instantiated fundamental properties are standard psychological prop-
      erties; and (b) all instantiated non-psychological fundamental properties are standard physical
      properties.

For the standard dualist, therefore, dualism is metaphysics built to endorse the near truth and near
descriptive completeness of physics more or less as we know it – the only exceptions are standard
psychological properties.
    Like standard materialism, standard dualism has a number of challenges, but perhaps the most
prominent is the exclusion argument and related arguments. The exclusion argument – to put it
again roughly but serviceably for present purposes – proceeds from two premises. The first prem-
ise – the closure premise – is that for every physical event that has cause, there are physical properties



                                                    219
                                              Daniel Stoljar


that are causally efficacious in the production of that event. The second premise – the exclusion
premise – is that if some property F is causally efficacious in the production of an event, then no
property metaphysically distinct from F is also causally efficacious in the production of that event.
These two premises entail that standard dualism is false, at least if we assume (reasonably) that psy-
chological properties are causally efficacious in the production of behaviour, for the events involved
in the behaviour of people and animals are physical events. And physical events, according to the
closure premise, are such that physical properties are causally efficacious for their production. But
then if standard dualism is true, psychological properties are not causally efficacious – for if they
were they would have to be so in addition to physical properties, and this is something ruled out
by the exclusion premise. There is much to say also about the exclusion argument, but again here
I will assume that, whether or not it is successful, it at least motivates the search for an alternative to
standard dualism.
   What then might these alternatives be? As I said earlier, I will be concerned with non-standard
materialism and panpsychism, and it is to these that I now turn.


                                  4.  Non-Standard Materialism
Non-standard materialism takes the general idea of materialism and adds that the physical properties
in question can be either standard or non-standard:

   Non-Standard Materialism: all instantiated fundamental properties are either standard physical
     properties or non-standard physical properties

So non-standard materialism is logically weaker than standard materialism; it does not require that
the fundamental properties are standard physical properties.
   What is a non-standard physical property? There are two main strategies of approaching this
question.3 The first, which I will call the Nagelian strategy, contrasts physical theories we currently
have with the physical theories that we will (or might) have in the ideal limit, or equivalently for
present purposes, with the physical theories (whatever they are) that are true and complete. If we
assume that the theories that we currently have are either not true or not complete, there is a dif-
ference between the properties expressed by current theories (i.e. standard physical properties) and
those expressed by ideal theories (i.e. non-standard physical properties). Correlatively, we have a
Nagelian version of non-standard materialism, according to which all fundamental properties are
either standard or non-standard physical properties (in the Nagelian sense).
   The second strategy, which I will call the Russellian strategy, appeals to the idea that standard
physical properties are structural or dispositional properties and then suggests that there must
be non-structural or non-dispositional properties that ground the standard properties in ques-
tion. If we assume that these non-structural or non-dispositional properties are not expressed
by physical theories of the kind we currently have, we have a distinction between disposi-
tional or structural properties expressed by those theories (i.e. standard physical properties) and
non-­dispositional or non-structural properties which ground such properties (i.e. non-standard
physical properties). Correlatively, we have a Russellian version of non-standard materialism,
according to which all fundamental properties are either standard or non-standard physical
properties (in the Russellian sense).
   There is a lot to say about the contrast between the Nagelian and Russellian versions of non-
standard materialism. This contrast is not our focus here, although I will say a little about it later. But
why should we adopt a version of non-standard materialism of any sort in the first place?
   Well, non-standard materialism has two apparent advantages. First, unlike standard material-
ism, it does not face the conceivability argument. The reason is that our epistemic relation to the


                                                   220
                                Panpsychism and Non-standard Materialism


non-standard properties (on either the Russellian or the Nagelian version of non-standard material-
ism) is quite unlike our epistemic relation to standard properties; in particular, while we can describe
non-standard properties, we don’t know what they are, and since we don’t know what they are,
we cannot reason about them in the way that the conceivability argument requires. Second, unlike
standard dualism, non-standard materialism does not entail that standard psychological properties are
fundamental; hence it does not face the exclusion argument about these properties.


                                     5.  Non-Standard Dualism
Turning now to panpsychism, it is helpful here first to formulate a more general position I will call
non-standard dualism. Non-standard dualism takes the basic idea of dualism and replaces ‘standard
psychological property’ with ‘non-standard psychological property’:

   Non-Standard Dualism: (a) some instantiated fundamental properties are non-standard psychologi-
     cal properties; and (b) all instantiated non-psychological fundamental properties are standard
     physical properties.

So non-standard dualism, unlike standard dualism, and like all the forms of materialism we have
considered, entails (at least with trivial further assumptions) that standard psychological properties
are not fundamental.
   What is a non-standard psychological property? As will emerge as we proceed, this is a difficult
question for any sort of non-standard dualism. But to a first approximation (I will consider further
proposals in a moment) we may assume that a non-standard psychological property is a psychological
property like any other except that it has (or may have) a non-standard bearer. Standard (i.e. usual)
bearers of psychological properties are objects such as people or animals, and an important feature
of these objects is that they do not themselves instantiate fundamental physical properties. Non-
standard psychological properties are instantiated in such objects, but also in other objects; in par-
ticular, in the bearers of fundamental physical properties. So for example, if some electron – a bearer
of a fundamental physical property – has some psychological property F, then, F is a non-standard
psychological property in this sense.


                      6.  From Non-Standard Dualism to Panpsychism
Non-standard dualism is not yet panpsychism. If you let etymology be your guide, the basic idea of
panpsychism is that everything whatsoever has psychological properties. And if you let the recent lit-
erature be your guide, as I will here, the basic idea is that everything that is fundamental – that is, every
bearer of a fundamental property – has psychological properties. By itself non-standard dualism is not
committed to these claims. It is consistent with non-standard dualism, for example, that only some,
or indeed only one, bearer of a fundamental property has a psychological property.
   However, while this is true, it is possible to add a further requirement to non-standard dualism,
and so obtain the version of panpsychism we will be interested in, as follows:

   Panpsychist Non-Standard Dualism: (a) some instantiated fundamental properties are non-standard
      psychological properties; (b) all instantiated non-psychological fundamental properties are
      standard physical properties; and (c) everything that bears a fundamental physical property
      bears a fundamental property that is a non-standard psychological property.

The requirement formulated in (c) is an optional extra for non-standard dualism. If we add it, we
get a panpsychist version of non-standard dualism; if we do not, we get a version of non-standard


                                                    221
                                             Daniel Stoljar


dualism that may not be panpsychist. I will come back later to whether the panpsychist version of
the view is preferable to the non-panpsychist version. But first, why adopt non-standard dualism of
any sort?
   Well, like non-standard materialism, non-standard dualism has two apparent advantages as well.
First, unlike standard dualism, it does not entail that standard psychological properties are funda-
mental; hence it avoids the exclusion argument about such properties. Second, unlike standard
materialism, it does not entail that standard psychological properties supervene on standard physical
properties, and so avoids the conceivability argument about such properties.


                             7.  Three Problems for Panpsychism
Whatever its attractions, panpsychist non-standard dualism (hereafter ‘panpsychism’) faces at least
three big problems.

   Big Problem 1 is that it provokes an incredulous stare.4 Surely electrons do not think and feel! That
      suggestion is on the face of it offensive to common sense in a very basic way.
   Big Problem 2 is that, while panpsychism does not face the modal challenge in the form of
      the conceivability argument formulated earlier, it nevertheless faces an analogous argument;
      indeed this point is extremely prominent in the recent literature.5 According to this argument,
      it is conceivable, and so possible, that there is possible world identical to the actual world
      in respect of fundamental physical properties and fundamental non-standard psychological
      properties, and yet different from it in terms of the nature and distribution of certain standard
      psychological properties, in particular those associated with phenomenal consciousness. If this
      is possible then panpsychism is false, for the same reason that standard materialism is false in
      the analogous situation.
   Big Problem 3 is that, while panpsychism does not face the exclusion argument about standard
      psychological properties, it nevertheless faces an analogous challenge. Consider some electron
      α, and suppose, in accordance with panpsychism, that α has both psychological and physi-
      cal properties. If we assume, as we should, that α behaves in various ways, we can mount an
      argument about it just as we did earlier about people and animals. For the events involved in
      the behaviour of α are physical events. And physical events, according to the closure premise
      mentioned above, are such that physical properties are causally efficacious for their production.
      But then if panpsychism is true, psychological properties of α are not causally efficacious – for
      if they were they would have to be so in addition to physical properties, and this is something
      ruled out by the exclusion premise. To adapt a phrase of Mark Johnston’s, we face a mind-
      body problem at the fundamental level, a problem that looks in essence the same as the prob-
      lem we originally faced at the non-fundamental level ( Johnston 1996).

Taken individually these three problems (hereafter, BP1–3) present major challenges to panpsychism.
But it is perhaps taken collectively that they have most force. What we wanted was a theory that
avoided the problems of standard dualism and standard materialism. But what we have is a theory that
faces both problems (suitably adjusted) and in addition provokes an incredulous stare.


                                  8.  Unimaginable Properties
How might the panpsychist respond to these problems? Of course there are a number of possible
avenues to consider; however, if one’s concern is with the comparison between panpsychism and
non-standard materialism, perhaps the most obvious thing to do here is to point out that we have
so far operated with a somewhat limited idea of what a non-standard psychological property is.


                                                  222
                               Panpsychism and Non-standard Materialism


Such properties are non-standard, we said, only in so far as they have non-standard bearers. But it is
open to the panpsychist to insist that, while they may be non-standard in this limited sense, they are
also non-standard in a more dramatic way as well; indeed, it is open to them to suppose that these
properties are quite unimaginable for us. After all, it is not implausible that other creatures instantiate
psychological states that are unimaginable for us; so too, one might say for the psychological proper-
ties, if any, that are instantiated by electrons.
    This ‘unimaginable property’ reply is, I think, most plausible when it is focused on BP1 and BP2,
so let us concentrate on them first. As regards BP1, the panpsychist can say that while it may be
offensive to common sense to say that electrons think and feel in ways familiar to us, it is not offen-
sive to common sense (for example, because common sense has no view on the matter) that they
think and feel in ways that are unimaginable to us. As regards BP2, if non-standard psychological
properties had by the bearers of fundamental properties are unimaginable to us, then it is possible
for the panpsychist to respond to the conceivability argument in the same way as the non-standard
materialist. In particular (they might say) it is not possible for us to conceive (in the relevant sense)
a situation in which they along with other properties are instantiated and yet standard psychological
properties are not.


                      9.  Essential Features of Psychological Properties
The unimaginable properties response is attractive on the surface, but it also faces two objections.
The first starts from the point that, while it may be true that there are psychological properties unim-
aginable to us, it is also true that psychological properties, whether imaginable or not, have certain
essential features. Moreover, when we focus on these features, what emerges is that they themselves
are sufficient to generate BP1 and BP2. Hence the possibility of unimaginable properties does not
alter the dialectical situation.
    What are these essential features of psychological properties? One good candidate here is that
psychological properties essentially consist in (or at least partially consist in) awareness of properties.6
For example, feeling a pain in your toe is or entails being aware of some property or properties that
your toe apparently instantiates. Likewise seeing a lemon is or entails being aware of certain proper-
ties that the lemon apparently instantiates, e.g. its colour, shape or position. On the assumption that
these examples are typical, it is an essential feature of any phenomenal property that it consists in
awareness of a property.
    However, if this is an essential feature of any phenomenal property, the unimaginable property
reply to BP1 and BP2 is no good. To see this, consider again BP1. If any phenomenal property
essentially involves being aware of some property, then panpsychism is committed to the view that
electrons and other bearers of fundamental properties are themselves aware of various properties. But
this idea will surely provoke an incredulous stare just as much as the original suggestion that electrons
think and feel in the way that we do. And here of course, it makes no difference that we cannot
imagine what these states of awareness are like.
    Or consider again BP2, the problem that panpsychism faces an argument analogous to the origi-
nal conceivability argument against standard materialism. The reply we formulated before to this
analogous argument is that if non-standard psychological properties are unimaginable, what this
argument claims to be conceivable is not so, or anyway is not in the relevant sense. But the problem
with this reply is that, if any non-standard psychological properties, imaginable or not, consist in
awareness of properties, it is hard to argue that the relevant claim is not conceivable. For it certainly
does seem conceivable that all the bearers of fundamental properties are aware of certain properties,
then the non-fundamental objects which are composed of these bearers – objects such as people and
animals – are not themselves aware of anything; at any rate, from the fact that the parts of a thing are
aware of something, it scarcely follows that the complex made out of those things is likewise aware of


                                                    223
                                              Daniel Stoljar


some other property. And if that is so, appealing to unimaginable properties does not after all provide
the panpsychist with the materials to respond to BP2.


                                    10.  The Threat of Collapse
A panpsychist might respond to this objection by denying that psychological properties have the
essential feature we have been looking at; at the limit, they might even say that phenomenal proper-
ties have no essential features at all. However, any move of this sort leads only to the second objection
to the unimaginable properties reply.
    The second objection is that the unimaginable properties reply threatens to remove the difference
between panpsychism and non-standard materialism. After all, if we literally know nothing about
non-standard psychological properties, it is hard to see why they should be called ‘psychological
properties’ in the first place. And if they are not psychological properties, then this ‘panpsychist’ posi-
tion stands revealed as no different to non-standard materialism.
    One might object that, as far as the threat of collapse goes, the panpsychist and the non-standard
materialist are in the same boat. After all, if we literally know nothing about non-standard physical
properties, it is hard to see why they should be called ‘physical properties’ either. However, while
this is certainly a natural line of thought, it remains the case that the issue of collapse causes more
trouble for the panpsychist than for the non-standard materialist, for two main reasons. First, the
non-­standard materialist begins from the claim that there are non-standard physical properties whose
nature we do not know; that is the initial and defining claim of the position. But the panpsychist by
contrast does not start from this position; rather it is forced on them when the most obvious way
to spell out the view becomes untenable. Second, the idea that there are physical properties whose
nature is completely unknown to us is relatively easily tolerated by our contemporary understand-
ing of a physical property in a way that the analogous claim is not tolerated by our understanding
of a mental property. According to our contemporary understanding of a physical property, a physi-
cal property (very roughly) is either a property distinctive of ordinary physical objects or else is a
property that explains the properties distinctive of ordinary physical objects. The second clause here
is forced on us by empirical developments, and in particular by the fact that contemporary physics
talks about properties quite distinct from the distinctive properties of ordinary physical objects. But
in view of this second clause, our understanding of the physical is very open ended. Hence while we
might be able to say in the case of mental properties that they have various essential features, this is
not at all clear in the case of physical properties.


                    11.  A Mind-Body Problem at the Fundamental Level
I have been looking at the first two problems of the three set out earlier, BP1 and BP2. What now of
BP3, the objection that the panpsychist faces the integration problem just as the standard dualist does?
   In this case the most promising avenue is for the panpsychist to adopt a Russellian version of
panpsychism. As we saw previously, a Russellian version of non-standard materialism holds (a) that
standard physical properties are dispositional or structural properties, and (b) that non-standard physi-
cal properties are the non-dispositional or non-structural properties that ground standard physical
properties. A Russellian version of panpsychism agrees with this with the exception that it is non-
standard psychological properties, rather than non-standard physical properties, that ground standard
physical properties.7
   How does a position of this sort answer BP3? Well consider again the second premise of the
exclusion argument, namely, that if some property F is causally efficacious in the production of an
event, then no property metaphysically distinct from F is also causally efficacious in the production
of that event. However exactly this premise is to be interpreted, one might argue that it should not


                                                   224
                              Panpsychism and Non-standard Materialism


apply in the case of structural or dispositional properties and the non-structural or non-dispositional
properties that ground them. After all, if the solubility of a tablet may cause the water you put it in
to fizz, so too does its chemical composition. In this case it seems mistaken to view the chemical
composition as being in competition with the solubility. If so, it would appear that a Russellian ver-
sion of panpsychism can withstand the exclusion argument, even when that argument is targeted at
the fundamental level rather than the non-fundamental level.


                                  12.  Essential Features Again
Earlier we noted that it is possible to be a non-standard dualist but not a panpsychist; what we have
just noted is that it is possible to be a panpsychist but not Russellian panpsychist. On the other hand,
it appears that when faced with BP3, the best thing for the non-standard dualist to do is to become
both a panpsychist and a Russellian panpsychist. It is for this reason that this is the most common
form of non-standard dualism.
    However, while this may be the best thing to do in the face of BP3, it too has a downside, and the
problem again has to do with the essential features of psychological properties. For suppose that the
psychological properties in question consist in being aware of some properties. Then what is being
claimed of fundamental objects such as electrons is not merely that they are aware of various prop-
erties, but that they play their normal physical roles in virtue of being aware of various properties.
But it seems to be quite unobvious why this should be so. Suppose, for example that some electron
has rest mass, and in consequence is disposed to exert gravitational attraction on other elementary
particles. Off hand it is reasonable to ask what it is about the electron that grounds its ability to do
this. According to the Russellian panpsychist the answer is that that the electron is aware of certain
properties. But this I think is an extremely peculiar answer. For one thing, that you aware of a prop-
erty does not usually make you attractive to others! More generally, there seems no reason at all why
the fact (assuming it to be a fact) that the electron is aware of something should make it have the
dispositions electrons do when they have rest mass.


               13.  Does Non-Standard Materialism Face These Problems?
I have been suggesting that BP1–3 present difficulties for panpsychism that are very considerable
indeed. But at this point one might wonder whether non-standard materialism faces the same prob-
lems, perhaps suitably adjusted. If that were the case, nothing we have said constitutes a reason to
favour non-standard materialism over panpsychism.
    However, I think it is clear that this is not the case. Consider BP1, the incredulous stare. The
non-standard materialist does not face this problem. For saying that there are fundamental proper-
ties whose nature we do not know is one thing, saying that every bearer of a fundamental property
instantiates a psychological fundamental property is quite another.
    Consider BP1, that panpsychism faces a conceivability argument that is very similar to the one
faced by standard materialism. The non-standard materialist does not face this problem. For suppose
we formulate a third conceivability argument, similar to the two already on the table; according
to this argument, it is conceivable, and so possible, that there is a possible world identical to the
actual world in respect of fundamental standard and non-standard physical properties, and yet dif-
ferent from it in terms of the nature and distribution of certain standard psychological properties,
in particular those associated with phenomenal consciousness. This argument is unpersuasive and
the reason is the one noted previously, viz., that while we can describe these non-standard physi-
cal properties, we don’t know what they are. Notoriously, the notion of ‘conceivability’ that is in
operation in these arguments is epistemically demanding: you cannot conceive a situation in which
various properties are instantiated unless you know, at least in outline, what those properties are.


                                                  225
                                              Daniel Stoljar


Since we don’t know what they are we can’t conceive of them in the way required by a conceiv-
ability argument.
    Finally, consider BP3, the mind-body problem at the fundamental level. The non-standard mate-
rialist does not face this problem. For the non-standard materialist who is a Russellian, there is the
same reply as the one I considered earlier, but in this case there is no problem of the sort I described.
And for the non-standard materialist who is a Nagelian, there is every reason to reject the closure
premise when it is formulated in terms of standard physical properties, and so the exclusion argument
has no purchase. Admittedly it remains the case that for the non-standard materialist there is some
story to be told about the integration of the standard physical properties and non-standard physical
properties. But this is conceived of by the non-standard materialist as a standard case of integration in
science, something like the integration of gravity and electromagnetism. We may have no idea now
how the story goes, and, human life being what it is, we may never have much of an idea. But there
is no reason in principle that the problem cannot be solved.


                    14.  Other Problems for Non-Standard Materialism
Even if it does not face BP1–3, non-standard materialism faces problems of its own. I have tried to
respond to these problem elsewhere, and will not try to provide a comprehensive treatment here (see
Stoljar 2006). However, if our concern is with the contrast between panpsychism and non-standard
materialism, two problems are perhaps most prominent.
    First, the panpsychist might object that claims about unknown properties do not alter the dialec-
tical situation: “Unknown properties bear deep theoretical similarities to the properties we already
know about and so the dualism-materialism issue will persist in a recognizable form.” But this view
hasn’t fully absorbed the key point of non-standard materialism. The whole idea of that view is that
the known is no guide to the unknown and so there is no deep theoretical similarity here. You can
deny that if you like but doing so is just to deny the non-standard materialism without offering an
argument for doing so. Alternatively one might try to support this idea by appealing to the conceiv-
ability argument. But as we have seen, that style of argument is no good against the non-standard
materialist.
    Second, the panpsychist might object (in an exasperated tone of voice) that speculations about
unknown properties are useless: “Surely we are interested ultimately in building a theory and build-
ing theories requires known parts to build them from.” But this objection confuses different ques-
tions you could ask about consciousness. True, if you want to know exactly what the relation is
between physical and phenomenal properties, non-standard materialism is no help; indeed, the view
itself predicts that you can’t (now) answer that question. But many of the most interesting questions
about consciousness can be pursued without answering that question. What is it that makes a mental
state conscious? Are you always aware of your conscious states? How do those states interact with
other psychological features? How do they evolve over time? What is their epistemological and
rational role? In what ways, if any, are they valuable? What neural and computational structures are
associated with them? There is nothing in non-standard materialism that says you can’t answer these
questions. On the contrary, they have often seemed so hard precisely because they are entangled with
metaphysical debates about dualism and materialism. If we get over that debate in the way the new
model suggests, we will be likely to make more progress, not less, on these very real questions about
consciousness.
    Indeed, at this point we can make a more general remark about the comparison between non-
standard materialism and panpsychism, and the way in which they depart from the standard views we
began with. An important feature of standard materialism is that it is, as Frank Jackson once pointed
out, excessively optimistic: “it is not sufficiently appreciated that physicalism is an extremely opti-
mistic view of our epistemic powers. If it is true . . . in principle we have it all” ( Jackson 1982: 135).


                                                   226
                                Panpsychism and Non-standard Materialism


The same is true of standard dualism since even if standard psychological properties are an exception
to materialism, they are not an exception to an extremely optimistic view of our powers, since the
dualist typically supposes that the subjects who are in these states know that they are in what Lewis
later called an “uncommonly demanding sense” (Lewis 1995).
     Now both panpsychism and non-standard materialism depart from these standard views as we
have seen. But do they also depart from excessive optimism? In the case of non-standard materialist,
it is clear that it does. That view is designed to emphasize the limitations of our knowledge of nature;
indeed, it is plausible also that this feature of the view is precisely what prompts the two objections
just considered and what permits it to respond to those objections in the way that it does. In the case
of panpsychism, however, it is clear it does not. Just as is it is not sufficiently appreciated that physical-
ism is an extremely optimistic view of our epistemic powers, so too is it not appreciated in the case of
panpsychism. Panpsychists present themselves as radical and are sometimes dismissed for that reason.
But from the point of view of non-standard materialism, the key feature of panpsychism is not that it
is too radical (though it may be) but that it is too conservative. What we need are unknown elements,
the non-standard materialist says, not non-standard arrangements of known ones.


                           15.  Russellian Non-Standard Materialism
                                 Versus Russellian Panpsychism
I have argued that non-standard materialism is distinct from, and more plausible than, panpsychism.
Let me turn finally to a question that has been in the background all along but has not be brought
to the surface, viz., if they are distinct, why are non-standard materialism and panpsychism so often
assimilated?
    I think the answer to this is these views look similar only if we focus on their Russellian incarna-
tions. As we have seen, both views can be presented in Russellian form, and if they are presented
in this way, it is plausible that they are structurally equivalent – that is, they have exactly the same
consequences for which structural or dispositional properties are instantiated. Hence if one counts
theories by whether they are structurally equivalent, one will be inclined to think that we have one
theory here rather than two.
    However, it is a mistake to think that theories that are structurally equivalent in this sense are
equivalent simpliciter. First, it remains the case both that there are non-Russellian versions of these
views and these non-Russellian versions are very different from each other. For example, Russellian
versions of panpsychism are akin to the non-Russellian versions of panpsychism; we miss this fact if
we concentrate simply on the Russellian version of the view.
    Second, while the Russellian versions of non-standard materialism and panpsychism are structur-
ally equivalent, there are many other theories that likewise have Russellian versions, and these other
theories are naturally thought of as distinct from either non-standard materialism or panpsychism.
Take the view, advocated at one time by D. M. Armstrong, that colours are the non-structural prop-
erties that fundamental objects instantiate (Armstrong 1961; see also Chalmers 2016). This view
might be thought of as a sort of pan-colour-ism. The Russellian version of this view is likewise
structurally equivalent to the Russellian version of panpsychism and non-standard materialism. But
we would not think on that ground that it is the same view.


                                            16. Conclusion
The results of our comparison of non-standard materialism and panpsychism may now be summa-
rized briefly: (a) Both theories are well motivated in that both are responses to well-known problems
with the standard versions of dualism and materialism. (b) Panpsychism faces three big problems that
non-standard materialism does not. (c) An initially promising way the panpsychist has to respond


                                                    227
                                                      Daniel Stoljar


to the first two of these problems is confounded by the point that phenomenal properties have
essential features, e.g., that they consist in awareness of properties, and moreover threaten to collapse
panpsychism into non-standard materialism. (d) An initially promising way the panpsychist has to
respond to the third of these problems is also confounded by the point that phenomenal properties
have essential features. (e) Non-standard materialism faces problems of its own but on reflection
these problems are much less serious than those faced by the panpsychist, in part because they are
generated by precisely the sort of optimism that non-standard materialists are trying to reject. Finally,
(f ) while it may be true that Russellian versions of panpsychism and non-standard materialism are
structurally equivalent, that is no reason to think they are equivalent simpliciter.


                                                         Notes
	1.	 See, e.g., Stoljar (2001, 2006, 2014, 2015). For further discussion see Pereboom (2011, 2014). Three termi-
           nological points: (a) I will use ‘materialism’ and ‘physicalism’ interchangeably here. (b) In other work I have
           argued that, strictly speaking, there is no thesis at all which is true and deserves the name ‘physicalism’; see
           Stoljar (2010). In this paper, as is in fact common in philosophy of mind, I will ignore this and use the notion
           informally. (c) Both positions I will discuss in this paper have versions that are called ‘Russellian Monism’, but
           I will ignore that phrase in this paper.
 	2.	 See, e.g., Strawson (2006), Chalmers (2016), Goff (2017), Mørch (2014, 2018), Roelofs (2015), Seager and
           Allen-Hermanson (2015).
  	3.	 For some discussion of these two strategies see Stoljar (2015).
   	4.	 This phrase is borrowed, of course, from Lewis (see 1986b: 133).
    	5.	 I have in mind here the recent literature on the so-called combination problem (see Seager and Allen-­
           Hermanson (2015); also Chalmers (2016), Coleman (2012, 2013), Goff (2006, 2009, 2016, 2018), Mørch
           (2014, 2018), Roelofs (2015, forthcoming)).
     	6.	 Might there be other candidate features? One possibility is that phenomenal properties are essentially
           systemic or holistic, i.e., if you instantiate one of them you instantiate a whole system of them. So when
           you feel a pain in your toe, you are aware of various different properties of your leg and indeed of your
           surrounds. A different possibility is that phenomenal properties essentially play rational roles, for example,
           in that being in the property justifies you in believing certain things – e.g., if the property is being aware
           of F, then being in it justifies you in believing something is F. It would be interesting to develop the point
           against the unimaginable properties focusing on these features, but I will concentrate here on the feature
           mentioned in the text.
      	7.	 There are some complications for the Russellian panpsychist here which concern the classification of dispo-
           sitional physical properties, which the position assumes to be standard physical properties. Are these proper-
           ties fundamental? If you say yes, you are committed to the view that fundamental properties can be grounded
           in other fundamental properties, which is something Lewis, whose views about fundamental properties were
           our starting point, would have denied. If you say no, you are committed to the view that the only fundamen-
           tal properties are phenomenal, which looks more like idealism than panpsychism. I will not try to clear up
           this complication here, however.


                                                      References
Armstrong, D. (1961). Perception and the Physical World. London: Routledge.
Chalmers, D. (2016).‘The Combination Problem for Panpsychism’. In G. Brüntrup and L. Jaskolla (eds.), Panpsy-
    chism. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 229–48.
Coleman, S. (2012). ‘Mental Chemistry: Combination for Panpsychists’. Dialectica, V66 (1): 137–66.
Coleman, S. (2013). ‘The Real Combination Problem: Panpsychism, Micro-Subjects, and Emergence’. Erkennt-
    nis, 79 (1): 19–44.
Goff, P. (2006). ‘Experiences Don’t Sum’. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 13 (10–11): 53–61.
Goff, P. (2009). ‘Why Panpsychism Doesn’t Help Us Explain Consciousness’. Dialectica, 63 (3): 289–311.
Goff, P. (2016). ‘The Phenomenal Bonding Solution to the Combination Problem’. In G. Brüntrup and
    L. Jaskolla (eds.), Panpsychism. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 283–304.
Goff, P. (2017). Consciousness and Fundamental Reality. New York: Oxford University Press.
Jackson, F. (1982). ‘Epiphenomenal Qualia’. Philosophical Quarterly (32): 127–136.



                                                           228
                                  Panpsychism and Non-standard Materialism


Johnston, M. (1996). ‘A Mind-Body Problem at the Surface of Objects’. Philosophical Issues 7: Perception: 219–29.
Lewis, D. (1986a). Philosophical Papers Vol II. Oxford: Blackwell.
Lewis, D. (1986b). On the Plurality of Worlds. Oxford: Blackwell.
Lewis, D. (1994). ‘Reduction of Mind’. In S. Guttenplan (ed.), A Companion to the Philosophy of Mind. Oxford:
    Blackwell,1994, pp. 412–431. repr. in his Papers in Metaphysics and Epistemology. Cambridge: Cambridge
    University Press, 1999, pp. 291–224. All references are to the reprinted version.
Lewis, D. (1995). ‘Should a Materialist Believe in Qualia?’ Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 73: 140–4.
Lewis, D. (2009). ‘Ramseyan Humility’. In D. Braddon-Mitchell and R. Nola (eds.), Conceptual Analysis and
    Philosophical Naturalism. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 203–22.
Mørch, H. H. (2014). Panpsychism and Causation: A New Argument and a Solution to the Combination Problem. Doc-
    toral Dissertation, University of Oslo. https://philpapers.org/archive/HASPAC-2.pdf.
Mørch, H. H. (2018). ‘Does Dispositionalism Entail Panpsychism?’ Topoi https://doi.org/10.1007/s11245-018-
    9604-y
Pereboom, D. (2011). Consciousness and the Prospects of Physicalism. New York: Oxford University Press.
Pereboom, D. (2014). ‘Russellian Monism and Absolutely Intrinsic Properties’. In U. Kriegel (ed.), Current Con-
    troversies in Philosophy of Mind. London: Routledge, pp. 40–69.
Roelofs, L. (2015). Combining Minds: A Defence of the Possibility of Experiential Combination. Doctoral Dissertation,
    University of Toronto. https://tspace.library.utoronto.ca/handle/1807/69449.
Roelofs, L. (forthcoming). ‘Can We Sum Subjects: Evaluating Panpsychism’s Hard Problem’. In W. Seager (ed.),
    The Routledge Handbook of Panpsychism. London: Routledge.
Seager, William, and Allen-Hermanson, Sean (2015). ‘Panpsychism’. In E. Zalta (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of
    Philosophy, Fall 2015 edition. http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2015/entries/panpsychism/.
Stoljar, D. (2001). ‘Two Conceptions of the Physical’. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 62 (2): 253–81.
Stoljar, D. (2006). Ignorance and Imagination: The Epistemic Origin of the Problem of Consciousness. New York:
    Oxford University Press.
Stoljar, D. (2010). Physicalism. London: Routledge.
Stoljar, D. (2014). ‘Four Kinds of Russellian Monism’. In U. Kriegel (ed.), Current Controversies in Philosophy of
    Mind. London: Routledge, pp. 17–35.
Stoljar, D. (2015). ‘Russellian Monism or Nagelian Monism’. In T. Alter and Y. Nagasawa (eds.), Consciousness in
    the Physical World: Essays on Russellian Monism. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 324–45.
Strawson, G. (2006). ‘Realistic Monism: Why Physicalism Entails Panpsychism’. In A. Freeman (ed.), Conscious-
    ness and Its Place in Nature: Does Physicalism Entail Panpsychism? Exeter: Imprint Academic.




                                                        229
                           20
                    PANPSYCHISM AND
                   RUSSELLIAN MONISM
                               Torin Alter and Sam Coleman




Panpsychism has recently gained interest among analytic philosophers of mind. This is due largely
to the view’s close relationship with Russellian monism, according to which consciousness is con-
stituted at least partly by intrinsic properties that serve as categorical grounds of dispositional prop-
erties posited by fundamental physics.1 On a leading version of this view, those intrinsic properties
are phenomenal, that is, experiential: properties that constitute what it is like to have an experience
(Chalmers 1996, 2013; Goff 2017; Rosenberg 2004). Panpsychism seems to follow. Interest in Rus-
sellian monism has therefore led to interest in panpsychism.2
    But what explains the recent interest in Russellian monism? Part of the explanation runs as fol-
lows. Over the last half-century or so, discussions of consciousness in analytic philosophy have focused
largely on materialism/physicalism (we use the terms interchangeably) and dualism. But many are
unsatisfied with traditional forms of these views. Traditional materialist views seem to either dis-
regard or distort the distinctive features of consciousness, and traditional dualist views have trouble
integrating consciousness adequately into the natural, causal order. Russellian monism seems to avoid
both problems. Russellian monists reject the doctrine that they believe leads to the problem with
traditional materialism: the doctrine that phenomenal properties are nothing over and above the
properties physics reveals. On panpsychist Russellian monism, phenomenal properties are taken to
be no less fundamental than physical properties. Dualism says that too. But unlike traditional dualist
views, panpsychist Russellian monism is designed to accord consciousness a crucial role in (or closely
related to) physical causation: the role of categorically grounding physical, dispositional properties.
    In this chapter, we will discuss two significant challenges to these supposed virtues of Russellian
monism: one by Robert Howell (2015) and one by Amy Kind (2015). Howell argues that Jaegwon
Kim’s exclusion argument can be modified to show that Russellian monism is untenable. And Kind
argues that it is “simply an illusion” that Russellian monism “transcend[s] the dualist/physicalist
divide” (2015: 417). We will argue that neither challenge is insurmountable.


                                   1.  Russellian Panpsychism
Following David Chalmers, we understand panpsychism as the thesis that all members of some fun-
damental physical types have conscious experiences. On this view, “there is something it is like to be
a quark or a photon or a member of some other fundamental physical type” (2013: 246–7).
   We understand Russellian monism to be the view that consciousness is constituted at least partly
by intrinsic properties that serve as categorical grounds of the dispositional properties posited by


                                                  230
                                   Panpsychism and Russellian Monism


fundamental physics. Panpsychist Russellian monism, or Russellian panpsychism for short, results from
combining this view with the thesis that those intrinsic properties are phenomenal.
    Not all versions of Russellian monism entail panpsychism. There is also panprotopsychist Rus-
sellian monism, which results from identifying the intrinsic properties that ground physical, disposi-
tional properties with what Chalmers calls protophenomenal properties. He writes,

      [L]et us say that protophenomenal properties are special properties that are not phenomenal
      (there is nothing it is like to have a single protophenomenal property) but that can col-
      lectively constitute phenomenal properties, perhaps when arranged in the right structure.
                                                                                        (2013: 259)

  Because of this volume’s panpsychist theme, we will focus mostly on Russellian panpsychism. But
much of what we will say applies equally to panprotopsychist Russellian monism, mutatis mutandis.


                               1.1.  The Conceivability Argument
To better appreciate why Russellian panpsychism might compare favorably to traditional material-
ism and traditional dualism, consider how Russellian panpsychists can respond to influential anti-
materialist and anti-dualist arguments. For example, consider a basic version of the anti-materialist
conceivability argument involving a zombie world, that is, a minimal physical duplicate of the actual
world but without consciousness. The argument begins with the premise that such a world is ide-
ally conceivable – that is, such a world cannot be ruled out by a priori reasoning – and ends with the
conclusion that materialism is false. The argument’s main steps can be summarized as follows:

1.	   A zombie world is ideally conceivable.
2.	   If a zombie world is ideally conceivable, then a zombie world is metaphysically possible.
3.	   If a zombie world is metaphysically possible, then materialism is false.
4.	   Therefore, materialism is false.

Materialists have responded in myriad ways, but many find their responses inadequate (Alter and
Howell 2012). Russellian panpsychists can respond to the aforementioned conceivability argument
in at least three ways.
    First, Russellian panpsychists can reject premise 1. This premise, they might argue, seems true only
if we conflate the physical with the dispositional: we recognize that a consciousness-free dispositional
duplicate of the actual world, or a dispositional zombie world, is ideally conceivable, and we infer that a
zombie world is ideally conceivable. But that inference is questionable. A dispositional zombie world
would resemble the actual world in all dispositional respects but, unlike a zombie world, perhaps not
in all physical respects. Here is why. Arguably, a complete physical duplicate of the actual world would
also have to include instantiations of any properties that, in the actual world, ground the dispositional
properties that physics describes. And if the grounding properties are phenomenal, Russelian panpsy-
chists might argue, then it follows that such a duplicate world would have to contain consciousness.
    Alternatively, Russellian panpsychists can reject premise 2. On this response, although there is no
a priori entailment from the physical to the phenomenal, there is an a posteriori entailment: a zombie
world is ideally conceivable but metaphysically impossible. The Russellian panpsychist might base
this move on a semantic view about terms in physics such as “mass” and “charge”: a view on which
such terms refer rigidly to the intrinsic, categorical phenomenal properties that ground dispositional
properties and consciousness, but in a way that cannot be discovered by a priori reflection.3
    As a third alternative, Russellian panpsychists can accept the argument’s anti-materialist con-
clusion. They can argue that phenomenal properties are nonphysical properties that nevertheless


                                                   231
                                      Torin Alter and Sam Coleman


categorically ground physical dispositional properties. But the core idea underlying this third response
is the same as that which underlies the first: because Russellian panpsychists reject the traditional
materialist doctrine that the phenomenal is nothing over and above the dispositional, their view does
not entail the sorts of claims that anti-materialist arguments such as the conceivability argument
threaten to undermine.4 Here are three examples of such claims: there are no phenomenal properties
(a claim associated with eliminativist materialism); phenomenal properties are functionally analyz-
able (a claim associated with analytic functionalism); and the complete dispositional truth a posteriori
necessitates and is ontologically prior to all phenomenal truths (a claim associated with nonreduc-
tionist materialism). Russellian panpsychists reject all such claims.


                                  1.2.  The Exclusion Argument
Influential anti-dualist arguments fault dualism for inadequately integrating consciousness into the
natural, causal order. We will focus on one of these arguments, known as the exclusion argument.
The exclusion argument says that nonphysical mental properties have no work to do in bringing
about physical events: all physical effects have entirely physical sufficient causes (Kim 1989, 2000).
We will summarize the exclusion argument’s main steps as follows:

1.	 Mental distinctness: no mental events are identical to physical events.
2.	 Physical adequacy: all physical events have sufficient physical causes (if they are caused at all).
3.	 Therefore, no physical events are uniquely caused by mental events.5

The exclusion argument is often adduced against interactionist dualism, on which mental events
are said to help bring about physical events, and against nonreductionist forms of materialism, on
which the mental and physical are numerically distinct but materialism is true nonetheless. Dual-
ists and nonreductionist materialists have responded in myriad ways, but many find their responses
inadequate.6
    Russellian panpsychism is sometimes construed as a form of dualism and sometimes as a form of
nonreductionist materialism. But it provides resources for responding to anti-materialist arguments
that traditional versions of those views do not. Russellian panpsychists can respond to the exclusion
argument in at least three ways (Howell 2015: 26–8).
    First, Russellian panpsychists can deny premise 1, mental distinctness, arguing that phenomenal
properties are not distinct from the dispositional properties they ground – and thus that events in
which instantiations of phenomenal and dispositional properties figure need not be distinct. Suppose
R is a categorical phenomenal property that grounds negative charge. On this first strategy, Rus-
sellian panpsychists deny that there are two properties here, R and negative charge. Instead, there is
one property and a law governing how things with that property behave. So, there is no competition
among properties for causal efficacy: there is just a single property, which can be construed in dif-
ferent ways.
    Alternatively, Russellian panpsychists can deny premise 2, physical adequacy. They can argue that
the properties physics describes cause nothing on their own: such properties would not even exist
(or be instantiated) without their phenomenal grounds. Interactionist dualists too deny physical
adequacy. But they do so in a way many find unacceptable. They posit causal gaps among physical
events as described by the physical sciences: gaps filled by nonphysical, mental events. Russellian
panpsychists need not posit any such gaps. Rather, this view enriches the basis of the complete physi-
cal causal chain already posited by the physical sciences.
    Finally, Russellian panpsychists can deny that the argument is valid. That is, they can argue that it
does not follow from mental distinctness and physical adequacy that mental events do not help cause
physical events. Here Russellian panpsychists would follow a well-trodden path. Several philosophers


                                                  232
                                   Panpsychism and Russellian Monism


(who do not commit to Russellian panpsychism) reject the argument’s validity, often on the basis that
some mental-physical relations can be modeled on the relation between determinables and determi-
nates (Yablo 1992; Bennett 2003; Shoemaker 2007; Ehring 2011; Wilson 2011). Russellian panpsy-
chists can offer a distinctive version of that sort of strategy. Plausibly, just as there is in general no
competition between determinable and determinate properties such as being red and being scarlet,
there is in general no competition between categorical properties and the dispositions they ground:
both make unique contributions to the causal process. So, Russellian panpsychists can argue, since
phenomenal properties categorically ground physical, dispositional properties, the contribution of
the latter properties in causing physical events does not compete with the contribution of the former.
On this model, neither sort of property is causally redundant in the bringing about of physical events.
    There is a common thread running through these three responses: Russellian panpsychism pro-
vides a principled basis for rejecting the idea that dispositional and phenomenal properties compete
in the way the exclusion argument requires. More generally, Russellian panpsychism does not seem
to be threatened in the way traditional dualism is by the problem of finding a role for consciousness
in the causation of physical events.
    Thus, Russellian panpsychism might seem to have considerable advantages over traditional mate-
rialism and traditional dualism. But appearances can be deceiving. Howell and Kind each argue that
in this case they are. We will now turn to their arguments, starting with Howell’s, and explain some
ways Russellian panpsychists might respond.


            2.  Can Russellian Panpsychists Answer the Exclusion Argument?
In Howell’s view, although the original exclusion argument does not undermine Russellian panpsy-
chism, a modified formulation does. He writes “[m]y general argument will be that even if phenom-
enal properties cause things on the Russellian Monism picture, they do not cause things in virtue of
their phenomenal nature” (2015: 28). If his modified exclusion argument is sound, then on Russel-
lian panpsychism phenomenality makes no unique contribution to the causation of physical events,
despite initial appearances to the contrary.


                            2.1.  The Modified Exclusion Argument
According to the original exclusion argument, physical and mental properties compete for causal
influence. Howell argues that the Russellian panpsychist’s responses to that argument merely relocate
this problem. The competition is no longer between properties, but rather between aspects of the
properties in virtue of which the properties do causal work. But there is still causal competition and,
he argues, the phenomenal aspects lose.
    Howell illustrates the problem by describing three worlds:

    Consider a world w1 in which R, phenomenal redness, grounds the property of nega-
    tive charge given the causal laws governing R in w1. Now consider world w2 where G,
    phenomenal greenness, is covered by those same laws so that G grounds the causal powers
    associated with negative charge and R instead grounds the powers associated with negative
    spin. Finally, consider a third world, w3, in which the laws are such that either R or G can
    ground the powers of negative charge – R and G are governed by exactly the same laws in
    exactly the same ways.
                                                                                      (2015: 28)7

Howell then compares R as instantiated in w1 with R as instantiated in w2, noting that, “They
are similar in one respect, their phenomenal character, but different in another, their causal profile”


                                                   233
                                      Torin Alter and Sam Coleman


(2015: 29). Next compare R as instantiated in w1 with G as instantiated in w2. These properties
differ in phenomenal character while being similar in causal role. And the same point applies to R
compared with G as both are instantiated in w3.
    Howell writes,

    In all cases . . . some similarities are grounded in the phenomenal character and others are
    grounded in the causal profile. Even given the ontology of Russellian Monism, therefore,
    there must be different relationships of grounding in virtue of which the different resem-
    blance relations hold.
                                                                                     (2015: 29)

So, RM properties, as Howell calls them, have two aspects: one that grounds phenomenal resemblance
relations and another that grounds causal resemblance relations. If so, the question arises, in virtue of
which of these two aspects do RM properties have physical effects?
    According to Howell, the answer is clear: physical effects occur in virtue of the latter aspect and
not the former:

    In the case of phenomenal causation, we want phenomenal properties to have causal power
    in virtue of their phenomenality. That means that we want the properties to cause things
    in virtue of that which grounds the similarity between R in w1 and R in w2. But that
    doesn’t appear to be the case since R in w1 and R in w2 are causally quite dissimilar. The
    point can be made within a world as well. We want the properties in w3 to cause things in
    virtue of that which grounds the similarity between R and G (in that world). It cannot be
    the phenomenal character because they are quite dissimilar phenomenally. It thus appears
    that these properties do not, after all, cause things in virtue of their phenomenal character.
                                                                                       (2015: 29)

   Howell states his modified exclusion argument as follows, where “an RM property is a property
that has a phenomenal categorical ground and some causal dispositions” (2015: 32):

1.	 [T]here are two distinct and separable aspects of RM properties, those that ground phenomenal
    resemblance relations and those that ground resemblances between causal profiles.
2.	 [A]ll physical events have sufficient causes in virtue of those aspects that ground resemblances
    between the causal profiles of RM properties.
3.	 Therefore, the aspects of RM properties that ground phenomenal resemblances make no unique
    causal contribution to the physical world (2015: 32).

If that argument is sound, Howell suggests, then Russellian monism fares no better than dualism at
integrating consciousness into the natural, causal order.
    In the previous section, we described three ways the Russellian monist could respond to the
original exclusion argument. According to Howell, none of those responses succeeds against the
modified version. On the first response (denying the original premise 1, mental distinctness), there is
a single RM property rather than two properties, one categorical and one dispositional, that compete
for causal influence. But that claim is consistent with the modified exclusion argument, which locates
the competition within a single RM property: aspects of that property compete.
    On the second response (denying the original premise 2, physical adequacy), physical, disposi-
tional properties would not exist (or be instantiated) were it not for the categorical RM properties
in which they are grounded. But it does not follow from that claim that the phenomenal aspects of



                                                  234
                                   Panpsychism and Russellian Monism


RM properties contribute to physical causation. And, Howell argues, the modal separability of the
phenomenal and dispositional aspects suggests that the former do not so contribute:

     The fact that both R and G can ground certain causal dispositions within a world despite
     their phenomenal dissimilarity suggests again that it is not the phenomenality of the ground
     that is really doing the work. It is whatever it is in virtue of which they fall under the rel-
     evant laws.
                                                                                         (2015: 31)

    Similar considerations, Howell argues, undermine the third response, denying the validity of the
original argument. On that response, “the dispositional properties and the categorical grounds don’t
causally compete because they enjoy such a tight metaphysical relationship” (2015: 31). According to
Howell, the relationship is not tight enough to undermine the argument’s validity if the two aspects
of RM properties can come apart, as they would in w1 compared with w2 and in w3.
    However, there are other ways Russellian panpsychists could respond to Howell’s modified exclu-
sion argument. For one thing, they could accept his causal inefficacy conclusion and argue that this
does not show that Russellian panpsychism fares no better than dualism at integrating conscious-
ness into the natural, causal order. Phenomenality, Russellian panpsychists might argue, achieves the
desired integration not in virtue of helping to cause physical events but rather in virtue of grounding
physical properties. Causation is one thing. Grounding is another (Lange 2017). If phenomenality
grounds physical, dispositional properties then, Russellian panpsychists might argue, that is integra-
tion enough.
    To some, that first response, if successful, would blunt the force of the modified exclusion argu-
ment. But others might find the causal inefficacy conclusion itself a significant strike against Rus-
sellian panpsychism. For that reason, we will leave the first response aside and focus on two other
responses, which are ways to avoid the causal inefficacy conclusion. One of those ways is to deny that
the modal separability of the dispositional and phenomenal aspects of an RM property shows that
the latter aspect does no causal work. Call that the compatibilist strategy or compatibilism for short. The
other way is to deny that the two aspects are modally separable in the way that Howell’s argument
requires. Call that the necessitarian strategy. We will discuss these strategies in turn.


                                 2.2.  The Compatibilist Strategy
In the actual world, chlorophyll plays a causal role in photosynthesis: it enables plants to absorb
energy from light. Suppose that there is a possible world in which the same role is played by a
biomolecule that is chemically distinct from chlorophyll. It would be a mistake to infer that in the
actual world chlorophyll makes no unique causal contribution to photosynthesis. According to the
compatibilist strategy, the modified exclusion argument makes an analogous mistake.
   According to compatibilism, in w1 negative charge has physical effects partly in virtue of R
(phenomenal redness) even though in w2 negative charge has those same effects partly in virtue of G
(phenomenal greenness). This is so, say compatibilists, because the grounding laws in w1 differ from
those in w2: they differ with respect to which phenomenal property plays which grounding role.
Or consider w3, in which each of R and G ground negative charge. According to compatibilism,
w3’s grounding laws entail that, in that world, both R and G help produce the effects of negatively
charged particles. In general, the assumption that the same grounding role can be played by two dif-
ferent categorical properties (either across or within worlds) does not entail that those categorical
properties are causally inefficacious. The grounding laws may be contingent. But they determine
which (if any) categorical properties in a given world do the grounding work. And it is precisely such



                                                   235
                                      Torin Alter and Sam Coleman


grounding work that constitutes the unique contribution phenomenal properties make to physical
causation.
     Compatibilists could challenge premise 2 of the modified exclusion argument: “[A]ll physical
events have sufficient causes in virtue of those aspects that ground resemblances between the causal
profiles of RM properties.” Arguably, the aspects that ground resemblances between the causal pro-
files of RM properties are not phenomenal properties. For example, R and G are phenomenally
distinct and yet the causal profiles associated with R in w1 and G in w2 are exactly alike. Nonethe-
less, the compatibilist might argue, in w1 negative charge has the effects it does partly because it
is grounded by R. In that world, given its contingent grounding laws, negative charge would have
no physical effects if not for R’s playing the grounding role it plays. That fact, say compatibilists,
is compatible with a distinct property G playing that same role in worlds with different ground-
ing laws, such as w2. Thus, the compatibilist might argue that premise 2 of the modified exclusion
argument is false.
     Compatibilism faces objections. For one thing, the photosynthesis analogy is inexact. When we
described chlorophyll as playing a causal role in photosynthesis, we said that it enables plants to
absorb energy from light. That description is fairly coarse grained, and one might argue that this
explains why the possibility of something else playing that role does not threaten the causal efficacy
of chlorophyll in the actual world. But such coarse-grained descriptions are not relevant to the modi-
fied exclusion argument. For example, describing the causal profiles associated with R in w1 and G
in w2 in a maximally fine-grained way would reveal no difference whatsoever between those pro-
files (that is true by stipulation). By contrast, causal differences would be revealed when c­ omparing
­chlorophyll to its role-filler in another possible world, if both are described in a m    ­ aximally fine-
grained way. So, analogies to the photosynthesis case and similar examples are of limited use in sup-
 porting the compatibilist strategy.
     Additionally, Howell might object that the compatibilist strategy leaves a Russellian panpsy-
 chist in essentially the same position as the interactionist dualist vis-à-vis integrating phenomenality
 into physical causation. Instead of the interactionist’s contingent psychophysical laws, the Russellian
 panpsychist posits contingent phenomenal-dispositional grounding laws. But that, Howell might
 argue, is no improvement. If so, Russellian panpsychism still loses its alleged advantage over tradi-
 tional dualism and the compatibilist strategy fails.
     That objection is partly correct. The Russellian panpsychist’s grounding laws can seem arbitrary
 in the way that, to many, the interactionist dualist’s psychophysical laws do. For example, the Rus-
 sellian panpsychist might seem to have no good explanation of why in w1 R rather than G grounds
 negative charge. But there is a difference. The interactionist dualist rejects the causal closure of the
 physical, positing gaps in scientific explanations – gaps filled by nonphysical, mental events. The
 Russellian panpsychist needs posit no such gaps. Her grounding laws are, in that sense, compatible
 with the causal closure of the physical. That difference gives Russellian panpsychism what might be
 regarded as a significant advantage over interactionist dualism.


                                 2.3.  The Necessitarian Strategy
The compatibilist strategy is to reject Howell’s inference from the modal separability of the phe-
nomenal and dispositional aspects of RM properties to the conclusion that the former aspects are
causally inefficacious. Russellian panpsychists might instead reject his premise that those aspects are
modally separable in the way the modified exclusion argument requires. They might, for example,
argue that the three worlds Howell imagines are not metaphysically possible. More specifically, they
might deny that w1 and w2 are compossible and that w3 is possible in its own right. This is the
necessitarian strategy.8



                                                   236
                                   Panpsychism and Russellian Monism


   Howell considers the necessitarian strategy:

    Such a ‘necessitarian’ Russellian Monism might in fact dodge the [modified] exclusion
    argument. Whether or not the base is phenomenal or protophenomenal, if the relationship
    between the causal and phenomenal features of the base is intimate enough – and meta-
    physical necessitation from the phenomenal to the causal probably qualifies – the [modi-
    fied] exclusion argument doesn’t succeed.
                                                                                (2015: 35–6)

Actually, “metaphysical necessitation from the phenomenal to the causal” would seem to only partly
qualify as supplying the requisite intimacy: that between phenomenal and dispositional features
needed in order to answer the modified exclusion argument. Granted, such metaphysical necessita-
tion would guarantee that if R (phenomenal redness) grounds negative charge in w1, then there is
no possible world w2 in which R does not ground negative charge – and thus that w1 and w2 are
not jointly possible, sparing the Russellian panpsychist that part of Howell’s exclusion challenge.
    But what about w3, in which R and G (phenomenal greenness) have the same causal profiles?
Metaphysical necessitation from the phenomenal to the dispositional does not seem to rule out that
world as impossible. It rules out only that R or G should exist in another world without ground-
ing negative charge. Yet the metaphysical possibility of w3 alone might be enough to motivate the
modified exclusion argument. In w3, the phenomenal dissimilarity between R and G does not
correspond to a causal difference. Regarding w3, Howell writes, “it is not the phenomenality of the
ground that is really doing the work” (2015: 31).
    So, to completely dodge the modified exclusion argument, the necessitarian Russellian panpsy-
chist might also have to defend metaphysical necessitation in the other direction, from the disposi-
tional to the phenomenal. With both entailments in place, from phenomenal aspect to dispositional
aspect and vice versa, necessitarian Russellian panpsychism pairs causal roles with phenomenal aspects
one-to-one with metaphysical necessity.
    Howell rejects the necessitarian strategy as dialectically unacceptable. Adopting necessitarianism,
he suggests, conflicts with the Russellian panpsychist’s “acceptance of . . . zombie-style conceivability
arguments that pushed her to Russellian Monism in the first place” (2015: 36–7). That concern is
natural enough. Necessitarian Russellian panpsychism rules out premises that those arguments typi-
cally invoke. For example, if the view includes a necessary entailment from the dispositional to the
phenomenal then necessitarianism would rule out the premise that a zombie world is metaphysically
possible.
    However, Russellian panpsychists (necessitarian and otherwise) need not accept zombie-style
conceivability arguments without qualification. These philosophers take those arguments to (i)
refute the traditional materialist view that the phenomenal is nothing over and above the disposi-
tional and (ii) support their view that consciousness consists at least partly in intrinsic, phenomenal
properties that categorically ground physical, dispositional properties (Alter 2016). But (i) and (ii) are
consistent with necessitarianism: they do not entail that the phenomenal and the dispositional are
modally separable.
    Howell raises another dialectical problem for the necessitarian strategy: the strategy would under-
cut the Russellian panpsychist’s advantages over traditional views. If she argues that zombie worlds
are only prima facie and not ideally conceivable, “then she appears to be making the same sort of
move as the type A physicalist with no more plausibility” (Howell (2015: 37).9 If she posits “necessi-
ties that hold despite conceivability,” then “she has to allow the same answer for the type B physicalist
and the property dualist” (2015: 37). Thus, he concludes, “Given this, necessitarian Russellian Mon-
ism might be conceptually coherent, but it is unmotivated” (2015: 37). Adopting necessitarianism, he



                                                   237
                                      Torin Alter and Sam Coleman


suggests, would result in sacrificing the advantages over traditional positions that Russellian panpsy-
chism is often presented as having.
    But that complaint could also be questioned. For example, consider the Russellian panpsychist
who accepts the conclusion of zombie-style conceivability arguments, that materialism is false. As
we have seen, her doing so does not require positing gaps in physical explanations. That is what
is thought to make her reaction more plausible than the traditional interactionist dualist’s way of
accepting the arguments. Adopting necessitarianism would not seem to threaten the Russellian
panpsychist’s ability to react in that way.


        3.  Does Russellian Monism Transcend the Dualist/Physicalist Divide?
Like Howell, Kind (2015) challenges the idea that Russellian monism10 has certain advantages
over traditional views. But her argument is different. She targets the claim that Russellian monism
“transcend[s] the dualist/physicalist divide,” arguing that “this is simply an illusion” (2015: 417).
What exactly she means by “transcend[ing] the dualist/physicalist divide” is not entirely clear, as we
will shortly explain. One point she emphasizes is that Russellian monism leaves unresolved at least
some of the main issues over which dualists and physicalist disagree. She is right about that. But she
seems to infer that Russellian monism lacks the advantages it is supposed to have over traditional
views. And that inference, we will argue, is not justified.


                                       3.1.  Kind’s Argument
Kind distinguishes between phenomenal Russellian monism and physical Russellian monism, or phe-
nomenal monism and physical monism for short. These two views differ over the nature of the intrinsic
properties that categorically ground dispositional properties. Following Montero (2010), she calls
those intrinsic properties inscrutables. Phenomenal monism construes inscrutables as phenomenal
properties, and physical monism construes them as physical properties. She notes that, for the pur-
poses of her main argument, what ultimately matters is that on physical monism the inscrutables are
nonphenomenal. So, phenomenal and physical monism correspond at least roughly to what we call
panpsychist and panprotopsychist Russellian monism.
   Kind writes:

    [T]here are really only two possibilities for the nature of inscrutables: they must be either phe-
    nomenal or physical. That means that a Russellian monist must endorse either phenomenal
    monism [or] physical monism. To my mind, these two views are as different from one another
    as traditional dualism and traditional physicalism are. Any attempt to adjudicate between them
    will have to settle the question as to whether consciousness is a fundamental part of nature –
    the same question that needs to be adjudicated in the debate between dualism and physicalism.
                                                                                          (2015: 418)

Call the question as to whether consciousness is a fundamental part of nature the fundamentality ques-
tion. Kind’s argument can then be summarized as follows:

1.	 Russellian monism transcends the dualist/physicalist divide only if it settles the fundamentality
    question.
2.	 Russellian monism is neutral between phenomenal monism and physical monism.
3.	 If Russellian monism is neutral between phenomenal monism and physical monism, then Rus-
    sellian monism does not settle the fundamentality question.
4.	 Therefore, Russellian monism does not transcend the dualist/physicalist divide.


                                                   238
                                   Panpsychism and Russellian Monism


                   3.2.  What Kind’s Argument Does and Does Not Show
Note that Kind does not conclude that no specific version of Russellian monism transcends the
dualist/physicalist divide. Her conclusion is rather that Russellian monism as such, the generic form,
fails in that regard. Bearing that in mind, let us assess her argument.
    Premises 2 and 3 are plausible, and we grant them. The argument is valid. That leaves premise 1.
This premise, along with the conclusion, could be understood in at least two different ways, depend-
ing on what it means to transcend the dualist/physicalist divide.
    Perhaps what it means to transcend the dualist/physicalist divide is to settle the fundamentality
question. Call this the pleonastic interpretation. On the pleonastic interpretation, premise 1 is pleonas-
tic and the argument’s conclusion seems unobjectionable. Unobjectionable but not insignificant: if
anyone believes that (generic) Russellian monism settles whether consciousness is a fundamental part
of nature, then Kind’s argument (on the pleonastic interpretation) should convince him that he is
mistaken. Note, however, that settling the fundamentality question is not among the advantages that
(generic) Russellian monism is typically presented as having. On the contrary, Russellian monists
argue among themselves as to the best form for the inscrutables to take. So, on the pleonastic interpre-
tation, Kind’s argument does not show that Russellian monism lacks any of its advertised advantages.
    On an alternative interpretation, to transcend the dualist/physicalist divide would be to move the
discussion forward: to achieve relevant things that have eluded traditional views. Kind’s discussion of
her argument’s implications could be read as supporting this interpretation. For example, she suggests
that her argument shows that Russellian monism is over-hyped: that “the excitement about Russel-
lian monism is misplaced” (2015: 402). But on this alternative interpretation, premise 1 is question-
able. Russellian monism is touted as providing precisely what traditional views have arguably failed to
provide: a way to integrate consciousness adequately into the natural, causal order without disregard-
ing or distorting consciousness’s distinctive features. If the view achieves that result, it does so by how
it applies the dispositional/categorical distinction to the mind-body problem: (proto)phenomenal
properties are said to figure into physical causation by categorically grounding physical dispositional
properties. Applying the dispositional/categorical distinction in this way does not require taking a
stand on whether the categorical grounding properties are phenomenal or nonphenomenal. Indeed,
panpsychist and panprotopsychist Russellian monists, who differ over precisely that issue, lay equal
claim to the desired result. Thus, the advance that Russellian monism promises seems not to depend
on settling the fundamentality question, contra Kind’s premise 1 (on the alternative interpretation of
“transcending the dualist/physicalist divide”).
    Kind allows that Russellian monism might make “some progress.” (2015: 420; original italics). She
concedes that phenomenal monism might improve upon traditional dualism and that physical mon-
ism might improve upon traditional materialism. Yet, she suggests, the fact that Russellian monism
does not settle the fundamentality question implies that, with respect to the debate between dualism
and physicalism, Russellian monism leaves us “essentially back where we started” (2015: 420). But
that does not follow.
    Arguably, where we started was with traditional dualism having no adequate way to integrate
consciousness into nature (no way that evades causal arguments such as the exclusion argument)
and traditional materialism having no plausible way to answer the anti-materialist arguments (no
response that avoids disregarding or distorting consciousness’s distinctive features). By construing
(proto)phenomenal properties as categorical grounds of physical dispositional properties, Russellian
monism provides a framework for developing a view that has neither of those shortcomings: a view
that adequately integrates consciousness into nature without denying or distorting consciousness’s
distinctive features. In that sense, Russellian monism takes us to a different place. The generic form of
this view does not take us to the final destination, if that means settling the fundamentality question.
But neither does it purport to do so.


                                                   239
                                          Torin Alter and Sam Coleman


   To be sure, Russellian monists will ultimately want to settle the fundamentality question. For
them, this will involve deciding between (what Kind calls) phenomenal and physical monism. But
the progress achieved by the generic form should not be underestimated. Adopting the generic form
implies reconceiving of the framework within which the fundamentality question is to be addressed.
That is no mean feat.


                                                4. Conclusion
Only a decade or two ago, it would have been fair to say that panpsychism was not taken seriously by
most analytic philosophers of mind. Reductio ad panpsychism would widely have passed as a valid form
of argument, a special case of reductio ad absurdum. Recent interest in Russellian panpsychism has
changed all that. We believe this is a change for the better, especially given the longstanding interest
in panpsychism from a global, historical perspective. Old questions are being recast in new ways, and
there appears to be hope for resolving a lamented impasse between materialism and dualism.
    It is not all sweetness and light for those with panpsychist sympathies. While leading versions
of Russellian monism imply panpsychism, there is also a panprotopsychist version that seems no
less viable. And Russellian panpsychism faces serious objections.11 We have tried to address two
of these, one by Howell and one by Kind. We have argued that neither is decisive. In our view,
Russellian panpsychism remains a contender position: one that is well worth investigating and
developing. In particular, compatibilist and necessitarian versions of the view seem worthy of fur-
ther attention.12


                                                      Notes
	 1.	 This characterization of Russellian monism will suffice for present purposes, but see Alter and Nagasawa
        (2012). Chalmers (1997) introduced the term “Russellian monism.”
	2.	 There are other reasons for the recent interest in panpsychism among analytic philosophers. A closely
        related reason is the influence of Galen Strawson’s work (e.g. 2006a, 2006b).
	 3.	 However, this second response seems susceptible to the same sorts of objections often brought against par-
        allel appeals to a posteriori necessity made by traditional materialists (Chalmers 2013: 253). This does not
        appear to be true of the other two alternative Russellian monist responses we describe.
	 4.	 Here we use “traditional materialism” (and “traditional physicalism”) to name those (and only those) ver-
        sions committed to the doctrine the (proto)phenomenal is nothing over and above the dispositional. We use
        the unqualified “materialism” (and “physicalism”) for the broader view, which also includes versions lacking
        that commitment.
	 5.	 This formulation, which closely follows Howell (2015: 23–4), ignores various complications that are not
        directly relevant, for example, in omitting a premise ruling out the possibility of rampant overdetermination.
	 6.	 For a dualist response, see List and Stoljar (2017). For a nonreductionist materialist response, see Pereboom
        (2011).
	7.	 We assume that “phenomenal redness” and “phenomenal greenness” are proxies for microphenomenal
        properties, which presumably differ from phenomenal redness and phenomenal greenness.
	 8.	 For necessitarian versions of Russellian monism, see Mørch 2014 and Coleman 2017. Carruth’s (2016) view
        of dispositions suggests a roughly similar doctrine, but he contrasts his view with Russellian monism.
	 9.	 The alphabetic taxonomy comes from Chalmers (1996, 2003a). Type-A materialism says roughly that all
        phenomenal truths are a priori entailed by the complete physical truth. Type-B materialism says roughly that
        though some phenomenal truths are not a priori entailed by the complete physical truth, all phenomenal
        truths are metaphysically necessitated by the complete physical truth.
	10.	 In this section, we refer to both the panpsychist and panprotopsychist versions of Russellian monism because
        of the central role they play in Kind’s argument.
 	11.	 For example, in addition to Kind (2015) and Howell (2015), see Seager (1995), Chalmers (2013, 2017),
        Coleman (2014), Ney (2015), Robinson (2015), Stoljar (2015), Pautz (n.d.), Ebbers, (n.d.).
  	12.	 For helpful comments and discussions, we thank Robert J. Howell, Amy Kind, Galen Strawson, and William
        Seager.



                                                        240
                                      Panpsychism and Russellian Monism


                                                  References
Alter, T. (2016). ‘The Structure and Dynamics Argument Against Materialism’. Nous, 50: 794–815.
Alter, T., and Howell, R. J. (eds.) (2012). Consciousness and the Mind-Body Problem: A Reader. New York: Oxford
    University Press.
Alter, T., and Nagasawa, Y. (2012). ‘What Is Russellian Monism?’ Journal of Consciousness Studies, 19: 67–95.
Bennett, K. (2003). ‘Why the Exclusion Problem Seems Intractable and How, Just Maybe, to Tract It’. Nous, 37:
    471–97.
Carruth, A. (2016). ‘Powerful Qualities, Zombies, and Inconceivability’. Philosophical Quarterly, 66 (262):
    25–46.
Chalmers, D. J. (1996). The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory. New York: Oxford University
    Press.
Chalmers, D. J. (1997). ‘Moving Forward on the Problem of Consciousness’. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 4:
    3–46.
Chalmers, D. J. (2003). ‘Consciousness and Its Place in Nature’. In S. Stich and T. Warfield (eds.), Blackwell Guide
    to the Philosophy of Mind. Cambridge: Blackwell. (Reprinted in D. J. Chalmers (ed.), Philosophy of Mind: Clas-
    sical and Contemporary Readings. New York: Oxford University Press, 2002, pp. 247–72).
Chalmers, D. J. (2013). ‘Panpsychism and Panprotopsychism’. Amherst Lecture in Philosophy. www.amherstlec
    ture.org/index.html. (Also in T. Alter and Y. Nagasawa (eds.) Consciousness in the Physical World: Perspectives
    on Russellian Monism. New York: Oxford University Press, 2015, pp. 246–76).
Chalmers, D. J. (2017). ‘The Combination Problem for Panpsychism’. In G. Brüntrop and L. Jaskolla (eds.),
    Panpsychism. New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 179–214.
Coleman, S. (2014). ‘The Real Combination Problem: Panpsychism, Microsubjects, and Emergence’. Erkenntnis,
    79(1): 19–44.
Coleman, S. (2017). ‘Panpsychism and Neutral Monism: How to Make Up One’s Mind’. In G. Brüntrup and
    L. Jaskolla (eds.), Panpsychism: Contemporary Perspectives. New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 249–82.
Ebbers, M. (n.d.). ‘A Priori Entailment and the Reference-Fixing Problem’. Unpublished ms.
Ehring, D. (2011). Tropes: Properties, Objects, and Mental Causation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Fine, K. (2012). ‘The Pure Logic of Ground’. Review of Symbolic Logic, 5: 1–25.
Goff, P. (2017). Consciousness and Fundamental Reality. New York: Oxford University Press.
Howell, R. J. (2015). ‘The Russellian Monist’s Problems with Mental Causation’. Philosophical Quarterly, 65:
    22–39.
Kim, J. (1989). ‘The Myth of Non-Reductive Materialism’. Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical
    Association, 63: 31–47.
Kim, J. (2000). Mind in a Physical World: An Essay on the Mind-Body Problem and Mental Causation. Cambridge:
    MIT Press.
Kind, A. (2015). ‘Pessimism About Russellian Monism’. In T. Alter and Y. Nagasawa (eds.), Consciousness in the
    Physical World: Perspectives on Russellian Monism. New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 401–21.
Lange, Marc (2017). Because Without Cause: Non-Causal Explanation in Science and Mathematics. New York:
    Oxford University Press.
List, C., and Stoljar, D. (2017). ‘Does the Exclusion Argument Put Any Pressure on Dualism?’ Australasian Journal
    of Philosophy, 95 (1): 96–108.
Montero, B. G. (2010) ‘A Russellian Response to the Structural Argument Against Physicalism,’ Journal of Con-
    sciousness Studies 17: 70-83.
Mørch, H. (2014). Panpsychism and Causation: A New Argument and a Solution to the Combination Problem. Disserta-
    tion, University of Oslo. https://philpapers.org/archive/HASPAC-2.pdf.
Ney, A. (2015). ‘A Physicalist Critique of Russellian Monism’. In T. Alter and Y. Nagasawa (eds.), Consciousness
    in the Physical World: Perspectives on Russellian Monism. New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 346–69.
Pautz, A. (n.d.). ‘A Dilemma for Russellian Monists About Consciousness’. ms.
Pereboom, D. (2011). Consciousness and the Prospects of Physicalism. New York: Oxford University Press.
Robinson, W. S. (2015). ‘Russellian Monism and Epiphenomenalism’. Pacific Philosophical Quarterly, 98 (on-line
    version; DOI:10.1111/papq.12138).
Rosenberg, G. (2004). A Place for Consciousness: Probing the Deep Structure of the Natural World. New York: Oxford
    University Press.
Seager, W. E. (1995). ‘Consciousness, Information, and Panpsychism’. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 2: 272–88.
Shoemaker, S. (2007). Physical Realization. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Stoljar, D. (2015). ‘Russellian Monism or Nagelian Monism?’ In T. Alter and Y. Nagasawa (eds.), Consciousness in
    the Physical World: Perspectives on Russellian Monism. New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 324–45.



                                                       241
                                       Torin Alter and Sam Coleman


Strawson, G. (2006a). ‘Realistic Monism: Why Physicalism Entails Panpsychism’. In A. Freeman (ed.), Conscious-
    ness and Its Place in Nature. Exeter: Imprint Academic, pp. 3–31.
Strawson, G. (2006b). ‘Panpsychism? Reply to Commentators with a Celebration of Descartes’. In A. Freeman
    (ed.), Consciousness and Its Place in Nature. Exeter: Imprint Academic, pp. 184–280.
Wilson, J. M. (2011). ‘Non-Reductive Realization and the Powers-Based Subset Strategy’. The Monist (issue on
    powers), 94: 121–54.
Yablo, S. (1992). ‘Mental Causation’. Philosophical Review, 101: 245–80.




                                                     242
          PART IV

How Does Panpsychism Work?
                   21
          CAN WE SUM SUBJECTS?
        EVALUATING PANPSYCHISM’S
             HARD PROBLEM
                                           Luke Roelofs


Panpsychist accounts of consciousness hold that humans are conscious because matter itself is con-
scious. One widespread motivation for panpsychism is dissatisfaction with physicalist explanations of
consciousness (Nagel 1979; Seager 1995; Chalmers 1995; Strawson 2006). If a non-mental under-
standing of physical matter leaves an ‘explanatory gap’ between physics and consciousness, and all
physicalistic attempts to ‘close the gap’ fail, perhaps we should make consciousness itself fundamental,
governed by some set of psychophysical laws of nature. Since the laws of physics seem to derive much
of their appeal from being simple and general, with a multitude of forms building up gradually from
a small set of widespread basic elements, let us suppose similarly general psychophysical laws, with
consciousness throughout the material universe.
    But what if we accept fundamental, omnipresent, consciousness but find our explanatory situation
unchanged: human consciousness stills seems like an unexplained mystery? This is the impasse to
which many critics have accused panpsychism of leading. Since panpsychism aims to add new funda-
mental laws only at the basic level, it still needs to explain how complex things like human minds are
‘built up’ from the basic experientiality of matter. And it needs to offer a more satisfying explanation
than either physicalism, which denies the fundamentality of consciousness, or emergentism, which
denies its omnipresence.1 And there is a concern, widely voiced by both opponents of and sympa-
thisers with panpsychism,2 that this cannot be done: minds simply do not combine in the necessary
way. This has been labelled the ‘combination problem’ (Seager 1995: 283).
    Different panpsychists respond differently to the combination problem, and different components
of it demand different responses. This chapter focuses on the very possibility of explanatory relations
between distinct subjects; in section 1 I explain why this is the principal ‘hard problem’ of combi-
nation. Section 2 covers the standards for an adequate solution, section 3 reviews three proposals,
evaluating them in light of these standards, and section 4 cautiously recommends a mixture of two
of these proposals.


                        1.  Hard and Easy Problems of Combination
Much work has been done to classify the components of the combination problem. Coleman dis-
tinguishes ‘internal’ and ‘bridging’ problems (2017: 3 ff.), Goff distinguishes ‘from above’ and ‘from
below’ (2017b: chs. 7–8), and Chalmers distinguishes problems around subjecthood, qualities, and
structure (2017). I will suggest another division, modelled on Chalmers’ division between the ‘hard



                                                  245
                                               Luke Roelofs


problem’ and ‘easy problems’ of consciousness (1995: 1 ff.). I believe there is a ‘hard problem of com-
bination’, interestingly different from several ‘easy problems of combination’.
    Neither Chalmers’ distinction nor mine is about degree of difficulty, but rather about type of dif-
ficulty. Chalmers says: ‘The easy problems of consciousness are those that seem directly susceptible to
the standard methods of cognitive science. . . . The hard problems are those that seem to resist those
methods’ (1995: 201).
    Even if it is very difficult to say, for instance, how the brain produces words matching the stimuli
its sense organs are exposed to, we at least have methods for approaching the task: those of psychol-
ogy, neuroscience, and other empirical sciences of the mind. By contrast, the problem of subjective
experience is ‘hard’ precisely in that those methods seem inappropriate. They just don’t make contact
with the problem, since for any neural mechanism or functional architecture, it still makes sense to
ask ‘But why does that feel like anything?’
    My distinction between ‘hard’ and ‘easy’ problems of combination is meant to exhibit an analo-
gous contrast between difficulties in applying an appropriate method, and difficulties where we seem
to lack a method which would even address the issue. But the methods in question are d­ ifferent –
the easy problems of consciousness are those which are tractable by the methods of the cognitive
sciences, but the easy problems of combination are those which are tractable by the methods of
phenomenological analysis. The hard problems of combination are whatever problems are not thus
tractable: I believe the main, and perhaps only, example is what has become known as ‘the subject-
summing problem’.
    By ‘phenomenological analysis’ I simply mean the inward-looking sort of attention to one’s own
experience which we routinely use to address questions about whether one type of experience is
necessary or sufficient for another. When we ask, for instance, whether the experience of math-
ematical reasoning is fully accounted for by the experience of entertaining the associated images, or
whether an experience of something as objectively existing might require certain kinds of imagina-
tive capacities, we are exploring relations among types of experience by analysing them as they occur
within our own mind. While some question the trustworthiness of such methods (e.g. Dennett 1991;
Blackmore 2002), they are a well-established part of how philosophers approach questions about
experience, not an ad hoc invention of panpsychists.
    So what are ‘hard’ and ‘easy’ problems of combination? Consider the subject-summing problem.
This problem is very simple to express: no facts about one subject’s consciousness seem to directly
explain facts about another’s. Or at least, it is not clear how they would, and many people find it
implausible that they ever could – in particular, many feel that subjects are in some sense ‘metaphysi-
cally insulated’, ‘cut off ’ from each other (e.g. James 1890: 226; Coleman 2012: 146; Blamauer this
volume). Since my parts are not identical with me, their consciousness is cut off from explaining mine.
Note that this worry is immune to any resolution based simply in phenomenological analysis of expe-
rience, for in phenomenological analysis the experiences I analyse are all mine: I cannot do phenom-
enological analysis on your experience. All I can find is that when certain experiences are had together
by the same subject, another sort of experience is had by that subject – which is irrelevant to explanatory
relations among different subjects. Just like the hard problem of consciousness, the subject-summing
problem is methodologically distinctive in a way that makes it obscure how to even approach it.
    To see the contrast with other problems of combination, imagine we fully satisfied ourselves that
given a certain configuration of microsubjects, the whole they compose must be a subject of expe-
rience. Many problems remain, but all concern explaining particular kinds of experience – why is
the macrosubject’s experience unified, qualitatively diverse, coarse-grained, epistemically bounded,
and so on? And for these questions, phenomenological analysis is entirely relevant, since phenom-
enological analysis is how we decide what sorts of experience might give rise to what other sorts.
For example, for the ‘palette problem’, of how a few basic ingredients can yield the diverse quali-
ties we experience, it is relevant to analyse the relations among different experienced qualities, to


                                                   246
                                  Evaluating Panpsychism’s Hard Problem


ask whether some are blends of others, and so on (see Mizrahi 2009). So for addressing these other
problems, panpsychists can draw on and extend existing phenomenological work – work which on
each occasion is done within a single subject’s mind. This is the sense in which I call them ‘easy’.
   There might be other hard problems of combination, apart from that of subject-summing. But
that is my primary example, and it is to this hard problem that I devote the rest of this chapter.


                              2.  Explanation and Explanatory Gaps
To solve the subject-summing problem, microsubjects must ‘explain’ macrosubjects. But what is it
for one thing (x) to ‘explain’ another (y)? One answer is that an idealised reasoner, given complete
knowledge of x, could deduce everything about y. Moreover, they need no additional a posteriori
premises: if some additional a posteriori premise z is needed to deduce y, then what explains y is ‘x
and z together’, not just x. Call this the ‘a priori deduction’ standard of explanation. It follows that x
fails to explain y if ‘x-without-y’ is conceivable, for deduction just rules out what cannot be consist-
ently conceived. Hence anti-physicalists argue for an explanatory gap from the conceivability of any
physical facts without consciousness.
     Applying the same standard, we ask: given a complete account of the microsubjects, is it conceiv-
able that there be no consciousness in the whole? Note that ‘a complete account of the microsub-
jects’ covers not only their experiential properties, but also the relations among them, their physical
properties, and the micro-level laws that govern them. This includes psychic or psychophysical laws,
if they operate at the micro-level, but not if they are ‘cross-level’ laws, connecting facts at one mereologi-
cal level with facts at another (as ‘emergence laws’ do).
     A priori deduction is not a universally accepted standard for explanation. If we have compelling
empirical and theoretical reason to identify A with B, why should it matter if our concept of B
gives us no grasp of A? Plausibly, the right model of explanation is whichever best accounts for the
explanatory power of natural science (see esp. Block and Stalnaker 1999; Chalmers and Jackson 2001;
Diaz-Leon 2011; McQueen 2015), and there can be reasonable disagreement here. We should thus
ask whether panpsychists could retreat from the demanding standard of a priori deduction, and main-
tain that microsubjects explain macrosubjects in some other way. But we must recall the panpsychist’s
dialectical positioning: if physicalism and emergentism are rejected for their explanatory failures,
panpsychism needs to deliver more.3
     So if panpsychists say that microsubjects ground macrosubjects in an ‘opaque’ but necessary way,
without giving any a priori insight, then physicalists will reply that their purely physical explanatory
base can ‘explain’ consciousness in that sense (cf. Block and Stalnaker 1999; Levine 1983; Loar 1990).
On the other hand, if panpsychists accept the possibility of microsubjects without macrosubjects, and
postulate a cross-level emergence law to produce the latter out from former, then emergentists will
reply that since we need the law to generate macrosubjects, the microsubjects are pointless.
     Are there ways for panpsychists to accept explanatory opacity, or cross-level laws, while retaining
an explanatory advantage over physicalism and emergentism? Perhaps. Consider physicalism first.
Classic anti-physicalist arguments, such as the ‘absent qualia’ and ‘inverted qualia’ thought experi-
ments, are often treated as establishing the same result (the physical does not fix the experiential),
but we can actually distinguish two issues. To have no explanatory gap at all, the physical facts need
to explain why certain systems are conscious at all, and the ‘absent qualia’ thought experiment seems
to undermine this. But they also need to explain why any conscious system has the particular sort
of experiences that it has, and the ‘inverted qualia’ thought experiment seems to undermine this too.
To explain consciousness means both to ‘explain-that’ some systems have consciousness, and also to
‘explain-what’ sorts of consciousness they have.
     Explaining-what and explaining-that might come apart. Given x we might be able to deduce that
some sort of y must appear, and yet not know which specific y. Those who accept the conceivability


                                                    247
                                               Luke Roelofs


of inverted qualia but not absent qualia hold this view of the physical and experiential facts (cf. Shoe-
maker 1975). On the other hand, x might show clearly what sort of y there would be if there was
some sort but leave open that there be none. For instance, suppose we encounter a robotic system of
unknown internal structure that seems to converse with us intelligently. Its behaviour might not tell
us whether to regard its apparent propositional attitudes as genuine or illusory, but still tell us that if
it has genuine propositional attitudes, then it has those which it seems to express.
    Physicalism seems to neither explain-that nor explain-what, so any view which achieves one or
the other would be an explanatory advance. This sense of complete mystery is evoked by Huxley’s
remark that ‘[H]ow it is that anything so remarkable as a state of consciousness comes about as a result
of irritating nervous tissue, is just as unaccountable as the appearance of the Djinn, when Aladdin
rubbed his lamp’ (1986: 193). If the panpsychist can either explain-that macrosubjects have experi-
ence, or explain-what sort of experience they have, they will have made human consciousness less
mysterious than Aladdin’s Djinn.
    What about maintaining an advantage over emergentism? There are ways to claim partial explan-
atoriness here as well. One might insist that it is just more intelligible for things of one fundamental
type to emerge from each other, than for fundamentally different things to emerge from each other
(e.g. Strawson 2006: 16–19), though this may seem question-begging to emergentist opponents.
A more neutral way is to focus on theoretical virtues. Why is (non-panpsychist) emergentism unat-
tractive? Not simply because it holds that some of the fundamental laws of nature connect things at
different mereological levels, but because doing so compromises its theoretical virtue. This involves
three specific problems.
    One problem concerns causal exclusion and arises somewhat as follows. If the panpsychist, or the
physicalist, could claim that macrosubjects are intelligibly grounded in micro-level entities (identical to
them, composed of them, realised by them, etc.) they could maintain that macro- and micro-entities
are not in causal competition: both can be causally efficacious without their effects being ‘overdetermined’
like the death of someone shot by two members of a firing squad. But if the micro-level entities need
the aid of a special emergence law to generate macrosubjects, it seems like macrosubjects are something
ontologically independent of them, and so if both cause some effect that really does look like over-
determination. Insofar as rampant overdetermination is theoretically vicious, this drives emergentists
towards either epiphenomenalism about macrosubjects, or denying the causal closure of microphysics.
Neither of these is attractive: one attraction of panpsychism is that it seemed to offer anti-physicalists
an escape from this dilemma, but re-introducing (strong) emergence will remove this advantage.
    Of course, avoiding causal competition between micro and macro is little consolation if there is still
competition between micro-experience and microphysics. To avoid this, many panpsychists present
their view as a form of ‘Russellian monism’ (traced to Russell 1927, cf. Eddington 1929; Lockwood
1981; Alter and Nagasawa 2015), on which micro-experience provides the basis for microphysics.
On this view, physical descriptions are in some sense ‘structural’ (cf. Stoljar 2014), saying how matter
behaves but leaving unspecified what it actually is that behaves that way. This allows the panpsychist
to posit micro-experience as that unspecified inner nature, thereby giving experience a central role
in physical causation and avoiding causal competition. But this commits them to a thorough-going
isomorphism of mental and physical (relating to the third criticism of emergentism, below), which
they cannot violate without risking the loss of their apparent advantage on the causal score.
    A second problem is that non-panpsychist emergence laws may offend very heavily against the
ideal of ‘simplicity’. To preserve the intuition that only human beings and some animals are con-
scious, the fundamental laws must connect consciousness with a specification – in wholly fundamen-
tal terms – of what it takes to be one of the relevant sorts of animal, and this specification would be
many orders of magnitude longer than any of the mathematical terms appearing in the laws currently
recognised by physics, with many more ‘brute facts’ about which precise values the many variables
must take (Cf. Feigl 1958: 428; Smart 1959: 142–3; Rosenberg 2004: 107–10).


                                                    248
                                 Evaluating Panpsychism’s Hard Problem


   A third issue is the desire to keep the mental and the physical ‘in line’ with one another as much
as possible. Overwhelming empirical evidence seems to show that they are closely intertwined,
and even if a theory recognises them as fundamentally distinct aspects, it should not let them ‘drift
out of sync’ (Cf. Mørch 2014: 10, 50). Consequently if the brain’s physical profile is just what we
would predict, given its parts and their arrangement, we should prefer a theory with a similar sort of
continuity in the mental realm. Certainly we should be reluctant to accept a radical change on the
mental side if the relevant physical processes are all fully continuous (Cf. James 1890: 147–8; Mørch
2014: 161–3).
   If the problem with emergentism is these three threats (to macroexperiential causal efficacy, to
theoretical simplicity, and to mental-physical correspondence), then a theory that postulated cross-
level laws but avoided these problems would be a comparative explanatory success. And if this
theory’s microsubjects were crucial to avoiding these results, we would have good reason to prefer
panpsychist emergentism to non-panpsychist emergentism.
   So if an account of subject combination secures a priori entailment of macrosubjects without
cross-level laws, it meets the ‘gold standard’. Other accounts can be partially successful by doing
two things: explaining more than physicalism (e.g. by either explaining-that or explaining-what), while
being more theoretically virtuous than emergentism (in causal non-competition, structural simplicity, and
mental-physical correspondence).


                                     3.  How to Sum Subjects
This section reviews three approaches to the subject-summing problem that have appeared:

•	   The ‘experience-sharing’ approach, on which token experiences belong simultaneously both to
     parts and whole.
•	   The ‘fusion’ approach, in which microsubjects predate macrosubjects rather than co-existing
     with them.
•	   The ‘phenomenal bonding’ approach, on which the crucial explanatory ingredient is a special
     relation among subjects.

Each approach has strengths and weaknesses: experience-sharing secures theoretical virtue at the
expense of revising pre-theoretical notions of subjecthood, fusion sacrifices theoretical virtue almost
as much as strong emergentism, and phenomenal bonding rests its explanation on a posit of which
we have no positive conception.
   Two approaches that I will not discuss here abandon the assumption that elementary particles
are the fundamental conscious subjects: ‘panprotopsychism’ holds that they are fundamental, but not
subjects (see Coleman 2012, 2014, cf. Chadha this volume), while ‘cosmopsychism’ holds that they
are not fundamental, but merely the smallest fragments of what is fundamental, namely the conscious
cosmos itself (see Jaskolla and Buck 2012; Shani 2015; Goff this volume, cf. Albahari this volume).
Rather than trying to solve the subject-summing problem, these approaches seek to re-frame it by
changing the starting point. In my view, both struggle to get beyond ‘moving the bump under the
rug’, with the basic difficulty of explaining human-sized subjects always reappearing in a different
guise, and with the same basic moves available to address it.


                                     3.1. Experience-Sharing
Why are physical wholes so readily explicable through their parts? One plausible answer is that they
have no properties (whether universal types or particular instances) that don’t, in some fashion, ‘come
from’ their parts. For example, a physical whole with a red spot shares an instance of redness with a


                                                  249
                                              Luke Roelofs


part of its surface; if dented or ripped, it likewise shares an instance of dentedness or rippedness with
a part. And, significantly, physical wholes often share token causal powers and responsibilities with
their parts, so that both can cause one effect without overdetermination. Of course not all properties
of a whole are shared with its parts: you can build a circle out of square parts. But as long as unshared
properties are themselves grounded in by some pattern of shared properties – as the shape of a circle
is accounted for by the location properties it shares with its many square parts – then we need no
‘further reality’ to make the whole: it simply shares the reality of its parts.
     What I call the ‘experience-sharing’ approach hopes that something similar is true of macrosub-
jects: each of their primitive experiential properties belongs both to the whole and to one of its parts,
and their other experiential properties are simply patterns of these shared primitive experiences. This
changes the shape of the subject-summing problem. If token experiences are not shared, we need
to explain not just a new subject, but a whole new stream of consciousness. But if the whole shares
token experiences with its parts, we already have our stream of consciousness. And if we take human
subjects to be identical with certain physical systems (brains), we already have our candidate mac-
rosubject. So given this composite entity, and this collection of experiences in its parts, the subject-
summing problem shrinks to: why is this entity related to these experiences suitably to be (one of )
their subject(s)? This does not remove the problem but might make it seem less insuperable.
     Consider three challenges to experience-sharing: that it intensifies the ‘easy problems’ of com-
 bination, that it is incompatible with the nature of subjectivity, and that it does not explain s­ubject-
summing. The first concern is that if the whole has the very same experiences as its parts, it becomes
harder to explain apparent discrepancies between human experience and what we can reasona-
bly posit at the micro-level. For instance, the micro-level is fantastically fine-grained, but quali-
tatively homogeneous, while human experience is comparatively coarse-grained, but qualitatively
diverse. Panpsychists who deny experience-sharing might dodge this problem by saying that macro-­
experience is dependent on, but still entirely distinct from, micro-experience. But no such move is
available to the experience-sharer. These problems may still be soluble, but experience-sharing makes
them harder.
     A second concern is that experience-sharing may contradict something basic about subjecthood.
For instance, we might think that conscious experience is essentially ‘private’, directly knowable by
only one subject, in contrast to the ‘public’ world of physical things. Since having an experience seems
closely linked to being able to know it directly, privacy seems to rule out experience-sharing. But
perhaps the experience-sharer can say that our intuitive idea of privacy is correct, but only when
applied to discrete (non-overlapping) subjects, rather than to distinct (non-identical) subjects. Since my
parts are distinct from me but not discrete from me, their sharing my experiences is compatible with
this qualified form of privacy (cf. Roelofs 2019: 121 ff ).
     A related worry, articulated in different forms by Basile (2010) and Coleman (2012, 2014), is
that experience-sharing conflicts with the holistic, perspectival, character of consciousness. Even if
some sort of ‘element’ were shared between two consciousnesses, this element will be experienced
differently from their two perspectives, due to the other contents of their respective consciousnesses.
And if they experience it differently, surely we should count it as a different experience: hence a
single experience cannot be shared. To put it another way, for experience-sharing to explain macro-
subjects, we must be able to build up a single conscious field from individual experiences with
some degree of independent existence, which is what this line of objection denies. Against this, the
­experience-sharer could accept that consciousness is holistic, but analyse this in terms of mutual
 influence among elements, so that the parts are fundamental but also heavily affected by each other.
 This would imply that the total experience of one component subject will depend on the experi-
 ences of the others: its phenomenology somehow reflects theirs (see Roelofs 2016, 2019).
     A third worry: even if the experience-sharing approach changes the explanandum (‘why do
 physical composites bear the ‘being-a-subject-of ’ relation to their parts’ experiences?’), does it


                                                  250
                                 Evaluating Panpsychism’s Hard Problem


actually explain that? It at least does better than physicalism. Recall section 2’s distinction between
explaining-what and explaining-that: experience-sharing at least accomplishes explaining-what. If
we knew that the parts of me had certain experiences, and knew that I had some experiences, it seems
we could deduce which experiences I would have – namely, those of my parts (and whatever other
more complex experiences those might underlie).4
    But why does the macrosubject have any experiences – why are there macrosubjects at all? If there
is no contradiction in a composite of microsubjects lacking experience, we still need an explanation
for why we do not inhabit a world of microsubjects without macrosubjects. One possibility is that
it is somehow in the nature of composition in general that wholes ‘inherit’ properties from their parts,
for at least some range of properties (this makes most sense if composition is something like identity,
cf. Baxter 1988; Lewis 1991, 1993; Sider 2007; Cotnoir 2013; Baxter and Cotnoir 2014). Or it might
be the nature of subjects that all their properties are reducible to certain patterns of resemblance, rep-
resentation, or causation among experiences (as on NeoLockean accounts of personhood, cf. Parfit
1984, 1999; Shoemaker 1997). In both these cases (both explored in Roelofs 2019), the explanation
would be a priori, but would require defending a contentious position on an independent metaphysi-
cal question.
    Alternatively, the experience-sharing theorist might posit a cross-level law of nature that wholes
(conditionally or unconditionally) share the experiences of their parts. This means accepting the
possibility of a ‘panpsychic zombie world’, where experiences were not shared: we know we are
not in such a world, because we know ourselves to be conscious, but this knowledge is a posteriori.
This implies a sort of ‘emergentism’, in that macrosubjects do not follow a priori from even the full-
est account of their parts. However, a posteriori experience-sharing lacks the theoretical vices which
I discussed in section 2. It does not generate causal competition between microsubjects and mac-
rosubjects, if causal responsibility is tied to particular shareable properties. It does not drive a wedge
between mental and physical structure – indeed, it posits a law of nature to make the mental realm
behave the same way as the physical realm. And because the posited law does not apply specifically
to humans and other animals, it lacks the ungainly complication required to specify such a narrow
range of application.
    Overall, experience-sharing offers a high-risk, high-reward strategy for panpsychists. It is the
approach most open to refutation – on grounds of privacy, perspectival holism, and the intensified
‘easy problems’. But if these objections can be resolved, panpsychists get a better explanation than
either emergentists (for simplicity, mental-physical correspondence, and causal non-competition) or
physicalists (for explaining-what the macrosubject experiences), whether or not the fact that macro-
subjects experience anything is explained by the metaphysics of subjecthood, or of composition, or
by a cross-level law.


                                      3.2.  Diachronic Fusion
Could the challenges facing experience-sharing show a problem with the whole idea of two co-
existing levels of experience? This thought leads some panpsychists (e.g. Seager 2010, 2017; Mørch
2014, cf. Humphreys 1997) to theorise combination as the ‘fusing’ of many subjects into one, so
that as soon as the macrosubject exists the microsubjects are gone. There are first some parts and no
whole, and then a whole and no parts, and the explanatory relation between them is diachronic, not
synchronic.
   Part of the appeal of the fusion approach is that in a sense there is no emergence at all, because
everything goes on ‘at the micro-level’. All subjects become ‘micro-subjects’, since none is com-
posed of any others. The laws governing fusion, therefore, are ‘micro-level’ laws – or rather, they are
laws operating on the most basic level, rather than ‘inter-level’ emergence laws. Thus human con-
sciousness is entailed a priori by a full specification of ‘micro-level’ facts and laws, meeting our ‘gold


                                                   251
                                               Luke Roelofs


standard’ for explanation. Yet this arguably satisfies the letter while violating the spirit: the human
subject may be synchronically simple but its complexity and causal powers are macro-scale, and so
in our intuitive sense of ‘micro-level’, the fusion approach denies the adequacy of the micro-level.
To properly evaluate it, we must look to the criteria outlined in section 2. Does it offer theoretical
simplicity, isomorphism with physics, and causal harmony?
    Seager (2010, 2017) argues that we should find fusion unproblematic, since there are examples
available in physical science. His first example (also used by Humphreys 1997: 15ff ) is quantum
entanglement: when particles become entangled, they ‘form a new state whose mathematical rep-
resentation cannot be decomposed into a product of the representations of the constituents’ (Seager
2017: 12). His second example is black holes, which may satisfy a ‘no-hair’ conjecture according to
which all details of the matter which enters them are permanently abolished, leaving the hole with
only three features: mass, charge, and angular momentum. Two black holes of the same mass, charge,
and angular momentum are identical in all respects, lacking any ‘hair’ that might distinguish them.
    If either of these provided a good model for the human mind, we really would have a good
micro-level explanation. For in both cases, the laws governing the fusion of many entities into one
are simply the general laws of physics, not laws tailored to specific complex cases. However, examin-
ing how these two examples differ reveals a dilemma for the fusion approach. Consider the problem
of ‘basal loss’, identified by Wong in his critique of Humphreys:

    The basal properties giving rise to [an emergent property] also constitute myriad non-
    emergent, structural properties. . . . If these lower level properties literally ceased to be in
    fusing . . . then so, it seems, would those structural properties.
                                                                                 (Wong 2006: 355)

Suppose, for instance, that certain of my neurone-states vanish into a fused mental state; what becomes
of the non-emergent total neural state that they composed? If it vanishes also, it will deprive the brain
of its mass, volume, shape, visible appearance, etc. Yet clearly brains do retain these non-emergent
physical properties, suggesting that they retain the underlying neurone-states.
    Note that for ‘hairless’ black holes, basal loss makes sense. What interested us in them is that the
specific features of what enters them really do seem to be lost. This makes it both an excellent model
of fusion, and a bad model for anything supposed to happen in the brain. Quantum entanglement fits
the brain better, but quantum entanglement is very different from black hole formation. Entangled
systems retain all the features of their ‘parts’; rather than losing anything, they add something, namely
lawlike relations between these features. Consequently, Wong’s point about basal loss seems to count
against treating entanglement as fusion.
    Note that although the properties of an entangled system cannot be explained just by the indi-
vidual properties of its parts, this does not mean that they cannot be explained by those individ-
ual properties, along with the ‘entanglement relations’ between them. These relations are certainly
odd, connecting the properties of disparate objects but not behaving like other ‘causal’ interactions
described by physics (in particular, ignoring the speed-of-light time limit). But any account of quan-
tum phenomena must be odd, and there need be nothing offensive to reductionistic scruples about
relations among parts being essential to a whole’s behaviour, as long as those relations follow from
the micro-level laws.
    The fact that we can treat entangled systems as composites does not show that we cannot or
should not treat them as a sort of emergent simple. So the holistic treatment might still be the model
for the mental case. But there is something problematic about treating them as fusion, which the
black hole example brings out. Consider two particles which become entangled with respect to
certain of their properties (e.g. spin) but not with respect to all (e.g. charge). The resultant entangled



                                                   252
                                  Evaluating Panpsychism’s Hard Problem


system still has a certain total charge and has portions of that charge at certain locations. Why does
it have these charge properties? Surely because the particles that entered into it had those charge
properties. But why should the properties of non-existent particles explain the properties of this sys-
tem, unless they are in some sense still around? The charge was not involved in the interaction that
entangled them, so it need not be mentioned in any sort of ‘fusion law’ of the form ‘when property X
and property Y interact, they form a new property Z’ (see Humphreys 1997 for details of the ‘fusion
operation’). The entangled system might have simply not had any charge properties, as the example
of the hairless black hole illustrates. So it seems we need extra laws, or extra clauses in the laws, saying
that unless otherwise specified, the charge of an entangled system is inherited from the now-vanished
particles that brought it into existence. But this seems like an unattractive multiplication of laws just
to account for what seem like trivial results. It seems more efficient to see the entangled system as
composed of the original particles, now differently related – or else to be thoroughly holistic, deny-
ing the fundamental existence of individual particles either before or after entanglement. But in
neither of these cases is there really any fusion going on.5
    This poses a dilemma when considering the brain. If the panpsychist’s fusion law specifies that
microsubjects displaying (say) a certain functional organisation fuse into a brain-sized subject, this
leaves open that all their properties irrelevant to functional organisation simply vanish, leaving
behind a macrosubject which ‘has no hair’. Yet the brain seems to retain all the physical features of
its parts, including the incredibly specific (though functionally irrelevant) distribution of features
across microscopically small locations. But fundamental laws specifying that this one thing, quite
distinct from the many things which go into it, should nevertheless match them exactly in trillions
of respects, are, as Mørch admits, ‘not very simple and elegant’ (2014: 190).
    We could avoid these worries about basal loss by letting mental and physical drift apart. Perhaps
the experiential parts of the brain fuse into a single macrosubject, but the physical parts do not cor-
respondingly fuse into a single physical entity (Seager 2017: 15). But this runs into causal exclusion –
not between between macrosubjects and microsubjects, but between macrosubjects and microphysics.
If the many particles account for everything the brain causes, the distinct single macrosubject faces
epiphenomenalism. Certainly, it is hard to see how to retain isomorphism between mental and physi-
cal, let alone the Russellian identification of one as the categorical basis of the other.
    The fusion approach deduces human subjects a priori from facts that can be called ‘micro-level’,
but risks losing the structural advantages associated with panpsychism. Mental fusion without physi-
cal fusion threatens causal harmony and mental-physical isomorphism; fusion that is both mental
and physical requires unparsimonious fusion laws. Perhaps the approach can somehow avoid both
problems, but it is hard to see how.


                                     3.3.  Phenomenal Bonding
Micro-physical explanations typically make essential reference to relations among components – few
macroscopic phenomena are explained by microphysics if we ignore causal, spatial, and other rela-
tions. So maybe the subject-summing problem results from not conceiving component subjects as
properly related.
    Of course, we can imagine subjects standing in many relations – resembling each other, acting
on each other, communicating with each other, etc. But these familiar relations don’t seem to help:
indeed, a classic way to dramatise the subject-summing problem is to imagine human subjects so
related (interacting, talking, touching, etc.) and observe how easily conceivable it is that there be no
further consciousness belonging to the group (see Plotinus 1956: 346; Brentano 1987: 293; James
1890: 160). But even if familiar relations cannot do the job, perhaps some relation previously unrec-
ognised does better. Following Goff (2017a, 2017b) I will call this relation ‘phenomenal bonding’.



                                                    253
                                              Luke Roelofs


    But what is phenomenal bonding, beyond ‘the relation that solves the subject-summing prob-
lem’? Goff maintains that its nature actually precludes our understanding it, because we cannot
learn about it either introspectively or perceptually. We cannot understand inter-subject relations
introspectively, for introspection reveals only one subject, not many. And we cannot understand
it perceptually, because it is essentially subjective, or ‘inner’, and perception shows us only what is
objective and ‘outer’ (2017a: 293–294). Thus Goff admits this approach ‘leads to a kind of mysteri-
anism’ (2017a: 294).6
    So while the monadic properties of microsubjects do not explain the consciousness of macrosub-
jects, those properties together with phenomenal bonding relations do. If we had a proper conception of
those relations, we would find it inconceivable that subjects standing in them not compose a subject.
The subject-summing problem arises because we lack, and cannot acquire, a proper conception of
the bonding relations.
    Goff suggests we can indirectly characterise the bonding relation as the ‘deep nature’ of spatial
relations (2017: ch. 7). This talk of ‘deep natures’ assumes Russellian monism: physics describes only
the abstract structure of things, not their intrinsic nature. Russellian panpsychists say that the deep
nature of physical properties is consciousness; Goff extends this by saying that the deep nature of
physical relations is a phenomenal relation.
    How to evaluate the phenomenal bonding approach? In one sense, it explains macrosubjects: it
postulates something whose nature entails them, and it provides a principled reason why we cannot
grasp this something. But in another sense it explains nothing: lacking a grasp of the explanatory
base, we gain no illumination as to why there are macrosubjects with any particular features.
    For one thing, we have no idea when and where the bonding relation obtains. Suppose we iden-
tify it with space or causation: does it hold wherever there is any degree of these (in which case it
probably connects every subject in the universe to every other), or does it require some threshold of
proximity or intensity, or does it itself come in degrees? This makes it hard to judge parsimony. Per-
haps, given our ignorance, we should suppose the most parsimonious distribution possible, such as an
entirely thorough-going one (as in Goff 2013). But this seems problematic, posing what Rosenberg
(1998, 2004) calls the ‘boundary problem’: it is easy to see how a universally distributed bonding
relation could yield a single cosmic mind, or an infinity of overlapping subjects. But why exactly do
we get the specific human subjects that we wanted to explain, or at least why do they in particular
have such prominence, being the only ones that get recognised as such? Perhaps this challenge can
be met, but without any insight into the bonding relation, the particular size and shape of the human
subject starts to seem mysterious.
    Moreover, when two microsubjects get phenomenally bonded, thereby forming a composite
subject, we are told basically nothing about what this subject’s experience will be like. Perhaps its
experiences will be type-identical to those of some or all of its parts, or perhaps token-identical,
or perhaps quite different. Goff insists that constituting an experience need not mean characterising it
(2017: 189 ff ). But this invites the question: what does characterise the macrosubject’s experience?
The phenomenal bonding approach does not seem to tell us.
    Overall, I think phenomenal bonding provides a good fall-back position for the panpsychist, if
all other approaches fail. The bonding approach can claim narrow advantages both over physicalism
(because while it does not provide an explanation of consciousness, it postulates a suitable explanatory
base, as opposed to the knowably insufficient physicalist base) and over emergentism (because while
it does not avoid positing an epistemically brute ‘factor X’, this factor is simple, general, and already
operative at the micro-level). It may however have trouble showing an advantage over non-standard
forms of physicalism (see Stoljar this volume), which postulate unknowable features of physical real-
ity but not fundamental consciousness. But if the subject-summing problem cannot otherwise be
solved, phenomenal bonding may be the best panpsychists can do.



                                                  254
                                       Evaluating Panpsychism’s Hard Problem


                                           4.  A Combined Proposal
I think the best approach for Russellian panpsychists combines experience-sharing and phenomenal
bonding. If we hold both that token experiences can belong to multiple subjects, and that the forma-
tion of macrosubjects depends crucially on distinctively phenomenal relations, we mitigate some
of the shortcomings of each approach. Moreover, we get a productive direction for future research:
extrapolating intra-subject phenomenal relations into inter-subject phenomenal relations.
     First, experience-sharing makes phenomenal bonding less mysterian. If the bonding relations
obtain between our own component subjects, and pertain specifically to their experiences, and if
we ourselves share those experiences, we do have access to the relations after all. We know them as
structural relations among our own experiences, such as phenomenal unification, composition of
content, mutual reference or accessibility, or whatever else phenomenology reveals. On this approach,
Goff is wrong to say that introspection reveals only one subject: introspection shows us at least some
of our component subjects as well as ourselves. Second, phenomenal bonding helps stop experience-
sharing from ‘making the easy problems harder’. If experiences change each other’s phenomenal
character through being bonded, and if moreover not all parts of me, or not all of their experiences,
are bonded, that might explain why our experience is sensitive to certain features of our brain and
not others.
     Neither of these advantages is a completed result: the easy problems are still quite hard, and we
still need a fuller account of the bonding relations. But this combined proposal suggests a meth-
odology to address these challenges. First, find distinctively phenomenal relations within human
experience. Then, evaluate them as potential bonding relations, asking if they are suitably basic and
explanatory. If they seem promising, work out how those relations could hold inter-subjectively,
between experiences of distinct subjects. This means both identifying any problems that follow from
such a supposition and finding points of contact between our chosen intra-subjective relations and
our inter-subjective relations with each other. This methodology, which I pursue in other work
(Roelofs 2016, 2017, 2019), is not guaranteed to succeed: but hopefully it will be illuminating,
whether it succeeds or fails.

                                                          Notes
	1.	 When I speak of ‘emergentists’, I mean ‘strong’ emergentism, on which some property of a complex could
         not be predicted from its emergence base even with the most complete knowledge of the relevant properties
         of that base. Instead, it arises from a sui generis law. Moreover, I will assume that (strong) emergentists are not
         panpsychists. ‘Weak’ emergentists, who hold emergent phenomena to be predictable in principle, even if not
         in practice, I count as physicalists or panpsychists, depending on the features of their emergence base (see
         Broad 1925; Chalmers 2006; Wilson 2016).
 	2.	 See James (1890: 147–61), Nagel (1986: 50), Van Cleve (1990: 219), Rosenberg (1998, 2004), Strawson
         (2006), Goff (2006, 2009a, 2009b), Basile (2010), Shani (2010), Seager (2010, 2017), Coleman (2012, 2014),
         Sebastián (2015), Mørch (2014), Roelofs 2014, 2016, 2019), and Mendelovici (this volume).
  	3.	 Of course, not all panpsychists rest their position on the explanatory gap faced by physicalism. There are
         other arguments for panpsychism available, most especially the ‘intrinsic natures’ argument that seems to
         show all non-panpsychist views to be unparsimonious and borderline unintelligible (e.g. Seager 2006; Cole-
         man 2009). But since much of the recent interest in panpsychism does derive from explanatory concerns, we
         should consider what panpsychists have to do to maintain their claim of explanatory superiority.
   	4.	 Note that in order to deduce this we would have to rule out that I had some other experiences, unrelated
         to those of my parts. But we are perfectly entitled to rule this out, according to the most prominent models
         of how explanatory deductions proceed in the physical realm (Chalmers and Jackson 2001; Chalmers 2012),
         which explicitly requires a ‘that’s-all’ clause in any micro-level explanation.
    	5.	 Will it help to say that the entangled system is not really partless, but simply holistic in the sense of being more
         fundamental than its parts (cf. Mørch 2014: 167–75, 191)? We can still say that at the fundamental level, the
         parts are replaced by a simple whole. And it is not clear that this provides any genuine persistence of the parts,



                                                            255
                                                    Luke Roelofs


     because it is not clear whether there can be genuine identity between a fundamental entity at one time and
     a non-fundamental entity at a later time.
	6.	 Chalmers (2017), following Dainton (2011), offers a less mysterian proposal: that the phenomenal bonding
     relation is ‘co-consciousness’, the relation studied in the literature of the unity of consciousness. I think this
     version of the bonding approach is stronger than the mysterian one, and have defended a version of it myself
     (Roelofs 2016, 2019).

                                                   References
Albahari, M. (this volume). ‘Abhidharma Panprotopsychist Metaphysics of Consciousness’. In W. Seager (ed.),
   The Routledge Handbook of Panpsychism. London: Routledge.
Alter, T., and Nagasawa, Y. (eds.) (2015). Consciousness in the Physical World: Perspectives on Russellian Monism.
   Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Basile, P. (2010). ‘It Must Be True – But How Can It Be? Some Remarks on Panpsychism and Mental Com-
   position’. Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplement, 67: 93–112.
Baxter, D. (1988). ‘Many-One Identity’. Philosophical Papers, 17 (3): 193–216.
Baxter, D., and Cotnoir, A. (eds.) (2014). Composition as Identity. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Blackmore, S. (2002). ‘There Is No Stream of Consciousness’. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 9 (5–6): 17–28.
Blamauer, M. (this volume). ‘The Crux of Subjectivity the Subjective Dimension of Consciousness and Its Role
   in the Arguments for and Against Panpsychism’. In W. Seager (ed.), The Routledge Handbook of Panpsychism.
   London: Routledge.
Block, N., and Stalnaker, R. (1999). ‘Conceptual Analysis, Dualism, and the Explanatory Gap’. Philosophical
   Review, 108: 1–46.
Brentano, F. (1987). The Existence of God: Lectures Given at the Universities of Worzburg and Vienna, 1868–1891.
   Ed. and Trans. S. Krantz. Nijhoff International Philosophy Series. Dordrecht: Nijhoff.
Broad, C. D. (1925). The Mind and Its Place in Nature. London: Kegan Paul.
Chadha, M. (this volume). ‘Abhidharma Panprotopsychist Metaphysics of Consciousness’. In W. Seager (ed.),
   The Routledge Handbook of Panpsychism. London: Routledge.
Chalmers, D. (1995). ‘Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness’. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 2 (3): 200–19.
Chalmers, D. (2006). ‘Strong and Weak Emergence’. In P. Clayton and P. Davies (eds.), The Re-Emergence of
   Emergence: The Emergentist Hypothesis from Science to Religion. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 244–56.
Chalmers, D. (2012). Constructing the World. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chalmers, D. (2017).‘The Combination Problem for Panpsychism’. In G. Brüntrup and L. Jaskolla (eds.), Panpsy-
   chism: Contemporary Perspectives. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 179–214.
Chalmers, D., and Jackson, F. (2001). ‘Conceptual Analysis and Reductive Explanation’. The Philosophical Review,
   110 (13): 315–61.
Coleman, S. (2009). ‘Mind Under Matter’. In D. Skrbina (ed.), Mind That Abides. Amsterdam: Benjamins,
   pp. 83–107.
Coleman, S. (2012). ‘Mental Chemistry: Combination for Panpsychists’. Dialectica, 66 (1): 137–66.
Coleman, S. (2014). ‘The Real Combination Problem: Panpsychism, Micro-Subjects, and Emergence’. Erkennt-
   nis, 79: 19–44.
Coleman, S. (2017). ‘Panpsychism and Neutral Monism: How to Make Up One’s Mind’. In G. Brüntrup and
   L. Jaskolla (eds.), Panpsychism: Contemporary Perspectives. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 249–82.
Cotnoir, A. (2013). ‘Composition as General Identity’. In K. Bennett and D. Zimmerman (eds.), Oxford Studies
   in Metaphysics, vol. 8. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 295–322.
Dainton, B. (2011). ‘Review of Consciousness and Its Place in Nature’. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research,
   83 (1): 238–61.
Dennett, D. (1991). Consciousness Explained. Boston: Little, Brown and Co.
Diaz-Leon, E. (2011). ‘Reductive Explanation, Concepts, and a Priori Entailment’. Philosophical Studies, 155:
   99–116.
Eddington, A. (1929). The Nature of the Physical World. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press [1927 Gifford
   Lectures. First edition published in 1928].
Feigl, H. (1958). ‘The “Mental” and the “Physical” ’. In H. Feigl, M. Scriven, and G. Maxwell (eds.), Minnesota
   Studies in the Philosophy of Science, vol. 2: Concepts, Theories and the Mind-Body Problem, Minneapolis: University
   of Minnesota Press, pp. 370–497.
Goff, P. (2006). ‘Experiences Don’t Sum’. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 13 (10–11): 53–61.
Goff, P. (2009a). ‘Why Panpsychism Doesn’t Help Us Explain Consciousness’. Dialectica, 63 (3): 289–311.




                                                         256
                                    Evaluating Panpsychism’s Hard Problem


Goff, P. (2009b). ‘Can the Panpsychist Get Round the Combination Problem?’ In D. Skrbina (ed.), Mind That
    Abides: Panpsychism in the New Millennium. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Goff, P. (2012). ‘There Is More Than One Thing’. In P. Goff (ed.), Spinoza on Monism. New York: Macmillan,
    pp. 113–22.
Goff, P. (2013). ‘Orthodox Property Dualism + Linguistic Theory of Vagueness = Panpsychism’. In R. Brown
    (ed.), Consciousness Inside and Out: Phenomenology, Neuroscience, and the Nature of Experience. Dordrecht:
    Springer, pp. 75–91.
Goff, P. (2017a). ‘The Phenomenal Bonding Solution to the Combination Problem’. In G. Brüntrup and L.
    Jaskolla (eds.), Panpsychism: Contemporary Perspectives. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 283–304.
Goff, P. (2017b). Consciousness and Fundamental Reality. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Goff, P. (this volume). ‘From Russellian Monism to Cosmopsychism’. In W. Seager (ed.), The Routledge Hand-
    book of Panpsychism. London: Routledge.
Humphreys, N. (1997). ‘How Properties Emerge’. Philosophy of Science, 64: 1–17.
Huxley, T. H. (1986). Lessons in Elementary Physiology. London: Macmillan (originally published 1866).
James, W. (1890). The Principles of Psychology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Jaskolla, L., and Buck, A. (2012). ‘Does Panexperiential Holism Solve the Combination Problem?’ Journal of
    Consciousness Studies, 19: 190–9.
Levine, J. (1983). ‘Materialism and Qualia: The Explanatory Gap’. Pacific Philosophical Quarterly, 64: 354–61.
Lewis, D. (1991). Parts of Classes. Oxford: Blackwell.
Lewis, D. (1993). ‘Many, But Almost One’. In J. Bacon, K. Campbell and L. Reinhardt (eds.), Ontology, Causality,
    and Mind: Essays in Honour of D. M. Armstrong. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 23–45.
Loar, B. (1990). ‘Phenomenal States’. Philosophical Perspectives, 4: 81–108.
Lockwood, M. (1981). ‘What Was Russell’s Neutral Monism?’ Midwest Studies in Philosophy (The Foundations of
    Analytic Philosophy), VI: 143–58.
McQueen, K. (2015). ‘Mass Additivity and A Priori Entailment’. Synthese, 192 (5): 1373–1392.
Mendelovici, A. (this volume). ‘Panpsychism’s Combination Problem Is a Problem for Everyone’. In W. Seager
    (ed.), The Routledge Handbook of Panpsychism. London: Routledge.
Mizrahi, V. (2009).‘Is Colour Composition Phenomenal?’ In D. Skusevich and P. Matikas (eds.), Color Perception:
    Physiology, Processes and Analysis. Hauppauge: Nova Science Publishers, pp. 185–202.
Mørch, H. H. (2014). Panpsychism and Causation: A New Argument and a Solution to the Combination Problem. Doc-
    toral Dissertation, University of Oslo. https://philpapers.org/archive/HASPAC-2.pdf.
Nagel, T. (1979). ‘Panpsychism’. In T. Nagel (ed.), Mortal Questions. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
    pp 181–195.
Nagel, T. (1986). The View from Nowhere. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Parfit, D. (1984). Reasons and Persons. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Parfit, D. (1999). ‘Experiences, Subjects, and, Conceptual Schemes’. Philosophical Topics, 26: 217–70.
Plotinus. (1956). Enneads. Ed. and Trans. S. MacKenna and B. Page. London: Faber and Faber. Accessed July 2013.
    http://archive.org/stream/plotinustheennea033190mbp#page/n11/mode/2up.
Roelofs, L. (2014). ‘Phenomenal Blending and the Palette Problem’. Thought, 3 (1): 59–70.
Roelofs, L. (2016). ‘The Unity of Consciousness, Within and Between Subjects’. Philosophical Studies, 173 (12):
    3199–221.
Roelofs, L. (2017). “Rational Agency without Self-Knowledge: Could ‘We’ Replace ‘I’?” Dialectica 71 (1): 3–33.
Roelofs, L. (2019). Combining Minds. New York: Oxford University Press.
Rosenberg, G. (1998). ‘The Boundary Problem for Phenomenal Individuals’. In S. Hameroff, A. Kaszniak, and
    A. Scott (eds.), Toward a Science of Consciousness: The First Tucson Discussions and Debates (Complex Adaptive
    Systems). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 149–56.
Rosenberg, G. (2004). A Place for Consciousness: Probing the Deep Structure of the Natural World. Oxford: Oxford
    University Press.
Russell, B. (1927). The Analysis of Matter. London: Kegan Paul.
Seager, W. (1995). ‘Consciousness, Information and Panpsychism’. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 2–3: 272–88.
Seager, W. (2006). ‘The Intrinsic Nature Argument for Panpsychism’. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 13 (10–11):
    129–45.
Seager, W. (2010). ‘Panpsychism, Aggregation and Combinatorial Infusion’. Mind and Matter, 8 (2): 167–84.
Seager, W. (2017).‘Panpsychist Infusion’. In G. Brüntrup and L. Jaskolla (eds.), Panpsychism: Contemporary Perspec-
    tives. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 229–48.
Sebastián, M. A. (2015). “What panpsychists should reject: on the incompatibility of panpsychism and organiza-
    tional invariantism.” Philosophical Studies 172 (7):1833–1846.




                                                       257
                                                  Luke Roelofs


Shani, I. (2010). “Mind Stuffed with Red Herrings: Why William James’ Critique of the Mind-Stuff Theory
    Does Not Substantiate a Combination Problem for Panpsychism.” Acta Analytica 25 (4): 413–434.
Shani, I. (2015). ‘Cosmopsychism: A Holistic Approach to the Metaphysics of Experience’. Philosophical Papers,
    44 (3): 389–437.
Shoemaker, S. (1975). ‘Functionalism and Qualia’. Philosophical Studies, 27: 291–315.
Shoemaker, S. (1997). ‘Parfit on Identity’. In J. Dancy (ed.), Reading Parfit. Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 135–48.
Sider, T. (2007). ‘Parthood’. Philosophical Review, 116: 51–91.
Smart, J. J. C. (1959). ‘Sensations and Brain Processes’. The Philosophical Review, 68 (2): 141–56.
Stoljar, D. (2014). ‘Four Kinds of Russellian Monism’. In U. Kriegel (ed.), Current Controversies in Philosophy of
    Mind. London: Routledge, pp. 17–39.
Stoljar, D. (this volume). ‘Panpsychism and Nonstandard Materialism: Some Comparative Remarks’. In
    W. Seager (ed.), The Routledge Handbook of Panpsychism. London: Routledge.
Strawson, G. (2006). ‘Realistic Monism: Why Physicalism Entails Panpsychism’. In A. Freeman (ed.), Conscious-
    ness and Its Place in Nature. Exeter: Imprint Academic, pp. 3–31.
Van Cleve, J. (1990).“Mind-Dust or Magic? Panpsychism versus Emergence.” Philosophical Perspectives 4: 215–226.
Wilson, J. (2016). ‘Metaphysical Emergence: Weak and Strong’. In T. Bigaj and C. Wüthrich (eds.), Metaphysics
    in Contemporary Physics (Poznan Studies in the Philosophy of the Sciences and the Humanities). Leiden: Brill
    Rodopi, pp. 251–306.
Wong, H. Y. (2006). “Emergents from Fusion.” Philosophy of Science, 73: 345–367.




                                                      258
                      22
              PANPSYCHISM VERSUS
            PANTHEISM, POLYTHEISM,
             AND COSMOPSYCHISM
                                         Yujin Nagasawa


                                          1. Introduction
Philosophers of mind have long debated the relationship between the mind and the body. Philoso-
phers of religion have long debated the relationship between God and the cosmos. On the face of it,
there is no link between these debates in two distinct areas of philosophy. However, at a certain level
they are structurally parallel and the contrast between them can be useful for making philosophi-
cal progress.1 In this chapter, I discuss and utilise these parallel debates by reference to four views:
panpsychism and cosmopsychism in the philosophy of mind, and polytheism and pantheism in the
philosophy of religion.
   Panpsychism says that phenomenality is everywhere. Pantheism says that divinity is everywhere.
These views appear parallel initially and that is why they are often contrasted or conflated. I argue,
however, that panpsychism is not exactly parallel to pantheism. We cannot derive pantheism merely
by replacing phenomenality in panpsychism with divinity in pantheism. I argue that what we can
derive by replacing phenomenality with divinity is (an extreme form of ) polytheism. I argue that if,
on the other hand, we replace divinity with phenomenality in pantheism we can derive cosmopsy-
chism. I analyse the relationships between these four views in detail. I argue based on the analysis that
we can develop a new way of undercutting the combination problem, which is widely considered
the greatest challenge for panpsychism.


                    2.  Relationships Between Pantheism, Panpsychism,
                               Polytheism and Cosmopsychism
Exactly how panpsychism should be defined is disputed. Some define it as a version of physicalism
while others define it as a version of dualism or nonphysicalist monism such as Russellian mon-
ism. Yet others define it as a form of idealism.2 I will not attempt to develop a precise definition of
panpsychism or specify necessary and sufficient conditions for it in this chapter. It does not make
much difference here which form of panpsychism is correct because our discussion applies equally
to most versions of panpsychism. We can start our discussion with the following broad formulation
of panpsychism:

   Panpsychism: Phenomenality is everywhere throughout the cosmos.



                                                  259
                                             Yujin Nagasawa


Classical panpsychists hold the radical view that mentality in general, which includes a broad range of
items such as thought, cognition, emotion and consciousness, is everywhere throughout the cosmos.
Yet many contemporary panpsychists hold a more modest thesis that phenomenal properties are eve-
rywhere throughout the cosmos. For our purposes in this chapter it suffices to adopt the preceding
formulation in terms of phenomenality rather than mentality in general.
   Panpsychism is often compared or conflated with pantheism, which can be formulated as follows:

   Pantheism: Divinity is everywhere throughout the cosmos.

One might wonder exactly what ‘divinity’ means here. I do not address this question in detail in this
chapter as it is a major question which philosophers of religion and theologians have disputed for
centuries. It suffices for our purposes to assume somewhat imprecisely that something is divine if
it is considered God or a god (but not another being – such as an angel – or the result of an act of
God or a god).
    The term ‘panpsychism’ originates from ‘panpsychia’, which the sixteenth-century Italian phi-
losopher Francesco Patrizi applied to his view that God’s phenomenality is present throughout the
cosmos. Hence, the first view that was labelled ‘panpsychism’ seems to be a version of pantheism.
This is understandable given how similar panpsychism and pantheism initially appear. In Greek
‘pan’ means ‘all’, ‘psyche’ means ‘soul’ or ‘mind’, and ‘theos’ means ‘God’. Hence, panpsychism is the
view that all is mind while pantheism is the view that all is God. If we replace ‘psyche’ with ‘theo’ in
‘panpsychism’ we obtain ‘pantheism’. Conversely, if we replace ‘theo’ with ‘psych’ in ‘pantheism’ we
obtain ‘panpsychism’.
    The relationship between panpsychism and pantheism has not been carefully discussed in the
literature but, as we have seen, it is commonly assumed that panpsychism and pantheism are at least
structurally parallel. I argue, however, that this is not correct. In what follows, I try to establish the
following six relevant theses:

	 (i)	 Panpsychism is not parallel to pantheism.
	(ii)	 Panpsychism is parallel to polytheism.
	(iii)	 Pantheism is parallel to cosmopsychism.
 	(iv)	 Cosmopsychism is not parallel to polytheism.
 	(v)	 Pantheism entails cosmopsychism but not vice versa.
 	(vi)	 Polytheism entails panpsychism but not vice versa.

The relationships between these six theses are illustrated in Figure 22.1.


                        (i)  Panpsychism is not Parallel to Pantheism
Again, panpsychism and pantheism are often thought to be parallel because panpsychism says that
phenomenality is everywhere and pantheism says that divinity is everywhere. I submit, however,
that they are radically distinct metaphysical views because the reason that panpsychism says that
phenomenality is everywhere is fundamentally different from the reason that pantheism says that
divinity is everywhere. Panpsychism says that phenomenality is everywhere throughout the cosmos
because everything in the cosmos is phenomenal. On the other hand, pantheism says that divinity is
everywhere throughout the cosmos because the cosmos as a whole is divine. In other words, while the
focus of panpsychism is on individual things in the cosmos the focus of pantheism is on the cosmos
as an entity in its own right. Panpsychism says that phenomenality is immanent and pantheism says
that divinity is immanent but they reach these conclusions from different directions – indeed from
the exact opposite directions.


                                                   260
                                           Yujin Nagasawa


can obtain cosmopsychism by replacing divinity in this thesis with phenomenality: phenomenality is
everywhere throughout the cosmos because the cosmos as a whole is phenomenal. These two theses
are clearly parallel. Among the four views that we address in this chapter, cosmopsychism is probably
the one that is least discussed in philosophy.
    It is important to grasp what cosmopsychism is not because many views may seem similar to cos-
mopsychism. First, cosmopsychism is distinct from the ‘Gaia hypothesis’, which regards the Earth as a
single organic living system (Lovelock 1979). While the focus of the Gaia hypothesis is on a specific
planet, the Earth, the focus of cosmopsychism is on the cosmos as a whole. Moreover, while the
Gaia hypothesis is formulated in terms of life, cosmopsychism is formulated in terms of conscious-
ness. Cosmopsychism is also distinct from Richard Maruce Bucke’s theory of ‘cosmic consciousness’
(Bucke 1901). Bucke maintains that cosmic consciousness is a form of consciousness which is higher
than the consciousness of ordinary people but appears in some specific people of ‘good intellect’,
such as Buddha and Christ. Contrary to cosmopsychists, Bucke does not attribute cosmic conscious-
ness to the cosmos as a whole. Perhaps Bucke’s view is comparable to John Hick’s thesis of the Real,
which I address ahead. Cosmopsychism is also distinct from Émile Durkheim’s view of ‘collective
consciousness’ (Durkheim 1893/1997). Collective consciousness is, according to Durkheim, a set of
shared beliefs and sentiments that are common to people in a given society. Collective consciousness
is broader than ordinary consciousness in its scope but it is not attributed to the cosmos as a whole.
Perhaps cosmopsychism is most closely related to the theory of anima mundi, or the ‘world soul’,
discussed in ancient Greek philosophy. In Timaeus 30b, Plato considers the world as a ‘living Creature
endowed with soul and reason owing to the providence of God’. A version of cosmopsychism we
discuss in this chapter is formulated in terms of consciousness rather than soul and reason, but the
attribution of mentality to the world as a whole in the theory of anima mundi is analogous to the
attribution of phenomenality to the cosmos in cosmopsychism.


                     (iv)  Cosmopsychism Is Not Parallel to Polytheism
I argued previously that panpsychism is not parallel to pantheism because while the focus of panpsy-
chism is on individual things in the cosmos the focus of pantheism is on the cosmos as a whole.
Similarly, cosmopsychism is not parallel to polytheism because while the focus of cosmopsychism is
on the cosmos as a whole the focus of polytheism is on individual things in the cosmos.


                (v)  Pantheism Entails Cosmopsychism but not Vice Versa
Again, pantheism holds that divinity is everywhere throughout the cosmos because the cosmos as a
whole is divine. Assuming that God has mental states with phenomenal properties, or, more simply
put, assuming that divinity entails phenomenality, pantheism entails the cosmopsychist thesis that the
cosmos as a whole is phenomenal. It makes sense in this respect that Patrizi calls his pantheistic view
panpsychism. This does not necessarily, however, mean that pantheism entails all versions of cos-
mopsychism because there can be a disagreement about the nature of the phenomenality in question.
Pantheism is a form of theism, so pantheists are likely to identify the phenomenality of the cosmos
with the phenomenality of God.3 That is, they are likely to hold that the phenomenality in question
corresponds to the consciousness or phenomenal states of the higher self. Yet some cosmopsychists
might reject the existence of a higher self and postulate the phenomenality of the cosmos as a whole
without assuming the self as its bearer. For example, some cosmopsychists might choose to attribute
to the cosmos as a whole what Gregg Rosenberg calls ‘protoconsciousness’, which does not require
a specific cognitive bearer, instead of full-blown consciousness, which does require it. According to
Rosenberg, properties of protoconsciousness are, contrary to what Chalmers calls ‘protophenom-
enal properties’, themselves phenomenal. Rosenberg remarks, “In contrast with protophenomenal


                                                 262
                              Pantheism, Polytheism, and Cosmopsychism


properties, the properties of protoconsciousness are phenomenal properties properly considered phe-
nomenal, but they do not require an associated cognitive engine to be experienced” (Rosenberg
2004: 97). That is, according to Rosenberg, while properties of protoconsciousness are phenomenal
on their own, they are not cognised by any subject. Having said that, we can set aside these details
because they do not affect my overall argument.
   It should be noted that while pantheism entails cosmopsychism, cosmopsychism does not seem
to entail pantheism. Even if, as cosmopsychism says, the cosmos as a whole is phenomenal it does not
immediately follow from the pantheistic thesis that the cosmos as a whole is divine (unless there is
a valid reason to think that the cosmos cannot be phenomenal without also being divine). It seems
possible that the phenomenality in question is not divine.


                 (vi)  Polytheism Entails Panpsychism but not Vice Versa
To the extent that pantheism entails cosmopsychism, polytheism entails panpsychism. Polytheism
says that divinity is everywhere throughout the cosmos because everything in the cosmos is divine.
Assuming that gods have mental states with phenomenal properties, or, more simply put, assuming
that divinity entails phenomenality, polytheism entails the panpsychist thesis that everything in the
cosmos is phenomenal. This does not, however, necessarily mean that polytheism entails all versions
of panpsychism because there can be a disagreement about what the phenomenality in question is.
Polytheism is a form of theism so polytheists are likely to identify the phenomenality of individual
things in the cosmos with the phenomenality of gods. That is, they are likely to hold that the phe-
nomenality in question corresponds to the consciousness or phenomenal states of selves. Yet some
panpsychists might reject the existence of selves in everything and postulate the phenomenality of
individual things in the cosmos without assuming selves as its bearers. For example, some panpsy-
chists might choose to attribute to individual things in the cosmos the aforementioned protocon-
sciousness instead of full-blown consciousness. Having said that, we can once again set aside these
details because they do not affect my overall argument.
    It should be noted that while polytheism entails panpsychism, panpsychism does not seem to
entail polytheism. (This is comparable to the fact that cosmopsychism does not seem to entail pan-
theism.) Even if, as panpsychism says, everything in the cosmos is phenomenal it does not imme-
diately follow from the polytheistic thesis that everything in the cosmos is divine (unless there is a
valid reason to think that individual things in the cosmos cannot be phenomenal without also being
divine). It seems possible that the phenomenality in question is not divine.


                      3.  Are Pantheism and Polytheism Compatible?
Let us set aside the philosophy of mind for a moment and focus on the relationship between the two
views in the philosophy of religion: pantheism and polytheism.
   Again, pantheism says that divinity is everywhere throughout the cosmos because the cosmos as
a whole is divine, and polytheism says that divinity is everywhere throughout the cosmos because
everything in the cosmos is divine. These two views seem completely distinct. While the focus of
pantheism is on the cosmos as a whole the focus of polytheism is on individual things in the cosmos.
Moreover, these two views appear to be incompatible. Pantheism is normally construed as a form
of monotheism as it postulates the cosmos as a sole God. Polytheism, on the other hand, postulates
more than one god, possibly infinitely many gods. It seems, therefore, that we cannot hold pantheism
and polytheism simultaneously.
   One might attempt to show that they are actually compatible. For example, one might purport
to derive the pantheist thesis that the cosmos as a whole is divine from the polytheist thesis that
everything in the cosmos is divine. Such a derivation, however, seems to commit the fallacy of


                                                 263
                                             Yujin Nagasawa


composition. It seems to assume erroneously that we can always derive something that is true of
the whole from something that is true of its parts. (Parallel example: It is fallacious to derive that
the cosmos as a whole is small from the fact that parts of the cosmos are small.) Similarly, one might
attempt to derive the polytheist thesis that everything in the cosmos is divine from the pantheist
thesis that the cosmos as a whole is divine. Such a derivation, however, seems to commit a fallacy
of decomposition. It seems to assume erroneously that we can always derive something that is
true of parts from something that is true of the whole. (Parallel example: it is fallacious to derive
that parts of the cosmos are massive from the fact that the cosmos as a whole is massive.) With my
­philosopher-of-religion hat on, I am interested in discovering if there is a way to show that panthe-
 ism and polytheism are compatible.
     John Hick’s (2004) strategy for defending religious pluralism can be construed as an attempt to
 resolve the apparent incompatibility between pantheism (or monotheism more generally) and poly-
 theism. Hick tries to resolve the apparent incompatibility by appealing to the notion of the ‘Real’,
 transcendental reality. He distinguishes ‘the Real in itself ’ and ‘the Real as humanly experienced’ (or
 manifested within the intellectual and phenomenal purview of a certain tradition). Hick says that
 the Real in itself is ‘transcategorial’ or ineffable. That is, our limited human language and thought
 cannot grasp its true nature. Therefore, for example, number does not apply to the Real. Yet people
 from divergent religious or cultural traditions perceive the Real differently due to human limitations;
 people in a monotheistic tradition see the Real as a single divine being and call it God while people
 in a polytheistic tradition see it as many divine beings and call them gods. This does not mean that
 polytheism and monotheism (like pantheism) are fundamentally incompatible; their incompatibility
 is merely epistemic, not ontological.
     I propose a new strategy to establish the compatibility between pantheism and polytheism. This
 strategy is distinct from Hick’s strategy because, unlike Hick’s, it is purely ontological. I mentioned
 earlier the claim that it is fallacious to derive properties of the whole from properties of its individual
 parts and to derive properties of individual parts from properties of the whole. But such derivations
 are not always fallacious. Suppose, for example, that there is a car that consists solely of parts that are
 thoroughly red. It is then right to infer that the car as a whole is thoroughly red. Suppose, to take
 another example, that there is a car that is thoroughly red. It is then right to infer that every indi-
 vidual part of the car is thoroughly red. These inferences about the car and its parts are valid and
 do not commit the fallacies of composition or decomposition because we have added a premise in
 each case – that a car consists solely of parts that are thoroughly red in the first case and that a car
 is thoroughly red in the second case. Similarly, we can show that polytheism can entail pantheism
 or that pantheism can entail polytheism by introducing extra assumptions. In this way, we can avoid
 the fallacy of composition and the fallacy of decomposition. Again, pantheism says that the cosmos
 as a whole is divine and polytheism says that everything in the cosmos is divine. In order to show
 that polytheism and pantheism are compatible, we can add an extra assumption that the cosmos as a
 whole is divine in virtue of everything in the cosmos being divine. Here, the divinity of individual things
 in the cosmos is considered ontologically prior to the divinity of the cosmos as a whole. Let us call
 this approach the ‘bottom-up approach’ because it starts with the divinity of individual things in the
 cosmos and we derive the divinity of the cosmos as a whole from it. There can also be a ‘top-down
 approach’: In order to show that pantheism and polytheism are compatible, we can add an extra
 assumption that everything in the cosmos is divine in virtue of the cosmos as a whole being divine. Here,
 the divinity of the cosmos as a whole is considered ontologically prior to the divinity of individual
 things in the cosmos.
     I do not have space to discuss whether either of the approaches ultimately succeeds. Nevertheless,
 they hint at a novel way of tackling an intractable problem in the philosophy of mind, which initially
 appears irrelevant to these approaches. The problem in question is the combination problem, which
 is widely considered the greatest challenge for panpsychism. I introduce the combination problem in


                                                    264
                              Pantheism, Polytheism, and Cosmopsychism


the next section, and explain in section 5 how we can utilise the previous observation of the apparent
incompatibility between pantheism and polytheism to undercut the combination problem.


                                4.  The Combination Problem
The main reason for holding panpsychism is that it avoids the problem of strong emergence, which
physicalism faces. This problem arises from the ‘unexpectedness’ of phenomenal properties: phe-
nomenal properties are instantiated by physical things in the cosmos such as aggregates of neurons.
This is unexpected and surprising because neurons seem to be fundamentally non-phenomenal. It
seems impossible to explain how something that is phenomenal can be instantiated by an aggregate
of something that is fundamentally non-phenomenal. Galen Strawson claims that the instantiation of
phenomenal properties by wholly non-phenomenal properties is as implausible as the instantiation
of spatial properties by wholly non-spatial properties (Strawson 2008: 64–5).
    Panpsychism avoids the problem of strong emergence by postulating that all physical things in
the cosmos, or at least physical ultimates, are themselves phenomenal. That is, according to panpsy-
chism, it is not surprising that phenomenal properties are instantiated by aggregates of neurons
because physical ultimates, which constitute neurons and other relevant physical entities, are already
phenomenal. That is, phenomenal properties of physical ultimates are fundamental phenomenal
building blocks. According to panpsychism, therefore, ‘smaller’ phenomenal properties realised by
physical ultimates are more fundamental than ‘larger’ phenomenal properties realised by the brain.
(I use the terms ‘larger’ and ‘smaller’ metaphorically here.) Panpsychism is comparable to the afore-
mentioned bottom-up approach for deriving pantheism from panpsychism. Panpsychism says that,
because physical ultimates are phenomenal, certain larger objects constituted by them, such as an
aggregate of neurons, if not the cosmos as a whole, are also phenomenal.
    Panpsychism may succeed in responding to the problem of strong emergence but it pays a price.
That is, it faces a difficult problem of its own: the combination problem. The combination problem
arises from the apparent discrepancy between, on the one hand, a highly complex, structured aggre-
gate of neurons and, on the other hand, a smooth, uniform phenomenal experience such as a visual
experience. The problem can be formulated as the following objection to panpsychism: ordinary
phenomenal experiences realised by the brain present themselves as smooth, continuous, and unified.
They do have distinct aspects but they have an underlying homogeneity. According to panpsychism,
however, all neurons instantiate phenomenal properties and our ordinary phenomenal experiences
result from combinations of these properties. It is hard to see, however, how ‘smaller’ phenomenal
properties of neurons could add up to manifest the homogeneous character of ‘larger’ phenomenal
properties instantiated by the brain.4
    The combination problem is widely recognised as the most intractable problem for panpsychism.
David Chalmers, for example, contends that it “is certainly the hardest problem for any sort of Rus-
sellian view [which includes a version of panpsychism]” (1996: 307). William Seager regards it as
“the most difficult problem facing any panpsychist theory of consciousness” (Seager 1995: 280). In
the next section, I argue that the combination problem can be avoided by replacing panpsychism
with cosmopsychism.


       5.  Cosmopsychism as a Way of Undercutting the Combination Problem
The combination problem arises because panpsychism is a bottom-up view. It regards ‘smaller’ phe-
nomenal properties instantiated by physical ultimates to be ontologically prior to ‘larger’ phenomenal
properties instantiated by the brain. The smoothness, uniformity and homogeneity of the ‘larger’
phenomenal properties are lost on the panpsychist assumption that they are aggregates of ‘smaller’
consciousnesses instantiated by physical ultimates.


                                                 265
                                              Yujin Nagasawa


    The combination problem does not arise, however, if we adopt cosmopsychism because it is a
top-down view. Recall the top-down approach to deriving polytheism from pantheism discussed
earlier. According to this approach, we can derive the divinity of individual things in the cosmos
from the divinity of the cosmos as a whole by holding that the divinity of the cosmos as a whole is
ontologically prior to the divinity of individual things in the cosmos. Similarly, we can adopt cos-
mopsychism and contend that the phenomenality of the cosmos as a whole entails the phenomenal-
ity of individual things in the cosmos by holding that the phenomenality of the cosmos as a whole
is ontologically prior to the phenomenality of individual things in the cosmos.5 In the bottom-up
approach of panpsychism, the ‘smaller’ consciousnesses are the more fundamental they are. The con-
sciousnesses of physical ultimates are the ‘smallest’ and most fundamental, and any ‘larger’ conscious-
nesses are compositions of them. In the top-down approach of cosmopsychism, on the other hand,
the ‘larger’ consciousnesses are the more fundamental they are. The consciousness of the cosmos is
the ‘largest’ and most fundamental, and any ‘smaller’ consciousnesses are derivatives of it.
    We can illustrate these points with an analogy. Suppose, per impossibile, there is an absolutely perfectly
smooth painting, which is analogous to a smooth, homogeneous phenomenal experience instantiated
by the brain. Such a painting cannot be an aggregate of small dots, which are analogous to phenomenal
properties of physical ultimates. Yet it can well be a segment of a larger painting that is equally smooth
and homogeneous, which is analogous to phenomenal properties of the cosmos as a whole. We face
the combination problem in the bottom-up approach of panpsychism because we try to derive the
‘larger’ consciousness instantiated by the brain (an absolutely perfectly smooth painting) from the
‘smaller’ consciousness of physical ultimates (small dots). But we do not face the same problem if we
try to derive the consciousness instantiated by the brain (an absolutely perfectly smooth painting) from
the ‘larger’ consciousness of the cosmos as a whole (a larger painting that is equally perfectly smooth).
    One might claim, however, that cosmopsychism still fails to respond to the following problem,
which I call the ‘derivation problem’: How could the consciousnesses of individuals like us be
derived from the consciousness of the cosmos as a whole? It is not easy to respond to the derivation
problem because we do not know the exact nature of the consciousness of the cosmos. Yet we can
speculate about how we might be able to respond to the problem. It is reasonable to assume that the
consciousness of the cosmos is somewhat comparable to the consciousnesses of individuals because,
after all, it is a form of consciousness. If we can then show that the consciousnesses of individuals can
be divided into ‘smaller’, less fundamental segments, then we have reason to think that the conscious-
ness of the cosmos can also be divided into ‘smaller’, less fundamental segments. And it seems indeed
possible to divide the consciousnesses of individuals into ‘smaller’ segments.
    Consider, for example, a visual experience. A visual experience can be considered a unity which
may be segmented into distinguishable colour experiences (e.g., experiences corresponding to red
and green hues) or experiences of separable regions in space (e.g., experiences corresponding to
the right-hand side and the left-hand side of the visual field). Yet the whole visual experience is
considered a unity which is ontologically prior to the segments. Perhaps the consciousness of the
cosmos relates itself to ‘smaller’ consciousnesses, such as consciousnesses instantiated by the brain,
in a comparable way. The consciousness of the cosmos is ontologically prior to the consciousnesses
of individuals, so it is not the case that the consciousnesses of individuals are building blocks of the
consciousness of the cosmos. On the contrary, smooth, continuous and unified consciousnesses of
individuals are derived or segmented from the smooth, continuous and unified consciousness of the
cosmos. Hence, it seems reasonable to think that cosmopsychism can answer the derivation problem.6
    Cosmopsychism would not be attractive if it entailed that we have to give up the virtues of
panpsychism. As mentioned earlier, the main virtue of panpsychism is that it provides a successful
answer to the problem of strong emergence confronting physicalism. Again, the problem is con-
cerned with the difficulty, if not the impossibility, of explaining how phenomenal properties can
be instantiated by aggregates of neurons, which are fundamentally non-phenomenal. The problem


                                                    266
                                    Pantheism, Polytheism, and Cosmopsychism


arises for physicalism because physicalism adopts the bottom-up approach and holds that things on
the fundamental, bottom level are physical, that is, non-phenomenal. While panpsychism adopts the
bottom-up approach too, it avoids the problem by holding that things on the fundamental, bottom
level are phenomenal rather than physical. Panpsychism says that it is not surprising that the brain
can instantiate phenomenal properties because neurons, which are ontologically prior to the brain
according to the bottom-up approach, are already phenomenal. Cosmopsychism avoids the problem
of strong emergence in a unique way. It puts everything upside down and adopts the top-down,
rather than bottom-up, approach. It holds that the problem does not arise because things on the fun-
damental, top level are phenomenal. According to cosmopsychism, it is not surprising that the brain
can instantiate phenomenal properties because the cosmos as a whole, which is ontologically prior
to the brain according to the top-down approach, is already phenomenal. Whether the fundamental
level is on the top or bottom of reality, if things on the fundamental level are phenomenal the prob-
lem of strong emergence does not arise.
    In sum: Physicalism faces the problem of strong emergence. Panpsychism avoids the problem of
strong emergence but it faces the combination problem. Cosmopsychism is an attractive alternative
because it avoids both the problem of strong emergence and the combination problem.


                                                  6. Conclusion
We have compared and discussed the relationships between four views: panpsychism, cosmopsy-
chism, polytheism and cosmopsychism. The relationship between panpsychism and cosmopsychism
is comparable to the relationship between polytheism and pantheism. I have argued that polytheism
and pantheism can be compatible because there is a way to derive polytheism from pantheism and
vice versa. By utilising the top-down approach to derive polytheism from pantheism I have devel-
oped a way of avoiding the combination problem. I have argued that we can avoid the combination
problem if we endorse cosmopsychism in conjunction with the top-down approach, according to
which the consciousness of the cosmos is ontologically prior to the consciousnesses of individuals
like us. I have also argued that cosmopsychism does not sacrifice the main virtue of panpsychism; it
undermines the problem of strong emergence to the same extent that panpsychism does.7


                                                        Notes
	1.	 For another attempt to bridge debates in the philosophy of mind and the philosophy of religion by consid-
           ering their parallel structures see Nagasawa (2008). There I develop new responses to Thomas Nagel’s bat
           argument and Frank Jackson’s Mary argument in the philosophy of mind, both of which are directed against
           physicalism, by contrasting them with arguments against the existence of God in the philosophy of religion.
 	2.	 For a variety of formulations of panpsychism see this volume and Brüntrup and Jaskolla (2016).
  	3.	 By the claim that pantheism is a form of theism I mean that it postulates the existence of God, whether or not
           the pantheistic God is radically different from the God according to traditional theism. In characterising the
           uniqueness of pantheism in comparison with traditional theism, Michael Levine calls pantheism ‘nontheistic
           theism’ (Levine 1994: 3).
   	4.	 This problem is sometimes called the ‘grain problem’ or the ‘structural mismatch problem’. Some claim that
           there are several other versions of the combination problem. See Chalmers (2016).
    	5.	 Similar points are made or anticipated by Philip Goff (2017), Ludwig Jaskolla and Alexander Buck (2012),
           Freya Mathews (2011) and Nagasawa and Wager (2016) but the metaphysical grounds of their views differ
           radically from each other.
     	6.	 See Nagasawa and Wager (2016) for a more thorough defence of this idea.
      	7.	 I would like to thank Philip Goff, Nino Kadić and Khai Wager for helpful comments on an earlier version
           of this essay. This publication was made possible through the generous support of a grant from the John
           Templeton Foundation. I would particularly like to thank Alex Arnold, John Churchill and Michael Murray
           from the Foundation for their help. The opinions expressed in this publication are those of the author and
           do not necessarily reflect the views of the Foundation.


                                                          267
                                                Yujin Nagasawa


                                                  References
Brüntrup, Godehard, and Jaskolla, Ludwig (eds.) (2016). Panpsychism. New York: Oxford University Press.
Bucke, Richard Maruce (1901). Cosmic Consciousness: A Study in the Evolution of the Human Mind. New York:
    E.P. Dutton and Company.
Chalmers, David (1996). The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chalmers, David (2016). ‘The Combination Problem for Panpsychism’. In G. Brüntrup and L. Jaskolla (eds.),
    Panpsychism. New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 179–214.
Durkheim, Émile (1893/1997). The Division of Labour in Society. Trans. W. D. Hallas. New York: Free Press.
Goff, Philip (2017). Consciousness and Fundamental Reality. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hick, John (2004). An Interpretation of Religion: Human Responses to the Transcendent. Basingstoke: Macmillan.
Jaskolla, Ludwig J., and Buck, Alexander J. (2012). ‘Does Panexperiential Holism Solve the Combination Prob-
    lem?’ Journal of Consciousness Studies, 19: 190–9.
Levine, Michael (1994). Pantheism. London: Routledge.
Lovelock, James (1979). Gaia: A New Look at Life on Earth. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mathews, Freya (2011). ‘Panpsychism as Paradigm’. In M. Blamauer (ed.), The Mental as Fundamental. Frankfurt:
    Ontos, pp. 141–55.
Nagasawa, Yujin (2008). God and Phenomenal Consciousness: A Novel Approach to Knowledge Arguments. Cam-
    bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nagasawa, Yujin, and Wager, Khai (2016). ‘Priority Cosmopsychism’. In G. Brüntrup and L. Jaskolla (eds.),
    Panpsychism. New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 113–29.
Rosenberg, Gregg (2004). A Place for Consciousness. New York: Oxford University Press.
Seager, William (1995).‘Consciousness, Information and Panpsychism’. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 2–3: 272–88.
Strawson, Galen (2008). Real Materialism and Other Essays. Oxford: Oxford University Press.




                                                       268
                    23
            THE ARGUMENT FOR
            PANPSYCHISM FROM
         EXPERIENCE OF CAUSATION
                                     Hedda Hassel Mørch


                                          1. Introduction
Panpsychism is the view that all things are associated with some form of consciousness or phenom-
enal experience. In recent literature, panpsychism has been defended by appeal to two main argu-
ments: first, an argument from philosophy of mind, according to which panpsychism is the only view
which successfully integrates consciousness into the physical world (Strawson 2006; Chalmers 2013);
second, an argument from categorical properties, according to which panpsychism offers the only
positive account of the categorical or intrinsic nature of physical reality (Seager 2006; Adams 2007;
Alter and Nagasawa 2012).1
   Historically, however, panpsychism has also been defended by appeal to a third argument based
on considerations about the nature and observability of causation. This argument has not been much
discussed in recent times. Here is a concise version from William James:

    The concrete perceptual flux, taken just as it comes, offers in our own activity-situations
    perfectly comprehensible instances of causal agency . . . If we took these experiences as the
    type of what actual causation is, we should have to ascribe to cases of causation outside of
    our life, to physical cases also, an inwardly experiential nature. In other words, we should
    have to espouse a so-called “pan-psychic” philosophy.
                                                                               ( James 1911: 218)

James here suggests that we have direct experience of causation in our own agency. He thereby
directly contradicts David Hume, who famously denied that we have any experience of causation.
James goes on to claim that if this experience is representative of causation in general, it follows that
all causation is mental, and that panpsychism is true.
    This kind of argument for panpsychism can be called the argument from (experience of ) cau-
sation. This chapter offers, first, a history of this argument and arguments closely related to it, and
second, an analysis of the argument – is it valid, are its premises in any way defensible, and how does
it relate to the other, more popular arguments for panpsychism from philosophy of mind and cat-
egorical properties?




                                                  269
                                          Hedda Hassel Mørch


                          2.  Historical Proponents of the Argument

                                            2.1. Leibniz
G. W. Leibniz held that reality ultimately consists of mind-like substances called monads. Among his
arguments for this view is the argument from causation:2

    The clearest idea of active power comes to us from the mind. So active power occurs only
    in things which are analogous to minds, that is, in entelechies; for strictly matter exhibits
    only passive power.
                                                                      (Leibniz 1704/1981: 171)

    I found then that [the nature of all substances] consists in force, and that from this there
    follows something analogous to sensation and appetite, so that we must conceive them on
    the model of the notion we have of souls.
                                                                      (Leibniz 1695/1989: 139)

Active power, for Leibniz, is the power to affect other substances, while passive power is the power
to be affected. He holds that active power must belong to all substances, because, echoing Plato’s
Eleatic Stranger, “what does not act does not exist” (1691/1965: 470).3 He finds it self-evident that
we experience active power in our own thinking and willing. To the suggestion that this might
be denied, he responds that “nothing in the world appears to be more contrary to reason” (Leib-
niz 1698/1908: 126). He thinks we should not posit non-mental active power in other substances
because we do not have as clear an idea (perhaps no idea at all) of non-mental power. He also
adheres to the principle that nature does not make leaps, i.e., is everywhere continuous. We know
from our own case that mental powers exist, but not that non-mental powers do, and there would
be a discontinuity between mental and non-mental powers; therefore, he holds, we should not posit
non-mental powers.


                                        2.2. Schopenhauer
Arthur Schopenhauer held a dual-aspect panpsychist view, according to which from the outside, the
world appears as representation (Vorstellung), but from the inside, it appears as will (Wille).4 The will
is both mental and causal in nature. Like Leibniz, Schopenhauer holds that all things must have causal
powers or be animated by forces. Furthermore, the only way to understand these powers or forces
is by analogy with our own power to act. Specifically, Schopenhauer argues, all causation must be
driven by a kind of motivation:

    Only from a comparison with what goes on within me when my body performs an action
    from a motive that moves me, with what is the inner nature of my own changes deter-
    mined by external grounds or reasons, can I obtain an insight into the way in which those
    inanimate bodies change under the influence of causes, and thus understand what is their
    inner nature.
                                                            (Schopenhauer 1859/1966a: 125)

    from the law of motivation I must learn to understand the law of causality in its inner sig-
    nificance. Spinoza (Epist. 62) says that if a stone projected through the air had consciousness,
    it would imagine it was flying of its own will. I add merely that the stone would be right.
                                                                  (Schopenhauer 1859/1966a: 126)


                                                  270
                              The Argument From Experience of Causation


                                              2.3. James
   William James was committed to panpsychism throughout large parts of his career. As we saw
previously, James claims that if we experience causation in agency, then panpsychism may follow. In
other work, he explicitly endorses that we really have such as experience:

    the recesses of feeling, the darker, blinder strata of character, are the only places in the world
    in which we catch real fact in the making, and directly perceive how events happen, and
    how work is actually done.
                                                                           ( James 1902/1987: 448–9)

He continues:

    Hume’s criticism has banished causation from the world of physical objects, and “Science”
    is absolutely satisfied to define cause in terms of concomitant change. . . . The “original” of
    the notion of causation is in our inner personal experience, and only there can causes in
    the old-fashioned sense be directly observed and described.
                                                             ( James 1902/1987: 449, footnote 1)

In this passage, James explicitly points to the experience of agency as a response to Hume’s famous
query as to whether we have any impression (or experience) that matches our commonsense idea
(or concept) of causal power. In later work, we find an elaborate discussion how this idea leads into
the “region of panpsychic . . . speculation” (1912: 189).


                           2.4.  Whitehead, Hartshorne and Others
A. N. Whitehead developed a distinctive process-ontological version of panpsychism, according to
which the fundamental components of reality are “occasions”, i.e., events or instantiations, of experi-
ence. He argues that:

    in so far as we apply notions of causation to the understanding of events in nature, we must
    conceive these events under the general notions which apply to occasions of experience.
    For we can only understand causation in terms of our observations of these occasions.
                                                                  (Whitehead 1933/1967: 184).

    Unlike other proponents of the argument, Whitehead does not focus on volition or motivation
as the basis of our experience of causation, but rather on the relation between memories and per-
ceptions and the events remembered or perceived. In this, he is followed by Charles Hartshorne, a
subsequent process philosopher:

    Psychicalism [i.e., panpsychism] has the signal advantage, hinted at by Francis Bacon,5
    that it can construe causal connectedness of events in terms of generalized concepts
    of memory and perception. Materialism and dualism lack these resources and are in
    Hume’s predicament about causality. Memory and perception are effects whose causes
    are intrinsically given to them. These are our only clues to the intelligible connected-
    ness of events.
                                     (Hartshorne 1977: ch. 3; see also Hartshorne 1954, 1973)


                                                   271
                                          Hedda Hassel Mørch


Other philosophers who have endorsed versions of the argument from causation include James
Ward (1915: 172–173), G. F. Stout (1931, 1935) and Friedrich Schiller (1906, 1907). These philoso-
phers mainly base their arguments on volition or motivation.
   A similar argument for a weaker conclusion can be found with Isaac Newton. Newton often
engaged in metaphysical speculation about the origin of the laws of motion and gravity and the
nature of force. On the one hand, he considered whether they might originate directly from God.
But he also considered whether laws and forces could be grounded in the powers we experience as
underlying our own motion: “We find in ourselves a power of moving our bodies by our thoughts”.
From this, he infers: “we cannot say that all nature is not alive” (Newton in a draft of Opticks, tran-
scribed in McGuire 1968: 171; see also Gabbey 2002). In other words, from the fact that we seem to
experience causation in agency, Newton concludes that panpsychism is possibly true.


                          3.  Historical Proponents of the Reductio

                                             3.1. Hume
Historically, several philosophers have also put forth a modus tollens, or reductio ad absurdum, version
of the argument – according to which one of the premises must be rejected because the panpsychist
conclusion is unacceptable. One example is Hume himself:

    It may be pretended, that the resistance which we meet with in bodies, obliging us fre-
    quently to exert our force, and call up all our power, this gives us the idea of force and
    power. It is this nisus, or strong endeavour, of which we are conscious, that is the original
    impression from which this idea is copied. But . . . we attribute power to a vast number of
    objects, where we never can suppose this resistance or exertion of force to take place; . . . to
    inanimate matter, which is not capable of this sentiment. . . . It must, however, be confessed,
    that the animal nisus, which we experience, though it can afford no accurate precise idea of
    power, enters very much into that vulgar, inaccurate idea, which is formed of it.
                                         (Hume 1748/1999: 139, footnote 13, emphasis original)

    Somewhat surprisingly, Hume here admits that we do have an impression to match our idea of
causation. Yet, he claims that this impression does not match any accurate and precise idea. One of
Hume’s reasons for dismissing the impression is that it would lead to a conflict with the assumption
that matter is not capable of sentiment; or in other words, that if the impression were accurate, it
would entail panpsychism. He thereby affirms the validity of the argument from causation but opts to
reject the premise that things have (knowable) causal powers rather than accepting the conclusion.6
    This shows that, from the very beginning, reductionism about causation was not solely motivated
by empiricism, as is often claimed, but also by resistance to panpsychism.


                                              3.2. Reid
Thomas Reid was one of the earliest critics of Hume’s view of causation. Reid argues that we know
causal powers from the experience of agency, and furthermore, that only conscious beings could
have them:

    of the manner in which a cause may exert its active power, we can have no conception, but
    from consciousness of the manner in which our own active power is exerted.
                                                                             (Reid 1788: 37)



                                                  272
                              The Argument From Experience of Causation


    Every thing we can discover in our own constitution leads us to think, that active power
    cannot be exerted without will and intelligence.
                                                                         (Reid 1788: 40–1)

   One might think this would lead Reid to accept panpsychism, but this he considers primitive and
unscientific (1788: 282–3). Instead, he rejects the premise that purely physical, non-conscious things
have causal powers. How does he think purely physical things get by without their own causal pow-
ers? Reid concludes that they must be governed by the active power of God – another conscious
being. In other words, he adopts a form of occasionalism with respect to the inanimate world.


                                          3.3. Newtonians
In the days of Newtonian science, many scientists were dissatisfied with Newton’s concept of force.
As mentioned, Newton himself understood force in partially metaphysical terms. Many of his readers
also engaged in extensive metaphysical speculation about the true nature of force (see Jammer 1957:
ch. 8). On the other hand, many scientists came to see the concept as essentially anthropomorphic.
They were therefore motivated to pursue a purely relational, mathematical definition of force –
effectively endorsing the reductio (see Jammer 1957: ch. 11).


                                              3.4. Mach
The scientist and philosopher Ernst Mach played an important role in the development of a rela-
tional reduction of force. He held that the concept of causation, which is linked to the metaphysi-
cally suggestive, unreduced concept of force, should be eliminated altogether, partly on the basis of
its inherent anthropomorphism:7

    I hope that the science of the future will discard the idea of cause and effect, as being for-
    mally obscure, and in my feeling that these ideas contain a strong tincture of fetishism [i.e.,
    animism, panpsychism], I am certainly not alone. The more proper course is, to regard the
    abstract determinative elements of a fact as interdependent, in a purely logical way, as the
    mathematician or geometer does. True, by comparison with the will, forces are brought
    nearer to our feeling; but it may be that ultimately the will itself will be made clearer by
    comparison with the accelerations of masses.8
                                                                            (Mach 1897: 253–4)


                                         3.5. Collingwood
Another eliminativist about causation is R. G. Collingwood. In his article “On the So-Called Idea
of Causation”, Collingwood claims:

    In the first sense of the word cause, that which is caused is the free and deliberate act of a
    conscious and responsible agent, and “causing” him to do it means affording him a motive
    for doing it.
                                                                         (Collingwood 1937: 86)

   This is “historically the original sense [of the word ‘cause’ . . .] and remains strictly speaking the
one and only ‘proper’ sense” (1937: 85). From this he concludes that Newton, with his distinc-
tion between caused (forced) and uncaused (inertial) motions, effectively advocated a “reduction of



                                                  273
                                          Hedda Hassel Mørch


physics to social psychology” (1937: 105). Accordingly, he recommends that the concept of causation
should be outright eliminated.


                                            3.6. Russell
Bertrand Russell, in his “On the Notion of Cause”, argues:

    the word “cause” is so inextricably bound up with misleading associations as to make its
    complete extrusion from the philosophical vocabulary desirable. . . . The law of causality,
    I believe, like much that passes muster among philosophers, is a relic of a bygone age, sur-
    viving, like the monarchy, only because it is erroneously supposed to do no harm.
                                                                               (Russell 1912: 1)

Part of the reason why the concept of causation is harmful is its connection with agency:

    The importance of these considerations lies partly in the fact that they lead to a more cor-
    rect account of scientific procedure, partly in the fact that they remove the analogy with
    human volition which makes the conception of cause such a fruitful source of fallacies.
                                                                                (Russell 1912: 9)

Russell does not explicitly claim that panpsychism constitutes or is involved in the fallacies in ques-
tion, but it is a natural interpretation.9


                            4.  Recent Proponents of the Reductio
The argument from causation has not found many contemporary defenders, but the reductio has
found quite a few. Since the decline of the anti-metaphysical influence of logical empiricism, non-
reductionism about causation has been on the rise. Edward Madden and Peter Hare were early
proponents of the revival of non-reductive causal powers metaphysics. They argue that we should
reject the view that causation can only be experienced in agency because it leads to panpsychism:

    It is most crucial to avoid what we like to call the “inferential predicament,” because getting
    involved in it forces one inevitably into pan-psychism and animism, an unmitigated disaster
    in the eyes of a great majority of contemporary philosophers. . . . The inferential predica-
    ment arises by taking volitional contexts as the only ones in which causal power is directly
    perceived, and then projecting such experienced power onto objects and events in order to
    make sense of causal necessities in the physical world.
                                                                      (Madden and Hare 1971: 23)

    The best, and perhaps only, way to avoid the inferential predicament and its pan-psychical
    consequence is to reject the premise that one is directly aware of causal power only in
    volitional situations.
                                                                 (Madden and Hare 1971: 25)

They proceed to argue that we are rather directly aware of causal power in the physical world.
   David Armstrong is known for developing the view that causation is grounded in irreducible
universal laws, as opposed to causal powers. He also endorses a version of the reductio, but takes it to
indicate only the falsity of dispositionalism, i.e., realism about causal powers, as opposed to realism
about irreducible laws:


                                                  274
                                 The Argument From Experience of Causation


    a disposition as conceived by a Dispositionalist is like a congealed hypothetical fact or state
    of affairs: ‘If this object is suitably struck, then it is caused (or there is a certain objective
    probability of its being caused) to shatter.’ It is, as it were, an inference ticket (as Ryle said),
    but one that exists in nature (as Ryle would hardly have allowed). That is all there is to a
    particular disposition. Consider, then, the critical case where the disposition is not mani-
    fested. The object still has within itself, essentially, a reference to the manifestation that did not occur.
    It points to a thing that does not exist. This must remind us of the intentionality of mental
    states and processes, the characteristic that Brentano held was the distinguishing mark of
    the mental, that is, their being directed upon objects or states of affairs that need not exist.
    This intentionality of the mental undoubtedly exists. But for physicalists such as myself it
    presents a prima facie problem. If the mental has intentionality, and if, as Brentano thought,
    it is also ontologically irreducible, then there is something here that would appear to falsify
    Physicalism. Physicalists about the mind are therefore found trying to give some ontologi-
    cally reductive account of the intentionality of the mental. But if irreducible dispositions
    and powers are admitted for physical things, then intentionality, irreducible intentionality,
    has turned up in everything there is.
        Is this not objectionable? Does it not assimilate the physical to the mental, rather than
    the other way around?
                                                                  (Armstrong 1997: 79, emphasis original)

   Intentionality is the manner in which thoughts, actions and other mental phenomena can be
about or directed toward other things. Armstrong observes that dispositions must also be conceived
as directed toward something. Fragility, he says, refers or points to shattering. Similarly, we could
think of electrons with the power of charge as referring, pointing, or perhaps aiming, toward repel-
ling other electrons. Armstrong claims that if dispositions and powers are irreducible, they can only
be understood as intentional and therefore mental, which he finds unacceptable. He concludes that
dispositions and powers must be reducible to laws, which, on his view, have nothing to do with
intentionality.
   C. B. Martin and Karl Pfeifer consider a similar reductio based on the similarities between causation
and intentionality. They argue:

    the most typical characterizations of intentionality . . . all fail to distinguish intentional men-
    tal states from non-intentional dispositional physical states. Accepting any of these current
    accounts will be to take a quick road to panpsychism!
                                                                        (Martin and Pfeifer 1986: 531)

After surveying various accounts of intentionality, they assert:

    Somewhat ironically, if we were to leave our discussion at this point, someone might inter-
    pret it as an argument for panpsychism, in that the characterizations of intentionality that
    we have discussed apply to anything (mental or physical) that has causal dispositions. For
    some, this may be a happy result – for us it is a reductio ad absurdum and an invitation to look
    elsewhere for an account of the intentional.
                                                                     (Martin and Pfeifer 1986: 551)

   Martin and Pfeifer only take this as a reductio of a certain kind of account of intentionality.
They think dispositionalism can be made compatible with physicalism by revising our account of
intentionality.


                                                        275
                                           Hedda Hassel Mørch


                                 5.  An Analysis of the Argument
The argument from causation can be understood as having the following general form:

	I.	Non-reductionism: All physical things have causal powers.
	II.	 Mental causation: The only causal powers whose nature we can know, or positively conceive of,
       are mental.
	III.	 Non-skeptical realism: The nature of the causal powers of physical things is knowable, or positively
       conceivable.

Therefore,

	IV.	 Panpsychism: All physical things have mental properties.

This argument seems valid. But are the premises defensible? Let us consider them one by one.


                               5.1.  Premise I: Non-Reductionism
Causal powers can be roughly defined as intrinsic properties in virtue of which causes produce or
bring about their effects, or make them happen, and thereby metaphysically necessitate them.10 Note that
causal necessitation is defeasible, not absolute: causes only necessitate their effects in the absence of
interference from other causes, i.e., ceteris paribus.
    On Hume’s view, there is no such thing as causal powers (at least not as far as we know). On the
Humean regularity view of causation, to say that one thing causes another is merely to say that things
of the first kind happen to be regularly followed by the things of the second kind. Or in other words,
causal regularities are metaphysically contingent, not necessary.
    According to Premise I of the argument from causation, all physical things have causal powers.
There are many different arguments that could support this view, but there is one which is especially
relevant for the argument from causation. This is the very basic argument from appearances: causa-
tion appears (in our experience) to involve causal powers and we have no good reason to distrust
this appearance.
    Most reductionists and skeptics about causation, including Hume, agree that causes pre-theoretically
appear to necessitate their effects, but take this appearance to be illusory. According to Hume, all
appearances of causal power are based on our own habits or subjective expectations that certain kinds
of events always go together. Hume supports this via a link between conceivability and possibility. On
Hume’s view, if we really experience necessary connections between objects or events themselves, i.e.,
something in virtue of which it would be impossible for an effect not to occur given the cause (in the
absence of interference), then it should also be inconceivable for the effect not to occur given the cause
(in the absence of interference). But, Hume argues, we can conceive of any cause with or without any
effect, which shows that we experience nothing in virtue of which their connection is necessary.
    How can Premise I be defended against this Humean view? Some argue that we really do experi-
ence causal powers in the external, physical world (Michotte 1963; Anscombe 1971). But if Premise
I is defended on this basis, there is a risk of undermining Premise II, according to which the only
causal powers we can know, or positively conceive of, are mental.
    Another option, that avoids this problem, is to rather defend Premise I on the basis of Premise II.
Assuming we really experience our own causal powers in agency, as suggested by many philosophers
discussed so far, this would show that some physical things, human beings, have causal powers. It does
not follow from this that all physical things have them, as Premise I asserts. But it would be natural to
suppose that all causation is of the same general metaphysical kind. It therefore seems arguable that


                                                   276
                               The Argument From Experience of Causation


if some causes necessitate their effects in virtue of causal powers, as per Premise II, then all causes do,
as per Premise I.
    Another way of defending Premise I would be to appeal to additional, more general arguments
against the regularity theory. One such argument is that if causation is contingent, it would be great
“cosmic coincidence” that the world is regular, which seems highly implausible for various rea-
sons (see, e.g., Armstrong 1983; Strawson 1987). Note, however, that these arguments leave it open
whether causes necessitate their effects in virtue of intrinsic causal powers of in virtue of extrinsic
governing laws a la Armstrong.


                               5.2.  Premise II: Mental Causation
Premise II says that the only kinds of causal powers whose nature we can know, or positively con-
ceive of, are mental. This is the most central premise of the argument from causation, and also the
most controversial. As noted, Hume takes inconceivability as a criterion of necessity. Taking this as
a starting point, there are two available strategies for defending Premise II: (1) to argue that some
mental properties, but no non-mental properties, are truly inconceivable without their effects; (2) to
argue that Hume’s criterion is too strong, and that we should rather adopt another criterion, which
only mental properties can meet.
    Several proponents of the argument from causation hold that in voluntary action, we experience
ourselves as exerting will, and to exert will is to exert power. Several philosophers who would not
support the panpsychist conclusion also hold a similar view (Locke 1689/1975: I.XXI.4, Searle 1983;
Strawson 1992: ch. 9; Armstrong 1997).
    Hume considers this view, but objects that we can easily conceive of willing, intending or try-
ing to do something but where no action follows. This seems correct. In the case of physical action,
it seems conceivable that someone tries to move their limbs, but their limbs refuse to move, in the
absence of any interference from other causes. The same holds for mental action: for example, it
seems conceivable that someone tries to solve a simple math problem, or tries to remember some-
thing, but the right solution or memory just fails to come to mind, without any interference. It
therefore seems that willing, intending or trying cannot be defended as experiences of causal power
via strategy (1); that is, they do not meet the inconceivability criterion.
    But they could perhaps be defended by strategy (2); that is, by showing that they meet a weaker
criterion. Even if we do not experience a strictly necessary connection between will and action,
the experience of will might still seem to give a more direct experience of causal power than the
experience of external, physical causation. Many philosophers have noted that our own actions are
directly experienced as events that do not just passively happen to us; rather, it feels as though we
actively bring them about (Ginet 1997; Bayne and Levy 2006; Horgan 2011). We do not inductively
infer that some bodily events are actions caused by us (e.g., walking, raising an arm) while others are
not (e.g., stumbling, having one’s arm lifted by someone else); rather, it seems we can directly feel
the difference.
    Some would argue that we can also sometimes non-inferentially detect physical causation, for
example, there is a sense in which many mechanical interactions such as collisions just look causal
(Michotte 1963). Such interactions could clearly conceivably be different, but if the conceivability
criterion is relaxed for volition, it should arguably also be relaxed for physical causation. But the case
for volition might still be stronger than the case for physical causes. Our ability to detect physical,
non-volitional causation seems mostly limited to specific kinds of mechanical cases (such as solid
objects colliding). In other contexts, it often goes wrong (for example, concerning action at a dis-
tance). It is also not highly reliable within the mechanical context: sequences that are not really
causal can easily be set up to look causal. In contrast, our ability to distinguish our own actions from
mere happenings seems much more general and reliable (that is to say, we are often wrong about


                                                   277
                                           Hedda Hassel Mørch


the results of our actions, but not about whether or not we are acting at all), which suggests that we
have a more immediate awareness of volitional causation. In further support of this, some empirical
research suggests that our phenomenology of effort tends to accurately track our actual, physically
measurable energy expenditure (Bayne and Levy 2006). We do not seem to have a similar ability to
directly track external, physical energy transfer.
    Some philosophers, notably Schopenhauer, hold that we experience causation in motivation. This
proposal is different from the proposal just considered. Whereas will or agency can be understood
as how agents exert causal power on the world, motives appear to exert causal power on the will or
the agent. Motives appear to make us (try to) do things. Elsewhere, (Mørch 2014, 2017, 2018, 2019)
I have elaborated on this idea and argued that we experience necessary connections between motives
such as pain and pleasure and efforts to avoid or pursue them. This is a connection which Hume did
not consider and which may have a chance of passing his conceivability requirement, i.e., it might
be defensible on the basis of strategy (1). It is hard to conceive of someone experiencing strong pain,
but where this does not make them at least try to avoid it11 – assuming the complete absence of
interfering motives to endure the pain.
    Other philosophers, including Whitehead and Hartshorne, argue that we experience causal pow-
ers via perception and memory. They claim that perceptions and memories present themselves not as
causes, but rather as effects of the events they are perceptions and memories of. It is hard to see how
this suggestion can be defended via strategy (1), because seems clearly conceivable that perceptions
and memories can be non-veridical. Whitehead and Hartshorne rather defend it via a version of
strategy (2): they endorse a distinctive indeterministic metaphysics of causation, according to which
the inconceivability criterion would not seem to apply (see Hartshorne 1973).
    Even if it is granted that we really experience causal powers through our phenomenology of
will, agency or motivation (from here I will set the proposal of memory and perception aside), it
could be objected that it does not follow that the causal powers we experience are mental. Perhaps
our experiences of causal powers can be viewed as analogous to ordinary perception. In percep-
tion, we represent properties such as the color and size of an apple by means of mental, perceptual
phenomenology. This does not mean that color and size are mental properties of the apple, and that
all things with size and colors must have minds. Why should we not regard our phenomenology of
will, agency or motivation in the same way; that is, as mental representations of non-mental causal
powers?
    One response is that the reason we take will and motivation to be mental is not because we rep-
resent them by mental phenomenology; rather, it is because will and motivation are mental in and of
themselves. Will essentially involves intentionality, which, as noted previously, is widely regarded as a
mark of the mental. Motives such as pain and pleasure, on the other hand, seem to affect our will in
virtue of how they feel or what they are like for a conscious subject. If there is such a thing as uncon-
scious or unfelt pain or pleasure, it would not affect the will in the same direct way. If this is correct,
then the causal powers of will and motives cannot be separated from mentality in the way physical
properties can be separated from our mental perceptual representations of them (Mørch 2014, 2018).
    Another objection to Premise II is that even if the only causal powers we experience are mental
properties, we can still conceive of non-mental causal powers. As mentioned, Armstrong holds that
causal powers, while not reducible to contingent regularities, are fundamentally grounded in irreduc-
ible governing laws of nature. Can this give the basis for a non-mental conception of causal powers?
    Etymologically, the concept of a law of nature is closely connected to both mental agency and
causal powers. The concept of a law of nature was originally a legal metaphor – before the scientific
revolution, the only concept of law was the concept of a rule imposed by human or divine agents,
who would have the power to impose laws. But of course, the etymology of a concept does not nec-
essarily determine its meaning. Armstrong proposes that that laws are to be understood as “relations
between universals” (Armstrong 1978, 1983), a notion which does not seem to have any connection


                                                   278
                               The Argument From Experience of Causation


with the notion of agent-imposed laws. But one might wonder how Armstrong’s view should be
more precisely understood. Somewhat surprisingly, in view of his criticism of dispositionalism cited
earlier, to clarify his concept of causation Armstrong at one point appeals to the experience of
agency as well:

    we have – in certain favourable cases – perception of forces acting on our bodies or our
    body exerting force on things, and perhaps also introspective awareness of the successful
    application of the will – direct or non-inferential, awareness of singular . . . causation. In
    Humean terms, there is an impression from which we derive the idea of causality.
                                                                    (Armstrong 1997: 216–17)

He then claims that the concept of a law comes from bringing together this experience of causation
and our experience of regularity. But if we experience our own will as mental, it is not clear how
this could yield a wholly non-mental concept of a law.
    Perhaps we can conceive of non-mental powers or laws on the basis of mental powers? One
might think that from the concept of a mental power we can abstract away a general, non-mental
concept of causal power (or law, but from here I will set the notion of irreducible laws aside). These
kinds of causal powers could be posited throughout the physical world.
    In response to this, panpsychists may argue that by abstracting away from the mental aspects of
power we are left with no positive conception of power (Mørch 2014, 2018). It seems that all we can
know about non-mental powers on this basis is that they are just like mental powers, but not mental.
But if we take away the mental aspect of will and motivation, then arguably not much is left to con-
ceive of: do we have any idea of what non-mental will or non-mental motives would be like, or how
they may enforce necessary connections or make things happen? Non-panpsychists must respond
either by explicating the positive content of their conception of non-mental power, or by arguing
that there is nothing wrong with positing non-mental powers of whose nature we have no positive
conception. The latter option may seem more promising. But this option is ruled out by Premise III
of the argument from causation, to which we now turn.


                           5.3.  Premise III: Non-Skeptical Realism
Premise III says that the nature of the causal powers of physical things is knowable, or positively con-
ceivable. This premise is denied by proponents of skeptical realism about causation, i.e., the view that
all physical things have irreducible causal powers, but we are completely ignorant about the nature of
these powers. That is to say, all we know (roughly) about causal powers is that they ground necessary
connections between causes and effects, but we have no positive grasp of how they do so or what
they are otherwise like. Someone who accepts Premises I (all physical things have causal powers) and
II (only mental causal powers can be positively conceived of ) of the argument from causation could
nevertheless avoid panpsychism by adopting skeptical realism about physical causal powers.
    How can the panpsychist respond to the skeptical realist? It would be hard to defend the general
thesis that if things have causal powers, then their nature must be conceivable by us. There is no clear
reason why reality should be limited to what we humans can know and conceive of. Hume and
James both (at times) expound meaning empiricism, the view that concepts without positive con-
tent derived from concrete experiences are meaningless.12 Given meaning empiricism, it would be
meaningless to assert Premise I, i.e. that all things have causal powers, while denying Premise III, i.e.,
that we have a positive concept of causal powers from experience. However, meaning empiricism is
a highly controversial view, and perhaps something panpsychists especially should be wary of accept-
ing anyway, as it risks undermining a whole host of metaphysical concepts that may be necessary for
articulating other aspects of the view.


                                                   279
                                          Hedda Hassel Mørch


    Yet, if Premise II is already granted, i.e., that some things have mental causal powers whose
nature we do know, there is a case to be made for Premise III which does not presuppose meaning
empiricism. As we saw earlier, Leibniz invokes a principle of the continuity of nature. Given such
a principle, we should not posit non-mental, but otherwise unknown, powers because they would
be discontinuous with mental powers. Another helpful principle is the principle of qualitative par-
simony: do not posit more fundamental kinds of properties and entities than you need in order to
account for your observations. Given this principle, we should not posit two kinds of powers, mental
and non-mental, when we can make do with only mental ones to account for our observations
(recall, according to Premise II, there are no observations of non-mental powers).
    But the best option may be to appeal another, general methodological principle: we should never
reject adequate, positive theories merely because there are other theories in terms of unknowable,
inconceivable properties which cannot be ruled out. For example, we cannot rule out that there is
some theory that no human could ever positively grasp that explains gravity much better than general
relativity theory. This does not seem like a good reason to reject the theory of general relativity. In
the same way, one might argue, panpsychism gives us an adequate, positive theory of causation which
should not be rejected in favor of the purely negative theory that there are unknowable powers.


                            6.  Other Arguments for Panpsychism
How does the argument from causation fit with the other, more commonly discussed arguments for
panpsychism from philosophy of mind and categorical properties?
    The argument from causation seems fully compatible with the argument from philosophy of
mind. In philosophy of mind, it has been argued that panpsychism can avoid the main problems of
both physicalism and dualism at once (Alter and Nagasawa 2012; Chalmers 2013). The argument
from causation can be regarded as further supporting the claim that it avoids the problem of dualism
is particular. Dualism’s main problem is the problem of mental causation: how can mental properties
be causally relevant to the physical? The argument from causation further assures us that panpsychism
does not face this problem by providing a more detailed picture of how panpsychist mental causation
would work. According to the argument, physical properties can only be causally efficacious in virtue
of mental powers, and these mental powers relate to physical relations in a way analogous to how our
will and motivation relate to our physical behavior.
    The argument from causation may seem less compatible with the argument from categorical
properties (Seager 2006; Alter and Nagasawa 2012). This argument can be construed as follows:

	I.	Categoricalism: All physical things have categorical properties.
	II.	 Mental categoricity: The only categorical properties whose nature we can know, or positively
       conceive of, are mental.
	III.	 Non-skeptical realism: The nature of the categorical properties of physical things is knowable or
       positively conceivable.

Therefore,

	IV.	 Panpsychism: All physical things have mental properties.

   Categorical properties are often understood as the opposite of dispositional properties, such as
causal powers. Proponents of the argument from categorical properties often argue that all mental
properties are categorical, and if categorical and dispositional properties are indeed opposites, this
would rule out that any mental properties, such as motivational or volitional properties, are disposi-
tional, as per the argument from causation.


                                                  280
                                 The Argument From Experience of Causation


    One way to resolve this conflict would be to deny that all mental properties are categorical, i.e., to
claim that motivational or volitional properties are purely dispositional and not categorical, whereas
other mental properties (such as sensory phenomenology) are purely categorical. But it might be
hard to defend that different kinds of phenomenal properties are that radically metaphysically dis-
continuous. A better alternative would be to reject the assumption that categorical and dispositional
properties are opposite fundamental kinds. Some philosophers (Martin and Heil 1999; Strawson
2008) defend the view that all properties necessarily have both dispositional and categorical aspects,
and that categorical and dispositional properties are actually identical. By assuming the identity view,
the argument from categorical properties and the argument from causation can be reconciled in a
more elegant and plausible way.
    Given the identity view, the argument from causation will appear very similar to the argument
from categorical properties, and one might worry it would therefore be dialectically superfluous. But
the argument has at least one distinct dialectical advantage. Premise I of the argument from categori-
cal properties, according to which all physical things have categorical properties, is often defended by
appeal to the principle that dispositions need categorical grounds. But this principle is rejected by the
aforementioned dispositionalists, according to whom all properties are irreducibly dispositional and do
not need categorical grounds (Mumford 2006). It is not clear how panpsychists can defend Premise
I of the argument from categorical properties against this claim. However, given the argument from
causation, no such defense is needed. If the argument is sound, dispositionalism entails panpsychism.


                                               7. Conclusion
The argument from causation is important both for the history of panpsychism and, in its reductio
version, the history of reductionism about causation. Now might be the right time for its revival. In
the current debate, panpsychism can no longer be dismissed as absurd, so the reductio in support of
reductionism (or the denial of some other aspects of the premises) can be turned on its head in order
to further support panpsychism.
    As we have seen, the argument can be construed as having a valid form. The premises are all
highly controversial, but still defensible. The most controversial premise is the premise that the only
kinds of causal powers whose nature we can know, or positively conceive of, are mental. This can be
defended by appeal to unique features of our phenomenology of will, agency and motivation. But
more work is still needed to fully develop and assess this idea.
    The argument makes a distinctive contribution to the debate about panpsychism, especially as a
response to the challenge from dispositionalism to the argument from categorical properties. It may
also contribute to debates within the metaphysics of causation, where non-reductionism about causal
powers is a widespread view, but no clear response is to be found to Hume’s challenge of how to
positively conceive of their nature. The argument from causation shows that a strong and straightfor-
ward response may be found with panpsychism.13


                                                     Notes
	 1.	 Historical defenders of the first type of argument include Leibniz (Monadology §17) and James (1890/1981:
      151–2); see also Skrbina (2005) on the arguments from non-emergence and continuity for others. Histori-
      cal defenders of the second kind of argument include Leibniz (see Pereboom 2015), Schopenhauer (see
      1859/1966a: §24; 1859/1966b: ch. XVIII) and Eddington (see Strawson 2006).
	 2.	 Leibniz may have been the first philosopher to explicitly put forth the argument from causation. Giordano
      Bruno and Francis Bacon also connect causation to mentality, but their reasoning is less explicit – see Skr-
      bina (2005).
	3.	 One might be surprised to hear this from Leibniz, who is known for his view that monads cannot be
      causally influenced by other monads. But Leibniz only denies the existence of transeunt or inter-substantial


                                                       281
                                                 Hedda Hassel Mørch


        causation, i.e., causation between distinct monads. Immanent or intra-substantial causation, whereby one state
        of same the monad causes the next, is real and essential to his system.
	 4.	 Schopenhauer repeatedly states that the will is not necessarily conscious, which may seem to show that he is
        at best a panprotopsychist and not a panpsychist. One reason to nevertheless interpret him as a panpsychist
        is that he does not seem to use the term consciousness (Bewusstseyn) to mean phenomenal consciousness, but
        rather to denote a mode of knowledge (see Schopenhauer 1859/1966b: 199).
	 5.	 For Bacon’s hint, see Skrbina (2005: 83).
	 6.	 Many scholars regard Hume as an eliminativist about irreducible causal powers. But some, such as Strawson
        (1989) regard him as a skeptical realist, i.e., as affirming the (possible) existence of irreducible causal powers
        but denying that we can form any positive conception of their nature.
	 7.	 This is somewhat curious, given that Mach endorsed a type of neutral monism that bordered on panpsy-
        chism (he took the neutral substrate to be pure experience). Perhaps it was only the kind of panpsychism
        that takes causation to be related to agency that he found objectionable.
	 8.	 Interestingly, Schopenhauer takes the exact opposite view: “if we refer the concept of force to that of will,
        we have, in fact, referred something more unknown to something infinitely better known, indeed to the
        one thing really known to us immediately and completely; and we have very greatly extended our knowl-
        edge. If, on the other hand, we subsume the concept of will under that of force, as has been done hitherto,
        we renounce the only immediate knowledge of the inner nature of the world that we have, since we let it
        disappear in a concept abstracted from the phenomenon, with which therefore we can never pass beyond
        the phenomenon” (Schopenhauer 1859/1966a: 111–112).
	 9.	 At least at this point of Russell’s career. Like Mach, Russell later endorsed neutral monism, a view very close
        to panpsychism. But the time of the publication of “On the Notion of Cause”, he was one of neutral mon-
        ism’s staunchest critics.
	10.	 Given indeterminism, one might say causes necessitate some objective probability of their effects. I will set
        indeterminism aside here for the sake of simplicity.
 	11.	 Note that it might still be conceivable that these tryings or efforts do not lead to successful avoidance, as per
        Hume’s objections discussed previously. In other words, the claim is that there is a necessary connection
        between motives (such as pain) and efforts (such as effort towards avoidance) understood as mental events,
        not between motives and successful physical actions.
  	12.	 As Hume claims: “If we have really no idea of a power or efficacy in any object, or of any real connexion
        betwixt causes and effects, it will be to little purpose to prove, that an efficacy is necessary in all operations.
        We do not understand our own meaning in talking so” (Hume 1739–40/2000). This is echoed by James:
        Everything real must be experienceable somewhere, and every kind of thing experienced must some-
        where be real. . . . By the principle of pure experience, either the word “activity” must have no meaning
        at all, or else the original type and model of what it means must lie in some concrete kind of experience
        that can be definitely pointed out.
                                                                                                ( James 1912: 160)
		 He continues:
        If we suppose activities to go on outside of our experience, it is in forms like these that we must suppose
        them, or else give them some other name; for the word “activity” has no imaginable content whatever
        save these experiences of process, obstruction, striving, strain, or release, ultimate qualia as they are of
        the life given us to be known.
                                                                                                  ( James 1912: 167)
	13.	 I would like to thank John Morrison and Galen Strawson for helpful comments on this chapter.


                                                     References
Adams, Robert (2007). ‘Idealism Vindicated’. In D. Zimmerman and P. van Inwagen (eds.), Persons: Human and
   Divine. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 35–54.
Alter, Torin, and Nagasawa, Yujin (2012). ‘What Is Russellian Monism?’ Journal of Consciousness Studies, 19
   (9–10): 67–95.
Anscombe, G. E. M. (1971). Causality and Determination: An Inaugural Lecture. Cambridge: Cambridge University
   Press.
Armstrong, David M. (1978). A Theory of Universals, Universals and Scientific Realism, Vol. II. Cambridge:­
   Cambridge University Press.
Armstrong, David M. (1983). What Is a Law of Nature? Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.


                                                           282
                                  The Argument From Experience of Causation


Armstrong, David M. (1997). A World of States of Affairs. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bayne, Tim, and Neil Levy (2006). ‘The Feeling of Doing: Deconstructing the Phenomenology of Agency’. In
   N. Sebanz and W. Prinz (eds.), Disorders of Volition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Chalmers, David J. (2013). ‘Panpsychism and Panprotopsychism’. The Amherst Lecture in Philosophy 8 (1–35).
   www.amherstlecture.org/chalmers2013. (Reprinted in G. Brüntrup and L. Jaskolla (eds.), Panpsychism.
   Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 19–47).
Collingwood, R. G. (1937). ‘On the So-Called Idea of Causation’. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, New Series,
   38: 85–112.
Gabbey, Alan (2002). ‘Newton, Active Powers, and the Mechanical Philosophy’. In I. B. Cohen and G. E. Smith
   (eds.), The Cambridge Companion to Newton. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ginet, Carl (1997). ‘Freedom, Responsibility, and Agency’. The Journal of Ethics, 1 (1): 85–98.
Hartshorne, Charles (1954). ‘Causal Necessities: An Alternative to Hume’. The Philosophical Review, 63 (4):
   479–99.
Hartshorne, Charles (1973).‘Creativity and the Deductive Logic of Causality’. Review of Metaphysics, 27 (1): 62–74.
Hartshorne, Charles (1977).‘Physics and Psychics: The Place of Mind in Nature’. In J. B. Cobb and D. R. Griffin
   (eds.), Mind in Nature: The Interface of Science and Philosophy. New York: University Press of America.
Horgan, Terry (2011). ‘The Phenomenology of Agency and Freedom: Lessons from Introspection and Lessons
   from Its Limits’. Humana Mente, 15: 77–97.
Hume, David (1739–40/2000). A Treatise of Human Nature. Ed. J. Cottingham. Oxford Philosophical Texts.
   Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hume, David (1748/1999). An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding. Ed. T. L. Beauchamp. Oxford:
   Oxford University Press.
James, William (1890/1981). ‘The Principles of Psychology, vol. 1’. In F. H. Burkhardt, F. Bowers, and I. K.
   Skrupskelis (eds.), The Works of William James, vol. 8. Cambridge, MA and London: Harvard University Press.
James, William (1902/1987). ‘The Varieties of Religious Experience’. In B. Kuklick (ed.), William James: Writ-
   ings 1902–1910. New York: Library of America.
James, William (1911). Some Problems of Philosophy: A Beginning of an Introduction to Philosophy. New York, Lon-
   don, Bombay and Calcutta: Longmans, Green & Co.
James, William (1912). ‘The Experience of Activity’. In James’s Essays in Radical Empiricism. New York, London,
   Bombay and Calcutta: Longmans, Green & Co.
Jammer, Max (1957). Concepts of Force: A Study in the Foundations of Dynamics. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
   versity Press.
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm (1691/1965). ‘De Primae Philosophiae Emendatione, Et De Notione Substantiae’.
   In C. I. Gerhardt (ed.), Die Philosophischen Schriften. Hildesheim: G. Olms.
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm (1695/1989). ‘A New System of the Nature and Communication of Substances,
   and of the Union of the Soul and Body’. In R. Ariew and D. Garber (eds.), Philosophical Essays. Indianapolis:
   Hackett Publishing Company.
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm (1698/1908). ‘On Nature in Itself ’. In G. M. Duncan (ed.), Philosophical Works of
   Leibnitz. New Haven: The Tuttle, Morehouse & Taylor Company.
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm (1704/1981). New Essays on Human Understanding. Ed. and Trans. P. Remnant and
   J. Bennett. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press.
Locke, John (1689/1975). An Essay Concerning Human Understanding. Ed. P. H. Nidditch. Oxford: Clarendon
   Press.
Mach, Ernst (1897). Popular Scientific Lectures. Trans. T. J. McCormack. Chicago: The Open Court Publishing
   Company.
Madden, Edward H., and Hare, Peter H. (1971). ‘The Powers That Be’. Dialogue, 10 (1): 12–31.
Martin, C. B., and Heil, John (1999). ‘The Ontological Turn’. Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 23 (1): 34–60.
Martin, C. B., and Pfeifer, Karl (1986). ‘Intentionality and the Non-Psychological’. Philosophy and Phenomenologi-
   cal Research, 46 (4): 531–54.
McGuire, James E. (1968). ‘Force, Active Principles, and Newton’s Invisible Realm’. Ambix, 15 (3): 154–208.
Michotte, Albert (1963). The Perception of Causality. Oxford: Basic Books.
Mørch, Hedda Hassel (2014). Panpsychism and Causation: A New Argument and a Solution to the Combination
   Problem. Doctoral Dissertation, Department of Philosophy, Classics, History of Art and Ideas, University of
   Oslo, Oslo.
Mørch, Hedda Hassel (2017). ‘The Evolutionary Argument for Phenomenal Powers’. Philosophical Perspectives,
   31 (1): 293–316.
Mørch, Hedda Hassel (2018). ‘Does Dispositionalism Entail Panpsychism?’ Topoi, https://doi.org/10.1007/
   s11245-018-9604-y


                                                        283
                                              Hedda Hassel Mørch


Mørch, Hedda Hassel (2019). ‘Phenomenal Knowledge Why: The Explanatory Knowledge Argument Against
    Physicalism’. In S. Coleman (ed.), The Knowledge Argument. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mumford, Stephen (2006). ‘The Ungrounded Argument’. Synthese, 149 (3): 471–89.
Pereboom, Derk (2015). ‘Consciousness, Physicalism, and Absolutely Intrinsic Properties’. In T. Alter and
    Y. Nagasawa (eds.), Consciousness in the Physical World: Perspectives on Russellian Monism. Oxford: Oxford
    University Press.
Reid, Thomas (1788). Essays on the Active Powers of Man. Edinburgh: John Bell and London: G. G. J. &
    J. Robinson.
Russell, Bertrand (1912). ‘On the Notion of Cause’. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 13: 1–26.
Schopenhauer, Arthur (1859/1966a). The World as Will and Representation. Trans. E. F. J. Payne, vol. 1. New
    York: Dover.
Schopenhauer, Arthur (1859/1966b). The World as Will and Representation. Trans. E. F. J. Payne, vol. 2. New
    York: Dover.
Seager, William (2006). ‘The “Intrinsic Nature” Argument for Panpsychism’. Journal of Consciousness Studies,
    13 (10–11): 129–45.
Searle, John R. (1983). Intentionality: An Essay in the Philosophy of Mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Skrbina, David (2005). Panpsychism in the West. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Stout, G. F. (1935). ‘Mechanical and Teleological Causation’. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Supplementary
    Volume, 14 (1): 46–65.
Strawson, Galen (1987). ‘Realism and Causation’. The Philosophical Quarterly, 37 (148): 253–77.
Strawson, Galen (1989). The Secret Connexion: Causation, Realism and David Hume. Oxford: Oxford University
    Press.
Strawson, Galen (2006). ‘Realistic Monism: Why Physicalism Entails Panpsychism’. Journal of Consciousness Stud-
    ies, 13 (10–11): 3–31.
Strawson, Galen (2008). ‘The Identity of the Categorical and the Dispositional’. Analysis, 68 (4): 271–82.
Strawson, P. F. (1992). Analysis and Metaphysics: An Introduction to Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Whitehead, Alfred North (1933/1967). Adventures of Ideas. New York: The Free Press.




                                                       284
                              24
                       A QUANTUM CURE
                        FOR PANPHOBIA
                                        Paavo Pylkkänen




       “What reason have we to suppose that the hoped for revolution in our understanding of
       matter at the most fundamental level will involve ascribing essentially mentalistic proper-
       ties to it?”
                                                         (Seager and Allen-Hermanson 2015: 31)



                                          1. Introduction
When I was doing my PhD in the early 1990s, I was amused by Jerry Fodor writing about “­epiphobia” –
which he defined as the fear that one is turning into an epiphenomenalist (Fodor 1989: 59). The
philosophers suffering from epiphobia were physicalists who did not want to deny the existence of
intentional (understood as non-physical) states. The worry of epiphenomenalism was there because
if one accepted the causal closure of the physical domain, there seemed to be no way that the inten-
tional states qua intentional could be causally responsible for behavioural outcomes – which amounts
to epiphenomenalism. But epiphobia is not the only worry a philosopher of mind can suffer from.
    In his essay “Panpsychism” Thomas Nagel (1979) proposed that a set of reasonable assumptions,
commonly held by philosophers, imply panpsychism – the view that the basic elements of matter
(“physical ultimates”) have mental properties. Nagel saw this option (which he took as a sign that
something may not be quite right) as arising out of the assumptions that we ought to take conscious
experience seriously, while denying psychophysical reductionism and radical emergence (for discus-
sion, see Pylkkänen 1996). More recently Galen Strawson (2006) has with great force argued toward
a similar conclusion, suggesting that the basic elements of matter even involve experience (Strawson
2006: 25). For him the idea arises as a result of assuming that everything concrete is physical; that
everything physical is constituted out of physical ultimates, and that experience is part of concrete
reality (2006: 25). Note especially that he considers “micropsychism” as the only reasonable option,
not merely as something one arrives at via inference to the best explanation.
    Those who find these arguments compelling may find themselves overcome by a worry, panpho-
bia, which we can define, following Fodor, as the fear that one is turning into a panpsychist. Why
should one be afraid of turning into a panpsychist? Strawson himself admits having felt abashed
about arguing for panpsychism (2006: 186) and acknowledges that it is not easy to accept in the




                                                  285
                                           Paavo Pylkkänen


current intellectual climate (2006: 25). Nagel has remarked that “panpsychism has the faintly sick-
ening odor of something put together in a metaphysical laboratory” (1986: 49), while Seager and
Allen-­Hermanson note that panpsychism has come to seem an implausible view, given our immense
scientific knowledge of the physical world and the corresponding desire to explain everything in
physical terms (2015: 1). Peter Simons summarizes more bluntly how many feel about this issue:

    “Panpsychism, at least in caricature, is one of the most immediately counterintuitive and
    off-putting of metaphysical positions. The idea of electrons making decisions about how to
    spin, nuclei harbouring intentions to split, or photons with existential Angst, makes ideal-
    ism seem positively sane.”
                                                                          (Simons 2006: 146-7)

Colin McGinn provides a more sympathetic and yet critical characterization:

    “Panpsychism is surely one of the loveliest and most tempting views of reality ever devised;
    and it is not without its respectable motivations either. There are good arguments for it, and
    it would be wonderful if it were true – theoretically, aesthetically, humanly. Any reflective
    person must feel the pull of panpsychism once in a while. It’s almost as good as pantheism!
    The trouble is that it’s a complete myth, a comforting piece of utter balderdash.”
                                                                              (McGinn 2006: 93)

If panpsychism is taken to mean that the elementary particles of physics (physical “ultimates”) have
proto-mental properties (Nagel 1986: 49), or even involve experience (Strawson 2006: 25), the doc-
trine seems very implausible. Nagel himself notes this:

    “What kind of properties could atoms have (even when they are part of a rock) that could
    qualify as proto-mental; and how could any properties of the chemical constituents of a
    brain combine to form a mental life?”
                                                                        (Nagel 1986, p. 49)

Lycan underlines the lack of scientific evidence for panpsychism:

    “. . . there is nothing I can exhibit to show decisively that a muon or a quark is not a locus
    of experience. But neither is there any scientific evidence for panpsychism; there is no sci-
    entific reason, as opposed to philosophical argument, for believing it.”
                                                                                (Lycan 2006: 66)

He goes on to spell out the absurdity of the notion:

    “. . . if every ultimate particle has mental properties, what sorts of mental properties in par-
    ticular do the particles have? It seems ludicrous to think that a photon has either sensory
    experiences or intentional states. (It does not even have mass.) How could it see, hear or
    smell anything? And if it has experiential properties, then presumably it also has rudimen-
    tary propositional attitudes. What would be the contents of its beliefs or desires? Perhaps it
    wishes it were a u quark.”
                                                                                  (Lycan 2006: 70)

More technically, McGinn worries about the causal inefficacy of the micro-experiental that seems to
be implicit in panpsychism (cf. epiphobia!):


                                                  286
                                    A Quantum Cure for Panphobia


    “Do the E [experiental] properties of elementary particles (or molecules or cells) contrib-
    ute to their causal powers? If so, how come physics (and chemistry and biology) never have
    to take account of their contribution? . . . if they are agreed not to have any causal powers –
    ­and so are entirely epiphenomenal – how can they blossom into properties that do have
     such powers once they take up residence inside brains?”
                                                                                (McGinn 2006: 94)

One apparent advantage of panpsychism is that it seems to solve the problem of how the experiental-
ity of an organism can emerge from its parts. McGinn however sees problems even here:

    “What kinds of E [experiental] properties do particles have? . . . This is a game without
    rules and without consequences. Is it really to be supposed that a particle can enjoy these
    kinds of experiences – say, feeling depressed at its monotonous life of orbiting a nucleus but
    occasionally cheered up by its experience of musical notes? [. . .] Even the faint and blurry
    is phenomenology too much for the humble electron. The problem is that we can solve the
    emergence problem only if we credit the ultimates with a rich enough phenomenology to
    form an adequate basis for a full-bodied human mind . . .”
                                                                              (McGinn 2006: 95)

So, on the one hand we have excellent philosophers arguing that panpsychism is the only reasonable
option, while equally excellent philosophers argue that the doctrine is just very implausible. Note in
particular how the arguments against panpsychism appeal to our intuitions about elementary parti-
cles. It is assumed to be obvious that electrons cannot make decisions, nuclei cannot harbour inten-
tions, photons cannot have sensory experiences, intentional states or existential Angst, and atoms
cannot have proto-mental properties. Thus, anyone who feels the pull of panpsychism but also shares
these common anti-panpsychist intuitions is likely to experience bouts of panphobia.
   The story we will tell in this chapter does not go all the way to claim that elementary particles
have all the properties that are ridiculed in the above quotes. However, we will propose that our best
physics implies that elementary particles are far more complex than what is commonly supposed by
contemporary materialist or physicalist philosophers of mind. Not only that, we will also show how
some leading physicists have suggested that it is even reasonable to interpret some novel properties
of elementary particles as protomental and that these protomental properties are causally efficacious.
This, then, opens up the possibility for a scientific argument for panpsychism – or at least panpro-
topsychism, the weaker doctrine according to which the ultimates have proto-mental properties,
rather than mental properties in a full sense.
   Epiphobia and panphobia lie at the opposite ends of a spectrum in philosophy of mind. An epi-
phobic worries that one’s mind-matter theory gives too weak a role for mind, while a panphobic
worries that it gives too strong a role. In this chapter we will explore whether a cure for both epipho-
bia and panphobia might be found in quantum theory.

                  2.  The Ontological Interpretation of Quantum Theory
Quantum phenomena exhibit a curious combination of wave and particle behavior. For example,
in the famous two-slit experiment, electrons arrive one by one at the detecting screen at localized
points, suggesting that they are particles. Yet as we keep on watching, the individual spots gradually
build up an interference pattern typical of wave behavior, suggesting that each individual electron
ALSO has wave properties. The usual interpretation of quantum theory describes the electron with
a wave function. In the minimalist (Bohr’s) version, the wave function only allows us to calculate
probabilities for finding the electron (as a localized particle) at a given location. In other words,
the wave function is seen as a part of a mathematical algorithm and is not given an ontological


                                                  287
                                           Paavo Pylkkänen


interpretation. However, following von Neumann, many physicists assumed that the wave function
provides a complete description of an individual quantum object. This gives rise to the many infa-
mous puzzles of quantum theory, such as the claim that a single electron is in two (or more) places
at once; that a cat is alive and dead at the same time; that the world at the macroscopic level is con-
stantly branching into copies (“many worlds”); and that to solve such problems we must assume an
ad hoc collapse of the wave function, or assume that the non-physical consciousness of the observer
plays an active role (for some of the problems with von Neumann’s approach, see Bohm and Hiley
1993, ch 2). Thus, it seems that quantum theory forces us to choose between Bohrian instrumen-
talism/antirealism or some very counterintuitive realist interpretation. (For a brief introduction to
quantum theory, see Polkinghorne 2002; Pylkkänen 2018; see also Lewis 2016; for Bohr’s views see
Plotnitsky 2010)
    An apparently more sober realist version of quantum theory was discovered by Louis de Bro-
glie in 1927 and independently rediscovered and further developed by David Bohm in 1952 and
in subsequent research. In this theory the electron is seen as a particle AND a wave. In the two-slit
experiment the particle goes through one of the slits. The wave goes through both slits, interferes
and guides the particle in such a way that an interference pattern is gradually formed, spot by spot,
as many electrons pass through the slit system (thus the theory has also been called the pilot wave
theory). It thus seems that we can have a realist or ontological interpretation of the quantum theory,
without the usual puzzles, such as Schrödinger’s cat, many worlds, collapse of the wave function, or
the consciousness of the observer producing physical reality (see Bacciagaluppi and Valentini 2009;
Bohm 1952a and 1952b; Bohm and Hiley 1987, 1993; Bricmont 2016; for latest developments, see
Walleczek et al. (eds.) 2018; Pylkkänen et al. 2016)).
    However, the Bohm theory, too, has exotic features. For one thing it implies a non-local interac-
tion between particles at a quantum level, creating a tension with relativity. Note however that this
non-locality is characteristic of quantum theory in general and consistent with the experimental
results (see Walleczek and Grössing 2016). Also, the wave function for a many-body system lives in
a multidimensional configuration space, making it difficult to assume that it describes an ordinary
physical field in a 3-dimensional space (see Ney and Albert (eds.) 2013). To alleviate this problem
(and for other reasons) Bohm and Hiley (1987, 1993) proposed the radically new notion that the
wave function describes not an ordinary physical field, but rather a field of information, which liter-
ally in-forms the energy of the particle. Bohm (1990) further proposed that such “active informa-
tion” can be seen as a primitive mind-like quality of elementary particles. Here, then, opens up the
possibility for scientific (rather than merely philosophical) support for panprotopsychism. Let us thus
examine the Bohm theory in more detail.
    While it is common in the usual interpretation of quantum theory to say that a quantum object
(such as an electron) is a particle OR a wave (depending on the context), the Bohm theory, as we
already mentioned, says less ambiguously that an electron is always a particle AND a wave. More pre-
cisely, it assumes that every particle has a well-defined position and momentum and is accompanied
by a new type of field, described by the wave function ψ which satisfies the Schrödinger equation.
The field affects the particle via a new potential, the quantum potential Q (eq. 1):

           2 ∇2 R
     Q=−
           2m R

This suggests a model of, say, an electron as a particle which moves along a trajectory and which
is influenced not just by classical potentials but also by the new quantum potential. The quantum
potential accounts for all (non-relativistic) quantum behavior, and in situations where the quan-
tum potential is negligible, classical physics provides a good approximation. From the perspective



                                                 288
                                                   Paavo Pylkkänen


                             Slit A                                                     Slit B




Figure 24.2  Trajectories for two Gaussian slits
Reprinted with kind permission of Società Italiana di Fisica, copyright (1979) by the Italian Physical Society

the slits. Which trajectory it takes depends, of course, on which place it happens to enter the slit
system.
    Note that the trajectories should be seen as a hypothesis about what may be going on in the two-
slit experiment. Because of the uncertainty principle it is not possible to measure the initial condi-
tions (position and momentum) of a particle simultaneously with an accuracy that would enable



                                                           290
                                     A Quantum Cure for Panphobia


us to predict which trajectory a given individual electron will follow (however, measurements of
so-called weak values allow us to calculate average trajectories, see Flack et al. 2018).

           3.  The Interpretation of the Quantum Field as Active Information
In the 1970s Bohm and Hiley (1975) began to re-examine the de Broglie–Bohm theory, partly as a
result of the interest their research students were showing in this approach, as well as the new atten-
tion to the question of non-locality due to John Bell’s work (see Bell 1987). They considered the
mathematical expression of the quantum potential, which describes the way the quantum wave field
affects the particle (eq. 1):
            2 ∇2 R
     Q=−
            2m R

Here ħ-bar is Planck’s constant divided by 2π, m is the mass of the particle, R is the amplitude of the
quantum wave and ∇2 is a differential operator which takes the second spatial derivative of R. The
term ∇2 R reflects how R changes, i.e., the shape or form of the quantum wave. In classical phys-
ics (e.g. with the classical electromagnetic field), a potential depends on the amplitude of the field
(somewhat like the size of a water wave determines the effect the wave has on a floating object).
However, Bohm realized that the quantum potential, and thus the effect of the quantum field upon
the particle, depends only on the form or shape of the field, not on its size or amplitude R. This is so
because R appears both in the nominator and the denumerator in the right hand side of equation 1,
and so can be multiplied by an arbitrary constant without changing the quantum potential; a wave of
small amplitude thus has the same effect as a wave of large amplitude, as long as the waves have the
same form. Bohm was thereby led to suggest that the quantum field is not pushing and pulling the
particle mechanically, but rather the quantum field literally puts form into or “in-forms” the particle
to behave in a certain way. The idea is that the electron is moving under its own energy that is being
in-formed by the quantum field.
    Bohm proposed that this is an instance of a general feature of active information that we see operat-
ing at many levels of nature (for discussion, see Seager 2018). The basic idea of active information is
that a low-energy form enters a greater energy and as a result the form of the greater energy becomes
the same as that of the smaller energy. If you consider a ship on autopilot guided by radar waves,
the waves are not pushing and pulling the ship. Rather, the form of the waves is taken up by the
autopilot device and is used to direct the ship. Analogously the quantum field contains information
about the environment of the particle (e.g. slits) and this information, along with the classical forces,
then determines the movement of the particle. Note, however, that there are important differences
between the ship analogy and the electron. It is important to emphasize that with the electron we
encounter holistic active information (with non-locality and irreducible wholeness), as opposed to
the more (classical) mechanical active information we encounter in the ship analogy (Pylkkänen
1992: 95–6; Dickson 1996: 234).
    Bohm also realized that the idea that the essential nature of the quantum field is that it is informa-
tion, rather than an ordinary physical field, enables one to make sense of the notorious multidimen-
sionality of the many-body quantum field. With information, multidimensionality is a natural concept
in the sense that information can be organized into as many dimensions as may be needed. As we will
see later, the many-body quantum field can be seen as a common pool of information for the two particles.
    One important potential criticism of the active information approach has to do with the notion
of information that is presupposed. Is it really justified to use the term “information” to describe
the sorts of processes connected to the quantum field? One can examine this question in the light
of recent developments in the philosophy of information (e.g. Floridi 2015). Floridi distinguishes



                                                   291
                                            Paavo Pylkkänen


between semantic and environmental information. Semantic information involves factual semantic
contents (i.e. information as meaningful data that represents facts correctly or incorrectly). Environ-
mental information sees information as mere correlation, e.g. the way tree rings carry information
about age. Semantic information can be further distinguished into factual and instructional informa-
tion. The quantum active information is about something (the environment, slits, etc.), it is for the par-
ticle and it helps to bring about something (a certain movement of the particle). This suggests that it is
not merely correlational but is also (proto)semantic and has both factual and instructional aspects (see
Pylkkänen 1992: 96–8). Also, Maleeh and Amani (2012) have usefully considered active information
in relation to Roederer’s (2005) notion of pragmatic information, suggesting that only biological sys-
tems are capable of “genuine” information processing. I think one can argue that Bohmian quantum
information potential involves genuine information processing (indeed, the most fundamental kind
of genuine information processing science has thus far discovered).
    While the notion of active information in quantum theory has not been widely accepted (for
criticism see Riggs 2008), some leading thinkers do take it seriously (e.g. Smith 2003). Also, an inter-
esting adaptation of the active information scheme to neuroscience has been proposed by Thomas
Filk (2012). In the field of the social sciences, Andrei Khrennikov (2004) has made imaginative use
of the proposal and the Bohm theory – as an analogical model – has also been applied to financial
processes by Olga Choustova (2007) and Emmanuel Haven (2005). For other ways of using the
mathematical and conceptual tools of quantum theory to model cognition, see Wang et al. (2013).
Of course, the notion of “quantum information” has been extensively discussed in recent years
(e.g. Bouwmeester et al. 2000). The advantages of the concept of active information over quantum
information are explored in Maroney (2002) and Maroney and Hiley (1999). Note finally that the
Bohm theory can be presented in a more minimalist way without giving the quantum potential (and
active information) a key role (see Goldstein 2013). Bohm, however, felt that at least something like
the notion of active information is needed if we want to give an intelligible ontological interpreta-
tion of quantum theory (Bohm and Hiley 1993: 60; see also Holland 1995: 90-1).


                            4.  Is information a Mind-Like Quality?
So let us assume, for the sake of the argument, that it is a reasonable hypothesis that the quantum
field encodes information. What reasons do we have to think that such information is a “primitive
mind-like quality”, as Bohm suggested? The idea that cognition is information processing has, of
course, been a central notion in cognitive psychology and cognitive science (Velmans 2009: 64–79).
Note also that some other researchers in philosophy of mind and consciousness studies have made
use of the concept of information in their theories of mind and consciousness. For example, Dretske
(1981) and Barwise and Seligman (1997) have explored the possibility that information in the sense
of factual semantic contents can be grounded in environmental information. For Dretske this was
an important part of his attempts to give a naturalistic account of sensory experiences, qualia and
consciousness. During recent years the notion of information has been used to explain consciousness
most notably by David Chalmers (1996), as well as by Giulio Tononi and his co-workers (Tononi
and Koch 2014; Oizumi et al. 2014); see also Velmans (1991a, 1991b). The relation of Bohm’s active
information to Chalmers’s views has been discussed in Pylkkänen (2007: 244–6), while its relation to
Tononi’s views is discussed in Pylkkänen (2016). While Bohm’s notion of information differs from
the notions of information mentioned above, there are some relevant similarities. For example, both
Bohm’s and Tononi’s notions of information differ from Shannon information in that they refer to
the literal meaning of information as “in-forming”, albeit in different ways.
    The preceding indicates that the idea that information is a mind-like quality is one of the key
options in contemporary discussions about the nature of mental states. In the light of this, Bohm’s
proposal that quantum theoretical active information is a primitive mind-like quality of elementary


                                                   292
                                     A Quantum Cure for Panphobia


particles seems not too unreasonable. The proposal implies that electrons have “proto-cognition”
(because of the information aspect) and “proto-will” (because the information is fundamentally active)
(cf. Wendt 2015: 139). Whether it also implies that electrons have proto-phenomenal properties is a
more tricky question. But one could claim that the electron is in some sense “perceiving” or monitor-
ing its environment via its information field, and that such “perceiving” involves proto-phenomenality.


               5.  Active Information and the Relation of Mind and Matter
Bohm also thought that the idea of active information at the quantum level opened up a way to
tackle a perennial problem in philosophy, namely that of the relationship between mind and matter
(1989, 1990). First of all, he suggested that mental states involve a hierarchy of levels of active infor-
mation. We do not merely think about objects in the external world, but we can also become aware
of our thinking. He suggested that such meta-level awareness typically gives rise to a higher level of
information. This higher level gathers information about the lower level. But because its essential
nature is active information, it does not merely make a passive representation of the lower level.
Rather, the higher level also acts to organize the lower level, a bit analogously to the way the active
information in the pilot wave acts to organize the movement of the particle. And of course, we can
become aware of this higher level of information from a yet higher level, and so on.
    How then does mind, understood as a hierarchy of levels of active information, connect with
matter in the Bohmian scheme? First of all, he suggested that it is natural to extend the quantum
ontology. So just as there is a pilot wave that guides the particle, there can be a super-pilot wave that
can organize the first-order pilot wave, and so on. He claimed that such an extension is “natural”
from the mathematical point of view (Bohm and Hiley (1993: 378–81, 385) discuss such extensions
in the context of quantum field theory). Now it seems that we have two hierarchies, one for mind
and another for matter. Bohm’s next step was to postulate that these are the same hierarchy, so that
there is only one hierarchy. This then allows, at least in principle, for a new way of understanding
how mind and body can affect each other. The meaning of information at a given level in the mind
can act downwards, all the way to the active information in the pilot waves of particles in, say, the
synapses or neural microtubules, and this influence can then be amplified to signals in motor cortex,
leading to a physical movement of the body (see Hiley and Pylkkänen 2005). In a reverse process,
perception can carry information about the external world and the inner state of the body to higher
levels, where the meaning of the information is apprehended, and can unfold again to organize the
more manifest levels. (For criticisms see Kieseppä (1997a, 1997b), Chrisley (1997); for replies, see
Hiley and Pylkkänen (1997, 2001) and Pylkkänen (1992: 96)). Bohm’s discussion fits well with the
idea of the mind-brain as a self-organizing system. Jenann Ismael (2016) has emphasized that the
human mind also essentially includes a self-governing system which is capable of deliberative reason-
ing and self-conscious thought. In the Bohmian scheme one can say that even conscious reflection
in thought happens according to the total meaning that prevails in a situation (see Bohm 1990: 282).
This weakens the distinction between self-organizing and self-governing systems.


                       6.  Quantum Ballet: The Priority of the Whole
As has already been hinted previously, the ontological interpretation also brings into focus the “undi-
vided wholeness” characteristic of the quantum world, implying a monistic metaphysics (cf. Schaffer
2010). This wholeness can be seen already when considering a single particle, for because the quan-
tum potential only depends upon the form of the field, it does not necessarily fall off with distance
even if the intensity of the field becomes weak as the field spreads out. Thus even distant features
(e.g. slits) of the environment of the particle can have a strong effect upon the particle, implying that
there can be a strong context-dependence in the behaviour of the particle. In the two-body system


                                                   293
                                             Paavo Pylkkänen


there is wholeness also in the sense that the quantum potential depends on the position of both parti-
cles in a way that does not necessarily fall off with the distance, implying the possibility of a non-local
interaction between the two particles. And we can generalize this to the N-body system where the
behaviour of each particle may depend non-locally on all the others, regardless of how far away they
may be (Bohm and Hiley 1987: 330).
    Nonlocality is an important new feature of the quantum theory, but Bohm emphasized that there
is yet another feature that is even more radical, namely that the quantum potential Q depends on the
quantum state of the whole system in a way that cannot be defined simply as a pre-assigned interac-
tion between all the particles. This underlines the priority of the whole that is typical of quantum
systems (cf. Schaffer 2010). For example, in the Hydrogen atom the interaction of the electron and
the proton depends on the quantum state of the whole system in a way that cannot be expressed
in terms of the relationships of the particles alone. In this sense the whole is prior to its parts in the
quantum domain (see Bohm and Hiley 1987: 331-2; see also Holland 1995: 281-2).
    In Bohmian terms the quantum state can be seen as a common pool of information that is guiding the
particles in the system. Note also that the quantum state is evolving in time according to Schröding-
er’s equation, so it is a dynamic whole that is guiding the particles. Bohm thus thought that quantum
theory was primarily about dynamical wholeness that is not reducible to the interactions between
individuals. As Max Jammer has pointed out, this means that the individuals are not “constitutive” to
the whole but rather depend on the state of the whole (1988: 696).
    However, the physical world we find in everyday experience can be approximately described in
terms of classical physics, characterized by relatively independent and separable objects. How do we
get from quantum wholeness to classical separability? The answer is that in certain circumstances the
wave function (i.e. the quantum field) of a system factorizes into two parts, and the corresponding
subsystems will then behave independently. These factorized parts of the wave functions represent
independent pools of information. The subsystems will cease to be guided by a common pool of
information and will instead respond to independent pools.
    An example that illustrates the preceding is provided by superconductivity where electrons at low
temperatures are able to move without resistance in a wire. In terms of the Bohm theory this happens
because the electrons are guided by a common wave function (or common pool of information) to
move in such a way that they do not scatter from obstacles but rather go around them in a coordi-
nated way. This is like a “ballet dance” where the wave function is the score and the particles are the
dancers. At higher temperatures the property of superconductivity disappears. This is because the
wave function factorizes into independent pools of information, and the particles behave indepen-
dently and scatter from obstacles. The particles are no longer like ballet dancers but are now like an
unorganized crowd of people who are acting independently and get in each other’s way (1993: 71).
    The key point is that the quantum potential arising under certain conditions can organize the
activity of an entire set of particles in a way that depends directly on the state of the whole. Bohm
and Hiley think it is plausible that such an organization can be carried to higher and higher levels
and eventually may become relevant to living beings. Indeed, given the recent advances in quantum
biology (Ball 2011, Marais et al. 2018)), it is tempting to speculate that the quantum potential (or
some higher-order quantum-like “biological potential”) plays a relevant role in determining whether
a system is “living” or “non-living”. The idea is that when the quantum potential within a biologi-
cal system has a non-negligible effect, it provides the organic unity characteristic of a living system.
Death, on the other hand, would correspond to a situation when the wave function factorizes and
the system loses its organic unity (cf. Pylkkänen 1992: 55).
    Mental states, too, can be seen as involving common pools of information which guide and co-
ordinate spatially distinct neural activities. Taken as a literal quantum model of the brain, a Bohmian
common pool of quantum information in the brain would imply that there can be non-local cor-
relations between particles in spatially separate brain areas. This, of course, is a speculative idea, but


                                                   294
                                    A Quantum Cure for Panphobia


recent advances in quantum brain theory (see Hameroff and Penrose 2014) make such a radical idea
at least conceivable.
    Note also that the idea of a common pool of information is interestingly similar to Baars’s (2007)
idea of a global workspace in consciousness studies. If we assume that consciousness would cor-
respond to a situation where a common pool of mental information is having a global effect on
distinct neural modules, then we could say that the transition from conscious to non-conscious state
corresponds to some kind of factorization of such a conscious common pool of information to non-
conscious independent pools. However, as Rosenthal (2009) has pointed out, while consciousness is
sometimes connected with the global effects of a workspace, there also seem to be situations where
there are conscious states without such global effects (e.g. conscious peripheral perceptions), and non-
conscious states with global effects (e.g. non-conscious thoughts as steps in problem solving). Thus it
does not seem reasonable to identify consciousness with the operation of a global workspace or com-
mon pools of information in connection with neural processes, even though these may often be cor-
related (for discussion, see Velmans 2009: 274-81). We will return to the issue of consciousness later.


          7.  The Ontological Interpretation and the History of Panpsychism
The ontological interpretation resonates with many panpsychist approaches in the history of phi-
losophy. We saw previously that this interpretation involves a top-down approach in the sense that
the basic law (which involves active information) refers to the whole universe, and that through
factorization we get relatively independent sub-wholes, each guided by their pools of informa-
tion. We can even imagine a wide range of situations where the quantum potential (and thus the
influence of active information) upon an elementary particle becomes negligibly small, in which
case classical physics provides a good approximate description of the behaviour of the particle (and
aggregates of such particles, such as tables and chairs). In this sense any Bohmian panpsychism is top
down – a mind-like quality (active information) is an essential part of the basic law that applies to
the universe as a whole, but it is not necessary to always attribute mind-like qualities to the ultimate
constituents of matter. The Bohmian scheme thus allows us to make a distinction between things
with mind-like qualities and things lacking mind-like qualities. At the level of fundamental physics,
particles for which the quantum potential is negligible lack (for all practical purposes) mind-like
qualities, while particles for which the quantum potential is non-negligible have mind-like quali-
ties. Similarly, at the macroscopic level we can make a distinction between systems where some kind
of active information is having a non-negligible effect (and the system [e.g., a living organism] has
mind-like qualities) and systems where such effect is negligibly small (and the system [e.g., a chair]
has no mind-like qualities). This view is reminiscent of Fechner’s endorsement of a “world-mind”
of which everything is a part. Fechner’s view did not require that every thing in the world be itself
enminded (Seager and Allen-Hermanson 2015: 5).
    Bohm’s way of thinking fits particularly well with Leibniz’s panpsychism. Leibniz’s idea that each
monad carries within it complete information about the entire universe is captured by Bohm’s gen-
eral notion of the implicate order, according to which each part of the universe enfolds information
about the universe as a whole in a holographic manner (Bohm 1980; see also Pylkkänen 2007, Seager
2013). For Leibniz space and time emerge from sets of relations amongst the monads (Seager and
Allen-Hermanson 2015: 11). This again fits with the idea that the implicate order describes a kind
of pre-space out of which the ordinary 3-dimensional space unfolds (Bohm and Hiley 1984). Seager
and Allen-Hermanson note that the only model Leibniz found adequate to describe his monads
was one of perception and spontaneous activity. This is analogous with the Bohmian electron, if we
assume there is a sense in which the electron “perceives” its environment via the quantum field, and
that the flexibility allowed by the hierarchy of quantum fields of information makes possible a kind
of spontaneity on the activity of the electron (cf. Bohm and Peat 2000: 183–4; 202–4). A further


                                                  295
                                           Paavo Pylkkänen


similarity between the Leibnizian and Bohmian panpsychist schemes is that both can make a distinc-
tion between things that have mental attributes from those who do not. Leibniz held that there is
a difference between a “mere aggregate” (e.g. a heap of sand) and the “organic unity” of an organ-
ism. In Bohmian terms a “mere aggregate” corresponds to a situation where the wave function of a
system of particles has factorized in such a way that each particle is guided only by its own pool of
information (and when the quantum potential of a particle has a negligible effect, so that classical
laws prevail), while “organic unity” corresponds to a situation where particles are guided by a com-
mon pool of information, with a non-negligible quantum potential.


                    8.  An analogical argument for panpsychism based
                             on the ontological interpretation
Seager and Allen-Hermanson (2015: 26) characterize a typical argument from analogy for panpsy-
chism as follows: “if we look closely, with an open mind, we see that even the simplest forms of mat-
ter actually exhibit behavior which is akin to that we associate with mentality in animals and human
beings.” They note that one fairly promising analogy is provided by the indeterminism of quantum
mechanics, and draw attention to how Whitehead wanted to see this indeterminacy “. . . as an expres-
sion not of blind chance but spontaneous freedom in response to a kind of informational inclination
rather than mechanical causation.” This general idea fits quite well with the way Bohm made use
of notions such as active information and “generative order” to characterize freedom and causation
(Bohm and Peat 2000). While it is usually assumed that quantum indeterminacy is pure randomness
and as such remote from deliberation, decision and indecision (Seager and Allen-Hermanson 2015:
27), reasonable extensions of quantum theory (e.g. Penrose 1994; Bohm and Hiley 1993: 378-381)
can go towards capturing the kind of interplay of spontaneity, contingency and determination that is
characteristic of human deliberation and decision.
    Seager and Allen-Hermanson think that a more promising quantum theory related analogical
argument for panpsychism has to do with the relation between consciousness and information. The
idea is that an important function of consciousness is to integrate information and to monitor exter-
nal and internal states. This idea can be developed into a view that monitoring and integrated infor-
mation actually make for consciousness (Lycan 1996: 40, quoted in Seager and Allen-­Hermanson
2015: 27). Seager and Allen-Hermanson note: “. . . it follows from this view that if information
monitoring is a fundamental and pervasive feature of the world at even the most basic levels, then
consciousness too should appear at those levels” (2015: 27-8). There is a sense in which quantum
theoretical active information involves information monitoring, so in case the ontological interpreta-
tion is correct, philosophers who emphasize the link between monitoring and consciousness, such as
Lycan, may be closer to panpsychism than they realize (cf. Lycan’s remarks about the lack of scientific
evidence for panpsychism that we cited in the Introduction). Also, Seager and Allen-­Hermanson
suggest that already according to the usual interpretation of quantum theory, experiments on entan-
gled photons imply that two entangled photons are effectively monitoring each other’s state of
polarization (2015: 28). Thus, regardless of whether we are using Bohm and Hiley’s ontological
interpretation, or the usual interpretation of quantum theory, it can be argued that quantum theory
implies that some kind of superluminal informational monitoring is taking place at a fundamental
level of the physical world (it is likely, however, that this does not involve superluminal signaling or
communication, see Walleczek and Grössing (2016)).
    If one accepts that monitoring and integrated information make for consciousness then, if Seager
and Allen-Hermanson are correct, the quantum theory implies that there is at least elementary con-
sciousness associated with quantum phenomena. However, as we have seen, Bohm for one thought
that it is obvious that elementary particles are not conscious. We will return to this issue later.



                                                  296
                                    A Quantum Cure for Panphobia


                                 9.  The Combination Problem
Bohm and Hiley’s interpretation provides a novel way of approaching the combination problem
of panpsychism, i.e. the problem of explaining how the (primitive) consciousness of the ele-
ments of a system could possibly combine into the full consciousness of the system. Nagel, for
example, worries about not only what the proto-mental properties of atoms could possibly be
but also about how they could “combine to form the mental life that we are all familiar” and
“how could any properties of the chemical constituents of a brain combine to form a mental
life?” (1986: 49–50).
    We have seen already that quantum theory challenges some key assumptions on the basis of which
the combination problem has traditionally been formulated in the first place. For while the problem
typically presupposes in a bottom-up fashion that the properties of the whole have to be explained
in terms of the properties of the parts, quantum theory strongly points to a monistic ontology, in the
sense that the whole is prior to its parts (cf. Schaffer 2010). This does not deny the existence of the
parts, nor does it deny that some aspects of the whole can be conveniently understood in terms of
the properties of the parts. But, as we have seen earlier, there are quite generally instances in quantum
theory (brought out especially clearly by the ontological interpretation) where the whole is prior to
parts in the sense that the behaviour of individual particles cannot be understood in terms of their
spatial relationships only. So we do not explain the behaviour of the whole in a bottom-up way in
terms of the behaviour of the parts, but rather explain the behaviour of the parts in a top-down way
partly in terms of the properties of the whole.
    We also saw that in terms of the ontological interpretation, the particles in a many-body quan-
tum system are guided by a “common pool” of information that cannot be reduced to the “private
pools” of individual particles. On the contrary, the whole is prior to the parts in the sense that
these private pools arise from the common pool in certain circumstances through factorization.
Thus quantum reality seems to provide a powerful holistic principle of combination, which in the
ontological interpretation can be understood in terms of a quantum potential, a new kind of non-
local, holistic organizing factor. Regarding the combination problem, the ontological interpretation
provides one way of understanding, at least as an analogy, how a subsystem (such as a human being)
can have properties (e.g. consciousness) that need not be accounted for entirely by the properties
of the parts of the subsystem (e.g. elementary consciousness of the parts). Thus, while the ontologi-
cal interpretation has a panpsychist flavour in postulating that elementary particles have mind-like
qualities (when the quantum potential for a particle is non-negligible), its emphasis on the priority
of the whole goes against the spirit of the bottom-up way of explaining consciousness characteristic
of traditional panpsychism. This can be seen as a deflationary approach to the combination problem
(Ilpo Hirvonen, private communication).


                     10.  Active Information and Conscious Experience
The preceding gives rise to the question of what the origin of conscious experience is in the Bohm-
ian scheme. We have noted that in this scheme the whole is primary, in the sense that active informa-
tion associated with an elementary particle derives from a common pool of information, ultimately
that of the universe as a whole. However, if we think of the quantum field of the universe in the
light of the ontological interpretation, there seems to be no reason to think that the active informa-
tion encoded in this vastly multidimensional quantum field is conscious. Indeed, while Bohm saw
nature as a dynamic process where information and meaning play a key dynamic role, he assumed
that “99.99 per cent “of our meanings are not conscious (see Weber 1987: 439). But how can one
then address the problem of consciousness in this scheme? In other words, why is there sometimes



                                                  297
                                             Paavo Pylkkänen


conscious experience associated with the activity of information? Why doesn’t all the activity of
information in humans proceed “in the dark”, as it seems to do in physical and biological processes
in general?
    Given that Bohm’s mind-matter scheme has a hierarchical structure, one natural possibility to
explore is whether some version of a higher-order theory of consciousness could be applied here.
Alternatively one could try to apply Tononi’s integrated information theory of consciousness
(Oizumi et al. 2014) to active information, or consider the relationship of the active information
scheme (with its emphasis on common pools of information) to Baars’s (2007) global workspace
theory of consciousness. Or perhaps a suitable combination and modification of these theories would
do the job of accounting for consciousness in the active information scheme? One thing to consider
here is that Tononi’s theory has been subject to severe criticisms by Scott Aaronson, who argues
that according to Tononi’s theory a simple Reed-Solomon decoding circuit would, if scaled to a
large enough size, bring into being a consciousness vastly exceeding our own – something Aaronson
thinks is simply absurd (for the debate, see Aaronson 2014a & 2014b). If we postulate that conscious-
ness requires the activity Bohmian quantum information (or something analogous to it), such simple
counterexamples will not work. In order for the system to be conscious, non-trivial quantum effects
have to play a role in it.
    A simple possibility would be to postulate that what makes a given mental state (or level of
information or mental activity) conscious is that there exists a higher level of (typically) unconscious
information, which has the content that one is in the first order mental state or activity (cf. Rosenthal
1997; Gennaro 2012). Note also that David Chalmers (1996) famously suggested that we tackle the
hard problem of consciousness with a double-aspect theory of information. The idea is that infor-
mation is a fundamental feature of the world, which always has both a phenomenal and a physical
aspect. Now, we could take this idea to the Bohm scheme and postulate that active information, too,
has phenomenal properties. This then raises the question about what we should think about the
active information in the pilot wave of an electron. Does it, too, have phenomenal properties in some
sense? We have seen that Bohm himself went as far as to say that an electron has a “primitive mind-
like quality”, but by “mind” he was here referring to the “activity of form”, rather than conscious
phenomenal experience in any full sense.
    I think that it is reasonable to combine Chalmers’s hypothesis with active information, but we
need to restrict the hypothesis. For example, we could say that a certain kind of active information
(for example, holistic active information that is analogous to quantum active information) has the
potentiality for phenomenal properties, but this potentiality is actualized only in suitable circum-
stances (for example, when a given level of active information is the intentional target of a higher
level of active information; or if we want to follow a Tononian-Baarsian approach, we could say that
suitably integrated active information which can act as a global workspace is conscious). Of course,
this also opens up the possibility for genuine artificial consciousness. If we could implement suitably
integrated quantum-like active information in an artificial system and set up suitable higher-order
relationships between levels and a global workspace in the system, phenomenal properties should
actualize themselves, according to this type of hypothesis.
    One advantage is that while Chalmers’s double-aspect theory suffers from epiphenomenalism,
Bohm’s scheme, when modified, opens up the possibility of a genuine causal efficacy of phenomenal
properties upon the physical domain (see Pylkkänen 2007: 244–6; Pylkkänen 2017). Also, Chalmers
thinks it an interesting possibility that some sort of activity is required for experience, and that static
information (e.g. information in a thermostat in a constant state) thus is not likely to have experience
associated with it (1996: 298). If we say that phenomenal properties are always properties of some
kind of Bohmian active information, we could do justice to the intuition that activity is required for
experience.



                                                   298
                                        A Quantum Cure for Panphobia


                                              11. Conclusion
We started off by noting that, given the prima facie absurdity of the notion that physical ultimates have
mental or even experiential properties, those who find panpsychist arguments convincing may find
themselves overcome by panphobia. We then examined in some detail Bohm and Hiley’s proposal
that elementary particles have mind-like qualities. Thus, panpsychism is not as anti-scientific as it
may seem, and perhaps a cure or at least alleviation of panphobia is here available. However, there is
one important point we need to consider. Bohm’s idea that elementary particles (or physical ulti-
mates) are not conscious (and that the quantum field of the universe as a whole is not conscious)
means that one needs to appeal to some kind of emergence to account for consciousness; and
emergentism and panpsychism are often seen as competing doctrines (Seager and Allen-Hermanson
2015: 3). Thus some panpsychists would not see the active information scheme – at least in the form
I have presented it here – as a genuinely panpsychist one, but rather as a form of emergentism. If
so, I suggest that the active information scheme makes emergentism a more plausible doctrine. It is
easier to see how a mind-like state can become conscious, than how a “purely physical” state can
become conscious. This intuition is shared by some higher-order theorists (see e.g. Lycan’s (1996: 24)
answer to the so-called problem of the rock for higher order theories). By postulating that mind-like
qualities are a fundamental aspect of the universe, Bohm’s active information and implicate order
schemes make the emergence of conscious experience more intelligible.


                                           Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Valtteri Arstila, Ilpo Hirvonen, Kristjan Loorits and William Seager for their
valuable comments on this chapter. The work for this chapter was partially funded by the Fetzer
Franklin Fund of the John E. Fetzer Memorial Trust.


                                                 References
Aaronson, S. (2014a) ‘Why I Am Not An Integrated Information Theorist (or, The Unconscious Expander)’,
   Shtetl Optimized: The Blog of Scott Aaronson. https://www.scottaaronson.com/blog/?p=1799
Aaronson, S. (2014b)‘Giulio Tononi and Me: A Phi-nal Exchange’, Shtetl Optimized: The Blog of Scott Aaronson.
   https://www.scottaaronson.com/blog/?p=1823
Baars, B. (2007). ‘The Global Workspace Theory of Consciousness’. In M. Velmans and S. Schneider (eds.), The
   Blackwell Companion to Consciousness. Malden, MA: Blackwell, pp. 236–46.
Bacciagaluppi, G., and Valentini, A. (2009). Quantum Theory at a Crossroads: Reconsidering the 1927 Solvay Confer-
   ence. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ball, P. (2011). ‘The Dawn of Quantum Biology’. Nature 474, pp. 272-4.
Barwise, J., and Seligman, J. (1997). Information Flow: The Logic of Distributed Systems. Cambridge: Cambridge
   University Press.
Bell, J. (1987). Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bohm, D. (1952a). ‘A Suggested Interpretation of the Quantum Theory in Terms of “Hidden Variables I” ’.
   Physical Review, 85 (2): 166–79.
Bohm, D. (1952b). ‘A Suggested Interpretation of the Quantum Theory in Terms of “Hidden Variables II” ’.
   Physical Review, 85 (2): 180–93.
Bohm, D. (1980). Wholeness and the Implicate Order. London: Routledge.
Bohm, D. (1989). ‘Meaning and Information’. In P. Pylkkänen (ed.), The Search for Meaning. Wellingborough:
   Crucible, pp. 43–62.
Bohm, D. (1990). ‘A New Theory of the Relationship of Mind and Matter’. Philosophical Psychology, 3: 271–86.
Bohm, D., and Hiley, B. J. (1975). ‘On the Intuitive Understanding of Non-Locality as Implied by Quantum
   Theory’. Foundations of Physics, 5: 93–109.
Bohm, D., and Hiley, B.J. (1984). ‘Generalization of the Twistor to Clifford Algebras as a Basis for Geometry’.
   Revista Brasileira de Fisica, Vol. Esp. Os 70 anos de Mário Schönberg, pp. 1-26.



                                                      299
                                                Paavo Pylkkänen


Bohm, D., and Hiley, B. J. (1987). ‘An Ontological Basis for Quantum Theory: I. Non-Relativistic Particle
    Systems’. Physics Reports, 144 (6): 323–48.
Bohm, D., and Hiley, B. J. (1993). The Undivided Universe: An Ontological Interpretation of Quantum Theory. Lon-
    don: Routledge.
Bouwmeester, D., Ekert, A., and Zeilinger, A. K. (eds.) (2000). The Physics of Quantum Information: Quantum
    Cryptography, Quantum Teleportation, Quantum Computation. Heidelberg and Berlin: Spinger.
Bricmont, J. (2016). Making Sense of Quantum Mechanics. Heidelberg: Springer.
Chalmers, D. (1996). The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Choustova, O. (2007). ‘Toward Quantum-Like Modeling of Financial Processes’. Journal of Physics: Conference
    Series, 70: 012006.
Chrisley, R. C. (1997). ‘Learning in Non-Superpositional Quantum Neurocomputers’. In Pylkkänen et al. (eds.)
    (1997), pp. 126–39.
Dickson, M. (1996). ‘Antidote or Theory?’ Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 27 (2): 229–38.
Dretske, F. (1981). Knowledge and the Flow of Information. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Filk, T. (2012). ‘Quantum-Like Behavior of Classical Systems’. In J. Busemeyer, F. Dubois, A. Lambert-Mogiliansky,
    and M. Melucci (eds.), Quantum Interaction (Lecture Notes in Computer Science), vol. 7620. Berlin: Springer,
    pp. 196–206.
Flack, R., Monachello, V., Hiley, B.J. and Barker, P. (2018) ‘A Method for Mesuring the Weak Value of Spin for
    Metastable Atoms’ Entropy 20, 566. Republished in Walleczek et al. (eds.) (2018).
Floridi, Luciano (2015). ‘Semantic Conceptions of Information’. In E. N. Zalta (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of
    Philosophy, Spring 2015 edition. http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2015/entries/information-semantic/.
Fodor, J. (1989). ‘Making Mind Matter More’. Philosophical Topics, XVII (1): 59–79.
Gennaro, R. (2012). The Consciousness Paradox. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Goldstein, Sheldon (2013). ‘Bohmian Mechanics’. In E. Zalta (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. http://
    plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2013/entries/qm-bohm/.
Hameroff, S., and Penrose, R. (2014). ‘Consciousness in the Universe: A Review of the “Orch OR theory” ’.
    Physics of Life Reviews, 11 (1): 39–78.
Haven, E. (2005). ‘Pilot-Wave Theory and Financial Option Pricing’. International Journal of Theoretical Physics,
    44: 1957–62.
Hiley, B.J. and Pylkkänen, P. (1997). ‘Active Information and Cognitive Science: A Reply to Kieseppä’. In Pylk-
    känen et al. (eds.) (1997), pp. 64–85.
Hiley, B. J., and Pylkkänen, P. (2001). ‘Naturalizing the Mind in a Quantum Framework’. In P. Pylkkänen and
    T. Vadén (eds.), Dimensions of Conscious Experience. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, pp. 119–44.
Hiley, B.J., and Pylkkänen, P. (2005) ‘Can Mind Affect Matter Via Active Information’. Mind and Matter 3 (2):
    7-26, URL = http://www.mindmatter.de/resources/pdf/hileywww.pdf
Holland, P. (1995). The Quantum Theory of Motion. An Account of the de Broglie – Bohm Causal Interpretation of
    Quantum Mechanics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Holland, P. (2011). ‘A Quantum of History’. Contemporary Physics, 52 (4): 355–8.
Ismael, J.T. (2016). How Physics Makes Us Free. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Jammer, M. (1998). ‘David Bohm and His Work: On the Occasion of His Seventieth Birthday’. Foundations of
    Physics, 18: 691–9.
Khrennikov, A. (2004). Information Dynamics in Cognitive, Psychological and Anomalous Phenomena. Series: Funda-
    mental Theories of Physics, vol. 138. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Kieseppä, I. A. (1997a). ‘Is David Bohm’s Notion of Active Information Useful in Cognitive Science?’ In Pylk-
    känen et al. (eds.) (1997), pp. 54–63.
Kieseppä, I. A. (1997b). ‘On the Difference Between Quantum and Classical Potentials – A Reply to Hiley and
    Pylkkänen’. In Pylkkänen et al. (eds.) (1997), pp. 86–99.
Lewis. P. (2016). Quantum Ontology. A Guide to the Metaphysics of Quantum Mechanics. Oxford: Oxford University
    Press.
Lycan, W. G.(1996). Consciousness and Experience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lycan, W.G. (2006). ‘Resisting ?-ism’. Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (10-11): 65-71.
Maleeh, R., and Amani, P. (2012). ‘Bohm’s Theory of the Relationship of Mind and Matter Revisited’. Neuro-
    quantology, 10: 150–63.
Marais, A., et al. (2018) ‘The Future of Quantum Biology’. J. R. Soc. Interface 15: 20180640.
Maroney, O. (2002). Information and Entropy in Quantum Theory. Ph D thesis, Birkbeck College, University of
    London. www.bbk.ac.uk/tpru/OwenMaroney/thesis/thesis.html.
Maroney, O., and Hiley, B. J. (1999). ‘Quantum State Teleportation Understood Through the Bohm Interpreta-
    tion’. Foundations of Physics, 29 (9): 1403–15.



                                                       300
                                          A Quantum Cure for Panphobia


McGinn, C. (2006). ‘Hard questions’. Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (10-11): 90-99.
Nagel, T. (1979). ‘Panpsychism’. In Mortal Questions. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 181–95.
Nagel, T. (1986). The View from Nowhere. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ney, A., and Albert, D. (2013). The Wave Function: Essays on th Metaphysics of Quantum Mechanics. Oxford: Oxford
    University Press.
Oizumi, M., Albantakis, L., and Tononi, G. (2014). ‘From the Phenomenology to the Mechanisms of Con-
    sciousness: Integrated Information Theory 3.0’. PLoS Computational Biology, 10 (5): e1003588.
Penrose, R. (1994). Shadows of the Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Philippidis, C., Dewdney, C., and Hiley, B. J. (1979). ‘Quantum Interference and the Quantum Potential’. Il
    Nuovo Cimento, 52 (1): 15–28.
Plotnitsky, A. (2010). Epistemology and Probability. Bohr, Heisenberg, Schrödinger and the Nature of Quantum-Theoretical
    Thinking. Heidelberg and New York: Springer.
Polkinghorne, J. (2002) Quantum Theory: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pylkkänen, P. (1992). Mind, Matter and Active Information. Reports from the Department of Philosophy No. 2,
    University of Helsinki. Helsinki: Yliopistopaino.
Pylkkänen, P. (1996). ‘On Baking Conscious Cake with Quantum Yeast and Flour’. In J. Shawe-Taylor (ed.),
    Consciousness at a Crossroads of Cognitive Science and Phenomenology. Thorverton: Imprint Academic.
Pylkkänen, P. (2007). Mind, Matter and the Implicate Order. Berlin and New York: Springer (Frontiers Collection).
Pylkkänen. P. (2016). ‘Can Bohmian Quantum Information Help Us to Understand Consciousness?’ In
    H. Atmanspacher, T. Filk, and E. Pothos (eds.), Quantum Interaction 2015: 9th International Conference, Revised
    Selected Papers. Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 76–87.
Pylkkänen, P. (2017). ‘Is There Room in Quantum Ontology for a Genuine Causal Role of Consciousness?’
    In A. Khrennikov and E. Haven (eds.), The Palgrave Handbook of Quantum Models in Social Science. London:
    Macmillan, pp. 293–318.
Pylkkänen, P. (2018). ‘Quantum Theories of Consciousness’. In R. J. Gennaro (ed.) The Routledge Handbook of
    Consciousness. New York and London: Routledge, pp. 216-231.
Pylkkänen, P., Hiley, B. J. and Pättiniemi, I. (2016). ‘Bohm’s Approach and Individuality’. In A. Guay and
    T. Pradeu (eds.), Individuals Across the Sciences. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 226–49. http://arxiv.org/
    abs/1405.4772.
Pylkkänen, P., Pylkkö, P. and Hautamäki, A. (eds.), Brain, Mind and Physics. Amsterdam: IOS Press
Riggs, P. (2008). ‘Reflections on the de Broglie – Bohm Quantum Potential’. Erkenntnis, 68: 21–39.
Roederer, J. G. (2005). Information and Its Role in Nature. Berlin: Springer.
Rosenthal, D. (1997). ‘A Theory of Consciousness’. In N. Block, O. Flanagan, and G. Güzeldere (eds.), The
    Nature of Consciousness: Philosophical Debates. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 729–53.
Rosenthal, D. (2009). ‘Concepts and Definitions of Consciousness’. In W. Banks (ed.), Encyclopedia of Conscious-
    ness. New York: Elsevier.
Schaffer, J. (2010). ‘Monism: The Priority of the Whole’. Philosophical Review, 119 (1): 31–76.
Seager, W. (2013). ‘Classical Levels, Russellian Monism and the Implicate Order’. Foundations of Physics, 43: 548–67.
Seager, W. (2018). ‘The Philosophical and Scientific Metaphysics of David Bohm’. Entropy 20, 493. Republished
    in Walleczek et al. eds (2018).
Seager, W., and Allen-Hermanson, S. (2015). ‘Panpsychism’. In E. Zalta (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philoso-
    phy, Fall 2015 edition. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2015/entries/panpsychism/.
Simons, P. (2006). ‘The seeds of experience’. Journal of Consciousness Studies 13 (10-11): 146-50.
Smith, Q. (2003). ‘Why Cognitive Scientists Cannot Ignore Quantum Mechanics?’ In Q. Smith and A. Jokic
    (eds.), Consciousness: New Philosophical Perspectives. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 409–46.
Strawson, Galen (2006). ‘Realistic Monism – Why Physicalism Entails Panpsychism’. Journal of Consciousness
    Studies, 13 (10–11): 3–31.
Tononi, G., and Koch, C. (2014). ‘Consciousness: Here, There but Not Everywhere’. https://arxiv.org/
    abs/1405.7089v1. (Published as ‘Consciousness: Here, There and Everywhere?’ Philosophical Transactions of
    the Royal Society B, 370: 20140167.).
Velmans, M. (1991a). ‘Is Human Information Processing Conscious?’ Behavioral and Brain Sciences 14 (4): 651–69.
Velmans, M. (1991b). ‘Consciousness from a First-Person Perspective’. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 14 (4): 702–26.
Velmans, M. (2009). Understanding Consciousness, 2nd edition. London: Routledge.
Walleczek, J., and Grössing, G. (2016). ‘Nonlocal Quantum Information Transfer Without Superluminal Signal-
    ling and Communication’. Foundations of Physics, 46 (9): 1208–28.
Walleczek, J., Grössing, G., Pylkkänen, P., and Hiley B.J. (2018). Emergent Quantum Mechanics: David Bohm Cen-
    tennial Perspectives. Printed Edition of the Special Issue Published in Entropy. Basel: MDPI. Free download:
    https://www.mdpi.com/1099-4300/21/2/113



                                                         301
                                              Paavo Pylkkänen


Wang, Z., Busemeyer, J. R., Atmanspacher, H., and Pothos, E. M. (2013). ‘The Potential of Using Quantum
  Theory to Build Models of Cognition’. Topics in Cognitive Science, 5: 672–88.
Weber, R. (1987). ‘Meaning as Being in the Implicate Order Philosophy of David Bohm: A Conversation’.
  In B. Hiley and F. Peat (eds.), Quantum Implications: Essays in Honour of David Bohm. London: Routledge,
  pp. 436–50.
Wendt, A. (2015). Quantum Mind and Social Science: Unifying Physical and Social Ontology. Cambridge: Cambridge
  University Press.




                                                     302
                25
    PANPSYCHISM’S COMBINATION
       PROBLEM IS A PROBLEM
          FOR EVERYONE
                                      Angela Mendelovici


                                         1. Introduction
Panpsychism is the view that the phenomenal experiences of macrophysical items, like ourselves, are
nothing over and above combinations of phenomenal experiences of microphysical items, where
the relevant modes of combination might involve physical properties and relations.1 Most versions
of the view can be seen as being motivated by the perceived failure of physicalism – the view that
consciousness is nothing over and above some arrangement of (non-experiential) physical items – to
provide an intelligible explanation of phenomenal consciousness, together with a desire to explain at
least our own experiences in more fundamental terms. Physicalist attempts at explaining conscious-
ness in terms of fundamental non-experiential physical reality are subject to explanatory gap worries
(Levine 1983), the conceivability argument (Chalmers 1996), and the knowledge argument ( Jackson
1982), all of which arguably arise from physicalism’s failure to render intelligible the putative con-
nection between phenomenal consciousness and physical reality. Dualism, which takes phenomenal
experiences such as our own to be fundamental, avoids such worries by denying that phenomenal
experiences can be explained in terms of something else, but gives up on the reductive spirit of
physicalism, taking our phenomenal experiences to be primitive, and perhaps brute and inexplicable,
features of reality.
    Panpsychism attempts to get the best of both worlds, combining physicalism’s reductive spirit
with dualism’s skepticism about explaining consciousness in non-experiential terms. Like physical-
ism, panpsychism aims to explain our phenomenal experiences in terms of something else, though
it denies that this something else is wholly non-experiential. Like dualism, panpsychism takes at least
some instances of phenomenal consciousness to be fundamental. Our experiences may not be fun-
damental, but they are made up of experiences that are.
    Unfortunately, it is not clear that panpsychism can offer an intelligible explanation of the phe-
nomenal experiences of macrophysical entities like ourselves at all, and so it is not clear that panpsy-
chism is any better off than physicalism with respect to explaining our experiences. The problem is
that it is not clear how fundamental experiences can come together to form experiences such as our
own. This problem is the combination problem, and it has been discussed at length by James (1890),
Seager (1995), Goff (2006), Stoljar (2006), Basile (2010), Coleman (2012), Roelofs (2014), Chalmers
(2016), Mørch (2014), and others.
    The aim of this chapter is to clarify the combination problem, assess the extent to which problems
of mental combination are unique to panpsychism, and consider the implications for arguments against


                                                  303
                                            Angela Mendelovici


panpsychism. I will argue that the panpsychist’s combination problem might not be hers alone and
that this suggests an “epistemic” reply to objections to panpsychism from the combination problem.


                       2.  Panpsychism and the Combination Problem
Panpsychism is a theory of phenomenal consciousness, the felt, qualitative, subjective, or “what it’s like”
(Nagel 1974) aspect of mental life. Particular instances of phenomenal consciousness are (phenomenal)
experiences, and the specific “what it’s like” or felt quality of an experience is its phenomenal character.
For example, an experience of redness might be said to have a “reddish” phenomenal character.
    According to panpsychism, the fundamental physical constituents of reality (microphysical entities)
have experiences, and the experiences of non-fundamental physical items (macrophysical entities) are
constituted by the experiences of microphysical entities, perhaps combined in a certain way, where
the relevant mode of combination might involve functional and physical properties and relations.
We can call the experiences of microphysical items microexperiences and the experiences of macro-
physical items macroexperiences. For panpsychism, phenomenal consciousness is both a posit and an
explanandum: panpsychism aims to explain macroexperiences such as our own and it does so by
positing microexperiences.
    Given that a central motivation for panpsychism is the failure of physicalism to provide an intel-
ligible explanation of phenomenal consciousness, I will assume that panpsychists aim to provide an
explanation of macroexperience that is intelligible. I will take this to require that the macroexperi-
ential facts are a priori entailed by the facts about microexperiences and how they are combined.
I will not assume, however, that panpsychism requires that we can ever know such a theory, and I will
eventually suggest that such a theory might not be knowable by us.
    Perhaps the most pressing worry for panpsychism is the combination problem, the problem of
explaining how the hypothesized microexperiences combine to form macroexperiences, such as our
own observed experiences. We can sharpen the worry with some assumptions:

(A1) Macroexperiences are not identical to any one of their constituent microexperiences.
(A2) The subjects of macroexperiences are not identical to any one of the subjects of their constitu-
      ent microexperiences.
(A3) Macroexperiences have phenomenal characters that are not had by any of their constituent
      microexperiences.

Given these three assumptions, the combination problem becomes that of explaining how groups
of microexperiences come together to constitute (1) new experiences, which belong to (2) new sub-
jects, and have (3) new phenomenal characters. We can thus tease apart three combination problems for
panpsychism:

(CP1)  The new experience problem
(CP2)  The new subject problem
(CP3)  The new phenomenal characters problem

Note that, given our definition of panpsychism, none of the assumptions that give rise to the com-
bination problems form a definitional part of panpsychism, and so a panpsychist solution to these
problems might coherently deny any one of them.
   Problems (CP1) and (CP2) are sometimes lumped together under the heading of “the subject
combination problem” and taken to be the central or most difficult part of the combination problem
(see Roelofs’ contribution to this volume). As we will soon see, (CP1) and (CP2) are distinct prob-
lems, though they interact with one another in interesting ways.


                                                    304
                                   Panpsychism’s Combination Problem


   The remainder of this section elaborates upon the combination problems for panpsychism and
suggests that what makes them particularly challenging is that they require mental things to come
together to form more than a mere collection of their parts.


                                   The New Experience Problem
The new experience problem is the problem of explaining how microexperiences combine to form
distinct macroexperiences. For example, according to panpsychism, two microexperiences, e1 and
e2, when combined in the right way, might give rise to a distinct macroexperience, E. The problem
is that of explaining how this new experience arises. What makes the new experience problem chal-
lenging is that it is not clearly intelligible why a collection of experiences, however organized, should
result in a further experience.
    The new experience problem can be avoided by rejecting assumption (A1), the assumption that
microexperiences combine to form distinct macroexperiences, and instead claiming that each mac-
roexperience is identical to a constituent microexperience. On such a view, macroexperiences are
present at the fundamental level, and so there are no “new” experiences to account for. Leibniz’s
(1714/1989) monadology is such a version of panpsychism. One worry with this general approach is
that it seems there would be a surprising structural mismatch between the microphysical properties
of the dominant monad and its corresponding experience (see Chalmers 2016). Another reason to
disfavor such a view is that taking our own experiences to be fundamental foregoes one of the main
advantages of panpsychism over ordinary dualism, which is that it promises to offer an explanation of
our own experiences in terms of something else. For these reasons, the panpsychist probably should
not try to avoid the new experience problem by rejecting (A1).


                                     The New Subject Problem
The new subject problem is the problem of explaining how subjects of microexperience combine to
form distinct subjects of macroexperience. Suppose s1 and s2 are the subjects of experiences e1 and
e2, respectively. On most natural versions of panpsychism, when e1 and e2 combine to form the new
experience E, this experience is an experience of a new subject, S, which is distinct from s1 and s2.
The new subject problem is that of explaining how S arises from a combination of s1 and s2. The
problem is challenging because it is not clearly intelligible why a mere collection of subjects, however
organized, should yield a new subject (see, e.g. Goff 2006, 2009).
    The new subject problem can be avoided by rejecting (A2), the assumption that the subjects of
macroexperiences are distinct from the subjects of any one of their constituent microexperiences,
and instead claiming that the subjects of macroexperiences are simply the subjects of one or more of
the constituent microexperiences. In the preceding example, we could say that E is an experience of
s1, s2, or both s1 and s2, taken severally. Of these options, the first two seem arbitrary (why should E
be an experience of s1 rather than s2?), which leaves us with the last option: s1 experiences E, and s2
also experiences E. But such a view, on which, presumably, every macroexperience is had by all the
subjects of all its constituent microexperiences, seems a bit excessive. It also faces the same structural
mismatch problem as the Leibnizian view discussed previously. For these reasons, the panpsychist
probably should not try to avoid the new subject problem by rejecting (A2).


                            The New Phenomenal Character Problem
The new phenomenal character problem is the problem of explaining how the phenomenal characters
of microexperiences combine to form the phenomenal characters of macroexperiences. The prob-
lem arises from (A3), according to which macroexperiences have phenomenal characters that their


                                                   305
                                            Angela Mendelovici


constituent microexperiences do not have. For example, we experience colors, shapes, and feelings of
déjà vu, but microphysical items presumably do not have all these kinds of experiences.
    We can distinguish between two types of new phenomenal characters the panpsychist might
want to accommodate: complex phenomenal characters, which are phenomenal characters that have
parts that are also phenomenal characters, and simple phenomenal characters, which are phenomenal
characters that are not complex. For example, the phenomenal character of an experience of a red
square might be complex in that it involves as parts both reddish and squarish phenomenal charac-
ters, but the phenomenal character of an experience of redness might be simple, not involving other
phenomenal characters as parts.
    The panpsychist faces challenges in accommodating both simple and complex new phenomenal
characters. Suppose a macroexperience E has a complex reddish-squarish phenomenal character.
According to panpsychism, E’s complex phenomenal character is a result of the phenomenal charac-
ters of its constituent experiences. Perhaps E is a combination of two experiences, e1 and e2, where
e1 has a reddish phenomenal character and e2 has a squarish phenomenal character. The problem is
that it is not clear why E should have a reddish-squarish phenomenal character, rather than a red-
dish phenomenal character alongside a squarish phenomenal character. In other words, it is not clear
why e1 and e2’s phenomenal characters should combine in E to yield a complex whole, a reddish-
squarish phenomenal character, rather than simply co-exist as two unrelated simple (or simpler)
phenomenal characters. It is even less clear how new simple phenomenal characters could arise from
the phenomenal characters of microexperiences, since they do not even have constituent parts that
are phenomenal characters. There aren’t any candidate phenomenal characters to be combined, let
alone a way of intelligibly combining them into a new whole.
    The problems can be avoided by rejecting (A3): If microphysical items do have the full range of
experiences found in macrophysical items, then there need be no combined phenomenal characters.
But it is implausible that the full range of experiences found at the macrolevel is found at the microlevel.
Many of the phenomenal characters of macroexperiences appear to be too sophisticated to be found
at the microlevel, such as feelings of jealousy or cognitive experiences of suddenly grasping a difficult
concept. Additionally, and perhaps more persuasively, it is implausible that there are enough kinds of
microexperiences to correspond to all the kinds of macroexperiences we can have. For these reasons, the
panpsychist probably should not try to avoid the new phenomenal characters problem by denying (A3).

                            3.  Combination Problems for Everyone
Panpsychism’s combination problems are challenging (see especially Goff 2006, 2009; Chalmers
2016), but the panpsychist does not face them alone. They are of the same kind as the problems of
explaining phenomenal unity, mental structure, and changes in quality spaces, which are problems for
anyone holding certain plausible assumptions.

            3.1.  The New Experience Problem Is Not Special to Panpsychism
This subsection argues that the new experience problem is the same in kind as two other well-
known problems, the problems of explaining phenomenal unity and mental structure. The phenom-
ena of phenomenal unity and mental structure arguably involve experiences coming together to
form new experiences in much the same way that panpsychism requires microexperiences to come
together to form new macroexperiences.

                                 The Problem of Phenomenal Unity
You might now be enjoying various visual, auditory, and cognitive experiences. These experiences
are in some sense experienced together. In contrast, your experiences and the experiences of other


                                                    306
                                  Panpsychism’s Combination Problem


people are not experienced together. Phenomenal unity is the phenomenon of experiences being
experienced together that is present in the former kinds of cases and absent in the latter.
   The problem of phenomenal unity is the problem of explaining how and why some experiences are
phenomenally unified while others are not. Solving this problem is particularly difficult because it
seems that what is required for a group of experiences to be phenomenally unified is something
more than their co-occurrence. Something like this is assumed by two influential characterizations
of phenomenal unity.
   On Bayne and Chalmers’ (Bayne 2012; Bayne and Chalmers 2003) characterization, experiences
are phenomenally unified when they are subsumed by a single conscious state; phenomenal unity
involves a new experience, one that subsumes the unified experiences.
   Similarly, Dainton (2000: 4) characterizes phenomenal unity in terms of co-consciousness, where
co-consciousness is not merely a matter of experiences occurring at the same time or place, or even
in the same subject, but rather “consists in a relationship between experiences that is itself experi-
enced.” On this characterization, the phenomenal unity of e1 and e2 involves an experienced relation
between e1 and e2, and the experience of this relation is a new experience, distinct from e1 and e2.


                                 The Problem of Mental Structure
Our mental states do not form an undifferentiated whole, or a set of isolated states, but are instead
related and structured in various ways. For example, a visual experience of a red circle does not only
involve an experience of redness and an experience of a circle, but also involves these experiences
being related in a certain way: The experienced redness qualifies the experienced circle. The problem
of mental structure is that of explaining how mental states come to be structured in this and other ways.
    One instance of the problem of mental structure is a version of the binding problem, the experi-
ence binding problem, which is the problem of explaining how distinct experiences that are subserved
by distinct neural areas are experienced as pertaining to the same consciously represented object.
Another instance of the problem of mental structure concerns intentional structure. Intentional con-
tents – what mental states “say,” are directed at, or represent – can be structured in various ways. The
problem of intentional structure is that of explaining how intentional states representing a content’s
constituent contents come together to form a complex structured intentional state rather than, say, a
mere set of contentful states.
    Mental structure quite plausibly involves new mental states, mental states involving but distinct
from the mental states that compose them. For example, suppose M1 and M2 are bound to the same
represented object. Then there is a mental state distinct from M1 and M2, consisting of M1 and M2
together and organized in a certain way, i.e., as bound to the same represented object. For example,
a thought that Lisa loves Sally involves not only the representation of the contents <Lisa>, <Sally>,
and <loves>, but also a distinct state representing <Lisa loves Sally>.
    If the preceding claims about the problems of phenomenal unity and mental structure are right,
then the problem of explaining how experiences combine to form new experiences may not be
special to panpsychism. On the reasonable assumption that certain kinds of holism are not true, an
assumption that we will consider shortly, phenomenal unity involves experiences coming together
to form new unified experiences, and mental structure involves experiences or intentional states
coming together to form new complex experiences or intentional states, respectively. Of course,
panpsychism requires that microexperiences combine to form new experiences, whereas phenomenal
unity and mental structure only require macroexperiences to combine to form new experiences. But
it is not clear that what is required is different in kind.
    One might object that there is a way out of this commitment in the case of the problems of
phenomenal unity and mental structure that is not available in the case of the panpsychist’s new
experience problem, so the problems are different in kind. The way out is to reject the assumption


                                                  307
                                           Angela Mendelovici


that when we experience a phenomenally unified or mentally structured whole, we also experience
its parts. A holistic view of this sort (see, e.g., James 1890) avoids commitment to new experiences by
denying that macroexperiences ever combine in the relevant way. What appear to be separable parts
of our experiences are in fact mere aspects of the experiences, having no distinct and independent
existence, but instead having an existence that depends on the whole of which they are an aspect.
    However, the panpsychist might similarly avail herself to a “holistic” solution to the new experi-
ence problem, maintaining that the ultimate constituents of reality are not “small” things, but rather
the world as a whole, which has one single experience (at least at a time) with many aspects cor-
responding to what we take to be our experiences (see Goff 2017). Alternatively, she might maintain
that the ultimate constituents of reality are or include subjects like ourselves. Like the way out of the
problems of phenomenal unity and mental structure, this strategy involves denying that the relevant
sort of mental combination occurs. Such a view still qualifies as panpsychist on our definition, since
it still maintains that macroexperiences are nothing over and above microexperiences combined in
a certain way – it’s just that every macroexperience is identical to a single microexperience. Unless
there is good reason to think that the problems of phenomenal unity and mental structure are par-
ticularly amenable to the holistic strategy while the new experience problem is not, the availability
of this strategy in their case does not suggest that the new experience problem is different in kind
from the problems of phenomenal unity and mental structure.
    Another objection to the claim that the new experience problem is the same in kind as the
problems of phenomenal unity and mental structure is that in the case of new experiences arising
from phenomenal unity and mental structure, the new experiences are experiences of the same
subjects that experience the combined experiences, whereas in the case of the panpsychist’s new
experiences, the new experiences are experiences of new subjects. This suggests that perhaps the
way in which microexperiences combine to form new macroexperiences is different from the way
in which macroexperiences combine to form new macroexperiences, which would mean that the
panpsychist’s new experience problem is indeed special to panpsychism. We will return to this
objection shortly.


              3.2.  The New Subject Problem Is Not Special to Panpsychism
Consider first a fairly thin notion of subjects on which subjects are sets of phenomenally unified
experiences. On this notion, when mental combination results in a new experience, that experi-
ence automatically has a subject. For example, once phenomenal unity results in a new experience
subsuming or including the unified experiences, that experience thereby automatically has a subject.
    On the thin notion of subjects, there is no mystery as to why phenomenally unified experiences
have subjects: they have subjects simply because they are phenomenally unified and subjects are sets
of phenomenally unified experiences. It might seem that the panpsychist can solve the new subject
problem in the same way: when the experiences of microsubjects are phenomenally unified, a new
macrosubject comes to exist and experiences the phenomenally unified experiences. The new sub-
ject problem, then, can be solved by adopting a thin view of subjects and solving the new experience
problem, which is a problem for everyone.
    There is a worry, however, which brings us back to the worry raised at the end of the previous
subsection: The way subjects combine to form new subjects according to panpsychism and the way
phenomenally unified experiences come to form subjects of experiences in the case of phenomenal
unity are importantly disanalogous. In a case of panpsychist subject combination, a new subject, S,
experiences microexperiences m1 and m2 combined (i.e., a macroexperience M), but, it is natural
to assume, m1 and m2 are each also experienced by a subject distinct from S. In contrast, in a case
of phenomenal unity, when experiences e1 and e2 are phenomenally unified to form experience
E, it is natural to assume that there is only a single subject of experience, which experiences e1 and


                                                  308
                                  Panpsychism’s Combination Problem


e2 together (i.e., E). So, what’s responsible for the arising of new subjects on panpsychism cannot
be the same thing as what’s responsible for phenomenally unified experiences having subjects. The
problem is not so much to do with how the new subject arises but rather with what happens to the
“old” subjects once combined. In the case of phenomenal unity, the old subjects cease to exist or are
subsumed by the new subject. In the case of panpsychist subject combination, the old subjects con-
tinue to exist. When microexperiences m1 and m2 combine into M, there are three subjects, whereas
when experiences e1 and e2 are phenomenally unified to form E, there is only one.
   This worry arises from two assumptions, the first of which is natural on panpsychism, and the
second of which is natural on any picture of phenomenal unity:

(A)	 When microexperiences (or macroexperiences) combine to form macroexperiences, they are
     experienced both together and in isolation.
(B)	 When macroexperiences are phenomenally unified, they are experienced together but not in
     isolation.

We can avoid the worry described above by rejecting either of these assumptions. On (A), when m1
and m2 are combined to form M, there is an experience of m1 in isolation, an experience of m2 in
isolation, and an experience of m1 and m2 combined (M). On a thin notion of subjects, this means
that there are three subjects of experience, a subject of m1, a subject of m2, and a subject of M. The
panpsychist might choose to deny (A) and instead claim that when m1 and m2 are combined, they
are experienced together but not in isolation.
    The combinatorial infusion view (Seager 2010, 2016; Mørch 2014) makes precisely such claims. On
this view, when microexperiences combine to yield macroexperiences, they fuse together and cease
to exist independently. As Seager (2010) puts it, they are “absorbed” or “superseded” by the macro-
experience they come to constitute. On this picture, when microexperiences combine, the result is
only one subject that experiences the combined microexperiences.
    The combinatorial infusion view, and any other panpsychist view that rejects the first assumption,
avoids the worry that the problems of explaining subject unity and phenomenal unity are different in
kind because they yield different treatments of the old subjects of experience. Indeed, Seager suggests
that the combinatorial infusion view might help solve the problem of phenomenal unity (2010: 184).
    We can also avoid the worry by rejecting (B). Perhaps when e1 and e2 are phenomenally unified,
e1 and e2 are experienced both together and severally. There is an experience of e1 together with e2
(E), an experience of e1 in isolation, and an experience of e2 in isolation. This option might seem
unlikely, since we have no phenomenological evidence that phenomenally unified experiences are
also experienced in isolation. But note that there is also no phenomenological evidence against this
possibility: It is entirely compatible with an experience of E that there exist isolated experiences of
e1 and e2. On the thin notion of subjects, there would then be three subjects of experience: the
subject of e1, the subject of e2, and the subject of e1 and e2 together. Indeed, Roelofs (2016) suggests
that such a view is true and helpful to panpsychism, helping us make sense of how experiences can
be shared between distinct microphysical and macrophysical entities.
    In sum, if we adopt a thin notion of subjects and reject one of (A) or (B), the panpsychist’s subject
combination is plausibly of the same kind as whatever results in phenomenally unified experiences
having subjects. The claim that panpsychism faces a special problem of subject combination depends
on both assumptions being true.
    The rejection of either (A) or (B) also allows us to respond to the worry described at the end of
section 3.1 that there is an important difference between the new experiences required by panpsy-
chism and those required by phenomenal unity and mental structure. The alleged difference is that
in the case of new experiences arising from phenomenal unity and mental structure, the new expe-
riences are experiences of the same subjects that experience the combined experiences, whereas in


                                                  309
                                            Angela Mendelovici


the case of the panpsychist’s new experiences, the new experiences are experiences of new subjects.
But if we adopt a thin notion of subjects and reject (A), then, in both cases, the combined experi-
ence is an experience of a single subject that is distinct from the subject of the experiences that form
the experience’s parts. And if we adopt a thin view of subjects and instead reject (B), then, in both
cases, the combined experience is an experience of a single subject that is also the subject of the
experiences that form the experience’s parts. So, the cases are not disanalogous. Again, the worry that
panpsychism faces a special problem of mental combination concerning new experiences depends on
both assumptions being true.
   I have argued that the panpsychist faces no special problem in accounting for new thin subjects of
macroexperience. But what if we think that there are such things as subjects on a thicker notion of
subjecthood, perhaps one that builds in criteria for identity over time? If the panpsychist accepts that
there are such thick subjects and that they can combine to form new thick subjects, then, depend-
ing on what exactly they are supposed to be, she might face special problems in accounting for the
required kinds of combinations. But even if the panpsychist accepts that macroexperiences have
thick subjects, she need not accept that microexperiences have thick subjects that combine to form
them. It is enough for the panpsychist to say that microexperiences have thin subjects, and that thick
subjects, if there are any, arise in some other way at the macro level. The problem of explaining how
they arise at the macro level, of course, is a problem for anyone who accepts them.


                       3.3.  The New Phenomenal Characters Problem
                                Is Not Special to Panpsychism
If the preceding arguments are sound, the new experience and new subject problems are not special
to panpsychism. Things are less clear in the case of the new phenomenal characters problem. Recall
that there are two types of new phenomenal characters that our macroexperiences seem to exhibit
that we need to explain: complex and simple phenomenal characters.
    To explain how macroexperiences can have new complex phenomenal characters we must
explain how complex phenomenal characters arise from their simpler parts. If the phenomenal char-
acters of the simplest parts are those of microphysical entities, then that is all we must do. If it is not,
then there is the further problem of explaining how these simple parts arise from the phenomenal
characters of microphysical entities, which calls for an explanation of how macroexperiences can
come to have new simple phenomenal characters, the second type of new phenomenal character the
panpsychist should accommodate.
    Let us start with the problem of explaining how complex phenomenal characters arise from their
simpler parts. This problem is of the same kind as the problem of mental structure, the problem
of explaining how phenomenal and intentional mental features come to be structured. Structured
experiences and intentional states have complex phenomenal characters and intentional contents,
respectively, which presumably are combinations of their constituent phenomenal characters or
intentional contents.
    Of course, since the panpsychist but not the non-panpsychist requires that there be microexperi-
ences that combine in the relevant ways, she might require that there be more instances of mental
structure than the non-panpsychist, and so her problem might be wider in scope. Still, the problems
are of the same kind.
    The situation is less clear when it comes to accounting for the combination of phenomenal
characters into new simple phenomenal characters. The problem of explaining simple combined
phenomenal characters is arguably the hard nut, and perhaps the special nut, of the combination
problem. The problem seems hard because what it seems to require, simple yet combined items,
seems incoherent. The problem seems special to panpsychism since the non-panpsychist appears not
to be committed to such simple yet combined phenomenal characters. She might accept that the


                                                    310
                                   Panpsychism’s Combination Problem


simple phenomenal characters in question exist but deny that they are the results of combinations of
other phenomenal characters.
    The panpsychist might attempt to sidestep this problem of accounting for the combination
of phenomenal characters into new simple phenomenal characters by denying that macroexperi-
ences have simple phenomenal characters. Roelofs (2014) considers such a view, suggesting that our
apparently simple phenomenal characters might be blends of the “alien” phenomenal characters of
microexperiences.
    In defense of this view, Roelofs points to examples of macroexperiences that appear simple but
plausibly are complex blends of other macroexperiences, such as the apparently simple phenomenal
characters of color experiences. An orangish phenomenal character might appear simple, but, he
claims, it is in fact a blend of a reddish and a yellowish phenomenal character. Roelofs suggests that
such examples show that it is possible for phenomenal characters to blend, and, further, that we are
bad at recognizing such blends. In the case of color experience, the reason we can come to appreci-
ate the relevant blends is that we can come to have experiences with the constituent phenomenal
characters on separate occasions. For example, we can have experiences with reddish phenomenal
characters, and by comparing our reddish experiences with our orangish experiences, we can come
to appreciate that “there’s a little bit of red in orange.” In the case of the alien phenomenal characters
of microexperiences that blend to form the phenomenal characters of macroexperiences, we are not
able to experience the alien phenomenal characters in isolation, so we are not in a position to appre-
ciate that the phenomenal characters of our macroexperiences are blends of them.
    However, it is not clear that Roelofs’ examples are effective. An orangish phenomenal character
is similar to reddish and yellowish phenomenal characters, but the reason for this similarity isn’t that
it is composed of them. The phenomenal characters of color experiences might be simple but have
various properties that are related to those of other phenomenal characters and that account for the
similarities between them, namely their values on dimensions of hue, saturation, and brightness. If
this is right, then it is not clear that the panpsychist can avoid commitment to new simple phenom-
enal characters, and the new phenomenal characters problem remains.
    I want to suggest that the problem may not be special to panpsychism. There is a nearby prob-
lem facing everyone, that of explaining how we can come to have macroexperiences with new
simple phenomenal characters that in some sense “build on” the phenomenal characters of other
macroexperiences:
    As we develop and learn, we acquire abilities to have new experiences. For example, a budding
wine taster might gradually acquire new abilities to have new wine tasting experiences, such as
experiences with fruity, oily, and tannin-ish phenomenal characters. The new phenomenal char-
acters we are able to have in such cases are not wholly unrelated to the phenomenal characters we
were previously able to have, but, instead, are similar and different to them in certain ways. We can
perspicuously model such relationships of similarity and difference between phenomenal characters
using quality spaces, abstract spaces with one or more dimensions corresponding to the dimensions of
possible variation in a system of phenomenal characters, where different phenomenal characters are
represented by different positions in the space. For example, since colors vary in hue, saturation, and
brightness, a quality space with axes corresponding to hue, saturation, and brightness is a perspicuous
way of modeling them and their similarity relations. We can think of learning and development as
building upon or expanding our pre-existing quality spaces. For example, the wine taster’s quality
space for wine-related experiences might expand to include new dimensions. In this way, newly
acquired abilities to experience new phenomenal characters might be thought to build upon pre-
existing abilities. Call the problem of explaining how exactly the quality spaces characterizing our
abilities to have experiences change in such ways the changing quality space problem.
    On the face of it, the panpsychist’s problem of explaining new simple phenomenal characters and
the changing quality space problem seem quite alike: they both require explaining how we can come


                                                   311
                                          Angela Mendelovici


to experience (at least sometimes) simple phenomenal characters that are not present in our other
concommitant or past experiences but that are nonetheless importantly related to them. Perhaps,
then, both problems involve the same kind of mental combination.
    Against this, one might suggest that only the panpsychist’s problem is a problem of mental combi-
nation. The panpsychist assumes that an experience’s new simple phenomenal characters are a matter
of the combination of the phenomenal characters of some constituent experiences, but a solution
to the changing quality space problem need not make such an assumption. One non-combinatorial
solution to the changing quality space problem maintains that it is macroexperiences’ functional
roles that determine their specific phenomenal characters. Perhaps, for instance, the functional roles
of color experiences fix their phenomenal characters, and when we acquire new concepts, their
functional roles, including those in relation to old experiences, alter our quality spaces, allowing for
experiences with new phenomenal characters.
    Even if such a functionalist solution to the changing quality space problem can succeed, this is
not automatically a problem for the claim that the panpsychist does not face a special problem in
accounting for new simple phenomenal characters, since she can co-opt the functionalist’s solution.
The panpsychist wants to explain new simple experiences in terms of mental combination, but the
relevant modes of combination can include functional properties. Where the non-panpsychist might
say that macroexperience E has a new simple phenomenal character C in virtue of playing a certain
functional role, R, the panpsychist can say that macroexperience E has a new simple phenomenal
character C in virtue of being constituted by experiences e1 and e2, which, together, play functional
role R. In effect, the panpsychist can turn the functionalist’s non-combinatorial solution to the
changing quality space problem into a combinatorial solution for the problem of explaining new
simple phenomenal characters. In the same way, other non-combinatorial solutions to the changing
quality space problem might be co-opted by the panpsychist. (Of course, this takes some of the bite
out of panpsychism, but the view still qualifies as a version of panpsychism.)
    I am doubtful, however, that the functionalist solution to the changing quality space problem can
succeed. Functionalism faces well-known indeterminacy worries. For instance, a set of states that
implements a symmetrical system of functional roles could equally well be said to realize at least two
quality spaces (Block 1978; Palmer 1999). More generally, even if functional roles can determine the
relations between phenomenal characters, it is far from clear that there is only one set of phenomenal
characters whose members can bear those relations to one another.2
    The functionalist might attempt to avoid indeterminacy worries by taking at least some func-
tional states to be broad, involving relations beyond the experiencing individual, as on some versions
of representationalism, but this would result in externalism about phenomenal consciousness, the
view that a subject’s experiences are at least partly determined by environmental features, which is
arguably implausible (see Gertler 2001 for a defense of phenomenal internalism). Another problem
with this view is that it makes the wrong predictions in certain cases, since the phenomenal charac-
ters of many phenomenal states do not match any items in the external environment (see Bourget
and Mendelovici 2014; Pautz 2006b, 2013b; Mendelovici 2013, 2016, 2018: chs. 3–4). A second
strategy is to throw phenomenal characters into the mix. If at least some positions in a quality space
have their phenomenal characters independently of their functional roles, then they can serve as
“anchor points” (Graham et al. 2007: 479), helping to constrain the possible phenomenal character
assignments to the rest of the space.3 However, it is not clear that this is enough to solve indetermi-
nacy worries (see Bourget MS).
    If there are no viable non-combinatorial solutions to the changing quality space problem,
then it might just turn out that everyone should accept a combinatorial solution, one that takes
the new phenomenal characters of macroexperiences to be a matter of the combination of other
constituent phenomenal characters, had either by the macroexperience itself or by constituent
experiences.


                                                  312
                                   Panpsychism’s Combination Problem


    The upshot of this discussion is that the panpsychist’s problem of explaining new simple phe-
nomenal characters might be the same in kind as the problem of explaining changing quality spaces,
a problem facing everyone. While it might seem that the two problems admit of different solutions,
I have suggested that the panpsychist can co-opt non-combinatorial solutions to the changing qual-
ity space problem, if such solutions can succeed, but that the changing quality space problem might
have to be solved by appeal to mental combination anyways.


                                4.  Implications for Panpsychism
I have argued that panpsychism’s combination problems are problems for everyone. This section
considers the implications of this claim for objections to panpsychism based on the combination
problem. I want to suggest that the fact that the combination problem is a problem for everyone
suggests the ignorance hypothesis, on which we are ignorant of certain key facts about mental com-
bination, similar to Stoljar’s (2006) “ignorance hypothesis” used to defend (broad) physicalism. The
ignorance hypothesis allows us to respond to two important objections to panpsychism based on the
combination problem.
   One objection to panpsychism based on the combination problem is that the combination prob-
lem undercuts one of the key motivations for panpsychism over physicalism, the argument from
physicalism’s perceived failure at offering an intelligible explanation of our experiences (see Straw-
son 2003). If the panpsychist cannot offer an intelligible explanation of our experiences either, then
panpsychism is no better off than physicalism in this regard (see Goff 2009).
   The second objection is that the combination problem shows that panpsychism is false. If the
facts about microexperiences and how they are combined do not a priori entail the macroexperi-
ential facts, then macroexperiences are not nothing over and above combinations of microexperi-
ences, and panpsychism is false. Goff (2009) and Chalmers (2016) consider a conceivability argument
against panpsychism along such lines, which is analogous to Chalmers’ (1996) conceivability argu-
ment against physicalism.
   The ignorance hypothesis allows the panpsychist to respond to these objections. We might argue
for the ignorance hypothesis as follows: Everyone should agree that mental combination of the
kinds the panpsychist requires does occur, so we know that there exists an intelligible explanation of
mental combination, whether or not we do or can know it. This explanation might make reference
to physical, functional, phenomenal, or other kinds of facts, or it might even take certain forms of
mental combination to be primitive – for present purposes, it doesn’t matter. But we don’t currently
have such an explanation. This suggests the ignorance hypothesis: we are ignorant of certain key facts
about mental combination.
   The ignorance hypothesis allows us to respond to the second objection: We simply are not able to
conclude that the facts about microexperiences and how they are combined do not a priori entail the
macroexperiential facts. For all we know, the facts about mental combination that we are ignorant of
secure the required entailment. So, conceivability arguments fail to show that panpsychism is false.4
   The first objection can also be avoided so long as the physicalist cannot similarly avail herself to an
appeal to ignorance. If an appeal to ignorance is equally available to the physicalist and the panpsy-
chist, then the panpsychist’s intelligibility-based argument for panpsychism over physicalism still fails.
I want to suggest that the panpsychist’s ignorance hypothesis is more plausible than an analogous
physicalist ignorance hypothesis: The classic arguments against physicalism (the conceivability argu-
ment, the knowledge argument, and explanatory gap worries) show not only that the physicalist has
not offered an intelligible explanation of consciousness in terms of the physical, but, further, that
there is no such explanation to be had. Given a certain conception of physical facts (e.g. Chalmers’
(1996) conception as facts concerning the structure and dynamics of physical processes), we can see
that no set of physical facts can a priori entail the phenomenal facts, and so, that not only do current


                                                   313
                                                 Angela Mendelovici


physical theories fail to intelligibly explain consciousness, but so too would any other possible physi-
calist theories. If this is right, then an appeal to ignorance cannot help the physicalist: We may be
ignorant of many physical facts, but we know enough about what physical facts look like in order
to see that they cannot result in phenomenal consciousness. In contrast, we have less of a clear idea
of what a plausible account of mental combination might look like. As a result, we simply do not
know that there is no possible account of mental combination that renders panpsychist explanations
of macroexperiences intelligible. Our epistemic situation rules out a physicalist account of macroex-
perience but leaves open a panpsychist account.


                                           5.  Concluding Remarks
I have argued that the panpsychist’s combination problems are problems for everyone and sug-
gested that this alleviates the panpsychist’s worries concerning intelligibility. Before concluding, it
is worth emphasizing that combination problems afflict our very understanding of the mind largely
independently of any particular metaphysical theories of mind. These problems are pervasive and
multi-faceted, arising for many different kinds of mental states and under many guises. And they
are largely underappreciated. For example, much discussion of phenomenal unity focuses on simply
characterizing the phenomenon rather than explaining it.5 Similarly, much discussion of intentional
structure focuses on determining rules for when simpler contents combine to form more complex
contents rather than explaining how mental structure is possible at all.6
    Given the pervasiveness and apparent intractability of combination problems, it is worth consider-
ing the possibility that we not only have not solved them, but that we simply cannot solve them. Per-
haps we are “cognitively closed” (McGinn 1989) to them in that our minds simply cannot grasp how
mental things can combine. It at least seems that we can intuitively understand items being spatially,
causally, or temporally related in various ways, that we can understand them piling up, bumping each
other around, and existing and changing through time (whether or not this is enough to under-
stand physical combination). But mental combination arguably requires something more than that.
It requires a new mode of interaction whereby mental things merge, blend, or otherwise become
more than a spatiotemporally and causally integrated sum of their parts. Perhaps this is something
we are simply not equipped to grasp, making the mind impossible for us to completely understand,
and giving rise to an unbridgeable (by us) explanatory gap between mental combinations and their
uncombined parts that faces physicalists, dualists, and panpsychists alike.7


                                                        Notes
	1.	 This is what Chalmers (2016) calls “constitutive panpsychism.” “Panpsychism” is sometimes more generally
        defined as the view that consciousness is fundamental and ubiquitous.
 	2.	 One way to put the worry is that there are reasons for thinking that functionalism cannot solve what Bourget
        (this volume) calls the “mapping problem.” The worry mirrors undetermination worries with functionalism
        about semantic properties; see, e.g. Kripke (1982), BonJour (1998), Putnam (1977), Mendelovici and Bourget
        (forthcoming), and Mendelovici (2018).
  	3.	 Such a strategy is employed by several phenomenal intentionality theorists, who take some intentional states
        to be determined by phenomenal states while others are determined by their functional relations to phenom-
        enal states. See Graham et al. (2007), Horgan and Graham (2009), Loar (2003), Bourget (2010), and Pautz
        (2006a, 2013a).
   	4.	 Such a response, in effect, casts doubt on the conceivability argument’s conceivability premise, e.g., that it is
        conceivable for there to exist microexperiential zombies, understood as creatures having the same microex-
        periences combined in the same ways as the panpsychist stipulates are found in us but lacking macroexpe-
        rience. (Goff ’s (2009) and Chalmers’ (2016) arguments against panpsychism understand microexperiential
        zombies as having the same microexperiences (and sometimes physical properties) as us but not necessar-
        ily involving the same modes of combination. However, these alternative characterizations of panpsychist


                                                          314
                                      Panpsychism’s Combination Problem


       zombies would yield conceivability arguments only effective against versions of panpsychism on which the
       relevant modes of combination are entailed by the microexperiential (or perhaps physical) facts, and not ver-
       sions that take mental combination to involve extra ingredients).
	5.	 For instance, both Dainton (2000) and Bayne and Chalmers (2003) mainly aim to characterize phenomenal
       unity rather than to offer an explanation of how it arises.
 	6.	 King (2007) provides an explanation of intentional structure in language, appealing to complex linguistic
       facts and the mental acts of “ascription,” and Soames (2010) offers an explanation appealing to mental acts of
       “predication.” These explanations only pass the buck to an explanation of mental structure.
  	7.	 Many thanks to David Bourget, Luke Roelofs, and Bill Seager for helpful comments on earlier drafts of this
       paper.


                                                   References
Basile, P. (2010). ‘It Must Be True – But How Can It Be? Some Remarks on Panpsychism and Mental Com-
    position’. Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplement, 85 (67): 93–112.
Bayne, T. J. (2012). The Unity of Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bayne, T. J., and Chalmers, D. J. (2003). ‘What Is the Unity of Consciousness?’ In A. Cleeremans (ed.), The Unity
    of Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 23–58.
Block, N. (1978). ‘Troubles with Functionalism’. Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, 9: 261–325.
Bonjour, L. (1998). In Defense of Pure Reason. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bourget, D. (2010). ‘Consciousness Is Underived Intentionality’. Noûs, 44 (1): 32–58.
Bourget, D. (MS). ‘The Underdetermination Problem for Conceptual Role Semantics and Phenomenal
    Functionalism’.
Bourget, D., and Mendelovici, A. (2014). ‘Tracking Representationalism’. In A. Bailey (ed.), Philosophy of Mind:
    The Key Thinkers. London: Continuum, pp. 209–35.
Chalmers, D. J. (1996). The Conscious Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chalmers, D. J. (2016). ‘The Combination Problem for Panpsychism’. In L. Jaskolla and G. Brüntrup (eds.),
    Panpsychism. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 179–214.
Coleman, S. (2012). ‘Mental Chemistry: Combination for Panpsychists’. Dialectica, 66 (1): 137–66.
Dainton, B. F. (2000). Stream of Consciousness: Unity and Continuity in Conscious Experience. London: Routledge.
Gertler, B. (2001). ‘Introspecting Phenomenal States’. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 63 (2): 305–28.
Goff, P. (2006). ‘Experiences Don’t Sum’. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 13 (10–11): 53–61.
Goff, P. (2009). ‘Why Panpsychism Doesn’t Help Us Explain Consciousness’. Dialectica, 63 (3): 289–311.
Goff, P. (2017). Consciousness and Fundamental Reality. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Graham, G., Horgan, T. E., and Tienson, J. L. (2007). ‘Consciousness and Intentionality’. In S. Schneider and M.
    Velmans (eds.), The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness. Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 468–84.
Horgan, T., and Graham, G. (2009). ‘Phenomenal Intentionality and Content Determinacy’. In R. Schantz (ed.),
    Prospects for Meaning. Amsterdam: De Gruyter, pp. 321–44.
Jackson, F. (1982). ‘Epiphenomenal Qualia’. Philosophical Quarterly, 32: 127–36, April.
James, W. (1890). The Principles of Psychology. New York: Dover Publications.
King, J. C. (2007). The Nature and Structure of Content. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kripke, S. A. (1982). Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Leibniz, G. W. (1714/1989). ‘The Principles of Philosophy, or, Monadology’. In R. Ariew and D. Garber (eds.),
    G. W. Leibniz: Philosophical Essays. Indianapolis: Hackett, pp. 213–24.
Levine, J. (1983). ‘Materialism and Qualia: The Explanatory Gap’. Pacific Philosophical Quarterly: 356–61.
Loar, B. (2003). ‘Phenomenal Intentionality as the Basis of Mental Content’. In M. Hahn and B. Ramberg (eds.),
    Reflections and Replies: Essays on the Philosophy of Tyler Burge. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 229–58.
McGinn, C. (1989). ‘Can We Solve the Mind-Body Problem?’ Mind, 98: 349–66, July.
Mendelovici, A. (2013). ‘Reliable Misrepresentation and Tracking Theories of Mental Representation’. Philo-
    sophical Studies, 165 (2): 421–43.
Mendelovici, A. (2016). ‘Why Tracking Theories Should Allow for Clean Cases of Reliable Misrepresentation’.
    Disputatio, 8 (42): 57–92.
Mendelovici, A. (2018). The Phenomenal Basis of Intentionality. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mendelovici, A., and Bourget, D. (forthcoming). ‘Consciousness and Intentionality’. In U. Kriegel (ed.), The
    Oxford Handbook of the Philosophy of Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mørch, H. H. (2014). Panpsychism and Causation: A New Argument and a Solution to the Combination Problem.
    Doctoral Dissertation, Department of Philosophy, Classics, History of Art and Ideas, University of Oslo, Oslo.
    https://philpapers.org/archive/HASPAC-2.pdf.


                                                        315
                                               Angela Mendelovici


Nagel, T. (1974). ‘What Is It Like to Be a Bat?’ The Philosophical Review, 83 (4): 435–50.
Palmer, S. (1999). ‘Color, Consciousness, and the Isomorphism Constraint’. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22 (6):
    923–43.
Pautz, A. (2006a). ‘Can the Physicalist Explain Colour Structure in Terms of Colour Experience?’ Australasian
    Journal of Philosophy, 84 (4): 535–64.
Pautz, A. (2006b). ‘Sensory Awareness Is Not a Wide Physical Relation: An Empirical Argument Against Exter-
    nalist Intentionalism’. Noûs, 40 (2): 205–40.
Pautz, A. (2013a).‘Does Phenomenology Ground Mental Content?’ In U. Kriegel (ed.), Phenomenal Intentionality.
    Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 194–234.
Pautz, A. (2013b). ‘The Real Trouble for Phenomenal Externalists: New Empirical Evidence for a Brain-Based
    Theory of Consciousness’. In R. Brown (ed.), Consciousness Inside and Out: Phenomenology, Neuroscience, and
    the Nature of Experience. Berlin: Springer, pp. 237–98.
Putnam, H. (1977). ‘Realism and Reason’. Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical Association, 50 (6):
    483–98.
Roelofs, L. (2014). ‘Phenomenal Blending and the Palette Problem’. Thought: A Journal of Philosophy, 3 (1): 59–70.
Roelofs, L. (2016). ‘The Unity of Consciousness, Within Subjects and Between Subjects’. Philosophical Studies,
    173 (12): 3199–221.
Roelofs, L. (forthcoming). ‘Can We Sum Subjects? Evaluating Panpsychism’s Hard Problem’. In W. Seager (ed.),
    The Routledge Handbook of Panpsychism. London: Routledge.
Seager, W. (1995). ‘Consciousness, Information, and Panpsychism’. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 2 (3): 272–88.
Seager, W. (2010). ‘Panpsychism, Aggregation and Combinatorial Infusion’. Mind and Matter, 8 (2): 167–84.
Seager, W. (2016). ‘Panpsychist Infusion’. In L. Jaskolla and G. Brüntrup (eds.), Panpsychism. Oxford: Oxford
    University Press, pp. 229–48.
Soames, S. (2010). What Is Meaning? Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Stoljar, D. (2006). Ignorance and Imagination: The Epistemic Origin of the Problem of Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford
    University Press.
Strawson, G. (2003). ‘Real Materialism’. In L. Antony and N. Hornstein (eds.), Chomsky and His Critics. Oxford:
    Blackwell, pp. 49–88.




                                                        316
                 26
    WHAT DOES “PHYSICAL” MEAN?
         A PROLEGOMENON
    TO PHYSICALIST PANPSYCHISM
                                           Galen Strawson


        ‘Panpsychism must be considered a species of naturalism.’
                                                                                (Sellars 1927: 218)1


                                           1. Introduction
Philosophy is plagued by the fact that different people use the same words in very different
ways. The misunderstandings that result are often calamitous, for a reason clearly stated by Mary
Shepherd:

     every one must be conscious that the particular forms of expression, in which thoughts of
     an abstruse and subtle nature are introduced to the imagination, and grow familiar there,
     are so intimately associated with them, as to appear their just and accurate representative.
     But these forms of expression, though clear and satisfactory to the person in whose mind
     they are so associated, may yet fail in conveying the same ideas with sufficient precision to
     the understandings of others.
                                                                                        (1824: vi)

All too often, philosopher A can’t hear what philosopher B is saying because A can’t help hearing
B’s words as meaning something different from what B is using them to mean. Many of us have
had the experience of re-reading a piece of philosophy and realizing that the reason we disagreed
with it the first time we read it was simply that we were closed to the way its author was using
certain words.
   It’s widely agreed that terminological problems are acute when it comes to the discussion of
mind. I’m going to make some proposals about how we may best use certain words, proposals that
will constantly raise substantive matters.


                                  2.  Panpsychism and Psychism
Panpsychism is the view that mind or consciousness (psyche) is present in all (pan) reality. In its strong-
est form, pure panpsychism, it’s the view that mind is all there is to reality: mind is the stuff of reality,




                                                    317
                                                 Galen Strawson


the (‘categorical’) stuff being of reality. Eddington puts it plainly: ‘the stuff of the world is mind-stuff ’
(1928b: 276). Drake says the same:

     psychic stuff is the very stuff of which the world is made; and while everything is subject
     to physical law, everything is made of the very stuff of which we ourselves – with our inner
     mental being – are composed.
                                                                                       (1925: 89)

According to the panexperientialist version of pure panpsychism, consciousness, or experience, or
experiencing, or experientiality, is all there is to reality (it is all there is to mind).2 Whitehead puts it
 plainly: ‘apart from the experiences of subjects there is nothing, nothing, nothing, bare nothingness’.3
     It’s worth saying straight away that there’s no conflict between panexperientialism and anything
true in physics. For while physics tells us a great deal about structural-relational features of reality, it
has little to say about the intrinsic structure-transcendent nature of the stuff that has the structure (see
section 10) – where by ‘stuff ’ I simply mean whatever it is (however insubstantial-seeming or fun-
damentally processual in nature) that gives the structural-relational features of reality their concrete
existence. Physics is wholly open to the possibility that the intrinsic nature of the shimmering stuff it
posits is consciousness or experientiality.4 Panexperientialism is accordingly wholly compatible with
 physicalism, when physicalism is properly understood (see section 4).
     This point was well understood in the first half of the last century. Since then it has been largely
 lost from sight, partly (or largely) for terminological reasons of the sort I aim to address in this
­chapter – to the point where many now find it preposterous, in a way that Mary Shepherd would
 find wholly unsurprising. It is a cast-iron point, but it has become very hard for some to see.
     A weaker form of panpsychism holds that while mind or consciousness – experience or experienc-
 ing or experientiality – is present in all of reality, it isn’t all there is. The Oxford English Dictionary defines
 panpsychism in this weaker way as the view that ‘there is an element of consciousness in all matter’.
     There’s good reason to think that panpsychism is the most plausible view of the fundamental
 nature of reality – where by ‘reality’ I mean concrete reality, everything that exists in the universe.5
 What’s the next most plausible view? One might call it psychism, although the name isn’t ideal. Psy-
 chism is panpsychism without the ‘pan’. It’s the view that while mind/consciousness/experience/
 experientiality is one of the fundamental features of reality (like electric charge), it isn’t all there is.
     I won’t go on repeating ‘mind or consciousness or experience or . . .’. From now on I’ll often
 simply use ‘experience’, by which I’ll always mean conscious experience (I take it that there isn’t any
 other kind), although I’ll also use ‘consciousness’ or ‘experientiality’.


                                   3.  Physicalist Pure Panpsychism
What do I mean by ‘(conscious) experience’ or ‘consciousness’? I mean what most people mean in
the current debate. I’ll say more in section 7. Before that I want to note one of the most implausible
views of the fundamental nature of reality. This is the view held by many (I think most) in the West
today, the view that psychism (and a fortiori panpsychism) is certainly false – that experience certainly
isn’t one of the fundamental features of reality.
    Those who endorse this last view have to hold either that

(i)	 experience doesn’t really exist at all – that it is an illusion –
or
(ii)	 experience somehow ‘emerges’ from stuff that is in its fundamental nature wholly and utterly
      non-experiential.


                                                        318
                                A Prolegomenon to Physicalist Panpsychism


Like many, I don’t think (ii) is tenable, because it requires that something known as radical emergence
takes place in nature. Few, however, will deny that it looks preferable to (i). So it’s striking that many
philosophers, unable to accept panpsychism or psychism, have in the last sixty years or so chosen (i)
over (ii).
    These philosophers standardly deny that they’ve chosen (i), even as they commit themselves to
claims that do in fact entail (i), and this denial, at least, is not surprising, because (i) – which is also
known as eliminativism about experience or consciousness – is I believe the silliest view that has ever
been held by any human being.
    You may wonder who these philosophers are. They include (for a start) all genuine philosophical
behaviourists, all those who genuinely endorse functionalism in the philosophy of mind, and some if not
all of those who now call themselves ‘strong representationalists’. Nearly all of them deny that they’re
eliminativists about consciousness, as remarked; they say that they offer ‘reductions’ of the experien-
tial to the non-experiential, and that reduction is not elimination. But reduction is elimination in
certain cases. All these so-called ‘reductions’ of experience amount to the denial of its existence, in
any honest accounting, simply because they propose to reduce experience to something that it obvi-
ously is not (see Strawson 2018).
    I need to say more about radical emergence, and about words like ‘mind’ and ‘experience’. First,
though – this topic is like a jigsaw puzzle – let me specify the kind of panpsychism I’ll focus on. I’ll
call it physicalist pure panpsychism, and concentrate on its panexperientialist version: physicalist panexpe-
rientialism – PP for short. According to PP, the physical world is wholly constituted of experience
(even subjects of experience are nothing ontologically over and above experiences). As far as I can
see, Strong, Drake and Eddington are physicalist pure panpsychists, along with Whitehead, Sprigge,
and many others, including, arguably, James (see e.g. Strong 1918, 1930; Drake 1925; Whitehead
1925; Eddington 1928b; Sprigge 1983; James 1909). Russell is open to the idea that it is true, and
constantly stresses the point that there must be a fundamental continuity of nature between the
conscious experience with which we have immediate acquaintance and the rest of concrete reality
(1927a, 1927b, 1948, 1956, 1959). More recently, Sprigge (1983) and Griffin (1998) stand out among
pure panexperientialist panpsychists.6


                                                 4. Stuff
To be a physicalist or materialist is simply to hold that everything that concretely exists is wholly
                                  7

physical (I start trying to say what it is to be physical in section 9). PP is physicalist by definition, and
it’s straight-up realist about everything that comprises what we ordinarily think of as the physical
world: clouds, brains, chairs, mountains, and all the entities and qualities whose existence physics is
right to recognize, quarks, say, or charge, or fields.8 It has nothing to do with idealism in the Berke-
leyan sense of the term (Berkeley 1710), according to which ‘physical objects’ are ideas in minds.
PP leaves the universe wholly independent of our minds – except for those parts of it that are our
minds. So too it leaves everything true in physics wholly in place, as remarked. Panpsychism has no
quarrel with physics because it offers an answer to a question about concrete reality about which
physics, strictly interpreted, has little or nothing to say. (Quine makes the key point: when it comes
to the denoting terms of physics, he says, ‘reference [can] be wildly reinterpreted without violence
to evidence’ (1992: 9).) The question is

     What is the ultimate, intrinsic, categorical nature of the stuff that exemplifies the structures
     that physics discerns and captures in its equations?

PP answers: the ultimate, intrinsic, categorical nature of physical stuff is experience, experienti-
ality.9 Most present-day physicalists assume that the ultimate intrinsic nature of physical stuff is


                                                    319
                                             Galen Strawson


non-experiential, and they further assume that this assumption is an essential part of physicalism. The
first assumption has no obvious warrant in physics, and the second is therefore doubtful.
    If one puts aside the standard use of the term ‘energy’ in physics to denote the power of doing
work possessed by a body or system of bodies, one can adopt Heisenberg’s large metaphysical use
of the term when he says that ‘energy is a substance’, and that ‘all particles are made of the same
substance: energy’ (Heisenberg 1958: 63, 71). On this view, concrete stuff isn’t well thought of as
something that is distinct from energy and that has energy. Rather concrete physical stuff is energy.
This is one way to make a first step towards PP.10
    Given that concrete physical stuff = energy, we can ask the following question: What is the
fundamental intrinsic structure-transcendent nature of this energy, this energy stuff? Physics doesn’t
say (section 10). We face the question whether it is non-experiential or experiential. PP points out
(1) that we know for certain that there is experientiality, (2) that we don’t know for certain that there
is any non-experiential reality, (3) that we have very strong reason to expect fundamental continuity of
being or nature between the experiential reality we know for certain to exist and any other concrete
reality there is, and (4) that to suppose that the fundamental intrinsic nature of reality is wholly non-
experiential requires one to posit ‘radical’ emergence of the experiential from the non-experiential.
In the light of this it proposes that the most natural and parsimonious hypothesis is that all concrete
reality is experiential.
    On this view, then, experientiality is a kind of stuff: stuff = energy = experientiality. If reality is
indeed spatio-temporal, then experientiality is spatio-temporal in exactly the same way as we ordi-
narily suppose non-experiential stuff to be. It may be said that a thing has to have some sort of non-
experiential stuff being in order to be spatial, and hence spatio-temporal. This is one potent source
of resistance to PP. In section 11 I’ll argue that it’s misguided.
    As with any stuff, one can wonder how much experientiality there is. We know there’s a lot on
this planet – human, elephantine, leonine, canine, feline. We may wonder how much more there
is in the universe. Most people think there isn’t any on the moon. They’re wrong if any form of
panpsychism or psychism is true, but they’re probably right that there isn’t any biologically evolved
experientiality on the moon.11 If experientiality is the whole stuff of reality, as PP proposes, or
even if it is only one fundamental feature of reality, as psychism proposes, then almost none of it is
biological (I’ll use ‘biological’ to cover all forms of evolved experientiality). When evolution gets
going it works physical stuff (= energy = experientiality) into wonderfully complex experiential
forms, e.g. animal vision, smell, and hearing, just as it works physical stuff (= energy = experiential-
ity) into wonderful spatial forms, e.g. the eagle spatial form or the human spatial form (opposable
thumbs and all).
    Another potent source of resistance to PP may be expressed as follows. (1) The power being of
stuff is (as Locke says) wholly grounded in – in fact nothing over and above – the categorical being of
stuff.12 (2) It seems natural at first to think that there is far more difficulty in supposing that all the
power being that we find in concrete reality is grounded in experiential categorical stuff than in
non-experiential categorical stuff. The principal reason for this, perhaps, is that (3) we find it extraor-
dinarily difficult, when we think of these things, to factor in a proper appreciation of the extent to
which what we apprehend as the physical world is an appearance – not only in our everyday life but
also when we are doing physics and taking it (as we naturally and mistakenly do) that in doing phys-
ics we are apprehending the nature of physical stuff in some way that goes beyond our apprehension
of the equations of physics. We have forgotten Kant, or if you like, the neo-Kantian correction of
Kant. We are as Russell said, constantly ‘guilty, unconsciously and in spite of explicit disavowals, of
a confusion in [our] imaginative picture of matter’ (1927a: 382). The problem is compounded by
the fact that we (many of us) tend to think we know what experientiality is in such a way that we
know that it couldn’t possibly ground all the power being that we see running the world, alive in the
world (as it were).13


                                                   320
                                 A Prolegomenon to Physicalist Panpsychism


   Kant makes point (1) as follows in a ‘pre-critical’ text –

     every substance, including even a simple element of matter, must . . . have some kind of
     inner activity as the ground of its producing an external effect, and that in spite of the fact
     that I cannot specify in what that inner activity consists
                                                                           (1766: 315, Ak. 2.328)

– and adds an intriguing footnote about point (2):

     Leibniz said that this inner ground of all its external relations and their changes was a power
     of representation [nb this power is an inner activity]. This thought . . . was greeted with laughter
     by later philosophers. They would, however, have been better advised to have first consid-
     ered the question whether a substance, such as a simple part of matter, would be possible in
     the complete absence of any inner state. And, if they had, perhaps, been unwilling to rule
     out such an inner state, then it would have been incumbent on them to invent some other
     possible inner state as an alternative to that of representations and the activities dependent
     on representations.
                                                                                                   (ibid.)

The point is simple: it’s not clear that we have any good reason to think we know anything about
concrete reality that favours the view that non-experiential stuff is better than experiential stuff as
(a ground for) the power being of the world. It’s quite unclear that physics favours this view (sec-
tions 10 and 12).
    It’s worth adding this. When we think of the physical world in the standard non-experiential
way, we easily allow that leptons and quarks jointly constitute larger things that have intrinsic, natu-
ral, categorical properties that are essentially more and other than the intrinsic, natural, categorical
properties of leptons and quarks. So too, when we switch to thinking of the physical world in a
non-standard, panpsychist way as constituted of experientiality, we may allow that non-biological
experiential entities like leptons and quarks jointly constitute larger things (e.g. biologically evolved
experiences) that have properties that are essentially more and other than the (experiential) proper-
ties of leptons and quarks.


                                                 5. Unity
We may do this even if we continue to conceive of leptons and quarks in a crude ‘smallist’ way
as genuine individuals of some sort. It seems, though, that we do better to conceive of them in a
quantum-field-theoretic way, as features or aspects of the various ‘fields’ that jointly constitute the
universe in a way that is profoundly mysterious to us, or (perhaps better still) as features or aspects of
the single complex field that constitutes – is – the universe, and is perhaps not ultimately ontologi-
cally distinct from space-time.14
    A further point in this vein. It seems we must allow the interconnection of everything (‘pick a
flower on Earth and you move the farthest star’ – a remark attributed to Paul Dirac) and the deep
(non-trivial) sense in which the universe is a single thing. At the same time, quantum field theory has
no difficulty with the fact that things like animals, stones, bottles, and aeroplanes present as individual
entities that are in some very fundamental manner ontologically distinct from other such entities –
even though they’re all wholly constituted by changing energy levels in the set of vibratory motions
in fields – and I can see no good reason to think that quantum field theory will have any more dif-
ficulty with the fact that subjects of experience like ourselves present as individual entities that are in
some fundamental manner ontologically distinct from, closed off from, other such entities.15


                                                     321
                                               Galen Strawson


    ‘No. The cases are quite different. The distinctness or individuality of the bottles and aeroplanes is
really just an appearance, an appearance to a subject of experience whose distinctness or individuality
can’t be just a matter of appearance – appearance to itself.’
    There is, I think, no real difficulty here. First, it seems that the unity of a planet orbiting a star – an
aeroplane in flight, a person walking along a road – must be allowed to be a genuine functional unity
in some sense given which the unity is not just a matter of appearance; even if there is a respect in
which it’s true to say that all there are in the end are vibratory motions in fields. Second, there’s no
reason to suppose that the seeming individuality of a single experience or single mind is not some-
thing of the same sort, a genuine functional unity that is, as such, not just a unity-appearance. Sup-
pose we represent the various fields (or the single complex field) that arguably wholly constitute (or
constitutes) concrete reality pictorially, as a great flexible grid. Human (and other biological) subjects
of experience may then be depicted as local peaks or bulges in the grid. To be an experiential peak
of this sort is to experience one’s consciousness as essentially bounded or isolated even though it’s
essentially part of the great interconnected weave. It is in fact essential to one’s biologically evolved
consciousness having the adaptive function it does that it have the character of being experience
from a single point of view.
    There is more to say. Many accounts have been given of how individual biological experiential
fields like our own may have the closed character they do even if they are in some sense just aspects
or ‘modes’, in Spinoza’s terminology (Spinoza 1677), of some larger field. The present aim is simply
to propose that there is no fundamentally greater difficulty in what one might call the singleness or
unity phenomena of subjects of experience than there is in the singleness or unity phenomena of
things like planets and bottles.16


                                 6. Why Physicalist Panpsychism?
‘Look, I understand that you might perhaps want to defend panpsychism, even pure panpsychism, but
why on earth do you want to defend physicalist pure panpsychism, PP? How can one possibly claim
to be both a physicalist (or materialist) and a panpsychist?’
   Well, this is an attempt to explain how one can do this and why one might want to. David Lewis
and Bertrand Russell are immediately helpful. Lewis points out that

     a thesis that says [that] panpsychistic materialism . . . is impossible . . . is more than just
     materialism
                                                                                         (1983: 36)

rebuking those who think that materialism (or physicalism) and panpsychism are mutually incom-
patible. Russell makes a related point when he notes that

     common sense leaves us completely in the dark as to the true intrinsic nature of physical
     objects, and if there were good reason to regard them as mental, we could not legitimately
     reject this opinion merely because it strikes us as strange. The truth about physical objects
     must be strange.
                                                                                       (1912: 19)

In later writings he adds that science – physics – also leaves us in the dark in this way:

     physics is mathematical, not because we know so much about the physical world, but
     because we know so little.
                                                                          (1927b: 125)


                                                     322
                                  A Prolegomenon to Physicalist Panpsychism


So far, then, and as already remarked, the way is wide open to PP – a point that was widely under-
stood in the first half of the twentieth century.


                        7.  Terminology 1: ‘Experience’, ‘Experientiality’
I’m now going to define and comment on a few terms and declare some assumptions. I’ll continue to
shunt certain details into footnotes designed for those who already have some familiarity with these
issues. I can’t hope to defend all the philosophically controversial things I will say in doing this –
even putting aside the fact that everything is controversial in philosophy. This chapter is at best a
prolegomenon to PP. Most of the work it aims to do lies in the following definitions and comments.
    So to begin. By ‘experience’ (used as a mass term with no plural) or ‘experientiality’ I mean what
many today in philosophy mean by ‘consciousness’. In more complicated vocabulary, I mean con-
cretely occurring experiential ‘what-it-is-likeness’, phenomenological ‘what-it-is-likeness’, however
simple or primitive, considered just as such. I mean subjective experience with a certain qualitative
character that is private in the straightforward and unexceptionable sense that it is directly known
only to the creature that is having it. Our own experience affords us clear examples of this sort of
‘what-it-is-likeness’: colour experience, thought experience, pain, fear, anxiety, amusement, and so
on. These examples suffice to convey the idea of what experience is in a completely general man-
ner that allows us to grasp the thought that there may be (and surely are) forms of experience that
we cannot imagine, including, perhaps, or no doubt, the most primitive forms of experience. It also
gives us the resources to suppose (in the way sketched at the end of section 4) that our own complex
biologically evolved experiences may be manifestations or effects or fusions of other experiential
phenomena of which we have no from-the-inside knowledge.17
    ‘Phenomenological what-it-is-likeness considered just as such’: the words ‘considered just as such’
are important. They’re designed to limit the meaning or reference of the words ‘experience’ and
‘experientiality’ strictly to the concretely occurring experiential character – the immediately given phenomeno-
logical18 content or character – of conscious mental episodes, while excluding any reference to anything else
that may exist, including anything else on which the existence of such character or content may be
thought to depend.19
    Experience is always and necessarily experience of or about something, simply because it necessar-
ily has some experiential/phenomenological content or ‘what-it-is-likeness’ or other, and it is always
(and trivially) experience of that, whatever else it is or isn’t experience of. In the limiting case it isn’t
experience of anything else at all. There needn’t, for example, be anything red in concrete reality, over
and above the kind of redness that may be truly said to be instantiated in the conscious occurrence
of the red-experience itself, in order to for there to be red-experience.20
    I’m an all-out, out-and-out realist about experience, a real realist about experience. I take it that we
know what experience is simply in having it, because the having is the knowing. (This may help some to
understand what I mean by ‘experience’: it’s that of which it is true to say that the having is the know-
ing.) We not only know exactly what particular kinds of experience are, simply in having them. We
also know what experience is quite generally considered, simply in having experience of certain sorts,
because, again, the having is the knowing. A five-year-old child knows as well as anyone else what it is.
    Suppose five-year-old Lucy is facing the sun with her eyes closed and eating a sweet. If we ask her
whether she likes the taste, and what colour she is experiencing, she’ll know exactly what we mean
and find it easy to answer. In the last century philosophers managed to turn this simple matter into a
conceptual Mordor, but we can ignore them. The real ‘mind – body problem’ begins only when one
endorses real, out-and-out, everyday realism about experience.
    To do anything else is to refuse to face the problem, as many who call themselves ‘physicalists’ do
today.21 All serious materialists or physicalists, all real or genuine materialists or physicalists, as I like to
say, are realistic materialists or physicalists. They are in other words materialists or physicalists who,


                                                      323
                                             Galen Strawson


like almost all materialists or physicalists for well over two thousand years (until about 1960 – or per-
haps 1920), are real realists about experience. The idea that materialism or physicalism might or does
lead to the denial (covert or overt) of the existence of consciousness or experience is very recent. As
far as I know, no one before the twentieth century was foolish enough to entertain it.

                               8.  Terminology 2: ‘Mental’, ‘Mind’
I take the words ‘mental’ and ‘mind’ to cover the whole range of things that are ordinarily taken to
be mental, from the most complicated thoughts about algebraic topology to the simplest possible
feeling experience, the simplest occurrence of which it is true to say that there’s ‘something it is like’,
experientially, to have it.
    According to this definition all experience is mental, and my concern in this chapter is only with
the experiential. It is, however, important to be aware that some philosophers use ‘mind’ and ‘men-
tal’ in an essentially narrower and more exclusive sense, according to which ‘mere’ or ‘bare’ feeling,
primitive experiential what-it-is-likeness, does not count as mental. Russell, for example, standardly
takes it that some sort of cognitive and mnemic (memory) capacity is a necessary condition of mind
or mentality, and accordingly classifies mere or bare feeling/sentience as not intrinsically mental. This
allows him to say that he is a neutral monist, someone who thinks that the fundamental stuff of reality
is stuff of a single kind that is neither mental nor physical, even as he proposes that ‘sensations’ are
the fundamental stuff of reality – things that we today ordinarily classify as paradigmatically mental.
Something similar is true of James when he declares himself to be a neutral monist while holding
that the fundamental stuff is ‘pure experience’ – something that we today ordinarily classify as para-
digmatically mental.22 Drake also holds that mind entails cognition, and takes it accordingly that there
can be essentially ‘psychic stuff ’ (1925: 91) without mind.
    There’s a parallel point to be made about the word ‘conscious(ness)’. I use it here in a standard
inclusive way according to which any sort of feeling or experiential what-it-is-likeness, however
primitive, is conscious. Russell, James, Drake, and many others use ‘consciousness’ to mean something
essentially more complex, something that is essentially intentionally of something other than its
immediately given phenomenological character, and essentially cognitive in that sense.
    It is, to repeat, very important to be aware of these different usages, especially when reading
earlier twentieth-century work. The terminological landscape is treacherous. Here I’ll continue to
use ‘mind’, ‘mental’, and ‘conscious’ in the inclusive way according to which any sort of experiential
what-it-is-likeness, however primitive, is correctly called ‘mental’ and ‘conscious’. Unlike James and
Russell, therefore, I accept [feeling → conscious] and [experiential → mental].23 We all accept [con-
scious → mind], but for different reasons: they because they have more restrictive notions of both
mind and consciousness, as just described, I because I have more inclusive notions of both. One has
to learn to navigate these differences.

                          9.  Terminology 3: ‘Physical’, ‘Physicalism’
The definition of the words ‘physical’ and ‘physicalism’ is particularly important. Much of the confusion
in the current discussion of the ‘mind – body problem’ stems from the fact that different philosophers
use these words in a number of different ways. (I suspect that this problem will never be remedied, as
succeeding generations pile enthusiastically into the debate and lock on to one use or another.)
    I take it, to begin, and entirely uncontroversially, that

[a]	[x is physical → x is concrete]
and
[b]	[x is physical → x is the subject matter of physics].

                                                   324
                                A Prolegomenon to Physicalist Panpsychism


[b] states that the physical is what physics is actually talking about, what is actually referred to in or
by physics, however wrong physics is about the physical, and however limited the descriptive powers
of physics are when it comes to the physical. There is as already remarked a fundamental respect in
which these descriptive powers are extremely limited (see further in the following).
   As a physicalist or materialist, I also take it that

[c]	[x is found in our universe → x is physical]
and that
[d]	[x is physical → x is physics-tractable]

where by saying that something x is ‘physics-tractable’ I mean something quite rich – roughly that
our physics doesn’t just talk about x but is capable of getting quite a lot right about its nature and
does in fact get quite a lot right about its nature.24
   I take it that [b] and [c] are enough to fix the reference of the term ‘physical’ while (rightly) leaving
fundamental questions about the nature of the physical as yet undetermined.
   I will also take it that

[e]	[x is physical → x is a spatio-temporal entity]
and indeed that
[f ]	 [x is physical ↔ x is spatio-temporal]

while noting, first, that a number of physicists think that space-time is not a truly fundamental feature
of reality, and, second, that there appear to be fundamental things that we don’t understand about the
nature of space-time.
    Given these two points, I’m going to treat ‘space-time’ as a proper name for whatever is in fact
the fundamental dimensionality of concrete reality. I take it as given – a priori – that concrete reality
must have some dimensionality or ‘existence-room’ (Existenzraum) or other. At the same time, I take
it – along with certain leading cosmologists – that there may be no real distinction between what
the existence of the (stuff of the) universe consists in and what the existence of (what we think of
as) its dimensionality consists in. Steven Weinberg’s characterization of a version of string theory is
one vivid illustration of this idea: on this view the fundamental entities currently recognized in the
standard model of physics are not strictly speaking fundamental and are to be explained as ‘various
modes of vibration of tiny one-dimensional rips in space-time known as strings’ (1997: 20).25
    With these provisions, ‘space-time’ and its adjective ‘spatio-temporal’ denote the actual dimen-
sionality of concrete reality even if (even though) we are in various ways wrong about or ignorant
of its nature. [e] and [f] emerge as trivially true given this ruling, but there’s no harm in that – no
harm in having [f] listed as an explicit condition of physicality. (One could simply name the actual
dimensionality of our universe ‘D’, and to use ‘D’ as adjective and noun to replace ‘spatio-temporal’
and ‘space-time’.)
    Plainly to be a physicalist is also to hold that

[g]	[x is experience and is in this universe → x is physical],

and to be a real physicalist, in my present terms, is to be a real realist (a five-year-old Lucy realist)
about experience. It’s to hold that ‘the heady luxuriance of experience’, ‘experience in all its rich-
ness’, in Quine’s robustly realist words (1981: 185),26 is wholly physical in nature. Let me say it again:
when I claim that experience (considered just as such – see p. 6) is physical, I’m not saying that it is
in any way other than what we ordinarily take it to be (unlike most philosophers when they say that

                                                    325
                                               Galen Strawson


experience is physical). I’m saying that it’s experience exactly as we ordinarily and generally under-
stand it that is wholly physical if physicalism is true.
     This simple point already conflicts directly with many uses of the terms ‘physical’ and ‘physicalist’.
It’s one of the most unfortunate – stickiest – sticking points of the debate. Physicalism is by definition
the view that everything in this universe is physical. It accordingly entails that the experiential – the
experiential as ordinarily and correctly understood, which we know for certain to exist – is physical. No clear-
headed physicalist can think that there is a fundamental distinction between the physical on the one
hand and the experiential/mental on the other hand, a distinction of such a kind that physical and
experiential/mental stand in some sort of opposition.27
     So far, perhaps, so good. I also take it to be part of the meaning of ‘physical’ that everything physi-
cal has a single fundamental metaphysical nature – a single fundamental metaphysical stuff-nature that we
denote by the word ‘physical’.28
     I’ll call this single fundamental metaphysical stuff-nature ‘φ’, so that I can refer to it without using
the word ‘physical’. All physical stuff is φ stuff by definition:

[h]	[x is physical ↔ x is φ].

It follows immediately that physicalism is a monist view, a stuff-monist view, according to which there
is only one fundamental kind of stuff in reality.29 What it is to be φ is still very largely undetermined.
    It may be said that [h] is a redundant move. ‘Of course it’s part of the meaning of “physical” that
all physical things share the same fundamental-kind nature or stuff-nature. Why introduce a new
fundamental-kind term, “φ”, and then say that it’s coextensive with “physical” ’?
    Reply: It seems conceivable that that there are in fact three fundamentally different kinds of stuff
or substance in our world – ζ stuff, ξ stuff and χ stuff – that interact smoothly and are all equally part
of the subject matter of our science of physics. To rule out this possibility, we need something like
[h] in addition to [b] and [c].30
    ‘No. In this imagined case, ζ stuff, ξ stuff, and χ stuff are all correctly called ‘physical’ simply
because they’re all ‘physics-tractable’ in such a way that they can all be treated in an integrated fashion
by a single theory: our physics. That’s just what it is to be physical. So [h] isn’t necessary after all.’
    This response fits with the (anti-metaphysical, instrumentalist) way some philosophers think
about the meaning of ‘physical’, but it simply overrides the core metaphysical idea that all physical
phenomena share a single fundamental stuff-nature. The single-naturedness of the stuff of our world
is not guaranteed by its physics-tractability.
    Another seeming possibility, after all, is that two different fundamental kinds of stuff, not only φ
stuff but also π stuff, satisfy all the equations of our physics. There may be a π stuff universe distinct
from our own. Perhaps there may be a planet made entirely of π stuff, existing inside a π bubble in
our otherwise wholly φ universe. If we examine it we’ll take the π planet to be physical stuff, and the
cheerful anti-metaphysicalists will say we’re right; but we’ll be wrong.
    To be physical, then, is not just to be physics-tractable; it’s not just to be tractable for any theory
formally identical to physics.31 It’s also to be φ, where φ refers to a certain ultimate intrinsic stuff-
nature – the stuff-nature of the stuff that is in fact the only fundamental kind of stuff in our universe.
According to PP, experience is the ultimate intrinsic nature of the stuff of our universe.
    It may now be said that the notion of fundamental same substancehood has little content unless
one can offer some account of how we might possibly decide whether or not smoothly interacting
entities are of the same or different fundamental stuffs. This kind of move is sometimes appropriate
in philosophy, but not here. Metaphysics is not subject to epistemic constraints of this sort; the notion
of same fundamental stuff is sufficiently robust for present purposes (if necessary, we can anchor it
in the idea that an omniscient being could tell whether there is one or more substance in play). We
can’t assume that physics-tractability is a sufficient condition of fundamental same substancehood.


                                                     326
                                A Prolegomenon to Physicalist Panpsychism


    Is the ζ – ξ – χ case really possible? Is it possible given that it requires that there be genuine causal
interaction between the three different fundamental kinds of stuff?32 I think it has to be allowed to
be possible by anyone who thinks that standard (Cartesian) substance dualism is coherent – even
if they think it is false. For when standard substance dualism allows that different fundamental
substances may possibly interact causally, it opens up the general possibility that the causal interac-
tions captured by the equations of physics are in fact interactions between different fundamental
substances. I’m inclined to take ability to interact causally to be a sufficient condition of same
substancehood, directly contrary to the spirit of the ζ – ξ – χ story (see Strawson 2003: 50). This,
however, rules out standard Cartesian dualism, and many think that Cartesian dualism is at least a
coherent position.


                                    10.  Terminology 4: ‘Physics’
I haven’t finished with ‘physical’, but I want now to say something about the word ‘physics’, and
indeed physics itself, in support of the claim that one has gone badly wrong if one is a physicalist and
thinks that there is a basic opposition between the physical and the experiential.
   There is of course an everyday use of ‘physical’ given which the opposition claim comes naturally.
But this is precisely the problem: the present claim is that this use is shatteringly unhelpful in phi-
losophy and – at the limit – plain wrong. Certainly we shouldn’t use ‘physical’ in philosophy in such
a way that Russell, Whitehead, and Eddington and many others are simply contradicting themselves
when they say (for example) that

     from the standpoint of philosophy the distinction between physical and mental is superficial
     and unreal
                                                                           (Russell 1927a: 402)

or that

     we do not know enough of the intrinsic character of events outside us to say whether it
     does or does not differ from that of ‘mental’ events
                                        (Russell 1927b: 221; see also the quotation in §4 above)

or that

     science has nothing to say as to the intrinsic nature of the atom. [From the point of view
     of physics] the physical atom is, like everything else in physics, a schedule of pointer read-
     ings. The schedule is, we agree, attached to some unknown background [the actual physi-
     cal stuff]. Why not then attach it to something of spiritual [i.e. mental] nature of which
     a prominent characteristic is thought [in Descartes’s sense of ‘thought’, i.e. consciousness]?
                                                                           (Eddington 1928b: 259)

I agree completely with Maxwell when he says that

     the physical is, very roughly, the subject matter of physics. By ‘subject matter’ I mean not the
     theories, laws, principles, etc., of physics, but rather what the theories and laws are about.
     The physical thus includes tables, stars, human bodies and brains, and whatever the constitu-
     ents of these may be.
                                                                    (1978: 366; my emphasis in bold)33


                                                    327
                                              Galen Strawson


So what about physics? It’s widely agreed that it can tell us a great deal about structural-relational
aspects of φ, the stuff in our universe (consider the inverse square laws, the mass–energy equivalence
equation, the Dirac equation, the Schrödinger equation, etc.). It is at the same time a commonplace
that physics is incapable – essentially incapable – of revealing the ultimate structure-transcendent
nature of φ, i.e. the nature of the stuff that has to be there given that the structural relations expressed
in the equations of physics are actually exemplified by something concretely real. Physics is silent
on this aspect of the nature of φ. Why? Because physics is as Hawking says ‘just a set of rules and
equations’ (1988: 174). It can’t tell us anything that can’t be expressed in such rules and equations.
This is why Eddington says that ‘if you want a concrete definition of matter it is no use looking to
physics’ (1928a: 95); physics can’t access ‘its inner un-get-atable nature’ (1928b: 257). ‘Science ignores
what anything is in itself ’, Whitehead observes: ‘its entities are merely considered in respect to their
extrinsic reality, that is to say, in respect to their aspects to other things’ (1925: 153). ‘Physics is math-
ematical’, says Russell in a passage already quoted, ‘not because we know so much about the physical
world, but because we know so little’ (1927b: 125). This isn’t any sort of failure on the part of physics;
it’s just not its job. ‘Physical science has reduced nature to activity, and has discovered abstract math-
ematical formulae which are illustrated in these activities of nature. But the fundamental question
remains, How do we add content to the notion of bare activity?’ (Whitehead 1938: 166).
     It doesn’t follow, in Kantian fashion, that we can’t know anything at all about the non-structural
or structure-transcendent nature of φ – I’ll call this ‘φST’ (‘st’ for ‘structure-transcendent’). Phys-
ics does indeed go beyond purely logico-mathematical structural description in asserting that the
universe has specifically spatio-temporal structure and causal structure, and in taking these to be the
fundamental concrete ‘real relations’ or ‘generating relations’ (Newman 1928: 145–6) that the purely
logico-mathematical structural descriptions of physics cotton onto. That said, to describe something
as causally structured is still to give a highly abstract description of it, a description that is silent on
its stuff-nature (causation is simply the ‘because something is, something else must be’ relation; Kant
1781–7: B288). The same goes for the description of something as spatio-temporally structured, to
the extent that we remain ignorant of the intrinsic nature of space-time. I will for this reason include
attribution of causal and spatio-temporal structure under the general heading of structural descrip-
tion, even though it is not purely logico-mathematical structural description.
     That’s one point. The next point is that if physicalism is true, as we’re supposing it is, then we
do know something utterly fundamental about φST. This is because we’re directly acquainted with
it, at least in certain respects. We’re directly acquainted with φST whenever we’re caught up in the
concrete process of having conscious experience, as we so very often are. This is because conscious
experience is part of concrete reality, hence a part of physical reality, given physicalism; and because,
when it comes to conscious experience – and as already remarked – the having is the knowing. As
Russell says, using ‘intrinsic’ loosely34 to mean ‘structure-transcendent’:

     we know nothing about the intrinsic quality of physical events except when these are mental
     events that we directly experience.
                                                                      (1956: 153, my emphasis)

When the physical events are mental events that we directly experience, we do know something about
their intrinsic structure-transcendent quality. So when Peter Lewis says that quantum mechanics ‘is a
theory in which we have no idea what we are talking about, because we have no idea what (if any-
thing) the basic mathematical structures of the theory represent’ (Lewis 2016: 23) we need to make
one correction: we do have some idea what we are talking about because sometimes we’re talking
about our experiences, whatever else we may or may not be talking about, and we know their intrinsic
structure-transcendent nature in certain very fundamental respects. We may then ask whether physical
events possess any other, radically different kind of intrinsic structure-transcendent quality. PP answers
No, and (backed up by Occam) challenges dissenters to give good reason to think otherwise.
                                                    328
                                A Prolegomenon to Physicalist Panpsychism


                   11.  Terminology 5: ‘Physical’, ‘Physicalism’ Continued
This raises a point about our epistemological limits – a point about the respect in which we will
only ever be able to form one kind of descriptively contentful general conception of φST that we can know
to cotton on (even if only partially) to the intrinsic nature of φST. Which conception is this? It’s the
conception just mentioned, the conception we form of it in having experience and knowing its
nature in having it because the having is the knowing.
    Suppose we let ‘φ*ST’ stand for the structure-transcendent stuff-nature of concrete reality without
carrying any implication that there is only one fundamental kind of stuff. Suppose we somehow gain
access to two different and compelling modes of description of φ*ST, and are able to know that both
of them cotton on (even if only partially) to the intrinsic nature of φ*ST. And suppose we continue to
have good reason to think that reality as it is in itself forms a causally interconnected whole. In that
case, the two modes of description might be so different that we feel we have good reason to suppose
that there are two different substances in causal interaction. I take it that that is not our actual case,
but many dualists have supposed that it is: that there is, first, the access to the essentially experiential
nature of φ*ST that we have simply in having conscious experience, and, secondly, the access to the
essentially non-experiential nature of φ*ST that we have not only when we engage in science but also
in our everyday experience of moving round in the world.
    But now we encounter one of the points that supports the panpsychist position: the fact that we
do not in fact have the second sort of access. We do not in fact have good reason to think that there
is any non-experiential stuff, or that we know its nature in any fundamental non-structural respect.
    Some may now say that we’re taking φ*ST to be spatio-temporal stuff whatever else is or is not
the case

[e]	[x is physical → x is a spatio-temporal entity]
and that anything spatio-temporal must be spatially extended
[i]	[x is a spatio-temporal entity → x is spatially extended]
and that anything spatio-temporally extended must have some sort of non-experiential stuff-nature
[ j]	 [x is spatially extended → x has non-experiential stuff being],
and therefore that
[k]	[x is physical → x has non-experiential stuff being].

And this may seem to settle the case against PP. But [k] isn’t warranted. First, we don’t know that we
know the nature of space-time (see §9), or whether it is indeed a genuinely fundamental feature of
φ*ST.35 Secondly, it’s not at all obvious that space-occupation requires non-experiential stuff being,
even if it seems so at first.36
   Some philosophers and physicists seem to think that a concretely real thing can exist in a spatio-
temporal universe and have no spatial extension at all. I think that’s incoherent, so I’m prepared to
agree that

[l]	[x is physical → x is spatially extended]

– always assuming that concrete reality is indeed fundamentally spatio-temporal. I’m also prepared
to put aside the view that we may be (surely are) deeply ignorant of the intrinsic nature of space,
although it already supplies grounds for rejecting the objection to PP in the last paragraph, and to
take it that we really do have a reasonably good if partial positive intuitive (more than merely struc-
tural) grasp of its nature. For, even then, when I go on to think of the (Heisenbergian) energy that
                                                    329
                                               Galen Strawson


wholly constitutes everything that we think of as spatially extended (and even, perhaps, space-time
itself), and then go on to raise the question of the intrinsic stuff-nature of this energy, and then go
on to consider the current hypothesis that it is wholly a matter of experientiality – the active, live
occurrent phenomenon that we know experience to be – I can see no good reason to think that
something consisting of wholly experiential stuff cannot be spatial in just the same way as the way in
which something thought of as non-experiential is supposed to be; so I reject [j], which was used in
conjunction with [e] and [i] to argue for [k], even as I accept [l].
    This leads to an important related point. Wholly experiential stuff can certainly be said to have
numerical and structural properties, and numerical and structural properties, considered specifi-
cally as such, are indeed correctly called non-experiential properties. It does not, however, follow
from this that there is any non-experiential stuff; it doesn’t follow that there are any non-expe-
riential stuff-­properties. So one can’t refute PP simply by showing that one can correctly ascribe
properties to concrete reality that are correctly or naturally said to be non-experiential proper-
ties. Failure to appreciate this point is likely to be another potent source of misunderstanding.37
‘Non-experiential’ is not the name of a positive type of stuff being; to say that a thing has non-
experiential properties is not ipso facto to say that it has any non-experiential stuff being.38 More
generally, one can say this: whatever the dimensionality of the concrete real, a panpsychist may
take it that its nature is such that it fits smoothly with the nature of the concrete real conceived
of as nothing but experientiality in exactly the same way as the way in which the dimensionality
of the concrete real understood as spatial in the conventional way is seen to fit smoothly with
the nature of the concrete real understood as good old fashioned non-experientially propertied
physical stuff.
    ‘But you must retain the idea of dimensional position, even when you take the dimensionality
of the concrete real to fit smoothly with the view of the concrete real as wholly experiential, because
the idea of position and difference of position is essentially built into the idea of dimensionality. And
the property of having some dimensional position is essentially non-experiential.’ True, but the reply
is the same as before; this raises no difficulty for the idea that the stuff-nature of the concrete real
is experientiality. (Note also that non-pure physicalist panpsychism remains an option even if one
continues to think that spatio-temporality entails non-experientiality.)


                   12.  Terminology 6: ‘Physical’, ‘Physicalism’ Continued
So: to be a physicalist is simply to hold [c] that all the stuff in this universe, including of course [g] all
experientiality, is wholly physical in every respect and feature. To be a serious or realistic physicalist is
to be (with Russell and almost all if not all materialists until some time in the twentieth century) a
real five-year-old-Lucy realist about experience. It’s also to hold (again with Russell) that in having
experience we know something about the intrinsic nature of the physical.
    What is it to be physical? It is (at least) to be [a] concrete, [b] what physics talks about, in its own
strictly limited way, [d] physics-tractable, [e] spatio-temporal and hence [l] spatially extended, and [h]
of a single kind of fundamental stuff φ whose single-kindhood must be allowed to transcend physics-
tractability by anyone who allows that the story of ζ stuff, ξ stuff and χ stuff is coherent. On this
view, leptons and quarks, fermions or bosons, matter and antimatter, charged and chargeless particles
(these are familiar classificatory distinctions made within the realm of the physical) are all of the same
fundamental kind of stuff, although they are importantly different types of things. They are as one
might say all made of the same fundamental kind of stuff.
    Don’t ask me how we might identify and distinguish fundamental kinds of stuff. I don’t have
access to Concretics, God’s great textbook of concrete reality, in which all possible types of concrete
stuff are specified. I’m simply expounding a way of understanding ‘physical’ according to which
‘physical’ carries an implication of sameness of fundamental nature that goes beyond being treatable


                                                     330
                                  A Prolegomenon to Physicalist Panpsychism


by a single theory, mathematical physics. [h] is (among other things) a dramatization of the point that
‘physical’ is a natural-kind term of a special kind.39
     Some may think that the above characterization of ‘physical’ is still radically incomplete, because
it’s part of the core or fundamental meaning of ‘physical’ that

[m]	 [x is physical → x is at least partly constituted of non-experiential stuff].
Many endorse the stronger view that
[n]	 [x is physical → x is wholly constituted of non-experiential stuff].

Russell and many others disagree, as I do. Nothing in physics provides compelling reason to endorse
[m] or [n]. They may certainly be allowed to be part of the meaning of ‘physical’ (or ‘material’) in
everyday use, but no one who uses ‘physical’ when engaged in metaphysical speculation about the
nature of things – using it to mean the stuff of which the world is in fact constituted, or the stuff that physics
is in fact concerned with and (so we believe) says many true things about – should accept this feature of the
ordinary meaning of ‘physical’ as a constraint on the theoretical employment of the term. It’s not just
that physics radically undermined the everyday conception of the nature of matter long ago. The
deeper point is that physics itself rules against this constraint by its very nature. This is the silence of
physics. It used to be well known: ‘the materialist, holding that the world is matter, is not wedded to
any one doctrine of the nature of matter’ (Williams 1944: 425). ‘Physical’ is not a term that carries
or contains any determinate positive descriptive non-structural characterization of a kind of stuff.
    Some philosophers may now say that the characterization of the word ‘physical’ (or ‘material’)
proposed here is bad because it’s incompatible with the terminology of the traditional debate about
the ‘mind-body problem’, which has matter (the physical) firmly and comfortably on one side, and
mind and conscious experience (the mental, the experiential), firmly and comfortably opposed to
matter, on the other. I think this is the opposite of the truth. This incompatibility is perhaps the
key virtue of the current characterization of ‘physical’. The traditional debate is a dead end, full
of seductive patterns of confusion, many of which revolve principally around the use of the word
‘physical’. We know experience is real, so we know that experience is physical if physicalism is true,
and the fundamental metaphysical question, given that we know that there is experiential physical
stuff, is whether there is any respectable reason to posit any non-experiential physical stuff. I think
that the best (and Occamical) answer may be No. And now Quine and Nietzsche turn up at my side.
Nietzsche points out, correctly, that the view that ‘substance is experienceless is only a hypothesis!
Not based on experience!’ (1882–4: KSA 10, 24[10]). Quine (using ‘physical’ in the standard sense
that implies having non-experiential being) observes that physical objects are ‘posits comparable,
epistemologically, to the gods of Homer’ (1951: 44).


                             13.  Terminology 7: ‘Radical Emergence’
I want now to say briefly what I mean by ‘radical emergence’ (also called ‘strong emergence’, see
e.g. Wilson 2015) and then conclude.
    In a case of radical emergence, at least as I understand it, some concrete stuff develops into or
produces or comes to constitute some concrete stuff that belongs, intuitively, and presumably also in
fact, to a wholly, radically different order of being. In the present case the first stuff is by hypothesis
non-experiential, so I’ll call it NE. The second stuff is experientiality, experiential stuff, so I’ll call it
E. E being is held to emerge – wholly naturally – from NE being that is quite radically different from
it: either constitutively (E being emerges from NE being as a result of some NE being’s coming to
constitute some E being) or causally (some E being emerges from some NE being inasmuch as some
NE being causes some E being to come into existence).


                                                      331
                                               Galen Strawson


   One way to illustrate the force of ‘radical’ is to observe that one can transform or develop any
form of matter into any other (steel into marshmallow, water into diamond), given sufficient force.
No such transformation will be a case of radical emergence, because all matter is made of the same
stuff (leptons and quarks, on one account). In fact the same goes for transforming matter into anti-
matter. This may sound as if it must be a case of radical emergence, but all this shows is that the terms
‘matter’ and ‘antimatter’ are potentially misleading. The only difference between an electron and an
antimatter electron (a positron) is that their charges are reversed.
   These are not cases of radical emergence. The transformation of wholly and utterly NE stuff into
E stuff – experiencing, experientiality – would, by contrast, be a case of radical emergence; so I claim.
I have no argument for this widely held view, nor anything to add to the kinds of intuitive considera-
tions I’ve given before (Strawson 2006a, 2006b). I’m not claiming that radical emergence is provably
impossible. I don’t think it is, although I think that the postulation of radical emergence must always
be a huge black mark against a theory.


                                        14.  Radical Emergence
The principal objection to taking it that E exists in our universe by virtue of radical emergence
from wholly and utterly NE can be put as follows. I’ll use ‘E’ (italic capital) to refer to all theories
that suppose that the fundamental stuff is wholly experiential, ‘NE’ to refer to all theories that sup-
pose that the fundamental stuff is wholly non-experiential, and ‘RE’ to refer to the view that radical
emergence exists.
    [1] We know for certain that E exists (biological E, at the very least). [2] We don’t know for cer-
tain that any NE exists. So right from the start, [3] the burden of proof is on those who believe that
NE exists. [4] There is, to begin, a burden on them to prove that it exists at all.
    This burden is very heavy; in fact it can’t be lifted. It’s a very old and familiar point that [5] it can’t
be proved that NE exists.
    The point [5] that it’s impossible to prove that there is any NE being is weighty. But let us put
it aside. Even when we put it aside it remains true that [6] there is a burden on those who believe
that NE exists to show that there is at least good reason to posit NE. It looks, however, as if [7] E
and NE+RE are empirically equivalent (theories are empirically equivalent if no empirical test can
decide between them). This is because it seems that [8] our best and most fundamental science of the
nature of reality – physics – can’t decide between them. Why not? Because of the silence of physics
on the question of the intrinsic structure-transcendent nature of reality. The reference of the terms
that refer to the structure-transcendent reality can as Quine says ‘be wildly reinterpreted without
violence to evidence’ (1992: 9). If this is right, [9] it won’t be possible to find good reason to posit
NE in addition to E (E which we know for certain to exist).
    At this point I think that there’s only one thing left for the advocates of NE to do. They need to
try to show that [10] even if NE+RE and E are empirically equivalent, still NE+RE is theoretically
superior to E. Their first and very large difficulty is immediate: there appears to be no reason to posit
radical emergence anywhere else in science. It is to that extent sorely ad hoc to posit it just and only
in the case of experience. It’s directly contrary to the dictates of sound methodological naturalism.
    Suppose the advocates of NE press on, in spite of this, and turn to perceived problems for E in the
hope that they can show at least one of them to be insuperable. They are likely to turn to the most
popular perceived problem for E – the problem of how we account for the existence of biological
experience like our own given the postulation of non-biological experience – and argue more or
less as follows.
    Suppose first that [11] we assume an irreducibly plural ontological setup in concrete reality.
Suppose for example that we take the language of particle physics more or less literally, if only
for purposes of argument. In this case, say the advocates of NE, [12] we face the ‘combination


                                                     332
                               A Prolegomenon to Physicalist Panpsychism


problem’.40 Experience can’t exist without an experiencer of some sort, and it appears to follow
that (non-­biological) particle-like microexperiences entail the existence of (non-biological) particle-
like microexperiencers. But how can non-biological microsubjects combine to constitute biologi-
cal macrosubjects like ourselves? The combination problem is so acute, they say, that [13] it’s more
plausible to suppose that biological E arises from or consists in the activity of a multiplicity of NE
microelements than a multiplicity of non-biological E microelements.
    Suppose alternatively that [14] we think of the universe in the way a considerable number of
present-day cosmologists and philosophers think best, i.e. as ultimately a single thing structured or
indeed constituted by a number of fields, or perhaps one complex field. Even then (say the advocates
of NE) [15] it’s more plausible to suppose that biological E arises from or consists in some sort of
activity-complexity in fields that have a fundamentally NE intrinsic nature than to think that it arises
from or consists in some sort of activity-complexity in fields that have a fundamentally E intrinsic
nature.
    I can see no force in [15]. There does seem to be some initial force to [12], given [11], but, first,
even if it’s very difficult, when we think in a simple particle-physics way, to conceive of how biologi-
cal E arises from or consists in the activity of a multiplicity of non-biological E elements, and hardly
less difficult, when we think in the field-theoretic way, to conceive of how biological E arises from
or consists in some sort of activity-complexity in a non-biological E field, it’s most unclear that it’s
easier to imagine that biological E arises from or consists in the activity of a multiplicity of NE ele-
ments, or some sort of activity-complexity in an otherwise fundamentally NE field.
    Many have said that there is a special and overwhelming difficulty in the idea that a multitude of
subjects can combine into a larger single subject, including, famously, William James in The Principles
of Psychology (1890: 160). But this leads directly to a second reply to those who wish to argue that E
faces such acute problems that it’s reasonable to suppose that NE+RE is theoretically superior to E.
    The point is simple and has wide implications when to comes to the general discussion of ideal-
ist theories, panpsychist or not. Almost all those who have argued that the combination problem is
insuperable for panpsychism have used a priori argument in support of their case. This is why they’ve
supposed that the arguments are decisive. It is, however, foolish to suppose that a priori argument can
have any decisive role to play in this matter. A hundred years ago someone might have argued, with
supreme confidence, and on purely a priori grounds, that wave-particle duality or quantum entangle-
ment or quantum superposition was provably impossible. That would have been a mistake. We have
daily proof from physics that there are fundamental things about the nature of concrete reality, and in
particular the structural-relational-combinatorial nature of concrete reality, that we don’t understand
and have no prospect of understanding.
    William James anticipates this general point beautifully, I believe, when in A Pluralistic Uni-
verse (1909) he simply abandons his earlier a-priori-argument based endorsement of the view that
the combination problem is insuperable. He understands our ignorance. Kant also anticipates this
point – shows a suitable grasp of our ignorance – when he considers one of the standard ‘rational-
ist’ or immaterialist objections to the materialists: if someone rejects materialism (or equally mic-
ropsychism, the idea that there are many small non-biological E elements) and argues for a simple
non-material soul

    merely on the ground that the unity of apperception in thought does not allow of its being
    explained [as arising] out of the composite, instead of admitting, as he ought to do that he
    is [quite generally] unable to explain the possibility of a thinking nature (einer denkender
    Natur), why should not the materialist [or equally the micropsychist], though he can as little
    appeal to experience in support of his possibilities, be justified in being equally daring, and
    in using his principle to establish the opposite conclusion?
                                                           (Kant 1787: B417–18, my emphasis)41


                                                  333
                                               Galen Strawson


We just don’t know enough to reach conclusions of the ‘rationalist’ sort.
   James and Kant aside, I think that the general doubt about the use of a priori argument in this
domain (a doubt strongly supported by physics) is enough to establish that we have no good reason
to pay much attention to standard formulations of the combination problem.42 We have to remem-
ber and respect our ignorance, however much it galls us. We have to remember Orgel’s Second
Rule: ‘Evolution is cleverer than you are’. If it’s adaptive for a portion of matter that moves around
under its own steam as a single unit to have an environment-representing experiential perspective
that corresponds to that singleness, evolution will make it happen, even if (and this is far from obvi-
ous) it has to conjure that perspective out of many experiential perspectives. We have to remember
the silence of physics, and the fact that even when we limit ourselves to the limited sorts of things
that physics can tell us about, nature appears to be more puzzling than we are likely to be able to
understand. After acknowledging all the known unknowns, we have to remember the unknown
unknowns, not to mention the unknowable unknowns, not to mention the knowably unknowable
unknowns.43


                                             15. Conclusion
This chapter has gone on long enough, and there are plenty of other expositions of the virtues of
panpsychism in this book.44 I want to conclude with an apparent difficulty. I’m attracted to the thing-
monist view according to which the universe is a single thing in some non-trivial sense and is indeed
space-time (i.e. not ultimately ontologically distinct from what we think of as its dimensionality).
On this view space-time itself is a substantial something, a stuffy something, a plenum, a weave of
fields, or rather perhaps a single complex field – which is in fact an experientiality field (Weinberg’s
characterization of a version of string theory, noted in §9 above, is one way among many of giving
colour to the thing-monist idea).
    This picture raises a large question. For if the universe is space-time, and if space-time is stuff,
and if it is experiential stuff, and if it is also, in a fundamental sense, a unity, and if the existence of an
experience entails an experiencer, in some fundamental and ineliminable sense, as I believe it does,
then – so it seems – we must not only suppose that the universe is itself a subject, but must also
(unless considerations about the nature of time show this to be a mistake) suppose that it is experi-
encing all the disparate and often mutually incompatible thoughts and feelings of all sentient beings.
    I’m not sure what to say about this. Certainly there are ways of conceiving of what we are, and
of why it is that we experience ourselves as radically bounded subjects that don’t clash irreconcilably
with the seemingly extraordinary idea of a cosmic subject. On the terms of section 5, we’re local
peaks in the great experiential weave. We’re not in fact radically isolated experiential units, but we
are sweetly tuned by evolution to experience ourselves as such.
    One possible solution is to give up thing monism. Some think that thing monism is the best or
only way to avoid the combination problem (see e.g. Goff 2017); but I can’t feel worried by the
combination problem, for reasons given in the previous section. Another possibility, perhaps, is that
the experientiality field (weave of fields) is a unity in some way that doesn’t require the universe to
be itself a single subject of experience. Goff engagingly suggests that the universe is indeed conscious,
but that ‘the consciousness of the universe is simply a mess. It may be hard for us to imagine a single
mental state involving such wildly conflicting contents, but I see no reason to think that such a thing
is impossible’ (2017: 243).
    As a passionate physicalist naturalist atheist, I think the thing to do is to relax. Die Welt ist tief – as
Nietzsche observed (1883–92: 264). The general case for favouring panpsychism over other theories
of the fundamental nature of reality is close to being overwhelming, independently of issues like this
one. I can’t at present see that a conception of the universe that posits a cosmic subject is worse off
than other conceptions.


                                                     334
                                     A Prolegomenon to Physicalist Panpsychism


   If there were such a subject, it wouldn’t, I think, be any sort of agent. The universe is a vast,
magnificent, and from some perspectives terrifying unfolding of being, but I don’t think anyone or
anything can do anything about how it goes.45


                                                          Notes
	 1.	 When I cite a work I give the date of first publication, or sometimes the date of composition, while the
         page reference is to the edition listed in the bibliography. In the case of quotations from languages other
         than English I give a reference to a standard translation but do not always use precisely that translation.
	 2.	 The term ‘panexperiential’ was introduced by Griffin (1977). See also Shields (2001).
	3.	 1927–8: 167. Note that to say this is not to say or imply that subjects are ontologically distinct from
         experiences.
	 4.	 By one estimate, 700 billion solar neutrinos pass through one’s brain every second.
	 5.	 ‘Concrete reality’ contrasts with ‘abstract reality’: some hold that numbers and concepts are real things, part
         of reality, but are abstract entities rather than concrete entities. One quick way to characterize concrete
         reality is to say that to be concretely real is to be capable of entering into causal relations. Here I put aside
         questions about abstract reality and usually speak simply of ‘reality’.
	 6.	 See also Hartshorne (1936, 1942). For some more recent discussion, see Nagel (1979, 2012: 54–8), Seager
         (1995, 2016), McHenry and Shields (2016). For a survey, see Skrbina (2005). I endorse psychism, although
         not under that name, in Strawson 1994 (e.g. pp. 60–2).
	 7.	 I follow D. C. Williams (1944: 418) and David Lewis (1994: 293) in treating these two terms as equivalent,
         although there is more to the physical than matter.
	 8.	 ‘Fundamental particle’ is a misleading term given quantum field theory; but terms like ‘quark’ and ‘electron’
         do pick out concretely real somethings, and it’s often useful to talk in terms of particles.
	 9.	 I’m hoping to avoid a nest of disputes by piling the terms ‘ultimate’, ‘intrinsic’ and ‘categorical’ on top of
         each other. I should say that I take it (contrary to some widespread terminological habits) that there’s a
         fundamental sense in which potencies or power properties are correctly said to be categorical properties, i.e.
         actual properties, properties that are always there, constitutive of the being of the thing whose potencies they
         are (they do not have a ‘merely dispositional’ existence). As Cavendish says: ‘body cannot quit power, nor
         power the body, being all one thing’ (1664: 98). See also Locke (1689–1700: §2.8), Heil and Martin (1998),
         Strawson (2008), Heil (2012: ch. 4).
	10.	 So too, concrete physical stuff isn’t well thought of as something that is in some way distinct from process,
         in which processes go on or occur; it is process. So too, concrete stuff isn’t something that possesses cer-
         tain natural, categorical, concretely instantiated intrinsic qualities while being in some manner irreducibly
         ontologically distinct from them; its existence is nothing ontologically over and above the instantiation of
         those qualities. It is, however, hard for us to hold this point steadily in mind given the deep object-property/
         subject-predicate structure of our thought and language.
 	11.	 In this case there is no mind on the moon, in the Russell-James sense to be explained in section 8 – even if
         there is experientiality or feeling/sentience or consciousness in the most common present-day sense of ‘conscious-
         ness’. This distinction between mind and consciousness, which is found in some of the principal writings on
         this topic, is a major terminological pitfall, because we take it today that consciousness entails mind. Another
         lies in the essentially cognitive-relational sense of ‘consciousness’ favoured by many in the early twentieth
         century, which has the consequence (directly contrary to standard present-day use) that sentience, in the
         maximally general sense of feeling of any sort (which does not presuppose sense organs), is not sufficient for
         consciousness.
  	12.	 Locke expresses this basic metaphysical point, which he shares with Descartes, and which is now sometimes
         called the ‘powerful qualities’ view, in an exemplary fashion (1689–1700: §2.8). Its occlusion is one of the
         catastrophes of modern metaphysics. One mistake (see note 7 above) is to think of power being as ‘merely
         dispositional’ in a way that forces one to oppose it to categorical being. In fact, power being is essentially
         something live, active, categorical. (It’s because ‘particles’ are essentially dynamic entities, always humming
         away, as it were, that they can and do do what they do). Another mistake is to think of the categorical being
         of stuff in a ‘staticist’ and ‘separatist’ manner – as if it could be what it is independently of the laws of nature
         that are in fact essentially constitutive of its nature.
   	13.	 It is perhaps the sense that experientiality just hasn’t got the resources (clout, oomph) to ground all the
         power being of the world that leads Goff to argue for a version of panpsychism in which there is ‘conscious-
         ness+’ in addition to basic consciousness = experientiality (see Goff 2017: 179ff). Compare Sellars 1932:
         420: ‘a brain-state is for me conscious content plus’. Although I think this way of putting things is useful,


                                                            335
                                                          Galen Strawson


                  I don’t think we have good reason to suppose that we know enough about experiential stuff to know that
                  it is less well fitted than non-experiential stuff to ground, or rather be, the power being of the world. To
                  know the nature of experience just in having it is not ipso facto to know its power being, in the sense of the
                  effects it is disposed to have on other things.
	14.	 What we have are particle-like appearances, produced by changing energy levels in the set of vibratory
                  motions in fields, that are not well thought of as persisting things. ‘Particles . . . are emergent entities in mod-
                  ern physics . . . the popular impression of particle physics as about the behavior of lots of little point particles
                  whizzing about bears about as much relation to real particle physics as the earth/air/fire/water theory of
                  matter bears to the Periodic Table’ (Wallace 2013: 220).
 	15.	 ‘The breaches between [experiences] belonging to different . . . minds’, in James’s words, ‘are the most abso-
                  lute breaches in nature’ (1890: 1. 226).
  	16.	 I take it that planets and bottles are not also subjects of experience, and I know of no panpsychist who thinks
                  that all collocations of subjects of experience are subjects of experience. Football teams aren’t subjects of
                  experience any more than bottles are.
   	17.	 There are various ways of sketching how this comes about. See e.g. Seager (2010, 2016); see also Mørch
                  (2014), Turausky (MS). See also Drake (1925: 98–100).
    	18.	 What is immediately phenomenologically given may be highly complex and conceptually rich, as it usually
                  is in our own case. See e.g. Montague (2016), Siegel (2017).
     	19.	 This is another point at which misunderstanding is possible – and likely, given a hostile reader. Suppose that
                  someone takes experientiality as just defined to be an intrinsic feature of a complex event e that also essen-
                  tially has non-experiential intrinsic features. (Many think in this way when they suppose that experiences are
                  neural goings-on.) The point is then that the words ‘experience’ and ‘experientiality’ as used in this paper
                  refer only to the experientiality of e and do not refer even indirectly to any supposed non-experiential being.
                  This ruling may be felt to clash with a picture of things according to which the experiential and the non-
                  experiential are somehow identical. It does, but this is a good thing, because the picture is incoherent – a
                  simple point that explains why Sprigge says that ‘anything going for the identity theory’, i.e. the mind-brain
                  identity theory, ‘is evidence for the truth of panpsychism, as was realized long ago by philosophers such as
                  Josiah Royce’ (Sprigge 1983: 102). There is a deep thought-bog here (I speak from painful past experience
                  of embogment).
      	20.	 There is as Pautz has remarked a primordial sense in which ‘colors live only in the contents of our experi-
                  ences’ (2009: 60). To this extent, the old and confident protest that experiences of red aren’t themselves
                  red is too quick. We can give a good account of the sense in which redness as we ordinarily and naively
                  conceive of it is an essentially experiential matter.
       	21.	 For an account of how Lewis does this, see Strawson 2019: §4.
        	22.	 I think this is the best way to take Russell’s and James’s neutral monism if one reads them in a more or
                  less straightforwardly metaphysical way. There is, however, disagreement about how to read them (see in
                  particular Wishon 2015; Stubenberg 2016), and one must never forget that both are strongly driven by
                  epistemological considerations of a radical empiricist kind. These lead Russell to say that both mental and
                  physical entities are ‘constructions’, ‘logical constructions’ out of sensations, and, as constructions, can’t be
                  the basic stuff ( James holds a similar view but substitutes ‘pure experience’ for ‘sensations’). The fact remains
                  that the ‘material’ out of which the mental and physical is constructed (‘sensation’ or ‘pure experience’)
                  counts as mental on most views, as do the ‘raw feels’ Tolman uses to characterize Russell’s view: ‘raw feels
                  may be the way physical realities are intrinsically, i.e., in and for themselves’ Tolman (1932: 427).
         	23.	 I use ‘→’ to mean ‘metaphysically entails’.
          	24.	 Note for philosophers of science: I take it that physics gets quite a lot right in a way that is not only compat-
                  ible with the truth of PP but also with Laudan’s ‘pessimistic induction’ (Laudan 1981).
           	25.	 In the classic debate about space and time between ‘substantivalists’ and ‘relationalists’, some ‘substantivalists’
                  think of space as a pure container of stuff that is in itself stuffless, relative to the stuff it contains, so they’re
                  not substantivalists in the present sense.
            	26.	 Quine the great naturalist never denied the existence of (real) experience, as some self-styled ‘naturalists’
                  now feel they need to do. Compare Maxwell, when he characterizes his own physicalism
         as a nonmaterialist physicalism. It is nonmaterialist in that it does not attempt to eliminate or in any way
         deemphasize the importance of the ‘truly mental’. On the contrary, it accords central roles to conscious-
         ness, ‘private experience’, subjectivity, ‘raw feels’, ‘what it’s like to be something’, to thoughts, pains, feel-
         ings, emotions, etc., as we live through them in all of their qualitative richness. The theory also claims,
         however, that all of these genuinely mental entities are also genuinely physical, from which it follows
         that some genuinely physical entities are genuinely mental. This should occasion no shock, for it is a
         consequence of any authentic mental-physical identity thesis. Of course, some call themselves identity


                                                                 336
                                        A Prolegomenon to Physicalist Panpsychism


         theorists and, at the same time, deny the existence of the genuinely mental (in my sense); but the result
         of this is always some kind of physical-physical identity thesis rather than a genuine mental-physical
         identity claim.
                                                                                                     (1978: 365)
	27.	 On this point see Strawson 1994: 57–8. A good number of philosophers seem to be trapped in the termi-
                       nology that allows the opposition. See further ahead.
 	28.	 This allows that physical stuff may be found in other universes: [c] doesn’t state a necessary condition of
                       being physical.
  	29.	 Stuff dualism holds that there are two fundamental kinds of stuff. Stuff monism contrasts with thing monism,
                       the view (held for example by Spinoza) that there is at bottom only one thing (substance, entity) in reality.
                       Schaffer (2010) calls thing monism and stuff monism ‘existence monism’ and ‘substance monism’ respectively.
                       In this chapter I take the notion of stuff or substance monism to be viable although it’s not entirely clear what
                       it amounts to: see e.g. Strawson (2003: §15); see also the discussion of ‘fungibility’ in Strawson (2017).
   	30.	 In this case, spatio-temporality isn’t a sufficient condition of same substancehood, nor of physicality (assum-
                       ing our world is indeed spatio-temporal).
    	31.	 Physics can be seen as a formal structure which can be given different interpretations or models.
     	32.	 I’m assuming that there is such causal interaction and therefore putting aside a ‘Leibnizian’ variant of the case.
     	33.	 See also Drake (1925: 243), Strong (1930: 327), and Lewis in section 6, this chapter.
      	34.	 It’s loose insofar as it’s natural to think that the structural properties of the physical are also part of its intrin-
                       sic nature.
       	35.	 Many physicists now doubt that it is. Kant rides again.
        	36.	 See e.g. Strawson (2017: 382–3) for an argument that it does not. It’s a tricky issue.
         	37.	 We might equally well take it that the property of having temporal duration is in itself an entirely non-
                       experiential property. If so, it is again a property which may be exemplified without there being any non-
                       experiential stuff.
          	38.	 I try to clarify this issue in Strawson 2016: 87–90, where I introduce ‘hylal’ as a positive term for a specific
                       type of non-experiential stuff being distinct from experiential being.
           	39.	 It’s special because we do know something for sure about the intrinsic nature of the physical if physicalism
                       is true, because (once again) we know that our experience is concretely real, and hence physical if physical-
                       ism is true, and there is a fundamental respect in which we know its nature in having it. (This claim that ‘we
                       know its nature’ is likely to be misunderstood by anyone who hasn’t taken in note 19 and the paragraph to
                       which it is attached.)
            	40.	 See e.g. Lucretius (c50 bce), Clarke (1707–18), Kant (1781–7), James (1890: ch. 6), Goff (2006), Chalmers
                       (2015); I’m going to take general familiarity with the combination problem for granted, and stick to the
                       ‘subject combination problem’.
             	41.	 I.e. that the unity of apperception does arise from the composite. Kant undermines the view that we can
                       know that the mind or soul or thinking subject is a single substance in his discussion of the Second Paralo-
                       gism. He grants – stresses – the sense in which the thinking subject is something that is necessarily single in
                       the activity of thought or experience, and points out that we cannot infer its ultimate metaphysical simplic-
                       ity from this fact.
              	42.	 I like to think (hope) that this general line of thought applies to all the problems listed in Chalmers (2015).
               	43.	 See further Stoljar 2006a, 2006b.
                	44.	 I offer a direct four-stage argument that PP is the most plausible theory of concrete reality in Strawson
                       (2017: 386–7).
                 	45.	 My thanks to Peter Lewis, Bill Seager, Jim Weatherall, and members of the Shanghai workshop on idealism
                       held in June 2017.


                                                           References
Berkeley, G. (1710/1998). A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge. Ed. J. Dancy. Oxford: Oxford
   University Press.
Cavendish, M. (1664/1994). ‘Letter 30’ of Philosophical Letters: Or, Modest Reflections Upon Some Opinions in
   Natural Philosophy’. In M. Atherton (ed.), Women Philosophers of the Early Modern Period. Indianapolis: Hackett,
   pp. 24–9.
Chalmers, D. (2015). ‘Panpsychism and Panprotopsychism’. In T. Alter and Y. Nagasawa (eds.), Consciousness in
   the Physical World: Perspectives on Russellian Monism. New York: Oxford University Press.


                                                                 337
                                                Galen Strawson


Clarke, S., and Collins, A. (1707–1718/2011). The Clarke-Collins Correspondence of 1707–18. Ed. W. Uzgalis.
   Peterborough, ON: Broadview Press.
Drake, D. (1925). Mind and Its Place in Nature. New York: Macmillan.
Eddington, A. (1928a). ‘Review of The Analysis of Matter’. Journal of Philosophical Studies, 3 (9): 93–5.
Eddington, A. (1928b). The Nature of the Physical World. New York: Macmillan.
Goff, P. (2006). ‘Experiences Don’t Sum’. In A. Freeman (ed.), Consciousness and Its Place in Nature. Thorverton:
   Imprint Academic, pp. 53–61.
Goff, P. (2017). Consciousness and Fundamental Reality. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Griffin, D. (1977). ‘Some Whiteheadian Comments on the Discussion’. In John B. Cobb and David Ray Grif-
   fin (eds.), Mind in Nature: Essays on the Interface of Science and Philosophy. Lanham, MD: University Press of
   America, pp. 97–100.
Griffin, D. (1998). Unsnarling the World-Knot: Consciousness, Freedom, and the Mind-Body Problem. Berkeley, CA:
   University of California Press.
Hartshorne, C. (1936). ‘The Compound Individual’. In O. Lee (ed.), Essays for Alfred North Whitehead. London:
   Longmans, Green, pp. 193–220.
Hartshorne, C. (1942). ‘Organic and Inorganic Wholes’. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 3 (2): 127–36.
Hawking, S. (1988). A Brief History of Time. New York: Bantam Books.
Heil, J. (2012). The Universe as We Find It. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Heil, J., and Martin, C. B. (1998). ‘Rules and Powers’. Philosophical Perspectives, 12: 283–312.
Heisenberg, W. (1958). Physics and Philosophy. New York: Harper and Brothers.
James, W. (1890/1950). The Principles of Psychology. New York: Dover.
James, W. (1909/1996). A Pluralistic Universe. Lincoln, Nebraska: University of Nebraska Press.
Kant, I. (1766/1992). ‘Dreams of a Spirit-Seer’. In D. Walford (ed.), Theoretical Philosophy 1755–1770. New
   York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 301–60.
Kant, I. (1781–7/1933). Critique of Pure Reason. Trans. N. Kemp Smith. London: Macmillan.
Laudan, L. (1981). ‘A Confutation of Convergent Realism’. Philosophy of Science 48 (1): 19–49.
Lewis, D. (1983/1999). ‘New Work for a Theory of Universals’. In Papers in Metaphysics and Epistemology. Cam-
   bridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 8–55.
Lewis, D. (1994). ‘Reduction of Mind’. In S. Guttenplan (ed.), A Companion to the Philosophy of Mind. Oxford:
   Blackwell.
Lewis, P. (2016). Quantum Ontology: A Guide to the Metaphysics of Quantum Mechanics. Oxford: Oxford University
   Press.
Locke, J. (1689–1700/1975). An Essay Concerning Human Understanding. Ed. P. Nidditch. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Lucretius. (c50 bce/2007). The Nature of Things. Trans. A. Stallings. London: Penguin.
Maxwell, G. (1978). ‘Rigid Designators and Mind-Brain Identity’. In C. Wade Savage (ed.), Perception and Cogni-
   tion: Issues in the Foundations of Psychology. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, pp. 365–403.
McHenry, L., and Shields, G. (2016). ‘Analytical Critiques of Whitehead’s Metaphysics’. Journal of the American
   Philosophical Association, CJO 2016. DOI:10.1017/apa.2016.21.
Montague, M. (2016). The Given. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mørch, H. H. (2014). Panpsychism and Causation: A New Argument and a Solution to the Combination Problem. Uni-
   versity of Oslo, PhD dissertation. https://philpapers.org/archive/HASPAC-2.pdf.
Nagel, T. (1979). ‘Panpsychism’. In Mortal Questions. New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 181–95.
Nagel, T. (2012). Mind and Cosmos: Why the Materialist Neo-Darwinian Conception of Nature Is Almost Certainly
   False. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Newman, M. (1928). ‘Mr. Russell’s “Causal Theory of Perception” ’. Mind, 37: 137–48.
Nietzsche, F. (1882–1884). Nachgelassene Fragmente 1882–1884: Sämtliche Werke 10. Berlin: de Gruyter.
Nietzsche, F. (1883–1892/2006). Thus Spoke Zarathustra: A Book for All and None. Trans. A. del Caro. Cambridge:
   Cambridge University Press.
Pautz, A. (2009). ‘A Simple View of Consciousness’. In R. Koons and G. Bealer (eds.), The Waning of Materialism:
   New Essays. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 25–66.
Quine, W. V. (1951). ‘Two Dogmas of Empiricism’. The Philosophical Review, 60: 20–43.
Quine, W. V. (1981). Theories and Things. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Quine, W. V. (1992). ‘Structure and Nature’. The Journal of Philosophy, 89 (1): 5–9.
Russell, B. (1912/1959). The Problems of Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Russell, B. (1927a/1992). The Analysis of Matter. London: Routledge.
Russell, B. (1927b). An Outline of Philosophy. London Allen & Unwin.
Russell, B. (1948/1992). Human Knowledge: Its Scope and Limits. London: Routledge.
Russell, B. (1956/1995). ‘Mind and Matter’. In Portraits from Memory. Nottingham: Spokesman, pp. 135–53.



                                                      338
                                   A Prolegomenon to Physicalist Panpsychism


Russell, B. (1959). My Philosophical Development. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Schaffer, J. (2010). ‘Monism: The Priority of the Whole’. Philosophical Review, 119: 31–76.
Seager, W. (1995). ‘Consciousness, Information and Panpsychism’. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 2–3: 272–88.
Seager, W. (2010). ‘Panpsychism, Aggregation and Combinatorial Infusion’. Mind & Matter, 8 (2): 167–84.
Seager, W. (2016).‘Panpsychist Infusion’. In G. Brüntrup and L. Jaskolla (eds.), Panpsychism: Contemporary Perspec-
    tives. New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 229–48.
Sellars, R. W. (1927). ‘Why Naturalism and Not Materialism?’ Philosophical Review, 36: 216–25.
Sellars, R. W. (1932). The Philosophy of Physical Realism. New York: Macmillan.
Shields, G. (2001). ‘Physicalist panexperientialism and the mind-body problem’. American Journal of Theology &
    Philosophy, 2: 133–154.
Shepherd, M. (1824). An Essay Upon the Relation of Cause and Effect, &c. London: Hookham.
Siegel, S. (2017). The Rationality of Perception. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Skrbina, D. (2005). Panpsychism in the West. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Spinoza, B. de (1677/1985). ‘Ethics’. In E. Curley (ed. and trans.), The Collected Works of Spinoza. Princeton:
    Princeton University Press.
Sprigge, T. L. S. (1983). The Vindication of Absolute Idealism. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Stoljar, D. (2006a). Ignorance and Imagination: On the Epistemic Origin of the Problem of Consciousness. Oxford:
    Oxford University Press.
Stoljar, D. (2006b). ‘Comments on Galen Strawson’. In A. Freeman (ed.), Consciousness and Its Place in Nature.
    Thorverton: Imprint Academic, pp. 170–6.
Strawson, G. (1994). Mental Reality. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Strawson, G. (2003/2008). ‘Real Materialism’. In Real Materialism and Other Essays. Oxford: Oxford University
    Press, pp. 19–52.
Strawson, G. (2006a). ‘Realistic Monism: Why Physicalism Entails Panpsychism’. In A. Freeman (ed.), Conscious-
    ness and Its Place in Nature. Thorverton: Imprint Academic, pp. 3–31.
Strawson, G. (2006b). ‘Reply to Commentators, with a Celebration of Descartes’. In A. Freeman (ed.), Conscious-
    ness and Its Place in Nature. Thorverton: Imprint Academic, pp. 184–280.
Strawson, G. (2008). ‘The Identity of the Categorical and the Dispositional’. Analysis, 68: 271–82.
Strawson, G. (2016). ‘Mind and Being: The Primacy of Panpsychism’. In G. Brüntrup and L. Jaskolla (eds.),
    Panpsychism: Philosophical Essays. New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 75–112.
Strawson, G. (2017). ‘Physicalist Panpsychism’. In S. Schneider and M. Velmans (eds.), The Blackwell Companion
    to Consciousness, 2nd edition. New York: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 374–90.
Strawson, G. (2018). ‘The Silliest Claim’. In Things That Bother Me. New York: New York Review Books.
Strawson, G. (2019). ‘A Hundred Years of Consciousness: A Long Training in Absurdity’. Estudios de Filosofía,
    59: 9–45.
Strong, C. A. (1918). The Origin of Consciousness: An Attempt to Conceive the Mind as a Product of Evolution. London:
    Macmillan.
Strong, C. A. (1930). ‘Nature and Mind’. In G. P. Adams and W. P. Montague (eds.), Contemporary American
    Philosophy: Personal Statements, vol. 2. London: George Allen and Unwin, pp. 313–32.
Stubenberg, L. (2016). ‘Neutral Monism’. In Edward N. Zalta (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Win-
    ter 2016 edition. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2016/entries/neutral-monism/.
Tolman, E. C. (1932). Purposive Behaviour in Animals and Men. New York: Century.
Turausky, K. (MS). ‘Picturing Panpsychism: New Approaches to the Combination Problem(s)’.
Wallace, D. (2013). ‘A Prolegomenon to the Ontology of the Everett Interpretation’. In A. Ney and D. Albert
    (eds.), The Wave Function: Essays on the Metaphysics of Quantum Mechanics. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
    pp. 203–22.
Weinberg, S. (1997). ‘Before the Big Bang’. The New York Review of Books, 44 (10), June 12.
Whitehead, A. (1925/1967). Science and the Modern World. New York: The Free Press.
Whitehead, A. (1927–8/1978). Process and Reality: An Essay in Cosmology. Ed. D. Griffin and D. Sherburne, cor-
    rected edition. New York: Free Press.
Whitehead, A. (1938/1969). Modes of Thought. New York: The Free Press.
Williams, D. C. (1944). ‘Naturalism and the Nature of Things’. The Philosophical Review, 43: 417–43.
Wilson, J. (2015). ‘Metaphysical Emergence: Weak and Strong’. In T. Bigaj and C. Wüthrich (eds.), Metaphysics
    in Contemporary Physics. Amsterdam and New York: Rodopi, Brill.
Wishon, D. (2015).‘Russell on Russellian Monism’. In T. Alter and Y. Nagasawa (eds.), Consciousness in the Physi-
    cal World: Perspectives on Russellian Monism. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 91–118.




                                                        339
                27
      STRAWSON ON PANPSYCHISM
                                           Terry Horgan




Galen Strawson’s case for panpsychism has caused me to regard that metaphysical position as more
plausible than I did formerly. As of now, however, I find myself incapable of believing panpsychism, or
of coming close to believing it – even though I do appreciate its theoretical virtues, which Strawson
is very good at articulating. Here I will explain why I remain unconvinced, focusing mainly on two
of his papers, Strawson (2016) and Strawson (this volume). Then I will situate my attitude toward
panpsychism in a wider context, by briefly rehearsing and motivating my comparative-­plausibility
ordering regarding a range of alternative positions concerning the metaphysics of mentality. Finally,
I will say how I see the relation between “blobjectivsm,” a version of ontological monism I favor
concerning concrete particulars, and the form of panpsychism known as “cosmopsychism.”

1.	 I begin by commenting on several passages in Strawson (2016). Consider first the following passage1:

        Objection: But still – why suppose that the basic nature of concrete reality is experi-
    (A)	
        ential? . . . I reply . . . with another question – ‘Why suppose that it’s nonexperien-
        tial – either in its basic nature or in any respect at all?’ What evidence is there for the
        existence of nonexperiential reality, as opposed to experiential reality? None. There
        is zero evidence for the existence of nonexperiential reality – even after we allow in
        a standard realist way that each of us encounters a great deal in concrete reality that is
        not his or her own experience. Nor will there ever be any. All there is, is one great big
        wholly ungrounded wholly question-begging theoretical intuition or conviction.
                                                                                        (2016: 94)

It seems to me that claiming that there is zero observational evidence for the existence of non-
experiential reality, over and above experiential reality, is very much like claiming that there is zero
observational evidence that here’s one hand and here is another. (After all, I could be a lifelong envat-
ted brain.) In both cases, the underlying thought seems to be this: since all my experience would be
exactly the same even if the given existence claim were false, I have zero observational evidence for
the existence claim.
    Admittedly, there is the following fact to consider, regarding my belief that here’s one hand and
here’s another. The intentional content of my sensory-perceptual experience itself is as-of here being
one hand and here being another. Arguably, the ongoing numerous occurrences of sensory-­perceptual
experiences with various presentational contents constitute constantly increasing observational


                                                  340
                                         Strawson on Panpsychism


evidence for my beliefs with those same contents – all the more so because the ongoing sensory-
perceptual experiences all cohere so well with one another, and with my ongoing expectations about
how these experiences will unfold in the short-term future.
    What about my many beliefs about the non-experientiality of numerous portions of reality –
e.g., the non-experientiality of tables, chairs, H20 molecules, black holes, and electromagnetic radia-
tion? Since on matters of epistemology I lean toward some version of experiential evidentialism,
I myself would look toward experience as providing justification for these beliefs. Now, is the non-
experientiality of tables, for example, part of the direct presentational content of my experiences as-of
tables? Probably not – which, admittedly, is a potentially pertinent difference from how my sensory-
perceptual experience is evidentially related to my belief that here’s one hand and here’s another.
However, it’s certainly the case that my experiences as-of tables, chairs, rocks, mountains, and trees do
not present such entities to me as experiential. Also, it’s certainly the case that the perceptible features
of such entities do not provide me with any evidence from which I can confidently abductively infer
that such entities (and/or their parts) are experiential – although I do have such evidence in the case
of the behaviors of other humans, non-human animals, birds, and so on. And it seems to me that this
pervasive absence of evidence for the experientiality of such entities constitutes good – indeed, very
good – evidence for the contention these entities (and their component parts) are not experiential.
I am strongly abductively warranted, on the basis of my experiences as-of such entities, in believing of
them that they are non-experiential.
    Consider next this passage:

     (B)	[P]hysics is silent about the intrinsic nonstructural nature of reality. The question is
          then this (it’s an ancient question, but I’ll give it again in Hawking’s words): “What
          is it that breathes fire into the equations and makes a universe for them to describe?”
          (Hawking 1988: 174). What is it that the equations are true of? What is the fundamen-
          tal, intrinsic, nonstructural nature or stuff being of the concrete reality that the true
          statements of physics are true of?
                                                                                        (2016: 85)

I’m not persuaded. An intrinsic feature, as I understand the notion of intrinsicness, is (roughly, at
least) a categorical feature whose presence does not depend constitutively on how the thing that
possesses the feature is related to other things that do not overlap with the given thing. Why aren’t
determinates of the determinable mass intrinsic features, especially since physics treats mass as a
feature that does not vary depending on the local strength of gravitation? Aren’t mass-determinates
construed in physics as intrinsic categorical properties underlying the dispositions systematized in laws
of motion? Why isn’t propagating at 186,000 miles per second an intrinsic feature of electromagnetic
radiation? True enough, our knowledge about the intrinsic features posited in physics ultimately
depends on experience. And perhaps, as seems plausible, our positive conceptions of such intrinsic
features often partly (or even largely) involve their varying experiential effects – e.g., the varying
experiences associated with lifting different dumbells, some weighing more than others. But for all
that, it seems to me that we do have some positive non-structural conception of certain intrinsic
features posited by physics, features like determinate masses or the speed of light.
    Here is a third passage from Strawson:

     (C)	 Let me now add a version of an old metaphysical thesis. . . :

          (7) natura non facit saltum
          i.e. (roughly) there are no absolute or radical qualitative discontinuities in nature. I take
              (7) – No Jumps – to be a solid part of any sound naturalism, and from (7), as


                                                    341
                                              Terry Horgan


            I understand it, one can derive the No Radical Emergence thesis as I understand
            it, that is,
         (8) there is no radical emergence
         (some may think that (8) is effectively the same as (7)). And from (8), I submit, we can
            derive
         (9) the experiential (experiential being) can’t emerge from the wholly and utterly
            nonexperiential (wholly and utterly nonexperiential being)
         – because any such emergence would have to be radical in an impossible way.
         I’m not going to argue for (8) and (9). The general idea is simple. “Emergence –
            e-­mergence”, no less – can’t be brute. In all genuine (nonradical) cases of emergence
            of one thing from another there’s a fundamental sense in which the emergent phe-
            nomenon, say Y, is wholly dependent on – somehow wholly flows from – that which
            it emerges from, say X. Otherwise it simply won’t be true after all to say that Y is emer-
            gent from X, for some part or aspect of Y will have come from somewhere else. . . .
         Many will agree. Others won’t. Two things seem worth saying straight away. The first
            is that it’s metaphysically far more extravagant and antinaturalistic to reject (7) the
            No Jumps thesis, and postulate radical emergence of the human or biological expe-
            riential from the nonhuman or nonbiological experiential – whatever difficulties
            the second idea might seem to raise (e.g., the ‘combination problem’).
         Secondly, and more importantly, one doesn’t need to meet those who don’t agree with
            No Radical Emergence with an argument to support it. All one has to do is ask
            them politely why they think anything nonexperiential exists; especially when this
            belief forces them to endorse radical emergence, given that they’re realists about
            experience. (2016: 82–3)

As a prelude to commenting on this passage, let me distinguish several pertinent theses. First is what
I will call gradualism, by which I mean the following. As evolution gradually produced creatures
with increasingly sophisticated forms of intentionality, thereby it gradually produced creatures with
increasingly more subtle and sophisticated forms of phenomenal consciousness – with phenom-
enally conscious states being (1) inherently intentional (with phenomenal intentionality being the
basic kind of intentionality in nature), and (2) the categorical basis of the systematically content-
appropriate functional roles that intentional mental states play in creatures that undergo such states.
Entities in nature whose behavior is not explainable in terms of mental intentionality, not even very
primitive forms of mental intentionality, don’t undergo states with mental intentionality – and thus
don’t undergo phenomenally conscious states, which are themselves inherently intentional. And the
most primitive forms of mental intentionality are very simple – in phenomenal character, in content,
and in terms of associated, content-appropriate, causal role. Consciousness emerged gradually from
there, in the course of evolution.
    Second is what I will call weak metaphysical emergentism, which goes as follows. (1) There are meta-
physically brute, explanatorily basic, supervenience relations between (i) certain complex physical
properties instantiable by sufficiently complex creatures, and (ii) phenomenal-intentional mental
properties. Furthermore, (2) the supervenient experiential properties are not fundamental force-
generating properties with causal efficacy over and above the causal efficacy of the physical properties
upon which they supervene; rather, they are only efficacious “superveniently” (so to speak), via the
causal efficacy of those subvenient physical properties. I call this position metaphysical emergent-
ism because it posits metaphysically brute, unexplainable, physical-to-experiential supervenience
relations. And I call it weak metaphysical emergentism because it does not deny the nomological
completeness of the physical; i.e., it does not treat emergent experiential properties as fundamental
force-generating properties.


                                                   342
                                         Strawson on Panpsychism


    There are two different versions of weak metaphysical emergentism, which I call, respectively,
nomic and Moorean. The nomic version asserts that the pertinent physical-to-experiential super-
venience connections are (fundamental) laws of nature; i.e., they obtain with nomic necessity. The
Moorean version asserts instead that these supervenience connections obtain with (synthetic) meta-
physical necessity, rather than with merely-nomic necessity. (G.E. Moore held that supervenience
relations with this latter kind of modal strength obtain between certain natural properties and moral
properties like intrinsic goodness.)
    Third is strong metaphysical emergentism. This position embraces claim (1) of weak metaphysi-
cal emergentism, while also asserting that experiential properties are fundamental force-generating
properties with causal efficacy over and above the causal efficacy of the physical properties upon
which they supervene. This position too has two different versions, nomic and Moorean.
    With the three-way distinction in hand between gradualism, weak metaphysical emergentism,
and strong metaphysical emergentism, I have several things to say concerning passage (C). First, I sub-
mit that gradualism is enormously plausible, and moreover that gradualism constitutes one important
respect in which it is true that there is no “radical emergence” in nature.
    Second, gradualism is compatible with both versions of weak metaphysical emergentism, and
likewise is compatible with both versions of strong metaphysical emergentism.
    Third, I think that both versions of weak metaphysical emergentism are seriously viable meta-
physical positions, with two notably attractive features. First, they explain why there is an apparent
“hard problem” of phenomenal consciousness – an apparent “explanatory gap” regarding questions
of the form “Why is physical property P a supervenience-base property of phenomenal-mental
property M, rather than being a supervenience-base property of some other phenomenal-mental
property or of none at all?” The explanation of the existence of this apparent hard problem is that
those physical-to-experiential supervenience relations are metaphysically brute necessitation relations, and
hence that they therefore are not themselves explainable. (The apparent explanatory gap is a genuine,
unfillable, explanatory gap.) Second, weak metaphysical emergentism is entirely compatible with the
thesis – central to any broadly materialist metaphysic of mind – that the physical domain is nomo-
logically complete in itself (and thus that there are no non-physical fundamental-force–generating
properties in nature). For more on this theme, see Horgan (2010).
    Fourth, although both versions of weak metaphysical emergentism look seriously viable to me,
and although I think that weak emergentism deserves to be called a form of metaphysical natural-
ism, in my view it should not count as a materialist metaphysical position, even in a broad sense that
distinguishes between “reductive” and “nonreductive” versions of materialism. In my view, any form
of metaphysical materialism should maintain that all supervenience relations in nature are explainable
rather than brute (cf. Horgan 1993).
    Fifth, consider now Strawson’s claim, in passage (C), that “it’s metaphysically far more extrava-
gant and antinaturalistic to reject (7) the No Jumps thesis, than it is to postulate radical emergence
of the human or biological experiential from the nonhuman or nonbiological experiential.” To
me the tradeoff between panpsychism and (either version of) weak metaphysical emergentism is a
much closer call. Weak emergentism, after all, (i) not only acknowledges the hard problem but also
explains its existence, (ii) fully comports with gradualism, (iii) fully comports with the nomological
completeness of the physical, and (iv) eschews the radical-seeming suggestion that everything – all
of concrete reality – is mind or consciousness. (I am not prepared to reject materialism and embrace
weak emergentism, however. I call myself a “wannabe materialist”; more on this to follow.)
    Sixth, consider Strawson’s remark in passage (C) regarding those who don’t agree with No Radi-
cal Emergence (understood as the denial of both weak and strong metaphysical emergentism): “All
one has to do is ask them politely why they think anything nonexperiential exists; especially when
this belief forces them to endorse radical emergence, given that they’re realists about experience.”
Well, as I said earlier in this section when commenting on passage (A), I maintain that the pervasive


                                                    343
                                              Terry Horgan


absence of evidence for the experientiality of such things as tables, mountains, trees, or molecules
constitutes very good evidence for the contention that these entities (and their component parts) are
not experiential. In correspondence, however, Strawson has questioned this contention of mine. So
I turn next to some elaboration and defense of it.
    2. Under what epistemic circumstances does absence of evidence for a hypothesis H count as
evidence in favor of the proposition ~H? Roughly, at least, this is so under circumstances in which
H is a bold hypothesis – and one that not knowable a priori. That is certainly the case in science.
Epistemically, bold scientific hypotheses are “guilty until proven innocent”; i.e., they need to “show
their mettle,” so to speak. One way to do this is abductively, via “inference to the best explanation”:
the hypothesis constitutes, or significantly contributes to, a good explanation of various phenomena
to which it pertains – and a better explanation than available competing alternatives. Another way is
empirically, for instance by generating specific empirical predictions that subsequently are borne out
by means of observational testing. Ideally, H will show its mettle in both ways.
    Bold metaphysical hypotheses too are epistemically guilty until proven innocent; they too must
show their mettle in order to be credible. Things often are trickier here than in science, in the follow-
ing important respect: very often in metaphysics, competing hypotheses do not generate alternative,
observationally testable, empirical predictions. Nonetheless, bold metaphysical hypotheses should
positively advance the broad project of philosophy, a project famously described by Wilfrid Sellars
(1962: 35) this way: “The aim of philosophy, abstractly formulated, is to understand how things in
the broadest possible sense of the term hang together in the broadest possible sense of the term.”
Bold metaphysical hypotheses can show their mettle in this respect by contributing to the overall
simplicity, and/or the overall unity and cohesiveness, and/or the overall explanatory power, of one’s
large-scale, science-respecting, worldview. They can do so even when they do not generate specific
empirical predictions and hence are not susceptible to observational tests.
    Panpsychism is certainly a bold hypothesis. But just what kind of hypothesis is it? There are two
perspectives from which one might regard it. First is what I’ll call the empirical perspective. Here one
expects attributions of mentality to provide fairly specific explanations of fairly specific observable
phenomena. Certain beings in nature exhibit patterns of behavior that are susceptible to explanation
in terms of sensory-perceptual states, goals, beliefs, desires, intentions, emotional states like fear or
aggression, and so on. Humans and many other earthly creatures exhibit such behavioral patterns, and
the susceptibility of those patterns to psychological explanation constitutes positive observational
evidence in support of attributions of mentality to these creatures. Many entities, however – both
ones encountered in ordinary life and ones posited in science – exhibit no known or hypothesized
behavioral patterns that are susceptible in any plausible way to psychological explanation. From the
empirical perspective, therefore, the hypothesis that mentality is pervasive in nature fails to show its
mettle – and fails dramatically. Absence of empirical evidence in favor of pervasive mentality thereby
constitutes strong empirical evidence in favor of widespread non-mentality.
    But there is a second perspective too, which I’ll call the metaphysical perspective. Here one first
concedes – or anyway, should concede – that the hypothesis of pervasive mentality does not show its
mettle from within the empirical perspective. One then proceeds to argue that despite this fact, the
pervasive-mentality hypothesis contributes very substantially to the philosophical aim of understand-
ing how things in the broadest sense of the term hang together in the broadest sense of the term.
Providing such an argument is a substantial dialectical burden, especially given how things stand
epistemically from the empirical perspective alone. But perhaps it can be done nonetheless.
    In the next two sections I say more about the prospects for successful-metaphysical perspective
argumentation in favor of panpsychism. But before doing that, let me briefly revisit passage (A).
There Strawson claims that “there is zero evidence for the existence of nonexperiential reality – even
after we allow in a standard realist way that each of us encounters a great deal in reality that is not his
or her own experience.” I say, on the contrary, that there is plenty of evidence for the existence of


                                                   344
                                       Strawson on Panpsychism


nonexperiential reality – viz., the fact that so much of reality as we know it does not exhibit behavior
patterns that are plausibly susceptible to psychological explanation. I.e., there is plenty of ordinary
empirical evidence for the existence of nonexperiential reality.
    3. Earlier I mentioned what David Chalmers calls the “hard problem” of consciousness, which
I glossed as involving questions of this form: “Why is physical property P a supervenience-base
property of phenomenal property M, rather than being a supervenience-base property of some other
phenomenal-mental property or of none at all?” One might think that panpsychism can somehow
solve or dissolve the hard problem, and that this would go a long way toward showing its mettle
metaphysically.
    As far as I can see, however, the hard problem still arises within the framework of panpsychism,
under the guise of the so-called “combination problem.” Relative to a version of panpsychism
embracing what Strawson (2016: 86) calls “smallism” – viz., the doctrine that “there are a great many
ultimate constituents of reality” – the problem is expressible by questions of the following kind.

    Why is complex property P of organism O – where O comprises such-and-such ultimate
    constituents that are related to one another in thus-and-such ways and respectively instanti-
    ate so-and-so respective kinds of consciousness themselves – a supervenience-base property
    for phenomenal property M of organism O, rather than being a supervenience-base prop-
    erty of some other phenomemal-mental property of O or of none at all?

     I myself see no clear progress, with respect to metaphysical understanding, from replacing the
original hard problem with the combination problem. I have as little idea about what could con-
 stitute answers to the replacement-questions as I have about what could constitute answers to the
original hard problem questions. And, insofar as the combination problem has no clear solution and
remains just as prima facie puzzling as does the original hard problem, no discernible metaphysical
insight is gained from the proposed replacement.
     Suppose that one addresses the combination problem by positing brute supervenience r­elations –
possessing perhaps nomic necessity, or perhaps metaphysical necessity – linking (i) certain com-
 plex combinations of primitively conscious ultimate constituents with (ii) certain high-level
­consciousness-properties instantiable by complex organisms that are constituted by those primitively
 conscious ultimate constituents as thus physically combined with one another. Well then, I see no
significant gain in metaphysical understanding, above and beyond the comparable kind of gain that
 results from weak emergentism – viz., the theoretical advantage of treating the apparent explanatory
 gaps as genuine explanatory gaps, ones that cannot be closed because the supervenience relations
 at issue are just metaphysically brute. Also, if I was right when I claimed in Horgan (1993) that any
 metaphysical position worthy of the label ‘materialism’ must eschew brute supervenience relations,
 then the now-envisioned approach to the combination problem would be no less a departure from
 materialism than weak metaphysical emergentism.
     What I have been saying in this section ties in closely with my remarks in section 1 about Straw-
 son’s passage (C). In one plausible and unproblematic-looking way, nature surely does conform to his
 slogan No Jumps: viz., gradualism is very likely true. But panpsychism offers no clear metaphysical
 advantage with respect to accommodating problematic-looking “jumps” in nature, because it still
 confronts the issue of combination-problem-style “jumps.” So, insofar as the hard problem of con-
 sciousness is concerned, the bold hypothesis of panpsychism remains unmotivated from the meta-
 physical perspective, while meanwhile encountering ample evidence against it from the empirical
 perspective.
     4. Are there perhaps other ways in which panpsychism can show its mettle from the metaphysi-
 cal perspective? I turn next to another metaphysical argument I find in Strawson (2016) and, more
prominently, in Strawson (this volume). The central line of thought, as I understand it, goes as


                                                  345
                                             Terry Horgan


follows. The only kind of concrete reality whose intrinsic, fundamental “stuff-nature” we know or
can know is experience. If there is only one kind of fundamental stuff in reality, then “everything in
physics remains in place, and physics continues to be a theory about the nature of concrete reality”
(this volume: 16). Therefore, “genuine, realistic, monistic naturalists ought to favour panpsychism
above all other theories of the nature of concrete reality, on grounds of theoretical simplicity and
ontological parsimony (one can add in “Occam’s Razor” as a further premiss)” (this volume: 16).
    Two considerations leave me unpersuaded by this argument. First, although I am happy to grant
that all one knows directly and by acquaintance, and all one can know in this way, is the intrinsic phe-
nomenal character of (one’s own) experience, this leaves open the possibility of knowing in other
ways facts about the intrinsic, fundamental, “stuff-nature” of various kinds of concrete reality. For
instance, one can know the masses of various kinds of concrete entities, e.g., stars, planets, subatomic
particles. And, arguably, mass is an intrinsic characteristic of these entities. The general point here
is that there is no reason in principle why one cannot know – for instance, via abductive scientific
theorizing, accompanied by suitable observational hypothesis-testing – about intrinsic, fundamental,
stuff-natures of various concrete entities that lack mentality altogether.
    Second, the contention that we know the intrinsic, fundamental, stuff-nature of experience seems
to me highly questionable, because it seems to presuppose several bold metaphysical hypotheses none
of which I find very credible. The apparent presuppositions include (1) the claim that experience
is a kind of stuff (indeed, a fundamental kind of stuff), and (2) the claim that subjects of experience
are not concrete beings in their own right, distinct from concrete experiences themselves. (See the
opening section of Strawson (this volume), including in particular the theses he labels [3], [4], and [5]
and his remarks there about them.)
    Prima facie, a better way to construe the ontology of experience goes as follows. Subjects of
experience are concrete beings distinct from experiences themselves. A concrete experience consists
in the instantiation, by a subject of experience, of a phenomenal mental property. By undergoing
an experience, the experiencer thereby comes to know, directly and by acquaintance, the intrinsic
phenomenal character of that property itself. But subjects of experience do not know directly and by
acquaintance the fundamental stuff-nature of anything in concrete reality.
    If this alternative construal is right, then claims (1) and (2) are both mistaken. Strawson clearly
holds that the construal is not right. Indeed, he explicitly embraces not only (1) and (2) but also yet
another bold metaphysical hypothesis, which seems to me to be functioning as an additional presup-
position of his contention that we know the fundamental stuff-nature of experience, viz., (3) the
claim that the right ontology (i) does not involve distinct categories of object and property and hence
(ii) also does not involve instantiations of properties by objects. (See section 3.4 of Strawson 2016).
    I favor the ontological construal of experience described two paragraphs ago. Admittedly, this
construal is best regarded as a metaphysical hypothesis itself, rather than as something knowable
directly and by acquaintance. (What one knows directly and by acquaintance is the intrinsic phe-
nomenal character of one’s current experience – which leaves open how experience is best con-
strued ontologically.) And if this construal is correct, then each of the bold metaphysical hypotheses
(1)–(3) is false – which in turn falsifies Strawson’s contention that we know the (putative) fundamen-
tal stuff-nature of experience. Before I could come to believe this contention, I would first need to
be persuaded of all three of those dubious-seeming presuppositions, each of which is itself a (very)
bold metaphysical hypothesis.
    5. Let me now situate my own attitude toward panpsychism within a broader perspective, by
saying something about my attitude toward various other competing positions in philosophy of
mind. To begin with, I have long called myself a “wannabe materialist,” a label by which I mean
that I lean strongly toward a materialist metaphysic of mind but I know of no form of materialism
that I find plausible enough to believe. (I literally don’t know what to believe about the metaphysics
of conscious experience.) I will describe a range of alternative positions, ordered progressively from


                                                  346
                                         Strawson on Panpsychism


the one I find least plausible to the one I find most plausible. And I will briefly explain why each of
these positions leaves me unsatisfied.
     First is the view, embraced most clearly and explicitly by Daniel Dennett (e.g. 1988, 1991), that
there is no such thing as phenomenal consciousness – no mental states such that there is “something
it is like” to undergo them, with this aspect (often called phenomenal character) being intrinsic to these
states, qua mental. I agree wholeheartedly with Strawson (2003), who calls this view The Great Sil-
liness. As Strawson rightly stresses, nothing is more epistemically secure, or more certain, than the
phenomenal character of one’s present experience; the intrinsic phenomenal character of experience
is known directly, and by acquaintance. The Great Silliness therefore ranks dead last on my own
plausibility scale and is not a philosophical position I can take seriously.
     Second is functionalism, which in one version or another has been the dominant generic position
in philosophy of mind for the past half-century. What I call second-order functionalism (sometimes
called role functionalism) holds that the complete essence of any mental property – any mental state-
type – is its typical causal role in a creature’s cognitive architecture vis-à-vis sensory/perceptual states,
behavior, and other mental state-types whose full essences likewise comprises their own distinctive
typical causal roles. What I call first-order functionalism (sometimes called filler functionalism) holds
(i) that every mental property-name is definable via typical-cause connections to sensory/perceptual
states, behavior, and other mental state-names that also are thus definable, and (ii) that these state-
names are population-relative nonrigid designators of certain first-order physical properties, viz.,
whichever physical properties actually fill the pertinent causal roles in the creatures belonging to
a specific creature-population. Second-order functionalism was first articulated by Hilary Putnam
(1960), and versions of it have since been embraced by many in philosophy of mind. First-order
functionalism, which combines a functionalist account of mental concepts with a form of the psycho-
physical identity theory for mental properties, was advocated most forcefully and explicitly by David
Lewis (1966, 1980) and David Armstrong (1968).
     In my view, second-order and first-order functionalism both suffer the same fatal flaw: they
wrongly contend that the full essence of mental properties, qua mental, is entirely non-intrinsic and
relational – entirely a matter of mental property’s typical-cause connections to other state-types. (First-
order functionalism can allow that mental properties do have intrinsic physical aspects, but cannot
allow that these aspects accrue to these properties qua mental.) Both kinds of functionalism thereby fail
to acknowledge the fact that phenomenally conscious mental state-types have intrinsic aspects, qua
mental – viz., their phenomenal character, i.e., their intrinsic “what-it-is-like-ness.” And in my view,
as an advocate of both cognitive phenomenology and agentive phenomenology, virtually all mental
state-types that are conscious-as-opposed to unconscious are also phenomenally conscious, with their
own phenomenal character that is distinctive, proprietary, and individuative. So the flaw I am com-
plaining about is extensive and pervasive, rather than applying only to a proper subset of the full range
of conscious mental state-types such as sensory-perceptual experiences. Functionalism too is therefore
a position that I cannot take seriously – although at least it is more plausible than the Great Silliness.
     Turning now to philosophical approaches to conscious mentality that I do take seriously (and in
ascending order of how plausible I find them), next on the list is panpsychism. To me this position
certainly deserves to be taken seriously, because (i) it acknowledges the intrinsic phenomenal char-
acter of conscious experience, qua mental, and (ii) it purports to be fully compatible with physics
and with all of the sciences. Nonetheless, I find it implausible for the kinds of reasons I have set out
in earlier sections of this chapter. From the empirical perspective, not only is there significant lack
of positive evidence for panpsychism, but (as explained in section 2), the systematic lack of positive
evidence counts as strong empirical evidence against this bold hypothesis. And from the metaphysi-
cal perspective (as explained in sections 3 and 4), panpsychism does not do enough theoretically to
render itself credible by virtue of contributing to the philosophical project of understanding how
things in the widest sense of the term hang together in the widest sense of the term.


                                                    347
                                              Terry Horgan


    Next on my list of successively more plausible metaphysical construals of mentality is weak
metaphysical emergentism, with slight preference for the Moorean version over the nomic ver-
sion because I think the former has somewhat better prospects than the former for fending off
epipheno­menalism (see Horgan 1987). A major theoretical advantage of metaphysical emergentism,
as I emphasized earlier, is that it explains why there seems to be intractable explanatory gap concern-
ing the ways phenomenal properties supervene on phenomenal properties. According to weak emer-
gentism, this gap is real and irremedial, because the pertinent physical-to-phenomenal supervenience
relations are metaphysically brute necessitation relations – brute relations of either nomic necessity
or metaphysical necessity.
    Despite this significant theoretical advantage, however, I find myself unable to believe in such
brute inter-level necessitation relations, especially insofar as they involve subvenient physical proper-
ties that are physically non-basic and are instantiable only by entities which themselves are physically
non-fundamental and are composed of vastly many fundamental physical constituents. I hanker after
a metaphysic of conscious mentality under which any and all supervenience relations involving sub-
venient physical properties are explainable rather than being brute and sui generis. And in my view,
nothing less than this deserves to count as a materialist metaphysic of mind (cf. Horgan 1993). So I am
unable to believe metaphysical emergentism, even though I do regard it as both seriously viable and,
from the metaphysical perspective, theoretically attractive.
    In some moods, slightly higher on my plausibility ordering than either kind of weak metaphysi-
cal emergentism is the view sometimes called “mysterianism,” associated most notably with Coin
McGinn (1989). This view, as I understand it, is a version of materialism: it treats physical-to-
phenomenal supervenience relations as explainable in some materialistically kosher way, rather than
as being metaphysically brute. It also asserts, however, that humans are constitutionally incapable of
formulating or understanding the pertinent explanations; by our very natures, we just aren’t smart
enough. To me the principal theoretical attraction of this view is that it manages to embrace mate-
rialism while also explaining why, try as I might, I find myself unable to comfortably regard the
apparent “hard problem” of phenomenal consciousness as just a pseudo-problem. But the theoretical
downside is that it offers a counsel of despair, at least as far as phenomenal consciousness is con-
cerned, about the prospects for the philosophical project of understanding how things in the widest
sense of the term hang together in the widest sense of the term. I am unable to believe that such
understanding is impossible for humans.
    At the top of my current plausibility ranking is a position of a kind that, as far as I know, has
been most clearly and most explicitly advocated in the philosophical literature by Brian McLaugh-
lin (2007, 2010, 2012). The key ideas in the version most attractive to me are the following. First,
each phenomenal mental property is identical to some intrinsic, categorical, physical property. Sec-
ond, phenomenal properties are instantiable only by physical entities that are physically complex
rather than physically fundamental. Third (and largely because of the preceding point), phenom-
enal properties are identical to physically non-fundamental properties – properties which, by their
very nature, probably require enormous physical complexity in any entities that could potentially
instantiate them. (Physical specifications of these properties would then require specifying requisite
structural complexity features of entities capable of realizing these properties.) Fourth, the intrin-
sic phenomenal character of phenomenal properties is not something distinct from – something
“over and above” – the intrinsic categorical physical nature of the physical properties to which the
phenomenal properties are identical; rather, phenomenal what-it’s-like-ness consists in fact that the
intrinsic categorical physical nature of the phenomenal properties is directly presented experientially to
the entities that instantiate such properties, presented in such a way that those entities thereby know
this intrinsic categorical physical nature directly and by immediate experiential acquaintance. Fifth,
physical-phenomenal properties that are experientially directly presented in this way give rise, at



                                                   348
                                        Strawson on Panpsychism


least in creatures as cognitively sophisticated as humans, to corresponding phenomenal concepts; these
concepts deploy those very properties – or mental images of them – as what, in Fregean language,
can be called self-presenting modes of presentation. I.e., the experientially directly presented physical-­
phenomenal properties – or mental images thereof – get redeployed in thought as modes of presenta-
tion of themselves. Sixth, “knowing what it’s like” is thus a matter of direct-acquaintance knowledge
of an intrinsic physical property that one either is currently experiencing or mentally images experi-
encing. Seventh, knowing in this way the intrinsic categorical nature of a physical property does not
constitute knowing that property’s intrinsic categorical nature “qua physical”; rather, the latter con-
sists of knowing that same nature under a concept of physics, which is a different matter entirely. Eighth,
the complex, non-fundamental, categorical physical properties to which phenomenal properties are
identical might well be “multiply realizable” by more finely specified physical properties – perhaps in
such a way that these non-fundamental physical properties are realizable by physically complex crea-
tures quite different in their fine-grained physical composition than earthly creatures (e.g., by being
composed of silicon rather than organic molecules). (By way of analogy, think of mean molecular kinetic
energy, as a property of gases that is arguably identical with temperature. It doesn’t matter what kinds of
molecules compose the gas, and there are innumerable different fine-grained inter-molecular states
each of which instantiate the very same temperature property.)
    Among the theoretical advantages of this position are the following. First, it acknowledges that
phenomenal mental state-types have an intrinsic nature, qua mental – something that functionalism,
for instance, fails to do. Second, as a type-type identity theory, it is a materialist metaphysic of mind,
thoroughly eschewing metaphysically brute supervenience relations between physical properties and
mental properties. Third, as a type-type identity theory, it also firmly avoids the threat of epiphe-
nomenalism about mental properties (a threat that looms over any metaphysical position that fails to
identify mental properties with certain physical properties). Fourth, it has resources to accommodate
familiar “multiple realization” arguments against type-type identity theories – viz., by identifying
phenomenal mental properties with physical properties that are complex and non-basic, it can allow
(i) that such physical properties might well be instantiable by a variety of different kinds of physically
complex creatures that differ significantly from one another in physical fine-grained ways (e.g., in the
kinds of molecules they are composed of), and also (ii) that such physical properties might well be
instantiable, within a single creature at a certain moment in its history, in a variety of different physi-
cally fine-grained ways (e.g., by a variety of different specific neural firing-patterns). (The second
possibility is what elsewhere I have called strong multiple realization.) Fifth, by distinguishing between
phenomenal concepts of physical-phenomenal state-types and physics-involving concepts of those
same physical-phenomenal state-types, it has resources to explain the existence of the apparent “hard
problem” of phenomenal consciousness – viz., a phenomenal concept and the corresponding, co-
referring, physics-involving concept are conceptually independent because of the different modes
of presentation they deploy. Sixth, it purports to eliminate any genuine hard problem, by treating a
phenomenal concept and the corresponding physics-involving concept as deploying respective non-
contingent modes of presentation which, despite being distinct (and, indeed, conceptually independ-
ent), nevertheless are modes of presentation of a single physical property.
    Despite these theoretical advantages, however, the lately described position also is one that I find
myself unable to believe. For me the principal stumbling block is that the apparent hard problem
continues to strike me as a genuine explanatory problem – even though I have to admit that have no
clear conception of what could even count as a solution. Here is one way to express the quandary
I feel. I see no reason in principle why there couldn’t be physically possible zombie-creatures that (i)
are quite different from humans in their fine-grained physical composition (e.g., are not composed
of organic molecules), (ii) have all the same functional cognitive architecture as humans, and yet (iii)
have no phenomenal consciousness at all. But if indeed such creatures are physically possible, then



                                                   349
                                              Terry Horgan


recalcitrant hard-problem questions of the following kind seem to arise: Why do the intrinsic physi-
cal properties that are the categorical bases of the pertinent cognitive-architectural functional roles
in the zombie-creatures have no phenomenal character, whereas the intrinsic physical properties that
play those same disposition-subserving roles in humans do have phenomenal character? Why are
the latter properties (the ones instantiated in humans) experientially presented what-it’s-like physical
properties, whereas the former properties (the ones instantiated in zombie-creatures, and subserving
the very same cognitive-architectural functional roles) are phenomenally blank?
    So I remain a “wannabe materialist.” If someone could persuade me that panpsychism is a form
of materialism that can effectively assuage my persistent hard-problem philosophical worries, then
panpsychism might then move into first place in my priority ordering – or it might then even
become a position that I could believe. (Strawson’s own case for panpsychism, although worthy of
serious philosophical respect, leaves me unpersuaded for the reasons explained earlier.)
    6. For some years Matjaž Potrč and I have been defending and articulating a large-scale
metaphysical-cum-semantic position we call “blobjectivism” (2000, 2002, 2008). Concerning meta-
physics, this view asserts that there is really just one concrete particular in the right ontology – viz.,
the whole cosmos (the blobject, as we call it). Although the blobject is nonhomogenous and enor-
mously structurally complex, these features do not involve a multiplicity of part-entities that also
belong to the correct ontology; rather, they are a matter of how various properties and relations are
instantiated, in various specific spatio-temporally local manners of instantiation, by the one concrete
particular – the blobject. Blobjectivism is a version of what Jonathan Schaffer (2010) calls “existence
monism.” (Schaffer himself defends a less austere position that he calls “priority monism,” which
asserts (i) that the right ontology includes a multiplicity of concrete particulars over and above the
whole cosmos, and yet (ii) that the whole cosmos is ontologically prior to any of its proper parts.)
    In ordinary thought and discourse, and also in science, numerous thoughts and statements com-
monly regarded as true posit concrete entities other than the blobject. According to the semantic
aspect of the Horgan/Potrc version of blobjectivism – contextual semantics, as we call it – typically
such thoughts and statements are indeed true, despite blobjectivism’s severe ontological austerity.
This is because (i) we construe truth as correct affirmability under contextually operative affirmabi-
lity norms, and (ii) we maintain that in most contexts of thought and discourse (including scientific
contexts), the contextually operative affirmability norms operate in such a way that truth is an indirect
form of thought/world and language/world correspondence that is consistent with the claim that
the blobject is the only concrete particular in the correct ontology. On this view, true statements
attributing specific kinds of mentality to specific individuals are made true by the way that phenom-
enally determinate mental properties are instantiated, in different local manners of instantiation, by
the blobject.
    A version of panpsychism called cosmopsychism has recently begun to be discussed and taken
seriously in the panpsychism literature (e.g., Nagasawa and Wager 2016). On this view (as I under-
stand it), the ontologically most fundamental kinds of consciousness accrue not to metaphysically
fundamental micro-entities like subatomic particles, but rather to the entire cosmos. As a form of
panpsychism, cosmopsychism fits naturally with Schaffer’s priority monism, as Nagasawa and Wager
emphasize. Indeed, they call their own version “priority cosmopsychism.”
    A priority monist need not embrace cosmopsychism but could instead contend that mental prop-
erties are instantiable only by fairly complex creatures that themselves are ontologically dependent
upon the ontologically prior concrete particular – the whole cosmos. Blobjectivism, on the other
hand, advocates an ontology that eschews ontologically dependent concrete particulars. So the ques-
tion naturally arises: Since, according to blobjectivism, mental properties only get instantiated by
the entire cosmos, does blobjectivism thereby qualify as a form of cosmopsychism – and hence as a
species of panpsychism?



                                                   350
                                           Strawson on Panpsychism


    Well, one could choose, stipulatively, to call blobjectivism a form of cosmopsychism, on the
grounds that this view asserts that the blobject is the sole concrete particular in the right ontology
and therefore is the sole instantiator of mental properties. However, it seems to me that this would be
contrary to the spirit of the metaphysical position which has recently been labeled cosmopsychism.
That position (as I understand it) asserts (i) that the ontologically fundamental kinds of conscious-
ness occur in a single, experientially unified mind (the cosmic mind), and (ii) that ordinary human
forms of consciousness are ontologically less basic that this unified cosmic consciousness. (There thus
arises, for cosmopsychism, a problem that is the logical dual of traditional panpsychism’s “combina-
tion problem” – viz., the “decombination problem,” as one might say.) By contrast, the blobjectivist
metaphysic of mind that I favor does not posit an experientially unified cosmic consciousness; rather,
it only posits various specific instantiations of mentality by the blobject in various distinct and diverse
spatio-temporally local manners of instantiation. Those spatio-temporally disjoint instantiations do
not collectively constitute a single unified cosmic consciousness, and I doubt that there is one. So, in
reply to the question “Is blobjectivism a form of cosmopsychism?”, my answer is No.2


                                                     Notes
1	 .	 I will label passages I quote with capital letters, to facilitate subsequent cross-references.
 	2.	 This paper is based on my commentary on Strawson (2016) in a symposium session on that paper at the
      2015 Pacific Division meeting of the American Philosophical Association in Vancouver. My thanks to Wil-
      liam Seager for inviting me to contribute to the present volume, and to Phillip Goff, Mark Timmons, and
      especially Galen Strawson for helpful interaction and feedback.


                                                  References
Armstrong, D. M. (1968). A Materialist Theory of the Mind. London: Routledge.
Dennett, D. (1988). ‘Quining Qualia’. In A. Marcel and E. Bisiach (eds.), Consciousness in Modern Science. Oxford:
   Oxford University Press, pp. 42–77.
Dennett, D. (1991). Consciousness Explained. London: Penguin.
Hawking, S. (1988). A Brief History of Time. New York: Bantam Books.
Horgan, T. (1987). ‘Supervenient Qualia’. Philosophical Review, 96: 491–520.
Horgan, T. (1993). ‘From Supervenience to Superdupervenience: Meeting the Demands of a Material World’.
   Mind, 102: 555–86.
Horgan, T. (2010). ‘Materialism, Minimal Emergentism, and the Hard Problem of Consciousness’. In G. Bealer
   and R. Koons (eds.), The Waning of Materialism. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 309–30.
Horgan, T., and Potrč, M. (2000). ‘Blobjectivism and Indirect Correspondence’. Factca Philosophica, 2: 249–70.
Horgan, T., and Potrč, M. (2002). ‘Addressing Questions for Blobjectivism’. Facta Philosophica, 4: 311–21.
Horgan, T., and Potrč, M. (2008). Austere Realism: Contextual Semantics Meets Minimal Ontology. Cambridge, MA:
   MIT Press.
Lewis, D. (1966). ‘An Argument for the Identity Theory’. Journal of Philosophy, 63: 17–25.
Lewis, D. (1980). ‘Mad Pain and Martian Pain’. In N. Block (ed.), Readings in the Philosophy of Psychology, vol. 1.
   Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, pp. 216–22.
Putnam, H. (1960). ‘Minds and Machines’. In S. Hook (ed.), Dimensions of Mind. New York: New York Uni-
   versity Press, pp. 148–79.
McGinn, C. (1989). ‘Can We Solve the Mind Body Problem?’ Mind, 98: 349–66.
McLaughlin, B. (2007). ‘Type Materialism for Phenomenal Consciousness’. In M. Velemans and S. Schneider
   (eds.), The Blackwell Companion to Consciousness. Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 431–444.
McLaughlin, B. (2010). ‘Consciousness, Type Physicalism, and Inference to the Best Explanation’. Philosophical
   Issues, 20: 266–304.
McLaughlin, B. (2012). ‘Phenomenal Concepts and the Defense of Materialism’. Philosophy and Phenomenological
   Research, 84: 206–214.
Nagasawa, Y., and Wager, K. (2016). ‘Panpsychism and Priority Cosmopsychism’. In G. Brüntrup and L. Jaskolla
   (eds.), Panpsychism: Contemporary Perspectives. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 113–29.



                                                       351
                                                  Terry Horgan


Schaffer, J. (2010). ‘Monism: The Priority of the Whole’. Philosophical Review, 119: 31–76.
Sellars, Wilfrid (1962). ‘Philosophy and the Scientific Image of Man’. In R. Colodny (ed.), Frontiers of Science and
    Philosophy. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, pp. 35–78.
Strawson, G. (2003).‘Real Materialism’. In L. Antony (ed.), Chomsky and His Critics. Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 49–88.
Strawson, G. (2016). ‘Mind and Being: The Primacy of Panpsychism’. In G. Brüntrup and L. Jaskolla (eds.),
    Panpsychism: Contemporary Perspectives. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 75–112.
Strawson, G. (this volume). ‘What Does “physical” Mean? A Prolegomenon to Physicalist Panpsychism’. In W.
    Seager (ed.), The Routledge Handbook of Panpsychism. London: Routledge.




                                                       352
                         28
                  IDEALISM AND THE
                 MIND-BODY PROBLEM1
                                         David Chalmers




When I was in graduate school, I recall hearing “One starts as a materialist, then one becomes a
dualist, then a panpsychist, and one ends up as an idealist”.2 I don’t know where this comes from, but
I think the idea was something like this. First, one is impressed by the successes of science, endors-
ing materialism about everything and so about the mind. Second, one is moved by the problem of
consciousness to see a gap between physics and consciousness, thereby endorsing dualism, where
both matter and consciousness are fundamental. Third, one is moved by the inscrutability of matter
to realize that science reveals at most the structure of matter and not its underlying nature, and to
speculate that this nature may involve consciousness, thereby endorsing panpsychism. Fourth, one
comes to think that there is little reason to believe in anything beyond consciousness and that the
physical world is wholly constituted by consciousness, thereby endorsing idealism.
    Some recent strands in philosophical discussion of the mind – body problem have recapitulated
this progression: the rise of materialism in the 1950s and 1960s, the dualist response in the 1980s and
1990s, the festival of panpsychism in the 2000s, and some recent stirrings of idealism.3 In my own
work, I have taken the first two steps and have flirted heavily with the third. In this chapter I want to
examine the prospects for the fourth step: the move to idealism.


                                      1.  Varieties of Idealism
I will understand idealism broadly, as the thesis that the universe is fundamentally mental, or perhaps
that all concrete facts are grounded in mental facts. As such it is meant as a global metaphysical thesis
analogous to physicalism, the thesis that the universe is fundamentally physical, or perhaps that all con-
crete facts are grounded in physical facts. The only difference is that “physical” is replaced by “mental”.
    We can understand mental facts as facts wholly about the instantiation of mental properties.4
Later we will examine possible versions of idealism that loosen this constraint. My focus is largely on
conscious experience as opposed to non-conscious mental states, so the mental states and properties
I will focus on are largely experiential states and properties, but in principle the definition includes
views on which other sorts of mental states play a role. As for concreteness: this excludes truths about
abstract domains, such as mathematics. In practice most physicalists and idealists are not committed to
the strong claim that mathematical truths are grounded in physical or mental truths, and the restric-
tion to concrete domains helps to avoid the issue.
    Although it is common to define idealism as a global metaphysical thesis analogous to mate-
rialism, in practice idealism is often understood more narrowly as a version of Berkeley’s “esse est


                                                   353
                                              David Chalmers


percipi” thesis, holding that appearance constitutes reality. This sort of idealism is typically seen as
a paradigm of anti-realism, in that it holds that there is no concrete reality external to how things
appear: all concrete non-mental truths p are grounded in or constituted by appearances that p, or
in closely related truths involving appearances. If we understand appearances as experiences had by
observers (most naturally as perceptual experiences, though thoughts about the external world are
also sometimes understood as appearances in a broad sense), it follows that the physical world is fully
grounded in the experiences as of a physical world had by observers.
    Anti-realist idealism entails idealism in the broad sense, but the reverse is not the case. For exam-
ple, there are panpsychist versions of idealism where fundamental microphysical entities are con-
scious subjects, and on which matter is realized by these conscious subjects and their relations. There
are also cosmopsychist versions of idealism where the whole universe is conscious, and on which the
complex physical states of the cosmos are realized by structurally isomorphic cosmic mental states.
Whether or not these views are plausible, they need have no commitment to “esse est percipi” or to
other anti-realist doctrines. In constituting the physical world, on this view, appearances concerning
the physical world may play no special role. It is the structure and relations among experiences rather
than their specific content that matters.
    One might object that all mental states (or at least all perceptual states) are appearances of some
sort, so that any view on which mental or perceptual states constitute reality is a view on which
appearance constitutes reality and is therefore anti-realist. But anti-realist idealism makes a stronger
claim connecting the nature of any nonmental reality to the specific content of appearances: roughly,
for any nonmental fact p about concrete reality, what it is for p to obtain is for appearances that p
(or closely related appearances) to obtain.5 On the realist versions of idealism discussed earlier, this
stronger claim is false: what it is for physical facts p to obtain is for certain structural roles to obtain.
When we conjoin the further (possibly contingent) claim that in fact appearances play that role, the
appearance-reality and the mental-physical connections follow as consequences.
    Idealist views like these are naturally understood as versions of realism about the physical world,
rather than versions of anti-realism. The physical world really exists out there, independently of our
observations; it just has a surprising nature. Indeed, views of this sort are highly congenial to epis-
temological structural realism, which says roughly that science reveals the structure of the physical
world but not its intrinsic nature. We can think of them as versions of realist idealism.
    Realist idealism may sound like an oxymoron, but this is only because we tend to associate ideal-
ism with the narrow anti-realist variety and ignore the broad variety. Correspondingly, the widespread
view that idealism has been refuted or defeated is best understood as a view about anti-realist ideal-
ism.6 Certainly the most familiar objections to idealism are largely objections to anti-realist idealism.
Realist idealism has not been subject to the same sort of searching assessment as anti-realist idealism.
    Anti-realist and realist idealism tend to go with two quite different paths to idealism. Anti-realist
idealism takes an epistemological path to idealism. It is most commonly driven by epistemological
questions about skepticism and is typically associated with the sort of empiricism that resists postulat-
ing hypotheses that go beyond appearances. Realist idealism takes a metaphysical path to idealism. It
is often driven by metaphysical questions about the mind and about physical reality and tends to go
with the sort of rationalism that allows metaphysical hypotheses that go well beyond appearances if
they help us to make sense of the universe as a whole.
    From certain angles realist idealism can even be seen as a sort of naturalistic view (naturalistic
idealism, perhaps?), on which idealism is put forward as a sort of scientific hypothesis to explain our
experiences. In any case, it is idealism in this rationalist or naturalist spirit that I want to examine in
this chapter. I will touch on anti-realist idealism along the way, but I will focus especially on realist
idealism in order to examine its prospects.
    A more traditional taxonomy of idealist views distinguishes subjective idealism, objective idealism,
transcendental idealism, and absolute idealism. These varieties of idealism do not have clear standard


                                                    354
                                   Idealism and the Mind-Body Problem


definitions, and they are often characterized as much by appeal to paradigmatic proponents (Berkeley,
Schelling, Kant, and Hegel respectively) as to specific doctrines. For present purposes I will set aside
the last two. Kant’s transcendental idealism is not really a version of idealism in the metaphysical sense
I am concerned with here. It is sometimes called a version of epistemological idealism:7 at most it is
idealist about the knowable phenomenal realm but not the unknowable noumenal realm, so it is not
idealist about reality in general. Absolute idealism is typically associated with a number of Hegelian
doctrines concerning teleology and rationality, and I do not have a clear sense of how these doc-
trines bear on the mind–body issues I am concerned with here. The label is occasionally used more
straightforwardly for an idealism grounded in the mental states of a single cosmic entity, but to avoid
the resonant Hegelian overtones I will give that view a different label below.
    As for subjective and objective idealism, these labels correlate with at least three different distinc-
tions. First is a version of the anti-realist/realist distinction above: reality is wholly constituted by the
way things appear to be (subjective), or it has some mental nature external to how things appear to
be (objective). A second distinction concerns whether the fundamental mental states are had by a
subject (subjective) or by some other sort of entity or no entity at all (objective). A third distinction
concerns what sorts of minds constitute reality: for example, human minds like ours (subjective) or
a cosmic mind (objective). These distinctions are to some extent independent of each other, and the
labels also bring enormous historical baggage, so for clarity I will use different language to mark the
relevant distinctions here. To mark the first distinction, I will speak of anti-realist vs. realist ideal-
ism. To mark the second distinction, I will speak of subject-involving and non–subject-involving
idealism. To mark the third distinction, I will speak of micro-idealism, macro-idealism, and cosmic
idealism.
    The third distinction is especially important for our purposes. Micro-idealism is the thesis that
concrete reality is wholly grounded in micro-level mentality: that is, in mentality associated with
fundamental microscopic entities (such as quarks and photons). Macro-idealism is the thesis that
concrete reality is wholly grounded in macro-level mentality: that is, in mentality associated with
macroscopic (middle-sized) entities such as humans and perhaps nonhuman animals. Cosmic ideal-
ism is the thesis that concrete reality is wholly grounded in cosmic mentality: that is, in mentality
associated with the cosmos as a whole or with a single cosmic entity (such as the universe or a deity).8
    For historical examples of each: Leibniz’s view has at least a flavor of micro-idealism, with all real-
ity grounded in the mental states of monads, although his monads may include macro and cosmic
entities as well as micro-entities. Berkeley looks like a macro-idealist, at least before God enters his
picture, and other British empiricists such as Hume and Mill have elements of this view. Many of
the 19th-century German and British idealists (e.g. Fichte, Schelling, Hegel, and Bradley) as well as
Hindu and Buddhist idealists (e.g. from the Advaita Vedanta and Yogācāra schools) at least tend in
the direction of cosmic idealism.9
    These three versions of idealism correlate fairly strongly with three existing philosophical views:
micropsychism (the thesis that microphysical entities have mental states), phenomenalism (external
reality is grounded in appearances), and cosmopsychism (the universe has mental states). Micro-
idealism entails micropsychism, but not vice versa: there can be non-idealist micropsychists who
hold that microphysical entities have mental and non-mental properties fundamentally (perhaps mass
and charge are mental, and space and time are nonmental?). Cosmic idealism entails cosmopsychism
but not vice versa, for the same sort of reason. Macro-idealism does not entail phenomenalism (a
nonphenomenalist macro-idealist might hold that reality is constituted by non-appearance-involving
mental relations among macrosubjects), and phenomenalism does not entail macro-idealism (a cos-
mic phenomenalist might hold that reality is partly or wholly grounded in appearances to a cosmic
mind, and a micro phenomenalist could in principle say something analogous about micro minds),
but the two views at least naturally go together. One could in principle speak of micropsychist,
phenomenalist, and cosmopsychist idealism, but I will use the shorter labels for brevity and clarity.


                                                    355
                                             David Chalmers


    There are also combined views on which more than one of the three sorts of minds is fundamen-
tal. For example, Berkeley can be understood as a cosmic/macro idealist, on which both a cosmic
mind (God’s) and macro minds (ours) are fundamental. Some emergent panpsychists may be micro/
macro idealists, holding that both micro and macro minds are fundamental. There is also room in
principle for micro/cosmic and micro/macro/cosmic idealism.10
    In what follows I will examine the prospects for micro-idealism, macro-idealism, and cosmic
idealism, looking also at combined versions along the way. I will not attempt to give compelling
arguments for these views over alternative views, but I will examine their merits and their challenges.
I will focus especially on the merits of these views as a solution to the philosophical mind – body
problem. Here the constraints are to give a satisfactory theory of (i) the physical world, (ii) conscious-
ness, and (iii) the relation between them. I will argue that all of these views face significant challenges,
but that micro-idealism and especially cosmic idealism have some promise as an approach to these
issues.


                                         2. Macro-Idealism
I will discuss macro-idealism only briefly, as it is perhaps the version of idealism that is least motivated
by the mind–body problem and least promising as a distinctive solution to it. It is also (in its phenom-
enalist guise) the version that is the most familiar in the existing literature, with familiar strengths and
weaknesses. I do not have a great deal that is new to say about it (and readers should feel free to skip
this section), but a few observations may be useful in drawing out the logical geography.
    Macro-idealism holds that the mental states of humans and perhaps other macroscopic systems
are fundamental, and that all of reality is grounded in these states. The first question for macro-
idealism, as for any sort of idealism, is: how do these mental states ground facts about the physical
world? Macro-idealists commonly answer: in virtue of appearance. Roughly speaking, the fact that
it appears that the physical world is a certain way grounds its being that way. The second question
is: how can there be illusions and hallucinations, where appearance is not a guide to reality? Macro-
idealists commonly answer: physical facts are grounded in something like normal appearances, or
coherence among multiple appearances, so that illusions and hallucinations are abnormal appear-
ances or appearances that do not cohere properly with other appearances. The third question: how
can there be unperceived parts of physical reality, such as the unperceived tree in the quad, or a rock
on Mars? Macro-idealists commonly answer: these entities are grounded either in appearances in a
cosmic or divine mind (God experiences the tree in the quad), thereby leading to cosmic or macro/
cosmic idealism, or in (naturally or nomologically) possible experiences by macroscopic subjects (if
we experienced going to a certain location on Mars, we would experience a rock).
    Classical phenomenalism answers all three questions: facts about physical reality are grounded in
coherence among facts about possible appearances (Mill’s “permanent possibilities of sensations”).
Phenomenalism is often understood as a semantic thesis (semantic phenomenalism): statements about
the physical world are analyzable as statements about possible experiences. This semantic thesis
naturally leads to a metaphysical thesis (though there is certainly room to accept one without the
other, for those who strongly separate semantics from metaphysics): facts about the physical world
are grounded in facts about possible experiences. We can call this metaphysical thesis weak metaphysi-
cal phenomenalism. This thesis does not entail idealism, since it is consistent with there being further
nonmentally-grounded facts lying behind the mentally grounded physical facts: for example, nou-
menal facts lying behind appearances. However, a version of idealism is entailed by strong metaphysical
phenomenalism, which says that all facts are grounded in facts about possible experiences.
    Strictly speaking, strong metaphysical phenomenalism entails only a qualified version of idealism:
reality is not wholly grounded in actual experiences, but it is grounded in naturally possible experi-
ences, or powers or potentialities or conditionals involving experiences. By allowing fundamental


                                                    356
                                  Idealism and the Mind-Body Problem


powers or potentialities or conditionals, this view arguably says that there is an irreducibly nomic or
modal aspect of reality as well as an irreducibly mental aspect, thereby qualifying the idealism. But as
long as the modal truths in question wholly concern the mental, the view seems still idealist enough
for it to deserve the name.
    There are many traditional objections to phenomenalism, but in my view the most important
objection to strong metaphysical phenomenalism is the explanatory objection: the truths about pos-
sible experiences demand explanation, and this view gives them none. For example, it is true that
the table looks a certain way to me, and that from a different angle it will look a certain related but
different way to me, and if I come back tomorrow it will once again look a related way to me, and so
on. There is an order and coherence among these possible experiences that calls out for explanation.
Standard nonphenomenalist views of the external world explain this by invoking a single physical
table that causes the relevant experiences. A classical phenomenalist cannot do this, since the physical
table is grounded in the possible experiences Rather, each truth about possible experience is taken as
fundamental. So we have an enormous array of related fundamental truths, with no explanation for
the relations. In effect, strong metaphysical phenomenalism gives an extraordinarily complex theory
of fundamental reality and should be rejected for the same reasons that we usually favor simple theo-
ries of fundamental reality.11
    In response to this objection, weak metaphysical phenomenalism and semantic phenomenal-
ism can allow further facts that causally explain the facts about possible experiences, as long as they
deny that these facts are physical facts. For example, Berkeley invokes facts about a divine mind in
this role. Other phenomenalists may invoke structural facts about an underlying structural reality, or
unknowable noumenal facts. These views are not entirely stable, since once one has underlying facts
in the picture that causally explain physical appearances, there is some pressure to say that these facts
themselves constitute the physical facts. But they are at least consistent. The further-fact response
does little to save strong metaphysical phenomenalism (of the macro variety) and macro-idealism,
however, as it allows facts that are not grounded in the mental states of macrosubjects. As a result,
many semantic or weak metaphysical phenomenalists end up augmenting their macro-idealism with
a non–macro-idealist account of external reality: perhaps cosmic idealism, micro-idealism, ontologi-
cal structuralism, or noumenalism.
    Perhaps the most promising macro-idealist response to the explanatory objection is to suggest
that the regularities in our experience are explained by intra-experiential laws of nature. On one
version of the view, the world is wholly experiential, but there are intra-experiential laws saying that
experiences evolve just as they would if there were certain laws of physics, boundary conditions, and
psychophysical laws. An initial objection is that a law like this amounts to the existence of an external
world, so that the view is not truly idealist. But given that the existence of intra-experiential laws is
consistent with idealism, it is at least not obvious why this complex law should be inconsistent with
idealism. Perhaps a more decisive objection is that the law should be rejected on abductive grounds.
The baroque hypothesis on which experiences are set up to mirror a simple physical world provides
a worse explanation of our experiences than the simpler hypothesis on which the physical world
exists and produces our experiences directly.12
    Because of the explanatory objection, I think that the epistemological route through phenom-
enalism to idealism is not especially compelling. That said, I think there is a structuralist cousin of
this route that has some promise for epistemological purposes. On this route, instead of holding
that physical truths p are grounded in normal appearances that p, one holds roughly that they are
grounded in the normal cause of appearances that p (and in related mutual causal roles). This leads
to a structuralist view on which reality as we conceive of it is grounded in experience along with a
structured network of causes that bring about those experiences. This view avoids the explanatory
worry above, while still giving us some purchase against skepticism. Like phenomenalism, it reclassi-
fies many apparently skeptical hypotheses (such as evil genius, brain-in-vat, and Matrix hypotheses)


                                                  357
                                            David Chalmers


as hypotheses in which the apparent physical facts really obtain (see Chalmers 2005, 2012: excursus
15, 2018). As a result, certain forms of global skepticism may be ruled out as incoherent. Because
this epistemological structuralism about the external world invokes external causes of experiences, it
goes beyond macro-idealism. Instead it tends to lead to ontological structuralism, noumenalism, or
perhaps micro or cosmic idealism about physical reality.
    Is there room for a structuralist and non-phenomenalist version of macro-idealism? In the case
of micro-idealism and cosmic idealism, there is a broadly structuralist nonphenomenalist view on
which physical states are constituted by (broadly causal) relations among the mental states of micro-
subjects or a cosmic subject. In principle there could be a broadly structuralist macro-idealism in
which physical states are constituted by causal relations among the mental states of macrosubjects.
In practice, this view is somewhat undermotivated and it is hard to make it work, not least because
much of what goes on in the physical world seems not to be reflected in the states of macrosubjects.
For example, it is hard to see how the location of a particle in a part of the universe far from con-
scious life could be constituted by the conscious states of a standard macrosubject (where it is at least
somewhat easier to see how states of microsubjects or a cosmic subject could do this). Perhaps the
view could posit a ubiquity of macrosubjects, or macrosubjects with unusually complex mental states,
or perhaps it could deny reality where there are no macrosubjects, but by this point the view seems
to have little to recommend it over micro-idealism or cosmic idealism.
    In principle there can be phenomenalist idealism without macro-idealism. A cosmic phenom-
enalist or a microphenomenalist could hold that reality is grounded in appearances to a cosmic mind
or to micro minds, via a general metaphysical principle connecting appearance and reality. Berkeley’s
invocation of God suggests a view of this sort (or perhaps a version of macro/cosmic phenomenalism,
with appearances in both human and divine minds grounding physical reality). One can also find at
least some elements of cosmic phenomenalism in Buddhist and Hindu versions of idealism, in which
cosmic experience and appearance-reality principles play a central role. As for microphenomenalism,
one can perhaps find a flavor of the view in interpretations of Leibniz on which matter is constituted
by monads’ perceptions of matter. Cosmic phenomenalism and microphenomenalism have less need
than macro-phenomenalism to appeal to merely possible experiences, since there may be cosmic or
micro-experiences corresponding to every part of physical reality, but one can still reasonably raise
the question of what explains the order among the cosmic appearances or the micro-appearances.
    Interestingly, there are a few recently discussed views with roots in contemporary science that
have some flavor of macro-idealism.
    Some views of this sort arise from quantum mechanics, which is sometimes associated with
idealist-sounding slogans such as “observation creates reality”. Perhaps the best-known view here
is the interpretation on which consciousness collapses the quantum wave function (Wigner 1961;
Stapp 1993; Chalmers and McQueen forthcoming). This view works best when consciousness is
present only in macrosubjects, since wave function collapse in microsubjects is hard to reconcile
with known quantum interference effects at the microscopic level. However, this view is standardly
understood as a version of dualism rather than a version of idealism, with a causal rather than a con-
stitutive connection between consciousness and a nonmental wave function. Anti-realist views are
occasionally put forward where the wave function state itself is constituted by observers’ experiences
(some versions of so-called quantum Bayesianism have something of this flavor), but these views are
very much subject to the explanatory objection to phenomenalism.
    It is also possible to combine quantum mechanics with a structuralist rather than a phenomenalist
route to idealism. One view of this sort grounds the wave function of the universe in the structure
and dynamics of cosmic experience. This view leads most naturally to cosmic idealism or perhaps
to cosmic/macro-idealism (if observer consciousness collapses the wave function) rather than to
macro-idealism. For a macro-idealist version, one needs quantum states to attach fundamentally to
macro systems but not to cosmic systems, perhaps because quantum entanglement extends to the


                                                  358
                                  Idealism and the Mind-Body Problem


macro level but not the cosmic level. The mind–body relation will be particularly tidy if person-
level systems such as brains have their own fundamental quantum states, constituted by isomorphic
structure and dynamics in person-level experience. This “quantum holist” view (as I called it in
Chalmers 2017) will in principle be macro-idealist (or perhaps micro-/macro-idealist), but it faces
serious challenges, not least because it postulates person-level experience whose structure is quite
unlike the apparent structure of our own experience. It is also not easy to see how quantum entan-
glement can stably remain somewhere around the person level rather than spreading to the cosmic
level (or collapsing to the micro-level), thereby yielding something closer to cosmic idealism or
micro-idealism.
    A second relevant view is the integrated information theory of consciousness put forward by
Giulio Tononi (2004). Tononi makes the idealist-sounding claim that only consciousness has intrin-
sic existence, and he also says that consciousness is present only in causal systems with a positive
amount of integrated information, which entails that conscious systems must be macrosubjects at
least in the sense of having two or more components. If we understand this view as a version of
macro-idealism, the obvious question concerns the status of single-component systems and perhaps
other unconscious system: they are needed to explain the dynamics of the universe, but they do
not truly exist? Here the macro-idealist reading of Tononi’s view seems to suffer from problems
analogous to those of phenomenalism. With only macro-conscious states, too much about the world
is unexplained; once we grant reality to the non-conscious states that help explain things, the view
looks much less like idealism.
    A final potential form of macro-idealism with roots in cognitive science is Donald Hoffman’s
“conscious realism” (2008). Hoffman first argues (drawing partly on psychophysics) for an “interface
theory of perception” on which the objects we perceive exist only as experiences (roughly as on
traditional sense datum views) and experiences may be misleading as a guide to objective reality. He
then argues for conscious realism, on which the objective world consists entirely of conscious agents.
It is not entirely clear whether Hoffman’s conscious agents are all macrosubjects. If they are, his view
can be understood as a sort of intersubjective phenomenalism, and it faces a severe version of the
explanatory objection to phenomenalism. If they are not, the views can avoid the explanatory objec-
tion by postulating microsubjects associated with every physical particle or perhaps a cosmic subject,
but then the view becomes a form of micro/macro or cosmic/macro idealism.


                                        3. Micro-Idealism
Micro-idealism is the thesis that all concrete facts are grounded in facts about the mental states of (or
mentality associated with) fundamental microscopic entities, such as quarks or photons.13
    Micro-idealism entails panpsychism, understood as the thesis that some fundamental physical
entities have associated mentality, but the reverse is not the case, for a number of different reasons.
The first reason turns on a delicate terminological issue: whether cosmopsychism, the thesis that
the whole universe has mental states, counts as a version of panpsychism. If we define panpsychism
as I just have here and adopt a version of cosmopsychism on which the universe is a fundamental
physical entity, then this sort of cosmopsychism entails panpsychism. If we define panpsychism as the
thesis that some fundamental microphysical entities have mental states, then cosmopsychism does not
entail panpsychism. Both definitions are common, but on balance I think it makes sense to define
panpsychism in terms of fundamental physics (as I have in previous work) rather than microphys-
ics, so that cosmopsychism counts. On this approach we can use Strawson’s term micropsychism for
the thesis that some fundamental microphysical entities are associated with mental states. This then
yields a first reason why panpsychism does not entail micro-idealism: micro-idealism entails mic-
ropsychism, so non-micropsychist versions of panpsychism such as cosmopsychism are inconsistent
with micro-idealism.


                                                  359
                                            David Chalmers


    Even narrowing our focus to micropsychism, there are a number of reasons why micropsychism
does not entail micro-idealism. First, nonconstitutive micropsychists deny that the mental states of
macrosubjects are grounded in those of microsubjects. These theorists include emergent micropsy-
chists, who holds that macrosubjects are strongly emergent from microsubjects, and autonomous
micropsychists, who holds that macrosubjects do not wholly depend on microsubjects. There are
idealist versions of these views, but they reject micro-idealism for micro/macro-idealism. Second,
some nonreductionist micropsychists may allow that there are fundamental nonmental properties in
the world (for example, biological or normative properties) that are not constituted by properties of
micro-entities. Third, impure micropsychists will allow that some fundamental microscopic entities
have fundamental nonmental properties (e.g. spatiotemporal properties), perhaps in addition to fun-
damental mental properties. By embracing fundamental nonmental properties, nonreductionist and
impure micropsychists reject idealism entirely.
    We could exclude all of these views by focusing on constitutive, pure, reductionist, versions of
micropsychism, thereby yielding the micro-idealist thesis that all facts are grounded in facts about the
mental states of micro-entities. One might call this thesis grounding micropsychism, but I will typically
speak just of micro-idealism for clarity.
    The basic motivations for micro-idealism are closely related to the standard motivations for
panpsychism. A common route to both is the route canvassed at the start, conjoining the successes
of science, the problem of consciousness, and the inscrutability of matter, along with a desire to see
consciousness closely integrated with the physical world and playing a causal role. These motivations
typically lead to versions of micropsychism and micro-idealism where micro-entities have experi-
ences (rather than other mental states). We might call these experiences microexperiences, contrasted
with our own macroexperiences. It is these experience-involving views that I will focus on here.
    In “Panpsychism and Panprotopsychism” I mounted a Hegelian argument for panpsychism, argu-
ing that panpsychism can be seen as a sort of synthesis of the best aspects of materialism and dualism
and the worst aspects of neither. Specifically, it respects the data of both the conceivability argument
for dualism and the causal argument for physicalism. In effect, panpsychism is ideally suited to hold
on to the three constraints: the irreducibility of consciousness, the causal role of consciousness, and
the causal closure of the physical world.
    The sort of micropsychism that satisfies these constraints is constitutive Russellian micropsychism.
Russellian micropsychism (in its experience-involving version) holds that microexperiential proper-
ties realize microphysical properties, in that they play the causal roles associated with microphysical
properties. For example, physics characterizes mass in terms of its role. Russellian micropsychism says
that a microexperiential property realizes mass by playing that role, thereby serving as the “intrinsic
nature” of mass. Constitutive micropsychism holds that these microexperiential properties collec-
tively constitute (or ground) macroexperiential properties in subjects such as ourselves. In effect,
Russellian micropsychism gives microexperiences a causal role, while constitutive micropsychism
allows macroexperiences to inherit a causal role from those at the microexperiences, thereby avoid-
ing the interaction problems for dualism.
    Micro-idealism is naturally seen as a sort of constitutive Russellian micropsychism. If all facts are
grounded in truths about mental states of microsubjects, then facts about mental states of macrosub-
jects are so grounded (yielding constitutive panpsychism), and facts about physics are so grounded
(strongly suggesting Russellian panpsychism). So micro-idealism seems well-suited to satisfy the data
of irreducibility of consciousness, a causal role for consciousness, and causal closure of physics.
    At the same time, we have already seen that micro-idealism goes beyond mere micropsychism,
in at least three respects: it is a constitutive, pure, and reductionist version of micropsychism. In
principle it also goes beyond constitutive Russellian micropsychism in these respects, but perhaps
the most natural and most common versions of constitutive Russellian panpsychism are reduction-
ist and micropsychist. The key respect in which micro-idealism goes beyond constitutive Russellian


                                                  360
                                   Idealism and the Mind-Body Problem


micropsychism is its purity: it holds that all (and not merely some) fundamental properties of micro-
entities are mental.
    This purity is the source of a number of the distinctive strengths and weaknesses of micro-idealism.
First, the strengths. In holding that all fundamental properties are of the same kind, micro-idealism
offers a simple and unified monistic view of nature. By contrast, impure versions of panpsychism have
both mental and nonmental properties at the fundamental level, yielding a sort of property dualism.
Simplicity considerations seem to militate in favor of purity here. Second, micro-idealism yields a
relatively comprehensible picture of fundamental reality, in that in principle we may be able to grasp
the fundamental properties, while impure views tend to leave it quite obscure what the non-mental
properties might be. One might endorse a sort of ontological structuralism about the non-mental
properties, but this would yield an odd mix of ontological structuralism about some microphysical
properties and nonstructuralism about others; or one might suppose they have their own intrinsic
natures, but then it is quite unclear what those might be. Finally, pure panpsychism avoids the inter-
action problem of making sense of mental-nonmental interaction, in favor of the arguably easier
problem of mental-mental interaction. Together the issues of unity, comprehensibility, and interac-
tion provide a powerful case for taking micro-idealism seriously.
    Second, the weaknesses. Some real challenges to micro-idealism arise from it having to handle
all fundamental microphysical properties. Even in a classical physics framework, there are challenges,
the first among which is the challenge of space and time. Perhaps it is not so hard in principle to see
how microexperiential properties might ground monadic properties and quantities such as mass and
charge, as long as they have an appropriate scalar structure. But it is much harder to see how they will
ground fundamental relational properties, as spatiotemporal properties seem to be.
    Here the worry is that spatial properties seem to involve certain fundamental relations – distance
relations, on a standard view – between fundamental physical entities. Pure Russellian panpsychism
requires that these relations are realized by fundamental experiential relations between microsubjects.
But it is very hard to understand what a fundamental experiential relation between distinct subjects
of experience might be. The most basic experiential properties that we know about seem to be
monadic properties of individual subjects. What sort of basic experiential relations between subjects
might there be, that can play the role of spatial and temporal relations?
    Micro-idealists might respond in a few different ways. First, they might try to find some experien-
tial relation that can do the job. One familiar relation is the relationship of co-consciousness – but this
holds between the experiences of a subject and it is not at all easy to see how it extends to a between-
subjects relation. Others include the relationship of empathy, or of mental perception between subjects’
perceiving each others’ mental states, or of joint attention. All of these are more naturally analyzed in
terms of individual mental states than as fundamental relations, though. Perhaps some other familiar
or unfamiliar experiential relation could do the job. But there is at least a major challenge for this
approach in making sense of these relations and of the picture of conscious subjects that emerges.
    Second, a micro-idealist might offer a nonrelational grounding of spatiotemporal properties. One
approach is to accept a substantivalist view of space or space-time on which these are single sub-
stances, and on which objects have spatiotemporal properties by being related to that substance.
A micro-idealist version of this picture presumably requires that the substance here be mental, yield-
ing an element of cosmic idealism in the picture, or perhaps a sort of microcosmic idealism, if there
are fundamental microsubjects bearing relations to the fundamental cosmic subject that constitutes
space-time. That view is no longer a form of micro-idealism, though, and it also once again faces
the question of what the experiential relations between microsubjects and cosmic subject might be.
Another approach is to analyze spatiotemporal locations as intrinsic monadic properties of funda-
mental entities – something like a set of intrinsic co-ordinates, say – which might then be realized by
corresponding microexperiential properties. But this would require at least an unorthodox view of
physics that would be particularly difficult to square with modern approaches.


                                                   361
                                             David Chalmers


    Third, a micro-idealist might deny that spatiotemporal properties are fundamental in physics.
This move to “emergent spacetime” (that is, weakly emergent space-time) has become increas-
ingly popular in recent physical theories, where numerous theories that attempt to unify quantum
mechanics and relativity (including string theory, loop quantum gravity, and causal set theory) have
prominent versions in which space-time is derived from more basic structure. However, on most
such views the more basic structure involves more basic high-dimensional spaces. If these spaces
involve fundamental relational properties, this just moves the bump in the rug. One tempting move
here is to invoke a sort of spatiotemporal functionalism that grounds spatiotemporal structure to
causal structure, thereby reducing the problem of space-time to the (somewhat easier?) problem of
causation, discussed next. However, for this move to help, we still need a fundamental physics with-
out any fundamental spaces that are constituted by quasi-spatial relations. Most current emergent
space-time theories do not have this character (even causal set theory involves a sort of geometry at
the fundamental level), so this move requires a large bet on the character of future physical theory.
    Finally, a micro-idealist might allow nonexperiential spatiotemporal properties in their picture of
the world, while arguing that this does not compromise their idealism so badly as to rule out the label.
Certainly there is some intuition that if the world consisted wholly of minds in time, where time
is not given a mental analysis, this is reasonably close to a version of idealism (although it should be
noted that Kant’s “refutation of idealism” involved arguing that time cannot be wholly mental). If the
world consists wholly of minds in space-time, where space-time is not given a mental analysis, then
the idealism is weakened further, but perhaps the view has at least an idealist flavor. I think we should
acknowledge that these views are not idealist in the strict sense defined at the start of the chapter, but
perhaps they are close enough to be interesting. For example, if all truths are grounded in the mental
properties of microsubjects along with their spatiotemporal relations, that would still seem closer to
idealism than to other traditional views. So qualified relatives of idealism remain a possibility here.14
    A related challenge concerns causal and dispositional properties of fundamental physical entities.
Russellian panpsychism holds that these properties have mental properties as their categorical bases,
but on a common view dispositions are distinct from their categorical bases and are not metaphysi-
cally grounded in those bases. But how can dispositional facts then be grounded in mental facts, as
micro-idealism requires?
    Responses to the challenge of causation largely parallel responses to the challenge of space-time.
First, the micro-idealist might seek a mental grounding of dispositions, perhaps grounding them
in active experiences such as that of the will. Second, the micro-idealist might reject fundamental
dispositional properties, as Humeans do. Third, a non-Humean micro-idealist might allow funda-
mental causal/dispositional truths that are not wholly analyzable in mental terms, while holding that
this does not compromise their idealism beyond recognition. As with the phenomenalist view that
appeals to potentialities and powers regarding appearances, a world including fundamental disposi-
tions to have experiences still seems idealist at least in spirit.
    Perhaps the most interesting option here is the first. Mørch (forthcoming; see also this volume)
has argued for a phenomenal powers views on which phenomenal states are or metaphysically ground
certain causal powers or dispositions. For example, the experience of pain might ground a disposition
to avoid certain situations, while the experience of love might ground a disposition to associate with
certain people. On one version of this view, the phenomenal state without the power is inconceiv-
able and metaphysically impossible (even if the power without the phenomenal state is conceivable
and possible). If this view is correct, it offers the intriguing prospect of a micro-idealist view in which
all microphysical dispositions and laws are grounded in the distribution of phenomenal states and the
phenomenal powers that they ground. This would be an especially pure version of idealism.
    These twin challenges of space-time and causation offer distinctive challenges to micro-idealism
that impure versions of micropsychism do not face. Other major challenges to micro-idealism
include two challenges faced by micropsychism in general.


                                                   362
                                   Idealism and the Mind-Body Problem


     One such challenge is the challenge of holism. It is arguable that contemporary physics does not
deal in fundamental micro-entities. Instead, fundamental properties (including fields, functions, and
the like) attach holistically to systems and perhaps ultimately to the universe as a whole. For example,
quantum mechanics invokes wave function properties that in general are not possessed by single par-
ticles, but rather by systems of particles and perhaps ultimately by the universe as a whole. In addition,
it is sometimes suggested (e.g. Schaffer 2003) that there may be no lowest or smallest level of entities
in physics, but an infinite chain of ever-smaller entities. If any of these views are correct, there are no
fundamental micro-entities to be realized by microsubjects, and there are no fundamental properties
possessed by these entities to be realized by microexperiences. If we take a Russellian panpsychist
approach to views of this sort, we will be led toward cosmopsychism and perhaps cosmic idealism
rather than micropsychism and micro-idealism.
     The other challenge is the famous combination problem ( James 1895; Seager 1995). How do
the microexperiences of microsubjects collectively constitute the macroexperiences of macrosub-
jects? Here there are at least three versions of the combination problem, concerning subjects (how
do microsubjects yield macrosubjects?), qualities (how do microqualities yield macroqualities?), and
structure (how does microphysical structure yield macroexperiential structure?).
     Some panpsychists respond by endorsing emergent micropsychism, where macrosubjects and/or
macroexperiences are fundamental, causally emerging from microsubjects rather than being meta-
physically grounded in them. The analogous move for a micro-idealist is to embrace a sort of micro/
macro-idealism. These views tend to raise all the macro-micro interaction problems that faced ver-
sions of dualism: how can fundamental macrosubjects and macroexperiences play a causal role in a
causally closed microphysical/microexperiential world? The move to micro/macro-idealism in effect
removes one of the major potential attractions of panpsychism and micro-idealism.
     Other panpsychists endorse constitutive micropsychism, but then they have to solve the combina-
tion problem, or at least make a case that a solution exists. I have discussed and raised problems for
a number of approaches to the combination problem in “The Combination Problem for Panpsy-
chism” (Chalmers 2017), and I will not recapitulate them. Here I will just note that micro-idealism
is a form of constitutive micropsychism, so the combination problem looms at least as large for it,
and if anything micro-idealism tends to sharpen the problem. Where impure panpsychists can appeal
to nonmental properties as well as mental properties to explain how the combination works, micro-
idealists are restricted to mental materials from the start, which rules out some possible options
and reduces the range of options generally. So the combination problem is a serious challenge for
micro-idealism.
     Overall: micro-idealism can be initially motivated by the same considerations as panpsychism,
including the argument from irreducibility of consciousness, the causal role of consciousness, and
the causal closure of the physical. It receives some extra motivation (relative to non-idealist panpsy-
chism) by considerations of simplicity, comprehensibility, and interaction. But it also faces significant
extra challenges from space-time and causation, as well as the more general challenges from holism
and the combination problem. Some of these problems are very serious. Arguably the combination
problem is the most serious, followed by the problems of space-time and of holism. So while there
are significant attractions to micro-idealism, its prospects are somewhat questionable.


                                        4.  Cosmic Idealism
Cosmic idealism is the thesis that all concrete facts are grounded in facts about the mental states of (or
the mentality associated with) a single cosmic entity, such as the universe as a whole or perhaps a god.
   Cosmic idealism entails cosmopsychism, the thesis that a cosmic entity has associated mentality.15
Cosmopsychism does not entail cosmic idealism, for roughly the same reasons that micropsychism
does not entail micro-idealism. First, nonconstitutive cosmopsychists (e.g. emergent or autonomous


                                                   363
                                             David Chalmers


cosmopsychists) deny that the mental states of macrosubjects are grounded in those of the cosmic
subject. These panpsychists will at best be cosmic/macro idealists. Second, impure cosmopsychists
will allow that the cosmic subject has fundamental nonmental properties (e.g. spatiotemporal prop-
erties) as well as fundamental mental properties. Third, some nonreductionist cosmopsychists may
allow that there are fundamental nonmental properties in the world (for example, physical, biologi-
cal or normative properties) that are not constituted by properties of the cosmic subject. As with
micropsychism and micro-idealism, we could exclude these three views by focusing on constitutive,
pure, reductionist versions of cosmopsychism, thereby yielding the cosmic idealist thesis that all facts
are grounded in facts about the mental states of the cosmic subject.
    The basic motivations for cosmopsychism and cosmic idealism are closely related to the motiva-
tions for panpsychism and micro-idealism. As with these views, cosmopsychism and cosmic ideal-
ism can be jointly motivated through the success of science, the problem of consciousness, and the
inscrutability of matter. In particular, experience-involving versions of cosmopsychism and cosmic
idealism hold out the promise of accommodating the irreducibility of consciousness, the causal role
of consciousness, and the causal closure of the physical.
    The sort of cosmopsychism that satisfies these constraints is constitutive Russellian cosmopsychism. To
understand this view, start with a basic “priority monist” view (Schaffer 2010) on which the universe
as a whole is fundamental, and on which it has fundamental cosmophysical properties: perhaps distri-
butional properties concerning the distribution of matter in space-time, perhaps wave function prop-
erties, or perhaps something else. Russellian cosmopsychism (in its experience-involving version)
says that cosmoexperiential properties realize cosmophysical properties by having their structure and
playing their causal roles. In effect, cosmoexperiential properties are the causal basis of cosmophysical
dispositions. Constitutive cosmopsychism holds that these cosmoexperiential properties collectively
constitute (or ground) the macroexperiences of macrosubjects such as ourselves.
    In effect, constitutive Russellian cosmopsychism is a view on which the world as a whole consists
in the interplay of complex physics-structured experiential states in the mind of a cosmic subject.
Russellian cosmopsychism gives cosmic experiences the structure and the causal role of physical
states, while constitutive cosmopsychism allows macroexperiences to inherit a causal role from cos-
mic experiences. Cosmic idealism is certainly a form of constitutive cosmopsychism: if all facts are
grounded in truths about mental states of the cosmic subject, then facts about macroexperiences are
so grounded. Cosmic idealism does not entail Russellian cosmopsychism, but the most natural realist
version of cosmic idealism is Russellian: the Russellian strategy seems the best way for cosmic mental
states to ground states of the physical world.
    What are the cosmic experiences like? We need not take a stand here. To start with analogs of
familiar human experiences, the basic cosmic experiences might be perceptual: perhaps the cosmos
undergoes a series of quasi-visual experiences roughly mirroring the evolution of the universe. They
might be cognitive: perhaps the cosmos has a stream of conscious thought that mirrors the universe’s
physical dynamics. They might be imaginative: perhaps the cosmos is in effect imagining states with
the structure of the universe. Or perhaps most likely, these states may be quite unlike any human
experience, with a distinctive phenomenology of their own that realizes the universe-level structure
and dynamics of physics.
    The key respect in which cosmic idealism goes beyond constitutive Russellian cosmopsychism is
its purity: it holds that all (and not merely some) fundamental properties of the cosmic subject are
mental. As in the case of micro-idealism, this purity is the source of both strengths and weaknesses for
cosmic idealism. As with micro-idealism, it has strengths stemming from unity and comprehensibility
of the fundamental properties, as well as a particularly straightforward story about causal interaction,
which comes down to mental-mental interaction in the mind of a single subject. As with micro-
idealism, it also faces distinctive challenges concerning space-time and causation, as well as some
more general challenges.


                                                   364
                                  Idealism and the Mind-Body Problem


    It is with respect to these challenges that cosmic idealism gains much of its distinctive motivation,
at least relative to micro-idealism. The problem of space-time is less of a challenge for cosmic ideal-
ism than it is for micro-idealism. In both cases we are challenged to find experiential relations that
can realize spatiotemporal relations – but it is easier to find experiential relations in the mind of a
single subject than between subjects. For example, there are relations of co-consciousness, phenom-
enal feature binding, relative distribution in a sensory field, and so on. One could even imagine that
space-time as a whole is realized by complex spatiotemporal experiences of a single cosmic subject.
There are still many questions to answer (for example, concerning how relativistic phenomena could
be realized experientially), but the initial obstacle seems significantly smaller.
    As for the problem of causation, the same range of options is available for cosmic idealism as for
micro-idealism, but in some respects these options are more attractive in the cosmic context. If we
have to admit irreducible causal relations or dispositions, admitting such relations within the mind of
a single subject (rather than between subjects) seems particularly idealist in spirit. The Mørch-style
move of saying that cosmic experiential states ground the relevant dispositions is particularly attrac-
tive in this context, as it seems particularly natural for experiential states to ground dispositions to
have further experiences within the mind of a single subject.
    What about the more general challenges for micro-idealism: holism and the combination prob-
lem? Holism is of course no problem for cosmic idealism, and it serves as one of the major motivators
for moving from micro-idealism to cosmic idealism in the first place.16 Independently of idealism: if
there are no fundamental physical micro-entities, this motivates a move to holistic physical entities
such as the universe as a whole with holistic physical properties. In an idealist context, we need only
combine this independently motivated move with the claim that these holistic physical properties
are realized by mental properties.
    An analog of the combination problem, by contrast, is a significant issue for cosmic idealism and
for related versions of cosmopsychism. This is the problem of how cosmic experiences can constitute
the ordinary macroexperiences of subjects like us. In earlier work I called this the “decomposition
problem”. Albahari (this volume) objects that this label makes it sound like the universe is decom-
posing and recommends “decombination problem” instead. However, this awkward neologism is
also somewhat misleading in suggesting that the universal mind must be a combination of the macro
minds. Instead, I will use the simple label of the “constitution problem” for the issue of how the cos-
mic mind constitutes macro minds. As a bonus, this label can be used to cover the analogous combi-
nation problem for micro-idealism and constitutive micropsychism (how do micro minds constitute
a macro mind?), bringing out that there is a unified problem for both views. Strictly speaking the
constitution problem arises only for constitutive versions of both views (emergent panpsychists deny
that fundamental minds constitute macro minds), but these are certainly the views that are subject to
the most serious combination/decomposition problems.
    As with the original combination problem, the constitution problem for cosmopsychism and
cosmic idealism has at least three subproblems. The subject constitution problem is that of how a
cosmic subject can constitute macrosubjects. The quality constitution problem is that of how cosmic
experiential qualities can constitute macroqualities. The structure constitution problem is that of
how cosmic experiential structure can constitute macroexperiential structure.
    All of these problems are serious. The quality and structure constitution problems are very closely
related to the corresponding combination problems for panpsychism, and the range of options is
similar (the main options discussed by Chalmers 2017 all apply here, with the same strengths and
weaknesses), so I will set them aside here. The subject constitution problem is perhaps more distinc-
tive in the cosmic case, and I will focus on it.
    The subject constitution problem for cosmic idealism is that of how a cosmic subject can consti-
tute macrosubjects such as ordinary human conscious subjects. It is at least not easy to see how this can
happen, and there are arguments that it is impossible. For example, a straightforward conceivability


                                                  365
                                             David Chalmers


argument (analogous to conceivability arguments against constitutive panpsychism mounted by Goff
2009) holds that one can conceive of the cosmic subject with all of its cosmic mental states without
any further distinct subjects, and in particular without any macrosubjects. This claim may be derived
from a more general claim that for any group of subjects one can conceive of any one of them with-
out the others, or it may be offered as independently plausible in this specific case. Either way, given
a link between conceivability and metaphysical possibility, it follows that it is metaphysically possible
that the cosmic subject exists without macrosubjects; and given a link between metaphysical possibil-
ity and constitution or grounding, it follows that the cosmic subject cannot ground macrosubjects.
    Many responses are possible. The first is to move to nonconstitutive cosmopsychism, giving up on
the requirement that there be a constitutive connection between the cosmic mind and macro minds.
One could endorse emergent cosmopsychism, holding that macro minds are strongly emergent in
some way from the cosmic mind, or autonomous cosmopsychism, holding that macro minds do
not wholly depend on the cosmic mind. Idealist versions of these views give up on straightforward
cosmic idealism and instead move to a version of cosmic/macro-idealism on which both cosmic and
macro minds are fundamental.17
    A common way to arrive at this sort of view is to adopt cosmopsychism as an account of the
physical world, while allowing that our own minds are not constituted by the physical world or its
realizers. This is an important view, but it has very much the flavor of dualist views of the mind–
body relation, and it suffers from analogous problems of interaction. For example, do the macro
minds affect the physics-constituting aspects of the cosmic mind (thereby threatening causal closure
of physics, as with interactionist dualism), or do they have no effect on it (thereby threatening the
intuition that consciousness affects the physical world, as with epiphenomenalism)? The view may
have some advantages over dualism in that the interaction will at least be mental-mental rather than
mental-nonmental, and unity and comprehensibility provide considerations in its favor. But the view
seems to give up on the initial promise of keeping the best aspects of materialism and dualism and
the worst aspects of neither.
    To keep this promise, one needs a constitutive solution to the constitution problem. This requires
constitutive cosmopsychism, on which macrosubjects are genuinely constituted by (metaphysically
grounded in) the cosmic subject and its mental states. Here there are a few strategies in the literature.
    The first is identity cosmopsychism, on which macrosubjects are identical to the cosmic subject. This
view avoids the conceivability argument by denying any subjects distinct from the cosmic subject,
but it encounters twin immediate objections. First objection: macrosubjects are distinct from each
other, so they cannot all be identical to the cosmic subject. Second objection: the cosmic subject has
experiences that each macrosubject (like me) is not having, so they cannot be identical. If identity
cosmopsychism is to retain anything like the standard logic of identity, it must presumably respond by
saying that in fact all of us are identical to each other, and all of us in fact are having all the experi-
ences that the macrosubject has. The cost is that both of these claims seem to be obviously false. The
task for the identity cosmopsychist is to explain away their apparent falsity as some sort of illusion.
    A natural strategy here suggests that the cosmic subject undergoes some sort of cognitive fragmenta-
tion into different components, modes, or guises, each of which lacks access to the other components.
Kastrup (2017) suggests an analogy with dissociative identity disorder (DID): in effect, each macro-
subject is an alter (of many multiple personalities) of the cosmic subject. Of course, the metaphysics
of DID is controversial, with some arguing that multiple subjects are present, but it is common to
hold that there is a single fragmented subject here. On a natural characterization, the subject has
multiple modes or guises that lack access to the other modes. The subject has the experiences of all
the alters, but under the mode of one alter they will lack cognitive access to the experiences (per-
haps including simultaneous experiences) associated with other alters. In effect, the subject’s access
is relativized to modes. If we use the fragmentation model to understand cosmic idealism, we can
then suggest that the experiences that seem to belong to a single macrosubject in fact belong to the


                                                   366
                                  Idealism and the Mind-Body Problem


cosmic subject under a certain mode, and under this mode we do not have cognitive access to the
experiences we are simultaneously having under other modes.
    Of course, this view raises many questions. There are many disanalogies between the universe and
a DID subject, and it is not at all clear how to find analogous within-subject fragmentation at the
level of cognitive processes in the universe. The view is also massively revisionary about our minds
and our relations to one another. It makes our ordinary mode of existence pathological, since in this
mode we are unaware of the vast majority of experiences we are having.18 This entails a massive
failure of introspection, as our ordinary beliefs reflect a near-complete lack of knowledge about our
own consciousness. This failure is at least uncomfortable for people who are realists about conscious-
ness, though analogous phenomena on a more limited scale are familiar. One analog is found in Ned
Block’s cases where phenomenal consciousness overflows cognitive access (Block 2007): we might
think of cosmic fragmentation as involving phenomenal overflow on a very large scale. Still, iden-
tity cosmopsychism along with cognitive fragmentation seems a coherent view that is worth taking
seriously.
    The alternative is non-identity constitutive cosmopsychism, on which there are multiple subjects
who are not identical to the cosmic subject but whose existence and experiences are grounded in the
existence and experiences of the cosmic subject. One view is that the multiple subjects are experien-
tial parts of the cosmic subject or that they are subsumed by the cosmic subject (Goff 2017). A related
if somewhat more obscure view (Mathews 2011; Shani 2015) is that macrosubjects are “vortices” in
the consciousness of a cosmic subject. An obvious objection to the first view is that parts of a subject
are not usually subjects – there does not seem to be a separate subject who has just by visual experi-
ences – and even if there is, the existence of such a subject does not seem to be necessitated merely by
the existence and experiences of a cosmic subject. The same goes for subsumption and for vortices
in consciousness. Goff (2017) gets around this by supposing that the cosmic subject has nonmental
as well as mental properties (“consciousness-plus”) and that these unknown and unconceived non-
mental properties can in principle explain the subsumption of cosmic subjects.19 In postulating these
fundamental nonmental properties, however, Goff gives up on cosmic idealism for a sort of cosmic
property dualism.
    A final strategy is to deflate subjects of experience or to eliminate them entirely. Views like this
are familiar in the Buddhist tradition, which denies the existence of the self and is often understood
to deny the existence of subjects as well (at least in ultimate reality). On views of this sort, there are
experiences but no subjects that have them; or at least, any bearers of the experiences are very much
unlike the primitive persisting entities that we have in mind when we think of subjects. This non–
subject-involving view is often combined with a sort of idealism on which conventional reality is
grounded in conventional appearances, and in which all this is grounded in cosmic experience at the
ultimate level. This picture at least tends to suggest a view on which macroexperience is grounded
in non–subject-involving cosmic experience in ultimate reality.20
    On a non–subject-involving cosmic idealist view, there is cosmic experience but no cosmic sub-
ject. It might then be argued that with no subjects there is no subject constitution problem to solve.
Of course, this does not eliminate the problem entirely. Presumably experiences still come bundled
into relatively unified groups (corresponding to what we thought of as subjects), and we still need
to know how a cosmic bundle of experiences could constitute a macro bundle of the sort I seem to
have. This problem is by no means straightforward (on the face of it one could run a conceivability
argument against it analogous to the one for subjects), but perhaps the problems for it are at least
more tractable than the corresponding problems for non–subject-involving views. One cost is then
to make sense of experiences without subjects of experience. I am not sure I can do this, but many
theorists have at least tried, and again the view is certainly worth taking seriously.
    To sum up the discussion of the constitution problem for cosmic idealism: I think that as with the
combination problem for micropsychism, the constitution problem is a very serious one, but there


                                                   367
                                             David Chalmers


are at least some avenues for solving it (especially the identity cosmopsychist avenue) that are more
promising than analogs in the micropsychist case and that are worth exploring further.
     Of course, there are also any number of possible further objections to cosmic idealism. One
potential objection holds that mental properties require nonmental properties lying behind them to
causally sustain their structure and dynamics. Cosmic idealism is perhaps better placed than macro-
idealism to answer this objection, by developing a picture on which cosmic experiences are both
fundamental and causally closed, so that they need no further causal sustaining. But it is certainly a
challenge to develop a detailed account of cosmic experience with the appropriate form.
     Another issue is the relationality problem.21 As Moore stressed in his “refutation of idealism” (1903),
experience seems to be relational. In an experience (e.g. a sensation of blue), a subject is aware
of some object (e.g. the subject is aware of blueness). Moore held that this object is itself non-­
experiential (in contemporary language, it is neither identical to an experience or grounded in
experience), which entails that idealism is false. Contemporary representationalist views can avoid
this consequence by holding that experience relates us to some abstract property (such as blueness)
or proposition (e.g. that some object is blue). As noted at the start of the chapter, an idealist need not
hold that abstract objects are grounded in experience. Still, if the fundamental experiences (e.g. in
a cosmic subject) represent a mind-independent world in which entities have mind-independent
properties such as blueness, and if there is no world independent of the cosmic subject, then it is hard
to avoid the conclusion that the cosmic subject is hallucinating, which is at least odd.
     Cosmic idealists might respond in a number of ways. If they retain a relational view of experience,
they could accept that cosmic experience is hallucinatory, or they may hold that cosmic experience
is nonperceptual: perhaps the cosmic mind merely imagines the relevant states of affairs, in which
case no hallucination need be involved. Alternatively, they could argue that the relational experiences
of a cosmic subject are veridical. For example, cosmic subjects might represent structural properties
which are instantiated in their world, or they might be unlike ordinary human subjects in that they
represent only experiences and not a mind-independent world. Still, combining cosmic idealism
with a relational view of experience seems to make the relational structure of experience at best
somewhat marginal to the role of experience in constituting the world. At least on a realist version
of idealism, it looks as if experience could have constituted reality just as well if it were not relational.
     A more radical but perhaps more principled response denies that cosmic experience is relational
at all. As Allinson (1978) observes, this response to Moore is available to so-called “non-dual” views
of experience in the Eastern traditions, such as the Advaita Vedanta and the Yogacara schools. On
these views, experience at a fundamental level does not involve a duality between subject and object
and does not involve a relational structure whereby subjects are aware of objects. For example, it
may involve states of pure awareness without objects, or perhaps pure qualities without awareness, or
something harder for us to comprehend. It is by no means straightforward to make sense of nonrela-
tional experience, but if it is possible, it has some attractions in avoiding the problems of relationality
at a fundamental level.
     A related issue specific to cosmic idealism is the austerity problem. The issue here is that the cosmic
mind in the present picture (whether relational or nonrelational) looks extremely austere, and very
much unlike a mind as we normally think of it. Its basic experiential structure and dynamics is tied
to the structure and dynamics of physics. There seems to be little or no rationality in this structure.
There seems to be very little thinking, valuing, or reasoning. It is not really clear why, if there is to be
a cosmic mind, it should be as austere as this.
     The cosmic idealist faces a choice point here. On the first option, the cosmic mind has experi-
ences that are wholly isomorphic to the structure of physics. This is the option taken by austere Rus-
sellian cosmopsychism, where the cosmic subject has mental states with structure and dynamics that
realize physical dynamics, and has no more mental states and no more structure and dynamics than
this. This option faces the austerity problem.


                                                    368
                                  Idealism and the Mind-Body Problem


    The second option is to postulate that the cosmic mind has experiences that go beyond the struc-
ture and dynamics of physics. One could adopt a non-Russellian cosmopsychism where the structure
and dynamics of physics is absent from cosmic experience, but this view has trouble in recovering
physical truths. A somewhat more attractive version of this option is enriched Russellian cosmopsychism,
where the cosmic subject has experiential states with the physical structure and dynamics, but also
has other mental states with further structure and dynamics. These further mental states might make
the cosmic mind much less austere and more mind-like. The cost for this option is a sort of excess
baggage problem: the world has more structure than physics suggests, and we have to postulate supra-
natural structure and dynamics beyond what natural science suggests. The extra mental states seem
to play no direct role in constituting physical states of the universe, and one might worry that they
will be entirely epiphenomenal with respect to the universe we observe.
    That said, there are arguably enriched Russellian cosmopsychist models where the extra mental
structure plays a role in sustaining physical dynamics. For example, on one model the cosmic sub-
ject is a rational being somewhat like you and me, except vastly more intelligent and with enor-
mously greater cognitive resources. Such a being may have an interest in imagining and simulating
universes, perhaps to learn what will happen in universes given various conditions. If the cosmic
subject fully simulates a universe like ours in its imagination, its imaginative states will then have
very much the structure and dynamics of physics in our universe. These imaginative states them-
selves may be somewhat austere, but they will be driven by further mental states of the cosmic
subject in which values and rationality inhere. A model like this allows for a much less austere
cosmic subject, perhaps at cost of making the mental states that constitute our universe something
of a sideshow in its mind.
    One might even adapt Bostrom’s simulation argument (2003) to argue that it is quite likely that
a cousin of this sort of cosmic idealism is true. A simplified version of the simulation argument says
that many simulated universes will be created in the lifetime of a universe containing intelligent life,
and there will be more beings in simulations than outside simulations, so it is very likely that we are
in a simulation. One could additionally argue that most simulations will be done within the minds
of simulating beings. The great majority of simulating beings will be superintelligent beings, and
these beings will have little need to run simulations on separate computers. Instead they will have
the resources to run simulations directly in their own computational minds. If so, most beings in the
cosmos will exist in universes realized by the minds of simulating beings.
    The idealism suggested by this simulation argument is admittedly subject to some qualifica-
tions. One is that it is far from obvious that the simulations in question will need to be con-
scious. The idealism may well involve constitution by non-conscious mental states, which may
themselves have underlying non-mental grounds. Another qualification is that on this view the
cosmic subject will not constitute the entire cosmos, but it will at least constitute everything in
our universe. Whether idealism or some other view is true of the cosmos as a whole remains a
further question.
    I conclude that there is significant motivation for cosmic idealism. It shares the general motiva-
tions for panpsychism, which are strong, and has some extra motivation in addition. Compared to
micro-idealism, it deals much better with the problems of space-time and of holism, and it at least
has some extra promise in dealing with the problem of causation and the all-important constitu-
tion problem. Compared to non-idealist forms of panpsychism and panprotopsychism, it has some
advantages in simplicity and comprehensibility, while it has both benefits and costs with respect to
the constitution problem. I do not know that the constitution problem can be solved, but there are
at least avenues worth exploring.
    Overall, I think cosmic idealism is the most promising version of idealism, and is about as promis-
ing as any version of panpsychism. It should be on the list of the handful of promising approaches to
the mind–body problem.


                                                  369
                                                David Chalmers


                                               5. Conclusion
I do not claim that idealism is plausible. No position on the mind–body problem is plausible. Mate-
rialism is implausible. Dualism is implausible. Idealism is implausible. Neutral monism is implausible.
None-of-the-above is implausible. But the probabilities of all of these views get a boost from the fact
that one of them must be true. Idealism is not greatly less plausible than its main competitors. So even
though idealism is implausible, there is a non-negligible probability that it is true.


                                                     Notes
	 1.	 Thanks to participants in the NYU Shanghai workshop on idealism and in the ANU philosophy of mind
      work-in-progress group. For written comments, thanks to Miri Albahari, Eddy Keming Chen, Bronwyn
      Finnigan, Hedda Mørch, Bill Seager, Itay Shani, and Trevor Teitel.
	 2.	 I recall either hearing this epigram in conversation or reading it somewhere, with the sense that it came
      from the school of recent British idealists such as John Foster, Howard Robinson, and T. L. S. Sprigge. To
      my surprise no one I have consulted (including Robinson) remembers the saying, so perhaps I hallucinated
      it or it was the invention of one of my conversational partners. Any leads are welcome!
	 3.	 The rise of materialism: e.g. Armstrong (1968), Feigl (1958), Lewis (1966), Place (1956), Putnam (1960),
      Smart (1959). The dualist response: e.g. Chalmers (1996), Foster (1991), Jackson (1982), Kripke (1980),
      Nida-Rümelin (1997), Robinson (1982) (with support from Nagel 1974 and Levine 1983). The festival of
      panpsychism: e.g. Brüntrup and Jaskolla (2017), Chalmers (2013), Goff (2017), Mathews (2003), Rosenberg
      (2004), Seager and Allen-Hermanson (2015), Skrbina (2009), Strawson (2006) (with support from Chalm-
      ers 1996, Griffin 1998, and Nagel 1979). The stirrings of idealism: Adams (2007), Albahari (this volume),
      Bolender (2001), Foster (2008), Goldschmidt and Pearce (2017), Kastrup (2017), Meixner (2017), Pelczar
      (2015), Yetter-Chappell (2017) (with support from Foster 1982, Sprigge 1983 and Strawson 1994, as well
      as cosmopsychists cited later). Of course there is an enormous amount of idealism in pre-20th century
      philosophy (Indian, Tibetan, British, German, and so on) but due to lack of expertise I am engaging with
      historical material only superficially.
	 4.	 That is, mental facts are facts involving only mental properties. Mental facts might involve logical and/or
      singular constituents in addition to properties: so e.g. ∃xMx and Ma both count.
	 5.	 Some subtleties: The definition of anti-realist idealism can either include or exclude microphenomenalist
      and cosmic phenomenalist views (discussed in the next section), depending on whether or not the relevant
      appearances are limited to those in observers like us. For it to include nonphenomenalist views where
      there are experiences but no physical objects, we should allow the definition to be true vacuously. For it
      to exclude versions of Russellian panpsychism on which structural roles fix the reference of physical terms
      to mental properties that play those roles (so that perhaps electron-appearances play the electron role and
      are therefore electrons), the “what it is” claim should probably be understood as conceptual or epistemic
      equivalence rather than metaphysical equivalence.
	 6.	 The assumption that idealism must be antirealist is reflected in a question in the PhilPapers Survey (Bourget
      and Chalmers 2014): “External world: idealism, skepticism, or non-skeptical realism”. The question tacitly
      acknowledges the possibility of skeptical realism but not of idealist realism. 4.3% accepted idealism. The
      figure would probably not have been much higher if realist idealism were explicitly acknowledged (and only
      0.4% indicated that they accepted more than one answer), but the phrasing brings out the way that views
      of this sort tend to be ignored. (Mea culpa.)
	7.	 Another common taxonomy distinguishes metaphysical idealism (reality is fundamentally mental) from
      epistemological idealism (all knowable facts are mental), conceptual idealism (our concepts constrain facts
      about reality; Rescher 1973; Hofweber 2017), and explanatory idealism (the mental plays some role in
      explaining all facts about reality; Rescher 2007; Ross 2017). My focus in this chapter is firmly on varieties
      of metaphysical idealism.
	 8.	 I say “mentality associated with” in order to make these three varieties of cosmic idealism consistent with
      non–subject-involving views that reject the idea that mentality requires something to bear on mental states.
      If we assume a subject-involving view (or a non–subject-involving view that allows bearers that are not
      subjects), one could change this expression to “mental states of ” here and throughout this article.
	 9.	 Among contemporaries, it is easy to read Strawson (2006) as a micro-idealist (though his view is consistent
      with cosmic idealism). Pelczar (2015) is a macro-idealist, and Kastrup (2017) is a cosmic idealist. Others
      discussed ahead hold combined views, or hold versions of panpsychism and cosmopsychism without full-on
      idealism.


                                                       370
                                        Idealism and the Mind-Body Problem


	10.	 Among contemporaries, Foster and Robinson can be read as cosmic/macro idealists in the Berkeleyan
               mould, while Albahari and Yetter-Chappell can be read as cosmic/macro idealists of a somewhat different
               sort. Adams offers both cosmic/macro and micro/macro alternatives. Emergent panpsychists such as Mørch,
               Seager, and Rosenberg might be read as micro/macro or perhaps micro/macro/cosmic idealists.
 	11.	 Pelczar (2015) holds that sensation conditionals are all primitive but argues that they can be nonreductively
               explained in terms of a relatively small subset of sensation conditionals: they are naturally necessitated by
               those sensation conditionals that constitute the basic laws of nature and the associated boundary conditions.
               This subset is nevertheless still enormously large and complex: every way we look, the laws of physics seem
               to be true. As a result the view is very much subject to a version of the explanatory objection: the order
               among these sensation conditionals constitutes a remarkably complex coincidence, and is much better
               explained if the appearances are caused by a separate domain in which the laws are true. Pelczar concedes
               that the complexity is a disadvantage of his view, but holds that separate-domain views have even worse
               problems.
  	12.	 A sophisticated macro-idealist view in this class has recently been put forward by Markus Müller (2019).
               On Müller’s view, there is a sequence of experiences governed by a single fundamental intra-experiential
               law: a given experience in the sequence is determined by its algorithmic probability conditional on earlier
               experiences (where the algorithmic probability of a sequence is higher when the sequence is generated by
               a short algorithm). The effect is that experiences start out random but that effective intra-experiential laws
               (shortish algorithms that generate experiences) may stabilize over time. However, it remains unclear why
               these intra-experiential laws should take a form that suggests an external world, with a domain of lawful
               interaction among non-experiential entities. The simplest intra-experiential laws will involve simple inter-
               actions among experiences, with no need for even an apparent external world.
   	13.	 I don’t know of any philosopher who is committed to micro-idealism. Perhaps the nearest is Roelofs (2014),
               who favors micro-idealism but does not rule out cosmic idealism. Strawson (2006) looks like a micro-
               idealist but has more sympathy with cosmic idealism. Many other panpsychists turn out to be emergent
               panpsychists (e.g. Mørch and Rosenberg), cosmopsychists (e.g. Goff and Shani), impure panpsychists (Goff
               again), or neutral monists (e.g. Coleman 2012).
    	14.	 Adams (2007) and Strawson (2006) both seem to allow that space-time may not be mentally analyzable.
               Adams calls the view “mere panpsychism”, holding that non-ideal space-time gives up on idealism. Straw-
               son seems to hold that idealism is consistent with minds existing in non-ideal space-time.
     	15.	 Recent proponents of cosmopsychism include Mathews (2011) (under the name “cosmological panpsy-
               chism”), Jaskolla and Buck (2012) (“panexperiential holism”), Nagasawa and Wager (2017) (“priority cos-
               mopsychism”, which is roughly what I am calling constitutive cosmopsychism), Goff (this volume and
               2017), and Shani (2015). See also Albahari (this volume) and Miller (2017) for discussion. Cosmopsychism
               is sometimes understood as the more specific thesis that the universe (or the cosmos) has mental states. This
               definition excludes many divine forms of cosmic idealism, so it is not entailed by cosmic idealism as defined
               earlier. Of course one could also define cosmic idealism more narrowly to exclude divine versions, but then
               we would need a fourth category of divine idealism. At least for present purposes it is more straightforward
               to treat the divine and non-divine versions of cosmic idealism and cosmopsychism together. My own focus
               is very much on non-divine versions, but much of what I say also applies to divine versions.
      	16.	 On the other hand, as Einar Bohn pointed out to me, the “what if there is no lowest level?” objection to
               micro-idealism is paralled by a “what if there is no highest level?” objection to cosmic idealism. If there is
               no cosmos (instead just infinitely embedded universes), the cosmos cannot serve as a cosmic subject.
       	17.	 Broadly autonomous versions of cosmic/macro-idealism (macro minds are autonomous from the cosmic
               mind) seem to fit the work of Foster (2008), Robinson (1982), and perhaps Adams (2007), while broadly
               emergent views (macro minds emerge from the cosmic mind) are adopted by Albahari (this volume) and
               Yetter-Chappell (2017).
        	18.	 According to some versions of this view, we can occasionally get hints of other fragments of our experience
               or become more lucidly aware of our underlying cosmic experiences. For example, some Buddhist tradi-
               tions suggest that certain meditative practices (e.g. Dzogchen practice in Tibetan Buddhism) can help us
               experience the fundamental mode of consciousness.
         	19.	 For similar reasons, panprotopsychist views that appeal to unknown protomental properties have certain
               advantages over pure panpsychist (idealist) views when it comes to the constitution problem. Arguably we
               understand experience well enough to see that subjects of experience cannot constitute distinct subjects;
               but because we do not understand the relevant protomental properties, we do not have correspondingly
               strong reasons to deny that they can constitute subjects of experience. On the other hand, panprotopsychist
               theories have to deal with a nonexperience–experience gap (many theorists hold that only experience can
               constitute experience), and pure panpsychist views have the advantage of relative comprehensibility.


                                                            371
                                                 David Chalmers


	20.	 It should be noted that not all Buddhists are idealists. Idealism is most common in the Yogacara school,
       but even there, there is a vigorous contemporary debate about whether Yogacara involves metaphysical or
       epistemological idealism. See Arnold (2008), Finnigan (2017) and Trivedi (2005) for discussion.
 	21.	 Thanks to Daniel Stoljar for pressing this problem for idealism.


                                                  References
Adams, R. (2007). ‘Idealism Vindicated’. In P. van Inwagen and D. Zimmerman (eds.), Persons: Human and
    Divine. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 35–54.
Albahari, M. (this volume). ‘Beyond Cosmopsychism and the Great I Am: How the World Might Be Grounded
    in Universal “Advaitic” Consciousness’. In W. Seager (ed.), The Routledge Handbook of Panpsychism. London:
    Routledge.
Allinson, R. E. (1978). ‘A Non-Dualistic Reply to Moore’s Refutation of Idealism’. Indian Philosophical Quarterly,
    5: 661–8.
Armstrong, D. M. (1968). A Materialist Theory of the Mind. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Arnold, D. (2008). ‘Buddhist Idealism, Epistemic and Otherwise: Thoughts on the Alternating Perspectives of
    Dharmakirti’. Sophia, 47: 3–28.
Block, N. (2007). ‘Consciousness, Accessibility, and the Mesh Between Psychology and Neuroscience’. Behavioral
    and Brain Sciences, 30: 481–548.
Bolender, J. (2001). ‘An Argument for Idealism’. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 8 (4): 37–61.
Bostrom, N. (2003). ‘Are We Living in a Computer Simulation?’ Philosophical Quarterly, 53 (211): 243–55.
Bourget, D., and Chalmers, D. J. (2014). ‘What Do Philosophers Believe?’ Philosophical Studies 170: 465–500.
Brüntrup, G., and Jaskolla, L. (2017). Panpsychism: Contemporary Perspectives. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chalmers, D. J. (1996). The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chalmers, D. J. (2005). ‘The Matrix as Metaphysics’. In C. Grau (ed.), Philosophers Explore the Matrix. Oxford:
    Oxford University Press, pp. 132–76.
Chalmers, D. J. (2012). Constructing the World. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chalmers, D. J. (2013). ‘Panpsychism and Panprotopsychism’. Amherst Lecture in Philosophy. www.amherstlecture.
    org/chalmers2013. (Reprinted in Brüntrup and Jaskolla (2017), pp. 19–47.)
Chalmers, D. J. (2017). ‘The Combination Problem for Panpsychism’. In Brüntrup and Jaskolla (2017),
    pp. 179–214.
Chalmers, D. J. (2018). ‘Structuralism as a Response to Skepticism’. Journal of Philosophy 115: 625-60.
Chalmers, D. J., and McQueen, K. (forthcoming). ‘Consciousness and the Collapse of the Wave Function’.
    In S. Gao (ed.) Consciousness and Quantum Mechanics. Oxford University Press.
Coleman, S. (2012). ‘Mental Chemistry: Combination for Panpsychists’. Dialectica, 66: 137–66.
Feigl, H. (1958). ‘The “Mental” and the “Physical” ’. Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, 2: 370–497.
Finnigan, B. (2017). ‘Buddhist Idealism’. In Goldschmidt and Pearce (2017).
Foster, J. (1982). The Case for Idealism. London: Routledge.
Foster, John (1991). The Immaterial Self: A Defence of the Cartesian Dualist Conception of Mind. New York: Routledge.
Foster, J. (2008). A World for Us: The Case for Phenomenalistic Idealism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Goff, P. (2009). ‘Why Panpsychism Doesn’t Help to Explain Consciousness’. Dialectica, 63 (3): 289–311.
Goff, P. (2017). Consciousness and Fundamental Reality. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Goff, P. (this volume). ‘Micropsychism, Cosmopsychism, and the Grounding Relation’. In W. Seager (ed.), The
    Routledge Handbook of Panpsychism. London: Routledge.
Goldschmidt, T., and Pearce, K. (2017). Idealism: New Essays in Metaphysics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Griffin, D. R. (1998). Unsnarling the World-Knot. Oakland: University of California Press.
Hoffman, D. (2008). ‘Conscious Realism and the Mind – Body Problem’. Mind and Matter, 6: 87–121.
Hofweber, T. (2017). ‘Conceptual idealism without ontological idealism’. In Goldschmidt and Pearce (2017).
Jackson, F. (1982). ‘Epiphenomenal Qualia’. Philosophical Quarterly, 32: 127–36.
James, W. (1895). The Principles of Psychology. New York: Henry Holt.
Jaskolla, L. J., and Buck, A. J. (2012). ‘Does Panexperiential Holism Solve the Combination Problem?’ Journal of
    Consciousness Studies, 19: 190–9.
Kastrup, B. (2017). ‘An Ontological Solution to the Mind – Body Problem’. Philosophies, 2: 2. DOI:10.3390/
    philosophies2020010.
Kripke, S. (1980). Naming and Necessity. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Levine, J. (1983). ‘Materialism and Qualia: The Explanatory Gap’. Pacific Philosophical Quarterly, 64: 354–61.
Lewis, D. (1966). ‘An Argument for the Identity Theory’. Journal of Philosophy, 63: 17–25.



                                                        372
                                    Idealism and the Mind-Body Problem


Mathews, F. (2003). For Love of Matter: A Contemporary Panpsychism. Albany: State University of New York Press.
Mathews, F. (2011). ‘Panpsychism as Paradigm’. In M. Blamauer (ed.), The Mental as Fundamental. Frankfurt:
    Ontos Verlag, pp. 141–55.
Meixner, U. (2017). ‘Idealism and Panpsychism’. In Brüntrup and Jaskolla (2017), pp. 387–406.
Miller, G. (2017). ‘Can Subjects Be Proper Parts of Subjects? The Decombination Problem’. Ratio, 30 (2).
    DOI:10.1111/rati.12166.
Mørch, H. H. (forthcoming). ‘Phenomenal Powers Panpsychism’.
Mørch, H. H. (this volume). ‘The Argument for Panpsychism from Experience of Causation’. In W. Seager (ed.),
    The Routledge Handbook of Panpsychism. London: Routledge.
Müller, M. 2019. Law without law: from observer states to physics via algorithmic information theory.
    arxiv:1712.01826 [quant-ph].
Nagasawa, Y., and Wager, K. (2017). ‘Panpsychism and Priority Cosmopsychism’. In Brüntrup and Jaskolla
    (2017), pp. 113–29.
Nagel, T. (1974). ‘What Is It Like to Be a Bat?’ Philosophical Review, 4: 435–50.
Nagel, T. (1979). ‘Panpsychism’. In Mortal Questions. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 181–95.
Nida-Rümelin, M. (1997). ‘Is the Naturalization of Qualitative Experience Possible or Sensible?’ In M. Carrier
    and P. K. Machamer (eds.), Mindscapes: Philosophy, Science, and the Mind. Pittsburgh: Pittsburgh University
    Press, pp. 117–44.
Pelczar, M. (2015). Sensorama: A Phenomenalist Analysis of Spacetime and Its Contents. Oxford: Oxford University
    Press.
Place, U. T. (1956). ‘Is Consciousness a Brain Process?’ British Journal of Psychology, 47: 44–50.
Putnam, H. (1960). ‘Minds and Machines’. In S. Hook (ed.), Dimensions of Mind. New York: New York Uni-
    versity Press, pp. 138–64.
Rescher, N. (1973). Conceptual Idealism. Oxford: Blackwell.
Rescher, N. (2007). ‘What Sort of Idealism Is Viable Today?’ In P. Basile and L. McHenry (eds.), Consciousness,
    Reality and Value: Essays in Honour of T.L.S. Sprigge. Heusenstamm: Ontos Verlag, pp. 67–78.
Robinson, H. (1982). Matter and Sense. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Roelofs, L. (2014). Combining Minds. Ph.D. thesis, University of Toronto. https://tspace.library.utoronto.ca/
    handle/1807/69449.
Rosenberg, G. H. (2004). A Place for Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ross, J. (2017). ‘Idealism and Fine-Tuning’. In Goldschmidt and Pearce (2017).
Schaffer, J. (2003). Is there a fundamental level? Nous 37: 498-517.
Schaffer, J. (2010). ‘Monism: The Priority of the Whole’. Philosophical Review, 119: 31–76.
Seager, W. E. (1995). ‘Consciousness, Information, and Panpsychism’. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 2: 272–88.
Seager, W. E., and Allen-Hermanson, S. (2015). ‘Panpsychism’. In E. Zalta (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of
    Philosophy, Fall edition.
Shani, I. (2015). ‘Cosmopsychism: A Holistic Approach to the Metaphysics of Experience’. Philosophical Papers,
    44: 389–437.
Skrbina, D. (ed.) (2009). Mind That Abides: Panpsychism in the New Millennium. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Smart, J. J. C. (1959). ‘Sensations and Brain Processes’. Philosophical Review, 68: 141–56.
Sprigge, T. L. S. (1983). The Vindication of Absolute Idealism. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Stapp, H. P. (1993). Mind, Matter, and Quantum Mechanics. Berlin: Springer.
Strawson, G. (1994). Mental Reality. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Strawson, G. (2006). ‘Realistic Monism: Why Physicalism Entails Panpsychism’. Journal of Consciousness Studies,
    13 (10–11): 3–31.
Tononi, G. (2004). ‘An Information Integration Theory of Consciousness’. BMC Neuroscience, 5: 42.
Trivedi, S. (2005). ‘Idealism and Yogacara Buddhism’. Asian Philosophy, 15: 231–46.
Wigner, E. P. (1961). ‘Remarks on the Mind – Body Question’. In I. J. Good (ed.), The Scientist Speculates. Lon-
    don: Heineman, pp. 284–302.
Yetter-Chappell, H. (2017). ‘Idealism Without God’. In Goldschmidt and Pearce (2017).




                                                      373
                                              INDEX




Note: Page numbers in italics indicate figures; page numbers in bold indicate tables.

20th-century physics and experimental psychology,           anomalous panpsychism, as most promising dualist
  and neutral monism 91                                        view 175 – 9
                                                            anti-physicalism 168
Aaronson, Scott 298; criticism of Tononi 291;               anti-realist idealism 354
   intelligent behavior as necessary condition for          “Architecture of Theories, The” (essay) [Peirce],
   consciousness 1                                             objective idealism 61
Abhidharma Buddhist tradition 26, 29, 31;                   argument from causation 269; form of 276
   consistency of with physics 32; dharmas 27; see also     arguments against panpsychism 55, 206 – 7, 222 – 5;
   Ābhidharmikas; Seager, William                              see also critiques of panpsychism
Abhidharmakośa [Vasubandhu], dharmas through                arguments for panpsychism 55 – 7, 105 – 8, 112, 206,
   logical analysis or mindfulness meditation                  280 – 1
   training 28                                              arguments from analogy 296
Abhidharma-Yogācāra (philosophers) 29                       Aristotle, panpsychism as implicit in 16
Ābhidharmikas 28 – 9                                        Armstrong, David 121, 227, 278 – 9, 347;
Abram, David, ecological philosopher 133                       intentionality and dispositions 274 – 5; objects-
absence of analysis argument, and micropsychism 151            having-properties 149
absolute idealism, reality only be known by                 attention, as necessary for conscious experience 29
   apprehending as a whole 88                               attention (manasikāra) 32
acausalism, causation 168 – 9                               austere Russellian cosmopsychism 368
active information 288, 291 – 3, 295 – 9                    austerity problem, and cosmic idealism 368
Advaita (non-dual) 120                                      authority, as argument for panpsychism 107 – 8
Advaita Vedanta 209, 368; dispositional and subjective
   nature of finite centre occurring in non-dual            Baars, B., global workspace theory of consciousness
   awareness 127 – 28; existence of permanent self            294, 298
   (atman) 212 – 13; and idealism 355; nirvikalpa           Barwise, J., and Seligman, J. 292
   samadhi (non-dual consciousness) 125 – 6; and            Basile, P. 250, 303
   “Perennial Philosophy” 119 – 20; and witness             Bateson, Gregory 131
   consciousness 214 – 15                                   Baumgarten, T. J., Schnitzler, A., and Lange, J.,
“advaitic” consciousness 119 – 30                             neuronal oscillation cycles 30 – 1
Agar, William 104                                           Bayne, T. J. 307
Allinson, R. E. 368                                         Bayne, T. J., and Chalmers, D. 307
Analysis of Matter,The (book) [Russell] 91–92, 95, 98       Bell, John 291
anima/animus, Gottfried Liebniz 46 – 7                      Bennett, Charles, problematic ethical implications of
animism: and environmental panpsychism 132; vs.               panpsychism 107 – 8
   panpsychism 103                                          Bergon, Henri, experience of time 211
anomalism, causation 168 – 9                                Berkeley, George 353 – 6


                                                          374
                                                    Index


Bieri, Peter, Liebniz and difficulty of translating      Clifford, William Kingdon 66; arguments for
  “mind” 46                                                panpsychism 108; “mind-stuff ” 58, 131; science
Blank, Andreas, Gottfried Liebniz 49 – 50                  and gap between organic and inorganic 57 – 8
“blobjectivism” 340, 350; cosmos as “blobject” 350 – 1   “Cognisensory Deprivation Tank” 125
body and mind, Baruch Spinoza 40 – 4                     cognition, model-based view of 193
Bohm, David 131, 287, 291 – 3, 295 – 9; cosmological     cognitive approach 196
  panpsychism 136; and hylozoism 104                     cognitive pluralism 190, 192 – 93, 201 – 2; as theory
Bohm, David, and Hiley, Basil 288, 291, 294, 296 – 9;      about cognitive architecture 194; understanding
  quantum mechanics 5                                      universe through mental models 193
Bostrom, N., simulation argument 369                     cognitivism, vs. dualism and materialism 200 – 1
Bradley, Francis 126; and hylozoism 103                  Coleman, Sam 245, 250, 303; and perspective
Brentano, Franz, intentionality 134 – 5                    problem 122 – 23; “smallism” 147 – 8
Broglie, Louis de 287                                    Collingwood, R. G., “On the So-Called Idea of
Broglie-Bohm theory 291                                    Causation” (article) 272 – 3
brute emergence 105 – 6, 342; as critique of             combination problem 108 – 9, 245, 297, 345; as
  panpsychism 111                                          argument against panpsychism 206; as challenge
brute matter 131                                           to micro-idealism 363; and foundational aspect of
Bucke, Richard Maruce, cosmic consciousness 262            subjectivity 8; micro-subjects and macro-subjects
Buddhaghosa 32                                             in 121; and polytheism 264 – 7; and subject–
Buddhism: and cosmic idealism 367; ideas of presence       summing problem 246 – 7; see also Subjective
  in 212; view of mind 25 – 35; see also Abhidharma        Property Physicalism (SPP)
  Buddhist tradition                                     “The Combination Problem for Panpsychism”
Buddhist meditation practices, neuroscientific             (article) [Chalmers] 363
  studies of 26                                          “combinatorial infusion” view 166; and quantum
Buddhist thought: compatibility of with panpsychism        entanglement 309
  26; conscious experiences and thoughts as              compatibilist strategy 235 – 6
  contributing to moral agency and actions 32;           composition problem, problem of 165 – 6
  representational form of object as phenomenal          conativity, and cosmological panpsychism 138
  form of the experience 30                              conceivability argument 26, 33, 231 – 32, 303, 313,
Butler, Samuel, Unconscious Memory (book) 58               360, 366 – 7; as challenge to standard materialism
                                                           219; critique of 223 – 6
Callender, Craig, experience of time 211 – 12            concept of “mind”, Gottfried Liebniz 44
Cartesian 327; dualism 192; mechanics 198                conscious attention, and “for-me-ness” of an
Cartwright, N. 195                                         experience 30
categorical properties 233, 235, 269, 280 – 1            conscious awareness 125
causal completion problem, as argument against           conscious experience: and Abhidharma Buddhist
   panpsychism 206                                         tradition 26; qualities of 159
causal exclusion 187 – 8                                 conscious subject, components of 124 – 5
causal relation, vs. grounding 146                       consciousness 28 – 30, 159 – 61, 318, 353; degrees of
causal relevance, vs. causation 177 – 8                    34; “hard” vs. “easy” problems of 245 – 7; and fabric
causation 168 – 69, 235; and cosmic idealism 365;          of universe 209; individual vs. witness 124–6;
   experience of 269; and micro-idealism 362;              214–15; radical emergence of 6; self-recursive
   Nietzsche, Friedrich 62; similarity as required         structure of 159; subjective nature 157; see also
   for 37                                                  “hard problem” of consciousness; James, William;
Chalmers, David 31, 190, 198 – 202, 292, 303,              Spinoza, Baruch
   365; combination problem 245, 265; “The               consciousness and subject: subject-summing problem
   Combination Problem for Panpsychism” (article)          245 – 7; subjective dimension of 157
   363; conceivability argument 313; “hard problem”      “consciousness+” 151
   of consciousness 2, 25–2, 298, 345; information       conservative emergence 6
   and consciousness 292; and microexperiential          constitution problem, and cosmopsychism 365
   properties 192; non-quality /quality gap 33 – 4;      constitutive cosmopsychism 144, 364, 366; non-
   panexperientialist 198; panprotopsychism                identity 367
   and non-phenomenal/phenomenal gap 33;                 constitutive micropsychism 144
   “Panpsychism and Panprotopsychism” (article) 360      constitutive panpsychism 73, 144; and non-physicalist
changing quality space problem 311 – 12                    reduction of human consciousness 145
Chomsky, Noam, mind-body problem 2                       continuity: as argument against panpsychism 107; as
Choustova, Olga 292                                        argument for panpsychism 107 – 8
Churchland, Paul 112 – 13, 183 – 4                       cosmic idealism 364 – 9


                                                     375
                                                      Index


cosmic Self 138                                             dualism 16, 219; anomalous 168 – 80; assumptions of
cosmological panpsychism 139; as answering                    158; as entrenched 16; justifications for rejection
   basic metaphysical questions 136 – 7; and law of           of mental causality 170 – 3; mind-matter 88 – 9;
   accommodation’s centrality in religion 140; as             and Plato 21; property 158, 161 – 4; reasons for
   making sense of religious experience 141; see also         doubting 144 – 5; see also non-standard dualism;
   Bohm, David; Plumwood,Val                                  standard dualism
cosmopsychism 8, 261, 340, 350 – 1, 355; and                Durkheim, Emile, collective consciousness 262
   combination problem 266 – 67; constitution
   problem and 365 – 6; identity 366; and                   ecological philosophers 133
   micropsychism 150 – 2; philosophy of mind 259;           Ecological Self,The (book) [Horst] 137
   problems for 122; and subject-subsuming subjects         Eddington, Sir Arthur 2, 327 – 28; “mind-stuff ” 87, 95,
   151; universal consciousness and 120; see also              318; as physicalist panexperientialist 319
   constitutive cosmopsychism                               Edelman, Gerald, panpsychism as “spooky and
Craig, William Lane, reconstruction of Plato’s                 mystical” 108
   thought 18                                               Edwards, Paul 111
critical metaphysics/ontology 193                           “effective field theories” 6
Critique of Pure Reason (book) [Kant], impossibility of     emergence 104 – 5, 204 – 17; problem of 105 – 6;
   mental combination 110                                      radical 204 – 7, 319, 331 – 2, 342; strong/brute 159
critiques of panpsychism: 108 – 14, 147 – 50; also          emergence laws, non-panpsychist 248
   arguments against panpsychism                            emergence problem, as argument for panpsychism
Crombie, I. M. 18                                              105 – 6
“crux of subjectivity”, subjective nature of                emergent properties 186
   consciousness 157                                        emergentism 6, 32, 104 – 5; metaphysical 348; strong
Cudworth, Ralph, combination problem 109                       metaphysical 343; weak metaphysical 343; see also
Curry, Patrick 133                                             emergence
                                                            emergentists, vs. panpsychists 105 – 6
Dainton, B. F. 307                                          empirical psychology 91
Danaiyarri, Hobbles 140                                     empiricism: radical 59, 67, 69; see also James,
Davidson, Donald 172                                           William
decoherence 6                                               environmental philosophy 136; and
“decombination” problem 121 – 4, 351, 365                      anthropomorphism 131 – 2
Dennett, Daniel 196, 347; consciousness as “mystery”        epiphenomalism, as critique of panpsychism 112
   15; subjectivity as cognitive “thought-illusion” 7       epistemic exclusion theorem 186 – 87
derivation problem, Colin McGinn 110                        eternal objects, Alfred North Whitehead and 81
Descartes, Rene 7, 16, 79, 151, 196; Discourse on the       Ethics (book) [Spinoza], conatus theory 54
   Method (book) 39; mind and body as distinct 37;          evolution 2, 50 – 1, 59 – 62, 75, 79, 104 – 5, 108, 111,
   use of mens 46; see also Cartesian                          177, 179, 320, 334, 342
design, as argument for panpsychism 56 – 7, 107             exclusion argument 224 – 25; as challenge to standard
dharma clusters 28                                             dualism 219 – 20; modified 233 – 5
Dharmakīrti, reflexive self-awareness 29 – 30               experience, William James and 67 – 70
dharmas: classified into types 31; as conscious             experience/experientiality/consciousness,
   momentary atoms 29; explanation of 27 – 8; mental           terminology [Strawson] 323
   31; see also Abhidharma Buddhist tradition               experience-sharing, combined with phenomenal
Diderot, Denis, combination problem and                        bonding 255
   panpsychism 109                                          experiential evidentialism 340
Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung (book)                   Exploring Meinong’s Jungle and Beyond (book)
   [Schopenhauer] 53 – 4                                       [Routley] 133
Dignāga (Yogācāra philosopher), Pramān.asamuccaya 29        extension 133 – 4
Dirac, Paul 321                                             external world, and minimal subject 209
direct realism, and neutral monism 210
direct route to panpsychism, Gottfried Liebniz              Fechner, Gustav 295; arguments for panpsychism
   198 – 9                                                     55 – 7; “Fechner’s Law” 55; non-emergence 108;
Discourse on the Method (book) [Descartes] 39                  pluralist panpsychism 56; On the Soul-Question
dissociative identity disorder (DID) 366 – 7                   (book) 56 – 7
Dorr, Cian, “Ontologese” 154                                Fichte, Johann 355; cosmological panpsychism 136
Drake, Durant 324; as physicalist panexperialist 319        Filk, Thomas 292
Dretske, Fred 292                                           first-person perspective 67, 122 – 4, 160 – 4
Dreyfus, Georges 28                                         Floridi, Luciano 291 – 92



                                                          376
                                                        Index


focal perspective, as component of conscious subject        Heil, John, truthmaking 146
   124 – 5                                                  Heisenberg, W. 320
Fodor, Jerry, “epiphobia” 285                               heterophenomenology 7
“formbodies”, as populating concrete reality 16             Hick, John, “the Real” 262, 264
free lunch constraint 121, 123 – 4; and grounding           Hinduism, ideas of presence in 212
   theory 146                                               Hobbs, Thomas, Liebniz and 46
fundamental positive ontology 193                           Hoffman, Donald, conscious realism 359
fundamentalism, as dualism 168                              Horst, Steven, The Ecological Self (book) 137
                                                            Howell, Robert J. 189; compatibilist strategy 235 – 6;
Gaia hypothesis 262                                           modified exclusion argument 233 – 5
Ganeri, J. 28 – 9                                           human mind, empiricist vs. realist 66
Garfield, Jay L. 26                                         Hume, David 33, 49, 269, 272, 276 – 7;
“Gemutsruhe” (peace of mind) (essay) [Liebniz] 45             supervenience 28
“General Problems of Philosophy” (course)                   Humphrey, Nicholas 252; criticism of panpsychism
   [James] 73                                                 108; radical emergence 111
generation problem 204 – 5                                  Husserl, E. 209 – 10
global neuronal workspace model 31                          Huxley, Aldous, soul and divine Reality 119
Goff, Philip 245, 303, 334, 367; conceivability             hylomorphism 16; Gottfried Liebniz 44, 48 – 49;
   argument 313; free lunch constraint 121; inner             Thomastic 16
   nature of cosmos 121; phenomenal bonding                 hylonoism 104
   253 – 4                                                  hylozoism, vs. panpsychism 103
gradualism 342                                              hylozoist(s) 60, 103; see also monism
grāhakākāra/grāhyākāra, subjective/objective forms 30       hypothetical strategy, David Chalmers 199 – 203
greater virtue, as argument for panpsychism 107
Griffin, David Ray: arguments for panpsychism 108;          idealism: absolute 88; Buddhist 358; cosmic 364 – 9;
   as physicalist panexperientalist 319; Unsnarling the        Hindu 358; varieties of 353 – 6; as version
   World Knot: Consciousness, Freedom, and the Mind-           of panpsychism 25; see also macro-idealism;
   Body Problem (book) 15 – 16                                 micro-idealism
grounding 121, 145; free lunch constraint on                idealist, Liebniz as 48
   adequate grounding theory 146; by inheritance            idealization, models and 194
   123 – 4; by subsumption 147 – 50; by truthmaking         identity cosmopsychism 366
   146 – 7; see also grounding relation                     ignorance hypothesis 313
grounding micropsychism 360                                 impure cosmic idealism, impure 364
grounding relation 121; and constitutive panpsychism        inclusive ontology 195
   145; and relation between facts 146                      Indigenous cultures 140 – 41; conceptions of
Gupta, B. 209 – 10                                             mentality of 132
Guthrie, W., Plato as dualist 23                            indivisibility of atom, as argument for
                                                               panpsychism 57
Haeckel, Ernst: evolution and unity of all natural          indwelling powers, as argument for panpsychism 108
  phenomena 59 – 60; as hylozoist 103; The Riddle           inherence 204 – 17
  of the Universe (book) 59 – 60; The Wonders of Life       inheritance, grounding by 123 – 4
  (book) 59 – 60                                            inscrutables 238
Haldane, John, and hylozoism 103 – 4                        integration problem 224 – 5
Hans Primas, quantum mechanics 5                            intensionality 133 – 4
“hard problem” of consciousness 2, 345; intractabilty       intentional stance models 197
  of 25; see also mind-body problem                         intentionality: and Abhidharma Buddhist tradition
“hard problem” of generation 204 – 5                           28; Franz Brentano 134 – 5; see also panpsychism-
Hartshorne, Charles 16, 95, 278; arguments for                 without-consciousness; Plumwood,Val
  panpsychism 108; memory, perception, and                  intention(ality) (cetanā) 28 – 32
  causation 271                                             interactionist dualist 232, 236, 238
Hartz, Glenn, Liebniz as theoretical dualist 48             intrinsic nature: as argument for panpsychism 55, 108
Harvey, Graham 132                                          Ismael, Jenann 292 – 4
Harvey, Mussolini 140
Haven, Emmanuel 292                                         Jackson, Frank 226
Hawking, Stephen 213, 328                                   James, William 2, 88, 90, 207 – 9, 211, 271, 303,
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, absolute                       324; causal agency 269; combination problem
  idealism 355                                                 110; empirical psychology 91; Fechner and
Heidegger, M. 209 – 10                                         “superhuman consciouness” 56; human mind as



                                                          377
                                                         Index


  empiricist vs. realist 66; as metaphysical pluralist       Lotze, Hermann: indivisibility of atom as foundation
  73; “mind dust” 131; panprotopsychism 66, 75;                for panpsychism 57; Microcosmos (book) 57
  as physicalist panexperientalist 319; and psychic          Lycan, W. 296; critiques of panpsychism 111 – 12
  phenomena 74; radical empiricism 59, 66 – 7, 69;
James, William, publications: “General Problems of           Mach, Ernst 2, 272 – 4; Science of Mechanics (book) 59
  Philosophy” (course) 73; A Pluralistic Universe            macroexperiences 304
  (book) 73 – 74, 110, 121 – 2, 333; The Principles          macro-idealism 356 – 59
  of Psychology (book) 72 – 3, 333; Some Problems            macrosubjects 358
  of Philosophy (book) 80; “A World of Pure                  Maddell, Geoffrey, criticism of panpsychism 108
  Experience” (essay) 71                                     Madden, Edward H., and Hare, Peter H.:
Jammer, Max 294                                                panpsychism as “unmitigated disaster” 108; revival
Johnston, Mark, mind-body problem and ­                        of reductio 274
  non-standard materialism                                   Maharaj, Nisargadatta 119, 125
                                                             Maleeh, R., and Amani, P. 292
Kant, Immanuel 16, 194 – 5, 209 – 10, 320, 333,              manifestation, and existence 160 – 4
  362; combination problem 109 – 10; Critique                “Man’s Glassy Essence” (essay) [Peirce] 61
  of Pure Reason (book) 110; intrinsic nature as             mapping problem, matter-to-mind anomalism 173 – 5
  argument for panpsychism 108; Metaphysical                 Maroney, O. 292
  Foundations of Natural Science (book) 199; Physical        Maroney, O., and Hiley, Basil 292, 298
  Monadology (book) 199; Third Critique (book) 141;          Martin, C. B.: double nature of a property 127 – 8;
  transcendental idealism 192 – 3, 355                         objects-having-properties 149
Kastrup, B., dissociative identity disorder (DID) 367        Martin, C. B., and Pfeifer, Carl, causality and
Khrennikov, Andrei 292 – 3                                     intentionality 275
Kim, Jaegwon 230; dead end on mind-body                      materialism 16, 218 – 19; see also non-standard
  problem 15                                                   materialism
Kind, A. 233; inscrutables 238; Russellian monism            materialists, reductive 158
  and dualist/physicalist divide 238 – 40                    Mathews, Freya, unconscious cosmic ground 123 – 4
“knowledge by acquaintance”, direct empirical                matter, nature of 2
  awareness [Russell] 88                                     matter-to-mind anomalism: mapping problem 173 – 5;
Koch, Christof 204                                             mechanistic ideal 3 – 4
                                                             Maxwell, Grover 327
Lakoff, G., and Johnson, M. 197                              McGinn, Colin 108, 110 – 12, 286 – 7; emergence
language, as mirroring ontology of enduring things             of consciousness from brain 15;irrelevance as
   [Whitehead] 78 – 9, 85                                      critique of panpsychism 112; “mysterianism” 348;
last man standing, as argument for panpsychism                 panpsychism as “metaphysically and scientifically
   107 – 8                                                     outrageous” 108; supervenience as critique of
“The Law of Mind” (essay) [Peirce] 61                          panpsychism 112
Leibnizian hylomorphism, textual support for 49 – 51         McLaughlin, Brian 348
Lewis, David 218 – 19, 227, 347                              meaning, and subjectivity 137 – 8
Lewis, Peter 328                                             meaningfulness, as core category of cosmological
liberal naturalism, vs. orthodox naturalism/reductive          panpsychism 138
   physicalism 25                                            meditation 120; see also Buddhist meditation practices
Liebniz, Gottfried 82, 192, 196 – 7, 295; argument           meditative states, phenomenology of 215
   from causation 270; continuity of nature 280;             mental: chemistry 1; continuity 29; properties 163
   difficulty of translating concept of “mind”               mental causality, dualists’ rejection of 170 – 3
   44 – 7; as explicitly panpsychist 16; intrinsic           mental causation 188 – 9, 277 – 7
   nature as argument for panpsychism 108;                   mental efficacy, mind-to-matter anomalism 169 – 73
   “Liebnizian” character of contemporary debates            mental features 28 – 9; as ontologically fundamental
   on panpsychism 108; monadological metaphysics               and ubiquitous 25
   of 47; monads 131; ontological gap in 50;                 mental structure: experience binding problem 307;
   panintentionalist 198                                       and new experience problem 306 – 8; problem of
Liebniz, Gottfried, publications: “Gemutsruhe” (peace          intentional structure 307
   of mind) (essay) 45; Monadology (book) 3; “New            mentalistic 79, 95, 98; models 196; properties 192 – 3
   System of the Nature of Substances” (essay) 49;           mental/mind/conscious, terminology [Strawson] 324
   Nouveaux Essais (book) 45;                                Merleau-Ponty, M. 209; experience of time 211
living cosmos 137, 141                                       metaphysical elitism 152 – 4; as privileging some
Locke, John 320                                                objects and properties 147
logic, extensionality and intentionality in 133 – 4          metaphysical emergentism 348



                                                         378
                                                       Index


Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science (book)         naturalized mind, as argument for panpsychism 107
  [Kant] 199                                               nature, as conceptually self-contained 36
metaphysical monism vs. dualism, William                   Nature of Mind and Human Automatism,The (book)
  James on 66                                                 [Prince], idealist monism 60
metaphysics: core categories of 138; environmental         necessitarian strategy 236 – 8
  crisis and 136                                           neuroscience: and psychophysical mapping 173 – 4;
Microcosmos (book) [Lotze], “mechanical science” vs.          studies of Buddhist meditation practices by 26
  “Philosophy of the Feelings” 57                          neutral monism 25, 207 – 16; and 20th-century
microexperiences 304                                          science 91; direct realism 210; and panpsychism
micro-idealism 359 – 64; challenges to 362 – 3; as            94 – 5; vs. radical emergence 204; and basic reality
  constitutive Russellian micropsychism 360 – 1;              87; and transitory qualities 90 – 1; see also Russell,
  and micro-idealism 362; and space-time 362;                 Bertrand
  weaknesses of 361                                        new animisms, as basis for ecological practice 132 – 3
micro-physical phenomenal properties 189                   new experience problem 304 – 8
micropsychism 144, 285, 333, 355, 359 – 65, 367;           new phenomenal characters problem 304, 310 – 13
  and cosmopsychism 150 – 2; see also constitutive         new subject problem 305, 307 – 10
  micropsychism                                            “New System of the Nature of Substances” (essay)
micropsychists 360                                            [Liebniz] 49
Mill, John Stuart 356                                      Newman, Max, critique of Russell’s
mind 16; Buddhist view of 25 – 35; as condition               structuralism 5 – 6
  for spatiotemporal existence 141; degrees of 40;         Newton, Isaac 3, 16, 196, 198, 272 – 3, 289
  difficulty of translating concept of 50; panpsychist     Newtonians, force 272 – 3
  accounts of 44; see also Liebniz, Gottfried              Nietzsche, Friedrich 62 – 5, 331, 334; combination
“mindbodies”, as populating concrete reality 16               problem as critique of panpsychism 109; intrinsic
mind-body interaction 37 – 38                                 nature as argument for panpsychism 108; Will to
mind-body problem 158, 168 – 80, 224 – 5, 331, 353;           Power (book) 62
  dilemma of 144 – 5; other 158; and philosophy            nirvikalpa samadhi (non-dual consciousness), and
  of mind 157; as unsolvable 15; see also Dennett,            meditation 125 – 6
  Daniel; Kim, Jaegwon; McGinn, Colin; Nagel,              no signs objection: as argument against panpsychism
  Thomas; Searle, John; Strawson, Galen; Whitehead,           206; as argument against panpsychisms 206
  Alfred North                                             nomic, strong metaphysical emergentism 343
mind-in-nature: see                                        nomism, and causation 168 – 9
  panpsychism-without-consciousness                        nonconstitutive cosmic idealism 363 – 4
“mind-stuff ” 318; as basic constituent of reality 58      non-emergence: as argument against panpsychism
mind-to-matter anomalism, metal efficacy 169 – 73             108; as argument for panpsychism 56, 107 – 8
minimal subject, and external world 209                    non-identity constitutive cosmopsychism 367
mnemic: memory 324; responsiveness 93 – 8                  non-reductionism 276 – 7; and impure cosmic
models: mentalistic 196, 199; success of 197 – 8              idealism 364
Monadology (book) [Liebniz] 3                              non-reductive materialism, property dualism as 165
monism 25, 59 – 61, 66, 73, 163, 204 – 17, 259, 334,       non-skeptical realism 279 – 80
  340; advaitic 370; anomalous 169, 172; basic reality     non-standard dualism, and panpsychism 221 – 2
  as neither mental nor material 87; C. S. Peirce 61;      non-standard materialism 220 – 1, 227 – 8; as
  Ernst Haeckel 59 – 60; “existence” 350; idealist            alternative to standard materials and standard
  60; priority 148, 350; Russellian; see also Russell,        dualism 218; and conceivability argument 223 – 6
  Bertrand; Russellian monism                              no-self doctrine 27, 33
Montero, Barbara 205, 238                                  “nothing over and above”: see grounding relation
Moore, G. E.: refutation of idealism 368; strong           “not-mental” objection: see inconclusive analogy
  metaphysical emergentism 343; supervenience 343;         noumenon, Kantian vs. Perennialist/Advaitic 128
  weak metaphysical emergentism 343                        Nouveaux Essais (book) [Liebniz] 45
Mørch, H. H. 253, 303; phenomenal powers 362               Nova de universis philosophia (book) [Patrizi], as origin
                                                              of “panpsychism” 103
Nagasa,Yujin, and Wager, Khai 124; priority
  cosmopsychism 350                                        object-oriented cognition 194
Nagel, Thomas 1, 25, 159, 165, 286, 297, 304;              “On the So-Called Idea of Causation” (article)
  Nagelian strategy 220 – 1; “Panpsychism” (article)         [Collingwood] 273 – 4
  285; radical speculation 15                              On the Soul-Question (book) [Fechner] 55, 57
Nanna (book) [Fechner], continuity as argument for         On the Will in Nature (book) [Schopenhauer] 54
  panpsychism 55                                           “Ontologese” 154



                                                       379
                                                   Index


ontology, and truthmakers 146                           phenomenal bonding, and experience-sharing 255
ontopoetics, and cosmological panpsychism 141           phenomenalism 355; strong metaphysical 356 – 5;
Owen, Adrian 2                                             weak metaphysical 356
                                                        phenomenological analysis 246
panexperientialism 198; as compatible with              philosophical behaviourists, and
  physicalism 318                                          functionalism 319
“panphobia” 285                                         physical: determinism 169; guidelines for defining
panprotopsychism 288; vs. emergentism 32; non-             185; nature of 2
  phenomenal/phenomenal gap 31, 33; Sautrāntika-        Physical Monadology (book) [Kant] 199
  Yogācāra view of consciousness 26; William James      physical science, structuralist restraints of 5
  and 66, 75; and zombies 33, 183; see also self-       physical theory, mismatch of with subjective
  awareness, reflexive                                     experience 3
panpsychism: analogical argument for 296; vs.           physicalism 168, 183, 247 – 8; micro-subjective 189;
  biological naturalism 204; as bottom-up view             objective vs. subjective 184; as a “stuff-monist
  266; and vs. hylozoism 103; living-cosmos 25;            view” 325
  as meta-theory 104; vs. neutral monism 204; vs.       physicalist panexperientialism (PP) 319
  pantheism 104. 259 – 3; vs. radical emergence         physicalist pure panpsychism 323 – 2; experience
  204 – 5; teleological versions of 135; as thesis         as ultimate intrinsic nature of the stuff
  about fundamental postive ontology 193; see also         of our universe 326; panexperientialist
  animism; combination problem; conceivability             version of 19
  argument; hylozoism;                                  physical/physicalism, terminology [Strawson] 324 – 31
panpsychism, anomalous 175 – 9                          physics, terminology [Strawson] 327
panpsychism, cosmological 136 – 4                       Plato 15 – 24, 104
panpsychism, problems for 222 – 5, 227 – 8; see also    Plumwood,Val 131; intensionality vs. intentionality
  arguments against panpsychism; critiques of              134 – 5; panpsychism-without-consciousness
  panpsychism                                              133 – 6; see also Routley, Richard
panpsychism, Russellian 224 – 5;                        pluralism 22, 67; cognitive 192 – 3; William James and
“Panpsychism” (article) [Nagel] 285                        73; A Pluralistic Universe (book) [James] 73 – 4, 333;
“Panpsychism” (article) [Seager and                        “compounding of consciousness” 110; critique of
  Allen-Hermanson] 44                                      idealism as applied to cosmopsychism 121 – 22
“Panpsychism and Panprotopsychism” (article)            Plutarch 21
  [Chalmers], grounding 360                             polytheism: and cosmopsychism 261 – 2; philosophy
panpsychism-without-consciousness, Plumwood,Val            of religion 259
  133 – 6                                               Popper, Karl and brute emergence 111
panpsychist non-standard dualism 221 – 2                Potrč, Matjaž, “blobjectivism” 350
panpsychists 15                                         PP see physicalist panexperialism (PP)
pantheism: philosophy of religion 259; and              Pramānasamuccaya (Dignāga) 29
  polytheism 263                                        “pre-established harmony”, Gottfried Liebniz 49
Parerga and Paralipomena (book) [Schopenhauer],         presence see time, experience of
  mind and matter 54 – 55                               Prince, Marvin, The Nature of Mind and Human
partial grounding, Itay Shani 122 – 3                      Automatism (book) 60
Patrizi, Francesco 260, 262; design as argument for     Principles of Psychology,The (book) [James] 72 – 3, 333
  panpsychism 108; Nova de universis philosophia        priority monism 148; Schaffer, Jonathan 121
  (book) 103                                            priority of the whole 293
Paulsen, Friedrich: arguments for panpsychism 108; as   problems, for panpsychism 222 – 5; see also arguments
  hylozoist 103                                            against panpsychism; critiques of panpsychism
Peirce, C. S.: “The Architecture of Theories” (essay)   process philosophy, language problem of 78 – 9
  61; continuity as argument for panpsychism 108;       properties: categorical 233, 235, 269, 280 – 1;
  cosmological panpsychism 136; “The Law of                emergent 186; phenomenal 168; psychological
  Mind” (essay) 61; “Man’s Glassy Essence” (essay)         223 – 5; unimaginable 222 – 4
  61; monism 61                                         protomental 287
percepts 92, 134                                        psyche 20 – 1; Plato’s use of 17
Pereboom, Derk 151                                      psychism 318
Perennial Philosophy: 120                               psychological properties: essential features of 223 – 5;
phenomenal: causal relevance of 183; consciousness         non-standard 221
  304; properties 168; quality of consciousness 160;    psycho-physical bridge laws, as supernatural 206;
  problem of phenomenal unity 306 – 7; see also            see also radical emergence
  phenomenalism                                         psychophysical mapping 173 – 4



                                                    380
                                                        Index


psychosocial, universe as 138                                Russell, Bertrand 207 – 9, 320 – 2, 324, 327 – 8, 331;
Putnam, Hilary 347                                             concept of causation as harmful 274; indirect
Pylkkänen, Paavo 292                                           nature of our knowledge of material objects 89;
                                                               intrinsic nature as argument for panpsychism 108;
quality space 311                                              “knowledge by acquaintance” 88; on Liebniz
quantum cure 285                                               48; mnemic responsiveness 93 – 8; and physicalist
quantum entanglement 4, 252 – 3, 296; and                      panexperialism 319; world as composed of
  “combinatorial infusion” 166                                 “events” 91; see also neutral monism; Russellian
quantum field, as active information 291                       monism
quantum field theory 5 – 6                                   Russell, Bertrand, The Analysis of Matter (book)
quantum mechanics 4 – 5, 280 – 1, 358; David Bohm 5;           91–92, 95, 98
  Edwin Schrödinger and 5                                    Russell, Bertrand, and mind(s): as constructions 90;
quantum potential 288–296; for two Gaussian slits              mental and material phenomena 87;
  289                                                          mind-matter dualism 88 – 9; self-consciousness
quantum theory, ontological interpretation of                  of mental episodes 94; Russell, Bertrand, neutral
  287 – 92                                                     monism 2, 87 – 102;
Quine, W.V. 325, 331; see also Subjective Property           “Russellian”: austere cosmopsychism 368;
  Physicalism (SPP)                                            constitutive micropsychism and micro-idealism
Quinean tradition 146                                          360 – 1; enriched cosmopsychism 369; non-
                                                               standard materialism 227; panpsychists 235 – 6
radical emergence 319, 332, 342; arguments against           Russellian monism 121, 168, 184, 220 – 1, 227, 23 – 33,
   206 – 7; vs. neutral monism 204; vs. panpsychism            248, 254; as dualism 168; as subjective physicalism
   204 – 5; as requiring brute fundamental psycho-             184; see also Russellian panpsychism
   physical bridge law 205; terminology [Strawson]           Russellian panpsychism 199; constitutive 360 – 2;
   331 – 32                                                    as non-standard dualism 225; non-standard
radical empiricism 59, 74; William James                       materialism 220 – 1, 227; see also neutral monism
   and 66 – 7, 69                                            Rutherford, Donald, monads vs. material in
random theory, the 176 – 9                                     Liebniz 48
realist idealism 354
reductio, and rejection of panpsychism 272 – 4               Sautrāntika-Yogācāra: Abhidharma Buddhist tradition
reduction 319                                                   26; model of consciousness 27 – 31; as panpsychism
reductive physicalism, orthodox naturalism 25                   or panprotopsychism 31
reflexive awareness 29; see also self-awareness, reflexive   Schaffer, Jonathan 152 – 3; cosmos as sole fundamental
reflexivity, as core category of cosmological                   concrete entity 121; existence monism 350;
   panpsychism 138                                              grounding relation 145; priority monism 121, 123,
Reid, Thomas 272 – 3                                            148, 350
relation 148 – 9, 151; grounding 121, 145 – 6                Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph von 131;
relationality problem, and cosmic idealism 368                  cosmological panpsychism 136; objective
relationists, vs. substantivalists 149                          idealism 355
relationships between panpsychism, pantheism,                Schiller, Friedrich 272
   polytheism and cosmopsychism 261                          Schopenhauer, Arthur 209 – 10, 270; causation
Rémond, Nicolas, and Liebniz 47                                 experienced in motivation 278; cosmological
renormalization group procedure 6                               panpsychism 136; Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung
Riddle of the Universe,The (book) [Haeckel], matter             (book) 53 – 54; mind-body problem as unsolvable
   and spirit as parallel 59 – 60                               15; and panpsychism 53 – 5; Parerga and Paralipomena
Robertson, T., and Atkins, P. 206 – 7                           (book) 54 – 5; On the Will in Nature (book) 54
Roederer, J. G. 292                                          Schrödinger, Erwin 294; quantum mechanics and 5
Roelofs, L. 303, 311                                         Science of Mechanics (book) [Mach], pansensism (“all is
Rose, Deborah Bird 133, 140                                     sensation”) 59
Rosenberg, G. 254; protoconsciousness 262 – 3                Seager, William 163, 215 – 16, 252, 265, 303; argument
Rosenthal, D. 294                                               against panpsychism 206; “composition principle
Routley, Richard 133 – 5; Exploring Meinong’s Jungle            165 – 6; how consciousness emerges from matter 15
   and Beyond (book) 133; see also intentionality;           Seager, William, and Allen-Hermanson, Sean 49, 286,
   Plumwood,Val                                                 295 – 6; “Panpsychism” (article) 44
Routley,Val: see Plumwood,Val                                Searle, John 2, 108, 204; most mainstream philosophy
Royce, Josiah: and hylozoism 103; revision 15; Spirit           of mind “obviously false” 15; panpsychism as
   of Modern Philosophy (book) 60; The World and the            “breathtakingly implausible” 108
   Individual (book) 60 – 61                                 seele (soul): Fechner’s use of 55; Liebniz and 45 – 6, 49



                                                         381
                                                     Index


self: as cognitive illusion 120; cosmic 138               Subjective Aspect Physicalism (SAP) 186; micro- and
self-awareness 30; Dignāga (philosopher) and 29;            macro- 189 – 90
   reflexive 32                                           subjective experience, as mismatch of with physical
selfhood: and cosmological panpsychism 138; false           theory 3
   sense of 31 – 32                                       subjective nature of consciousness, as argument for
self-realizing, selves as 138                               and against panpsychism 157
Sellars, Wilfrid 344                                      subjective physicalism: as having “family resemblance”
semantic phenomenalism 356 – 57                             of to panpsychism 190; varieties of 185 – 6
sensory perception, as paradigm of conscious              Subjective Property Physicalism (SPP) 186
   experience 28                                          subjectivity 157 – 67, 164; as character of
sentience, and consciousness 1                              conscious experience 160; as core category
Shani, Itay 121 – 4                                         of cosmological panpsychism 138; denial of
Shepherd, Mary 317 – 18                                     existence 7; and meaning 137 – 8; as part of
Sider, Theodore 152 – 3; and “metaphysical                  fabric of universe 209; see also consciousness;
   elitism” 147                                             self-awareness; selfhood
Silberstein, M., and Chemero, A. 209 – 10                 subject-summing problem: approaches to 248 – 54; as
Simons, Peter 286                                           “hard” problem of consciousness 245 – 7
singularity, living cosmos as 137                         substantivalists, vs. relationists 149
skandhas: as mental and physical processes 27; see also   subsumption, grounding by 147 – 50
   Abhidharma Buddhist tradition                          “superhuman consciousness” [James], Fechner
Skrbina, D. 95; Plato as panpsychist 22 – 3                 and 56
“smallism” 148                                            supervenience, Moore, G. E. 343
Some Problems of Philosophy (book) [James] 80
soul, as universal cause 18; soul, Liebniz’s use of 49;   theological: argument for panpsychism 57, 107
   see also seele (soul)                                  theories of consciousness 169
“soulbodies”, as populating concrete reality 16           Theravāda 32
space-time 127 – 8, 334; and cosmic idealism 365;         thinking substances, Gottfried Liebniz 198
   fundamental dimensionality of concrete reality. 325;   Third Critique (book) [Kant] 141
   and micro-idealism 362; theory of relativity 83        Thorndike, E. L., empirical psychology 91
spatiotemporal: properties 361 – 2; Whitehead’s use of    time, experience of 210 – 12
   83 – 4                                                 Titchener, E. B., empirical psychology 91
Spinoza, Baruch 131, 139, 322; complexity of body         Tononi, Giulio 292; integrated information theory of
   and mind 40 – 4; cosmological panpsychism 136;            consciousness 298, 359
   Ethics (book) 54; extension (the physical) 36; as      trajectories for two Gaussian slits 290
   “hyolozoic atheist” 109; metaphysics of 36 – 7; as     truthmaker micropsychism 150 – 2
   pantheist 104; parallelism doctrine 38; power/         truthmaking, grounding by 146 – 7
   complexity/consciousness 41 – 2                        two-slit experiment 288
Spirit of Modern Philosophy (book) [Royce], Universal
   Self as behind all phenomena 60                        ultimate reality, as atomic in character 22
spiritualism 46                                           Unconscious Memory (book) [Butler] 58
Sprigge, T. L. S., as physicalist panexperialist 319      unconscious mentality problem, as argument against
standard dualism 219 – 20                                    panpsychism 206
standard materialism 218 – 19                             unimaginable properties 222 – 4
Stapp, H. P. 172                                          unity 321
Stoics, as pantheists 104                                 universal composition see composition principle
Stoljar, D. 303, 313                                      universal consciousness: and individual human
storehouse consciousness 33                                  experience 120; as non-dual grounding-base 124
Stout, G. F. 272                                          universe: conscious 151; as psychosocial entity 138; as
Strawson, Galen 78, 204, 265, 285 – 6, 340, 346; brute       a self 137
   emergence 159; micropsychism 359; mind-body            Unsnarling the World Knot: Consciousness, Freedom, and
   problem 15; “real psychicalism” and realistic             the Mind-Body Problem (book) [Griffin], mind-body
   materialism 25                                            problem as unsolvable 15 – 16
Strong, C. A., as physicalist panexperientialist 319
strong metaphysical emergentism: Moorean 343;             Varela, F., Lachaux, J-P., Rodriguez, E., and
   nomic 343                                                Martinerie, J., brainweb 31
strong metaphysical phenomenalism 356 – 7;                Vasubandhu (Yogācāra philosopher): Abhidharmakośa
   explanatory objection 357                                28; no-subject doctrine 27
Stubenberg. L., pure experience as neutral 208            von Neumann, John 287



                                                      382
                                                           Index


Wagner, Rudolph Christian, Liebniz and 46                      witness consciousness 124 – 6; as component
Wang, Z., Busemeyer, J. R., Atmanspacher, H., and                of conscious subject 124 – 5; vs. individual
  Pothos, E. M. 292                                              consciousness 214 – 15
Ward, James 272                                                Wittgenstein, Ludwig 153; criticism of
Watson, J., empirical psychology 91                              panpsychism 108
weak metaphysical emergentism 342 – 3                          Wittman, Marc, experience of time 211
weak metaphysical phenomenalism 356                            Wonders of Life,The (book) [Haeckel] 59 – 60
Weatherson, B. 28                                              Wong, H.Y. 252
Weinberg, Steven 325, 334                                      World and the Individual,The (book) [Royce] 60 – 1
Wheeler, John, participatory universe 213 – 14                 “world knot”, mind-body problem as
Whitehead, Alfred North 16, 17, 22, 271,                         unsolvable 15
  278, 296, 318, 327 – 8; concrescence 80 – 1, 84;             “World of Pure Experience, A” (essay) [James] 71
  defending panpsychism 79 – 80; language and                  World Soul 17, 19 – 21
  enduring things 78 – 9; naturalist perspective               Wundt, W.: and empirical psychology 91
  of 83 – 4; panexperientialism 79; as physicalist
  panexperialist 319; “prehending” particles 131;              Yogācāra: and idealism 355; kinds of consciousness
  process philosophy 59, 78, 81 – 3; reality as serially         29; philosophers 26;Vasubandhu (philosopher)
  interconnected experiential events 80; see also                27 – 8; see also Dignāga (philosopher)
  “hard problem” of consciousness
Will to Power (book) [Nietzsche] 62                            Zahavi, Dan 123, 209
Windt, Jennifer 211                                            zombies 349 – 50; panpsychist 33, 183




                                                           383
