                                                                                                                                                       Second edition

        Classics in Psychotherapy                                                                                                    Classics in Psychotherapy




                                                                                                       Interpersonal Psychotherapy
        Interpersonal
        Psychotherapy                                                                                                                 Interpersonal
         a clinician’s guide                                                                                                         Psychotherapy
                                                                                                                                         a clinician’s guide
                                                                                                                                        Scott Stuart and Michael Robertson




                                                                                                     Stuart and Robertson
         This ground-breaking text has firmly established itself as a touchstone for all
         therapists using interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT).
         Key features and benefits:
         ■    A wealth of clinically-based descriptions and vignettes help bring the theory
              to life
         ■    Numerous case studies highlight the key issues in IPT
         ■    Reproducible diagrams and flowcharts for use by therapists and their patients
         ■    Comprehensive coverage of key theoretical issues and an up-to-date critical
              appraisal of IPT research
         For this, the second edition, there is extended coverage of the clinical
         adaptation of IPT to post-traumatic mental health and other new applications
                                                                                                     Second edition


         of IPT, more on depression and common problems encountered in IPT training
         and dissemination, as well as how to manage joint sessions and integrate
         techniques from other approaches and models.
         Interpersonal Psychotherapy: a clinician’s guide remains invaluable for all mental
         health workers including the clinical trainee seeking an introduction to IPT,
         instructors of psychiatry residents, psychology interns, graduate students, and
         social work students.

                                                                         I S B N 978-1-4441-3754-5




                                                                         9   781444 137545




137545_INTER_PSYO_V6.indd 1                                                                                                                                            03/08/2012 14:25
                                                Second Edition




 Interpersonal
  Psychotherapy
                 A Clinician’s Guide



Scott Stuart md
Professor of Psychiatry, Psychology and Obstetrics and Gynecology,
University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA
Director, IPT Institute




Michael Robertson franzcp
Clinical Associate Professor, Centre for Valves, Ethics and Law in
Medicine, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia
CRC Press
Taylor & Francis Group
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742

© 2012 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business

No claim to original U.S. Government works
Version Date: 20150220

International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-4441-3755-2 (eBook - PDF)

This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. While all reasonable
efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, neither the author[s] nor the publisher can
accept any legal responsibility or liability for any errors or omissions that may be made. The publishers wish
to make clear that any views or opinions expressed in this book by individual editors, authors or contributors
are personal to them and do not necessarily reflect the views/opinions of the publishers. The information or
guidance contained in this book is intended for use by medical, scientific or health-care professionals and is
provided strictly as a supplement to the medical or other professional’s own judgement, their knowledge of
the patient’s medical history, relevant manufacturer’s instructions and the appropriate best practice guide-
lines. Because of the rapid advances in medical science, any information or advice on dosages, procedures
or diagnoses should be independently verified. The reader is strongly urged to consult the relevant national
drug formulary and the drug companies’ and device or material manufacturers’ printed instructions, and
their websites, before administering or utilizing any of the drugs, devices or materials mentioned in this
book. This book does not indicate whether a particular treatment is appropriate or suitable for a particular
individual. Ultimately it is the sole responsibility of the medical professional to make his or her own profes-
sional judgements, so as to advise and treat patients appropriately. The authors and publishers have also
attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to
copyright holders if permission to publish in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has
not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may rectify in any future reprint.

Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmit-
ted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented,
including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system,
without written permission from the publishers.

For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.copyright.
com (http://www.copyright.com/) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood
Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organization that provides licenses and
registration for a variety of users. For organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by the CCC,
a separate system of payment has been arranged.

Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used
only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com

and the CRC Press Web site at
http://www.crcpress.com
                         Contents
        Preface                                                            iv
        Acknowledgements                                                  xvi
Section 1: Introduction
        Chapter  1. Introduction                                          3
        Chapter  2. Theory and Clinical Applications                     17

Section 2: Assessment/Initial Sessions
        Chapter  3. The Structure of Interpersonal Psychotherapy         45
        Chapter  4. Assessment and Patient Selection                     54
        Chapter  5. The Interpersonal Inventory                          72
        Chapter  6. The Interpersonal Formulation                        83
        Chapter  7. The Treatment Agreement                              96

Section 3: IPT Techniques
        Chapter  8. Clarification                                        107
        Chapter  9. Communication Analysis                               114
        Chapter 10. Problem Solving                                      139
        Chapter 11. Use of Affect                                        152
        Chapter 12. Role Playing                                         159
        Chapter 13. Homework and Other Directives                        167

Section 4: Problem Areas
        Chapter 14. Interpersonal Disputes                               179
        Chapter 15. Role Transitions                                     202
        Chapter 16. Grief and Loss                                       223

Section 5: Concluding IPT
        Chapter 17. Concluding Acute Treatment and Maintenance
                     Treatment                                            239

Section 6: Additional Aspects of IPT
        Chapter 18. Psychodynamic Processes                              257
        Chapter 19. Applications of Interpersonal Psychotherapy           266
        Chapter 20. Research in Interpersonal Psychotherapy              283
        Chapter 21. Integrated Case Example                              286

Appendices
      A.	IPT Institute and Certified Training in
          Interpersonal Psychotherapy                                    306
      B.	 Interpersonal Inventory Form                                   309
      C.	Interpersonal Formulation Form                                  310
      D.	 International Society of Interpersonal Psychotherapy (ISIPT)   311
                                            Preface
We present herein the second edition of our guide to conducting Interpersonal
Psychotherapy (IPT). We are grateful that many clinicians and academicians have used the
original edition of this book in their clinical work and teaching over the past decade, as well
as in various research projects around the world. Our original intent was (and current intent
still is) to publish a text that is useful for clinicians. We seek to encourage clinicians to utilize
IPT as a framework in which they can exercise their judgment, recognizing that at least to
date, none of the many psychotherapy manuals that have been published (including ours)
have been carved in stone and carried down from Mount Horeb.
     A flexible approach is needed as manual-based psychotherapies are disseminated
from tightly controlled academic settings into the field. Terms such as ‘empirically based’
or ‘empirically supported’ treatments are now being used to describe clinical applications,
denoting not only that flexibility is important with complex patients,a but that rigid
adherence to manuals often results in outcomes that are not as good as those obtained when
manuals are used as guides and combined with clinical judgment and common sense. Our
use of the term ‘guide’ is intended to convey that IPT is best conceptualized as a treatment
which is theoretically grounded, empirical, and clinically validated, and applied with a
healthy measure of clinical judgment. We recognize that randomized controlled trials,
though critically important, are only one means of obtaining empirical data. The experience
of clinicians is also a wealth of qualitative data which should inform clinical practice.
     Our primary goal is to assist therapists in their endeavors with the unique individuals
with whom they work, with the conviction that IPT is an extremely useful framework for
both clinicians and their patients to accomplish the goals that they have mutually set forth.
Our objective aim is to provide a guide to the conduct of IPT, but our subjective aim is to help
therapists better understand their patients. This mirrors the process of IPT: helping patients
alleviate their suffering requires that therapists understand their individual patients, all the
while working to help those patients better understand themselves.
     Since we last wrote, there have been many changes to IPT which have been disseminated
worldwide. Among these are major modifications in the structure of IPT. Acute treatment
with IPT is now concluded rather than terminated, with provision made for Maintenance
Treatment for most patients. This practice of shifting to maintenance therapy rather than
‘terminating’ IPT has been the norm in clinical practice for many years. The range of sessions
which may be used in IPT has expanded, and is now conceptualized as a flexible dosing
range rather than a fixed number. The Problem Areas have been reduced from four to three
(eliminating Interpersonal Sensitivity). Each of these changes is grounded in empirical
research and clinical experience with IPT.
     We have also greatly expanded the application of Attachment and Interpersonal Theory
to IPT. A structured IPT Formulation, which has proven to be extremely valuable for
clinicians and patients, incorporates this new emphasis. Several specific techniques, such
   We have, for convenience sake, chosen to use the term patient throughout the text. In many ways, the term ‘patient’,
a  

   which originally meant ‘one who suffers’, is a very accurate description of the people with whom we work – they are
   suffering, and are in need of help. In other ways, neither the term ‘patient’ nor ‘client’ captures what we would most
   like to convey; as an alternative, we encourage you to think of the people with whom we work as unique individu-
   als, whose diagnoses, disorders, and distress are but a few of their many human qualities.
                                                                                            Preface

as communication analysis, have also been modified. Also new to this edition are some
additional clinical tools which have been tested in the field and are now widely disseminated.
These include a structured Interpersonal Inventory, a Timeline for Role Transitions, and an
Interpersonal Conflict Graph for Interpersonal Disputes. Each is a simple tool designed to
help clinicians better understand their patients.
     Most importantly, this second edition takes a much broader view of the problems that
are amenable to treatment with IPT. Over the past decade there have been a multitude
of treatment trials using IPT for many different disorders, and clinical experience has
also supported its use transdiagnostically. Given the upcoming shift to Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM)-V as well as the completely new Research
Domain Criteria (RDoC),1,2 which are under development by the US National Institute of
Mental Health, this transdiagnostic approach is both timely and empirically supported.
Consequently, we have chosen to use the term ‘distress’ to encompass these concepts broadly
as well as to describe their formulation within IPT.
     Since our first edition in 2003, there have been many exemplary studies of IPT for a
number of disorders and populations.b However, it continues to be the case that, while IPT
enjoys even more empirical support for its efficacy, there is still limited research evaluating
its effectiveness in typical clinical settings. As we noted a decade ago, this is the case for all of
the empirically validated psychotherapies. In other words, IPT (and other evidence-based
practices) have been empirically demonstrated to be of benefit when used:
●● In academic settings with therapists specifically devoted to their application

●● With subjects (as opposed to patients) who meet carefully selected diagnostic criteria and

   do not have comorbid diagnoses
●● With subjects who agree to be involved in randomized clinical trials

●● With subjects who are not required to pay for treatment

●● With tightly controlled protocols which dictate strict adherence to a manual.

In contrast, most clinicians work in settings in which it would be nearly inconceivable to
meet weekly with a patient for 12, 16, or any arbitrary number of consecutive weeks as
research protocols require. Most clinicians are paid for direct patients services rather than
being paid by a research grant. Most clinicians do not have the luxury of working with
patients with major depression without any comorbid diagnoses – many ‘real-life’ patients
have combinations of depression, anxiety, dysfunctional personality traits, substance abuse,
and many other problems. Most patients who seek treatment in community clinics do so
with a preconceived idea about the kind of treatment they want, whether it is medication,
therapy, or something else. They are different from subjects in research studies who agree to
be randomly assigned to treatment. There are no distressed patients who come to community
clinics and ask to be treated by being randomized to a placebo.
    While empirical research regarding the efficacy of a treatment is essential (e.g. its benefit
when applied in a strict research setting in a randomized, controlled study), the effectiveness
of a treatment (e.g. its benefit when applied in clinical settings) is the ultimate measure of its
clinical utility.3,4 Though population-based empirical research regarding the effectiveness of
IPT is not well-developed at present, there is a great deal of clinical wisdom and experience
which does address its use in the community. This clinical experience is also a form of
research: the careful observation of the application of IPT and the responses of patients to
adaptations and changes is qualitative data. We believe that the practice of IPT should be


b   
       See Chapters 19 and 20.

                                                                                                    v
Preface

based on both empirical data gathered from randomized trials and from the qualitative data
derived from clinical experience.c
     This conviction leads to a fundamental conclusion about manualized forms of IPT
and manualized treatments in general. Requiring strict adherence to a manual outside
of a research protocol is likely to diminish the effectiveness of the treatment because
it discourages therapists from utilizing their clinical experience. This assertion is now
supported by evidence: experienced therapists have been shown to have better outcomes
when they more flexibly deliver empirically validated treatments.5,6
     The data – observable and inferential data – that a therapist obtains from a patient
during therapy, such as the kind of insight the patient is developing, the degree to which she
is motivated to change, the effect of the transference on the therapeutic interaction, and the
quality of the therapeutic alliance, should assist the therapist to decide whether the patient
might benefit from a homework assignment, might develop more insight with a well-timed
therapist self-disclosure, or might have greater improvement with 20 as opposed to 16
sessions of therapy. These decisions should be mutually determined within each therapeutic
dyad, not dictated ‘a priori’ by a manual.7–9 Thus this book is a guide rather than a manual – it
provides a set of principles which serve as a framework for the conduct of IPT rather than a
set of rules which constrain it.
     This is reflected in our description of the structure of IPT in this second edition. For
instance, we originally noted that clinical experience had made clear that conducting
consecutive weekly sessions of IPT, then terminating treatment abruptly after 12 or 16 sessions,
was not the best way to conduct IPT most effectively in a clinical setting. Since then, several
well-controlled efficacy trials have been conducted in which Acute Treatment with IPT was
concluded, often with sessions tapering in frequency over time, and Maintenance Treatment
was then provided.10–12 Outcomes using this approach have been superior in reducing relapse,
as experienced clinicians have known for some time. Since there are data which demonstrate
that many disorders such as depression recur,13,14 and since Maintenance IPT reduces the risk
of recurrence,10,11 it is literally malpractice not to provide it if patients are at high risk.
     The provision of Maintenance Treatment means that IPT should not be terminated. It is
much more effective to negotiate the scheduling of sessions with each patient, to meet for several
biweekly or monthly sessions prior to concluding Acute Treatment, and to provide Maintenance
Treatment as indicated. Acute Treatment with IPT should be concluded, not terminated. Clinical
experience with IPT as well as empirical data also support a Biopsychosocial formulation for IPT.
The Biopsychosocial model is used universally in psychiatry, psychology, and medicine.15–19 More
recent clinical experience suggests that expanding this model to include cultural and spiritual
factors is likely to be of even more benefit.d Human psychological functioning is complex,
multifactorial, and far beyond characterization as a simple medical ‘disorder’. We are more than
the sum of our genes or our ‘medical’ selves.
     It is our belief that strict adherence to a medical model of psychopathology dehumanizes both
the therapist and the person with whom she is working. The medical model requires that patients,
not people, must be diagnosed with a specific medical disorder, usually as defined by DSM20 or
the International Classification of Diseases (ICD)21 criteria. This approach not only categorizes
and defines the people with whom we work by their ‘symptoms’ or ‘diagnoses’, it limits our ability
to understand them as unique individuals, and to work creatively with them to develop solutions
to the problems they are experiencing. Since the primary goal of therapy in general, and IPT

     This same principle applies to all other empirically validated treatments, whether they are psychotherapeutic or
c    

     psychopharmacologic.
d   
     We are indebted to our colleagues Rob McAlpine and Anthony Hillin for this improvement in IPT.

vi
                                                                                           Preface

specifically, is to understand the person seeking treatment, using only strict medical diagnoses to
develop that understanding and reflect it to the patient is simply poor clinical practice. IPT should
be based on a comprehensive Biopsychosocial/Cultural/Spiritual formulation.
    Therefore, although a symptom-based diagnostic system is an important way to
understand patients, it should not be used as the primary basis for conceptualizing
patients’ distress, nor as a requirement for treatment with IPT. IPT can be used clinically
with patients who present with interpersonal problems. Some will be depressed, some will
be anxious, some will have personality issues, and many will have combinations of these
factors. Some will be old, some adolescents; some will be male, some female; some will
be from cultural backgrounds different from their therapists’; some will be poor, some
wealthy; but all will be individuals who can be understood in part as social beings who
are intimately involved in a social network, and are therefore potential candidates for IPT.
The question of whether the treatment should be applied in a clinical setting if the patient
does not meet strict diagnostic criteria is not relevant; it is the individual’s unique problems
and distress and social context that should be used to make a determination regarding her
suitability for IPT.
    In sum, the empirical evidence of efficacy should form the foundation for the clinical
delivery of IPT, should be built upon by clinical experience, and should be supplemented by
clinical judgment.


The History of IPT
The early developmental trajectory of IPT was different from most of the other ‘brands’
of empirically supported psychotherapy currently practiced. Most have been derived
from clinical observations which gradually coalesced into theories explaining how
the treatments ‘worked’. In many cases, such as that exemplified by behavioral therapy,
these theoretical hypotheses about the mechanisms of change led to specific therapeutic
techniques.
     Over the past four decades, the movement towards the delivery of evidence-based
medicine has required that psychotherapeutic treatments also be empirically validated.
Largely influenced by psychopharmacologic trials, randomized and well-controlled
efficacy treatment trials have been the ‘sine qua non’ method for ‘proving’ that a particular
psychotherapy works.22 Empirically supported treatments (ESTs) are defined as ‘clearly
specified psychological treatments shown to be efficacious in controlled research with a
delineated population’,23 and specific criteria have been established to define what an EST
is24 (Box 0.1). At the time of this writing, the American Psychological Association (APA)
Division 1225 lists 60 psychotherapies that meet these criteria (Box 0.1).
     Thus the progression of most recently developed psychotherapies, epitomized by
cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), has moved from clinical observation to theory to
randomized treatment trials. Efficacy testing is critical: it is becoming increasingly common
around the world that reimbursement and licensure are tied to provision of ESTs. Because
of this, there is a lot at stake in ensuring that one’s favorite therapy, especially if one is the
developer, is on the EST list. This has compounded the rigidity of manualized therapies –
once on the list and recognized as empirically validated or supported, there is every reason
to insist that one’s favored therapy be delivered exactly as described. Manuals become dogma
rather than a set of guiding principles.
     This same process occurs when pharmaceutical companies market their US Food and
Drug Administration (FDA)-approved psychopharmacologic medications. It is in the
                                                                                                  vii
Preface

Box 0.1 Criteria for well-established empirically validated psychotherapy

  I. At least two good between-group design experiments demonstrating efficacy in one
      or more of the following ways:
  	 A. Superior (statistically significantly so) to pill or psychological placebo or to another
          treatment
  	 B. Equivalent to an already established treatment in experiments with adequate
         sample sizes
  or
  II. A large series of single case design experiments (n >9) demonstrating efficacy. These
       experiments must have:
  	 A.	Used good experimental designs
  	 B.	Compared the intervention to another treatment as in IA

  Further criteria for both I and II:
  	 C.	Experiments must be conducted with treatment manuals
  	 D.	Characteristics of the client samples must be clearly specified
  	 E. 	Effects must have been demonstrated by at least two different investigators or teams


developer’s interest to make every possible distinction between his medication or therapy and
all of the others, and to argue for the superiority and universality of his treatment. A treatment
that is advertised as better than others increases sales. It is not in the developer’s interest to
make any adaptations or changes to the treatment because adaptations or changes put the
FDA approval or APA approval at risk. This contrasts with the ideal bidirectional collaboration
which should occur when empirically validated treatments are disseminated. Ideally, as
experience is gained and additional clinical observations accumulate, both theory and
techniques should be modified and then tested for efficacy once again. This bidirectional or
circular approach to psychotherapy development recognizes that data also come from clinical
practice. The best evidence-based practices recognize practice-based evidence (Figure 0.1).
     Clinical observations lead to a theoretical understanding of psychopathology and
mechanisms of change. These are then translated into clinical strategies and techniques
which are refined during pilot testing. A manual or guide is then developed and the
treatment empirically tested; those that are efficacious are disseminated clinically. Often,
the process stops at this point. Ideally, once the treatment is disseminated, additional
clinical observations are collected and used to further refine the theory and improve clinical
interventions. These are then pilot tested, added to a revised manual, and empirically tested
and disseminated once again. The process is dynamic and evolving, and leads to therapies
that are both efficacious and effective.
     IPT evolved in a strikingly different fashion than most ESTs. Rather than beginning
as a set of clinical observations that were used as the basis for a coherent theory of
psychopathology and led to specific techniques to bring about change, IPT began as a
manualized treatment developed for a research protocol. In fact, IPT was initially developed
not as a clinical treatment, but for the express purpose of serving as a manualized ‘placebo
condition’ for a psychopharmacologic treatment trial for depression.26–29 It was largely
accidental that IPT was discovered to be of benefit.
     In order to understand the original IPT model, it is important to note that it was
developed in the 1970s,26 during which time the medical model of psychopathology reigned
supreme. At that time, there was an increasing emphasis on medical treatments, particularly
psychotropic medications, fueled both by the pharmaceutical industry and the desire of
many psychiatrists to be seen as legitimate, empirically based ‘medical’ specialists.30,31 It was
viii
                                                                                                           Preface




                           Clinical observations                   Clinical dissemination




                    Theory                                               Empirical testing




                        Clinical strategies and techniques             Manual/guide development



                                            Clinical refinement/Pilot
                                                      testing

Figure 0.1  Psychotherapy development: an ideal approach


widely held within this model that psychotherapy was not particularly effective, and that it
should largely be subsumed by psychopharmacologic treatments.
     Nonetheless, some early studies investigating the treatment of depression with
medication included psychotherapy as a treatment component, as the trials were designed
to mirror the clinical practice of the time, which generally included some form of
psychodynamic psychotherapy along with medication.e Klerman, Weissman, and their
colleagues incorporated a manualized form of psychotherapy in their medication trials for
depression for this reason. This manualized treatment, which later became IPT, was initially
called a ‘high contact’ condition,32 the presumption being that there might be some benefit
from the non-specific effects of contact with a therapist, but none that would be attributable
to any specific techniques.29
     Explicitly following the model established by pharmacologic treatment trials, a codified
manual describing the procedures and techniques to be used in the psychotherapy condition
was developed, so that fidelity to treatment could be preserved. The primary concern
of the investigators was that the therapeutic treatment was reproducible – the specific
techniques to be used and the theoretical basis for the psychotherapeutic interventions were
of secondary importance.29 In contrast to the investigators’ expectations, the early studies
of IPT demonstrated that it had a therapeutic effect.26,28 As IPT was largely conceived of as
a ‘social work’ or ‘social support’ intervention, it was hypothesized that changes in social
circumstances and social relationships were largely the driving force behind improvement.
The investigators’ enthusiasm to continue to empirically test IPT in rigorously controlled
trials led to the use of IPT in many research settings.
     In short, IPT was initially constructed in ‘retrograde’ fashion rather than being derived
from clinical observations which were used to develop a theory of psychopathology and
to develop specific techniques. IPT began as a manualized therapy which was believed to
be an inert treatment, or at most was simply thought to be a codification of ‘non-specific’
therapeutic factors common to all psychotherapies. The original purpose of IPT was to serve
as a credible and reproducible placebo psychotherapy. It was not originally developed from


    Some have suggested that psychotherapies were included in these medication treatment trials with the intent of
e   

    demonstrating that they were not effective, thus reinforcing the primacy of biological psychiatry.

                                                                                                                     ix
Preface

clinical observations, and it has only been over the past decade that close attention has been
paid to its theoretical foundations.
    This developmental process had two effects on the dissemination of IPT in the 1980s and
1990s. First, ‘manualized’ IPT was constructed to meet the demands of an empirical research
protocol; it was not designed for clinical use. Consequently, for nearly two decades, IPT was
largely restricted to academic settings and efficacy studies, with clinical dissemination lagging far
behind empirical research. Second, the historical emphasis on the reproducibility of IPT in efficacy
research studies led to an insistence by many investigators that IPT had to precisely follow the
dictates of the research manual, rather than being flexible when it was adapted to clinical settings.
Adherence to the manual was primary; flexibility and quality were distant seconds.
    These two effects were magnified by the inclusion of IPT as one of the two
psychotherapeutic treatments investigated in the National Institute of Mental Health
Treatment of Depression Collaborative Research Program (NIMH-TDCRP).33 The
NIMH-TDCRP, which utilized what is still considered the gold-standard methodology
for psychotherapy efficacy studies, was designed to definitively answer how efficacious
psychotherapy (IPT and CBT specifically) and medication were as acute treatments
for depression. The rigorous design dictated that IPT be adapted to the research
protocol, rather than adapting the protocol design to reflect good clinical use of IPT.33
For instance, the description of the NIMH-TDCRP protocol specifically states that the
length of the treatments selected for the trial were based on the requirements of the
psychopharmacologists, not on the needs of the psychotherapists. To quote Elkin et al.:33
    All treatment conditions are 16 weeks long. This treatment length was based
    primarily on pharmacotherapy practice current at the time this program was initi-
    ated; the two experimental psychotherapies are frequently only 12 weeks long.

The rigorous NIMH-TDCRP design further entrenched IPT as a ‘research’ therapy following
a medical model. The emphasis on reproducibility and adherence to the IPT manual led to an
insistence that it continue to be conducted exactly as specified in the NIMH-TDCRP protocol.
Rather than being conceptualized as a dynamically developing treatment which should
incorporate new clinical observations and clinical experience, the way IPT was manualized
in the NIMH-TDCRP became for many years the singular and ‘correct’ way to conduct it. For
nearly two decades this 16-week protocol was used inflexibly by many IPT clinicians.
    Ironically, the flexibility that was included in the NIMH-TDCRP protocol was ignored by
those advocating rigid adherence to the manual. In fact, clinical judgment was permitted, and
flexibility was explicit. To quote the investigators once again:33
    There are, however, some slight differences in the total number and frequency
    of treatment sessions. These differences are consistent with usual practice for
    each of the approaches. The patients in CB therapy receive 12 sessions over
    the course of the first eight weeks, followed by eight sessions once a week, for
    a total of 20 sessions. The patients in IPT receive 16 weekly sessions with the
    therapist having the option of scheduling up to four additional sessions, for a total
    of 16 to 20 sessions.
There was also a wide range of psychotherapy delivery in the NIMH-TDCRP. Though the
treatments were planned to be 16 weeks in length, the average number of sessions actually
delivered was only 13.0.
    The NIMH-TDCRP was structured with the intentional inclusion of therapeutic
judgment. Therapists were allowed to schedule up to four additional sessions at their
discretion. A reasonable interpretation of the data is that there should be flexibility in the

x
                                                                                         Preface

structure of IPT, and that a dosing range should be used for individual patients. This was not
the way that IPT was disseminated for nearly two decades. The early manuals became a set of
rigid rules rather than clinical guidelines, and dissemination was hindered.
     Another ramification of the inclusion of IPT in the NIMH-TDCRP was that some of the
components in the original IPT research manual were included (or excluded) primarily as
a means of distinguishing it from CBT. By intent, the two psychotherapies to be compared
were to be as different as possible in hypothesized effects, therapeutic stance, and specific
interventions.33 Some techniques which are intrinsic to CBT, such as the assignment of
homework, were intentionally excluded from IPT. IPT was described as relying largely on
‘non-specific’ techniques such as non-directive exploration and clarification in order to
distinguish it from the behavioral components of CBT. Thus the exclusion of homework
specified in the early IPT manuals, for example, was the result of research expedience rather
than being supported by a specific theoretical rationale or by clinical experience. The lack
of techniques specific to IPT, and the lack of techniques derived from a theoretical base,
led some critics to describe IPT as nothing more than a ‘time-limited psychodynamic
psychotherapy’, or a sophisticated means of encouraging social support.34
     Another major influence of the NIMH-TDCRP on the development of IPT was that the
major outcome measures used were focused on symptom reduction. Because medications
for depression are targeted specifically at DSM symptoms, the efficacy of IPT as a comparison
treatment was measured by the reduction it brought about in depressive symptoms. This reduced
IPT (and CBT) to simplistic analogs of antidepressant medication.35 The implication was that
the ‘value’ of IPT was restricted to the narrow focus of relieving a predefined cluster of symptoms
rather than recognizing the benefit of IPT for more broadly defined psychological distress.
     While there is no doubt that symptom relief is a highly desirable goal, and no doubt that
a multitude of efficacy studies demonstrate that IPT does lead to reduction in symptoms, this
narrow focus has displaced attention from the other benefits of IPT. These include potential
changes in insight, improvement in social relationships, general life satisfaction and well-
being, and an acceptance of life circumstances which is more congruent with the patient’s
condition. Though these concepts are very difficult to quantify and to measure, neglecting
them as changes in IPT, and focusing narrowly on symptomatic outcome alone, runs the risk
of missing some of the most powerful and beneficial aspects of the therapy – changes that
would be unique to psychotherapy as opposed to the use of medication.
     Though the more comprehensive Biopsychosocial/Cultural/Spiritual model is
now widely used in IPT, most IPT research still continues to be focused narrowly
on symptomatic relief. Most research in IPT continues to examine its application to
well-circumscribed DSM psychiatric disorders, rather than examining its impact on
interpersonal problems in general. There is a great need for effectiveness studies of IPT in
the community with complex patients that focus on presenting problems rather than strict
diagnoses, as well as a need for investigation of changes in interpersonal functioning, social
functioning, and general distress.
     Fortunately, over the past decade, adaptations to IPT have occurred, driven both by
clinical experience and research. The application of IPT to more complex populations and to
non-affective disorders has led to changes such as the modification of frequency and duration
of treatment, development of maintenance treatment, and the combination of IPT with other
modalities. These have been implemented in training as well. IPT is now disseminated and
practiced as a flexible principle-guided treatment, reflecting what is universally recognized
as the most appropriate and effective means of delivering ESTs. To quote the American
Psychological Association:36

                                                                                                xi
Preface

      The APA has identified ‘best research evidence’ as a major component of
      evidence-based practice. This research evidence for psychological treatments
      will necessarily be combined with clinician expertise and patient values and
      characteristics in determining optimum approaches to treatment. (emphasis
      added)
These changes and the flexible approach to IPT that is now used are emphasized in this text.
These include a shift to Conclusion of Acute Treatment followed by Maintenance Treatment,
a flexible approach to scheduling sessions, and flexibility in utilizing the three Problem Areas.
These changes also reflect the further development of the theoretical basis of IPT, from the
original description of the use of Attachment and Interpersonal Theory in IPT in our first
edition to current data supporting the impact of attachment in the clinical delivery of IPT.37–39
     These changes are of critical importance in fostering the dissemination of IPT. A new
paradigm of clinical practice is emerging. Driven by insurer and governmental demands
that therapists deliver evidence-based treatments, IPT and many of the other ESTs are being
rolled out across the globe. This trend hearkens a profound change: community-based
clinicians will be expected to be trained in IPT and other ESTs in order to be reimbursed or
employed in mental health systems. It is our responsibility to ensure that these therapists
are well-trained, can utilize a variety of ESTs, and that they can deliver high-quality ESTs
combined with clinician expertise and patient values and characteristics to provide the optimum
approach to treatment for the specific individuals with whom they work.


A Metaphor for IPT and Other Empirically
Supported Therapies
Learning psychotherapy is like learning to play chess. If you want to learn how to play chess
well, you need to do two things: read books which explain how to play, and play a lot of games
against the best competition you can find.
     Nearly all chess textbooks divide games into opening, middle, and endgame phases.
There are always detailed discussions about how to begin the game, ranging from simple
descriptions of the movements of the various pieces to elaborate opening defenses such as
the Italian Game or the Vienna Game. Chess manuals also have detailed descriptions of
the conclusions of games. As with the opening phases, elaborate descriptions and analyses
are offered for the few moves which conclude a game. In contrast, there isn’t much
information about what happens in the middle of games. This is particularly striking
considering how much of the game actually takes place in this ‘middle’ phase. The middle
of the game is shrouded in mystery, a black box which connects the input of the opening
phase to the endgame output.
     Psychotherapy manuals are like chess textbooks. Most provide detailed information
about selecting patients for the specific therapy being described, beginning treatment, and
introducing the treatment model to the patient. This is usually followed by a brief review
of techniques that might be used (a simple description of how the pieces move outside
of the context of an actual game), and then a detailed description of the end of therapy is
given. There is good reason to be critical of this approach, which neglects the importance
of understanding techniques in the context of the whole treatment. However, much of
the reason that disproportionate time is spent on the opening phases of chess games and
psychotherapy treatments, and the reason that so much effort is expended on the end of
the games/treatments, is that these are the only two times in the process when things can be

xii
                                                                                       Preface

described with any precision. There are too many permutations and too many possibilities to
even begin to describe what happens in the middle of the game or the middle of therapy. In
contrast, the limited possibilities of move and countermove, statement and response, during
the opening phase make it more amenable to precise description. When only a few pieces are
left at the end, or when only a session or two is left, it again becomes possible to offer more
precise descriptions – there aren’t so many moves that they defy analysis.
     Textbooks which give an ordered list of sequential moves to make in a chess game are
of little value. Manuals which prescribe what a therapist is to do each and every session are
of little value. Patients are different. Some don’t want to do homework; some don’t want to
set an agenda. Some will follow the lead of the therapist; some won’t. In each and every case,
adaptations have to be made. There are too many ways the middle of the game can be played
to script every move.
     This is where playing a lot of games with the best competition and working with the most
challenging patients comes into the picture. Experience is the best way to learn to conduct
the Middle Phase – more so if there is a chess master or psychotherapy supervisor to offer
further insights and tips along the way. Experience and skill come from practice. Learning
what to do in the Middle Phase, developing a repertoire of moves and strategies and knowing
what tactics to use, depends not on rigidly following a manual but on refining intuition and
judgment. Master chess players and master therapists develop an intuitive sense of what will
work best in a particular session with a particular client, and have the experience to decide
when and how to do it. Master chess players and therapists are artisans, not technicians. As
one devotes a lifetime to mastering chess, expert clinicians do the same with continual study,
self-reflection, and constant practice.
     After studying the ‘how-to’ manuals and getting some experience playing games, chess
players move on to the ‘case-study’ books that describe the great games of the masters. Rather
than providing technical information, these case studies are read to hone the chess player’s
sense of judgment, timing, and intuition – to get inside the mind of the great chess masters.
Similarly, at a high level of development, therapists also learn from case studies describing
individual cases from which general principles can be gleaned.
     Master psychotherapists are those who work to understand the craft of psychotherapy as
well as specific techniques. While opening chess defenses and various forms of psychotherapy
are important tools to have at one’s disposal, they do not constitute the whole of the
experience or the process of therapy. Just as chess masters intimately understand a variety
of opening strategies, psychotherapy masters should understand and practice a variety
of approaches. The art of chess and psychotherapy is making well-informed judgments
about when to use which specific strategies and having the ability to carry them out. Master
clinicians, like master chess players, recognize that textbooks and manuals are limited.
Though helpful in providing a framework for treatment, clinical practice demands that
therapists be flexible and that they use clinical judgment in applying the therapy to individual
patients. The psychotherapy texts, like the chess books, should be used as guides to treatment.
The ability to combine experience and judgment and a willingness to practice diligently is
what makes a clinician an expert.

Conclusion
This text is designed to guide clinicians who wish to practice IPT. Our primary goal is to
make IPT available and applicable – to encourage the dissemination of what we believe
to be an extraordinary treatment for a variety of interpersonal problems and psychiatric

                                                                                             xiii
Preface

syndromes. We offer a paradigm universally accepted by clinicians and researchers alike: IPT
is an EST that can be used as a foundation for therapists using their clinical experience within
each unique clinical relationship. IPT is grounded in theory, empirical research, and clinical
experience, and should always incorporate clinical judgment.

IPT: An Established Paradigm
1.	 The practice of IPT should be based on theory, empirical data, and clinical experience.
2.	 Incorporating new empirical data and clinical experience into the IPT model will
    continue to improve treatment.
3.	 IPT therapists should utilize IPT as an EST, meaning that adaptations to individual
    patients and circumstances will enhance outcome.
4.	 Utilizing clinical judgment within an IPT framework will improve outcome.
5.	 IPT need not be restricted to specific diagnostic entities, but can be applied to a variety of
    interpersonal problems.

References
 1.	 Cuthbert BN and Insel TR. Toward new approaches to psychotic disorders: the NIMH
     Research Domain Criteria project. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 2010, 36(6): 1061–1062.
 2.	 Insel T, et al. Research domain criteria (RDoC): toward a new classification framework
     for research on mental disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry, 2010, 167(7): 748–751.
 3.	 Nathan PE, Stuart S and Dolan S. Research on psychotherapy efficacy and effectiveness:
     between Scylla and Charybdis? Psychological Bulletin, 2000, 126: 964–981.
 4.	 Barlow DH. Health care policy, psychotherapy research, and the future of psychotherapy.
     American Psychologist, 1996, 51: 1050–1058.
 5.	 Barber J, et al. The role of therapist adherence, therapist competence, and the alliance in
     predicting outcome of individual drug counseling: results from the NIDA collaborative
     cocaine treatment study. Psychotherapy Research, 2006, 16: 229–240.
 6.	 Castonguay L, et al. Predicting the effect of cognitive therapy for depression: a study of unique
     and common factors. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 1996, 64: 497–504.
 7.	 Edelson M. Can psychotherapy research answer this psychotherapist’s questions?, in
     Talley PF, Strupp HH and Butler SF (eds) Psychotherapy Research and Practice: Bridging
     the Gap. 1994, New York: Basic Books.
 8.	 Garfield SL. Some problems associated with ‘validated’ forms of psychotherapy. Clinical
     Psychology: Science and Practice, 1996, 3: 218–229.
 9.	 Strauss BM and Kaechele H. The writing on the wall: comments on the current
     discussion about empirically validated treatments in Germany. Psychotherapy Research,
     1998, 8: 158–170.
10.	 Frank E, et al. Interpersonal psychotherapy and antidepressant medication: evaluation
     of a sequential treatment strategy in women with recurrent major depression. Journal of
     Clinical Psychiatry, 2000, 61: 51–57.
11.	 Frank E, et al. randomized trial of weekly, twice-monthly, and monthly interpersonal
     psychotherapy as maintenance treatment for women with recurrent depression.
     American Journal of Psychiatry, 2007, 164: 761–767.


xiv
                                                                                       Preface

12.	 Talbot N, et al. A randomized effectiveness trial of interpersonal psychotherapy for
     depressed women with sexual abuse histories. Psychiatric Services, 2011, 62: 374–380.
13.	 Kessler RC, et al. The epidemiology of major depressive disorder: results from the
     National Comorbidity Survey Replication (NCS-R). Journal of the American Medical
     Association, 2003, 289: 3095–3105.
14.	 Kessler RC, et al. Lifetime prevalence and age-of-onset distributions of DSM-IV
     disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry,
     2005, 62: 593–602.
15.	 Engel GL. The clinical application of biopsychosocial models. American Journal of
     Psychiatry, 1980, 137: 535–544.
16.	 Engel GL. The biopsychosocial model and medical education: who are to be the teachers?
     New England Journal of Medicine, 1982, 306: 802–805.
17.	 Sadler JZ and Hulgus YF. Clinical problem solving and the biopsychosocial model.
     American Journal of Psychiatry, 1992, 149: 1315–1323.
18.	 Hartmann L. Presidential address: reflections on humane values and biopsychosocial
     integration. American Journal of Psychiatry, 1992, 149: 1135–1141.
19.	 Fava G and Sonino N. The biopsychosocial model 30 years later. Psychotherapy and
     Psychosomatics, 2008, 77: 1–2.
20.	 American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,
     4th edn. 1994, Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.
21.	 World Health Organization. International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related
     Health Problems: ICD-10, 10th edn. 1992, Geneva: World Health Organization.
22.	 Parloff MB. Placebo controls in psychotherapy research a sine qua non or a placebo
     for research problems? Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 1986, 54:
     79–87.
23.	 Chambless DL and Hollon S. Defining empirically supported therapies. Journal of
     Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 1998, 66: 7–18.
24.	 Chambless DL, et al. Update on empirically validated therapies, II. Clinical Psychologist,
     1998, 51(1): 3–16.
25.	 Society of Clinical Psychology APA Division 12. Psychological Treatments. 2011.
     Available at: www.psychology.sunysb.edu/eklonsky-/division12/treatments.html.
26.	 Klerman GL, et al. Treatment of depression by drugs and psychotherapy. American
     Journal of Psychiatry, 1974, 131: 186–191.
27.	 Weissman MM. The psychological treatment of depression. Evidence for the efficacy of
     psychotherapy alone, in comparison with, and in combination with pharmacotherapy.
     Archives of General Psychiatry, 1979, 36: 1261–1269.
28.	 Weissman MM, et al. The efficacy of drugs and psychotherapy in the treatment of acute
     depressive episodes. American Journal of Psychiatry, 1979, 136(4B): 555–558.
29.	 Weissman MM. A brief history of interpersonal psychotherapy. Psychiatric Annals, 2006,
     36(8): 553–557.
30.	 Detre T. The future of psychiatry. American Journal of Psychiatry, 1987, 144: 621–625.
31.	 Detre T and McDonald MC. Managed care and the future of psychiatry. Archives of
     General Psychiatry, 1997, 54: 201–204.


                                                                                             xv
Preface

32.	 DiMascio A, Weissman MM and Prusoff BA. Differential symptom reduction by drugs and
     psychotherapy in acute depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 1979, 36: 1450–1456.
33.	 Elkin I, et al. NIMH Treatment of Depression Collaborative Treatment Program:
     background and research plan. Archives of General Psychiatry, 1985, 42: 305–316.
34.	 Markowitz JC, Svartberg M and Swartz HA. Is IPT time-limited psychodynamic
     psychotherapy? Journal of Psychotherapy Research and Practice, 1998, 7: 185–195.
35.	 Stiles WB and Shapiro DA. Abuse of the drug metaphor in psychotherapy process-
     outcome research. Clinical Psychology Review, 1989, 9: 521–544.
36.	 APA Presidential Task Force on Evidence-Based Practice. Evidence-based practice in
     psychology. American Psychologist, 2006, 61: 271–285.
37.	 Ravitz P, Maunder R and McBride C. Attachment, contemporary interpersonal theory
     and IPT: an integration of theoretical, clinical, and empirical perspectives. Journal of
     Contemporary Psychotherapy, 2008, 38(1): 11–22.
38.	 McBride C, et al. Attachment as a moderator of treatment outcome in major depression:
     a randomized control trial of interpersonal psychotherapy versus cognitive behavior
     therapy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 2006, 74: 1041–1054.
39.	 Stuart S and Noyes R Jr. Attachment and interpersonal communication in somatization.
     Psychosomatics, 1999, 40(1): 34–43.




                Acknowledgments
We are indebted to many for their help with this project. We are particularly grateful to Mike
O’Hara and the staff of the Iowa Depression and Research Center, the participants in the IPT
Institute, and the many clinicians and colleagues we have had the privilege of working with
over the years.
    A personal and heartfelt thanks as well to the many patients we have had the privilege of
working with. We are grateful for all we have learned from you, and for the graciousness with
which you have shared your life stories with us.
    Finally we are grateful to our families: Shana, Kaela, Ryson, Darra, and Logan, and to
Anna and Lucas.
Scott Stuart – Iowa City, USA
Michael Robertson – Sydney, Australia




xvi
                              Section 1
Introduction


Chapter   1. Introduction
Chapter   2.  Theory and Clinical Applications
This page intentionally left blank
                                                                    1
Introduction
Characteristics of IPT                                                                        4
A Metaphor for IPT                                                                           14
Conclusion                                                                                   15
References                                                                                   15

Interpersonal Psychotherapy (IPT) is a short-term, attachment-based psychotherapy which
aims to alleviate patients’ suffering and improve their interpersonal functioning. IPT focuses
specifically on interpersonal relationships as a means of bringing about interpersonal change
and symptomatic recovery, with the goal of helping patients to improve their interpersonal
relationships and to learn to ask more graciously for the emotional and practical support they
need. In addition, IPT also aims to assist patients to improve their social support so that they
can better manage their current interpersonal distress.
     IPT was originally developed in a research context as a treatment for major depression
and was codified in a research manual by Klerman et al. in 1984.1 Since that time, as clinical
experience and empirical evidence supporting IPT has accumulated, its use has broadened
to include not only the treatment of patients with a variety of well-specified diagnoses as
described in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM)-IV,2 but also
the treatment of patients presenting with a variety of interpersonal problems and those with
psychological ‘distress’ broadly conceptualized.
     IPT reflects the best of both empirical research and clinical experience, incorporating
changes as additional data (both quantitative and qualitative) and clinical experience
continue to grow. IPT is not static or fixed; clinical experience and research have (and
will continue) to inform modifications to IPT. Since the publication of Interpersonal
Psychotherapy: A Clinician’s Guide in 2003, the modified and flexible structure of IPT has
fostered its dissemination and utilization in general clinical settings, moving beyond its
previously exclusive use in randomized treatment trials in academic research settings.
Moreover, this flexible structure, which allows and encourages therapists to apply their
clinical judgment when providing IPT, has also increased its effectiveness and allowed it to be
applied to a more diverse group of patients.
     As was the case with our first edition, this updated guide is written to reflect the current
‘state of the art’ of IPT, recognizing that future research and clinical experience will lead
to further refinements in the treatment, and that IPT will continue to evolve and improve
over time. It is our conviction that this should and must be the case in order to maximize its
effectiveness. We are grateful to have the opportunity to publish this revision, but our hope is
that there will continue to be subsequent revisions as new clinicians and investigators develop
even better techniques and tactics within the IPT framework. Both empirical data and
clinical experience have contributed, and should continue to contribute, to the IPT model
and its clinical application.



                                                                                               3
Introduction

Characteristics of IPT
IPT is characterized by four primary elements. First, as is clear from the name, it focuses
specifically on interpersonal relationships and social support as points of intervention.
Second, IPT is based on a Biopsychosocial/Cultural/Spiritual model of psychological
functioning. Third, IPT is short-term in the Acute Phase of Treatment. Fourth, the
interventions used in IPT typically do not directly address the patient–therapist relationship
as it develops in therapy (Box 1.1).
Box 1.1  Characteristics of IPT

    ●● IPT focuses specifically on interpersonal relationships and social support as points of
       intervention
    ●● IPT is based on a Biopsychosocial/Cultural/Spiritual model of psychological

       ­functioning
    ●● IPT is short-term in the Acute Phase of treatment

    ●● IPT interventions typically do not directly address the patient–therapist relationship




IPT Is Interpersonally Oriented
IPT is based on the premise that interpersonal distress is intimately connected with
psychiatric symptoms and psychological distress generally. Thus the foci of IPT are twofold.
The first is the conflicts, transitions, and losses in the patient’s relationship: the aim is to help the
patient to either improve communication within those relationships, or to develop more
realistic expectations about them. The second focus is helping the patient to build or better
utilize her extended social support network so that she is better able to muster the interpersonal
support needed to deal with the crises which precipitated the distress.
     This approach is extremely well-suited, for instance, to the treatment of women who may be
experiencing postpartum depression.3 Many women in these circumstances describe that their
distress is linked to conflicts in their relationships with their partners. In addition, many also report
that they have difficulty making the transition from ‘working woman’ to ‘mother’, and that this
change in social circumstances and social support contributes to their problems. An IPT therapist
would help her to resolve the conflicts with her partner over issues such as division of childcare
labor, and would also assist the woman to garner more support from her social network. This
might include connecting with and asking for support from other friends who have had children,
extended family members, or colleagues at work. It could also include encouraging her to get
involved in a new mothers’ support group. Resolution of the particular interpersonal conflict,
along with improved interpersonal support while the Role Transition is being negotiated, leads to
symptomatic improvement and improvement in interpersonal functioning.
     This is a clear distinction between IPT and treatments such as Cognitive Behavior
Therapy (CBT)4 and psychoanalytically oriented psychotherapy. In contrast to CBT, in
which the primary focus of treatment is the patient’s internally based cognitions and
schema, IPT focuses first and foremost on the patient’s interpersonal communications
with others in her interpersonal sphere and on her social support. In contrast to
analytically oriented treatments, in which the primary focus of treatment is on
understanding the contribution of early life experiences to psychological functioning,
IPT focuses primarily on helping the patient to improve her communication and social
support in the present. Past experiences, while clearly influencing current functioning,
are not a major focus of intervention.

4
                                                                        Characteristics of IPT

    This critical distinction between IPT and other psychotherapies merits further emphasis
because it is often missed or glossed over by proponents of other approaches. There is no
doubt that all psychotherapies address interpersonal functioning to some degree – it is the
bread and butter of the problems that lead people to seek counseling. The difference is in the
emphasis. In IPT, these interpersonal issues – Grief and Loss, Interpersonal Disputes, and
Role Transitions – are the primary foci of treatment. In CBT, psychodynamic psychotherapy,
Problem Solving Therapy, Acceptance and Commitment Therapy, Behavioral Activation,
and even new-wave ‘stand on your head in the corner with crystals’ therapies, interpersonal
issues are not the primary focus. Cognitions, schema, values, or upside-down crystals are.
Interpersonal issues are discussed in other treatments, but they are not the primary focus.
This is why these therapies are not called ‘Interpersonal CBT’ or ‘Interpersonal Crystal
Therapy’.
    To be fair and balanced, there is also no doubt that IPT also addresses issues inherent
in other therapies. For instance, one could make a compelling Socratic argument that
what are called ‘expectations’ about relationships in IPT are very similar to what are called
cognitions in CBT, or that IPT therapists are suppressing the concept that motivations in
communication may be driven by psychological factors outside of the patient’s awareness.
These are valid points. But these issues are not the primary foci of IPT, just as interpersonal
issues are not the primary foci of these other therapies. While there is overlap between the
empirically validated therapies, there are also very clear distinctions.
    It is this primary focus on interpersonal issues, however, that is part of the reason why
IPT is so effective. IPT directly addresses the here-and-now interpersonal problems that
people bring to therapy without having to invoke some kind of sophisticated psychological
mechanisms or theories. In IPT, the therapist can state simply and directly that the
interpersonal issues which drove the patient to seek help, such as grief, will be talked about
in therapy – there’s no need to describe hypothetical concepts such as schema or ids or
crystalline magnetism.
    A corollary of these differences is that by virtue of IPT’s primary focus on here-and-
now interpersonal functioning, it is designed to resolve psychiatric symptoms and improve
interpersonal functioning rather than to change underlying psychodynamic structures.
While ego strength, defense mechanisms, and personality characteristics are all important
in assessing suitability for treatment, change in these constructs is not presumed to occur in
IPT because it is short-term. There’s not enough time. Rather, ego strength, personality, and
attachment are taken as givens for a particular patient, and the question that drives the IPT
therapist’s interventions is:
    Given this patient’s personality style, ego strength, defense mechanisms, and
    early life experiences, and the time frame I am working within, how can I help
    her to improve her here-and-now interpersonal relationships and build a more
    effective social support network?


IPT Is Based on a Biopsychosocial/Cultural/Spiritual Model
IPT is based on a Biopsychosocial/Cultural/Spiritual model of psychological functioning.
Rather than viewing psychological distress or psychiatric problems narrowly as medical
diseases, the IPT approach is to conceptualize the patient’s functioning in broad terms as a
product of her temperament, personality, and attachment style, placed upon a foundation
of biological factors such as genetics and physiological functioning, in the context of social
relationships and general social support. Cultural and spiritual elements are also major

                                                                                                 5
Introduction

factors – this has been increasingly apparent as IPT has been utilized in different settings
around the world.
      This five-factor model of distress is the most appropriate for IPT for three reasons. First,
it is congruent with the theoretical foundation of IPT, in which attachments to others and
the individual’s ability to communicate effectively are hypothesized to be intimately linked
with psychological functioning. Second, the Biopsychosocial/Cultural/Spiritual model
leads directly to the specific techniques and interventions that are used in IPT. These include
IPT interventions such as the development of Interpersonal Incidents and communication
analysis. The acknowledgment of biological factors as one component of distress also
makes IPT compatible for use with psychotropic medication when indicated. Third, the
Biopsychosocial/Cultural/Spiritual model is strength based – it focuses not only on factors
that are diatheses for psychological distress, but also includes factors which are protective. All
can be included in the IPT Formulation, which is described in detail in Chapter 6.
      The original iteration of IPT over three decades ago was based on a biological model of
disease. Given the historical context and the requirements of the research design in which
it was developed, this limited perspective is quite understandable. Historically, IPT was
developed at a time in which biological mechanisms were primary in medicine; psychiatry
was struggling to be taken seriously as a medical discipline, and much of the biological
emphasis was an intentional contrast with psychoanalytic psychiatry which had been in the
fore for many years. Early research designs, in which IPT (and other psychotherapies) were
being compared to medications for specific diagnoses like major depression, also forced IPT
into a disease-based biological model.
      A consequence of this restrictive medical model was the requirement in the original
research manual that patients be given a ‘sick role’ as they began treatment with IPT. This
literally meant instructing the patient that he was medically ill and should be treated as
such, i.e. that he should be absolved of life responsibilities for a time, and allowed by others
to recover before being asked to take responsibility for change. It didn’t matter whether the
patient agreed with this idea of the sick role – it was simply imposed upon him rather than
developing a collaborative understanding of his experience.
      There are several problems inherent in this outmoded biological disease model. First,
the field of medicine as a whole has taken a much broader view of illness or dysfunction.
No longer is diabetes, for example, seen solely as a ‘biological disease’. Instead, the
physiologically based disease of diabetes is understood in the context of psychological and
social functioning, and cultural and spiritual factors are noted as well. For type 2 diabetes in
particular, psychological factors leading to eating behavior, and cultural influences affecting
engagement with medical treatment, are seen as critical in the genesis and maintenance of
the illness. All physicians now agree that describing diabetes as a simple biological disease,
as opposed to a multifaceted illness, is an inappropriate reductionism which compromises
treatment and patient care. One simply must pay attention to the whole person, not just his
pancreas.
      The same is true of psychiatric illnesses. Like diabetes, depression and other psychiatric
illnesses have unquestioned biological bases, but they are also embedded within a social
and cultural context and infused with psychological and spiritual meaning. Imposing a
limited and outdated term such as ‘sick role’ on the patient does a disservice by discounting
his unique individual experience. Moreover, and much more dangerously, it suggests to
the patient that he need only ‘sit and wait’ for a biological change to take effect (i.e. taking
medication) rather than taking responsibility for generating change within his social
environment and for making changes in his interpersonal relationships. Therapeutically

6
                                                                          Characteristics of IPT

imposing the term ‘sick role’ also contradicts the evidence that the patient should be active in
his own recovery. Behavioral activation5,6 and motivational interviewing,7 for example, have
provided ample evidence that engagement in treatment is a critical part of recovery. While
it is true that the patient is suffering and may be unable to function at full capacity while
recovering, it is also true that removing him from normal activities and responsibilities may
actually reduce the chances of recovery.
      Clinically speaking, it has been often observed that a major problem with ‘giving’
patients the ‘sick role’ is that many of them then assume it. The clinician’s explicit permission
to reduce or avoid activities and to not be held responsible for a ‘medical disease’ can be
used as a bludgeon to get others to take on the patient’s responsibilities and as a means of
perpetuating the patient’s illness behavior. This is an instance in which the term secondary
gain has relevance. A far better comparison for understanding the process in IPT is to think
about recovery from depression as similar to recovery from an orthopedic injury (or any
other physiological dysfunction for that matter). It is acknowledged that the patient has a
physiologically based disease, but that there are many other aspects to his illness and recovery.
Rather than taking a passive role, the patient should be encouraged to be actively engaged
in and committed to rehabilitation, and to recognizing that there may be many difficult and
painful exercises that will need to be done as recovery occurs. The degree to which the patient
does these things – literally engages in and completes these rehabilitation activities – will play
an enormous part in his recovery. The therapist should give no encouragement to the patient
to ‘sit and wait’ – quite the contrary: the patient should be instructed to ‘get up and get going’
as quickly as possible.
      Of course the therapist plays a major role in providing encouragement and expert
instruction to the patient as he recovers, and the therapist must take some of the
responsibility for motivating him to engage in treatment. Positive reinforcement is critical.
The therapist might best be portrayed in the role of a coach in this aspect of IPT. Like a
swimming coach, for instance, the therapist should be in the water with the patient, watching
carefully to diagnose a problem with arm stroke, kick technique, or timing of breathing. The
therapist should, based on this information, help the patient to develop the best possible
set of exercises or training regimens to get back into shape and to correct the specific flaw
in technique. And the therapist should be a motivator, helping the patient to get back in
the water, to start swimming again despite some initial pain, and to be a cheerleader and
comforter and taskmaster as needed so that the patient keeps working and progressing.
Practice makes perfect.
      But no matter how well the therapist does all of these things, it is the patient who must
do the work. There is no substitute or reframing of this fact, and no ‘sick role’ to explain it
away. The patient has to do the work. He has to swim the long and tedious laps to get back
into shape and to rehabilitate the injury. He has to practice, he has to endure, and he has to
persist. There is no other road to recovery. The patient is not sick; he is recovering, and he has
to work. And he has to work hard. This is not something that you can ‘give’ to a patient; it is
work the patient has to do. It is much more honest, and much more consistent with clinical
reality, to tell the patient that he has a lot of hard work to do. But be sure and tell him that, in
addition, you will be there to assist and motivate him and to celebrate his accomplishments.

IPT Is Short-term in Its Acute Phase
IPT is characterized by a short-term Acute Treatment Phase. This statement implies two
things that we will make explicit: (1) ‘short-term’ means a dosing range of about 4–20
sessions; and (2) there is a long-term Maintenance Phase of IPT in addition to the Acute
                                                                                                  7
Introduction

Treatment Phase. There are now IPT studies in which 6,8 8,9,10 12,3 16,11 and even 2412 sessions
have been used in research paradigms, each of which has demonstrated significant reductions
in symptoms. Clinical experience and common sense suggest that these data should be used
to inform clinical practice, not to dictate it rigidly. There is no empirically required number of
sessions of IPT. Hence the use of the term ‘empirically supported psychological treatment’ as
opposed to ‘empirically required psychological treatment’.
    Moreover, there is now unequivocal evidence that psychiatric illnesses generally, and
depression specifically, are remitting and relapsing illnesses. Since that is the case, patients
benefit from Maintenance Treatment which can reduce the risk of relapse. There are a
number of studies that suggest that long-term Maintenance IPT in particular is very effective
in reducing this relapse risk.13,14 The obvious data-driven conclusion, supported by clinical
experience, is that Maintenance IPT should be provided in some form to most patients.
    Finally, despite a great deal of prose devoted to the subject, there is absolutely no evidence
whatsoever that terminating therapy after a specified number of sessions is of benefit.15 The theory
that psychotherapy of any sort must have a definitive endpoint that is non-negotiable and that
adhering to this rigid endpoint is associated with better outcomes is just that: a theory. And an
unsupported one at that. Granted, it is very appealing to hold to this theory with some patients.
Those who are more dependent or narcissistic in particular are often deemed by clinicians to be
good candidates for termination – the sooner the better. However, though a complete termination
may be a relief for clinicians, there is no evidence that it is of benefit to patients.a
    This ‘termination is of benefit’ theory is also intuitively appealing to academicians
and clinicians of all stripes who know from experience that having a grant deadline, or a
deadline for publication, or for completing clinical notes, is a major motivator to getting
work accomplished. At first glance, it does make sense. However, a deadline is different than
a termination. Consider how you might respond to a deadline-based approach to work if
your supervisor, dean, editor, or grant officer made clear that once the grant was submitted
or notes were completed your relationship with them would be terminated. No more job, no
more submissions, no more grants. Terminated. Your reward for hard work is termination.
Most people would find it hard to get motivated.
    There is an enormous difference between completing a task by a particular deadline and
terminating a relationship – especially an intense clinical relationship – when the task is
complete. Setting task deadlines need not require termination of relationship. IPT should not
be terminated; IPT should be concluded once Acute Treatment is complete, and Maintenance
Treatment provided as necessary.
    How should these data and experience be applied clinically? The general answer is
obvious: with a good measure of clinical judgment. The data support a dosing range of about
4–20 sessions of IPT for most patients, depending on clinical complexity, followed by longer
term Maintenance IPT for most patients, again depending on clinical complexity. Unless
the clinician is perfectly prescient in the first session and can predict without fail the exact
number of sessions a patient will require for an acute course of IPT, the Treatment Agreement
should have some flexibility built into it. Practically speaking this means that a patient with
mild depression, good social support, and a secure attachment style who has experienced a
recent loss may need only four to six Acute Treatment sessions, while a patient with severe
depression complicated by anxiety and personality issues or maladaptive attachment style

a	
      f course the idea that termination is complete is also a myth. There is absolutely nothing preventing a patient
     O
     from walking right back into your office the day after termination, saying he is in distress or is suicidal, and
     ­demanding treatment.

8
                                                                         Characteristics of IPT

may need 16–20 sessions to recover. The first patient may need maintenance contact once
every 6 months, while the second would benefit from monthly maintenance sessions to
reduce relapse risk. Both are simple examples demonstrating that a combination of data and
common sense can lead to efficient and effective clinical care.
     Clinical experience is also clear that rather than ending Acute Treatment abruptly, as is
required in research settings, IPT is better concluded with a tapering of Acute Treatment
sessions. In other words, IPT should be gradually tapered such that the last several sessions
are conducted every two to three weeks instead of continuing weekly until the conclusion.
In addition to fortifying the gains made in therapy as the patient becomes increasingly
autonomous, it greatly eases the pressure on the therapeutic relationship by gradually
reducing dependency on the therapist rather than exacerbating it with an abrupt termination.
This structure also allows for a smooth transition into maintenance care.
     Since there is no evidence that termination – literally complete cessation – is of benefit
to patients, an obvious question to ask is why should IPT be time-limited in the Acute Phase.
There are at least four different reasons this is the case. The first is that the data support this
approach. While the data do not support a specific number of sessions for all patients, all
of the studies which have been conducted do support a time limit for Acute Treatment.
The 4–20-session dosing range is supported by clinical practice as well. Second, one of the
primary targets of IPT is to increase the patient’s social support. This means that the therapist,
though providing critical support in the early phase of therapy, should gradually move out of
a primary support role as the patient increasingly relies on others for practical and emotional
support. One way to foster this movement is for the therapist to limit Acute Treatment to
the time needed to resolve the interpersonal issues, increase social support, and to transition
to attachment relationships outside of therapy. In this sense, the shorter the treatment, the
better. Third, the longer the therapy, the more likely that transference will become the focus
of treatment. While this is desirable in psychodynamic or psychoanalytic work, it is the
opposite of what is desired in IPT. Instead, the goal in IPT is to complete Acute Treatment
before transference issues arise. To focus on transference detracts from the IPT focus on
interpersonal relationships outside of therapy.
     The time frame in IPT is extremely important in helping to prevent the therapy from
moving from a treatment focused on symptoms and interpersonal issues to one that focuses
on the transference relationship. IPT is focused on the rapid resolution of interpersonal
crises, and on the problems that patients are experiencing in their current interpersonal
relationships. Shifting this focus to one in which the patient–therapist relationship becomes
primary makes it more difficult to generate immediate change in patients’ social networks
and their relationships outside of therapy. Encouraging the development of transference,
which is fostered by increasing the duration and intensity of sessions, is likely to shift the
work from relationship change to intrapsychic exploration.16 Maintaining a time-limited
approach helps to keep this from happening.
     Finally, clinical utility is a compelling factor in limiting the length of Acute Treatment
with IPT. Resources are limited, and though many patients may benefit from long-term
therapy, others with more acute needs are waiting for care. The model of providing short-
term Acute Treatment with long-term Maintenance is a much better fit given the resources
available. In addition, most patients don’t stick around for long-term work. Most, when
improvement is occurring, are inclined not to come to treatment so often. When IPT is
done well – when the therapist listens well and conveys a sense of caring – requests from
patients for complete termination will be rare. But many will, as they feel better, begin asking
fairly quickly to extend the time between sessions. The cost-benefit of treatment changes

                                                                                                 9
Introduction

as improvement occurs, and expense, travel time, and other logistical issues begin to weigh
much more heavily. The Acute Treatment model simply fits clinical reality.
     In general, a dosing range of 4–20 acute sessions of IPT is used for the Acute Treatment of
interpersonal problems, depression, and other major affective and anxiety disorders. While
empirical research regarding Acute Treatment is at present limited to controlled studies in
which weekly therapy is provided and then abruptly stopped, clinical experience has been
that tapering sessions over time is generally a more effective way of utilizing the treatment.
Weekly therapy may be provided for 6–10 weeks, followed by a gradual increase in the time
between sessions as the patient improves, such that weekly sessions are followed by biweekly
and monthly meetings.
     Though Acute Treatment should be short-term, both empirical research and clinical
experience with IPT have clearly demonstrated that Maintenance Treatment, particularly for
those patients with recurrent disorders such as depression, should be provided for patients
who have responded to Acute Treatment in order to reduce relapse risk.13 This Maintenance
Treatment should be distinguished from the Acute Phase of Treatment in IPT, and a specific
agreement should be negotiated for the Maintenance Phase as well.17 There is no need in IPT
to ‘terminate’ at the conclusion of Acute Treatment, especially as it is not in the interest of
most patients to do so.

IPT Interventions Do Not Directly Address the
Patient–Therapist Relationship
IPT is characterized by a relative absence of interventions which directly address the
therapeutic relationship. Though sharing this characteristic with CBT and several other
solution-focused therapies, IPT clearly differs in this way from the dynamically oriented
therapies. A more thorough explanation of the use of the therapeutic relationship in IPT is
necessary to fully appreciate this element of the treatment.
     Both Bowlby18 and Sullivan19 wrote extensively about the ways an individual’s life
experiences lead him to interact in subsequent relationships. Sullivan used the term ‘parataxic
distortion’ to describe the way in which individuals impose characteristics of previous
relationships upon new relationships.19 In other words, individuals’ experiences in previous
relationships inform what they expect in new ones. This expectation then leads them to ‘impose’
characteristics upon new individuals with whom they come into contact. They expect the
new to be like the old. Their expectations are based on the sum of their previous relationship
experiences; because of this, the imposition of these expectations are often not accurate in new
relationships. New relationships are ‘distorted’ by these imposed and inaccurate expectations.
     For example, if an individual has had previous abusive relationships, she will tend to react
to new people as if they too will be abusive. The previous experience is superimposed upon
the new. New relationships will be distorted because the expectation is that new significant
others will be abusive, even if in reality that is not the case. Similarly, if an individual has
had experiences of being deceived, then she will superimpose that lack of trust upon new
relationships as well, and will act ‘as if ’ the new person should not be trusted.
     Though Sullivan believed that these formative experiences were largely the result of early
life experiences, he also believed that parataxic distortions could be modified over time by
experiences in adulthood. For instance, a severe trauma, such as an assault, could profoundly
change the expectations that an otherwise trusting individual might have about new
relationships. Further, Sullivan also argued that the distortions could be modified in both
positive and negative ways. While the above examples are indicative of negative modification,

10
                                                                         Characteristics of IPT

the distortions could also be modified positively with the experience of long-term productive,
intimate, and trusting relationships.
     Bowlby20 described a similar phenomenon but used the term ‘working model’ of
relationships to describe the ways in which individuals conceptualize new relationships.
Their expectations of others in new relationships impact their behavior towards these new
people. The purpose of the working model is to organize interpersonal behavior – it allows
an individual to predict the behavior of others and to act accordingly. In a fashion similar to
Sullivan’s concept of parataxic distortion, this working model reflects all of an individual’s
experiences, with a heavy, but not exclusive, emphasis on early life interactions. The working
model of attachment forms the basis for the development of new relationships, as the
individual imposes the old working model upon new relationships with the expectation that
new acquaintances will behave similarly to people in past relationships.
     The problem, according to both Sullivan and Bowlby, is that while parataxic distortions
and old working models may be accurate representations of earlier relationships, and may
have been adaptive in those previous relationships, they restrict the development of new
intimate relationships. New relationships become constrained by the model or the distortion,
as opposed to being allowed to develop unfettered. Working models which reflect an accurate
view of others as abusive during childhood are no longer accurate in adulthood with all new
relationships, yet the imposition of the old model hinders an individual from trusting others
or developing any sense of intimacy. It also prevents a realistic appraisal of good and bad
relationships. Working models of attachment may reflect a distrust of others which developed
honestly as a consequence of real breaches of trust in early relationships, but when they are
superimposed upon new relationships in which the development of trust and intimacy would
otherwise be possible, they severely limit the individual’s ability to function interpersonally.
     Because these distortions and working models are imposed upon all relationships, they
occur within therapeutic relationships as well. Given enough time, a patient will display
behavior towards her therapist which is reflective of her parataxic distortions or working
models of attachment. This is the theoretical basis for the occurrence of transference in IPT.
The therapist is in a unique position to experience and examine the way in which a patient
develops and maintains relationships, because the therapist is in a relationship in which she
is the person upon whom the distortions or working models are imposed. Both Sullivan
and Bowlby, in the tradition of Freud and other psychoanalysts, believed that one of the
most powerful ways to work on correcting these distortions was to examine the relationship
between therapist and patient in detail. This was done overtly and explicitly, using techniques
such as interpretation in which the transference was directly discussed, and clarifications in
which the therapist would directly ask the patient for her reactions to the therapist.
     In psychoanalytic treatments in particular, the therapy is structured in such a way that the
transference is magnified so that it may be more closely examined. Psychoanalytic therapy is
designed to facilitate the patient’s projection of her parataxic distortions or working models
of relationships onto the ‘blank screen’ of the therapist. This is enhanced by therapist opacity,
by high-frequency sessions (four to five times per week), and by open-ended treatment which
may last several years. All serve to intensify the patient–therapist relationship, with the goal of
examining the transference as it is displayed in the therapeutic relationship.
     Transference, parataxic distortions, and the imposition of working models are universal
phenomena in all psychotherapy, including IPT. However, while in IPT the therapist’s
experience of patient–therapist relationship is used to gather important information about
the patient and her interpersonal world, the transference elements of this relationship need
not be addressed directly by the therapist as a part of the treatment. Instead, the therapist’s

                                                                                               11
Introduction

experience of the therapeutic relationship in IPT is used as a means of understanding
the patient’s interpersonal functioning and to assess the patient’s attachment style. This
information is crucial. The information gleaned from the therapeutic relationship in IPT
can then be used to formulate questions about the patient’s interpersonal relationships with
real people outside of therapy. The use of the transference experience to inform the therapist
about potential problems in therapy, and to predict the likely outcome of treatment, and to
plan for a good conclusion, is also paramount (Box 1.2).
Box 1.2  Uses of the patient–therapist relationship in IPT

  ●●  T o assess the patient’s attachment style
  ●●   To formulate questions about the patient’s interpersonal relationships outside of
        therapy
  ●● To understand the patient’s interpersonal functioning outside of the therapeutic

        relationship
  ●● To inform the therapist about potential difficulties in therapy

  ●● To predict the likely outcome of treatment

  ●● To plan for a good conclusion to therapy




Overt discussion of the patient–therapist relationship is not encouraged in IPT, however,
because it switches the focus of treatment from more immediate work on the patient’s current
social relationships to an intense experience with, and analysis of, the relationship with the
therapist. Addressing the patient–therapist relationship directly as a primary technique shifts
the therapy from one that is oriented towards improvement in symptoms and immediate
interpersonal functioning to a therapy that is oriented towards intrapsychic insight.
     While this may be quite helpful for well-selected patients, the majority of patients that are
seen in general practice are generally much more concerned with immediate symptom relief
than with self-actualization – they are not working at the top of Maslow’s hierarchy of needs.21
Usually, self-actualization isn’t even on their radar screens; instead, they come to therapy
because they are distressed and lack a sense of intimacy, acceptance, or self-esteem. In other
words, they are experiencing interpersonal distress. Their goal is to relieve that distress as
quickly as possible. Discussion of transference, an expensive and lengthy course of therapy,
and treatment with a therapist who may be perceived as being cold and unsupportive, is
neither what they want nor need.
     For the reasons described above, the focus of interventions in IPT is not on the
therapeutic relationship. To discuss the therapeutic relationship at length shifts away from
a more productive focus on social support and interpersonal problems outside of therapy.
It is the development and examination of relationships outside of therapy that is the goal
of IPT.
     IPT is therefore structured in such a way that transference problems are less likely to
develop. First and foremost, the patient–therapist relationship is not explicitly discussed.
In addition, the IPT therapist generally takes a supportive stance rather than being neutral.
The Acute Phase of therapy is time-limited, and the treatment is specifically focused on
interpersonal issues in the patient’s social relationships. All of these tactical elements in IPT pull
the treatment away from a focus on the transference to one which is focused on here-and-now
interpersonal relationships in the patient’s social environment outside of therapy.
     While IPT is specifically designed to delay or diminish the effect of parataxic distortions on
the conduct of therapy, it would be a grave mistake to ignore the extraordinary treasure trove
of information about the patient which can be gleaned from the therapist’s experience of the

12
                                                                             Characteristics of IPT

therapeutic relationship. Though the patient–therapist relationship is not directly addressed in
sessions, the clinician can, using her observational skills and finely honed intuitive sense of the
relationship that is developing, gather a vast amount of information about the patient. This is
because the way in which the patient behaves in therapy is a direct reflection of the way in which
she behaves and communicates in relationships outside of therapy. Gathering this information
is crucial, as it informs the therapist about the patient’s suitability for treatment, her prognosis for
therapy, the potential roadblocks that may occur, and about the specific techniques that are likely
to be of use during therapy. Understanding the transference, recognizing the distortions that the
patient brings to therapy, and developing hypotheses about the patient’s interpersonal working
model, are all essential to IPT.
     As an illustration of this use of information about the parataxic distortions that occur in
therapy, consider a patient who forms a relationship with his therapist that is dependent in
nature. The patient may manifest this dependency as difficulty in ending sessions, calls to the
therapist between sessions, or in more subtle pleas to the therapist for help or reassurance.
This transferential relationship should inform the therapist about several aspects of the
patient’s functioning: (1) the patient is likely to have problems with other people because
he relates to them in the same dependent fashion; (2) the patient is likely to have difficulty
ending relationships with others; and (3) the patient has likely exhausted others with
persistent calls for help. A hypochondriacal patient would be an excellent example
of this kind of behavior, manifest in the ways described. This information is then used by the
therapist to formulate hypotheses about the patient’s difficulties with others, and should lead
the therapist to ask questions about how the patient asks others for help, ends relationships,
and feels when others aren’t responsive to his needs. These questions are directed to
relationships outside of the therapy, however – to interpersonal relationships in which the
patient is currently engaged, rather than the relationship between therapist and patient.
     Further, the information obtained from the transference experience should be used by
the therapist to predict potential problems that may arise in treatment, and to modify IPT
accordingly. For instance, the therapist might hypothesize that the patient’s dependency is
likely to cause a problem when concluding therapy, and may begin discussing the Conclusion
of Acute Treatment much earlier than with less dependent patients. The therapist might also
plan to taper the frequency of sessions later in the course of therapy, moving to sessions once
every two weeks as the patient is in recovery. This tapering would allow the patient to depend
less on the therapist and increase his sense of independent competence. The principles are
the same for all patients: though specific modifications will differ for each, adaptations in
structure and tactics in IPT should also be made with those who are avoidant, who manifest
other personality characteristics, or have other traits that make treatment more complex. In
addition, data gleaned from the therapeutic relationship should provide the therapist with
information about the patient’s prognosis in therapy. More severe parataxic distortions,
and those which become manifest earlier in treatment, suggest a poorer outcome. This
information should not be used nihilistically, but rather should lead the therapist to more
realistic expectations of outcome.
     In sum, the patient–therapist relationship, and particularly the patient-generated
distortions in that relationship, are extremely important in IPT, but are not addressed directly
in therapy. To do so detracts from the focus on symptom reduction and improvement in
interpersonal functioning that is the basis of IPT, and also typically leads to a much longer
course of treatment than is required for IPT. The goal in IPT is literally to work with the
patient to quickly resolve his interpersonal distress before problematic transference develops
and becomes the focus of treatment.

                                                                                                    13
Introduction

A Metaphor for IPT
The Sydney Harbor Bridge was completed in 1932, and even today is considered an
engineering marvel. The single arch, more than 500 meters in length, spans one of the most
beautiful harbors in the world, with a magnificent view of the Sydney Opera House, the
Rocks, and downtown Sydney. On clear days the view extends to the Pacific Ocean and
beyond. It is simply one of the most spectacular sights in the world.
     Since 1998, people have been allowed to climb up a very narrow catwalk to the top of the
bridge. Not a stairway – the climb is literally on top of the curving superstructure of the bridge,
along steel beams at some points only a foot or two across. The top of the arch, which is 134
meters above the harbor, is the highest point on the bridge. It is completely exposed, and on a
windy day the whole bridge literally sways back and forth, giving climbers the queasy feeling
that they will be pitched over the side and plummet each of those 134 long meters to the water
below.
     Like most things in life, climbing the bridge requires taking a risk. It requires
suspending one’s sense of psychological safety. It requires extending oneself. The reward
is immense, but it requires physical and psychological effort. For some people who
are adventurous or genetically or temperamentally endowed with a predisposition to
risk-taking, the bridge climb is an exhilarating experience. No fear, no anxiety, just the
thrill and adrenaline rush that comes with being suspended over 120 meters in the air
and seeing one of the most breathtaking views in the world. For others, the climb is a bit
more anxiety provoking. Some of these mildly anxious people have the psychological
resources to literally ‘talk themselves’ into climbing the bridge. This self-talk might
include rationalizations that the climb is really safe (despite appearances to the
contrary), or might include continued self-reminders that the effort and risk will be well
worth the rewards. Terms such as ego strength and a capacity for delayed gratification
might be used when describing these people.
     Some people, because of life experience, biological, temperamental, or other factors, need
some help to manage the climb. For some, cognitive reassurance is sufficient. A reminder –
from a trusted significant other – of an accurate cognitive appraisal of the situation is needed.
‘After all,’ a friend might say, ‘the Sydney Harbor Bridge has stood since 1932 without falling
down. Hundreds of thousands of people have climbed it without plunging to their deaths.’b
And in Socratic fashion, a friend serving as amateur clinician might rhetorically ask, ‘When
was the last time you read in the Sydney Morning Herald about someone falling off the
bridge? What do you think the realistic chance is that something bad will happen to you if
climb?’ Thus reassured, these moderately anxious people are able to ascend.
     For those who are more anxious, or who are more dependent in personality and
attachment, such cognitive reassurance is not sufficient. It is not simply cognitive reappraisal
that they require, it is interpersonal reassurance. Such people are looking for someone to
literally take their hand, to be with them, and to support them psychologically. Such a person,
though feeling very anxious about the climb, might be able to say, ‘I’ll do it if you go with me.’
     Some people requiring this kind of reassurance are able to ask for it directly and
graciously, and as a result are generally pretty successful in getting the support they
need. Their friends can respond to them easily, and are available and willing to provide

b	
      is is the art of therapy: not only knowing when to reassure, but being aware that words like ‘plunging to their
     Th
     deaths’ are likely to be less reassuring than noting that hundreds of thousands of people have climbed the bridge
     safely. As they say, that’s what friends are for.

14
                                                                                      References

interpersonal and emotional support. In contrast, other people facing the Sydney Harbor
Bridge climb have personality or communication styles in which their needs are conveyed
either indirectly or in a way that is counterproductive. Whining, complaining, being passive-
aggressive, and dependently clinging are not good ways to get someone to hold your hand
while climbing the bridge. Finally, there are those that go to Sydney, look at the bridge,
and say to themselves, ‘I could never do that’. And for a variety of psychological, physical,
temperamental, and social reasons, they don’t.
     The Sydney Harbor Bridge climb is a crisis. It is literally a transcendent experience
which requires taking a risk. The approach that people take to this crisis is based largely on
their biopsychosocial and cultural and spiritual makeup. Genetics, temperament, early life
experience, attachment, personality, social support, and adult experience all play a role in
determining who will attempt, and who will succeed, in climbing the bridge. IPT is designed
to help those people who need interpersonal support in order to complete the climb. IPT is
designed to help people recognize their interpersonal needs for attachment and reassurance,
and to express those needs graciously so that others can respond in a helpful way. IPT is not
designed for everyone; not everyone needs it. Many people are able to deal with their particular
crises without professional help. A few have problems so severe that they need much more
extensive help. But there are a significant number of people who need help to resolve a specific
crisis, and who need assistance in generating or using their social support system to negotiate it.
     IPT is designed to help people to face their bridge climb crises, to reach new heights, and
to bring someone along to enjoy the view together.


Conclusion
The defining characteristics of IPT are its four primary elements: an interpersonal
orientation; the Biopsychosocial/Cultural/Spiritual model of psychological functioning and
distress; a short-term Acute Treatment Phase; and the avoidance of interventions which
directly address the patient–therapist relationship. IPT is extremely useful for patients who
face acute interpersonal crises that they cannot manage alone.

References
1.	 Klerman GL, et al. Interpersonal Psychotherapy of Depression. 1984, New York: Basic Books.
2.	 American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,
    4th edn. 1994, Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.
3.	 O’Hara MW, et al. Efficacy of interpersonal psychotherapy for postpartum depression.
    Archives of General Psychiatry, 2000, 57: 1039–1045.
4.	 Beck AT, et al. Cognitive Therapy of Depression. 1979, New York: Guilford Press.
5.	 Jacobson NS, Martell CR and Dimidjian S. Behavioral activation treatment for depression:
    returning to contextual roots. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 2001, 8: 255–270.
6.	 Addis ME and Martell CR. Overcoming Depression One Step at a Time: The New Behavioral
    Activation Approach to Getting your Life Back. 2004, Oakland: New Harbinger.
7.	 Miller WR and Rollnick S. Motivational Interviewing: Preparing People for Change, 2nd edn.
    2002, New York: Guilford Publications.
8.	 Schulberg HC, Block MR and Madonia MJ. Treating Major Depression in Primary Care
    Practice. Archives of General Psychiatry, 1996, 53: 913–919.

                                                                                                15
Introduction

 9.	 Swartz HA, et al. A pilot study of brief interpersonal psychotherapy for depression
     among women. Psychiatric Services, 2004, 55(4): 448–450.
10.	 Grote NK, et al. A randomized controlled trial of culturally relevant, brief interpersonal
     psychotherapy for perinatal depression. Psychiatric Services, 2009, 60(3): 313–321.
11.	 Elkin I, et al. NIMH Treatment of Depression Collaborative Research Program: I. General
     effectiveness of treatments. Archives of General Psychiatry, 1989, 46: 971–982.
12.	 Talbot N, et al. A randomized effectiveness trial of interpersonal psychotherapy for
     depressed women with sexual abuse histories. Psychiatric Services, 2011, 62: 374–380.
13.	 Frank E, et al. Three-year outcomes for maintenance therapies in recurrent depression.
     Archives of General Psychiatry, 1990, 47(12): 1093–1099.
14.	 Frank E, et al. Randomized trial of weekly, twice-monthly, and monthly interpersonal
     psychotherapy as maintenance treatment for women with recurrent depression.
     American Journal of Psychiatry, 2007, 164: 761–767.
15.	 Gelso CJ and Woodhouse SS. The termination of psychotherapy: what research tells us
     about the process of ending treatment, in Tryon GS (ed.) Counseling Based on Process
     Research: Applying What we Know. 2002, Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
16.	 Stuart S. Interpersonal psychotherapy, in Dewan M, Steenbarger B and Greenberg R
     (eds) The Art and Science of Brief Psychotherapies: A Practitioner’s Guide. 2004,
     Washington DC: American Psychiatric Press, pp. 119–156.
17.	 Stuart S. Interpersonal psychotherapy, in Dewan M, Steenbarger B and Greenberg R
     (eds) The Art and Science of Brief Psychotherapies: A Practitioner’s Guide, 2nd edn. 2011,
     Washington DC: American Psychiatric Press.
18.	 Bowlby J. Developmental psychiatry comes of age. American Journal of Psychiatry, 1988,
     145: 1–10.
19.	 Sullivan HS. The Interpersonal Theory of Psychiatry. 1953, New York: Norton.
20.	 Bowlby J. The making and breaking of affectional bonds: etiology and psychopathology
     in the light of attachment theory. British Journal of Psychiatry, 1977, 130: 201–210.
21.	 Maslow A. A theory of human motivation. Psychological Review, 1943, 50: 370–396.




16
                                                                                           2
Theory and Clinical Applications
Introduction                                                                                                                17
Attachment Theory                                                                                                           19
Interpersonal Theory                                                                                                        27
Social Theory                                                                                                               32
IPT: From Theory to Intervention                                                                                            34
Conclusion                                                                                                                  38
References                                                                                                                  38


Introduction
Interpersonal Psychotherapy (IPT) rests on two primary theoretical foundations. The first
and most important is Attachment Theory, which forms the basis for understanding patients’
relationship difficulties. The second, Interpersonal Theory, describes the ways in which
patients’ maladaptive communication patterns lead to difficulty in their here-and-now
interpersonal relationships. Communication is one manifestation of attachment behavior,
but it is an extremely important particular in IPT, as it is the point of intervention for many
IPT techniques. Social Theory is also a useful way to understand the impact of social support
within an IPT framework, but is generally given a lesser theoretical role.a
    IPT is based on the premise that psychiatric and interpersonal difficulties result from
a combination of interpersonal, social, and other factors, following the Biopsychosocial/
Cultural/Spiritual model of psychiatric illness and psychological distress. Upon this
foundation rests the individual’s temperament, personality traits, and early life experiences,
which in turn are reflected in a particular attachment style. These factors, as well as cultural
and spiritual factors, may be either predisposing or protective. The attachment style may
be more or less adaptive, and has effects upon the person’s current social support network
and her ability to enlist the support of significant others. To put it succinctly, individuals
with biological and psychological diatheses will be more likely to become distressed when
experiencing interpersonal crises. Interpersonal functioning is determined by the severity
of the current stressors in the context of social support. This is depicted in the Interpersonal
Triad (Figure 2.1), which is the IPT model that explains why people become distressed.
    IPT is therefore designed to treat psychiatric symptoms and improve interpersonal
functioning by focusing specifically on patients’ primary interpersonal relationships,
particularly in the problem areas of Grief and Loss, Interpersonal Disputes, and Role
Transitions.b Although fundamental change in either personality or attachment style is

a	
      e de-emphasis of Social Theory is a change from our 2003 guide; however, the emphasis on social support in
     Th
     IPT remains paramount.
b	
     Readers of previous IPT manuals, including our first iteration, will note that this list no longer includes interpersonal
      sensitivity (also called deficits) in the IPT Problem Areas. This former Problem Area is now best understood as an
      attachment style rather than an acute interpersonal problem. This is addressed at length in subsequent chapters.

                                                                                                                            17
Theory and Clinical Applications


                                       Interpersonal Triad

                       Acute Interpersonal Crisis




                                                               Attachment and
                                                               Biopsychosocial/
                                 DISTRESS                      Cultural/Spiritual
                                                               vulnerabilities




                       Inadequate social support


Figure 2.1 Interpersonal Triad

unlikely during short-term treatment, resolution of symptoms and distress is made possible
when patients are assisted in repairing their disrupted interpersonal relationships, and when
they learn new ways to communicate their needs for emotional and practical support.
     A comprehensive and well-articulated theory that supports IPT is necessary for
several reasons. The most important is that it informs the clinician about the nature of the
patient’s problems and about the kinds of interventions that may be helpful to resolve them.
A comprehensive theory forms the basis for the clinician’s formulation of a case, and for
determining which specific therapeutic interventions are likely to be most helpful. It also
provides guidance in anticipating potential problems with a given individual during the
course of therapy (such as problems with forming a therapeutic alliance), and informs the
therapist about the ways in which she can prevent or effectively manage these roadblocks.
     The theoretical foundation for IPT has the following features:
●● It is based on the available empirical evidence.
●● It reflects clinical observations and experience as accurately as possible.

●● It forms the basis for hypotheses that can be examined clinically.
●● It forms the basis for hypotheses that can be tested empirically.

●● It is subject to modifications as new empirical and clinical evidence arises.

The theory supporting IPT is, therefore, not a set of static dictums, but is open to
investigation and modification as it evolves with clinical experience and as empirical data
accumulate (Figure 2.2).
     The patient’s Biopsychosocial/Cultural/Spiritual diathesis is the template upon which
interpersonal crises occur. A sufficiently intense crisis (e.g. Interpersonal Dispute, Role
Transition, or Grief and Loss experience) in the context of insufficient social support
may lead to interpersonal problems, psychiatric symptoms, and distress. If the crisis is
subthreshold, then symptoms and distress are averted. If social support is sufficient, even in
the face of a great crisis, symptoms can be averted as well. But if the crisis is great enough,
and the social support insufficient, the patient’s attachment needs during the crisis go unmet.
Maladaptive communication of those needs often follows, and interpersonal distress and
psychiatric symptoms are the result.

18
                                                                                   Attachment Theory


                           Biopsychosocial/Cultural/Spiritual diathesis


 Biological factors                                                      Psychological factors
 Genetic predisposition to stress                                        Early life experiences
 Temperament                                                             Attachment style


             Cultural factors                                            Spiritual factors
                                             Social factors
                                     Current significant relationships
                                         Current social support



                                          Interpersonal Crises



     Interpersonal Dispute                  Role Transition                            Grief and Loss



   Subthreshold
     intensity
                                            Suprathreshold
                                               intensity
   Manageable
    distress


                                      Insufficient social support
     Sufficient
   social support

                                      Attachment needs unmet
  Manageable                            (Attachment Theory)
   distress

                                    Maladaptive communication of
                                           attachment needs
                                        (Interpersonal Theory)


                                      Interpersonal distress and
                                        psychiatric symptoms


Figure 2.2 Outline of IPT theory


Attachment Theory
Attachment Theory is one of the foundations of IPT. It describes the ways in which
individuals form, maintain, and end relationships, as well as the ways they develop problems
within them. John Bowlby among others articulated the principles of Attachment Theory,1–8
which is based on the premise that humans have an intrinsic instinctual drive to form

                                                                                                        19
Theory and Clinical Applications

interpersonal relationships. This drive is biologically grounded, a concept that is supported by
both ethological research and evolutionary theory,6 which assert that the capacity and drive
to form intimate bonds is crucial to human survival. Humans function optimally when their
attachments needs are met; they develop problems, often manifest as psychiatric symptoms
or as distress, when their attachment needs go unmet.
      Attachment organizes behavior in interpersonal relationships. It forms the basis for a
relatively enduring pattern of inner experience and interpersonal behavior, which leads
an individual to seek care and comfort in a characteristic way. Though always operating,
it is activated to a greater degree when an individual is stressed and her sense of security is
threatened. Attachment needs then drive care-seeking behavior.
      Bowlby described attachment succinctly by stating:
     [A]ttachment behavior is conceived as any form of behavior that results in a
     person attaining or retaining proximity to some other differentiated and preferred
     individual. While especially evident during childhood, attachment behavior is held
     to characterize human beings from the cradle to the grave. In adults it is
     especially evident when a person is distressed, ill, or afraid. The particular
     patterns of attachment behavior shown by an individual turn partly on his present
     age, sex, and circumstances and partly on the experiences he has had with
     attachment figures earlier in his life.3 (p. 203)
     The desire to be loved and cared for is an integral part of human nature through-
     out adult life as well as earlier, and the expression of such desires is to be
     expected in every grown-up, especially in times of sickness or calamity.4 (p. 428)
Attachment is an intrinsic part of human behavior, and is generated when an individual
is physically or psychologically stressed. Wanting to be loved and cared for is simply
being human; the drive to seek care is magnified when an individual is feeling sick, lonely,
tired, depressed, anxious, distressed, or in need of affection. In IPT, it is understood that
psychological problems occur, and interpersonal relationships break down, when an
individual’s needs for attachment are not being met. This can occur both when the individual
cannot effectively communicate her needs to others and when her social support network is
incapable of responding adequately to her needs.
    Bowlby hypothesized that particular attachment styles derive largely from early
childhood experiences as a child engages in attachment relationships with her primary
caregivers.1 These formative experiences lead to the development of a working model of
relationships, so that the actual attachment experiences of an individual are transposed into
expectations about relationships in general and new relationships in particular. In other
words, the cumulative relationship experiences of an individual inform her views about
what subsequent new relationships will be like. This model allows an individual to function
interpersonally, because it gives her a template upon which to predict how others will behave
in different circumstances.
    This model explains the answer a person expects to the question:
     When I am stressed and in need of care and support, others will typically react
     towards me by being ...
Different people answer this question in different ways: some expect comfort, some
expect rejection, and some expect indifference. But in all cases, the expected answer to
this statement forms the basis for the way an individual seeks to meet her attachment
needs. If the expectation is that her needs will be met by others, then she will act by
directly asking for support. If her expectation, based on her real-life experiences, is that

20
                                                                             Attachment Theory

requests for support will be met with rejection, then she is likely to avoid asking for help,
or demand it in ways that may be self-defeating. People also develop similar working
models about themselves and their ability and competence to deal with stressors. This
‘model of self ’ is also based largely on early life experiences, but can be modified during
adulthood. The analogous question here is:
    When I am stressed and in need of care and support, I typically react by being …
Different people answer this question in different ways: some feel competent to deal with
most stressors; some are anxious about their ability to manage crises. This model of self
interacts directly with attachment behavior towards others.
     The working models that people develop are based on real-life experiences. No sophisticated
intrapsychic mechanisms or abstract constructs are required. An individual who has
experienced abuse will understandably and quite reasonably expect the same treatment
in new relationships; someone who has experienced rejection will expect more rejection;
and someone who has had productive and trusting relationships will anticipate that new
relationships will be similar. The attachment effects of these expectations are evident during
childhood, but have also been extended to adult behavior as well.9–14
     Bowlby’s concept of a working model of attachment is similar to Sullivan’s concept of
parataxic distortion,11 in which the cumulative experiences of an individual inform the
way she relates to others. Both Sullivan and Bowlby argued that the working model of
relationships, and the subsequent distortions that occurred as a result of the imposition
of the model on current and new relationships, are based largely (though not exclusively)
on early life relationships with the individual’s primary caregiver. Both also hypothesized
that an individual experiences interpersonal problems not because her working models
are inaccurate reflections of her past experiences, but because the models are imposed
inappropriately onto current and new relationships, in which her assumptions about the ways
others will behave towards her are not accurate.
     For instance, a patient with a history of abuse is quite understandably likely to develop
a working model of relationships that people are not to be trusted, or that others will take
advantage of her – a model that is imposed consistently upon all relationships. While adaptive
and protective when faced with the threat of abuse, this model impairs the ability of the patient
to function interpersonally when in situations in which abuse is not likely to occur. She is
likely to have difficulty developing intimate relationships because her model of relationships
dictates that people can’t be trusted – even those who are impeccably trustworthy are pushed
away. Therapeutic examples abound: patients with distorted models of relationships frequently
impose them upon others in situations in which the models are inaccurate, leading ultimately to
self-defeating behavior and distress. This parataxic distortion impairs the ability of the patient to
function and feel secure within all relationships, including the therapeutic relationship.
     An individual’s working model of relationships is generally consistent both within and
across relationships, coalescing to form a characteristic attachment style. An individual tends
to maintain the same attachment style over time in a given relationship, and also tends to
form new relationships with a consistent style of attachment. This phenomena is dramatically
illustrated with hypochondriacal patients, for instance, who form dependent relationships
with family members, significant others, and healthcare professionals that are all based on
a dependent attachment style – they don’t suddenly change their way of attaching to others
once they are in a relationship, nor do they suddenly change their attachment style when they
enter new relationships. Their attachment style is consistent.
     This consistency in attachment style forms the theoretical basis in IPT for the
development of transference. Given enough time, a patient will manifest the same attachment

                                                                                                 21
Theory and Clinical Applications

style with the therapist that she manifests with others outside of therapy. Thus sensitivity
to the therapeutic relationship allows the therapist to tap into this extremely important
information about the patient’s attachment style and model of relationships, and allows the
therapist to develop hypotheses about the kinds of interpersonal problems the patient is likely
to experience, and the ways others are likely to perceive the patient. Though transference
is not addressed directly in IPT, the information obtained from the patient’s behavior and
communication in the therapeutic relationship is crucial to understanding her attachment
and communication problems in her current relationships.
     It is absolutely essential for the therapist to keep in mind that the attachment difficulties
experienced by the patient and the distortions she imposes upon current and new
relationships are all a product of her real experiences. People come by their relationship
models honestly. Their models and distortions reflect real attempts to cope with earlier
stressors, abuse, or deprivations, and the tragedy is that these past experiences continue to
haunt patients through their continuing effect on attachment and interpersonal functioning.
Such tragedies call for empathy rather than pathological labels.
     Bowlby1 described three basic styles of attachment: secure, anxious ambivalent, and
anxious avoidant.c Over the past decade, this model has been replaced in IPT by Bartholomew
and Horowitz’s15 four quadrant model of attachment, which has proven to be more useful in
clinical work (Figure 2.3). The four quadrants of this model are the result of the intersection of
the individual’s working model of self (x-axis) and working model of relationships with others
(y-axis). Based on real-life experiences, individuals develop a working model of self as either
capable of caring for their own needs for the most part, or as needing to rely on others for care
because of their belief that they are incapable of caring for themselves. At the same time, based
on real-life experience, they also develop a working model of others as either dependable – i.e.
willing to provide care if asked – or not dependable. The intersection of the working models of
self and others form the four primary attachment styles.


                                                                  Model of self
                                                  Self-competent               Not self-competent


                       Dependable                               Secure       Preoccupied


                       Model of others


                       Not dependable                      Dismissing        Fearful




Figure 2.3 The four quadrant model of attachment in IPT


c	
      owlby’s model is noted largely for historical reasons; it was first described as the theoretical basis for IPT in our
     B
     2003 Clinician’s Guide. The reader should note that other authors have described additional attachment styles;
     disorganized attachment has been noted by some and others have described models incorporating different
     attachment styles. Much work remains to be done to more fully describe the variety of attachment within human
     relationships throughout the lifespan.

22
                                                                           Attachment Theory

Securely attached individuals base their relationships on working models of self and others
which are healthy and flexible – in other words, they generally trust others, believe that
their needs will be met, and are able to explore the world and seek out new relationships and
experiences with a sense of security. They have a sense of self-competence, and believe that
they can manage most crises. They manifest, as Bowlby described, the characteristics of good
mental health: they are able to effectively ask for care from others when it is needed, and
are also able to provide care to others when asked to do so. Their relationships are generally
satisfactory and productive, they have extensive social support networks, and are therefore
able to effectively manage most life crises.
     Individuals with a preoccupied attachment style, in contrast, are constantly anxious
that their attachment needs will not be met. Their working model of self develops from the
experience of being unable to care for themselves. Their working model of others assumes
that others, although they are capable of providing care and support, may choose not to do so.
In order to get their attachment needs met, they must constantly seek care and reassurance.
These models of self and others often develop from inconsistent or overprotective care during
childhood. Hypochondriacal patients are classic examples of this attachment behavior – they
constantly seek reassurance, and are so preoccupied with obtaining sufficient care in their
attachment relationships that they lack any capacity to provide care for others.16 Moreover,
their constant reassurance seeking behavior eventually wears out their care providers,
ultimately resulting in rejection.17,18 As a result, the intimate relationships they are able to
develop are unstable, and they are very vulnerable to conflicts or losses which threaten their
attachments. Further, since they are unable to develop mutually supportive relationships,
their social support networks are very poor.
     Individuals with a dismissing attachment style often have early life experiences in which
care was never adequately provided. As a result, they develop working models of others based
on their belief that care will never be sufficient or will simply not be provided at all, and that
their attachment needs will never be met. Narcissistic or antisocial interpersonal behaviors
are consistent with this attachment style. The fear of never being cared for sufficiently is
covered with a superficial belief that they can meet their own needs and don’t need others at
all, hence they are quick to dismiss others as incompetent or uncaring. There is little if any
capacity for intimate and trusting relationships.
     Fearfully attached individuals lack the conviction that they will be cared for in
relationships, and therefore form either superficial bonds with others or avoid them
altogether. Coupled with a working model of self in which they believe they are unable to
meet their own emotional needs, such individuals may manifest avoidance or compulsive
self-reliant behavior. Their social support network tends to be very poor as a result. Patients
with social phobia or schizoid personality disorders often fit into this category.
     Individuals with insecure attachment styles are twice cursed, so to speak. First, their
life experiences have led them to develop working models of relationships in which they
are convinced that care will not be available to them when needed. Second, because they
typically lack the capacity to care for others or to develop intimate relationships, their social
support networks are usually very poor. Neither their internal world, nor their external world,
is adapted to deal with interpersonal stress.
     In sum, Attachment Theory hypothesizes that individuals have difficulty when they
experience disruptions in their relationships with other people. This is both because of the
loss of or threat to the specific attachment relationship and because their social support
network is not able to sustain them during the loss, conflict, or transition. Insecurely attached
individuals are much more vulnerable to difficulties with personal conflicts, such as divorce

                                                                                              23
Theory and Clinical Applications

or relationship disruptions, and to transitions such as moving or loss of a job, both because
of their tenuous primary relationships and because of their poor social support networks.19
In addition, they are also more likely to develop problems when faced with a major loss such
as the death of a primary attachment.2,20 These Problem Areas – Interpersonal Disputes, Role
Transitions, and Grief and Loss – are specifically addressed in IPT.
     The vulnerability of insecurely attached individuals is a result not only of their attachment
style, but also the fact that their social support networks are poorly constructed and poorly
responsive to their needs. Further, insecurely attached individuals are largely unable to
communicate their interpersonal and attachment needs directly21 or graciously, making it
unlikely that others, even if so inclined, will be able to respond to their needs effectively. Even
securely attached individuals can become distressed or develop interpersonal problems if
faced with a stressor that is great enough, such as the death of a spouse, but their threshold for
the development of problems is higher than for those with insecure styles. Both their internal
sense of security and their superior social support systems can sustain securely attached
individuals in situations in which others might be overwhelmed. Those who are securely
attached are also able to ask effectively for support from others when it is needed. Their
previous experience and internal working models lead them to expect that support is likely to
be provided, and they can communicate more effectively their specific needs for it.
     Attachment Theory is consistent with the clearly established biological diatheses for
depression and other illnesses. Genetic contributions combine with attachment style to
influence the vulnerability of an individual to stress, which, when combined with a sufficient
psychosocial crisis, leads to psychiatric symptoms or distress. Given that a maladaptive
attachment style often develops because an individual grows up with parents who have
psychiatric problems which influence their parenting behavior, and that as a result she
has both a heritable biological predisposition to develop psychiatric problems and a
maladaptive attachment style, it is not surprising that difficulties develop. In IPT, this is best
conceptualized using a Biopsychosocial/Cultural/Spiritual model.
     A careful reading of Attachment Theory would likely suggest to the astute clinician that
one way to improve a patient’s functioning would be to change her basic attachment style.
This implies therapeutic goals of helping the patient to recognize her patterns of attachment,
to understand how her attachment style developed, and to modify her internal working
models of attachment. This reworking of attachment patterns requires the development
of insight through the examination of early childhood experiences, as well as an overt
discussion of the therapeutic relationship to examine patterns of interaction. The patient’s
interaction with the therapist would be examined in detail, with the goal of using it as
the vehicle for change. A primary technique would be interpretation of the transferential
experience. This is essentially an open-ended psychodynamic approach to treatment. In
addition to this intensive therapeutic experience, the patient would also have to literally
reconstruct her attachment models of self and others. Insight isn’t enough to compensate – it
is the lived experience of being in long-term trusting relationships and being able to depend
on oneself that slowly changes attachment. The time required is great – it may take years of
healthy and productive attachment to change the patient’s working models at a core level.
     While there is utility in a long-term transferential approach with extremely disturbed patients
with very maladaptive attachment styles, it takes a great deal of time to bring about a core change in
attachment, and the treatment must be quite intensive. Bowlby himself stated that:
     A restructuring of a person’s representational models and his re-evaluation of
     some aspects of human relationships, with a corresponding change in his modes
     of treating people, is likely to be both slow and patchy.3 (p. 427)

24
                                                                                 Attachment Theory

Long-term therapy which aims to bring about such deep and lasting changes in attachment
requires great motivation, insight, time, financial resources, and a patient and therapist who are
able to devote themselves to the task without the need for immediate gratification. The key is to
determine ‘how much therapy’ is appropriate for a given patient considering these factors.
    In addition, focusing therapy on a patient’s internal model of attachment is likely to
detract from a focus on the rapid resolution of her current distress. By definition, a therapy
that is constructed to look more intensively at the therapeutic relationship will devote less
time to resolving the patient’s current interpersonal problems outside of therapy. Further,
the psychodynamic therapist must always be aware of the fact that, despite her best efforts
to support the patient, she will ultimately fail over time to meet the patient’s attachment
needs as they are manifested in therapy. Thus to continue therapy in an intense and
open-ended fashion will eventually require that the therapeutic relationship be discussed
as a central feature of the therapy as that disappointment or empathic failure is worked
through.
    In contrast, rather than attempting to change the patient’s fundamental attachment style, IPT
focuses on helping the patient to communicate her attachment needs more directly and graciously, and
helping her to construct a more supportive social network. Taking the patient’s attachment style as a
constant, IPT works in real-time relationships to help the patient communicate her needs more
effectively. It is not designed to change the patient’s internal structures, ego functioning, defense
mechanisms, or attachment style, but rather to help the patient identify or develop social supports,
and to help with the communication of her attachment needs in that context. The experience of
having her attachment needs met may help to restructure the patient’s internal model in a way
that more accurately reflects reality, but this is not the primary goal of treatment. Rather, priority is
given to rapid symptom resolution and improvement in interpersonal functioning, and treatment
can therefore be short-term (Figure 2.4).


               Biopsychosocial/Cultural/Spiritual diatheses



                            Early life antecedents
                                                                        Psychodynamic
                                                                        psychotherapy
                               Attachment style



                             Interpersonal Crises


                                                                         Interpersonal
                             Social environment                          Psychotherapy



                      Psychiatric symptoms/distress/
                    impaired interpersonal functioning


Figure 2.4 IPT and psychodynamic psychotherapy: differing points of intervention. IPT intervenes at
the level of the acute interpersonal crises or stressor and the current social environment with the goal
of alleviating distress and improving social functioning. Psychodynamic psychotherapy is designed to
facilitate fundamental change in attachment style by examining early life experiences and transference
within the therapeutic relationship.

                                                                                                      25
Theory and Clinical Applications

The Therapeutic Implications of Attachment Theory
Attachment Theory forms the basis for conceptualizing a patient’s distress as attachment needs
which are unmet.
   This may be because the patient has a maladaptive style of attaching to others which leads
   her to believe that care from others is insufficient or unavailable. It may also occur when
   a securely attached individual is faced with an overwhelming interpersonal crisis. In IPT,
   the emphasis is on quickly assisting the patient to get her needs met more effectively by
   focusing on communication within the patient’s attachment relationships, and on her
   social support system. Attachment style is not a target of change; communication is. In
   contrast, in long-term psychodynamic psychotherapy, the emphasis is on modifying the
   patient’s underlying attachment style (Box 2.1).
Box 2.1  Therapeutic implications of Attachment Theory

 Attachment Theory forms the basis for:
 ●● Conceptualization of the patient’s interpersonal problems and psychological distress

 ●● U
     nderstanding the patient–therapist relationship and thereby understanding the

    patient’s relationships outside of therapy
 ●● Anticipating potential problems in therapy and ways to counter them flexibly within

    the structure of IPT
 ●● Planning interventions that are likely to be of benefit in IPT

 ●● Predicting prognosis.




Attachment Theory connects the way the patient attaches to the therapist to the way the patient
attaches to significant others.
   Although the patient–therapist relationship is not directly addressed in IPT, the therapist’s
   experience of it should assist her to develop hypotheses about the patient’s interpersonal
   functioning in relationships outside of therapy, and should direct the therapist to ask even
   more precisely directed questions about the patient’s relationships outside of therapy.
   Attachment theory informs the therapist about potential therapeutic difficulties, and
   about ways to counter them by flexibly structuring IPT. Patients with fearful or dismissive
   attachment styles, for example, are likely to have more difficulty in forming a therapeutic
   alliance, so the therapist may want to take more time engaging the patient in the early sessions
   of therapy. This would literally take the form of conducting an assessment over three to four
   sessions rather than one to two sessions, for example, in order to facilitate a good therapeutic
   alliance. Patients with preoccupied attachments are likely to have difficulty concluding acute
   therapy and ending their intensive relationship with the therapist; in this situation the therapist
   may want to spend more time discussing the transition to Maintenance Treatment earlier in
   therapy, and may put special emphasis on helping to establish external social supports that
   they can use in lieu of the therapeutic relationship when Acute Treatment is concluded.

Attachment Theory informs the therapist about the interventions which are likely to be helpful in IPT.
   Exploration and clarification of the patient’s current interpersonal relationships, and recent
   transitions in those relationships, are nearly always of help with all patients. Exploring patterns
   of relationships, such as the ways in which the patient asks for help from others, feels that she
   is understood by others, and the typical ways in which her relationships end, should also be
   beneficial. However, directive techniques often need to be modified on the basis of attachment
   style. For example, securely attached patients may benefit from therapist self-disclosure, and
   are much more likely to be able to constructively use homework assignments or direct advice.
26
                                                                            Interpersonal Theory

Attachment Theory informs prognosis.
	 The more securely attached a patient is, the better her prognosis. The prognosis is better not
   just for IPT, but for all psychotherapies. This is true for a number of reasons. A more securely
   attached patient generally has better social support, and also has a greater capacity to ask for
   help when it is needed. A more securely attached patient is also able to form a more productive
   alliance with the therapist, and enters therapy with the expectation that it will be helpful. Such
   a patient is also less likely to have difficulty concluding therapy, as her attachments outside of
   therapy are more satisfying than those of patients who are less securely attached.
Attachment style is a powerful predictor of outcome in all varieties of psychotherapy. The
reality is that ‘the rich get richer’– those patients with more interpersonal and intrapsychic
resources, with better social support networks, and with more adaptive attachment styles,
benefit more from therapy. It would be wonderful if there was a therapy that worked better
for more severely disturbed patients than it did for securely attached patients – it would get a
lot of use – but such an intervention does not exist.
     Despite the fact that attachment is intimately related to therapeutic outcome, clinicians
should not be nihilistic about their work with patients with more maladaptive attachment
styles. There are many patients with varying styles of attachment who do quite well in IPT.
Further, there is no evidence that patients with more maladaptive attachment styles do
better in other psychotherapies as compared with IPT – in fact, a reasonable argument could
be made that for acute problems, IPT is well suited for many insecurely attached patients
because the treatment is focal and less intense than more dynamically oriented therapies.
The bottom line is that the therapist should recognize that attachment style does influence
outcome, and should adjust her expectations about what therapy is likely to achieve on that
basis.


Interpersonal Theory
Interpersonal Theory, as articulated by Kiesler,22–25 Benjamin,26,27 and Horowitz,28,29 among
others, is intimately connected to Attachment Theory, and can be understood in an IPT
framework as describing the way individuals communicate their attachment needs to
significant others within specific interpersonal relationships. Attachment Theory describes
what happens in the broad, or macro, social context, while Interpersonal Theory describes
communication within individual relationships on a micro level. Attachment is the template
upon which specific interpersonal communication occurs.
    According to Kiesler and Watkins,30 human personality can be understood as an
enduring pattern of recurrent interpersonal interactions. Similarly, attachment can also
be understood as an enduring pattern of recurrent interpersonal interactions. These
patterns are played out across a wide variety of relationships in the individual’s social
network. Dysfunctional interpersonal relationships are characterized by disordered
interpersonal communications, which in turn are influenced by the individual’s
expectations about how relationships are formed and maintained. In IPT, this
expectation about relationships is based on the working model of attachment described
by Bowlby.6 The distortions imposed upon relationships as a result of these working
models, because they are often inaccurate, dramatically influence the interpersonal
communication that occurs.
    In every interpersonal communication that occurs, individuals negotiate
three specific aspects of relationship.30 Because these aspects are a product of the
communication between individuals, they are termed ‘metacommunications’ – they
                                                                                                 27
Theory and Clinical Applications

are communications about the qualities of the relationships itself, and reflect what the
relationship is like. The elements are:
●● Affiliation, i.e. the degree to which individuals have positive (high affiliation) or negative

   (low affiliation) feelings about one another
●● Status, i.e. the degree to which one or the other person is ‘in charge’ of decisions made

   within the relationship and the agenda for the relationship (dominant versus submissive)
●● Inclusion, i.e. the degree to which the relationship stands as important to each individual

   (high versus low inclusion).
The affiliation and status aspects of relationships can be portrayed graphically using
two-dimensional axes, and an individuals’ communication at any given moment can be
graphically displayed on this grid (Figure 2.5). The x-axis denotes affiliation (ranging from
low to high) and the y-axis the degree of status (ranging from dominant to submissive). The
z-axis (not pictured) could be included in three-dimensional space representing inclusion
(ranging from low to high inclusion).
                                 Status      Dominance
                                 (y-axis)




                                                                           Affiliation
                                                                           (x-axis)

                    Low                                                    High
             affiliation                                                   affiliation




                                             Submission

Figure 2.5 Dimensions of interpersonal relationships

The metacommunication of an individual can be plotted on this grid for any specific
communication. For instance, the statement ‘I love you’ spoken to an intimate partner
would convey a very high degree of affiliation, a high degree of inclusion reflective of the
importance of the relationship, and a neutral degree of dominance. A statement such as
‘This project is unacceptable’, spoken by a boss to an employee, would convey a high degree
of dominance along with low affiliation. Such a statement would also convey a high degree
of inclusion if the employee wants to keep her job. A passing comment between strangers,
such as ‘Nice day today’, although fairly high in affiliation, would have a low degree of
inclusion as the relationship is not particularly important to either person. On a micro-
level, this communication occurs on a moment-by-moment, or statement-by-statement,
basis.31 The cumulative effect of these metacommunications determines the nature of a
relationship, and is a manifestation of the attachment styles of both individuals in the
relationship.

28
                                                                                           Interpersonal Theory

     In addition to the direct communication which occurs in relationships, affiliation, status,
and inclusion metacommunications also evoke specific responses from others.30 These
reciprocal responses follow a predictable pattern that has been confirmed by research. The most
obvious of these reciprocal responses occurs with affiliative communication: communication
which is high in affiliation typically evokes highly affiliative responses (Figure 2.6). This is true
both of dominant and submissive communication on the affiliative side of the graph, in which
affiliative dominant comments tend to evoke or elicit more submissive affiliative responses and
vice versa. For example, a friendly request for advice or assistance (affiliative submissive) usually
elicits a pleasant offer of input or help (affiliative dominant); a gracious offer of help (affiliative
dominant) is usually gratefully received (affiliative submissive). These interactions are illustrated
by the solid arrow on the right side of the graph in Figure 2.6.
                                                       Dominant




                         Low                                                                  High
                  affiliation                                                                 affiliation




                                                      Submissive
Figure 2.6 Reciprocal interpersonal communication
Reciprocal responses are elicited by specific interpersonal communications. In addition to
the responses typically elicited by specific affiliative and status communications, inclusive
communications pull for a similar degree of inclusiveness from the other individual.
    The dotted curved line in Figure 2.6 represents the elicitations typical for hostile
dominant communications. Rather than eliciting a submissive response, hostile dominant
comments pull for more of the same – more hostile and more dominant responses. Threats
tend to provoke threats, and, unfortunately, the potential for violence tends to escalate quickly
as dominant threats are made back and forth.
    The one surprising reciprocal communication is the response that is elicited by more
submissive hostile communications (the dashes). In contrast to what might be expected (a
hostile dominant response), submissive low-affiliation communications tend to initially elicit
high-affiliation dominant responses. Significant others (particularly therapists attempting to
maintain a positive frame) often attempt to pull the passive-aggressive individual into a more
positive relationship by responding positively.d This last kind of reciprocal communication
occurs frequently in therapeutic encounters. For instance, a low-affiliation submissive
d	
      n alternative hypothesis would be that the passive-aggressive individual is so good at their communication style
     A
     that the respondent has no choice but to respond differently – meeting passive-aggressiveness with passive-
     aggressiveness is a difficult skill to learn!

                                                                                                                     29
Theory and Clinical Applications

communication from a patient, such as ‘I didn’t manage to get my homework done’, usually
elicits a response from the therapist like, ‘That’s OK, I’m sure you’ll be able to do it next week’
or an even more apologetic ‘I think I assigned homework that was too difficult for you;
we’ll try again and I’m sure you’ll get it done this time.’ The response can be thought of as
cheerleading to try to shift the patient out of the passive-aggressive position. It is usually not
successful if the patient is skilled at passive-aggressiveness. And it is difficult for the therapist
to maintain the cheerleading if the patient continues to be passive-aggressive – eventually, the
therapist will respond reciprocally with hostility or rejection.
     According to Kiesler, interpersonal problems occur because patients unintentionally elicit
negative reciprocal responses from others31 such as those described above. Hostile aggression,
for example, elicits more hostility and rejection. Persistent passive-aggressive communication
ultimately elicits low-affiliative rejection. The accumulation of these communications
establishes a relationship which is reflective of the attachment styles of both participants. As
noted above, attachment patterns tend to be consistent both within relationships and across
relationships over time, and individuals tend to communicate their attachment needs in a
consistent fashion over time as well. Maladaptive attachment styles are therefore reflected on
a micro-level as specific communications which elicit responses that do not effectively meet
the individual’s attachment needs.
     Patients’ attachment needs are not met effectively because they tend to elicit reciprocal
responses from others which are hostile or rejecting. Consider, for example, an individual
who demands care in a hostile fashion. Rather than eliciting a response which is high in
affiliation, a hostile communication is almost certain to evoke a response from others which
is low in affiliation. Potential care providers are driven away by the hostility. Demanding
communications which are high in dominance are also likely to be met with resistance, as the
overt or covert hostile response they tend to evoke will also lead to rejection.
     This kind of maladaptive interpersonal communication has been observed in
patients with somatizing disorders,16 who tend to provide classic examples of this type
of communication pattern. Patients with somatization disorder, for example, frequently
manifest a dismissing attachment style, believing that others will never be able to meet their
attachment needs. Their communication of this fear and attachment distress, however, comes
in the form of statements conveying anger at not being cared for, not being understood, and
not being taken seriously. Their demands are usually hostile and aggressive. This ultimately
results in the caregiver’s rejecting of the somatizer, as well as the somatizing patient’s rejection
of help from others. Medical professionals are usually quite happy to be rid of such patients,
as their persistent hostile communication quashes any desire of the care provider to help. The
patient’s hostile communications elicit rejection.
     Hypochondriacal patients, as another example, often have preoccupied attachment styles
which are manifested as persistent help-seeking behavior.17 Unlike somatizing patients, however,
their attachment needs are communicated in a way that is high in affiliation but which is very
submissive. Initially, they tend to evoke caring responses from others – many hypochondriacal
patients are quite pleasant to work with during the first several sessions. Over time, however,
their persistent help-seeking behavior, combined with a very passive and submissive pattern of
communication and an inability to be reassured, lead others to become frustrated and ultimately
reject the hypochondriac. Again, the patient’s communications elicit rejection.
     As a final example, consider a patient with schizoid personality traits. Because of his
fearful attachment style, such a patient will typically communicate in a fashion which
is low in affiliation and inclusion – though not hostile, he may be unable to tolerate a
close relationship and will remain distant. This distancing behavior and communication

30
                                                                                   Interpersonal Theory

consistently elicits a distancing or low affiliation response from others. A lack of social skills
may also inhibit the communication, leading to a frustration of attachment needs when they
are communicated ineffectively to others.
    In sum, maladaptive attachment styles lead to inappropriate or inadequate interpersonal
communication that prevents the patient’s attachment needs from being met. The continual and rigid
verbal and non-verbal pattern of communication elicits a rigidly restricted range of responses
from others, usually culminating in rejection. These maladaptive attachment styles and
communications are characterized by their rigidity and by the negative responses they evoke.
    To make matters worse, patients’ maladaptive attachment styles and communication
patterns are reinforced by the responses which they provoke. Since those with insecure
attachments tend to push others away and elicit rejecting responses as a result of their
ineffective communication, their working model of relationships that others will not provide
support or will reject them is further reinforced. The very rejection that their behavior and
communication evokes becomes further proof that they will never receive adequate care.
Since their ability to convey a need for care is greatly restricted, the threat to the minimal
care they are able to obtain is met with an even more intense use of the same maladaptive
communication, perpetuating and escalating the cycle. For example, angry somatizing patients,
upon the elicitation of a rejecting response from a care provider, will communicate even more
anger and hostility at being rejected in their next encounter with a medical professional. This
makes it even less likely that their attachment needs will be met, and further reinforces their
interpersonal working model and their maladaptive attachment style (Figure 2.7).

                      Dismissive attachment style




                     Working model of attachment:
                    Others won’t provide sufficient care




                       Attachment needs manifest
                          as somatic symptoms




                   Hostile, critical and demanding
                 communication of attachment needs




                           Elicited response:
                   Rejection from potential caregivers



Figure 2.7 The interpersonal communication of somatizing patients. Somatization disorder is
­characterized by a dismissing attachment style. This reflects a working model of attachment in which
 the patient is convinced that others won’t provide sufficient care. The patient’s attachment needs are
 framed as somatic symptoms for which he needs care, but his requests for care and reassurance
 are usually hostile, critical, and demanding. This elicits a rejecting and hostile response from potential
 care providers, further reinforcing the patient’s belief that others won’t provide sufficient care. The cycle
 repeats with greater intensity.


                                                                                                           31
Theory and Clinical Applications

Adding insult to injury, patients displaying maladaptive communication patterns typically lack
insight into their communication style.30 In other words, they are at a loss to understand why
others are not providing care for them, and do not understand why others ultimately reject
them. They are quite aware that they are distressed and that their needs are not being met, but
they do not appreciate that this is in large part because the way they are communicating that is
leading to their distress. They do not understand that they are not communicating their needs
graciously, nor communicating them in a way that others can respond to easily.
     This understanding of communication and interpersonal relationships leads to four
specific tasks for the IPT therapist.
●● First, the therapist should identify the patient’s maladaptive communication style and the

   way her moment-to-moment communication is eliciting rejection or negative responses
   from others. Interpersonal Incidents (described in Chapter 9) are an excellent way to
   obtain this information.
●● Second, the therapist should help the patient to recognize her ineffective communication,

   often using communication analysis (another technique described in Chapter 9).
●● Third, the therapist should work with the patient to determine ways that she can commu-

   nicate more effectively.
●● Fourth, the therapist should help the patient to put these into practice in her relationships

   outside of therapy.
Despite the wishes of the therapist and patient that therapy would be easy, it is this last point –
working to change communication and practicing, practicing, practicing – that requires the most
persistence. There are, in IPT and all other therapies, no magic words or miracle cures that will
allow the patient to make changes and sustain them without a lot of practice.


Social Theory
Social Theory has less relevance than Attachment and Interpersonal Theories to the
specific interventions in IPT, but it is important in emphasizing the need for general
social support in recovering from depression and maintaining wellness. Research in
depression and anxiety has consistently emphasized the causative role of interpersonal
factors such as loss, poor or disrupted social support, and maladaptive responses to life
events.32 The social milieu in which an individual develops interpersonal relationships,
and her social support in particular, strongly influence the way in which she copes with
interpersonal stress.
    Social Theory has been described by Henderson et al.33–35 and Brown et al.36–38 among
others. Social Theory posits that a deficiency in social relationships is a causal factor in
the genesis of psychological distress, and that the effect of these deficits holds whether
an individual is exposed to high or low levels of adversity. Moreover, it is the effect of the
individual’s current environment that is crucial.34 While past relationships and early life
environment may contribute to the picture by distorting the individual’s perception of
contemporary conditions, it is not invoked in social theory as a necessary causal agent.34 In
sum, stress in current social relationships is an independent causative factor in the genesis of
psychological distress.
    Social Theory therefore stands in sharp contrast to psychoanalytic theory, and clearly
differentiates IPT from more psychoanalytic and psychodynamic approaches. Psychoanalysis



32
                                                                                      Social Theory

rests on two fundamental principles: psychic determinism and the proposition that
unconscious mental processes are the foundation for an individual’s conscious thoughts
and behaviors. According to psychoanalytic theory, individuals are largely unaware of the
processes that drive their behavior, and it is these unconscious factors that lead to neurosis
and psychopathology.39 In contrast, Social Theory as it informs IPT invokes neither of
these principles. The fundamental basis for Social Theory is that current interpersonal
stressors lead to psychopathology – there is no need to rely on either unconscious processes
nor psychic determinism as causal factors. The implications of this difference are clear –
psychoanalysis is designed to elicit the unconscious determinants of psychopathology, while
Social Theory suggests that interventions which affect current social relationships will lead to
improved functioning. The latter approach is completely consistent with IPT, and accounts
for the emphasis on the development and utilization of social support, a key target in IPT.
     Another important concept in Social Theory is that of qualitative responses to social stress.
Rather than viewing psychiatric illness as a dichotomous proposition – i.e. one either has an
illness or does not have an illness – many social theorists have argued that the distinction between
emotional distress and illness is simply one of degree.40 In other words, there is a spectrum of
responses to social stressors which ranges from mild to severe distress; psychiatric illness is simply
defined as crossing an arbitrary line of severity. This is the position taken in IPT: distress, whether
conceptualized as a formal psychiatric disorder or not, is the appropriate target for therapy.
Further, the differences in individuals’ experiences of distress, depression, and anxiety are strongly
influenced by psychosocial factors.41 These experiential differences are not reflected in diagnoses,
which include only symptoms, but can and should be included in the Interpersonal Formulation.
This concept is important in IPT because it is the basis for providing treatment to all individuals
who are distressed rather than limiting it only to those who meet a particular set of diagnostic
criteria. A number of studies have demonstrated an association between quality of social support
and psychological distress, including a series of studies by Henderson et al.,34,42 who demonstrated
that poor social support is associated with depression and other ‘neurotic’ illnesses.35,43 Henderson
also hypothesized that personality and quality of attachments, among other factors, may be
responsible for the difficulties some individuals have in obtaining care and support from others.33
     The concept of ‘social support networks’ has been shown to be relevant to interpersonal
and psychological distress. Studies confirm that social isolation or limited social interaction
places individuals at greater risk for mental illness. The quality of the interaction, however,
appears to be more important than the absolute number of relationships. This perceived
social support is a function of the individual’s subjective evaluation of the dependability
of the social network, the ease of interaction within the network, her sense of belonging
to the network, and her sense of intimacy with network members.44 Work by Brown and
colleagues has also consistently demonstrated a correlation between adverse social events
and the incidence of psychiatric disorders.45,46 Both current social stressors and childhood
experiences of neglect and abuse have been correlated with anxiety and depression.36
     Marital conflict is one of the most consistent risk factors for depression and is an example
of the link between interpersonal problems and distress. Rates of major depressive disorder
are highest among separated and divorced individuals and lowest among the single and
married. Recent widowhood is associated with higher rates of major depressive disorder
across the life cycle,47 and the absence of a spouse is a risk factor for major depressive
disorder.37 Grief and loss have been associated with depressive symptoms in both men
and women, particularly those with poor social supports.48,49 In contrast, the presence of




                                                                                                   33
Theory and Clinical Applications

attachments that can help sustain individuals during a loss appears to be helpful in preventing
episodes of depression.50
    In sum, an individual’s social support network greatly influences the likelihood that
she will have psychiatric difficulties. This relationship appears to be even stronger when an
individual is faced with a significant psychosocial stressor. Those individuals who do not
have, or perceive that they have do not have, others they can depend on for support or a good
social network, are much more likely to become distressed.

IPT: From Theory to Intervention
The targets of IPT, psychological distress, interpersonal problems, and social support, are
all based on Attachment, Interpersonal, and Social Theories. These theories also inform the
specific techniques and tactics used in IPT. This theoretical foundation leads to five essential
tasks for the IPT therapist (Box 2.2).
Box 2.2  Therapeutic tasks in IPT

 ●● The therapist must create a strong therapeutic alliance (a relationship with a high
    degree of inclusion and affiliation)
 ●● The therapist must identify the patient’s maladaptive communications

 ●● The therapist must help the patient become aware of her maladaptive

    communications
 ●● The therapist must help the patient modify her communications and practice these

    changes
 ●● The therapist must assist the patient to build a better social support network, and to

    utilize the social supports that are currently available

First and foremost, the clinician must create a therapeutic environment in which there is a high
degree of inclusion and affiliation: a good therapeutic alliance is absolutely essential in IPT,
and the burden to create one is on the therapist! The therapeutic relationship needs to be
developed in such a way that it holds importance for both the therapist and patient – both
should be actively engaged and attentive to communications from the other. If this does not
occur, feedback from the therapist (and from the patient) will be easily dismissed, and the
therapy itself will be jeopardized because the patient will simply abandon it. If a productive
therapeutic alliance is not established, the patient can easily devalue the therapeutic
relationship and consequently ignore any input from the therapist, rendering moot all of the
specific techniques the therapist might use.
    Creating a meaningful therapeutic relationship is a necessary condition of all
psychotherapies. It is of particular importance in IPT, however, as the Acute Phase of
Treatment is time-limited. It is incumbent upon the therapist to quickly establish a
therapeutic alliance, so that the work of therapy can be accomplished. For this reason, in IPT
particular attention must be paid to all of the ‘non-specific elements’ of therapy: warmth,
empathy, affective attunement, positive regard – all of the elements described by Rogers and
Truaz51 as necessary to bring about psychotherapeutic change. It is crucial that IPT therapists
be more than technicians – without establishing a productive therapeutic alliance, none of
the IPT techniques and strategies will be effective – for that matter, neither will techniques
from any other therapeutic approach.
    The therapist should also constantly remember that the quality of the alliance is the
primary predictor of psychotherapy outcome. Research has consistently demonstrated
this in literally every form of therapy in which the alliance has been examined.52–58 This is

34
                                                             IPT: From Theory to Intervention

not to say that the specific techniques and tactics which characterize different therapies are
not important, but rather that they pale in comparison to the effects of the alliance. The
therapeutic alliance is even more important with patients who have maladaptive attachment
styles,57 as they will make it difficult for their therapists to consistently respond empathically.
Rather than eliciting sympathetic and caregiving responses, such patients will eventually
evoke hostility and rejection even from the most gracious therapists. The therapist must be
aware of this, and respond by being even more active in conveying empathy and positive
regard to those patients who do not naturally evoke such responses.
     A patient with a fearful attachment style, for instance, may evoke feelings of boredom or
rejection, which will destroy the therapeutic alliance if the therapist responds in kind to this
provocation. The therapist must recognize the interpersonal response that is being evoked
by the patient, understand the specific communication that is eliciting it, and adapt her
responses to create a more productive therapeutic alliance. With such a patient, the therapist
may choose to use more empathic statements, or may choose to let the patient set the agenda
in early sessions rather than imposing the therapist’s agenda too early and risk having the
patient feel rejected.
     Conversely, a patient with a preoccupied attachment style may ‘wear down’ the therapist
with repeated requests for reassurance, so that over time, the responses that are evoked by the
patient are exasperation and rejection. Again, the therapist must recognize the communication
pattern, be aware of the responses that the patient evokes, and move to counter the patient’s
provocation by being consistently caring despite being drawn to do otherwise. Patients with
preoccupied attachment are more likely to become dependent on the therapist and therefore
have difficulty ending a time-limited therapeutic relationship. The therapist can counter this by
placing even greater emphasis on the need for the patient to develop a more supportive social
network outside of therapy. Structurally, the therapist can also gradually taper the last several
sessions of Acute Treatment over time rather than coming to an abrupt termination, an event
which would undoubtedly be very distressing to a preoccupied patient.
     Some patients, fortunately, are relatively secure in their attachments, and can
communicate their needs effectively, including those in the therapeutic relationship. Such
patients require little adjustment on the part of the therapist, are able to receive feedback
and use it productively, and are also able to make adjustments within their extended support
network. With these patients, the therapist can move to the intermediate phase of IPT and
can begin giving feedback to the patient much more quickly, as it will be perceived by the
patient as helpful rather than as rejecting.
     Herein is a crucial difference between IPT and transference-based psychodynamic
psychotherapies. In IPT, the therapist works to recognize the patient’s underlying attachment
needs and to help the patient meet those needs outside of therapy. In transference-based
psychotherapy, the therapist attempts to become a ‘blank screen’ upon which the patient
projects her transference neurosis – this reaction is stimulated with intent as the therapist
actively resists meeting the patient’s attachment needs in therapy.
     The second task of the IPT therapist is to develop an understanding or conceptualization of
the patient’s communication problems by recognizing the pattern of interpersonal communication
as it occurs both in the patient’s interpersonal sphere outside of treatment and in the therapeutic
relationship. Attachment Theory suggests that attachment styles will be manifest across
relationships, including the relationship that develops between therapist and patient. The
patient–therapist relationship must be attended to very carefully by the IPT therapist, as it
provides extremely valuable information about the way the patient typically attaches to and
communicates with others. The difficulties experienced by the patient in communicating

                                                                                               35
Theory and Clinical Applications

within the therapeutic relationship will be manifest in her other relationships. The
attachment style which becomes apparent in therapy will be manifest in all of the patient’s
other relationships, and the ways the therapist is drawn to respond to the patient’s
communications, particularly those communications involving care-eliciting behavior, will
be the ways others outside of therapy are also drawn to respond. Understanding transference
in IPT is paramount in developing an accurate formulation of the patient’s attachment
behavior and interpersonal communication.
     In IPT, however, this information is used to ask questions about relationships outside of
therapy rather than being used to directly address the relationship between the patient and
the therapist. The data gleaned from the therapist’s experience of the transference should lead
her to ask questions about the way the patient communicates in her relationships outside of
therapy; the therapeutic relationship itself need not be addressed as a point of intervention
in IPT. When the therapist experiences the patient as passive, for instance, it should lead the
therapist to ask questions about the ways the patient may be passive in her extra-therapy
relationships. When the therapist feels drawn to respond with hostility, this should lead to
queries about incidents when the patient has experienced others outside of therapy reacting
with hostility. When the therapist is feeling frustrated, questions which investigate the
possibility that others also feel frustrated by the patient should be asked.
     While understanding the transference which develops in IPT is crucial to its conduct
because it informs the therapist about the ways the patient forms and maintains relationships
outside of therapy, IPT, in contrast to psychodynamic psychotherapies, does not focus on
transference or the therapeutic relationship as a point of discussion in therapy. The reason
for this is that to do so is likely to move the patient away from a here-and-now focus on
symptom resolution and into a long-term therapy designed to modify personality or
deep-seated attachment problems. While such therapies may be quite helpful for severely
disturbed patients, they are outside of the scope of IPT. In IPT, the focus is rapid resolution of
symptoms and distress rather than a focus on changing underlying attachment style.
     Because the point of IPT is resolution of distress rather than an examination of
transference as it develops, the therapist has some latitude in positioning herself in therapy.
In transference-based therapies, the therapist ideally is a ‘blank screen’ upon which the
patient has maximum opportunity to project and make clear her transference reactions.
Transference-based therapies are designed in such a way that the therapist encourages
the development of transference, not only by asking questions about it, but by being non-
disclosing and neutral. In contrast, because IPT is designed to focus on relationships outside
of therapy and therefore need not encourage the development of transference, the therapist
can position herself in the role of a ‘coach’ or ‘mentor’. In attachment terms, the therapist’s
stance is to be a constant and consistent care-provider, encouraging a positive transferential
relationship with the patient in which the therapist is seen as an expert who is willing and able
to be of help.
     On a practical level, this means that the IPT therapist has more freedom to use techniques
which might otherwise obscure the development of transference. Self-disclosure, for instance,
may be very useful with patients who are more securely attached. The therapist may wish
to speak about solutions that other patients with similar problems have found helpful
(taking care to maintain confidentiality). The IPT therapist may also be active in helping the
patient to extend her social support network, making direct suggestions to attend groups
such as Alcoholics Anonymous, religious or spiritual groups, new mothers’ support groups,
exercise classes and the like, going as far, if needed, as helping the patient find resources for
transportation to such groups.

36
                                                           IPT: From Theory to Intervention

     Although the transference experience provides a great deal of information about the
patient’s style of attachment and communication, it is by no means the only information that
the therapist should use. In fact, the primary source of information for understanding the
patient’s communications should be examples of communication: specific incidents in which
the patient has attempted to communicate her needs with significant others. The technique
of examining Interpersonal Incidents, described in Chapter 9, is a wonderful method to
examine in detail the ways in which the patient is not effectively communicating her needs
within relationships. Analyzing these will help the therapist to understand how maladaptive
or ineffective communication is occurring.
     General patterns in relationships should also be explored, both to help the therapist
understand the patient more fully and to assist the patient to see these patterns. The
Interpersonal Inventory, in addition to providing information about the patient’s social
support, should be used as a means of beginning to understand the patient’s patterns of
relationships. Asking questions about the ways the patient typically forms relationships, ends
relationships, or common disappointments that she experiences in relationships can also be
extremely helpful.
     In essence, the goal of the IPT therapist is to gather information which contributes to
an understanding of the patient’s attachment style, and then to use specific techniques like
Interpersonal Incidents to collect and analyze examples of communication. This provides
for a more complete understanding of the patient’s difficulties in communication outside
of therapy. Within therapy, rather than examining the transference with the patient, the
therapist should position herself as an expert help-provider. The idea is literally to have the
patient ‘get in and get out’ of therapy before problematic transference develops. Thus the
paramount importance of the time limit in IPT, and the need to focus on here-and-now
relationships outside of therapy as the best way to address the primary targets of symptom
resolution and relief of distress.
     The third task of the IPT therapist is to help the patient become aware of her maladaptive
communications: the goal is to help the patient develop insight into her communication style.
The therapist needs to understand the ways the patient communicates, the responses that
the patient’s communication evokes, and the ways the patient’s style of communication
is perpetuated. In addition, the therapist must assist the patient to appreciate that her
communication is not effective – i.e. that it is not achieving the patient’s goal of meeting her
attachment needs. Communication analysis is a great technique to achieve this. Most patients
feel very misunderstood, and once that is acknowledged, the therapist can then work with the
patient to communicate differently – to help her to help others understand her more fully.
     The goal of treatment with IPT is change in the patient’s communication and behavior
so that her attachment needs are more fully met. In most cases, this requires at least a
limited degree of insight by the patient. This is insight in which the patient recognizes her
communication style and the responses it evokes. It does not necessarily require insight into
the genesis of the patient’s attachment or communication styles. The insight need only be
enough that the patient recognize the consequences of her here-and-now communications
with others, and in doing so, is motivated to change.
     Ideally, the patient would come to recognize something like this:
   I have a tendency to communicate in a specific way. My communications tend to
   draw others to respond in a characteristic way as well. The responses I elicit from
   others aren’t helpful to me, and tend to produce a response which leaves me
   even more frustrated. I now recognize that I can get my needs met more fully by
   communicating differently in a way that others respond to more positively.

                                                                                             37
Theory and Clinical Applications

The fourth task of the IPT therapist is to help the patient modify her communications and
practice these changes. The therapist must help the patient to change her communication
by developing and practicing new behaviors. IPT techniques such as problem solving can
assist the patient both to recognize and to change communications, so that her attachment
needs are met more fully. Role playing provides the opportunity to solidify the newly
established ways of communicating. Homework can also be used. The goal is to help the
patient recognize communication patterns, modify those patterns so that her needs are more
effectively met, and maintain the new communication once it is established. It is a simple
process, but it takes a great deal of practice.
    The fifth task of the IPT therapist is to assist the patient to build a better social support
network, and to utilize the social supports that are currently available. The social milieu is
intimately connected to the patient’s ability to deal with interpersonal crises. The greater
the support, the more likely the patient is to weather the interpersonal storm. Thus it is the
therapist’s task to encourage the patient to identify both existing and potential sources of
support, as well as to begin to utilize them constructively.

Conclusion
IPT rests on two primary theoretical foundations: Attachment Theory and Interpersonal
Theory. Social Theory provides additional emphasis on the importance of social support.
All coalesce within a Biopsychosocial/Cultural/Spiritual model which explains the patient’s
distress as well as directing the interventions which are used in IPT. The Interpersonal Triad
includes an acute psychosocial stressor, coupled with biological and attachment diatheses,
in the context of insufficient social support, which lead to the development of symptoms
and psychological distress. IPT is specifically designed to help patients by assisting them to
improve their interpersonal communication, resolve their interpersonal problems, and more
fully develop and utilize their social support systems.

References
1.	 Bowlby J. Attachment. Attachment and Loss. Vol. 1. 1969, New York: Basic Books.
2.	 Bowlby J. Separation: Anxiety and Anger. Attachment and Loss. Vol. 2. 1973, New York:
    Basic Books.
3.	 Bowlby J. The making and breaking of affectional bonds: etiology and
    psychopathology in the light of attachment theory. British Journal of Psychiatry, 1977,
    130: 201–210.
4.	 Bowlby J. The making and breaking of affectional bonds, II: some principles of
    psychotherapy. British Journal of Psychiatry, 1977, 130: 421–431.
5.	 Bowlby J. Loss: Sadness and Depression. Attachment and Loss. Vol. 3. 1980, New York: Basic
    Books.
6.	 Bowlby J. Developmental psychiatry comes of age. American Journal of Psychiatry, 1988,
    145: 1–10.
7.	 Ainsworth MD. Object relations, dependency, and attachment: a theoretical view of the
    infant-mother relationship. Child Development, 1969, 40: 969–1027.
8.	 Ainsworth MS, et al. Patterns of Attachment: A Psychological Study of the Strange Situation.
    1978, MahWah: Erlbaum.

38
                                                                                  References

 9.	 George C, Kaplan N and Main M. Adult Attachment Interview, 2nd edn. 1985, Berkely:
     University of California at Berkely Press.
10.	 Hazan C and Shaver PR. Romantic love conceptualized as an attachment process. Journal
     of Personality and Social Psychology, 1987, 52: 511–524.
11.	 Sullivan HS. The Interpersonal Theory of Psychiatry. 1953, New York: Norton.
12.	 Main M and Solomon J. Discovery of an insecure-disorganized/dioriented attachment
     pattern, in Brazelton TB and Yogman M (eds) Affective Development in Infancy. 1986,
     Norwood: Alblex Publishing, pp. 95–124.
13.	 Pilkonis PA. Personality prototypes among depressives: themes of dependency and
     autonomy. Journal of Personality Disorders, 1988, 2: 144–152.
14.	 Brennan KA, Clark CL and Shaver PR. Self-report measure of adult attachment, in
     Simpson JA and Rholes WS (eds) Attachment Theory and Close Relationships. 1998, New
     York: Guilford Press, pp. 46–76.
15.	 Bartholomew K and Horowitz LM. Attachment styles among young adults: a test of a
     four category model. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1991, 61: 226–244.
16.	 Stuart S and Noyes R Jr. Attachment and interpersonal communication in somatization.
     Psychosomatics, 1999, 40(1): 34–43.
17.	 Stuart S and Noyes R Jr. Treating hypochondriasis with interpersonal psychotherapy.
     Journal of Contemporary Psychotherapy, 2005, 35: 269–283.
18.	 Stuart S and Noyes R Jr. Interpersonal psychotherapy for somatizing patients.
     Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 2006, 75: 209–219.
19.	 Parkes CM. Psycho-social transitions: a field of study. Social Science and Medicine, 1971,
     5: 101–115.
20.	 Parkes CM. Bereavement and mental illness. British Journal of Medical Psychology, 1965,
     38: 1–26.
21.	 Henderson S. Care-eliciting behavior in man. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease,
     1974, 159: 172–181.
22.	 Kiesler DJ. Interpersonal methods of assessment and diagnosis, in Snyder CR and
     Forsyth DR (eds) Handbook of Social and Clinical Psychology: The Health Perspective. 1991,
     Elmsford: Pergamon Press, pp. 438–468.
23.	 Kiesler DJ. Interpersonal circle inventories: pantheoretical applications to psychotherapy
     research and practice. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 1992, 2: 77–99.
24.	 Kiesler DJ. Standardization of intervention: the tie that binds psychotherapy research and
     practice, in Talley PF, Strupp HH and Butler SF (eds) Psychotherapy Research and Practice:
     Bridging the Gap.1994, New York: Basic Books.
25.	 Kiesler DJ. Contemporary Interpersonal Theory and Research: Personality, Psychopathology,
     and Psychotherapy. 1996, New York: John Wiley & Sons.
26.	 Benjamin LS. Interpersonal Diagnosis and Treatment of Personality Disorders. 1996, New
     York: Guilford Publications.
27.	 Benjamin LS. Introduction to the special section on structural analysis of social behavior.
     Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 1996, 64: 1203–1212.
28.	 Horowitz LM. Interpersonal Foundations of Psychopathology. 2004, Washington DC:
     American Psychological Association.


                                                                                             39
Theory and Clinical Applications

29.	 Horowitz LM, et al. How interpersonal motives clarify the meaning of interpersonal
     behavior: a revised circumplex model. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 2006, 10:
     67–86.
30.	 Kiesler DJ and Watkins LM. Interpersonal complimentarity and the therapeutic alliance:
     a study of the relationship in psychotherapy. Psychotherapy, 1989, 26: 183–194.
31.	 Kiesler DJ. An interpersonal communication analysis of relationship in psychotherapy.
     Journal for the Study of Interpersonal Processes, 1979, 42: 299–311.
32.	 Weissman MM and Paykel ES. The Depressed Woman: A Study of Social Relationships.
     1974, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
33.	 Henderson S. The social network, support, and neurosis: the function of attachment in
     adult life. British Journal of Psychiatry, 1977, 131: 185–191.
34.	 Henderson S, Byrne DG and Duncan-Jones P. Neurosis and the Social Environment. 1982,
     Sydney: Academic Press.
35.	 Henderson S, et al. Social bonds in the epidemiology of neurosis. British Journal of
     Psychiatry, 1978, 132: 463–466.
36.	 Brown GW, Harris TO and Eales MJ. Social factors and comorbidity of depressive and
     anxiety disorders. British Journal of Psychiatry, 1996, 168 (suppl 30): 50–57.
37.	 Brown GW and Harris TO. Social Origins of Depression: A Study of Psychiatric Disorders in
     Women. 1978, London: Tavistock.
38.	 Brown GW and Harris TO. Life Events and Illness. 1989, New York: Guilford Publications.
39.	 Brenner C. An Elementary Textbook of Psychoanalysis. 1973, New York: Anchor Press.
40.	 Bebbington PE. Inferring causes: some constraints in the social psychiatry of depressive
     disorders. Integrative Psychiatry, 1984, 2: 69–72.
41.	 Brown GW. Genetic and population perspectives on life events and depression. Social
     Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 1998, 33: 363–372.
42.	 Henderson S, et al. Psychiatric disorder in Canberra: a standardized study of prevalence.
     Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 1979, 60: 355–374.
43.	 Henderson S, et al. Social relationships, adversity and neurosis: a study of associations in
     a general population sample. British Journal of Psychiatry, 1980, 136: 574–583.
44.	 Henderson AS. Interpreting the evidence on social support. Social Psychiatry, 1984, 19:
     49–52.
45.	 Brown GW, et al. Life stress, chronic subclinical symptoms and vulnerability to clinical
     depression. Journal of Affective Disorders, 1986, 11: 1–19.
46.	 Andrews B and Brown GW. Social support, onset of depression and personality: an
     exploratory analysis. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, 1988, 23: 99–108.
47.	 Paykel ES. Life stress and psychiatric disorder, in Dohrenwend BS and Dohrenwend BP
     (eds) Stressful Life Events: Their Naure and Effects. 1974, New York: Wiley.
48.	 Walker K, MacBride A and Vachon M. Social support networks and the crisis of
     bereavement. Social Sciences in Medicine, 1977, 11: 35–41.
49.	 Maddison D and Walker W. Factors affecting the outcome of conjugal bereavement.
     British Journal of Psychiatry, 1967, 113: 1057–1067.
50.	 Parker G. The Bonds of Depression. 1978, Sydney: Angus and Robertson.


40
                                                                                    References

51.	 Rogers CR and Truaz CB. The therapeutic conditions antecedent to change: a theoretical
     view. The Therapeutic Relationship and its Impact, ed. C.R. Rogers. 1967, Madison:
     University of Wisconsin Press.
52.	 Lambert MJ. Psychotherapy outcome research: implications for integrative and eclectic
     theories, in Norcross JC and Goldfried MR (eds) Handbook of Psychotherapy Integration.
     1992, New York: Basic Books.
53.	 Barber JP, et al. Alliance predicts patients’ outcome beyond in-treatment change in
     symptoms. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 2000, 68: 1027–1032.
54.	 Barber J, et al. The role of the alliance and techniques in predicting outcome of
     supportive-expressive dynamic therapy for cocaine dependence. Psychoanalytic
     Psychology, 2008, 25: 461–482.
55.	 Martin DJ, Garske JP and Davis MK. Relation of the therapeutic alliance with outcome
     and other variables: a meta-analytic review. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
     2000, 68: 438–450.
56.	 Zuroff DC, et al. Relation of therapeutic alliance and perfectionism to outcome in brief
     outpatient treatment of depression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 2000,
     68: 114–124.
57.	 Diener MJ and Monroe JM. The relationship between adult attachment style and
     therapeutic alliance in individual psychotherapy: a meta-analytic review. Psychotherapy,
     2011, 48(3): 237–248.
58.	 Horvath AO, et al. Alliance in individual psychotherapy. Psychotherapy, 2011, 48(1):
     9–16.




                                                                                              41
This page intentionally left blank
                              Section 2
Assessment/Initial Sessions


Chapter   3. The Structure of IPT
Chapter   4. Assessment and Patient Selection
Chapter   5. The Interpersonal Inventory
Chapter   6. The Interpersonal Formulation
Chapter   7. The Treatment Agreement
This page intentionally left blank
                                                                   3
The Structure of Interpersonal
Psychotherapy
Introduction                                                                                45
Assessment/Initial Phase                                                                    46
Middle Phase                                                                                46
Conclusion of Acute Treatment                                                               46
Maintenance Treatment                                                                       47
IPT and the Biopsychosocial/Cultural/Spiritual Model                                        48
IPT Problem Areas                                                                           49
The Benefits and Limitations of Structured Psychotherapies                                  50
Conclusion                                                                                  52
References                                                                                  52


Introduction
This chapter is a brief overview of the structure of Interpersonal Psychotherapy (IPT),
emphasizing a view of the forest rather than the trees. IPT is divided into four segments: the
Assessment/Initial Phase, the Intermediate Phase, the Conclusion of Acute Treatment, and
Maintenance Treatment (Figure 3.1).


                   IPT structure

                   Assessment/Initial Phase
                                                            1–3 sessions


                   Middle Phase                            4–12 sessions



                   Conclusion of Acute Treatment            1–2 sessions



                    Maintenance Treatment                   Per contract




Figure 3.1 The structure of IPT
In the Assessment/Initial Phase, the therapist makes a determination about the patient’s
suitability for IPT. This assessment includes an Interpersonal Inventory and an Interpersonal
Formulation. If the patient is suitable, the therapist then negotiates a Treatment Agreement
                                                                                             45
The Structure of IPT

with the patient. In the Middle Phase, the therapist and patient work at resolving the
patient’s interpersonal problems (the three IPT Problem Areas) using IPT techniques. When
Concluding Acute Treatment, the therapist and patient review progress as well as planning
for future problems. Maintenance IPT should be arranged by the patient and therapist
depending on the patient’s history, severity of distress, and risk for relapse. The Conclusion
of Acute Treatment can be tapered so that sessions are less frequent as the conclusion
approaches.

Assessment/Initial Phase
The first purpose of the Assessment/Initial Phase is to determine if the patient is a suitable
candidate for IPT, and to determine whether IPT is the best treatment. During the assessment
the therapist should focus on the patient’s presenting problems and attachment style,
and should ask about specific instances of interpersonal interaction in order to begin to
understand the patient’s typical style of communication. Much of this can be accomplished
by constructing an Interpersonal Inventory.
     The Assessment/Initial Phase of IPT includes a number of specific tasks. The primary
goals are to construct an Interpersonal Inventory (Chapter 5) and to develop an Interpersonal
Formulation, a detailed hypothesis describing and explaining the patient’s interpersonal
difficulties (Chapter 6). A Treatment Agreement should be established with the patient
to proceed with IPT, and to work on several specific interpersonal problems. Note that
the agreement, in contrast to a rigid contract, is flexible, so that a range of acute treatment
sessions can be negotiated rather than a fixed number.

Middle Phase
In the Middle Phase of IPT the therapist and patient work together to resolve the patient’s
Interpersonal Disputes, to adjust to his Role Transitions, or to deal with Grief and Loss
issues. In general, after identifying one or more Interpersonal Problem Areas during the
Assessment/Initial Phase, the therapist gathers more information about the patient’s specific
interpersonal problems. Both patient and therapist then work collaboratively to develop
solutions to each, usually coming in the form of improving the patient’s communication skills
or modifying his expectations about a relationship conflict. A suitable option is selected,
and then the patient attempts to implement it between sessions. The patient and therapist
then work in subsequent sessions to refine the solution and to further assist the patient to
implement it if he has had difficulty in carrying it out completely.
    The hallmark of the Middle Phase of IPT is a lot of implementation and practice. The key
in IPT (as in all therapies) is practice and persistence.

Conclusion of Acute Treatment
The Conclusion of Acute Treatment is a mutually negotiated ending of the intensive time-limited
part of IPT. It includes a review of the patient’s progress in resolving the interpersonal problems
first identified in the Interpersonal Inventory and planning for these and others which may arise in
the future. The patient’s (and the therapist’s) reactions to the conclusion should be acknowledged so
that they can be discussed if needed. If IPT is done well, however, the option to taper the frequency
of sessions during the Conclusion of Acute Treatment can be utilized so that the transition to
Maintenance is seamless and does not cause the patient distress.

46
                                                                      Maintenance Treatment

Maintenance Treatment
A specific agreement regarding the provision of Maintenance Treatment should always be
negotiated with all patients, though this can vary a great deal depending on the patient’s risk
for relapse and need for ongoing care. In cases where a patient’s problems are likely to be
recurrent, the patient and therapist should develop an agreement to meet for more frequent
maintenance sessions (such as monthly) to monitor ongoing interpersonal problems and
to help the patient continue to work on his interpersonal skills. In contrast, if the patient’s
risk for relapse is low, and his current episode has been mild, the therapist and patient may
choose to meet once every 6 months, or even just to have phone or email contact if needed.
The scheduling of maintenance IPT sessions requires clinical judgment based on risk and
need for longitudinal care. The critical tactic in IPT is simply to have a crystal clear agreement
about ongoing contact based on clinical judgment – all patients will benefit from the
continuity of care that is provided.
     IPT is not a terminable therapy. It does not come to a complete and final end at the
Conclusion of Acute Treatment. IPT is structured so that it comes to a conclusion because
all of the empirical data point to the need for Maintenance Treatment for most patients.
Maintenance Treatment may differ in frequency and intensity based on the individual
patient’s needs, but it should be provided nonetheless.
     The evidence is very clear that affective and anxiety disorders are relapsing and remitting
disorders. In addition, IPT has been demonstrated to be a very effective maintenance
treatment,1,2 and it has also been shown that the frequency of Maintenance Treatment can be
flexible, as equivalent outcomes resulted when weekly, biweekly, and monthly maintenance
sessions were compared.3 The logical evidence-based conclusion is that Maintenance
Treatment should be flexible and based on the needs of the individual patient for whom it
is being provided. IPT is much more effective if it is tailored to the individual rather than
attempting to use it as a one-size-fits-all approach.
     In addition, in contrast to the plethora of theoretical writing on the subject, there is no
evidence that terminating psychotherapy leads to better outcomes.4 Given the well-known
risk for relapse, terminating therapy is simply poor clinical practice. Moreover, despite
therapists’ occasional wishes to the contrary, terminating therapy is in reality nothing more
than semantics: there is absolutely nothing to prevent a distressed patient from paying a
visit to your office the day immediately following termination, nothing to prevent him from
presenting with a new crisis, and nothing to prevent him from suing you if you refuse to
treat him again. Clinicians in settings in which the number of sessions are arbitrarily limited
by convention are well aware of the many ingenious ways that patients (and therapists) can
circumvent the termination rules.
     Terminating therapy after a fixed number of sessions is also an affront to the quality
of care that virtuoso IPT clinicians should be providing. No ethical or compassionate
clinician would terminate IPT after 16 sessions if the patient was still symptomatic
and would benefit from a few more sessions. No reasonable clinician would terminate
therapy the session after a patient has had a miscarriage or has been diagnosed with
cancer or has been assaulted or has experienced any of the innumerable tragic events
that randomly occur in life. It would be nice to guarantee that nothing adverse would
disrupt the life of a patient as they are coming to the end of treatment, but life happens.
And it sometimes happens near the originally agreed upon end of treatment. And if it
does happen, then treatment should be extended. Use your common sense and clinical
judgment (Box 3.1).

                                                                                               47
The Structure of IPT

Box 3.1  The structure and components of IPT

 Assessment/Initial Phase
 ●● Evaluate the suitability of the patient for IPT
 ●● Evaluate the suitability of IPT for the patient
 ●● Assess psychiatric and interpersonal problems

 ●● Construct an Interpersonal Inventory

 ●● Develop an Interpersonal Formulation

 ●● Identify specific IPT Problem Areas: Disputes, Role Transitions, Grief and Loss

 ●● Explain the rationale for IPT

 ●● Collaboratively establish a Treatment Agreement


 Middle Phase
 ●● Attend to the therapeutic relationship
 ●● Maintain the focus of discussion on the specific IPT Problem Area(s)
 ●● Explore the patient’s expectations and perceptions of the specific interpersonal

    problem(s)
 ●● Help the patient to develop solutions to the interpersonal crises

 ●● Help the patient to implement the proposed solutions

 ●● Practice, practice, practice


 Conclusion of Acute Treatment
 ●● Review the patient’s progress
 ●● Anticipate future problems
 ●● Positively reinforce the patient’s gains

 ●● Establish a specific agreement for Maintenance Treatment


 Maintenance Treatment
 ●●   Focus on Problem Areas
 ●●   Monitor progress




IPT and the Biopsychosocial/Cultural/Spiritual
Model
IPT is based on the Biopsychosocial/Cultural/Spiritual model of psychological
functioning, expanding beyond the Biopsychosocial model described in the first
iteration of this book5 and the long discarded and antiquated medical model.
Biological diatheses in conjunction with early life experiences and attachment style
lead to vulnerabilities in individual patients. Cultural and spiritual factors may also
be vulnerabilities or strengths. Coupled with a sufficiently intense interpersonal
stressor, individuals without adequate social support are likely to develop interpersonal
difficulties. This explanatory model of distress is depicted in the Interpersonal Triad in
Figure 3.2.
    The structure used in IPT is directly linked to Attachment and Interpersonal Theory.
The IPT therapist focuses on the patient’s interpersonal relationships, particularly the way
in which the patient’s attachment is manifest in them. The therapist also examines the
communication style that the patient uses in initiating, maintaining, and disengaging from
relationships. This occurs within the time-limited Acute Treatment format of IPT, and
focuses on here-and-now resolution of symptoms and distress rather than on the patient–
therapist relationship.

48
                                                                               IPT Problem Areas


                                        Interpersonal Triad

                        Acute Interpersonal Crisis




                                                                   Attachment and
                                                                   Biopsychosocial/
                                 DISTRESS                          Cultural/Spiritual
                                                                   vulnerabilities




                        Inadequate social support


Figure 3.2 Interpersonal Triad


IPT Problem Areas
IPT focuses on three specific Problem Areas which reflect the interpersonal nature of the
treatment. These are: Grief and Loss, Interpersonal Disputes, and Role Transitions. Psychosocial
stressors from any of the Problem Areas, when combined with an attachment disruption
in the context of poor social support, can lead to interpersonal problems, psychiatric
syndromes, or distress. The Problem Areas should be used as guidelines, not rigid categories.
They are simply a way of focusing treatment as it proceeds.
●●  Though often understood as a reaction to the literal death of a significant other, the Grief

    and Loss Problem Area in IPT can best be conceptualized as any loss experienced by the
    patient. That loss, whatever it may be, should be defined by the patient, not the therapist. It is
    the therapist’s job to understand the patient and his perspective, not to force it into a par-
    ticular category. Thus if the patient conceptualizes his experience as a Grief and Loss issue,
    then it is. Common sense and therapeutic graciousness should prevail in a therapist who
    wishes to do IPT well. In addition to loss through death, losses such as divorce may be seen
    by the patient as Grief and Loss issues. Loss of physical functioning, such as that following
    a heart attack or traumatic injury, may also be considered in the Grief and Loss Problem
    Area.6 Anticipatory grief in the setting of a terminal illness, or the anticipation of the death
    of a loved one, such as with caregivers of patients with Alzheimer’s disease, are additional
    examples. There is no ‘right’ or ‘wrong’ way to use the Grief and Loss category – it is simply
    a way to focus treatment on the specific interpersonal problem.
●●  Interpersonal Disputes involve a conflict between the patient and another person, and may

    result from either the communication problems or the unrealistic expectations of either
    person. Like Grief and Loss, disputes should be patient defined.
●●  Role Transitions, as the name suggests, involve changes in a patient’s social role and the

    changes in social support which may accompany such transitions. These include not only
    life-phase transitions, such as adolescence, childbirth, and aging, but also include many
    social changes such as leaving home, getting married, or changes in school or job status.

                                                                                                  49
The Structure of IPT

Therapists familiar with previous work in IPT will note that the Problem Area formerly
known as interpersonal sensitivity or interpersonal deficits is no longer used in IPT. The
reason is that these concepts describe a long-standing attachment style in the fearful range of
attachment rather than an Acute Interpersonal Crisis. There are patients with this style, and
without doubt, they are more difficult to treat. They are difficult because they have a paucity
of interpersonal support, and because it is difficult to form a therapeutic alliance with them.
All of the IPT literature notes that these individuals are more complex, and that prognosis is
not as good.5,7–9 It is their fearful attachment style that leads to this complexity.
    Therefore interpersonal sensitivities or deficits are best understood as a
characteristic style of attachment in which the patient has difficulty forming satisfying
interpersonal relationships. The poor social support network which is a consequence of
this style often leads the patient to be more likely to become distressed when an acute
interpersonal problem occurs. The acute problem – the Role Transition, Interpersonal
Dispute, or Grief and Loss issue – should be the primary focus of IPT rather than the
fearful attachment style. The fearful attachment style, manifested as sensitivities or
difficulties in establishing relationships, is an additional psychological factor just like all
of the other attachment styles, and it influences the way the patient will react to an acute
interpersonal stressor.
    There is always an acute crisis that leads a patient to seek treatment. Even if there have
been long-standing attachment problems or a paucity of social relationships, something acute
happens which finally leads a patient to make the decision to seek help – to seek therapy.
It may be the death of a family member, it may be the loss of a job, it may be a perceived
personal rejection, but something acute tips the balance just enough for the patient to make
the decision to go to treatment. It is this crisis that should be the focus of treatment.
    While the Problem Areas are very helpful as a means of focusing the patient on specific
interpersonal problems, it is important for the therapist to be flexible when using them.
Rather than providing the patient with the proper Problem Area ‘diagnosis’, the Problem
Areas should be used primarily as tools to maintain focus upon one or two interpersonal
problems, particularly as the time available in IPT for Acute Treatment is limited. The
patient’s view of the nature of the problem should be used – for example, if the patient feels
that his recent divorce is a Grief issue rather than a Role Transition, then the Grief and Loss
Problem Area should be used. The therapeutic alliance should not be sacrificed in order to
impose the ‘correct’ Problem Area ‘diagnosis’ upon the patient.
    The therapist should also be mindful that the interpersonal problems experienced
by patients are similar in that they are all derived from the combination of an acute
interpersonal stressor combined with a social network that does not sufficiently support
them. In addition to addressing the specific problem, effort should always be directed
towards improving patients’ social support.

The Benefits and Limitations of Structured
Psychotherapies
One of the more useful ways to describe psychotherapeutic approaches is to draw a
distinction between ‘structured’ and ‘unstructured’ psychotherapies. Psychotherapeutic
interventions can be placed on a spectrum on this dimension, with most of the short-term
treatments at the more structured end of the scale, and most of the analytically oriented
therapies at the other. There are obvious benefits and limitations to both structured
and unstructured approaches – the point is to consider how specific treatments best

50
                             The Benefits and Limitations of Structured Psychotherapies

meet the needs of a given patient. Table 3.1 compares the ‘structured’ and ‘unstructured’
psychotherapies.

Table 3.1  Characteristics of structured and unstructured therapies

                    Structured                                  Unstructured

 Examples           IPT, cognitive behavioral therapy           Psychoanalysis, self-psychology
                    (CBT)

 Time frame         Time-limited                                Open-ended

 Focus              Improved functioning                        Psychodynamic change and
                                                                insight

 Therapeutic

 Relationship       Supportive, active                          Non-transparent, passive

 Discussions        Directed primarily by therapist             Directed primarily by patient

 Transference       Not a point of intervention                 Primary point of intervention


A helpful way of conceptualizing the place of IPT and other more structured
psychotherapies in clinical practice is to compare them with pharmacologic treatments
for physical problems such as diabetes or hypertension. From this point of view, IPT can
literally be ‘prescribed’ as an appropriate and indicated treatment for the patient’s specific
problem. For example, the structure of IPT lends itself to a prescriptive treatment in a
fashion analogous to the use of antibiotic therapy for pneumonia. Most patients with
pneumonia require a structured course of antibiotics that is time-limited and specific
to one bacterial pathogen; this treatment is usually highly effective in resolving the
illness. There are, however, a few patients who are prone to recurrent infections or who
are immunosuppressed. These patients require longer term use of multiple agents, with
marked variations in dosing and time course.
     To carry the analogy further, all patients who are treated for acute pneumonia – literally
all of them – receive maintenance care as well. A primary care physician would never
‘terminate’ treatment; instead, he would schedule the patient for a follow-up visit a week or
two later, invite the patient to call him if the problem recurred, and would ensure that the
patient was scheduled for a routine physical exam at some point in the future depending on
the patient’s age, health profile, and risk for additional problems. A primary care physician
uses his clinical judgment and continues to care for his patient.
     Similarly, many patients who present for mental healthcare tend to have acute and
specific problems, and will benefit from an acute intervention. In these cases, a structured
intervention like IPT is likely to offer the greatest benefit in a limited time frame. As in
primary care, the IPT therapist should ensure that appropriate maintenance treatment is
provided to all patients. In contrast, those patients who require ongoing and less structured
interventions, such as those with severe and complex trauma experiences, profound
disturbance in personality functioning, or severely debilitating mood or psychotic disorders,
will likely require longer term and more transference-based psychological treatments.
Borrowing further from this analogy, the concept of ‘dose–response’ can also be applied
to the more structured psychotherapies. There is evidence that benefits to the patient
accrue exponentially during the first 5–10 sessions of psychological interventions, with an

                                                                                                51
The Structure of IPT

attenuation of improvement thereafter.10 Though there continue to be benefits with more
sessions, the amount of additional improvement appears to diminish with each additional
session. Thus the benefit or ‘response’ to treatment must be considered in light of the ‘dose’ or
number of sessions that are provided.
    Research also suggests that there is a rapid decline in clinic attendance and continuation
in psychotherapeutic treatments after 5–10 sessions.11,12 One study found that 40 percent
of appointments with psychiatrists are ‘one-off ’ (i.e. only one session), and that the average
number of visits to a psychiatrist for a given patient is approximately seven.13 There seems
to be a brief window of opportunity for most patients, and that window opens when they
experience an acute crisis that leads them to seek treatment. This window of opportunity is
often best entered with a structured and time-limited treatment like IPT that focuses on the
acute crisis.
    Research aside, it is an unfortunate fact that the current climate of rationed healthcare
and the emphasis on cost-effective treatments has had a profound effect on the healthcare
system. If anything, this situation has gotten worse since the original iteration of our book in
2003; no doubt it will continue to be an issue for the foreseeable future. While there are many
advantages to more open-ended treatments, IPT and other more structured interventions
can often be provided within the constraints of managed care systems. IPT is also well-suited
to this environment because there is evidence supporting its efficacy, a point of emphasis for
managed care.

Conclusion
The structure of IPT is one of its key virtues. However, maintaining structure should not
supersede the fact that the patient’s unique needs are of primary concern. A course of IPT that
adheres concretely to a manual at the expense of the patient’s needs is almost certain to be a
less effective treatment than that provided by a flexible therapist who follows the principles of
IPT using clinical judgment.

References
1.	 Frank E. Interpersonal psychotherapy as a maintenance treatment for patients with
    recurrent depression. Psychotherapy, 1991, 28: 259–266.
2.	 Frank E, et al. Three-year outcomes for maintenance therapies in recurrent depression.
    Archives of General Psychiatry, 1990, 47(12): 1093–1099.
3.	 Frank E, et al. Randomized trial of weekly, twice-monthly, and monthly interpersonal
    psychotherapy as maintenance treatment for women with recurrent depression. American
    Journal of Psychiatry, 2007, 164: 761–767.
4.	 Gelso CJ and Woodhouse SS. The termination of psychotherapy: what research tells us
    about the process of ending treatment, in Tryon GS (ed.) Counseling Based on Process
    Research: Applying What We Know. 2002, Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
5.	 Stuart S and Robertson M. Interpersonal Psychotherapy: A Clinician’s Guide. 2003, London:
    Edward Arnold Ltd.
6.	 Stuart S and Cole V. Treatment of depression following myocardial infarction with
    interpersonal psychotherapy. Annals of Clinical Psychiatry, 1996, 8: 203–206.
7.	 Klerman GL, et al. Interpersonal Psychotherapy of Depression. 1984, New York: Basic Books.


52
                                                                                  References

 8.	 Klerman GL and Weissman MM. New Applications of Interpersonal Psychotherapy. 1993,
     Washington DC: American Psychiatric Press.
 9.	 Weissman MM, Markowitz JW and Klerman GL. Comprehensive Guide to Interpersonal
     Psychotherapy. 2000, New York: Basic Books.
10.	 Howard KI, et al. The dose-effect relationship in psychotherapy. American Psychologist,
     1986, 41: 159–164.
11.	 Howard KI, et al. Patterns of psychotherapy utilization. American Journal of Psychiatry,
     1989, 146: 775–778.
12.	 Howard KI, et al. The psychotherapeutic service delivery system. Psychotherapy Research,
     1992, 2: 164–180.
13.	 Goldberg D. Impressions of psychiatry in Australia. Australasian Psychiatry, 2000, 8: 307.




                                                                                            53
                                                                   4
Assessment and Patient Selection
Introduction54
The Assessment Process                                                       55
Assessing Traditional Patient Characteristics for Time-limited Psychotherapy 62
Patient Characteristics Specific to IPT                                      64
Empirical Support for IPT                                                    66
Conclusion67
References68


Introduction
The primary purpose of conducting an assessment is simply to determine if the patient is a
good candidate for Interpersonal Psychotherapy (IPT), and if so, to make a judgment about
how to modify the therapeutic structure. Though it is obvious, it is worth emphasizing that
the treatment and patient must be compatible to ensure the greatest likelihood of resolving
the patient’s interpersonal problems. When making this determination, the therapist should
be guided by several factors including the patient’s attachment style, her communication style,
her motivation and insight, and the empirical evidence regarding IPT. All of these factors
should be integrated using a good measure of clinical judgment.
     A thorough evaluation to determine the suitability of IPT should always be completed
before a Treatment Agreement is established. The Treatment Agreement to proceed with IPT
is that last step of the Assessment/Initial Phase, and should be constructed only after the full
evaluation, including the Interpersonal Inventory and Formulation, has been completed.
Referrals for IPT, whether self-referrals by the patient or referrals from other professionals,
should be managed by indicating that an evaluation for IPT will be conducted, rather than
implying or directly stating that IPT will be definitively provided. The determination to
proceed with IPT should not be made until the assessment is complete.
     An evaluation for IPT need not be conducted hastily. There is no reason why the therapist
cannot take several sessions to complete an evaluation if her clinical judgment suggests this
should be done. It is naïve to think that an appropriate Treatment Agreement for IPT (or any
other therapy) can be established for anyone after only one session – it takes time to listen
and understand, not to mention to develop an inclusive therapeutic relationship.
     Therefore, though assessment is an intrinsic part of IPT, it should not be framed in a way
that obligates the therapist to proceed with IPT unless it is warranted. The assessment should
set the stage, so to speak, for the conduct of IPT when indicated, but should not obligate the
therapist to provide IPT, nor lead the patient to expect IPT, unless it is the most appropriate
treatment.
     The assessment should answer two simple questions:
1.	 Will this particular patient benefit from IPT?
2.	 Is IPT the best treatment for this particular patient?

54
                                                                  The Assessment Process

The Assessment Process
Rather than reiterate the process of conducting a complete psychiatric assessment, this
chapter will describe the elements of the assessment that are unique to IPT. This should not
diminish the fact that conducting a thorough psychological assessment of each and every
patient, including psychiatric history, family history, medical history, and a complete social
assessment, is extremely important. The additional elements that should be included in IPT
are an assessment of the patient’s attachment and communication style, ability to provide
narrative, motivation for treatment, and psychological mindedness. The empirical evidence
supporting the efficacy of IPT for particular disorders should also be considered.

Assessing Attachment and Communication Style
A good psychological or psychiatric assessment allows the therapist to see both the forest
and the trees. In IPT, this consists of a large-scale map of the route the patient has traversed
to arrive at her current interpersonal circumstances, and a detailed blueprint of the specific
interpersonal and psychological difficulties she is struggling with at the moment. The
therapist can consider the patient’s attachment style as the ‘topography’ of the map – a
feature which inevitably dictates the general route to be taken, though there are many
alternative paths along the way. The more detailed features – the trees – are the patient’s
current interpersonal relationships. These trees are either felled or nurtured by the patient’s
interpersonal communications.
    There are several reasons why attachment must be examined during the assessment phase
of IPT. First and foremost, the assessment should lead to a determination about whether
the patient’s attachment style renders her a suitable IPT candidate. Second, the patient’s
attachment style is closely correlated with her prognosis; a good assessment should allow
the therapist to make a reasonable prediction about how therapy will proceed and conclude.
Third, specific techniques and modification of structure follow directly from the patient’s
attachment style.
    Attachment style can be assessed in four ways:
●● The patient’s description of her relationships

●● A significant other’s description of the patient

●● The quality of the patient’s narrative

●● The quality of the patient–therapist relationship.


The patient’s description of her relationships
The assessment of the patient’s attachment style should begin with an evaluation of the
patient’s past and current relationships. Simply asking open-ended questions about her
relationships is a good way to start. More specific inquiries can be directed towards what the
patient does and communicates when distressed, ill, or otherwise seeking care. She should
also be queried about her typical responses when asked to assist others. This information is
easy to obtain, requires little in the way of inference, and is an obvious way to evaluate the
patient’s attachment style. Both directives and open-ended questions can be used to more
fully understand the ways a patient functions in relationships.
    The primary source of information is the patient’s current relationships. This can be
evaluated by asking both specific questions as well as those which require a bit more insight.
For instance, the patient can be directly asked about any patterns that she has noticed in
her relationships. Typical ways of beginning and ending relationships can be explored.
The patient should also be asked about the ways she asks for help if it is needed, and the
                                                                                             55
Assessment and Patient Selection

ways she communicates with others when feeling upset or angry. Both intimate and family
relationships should be explored in detail, and work or school relationships covered as well.
    Though IPT does not focus on reworking past relationships, information about past
relationships should still be obtained. A full history of dating or sexual relationships is
important, as the therapist can glean information about how the patient typically forms these
types of relationships. Questions about the patient’s interactions with important caregivers
are also an excellent way to begin to solidify hypotheses about the patient’s attachment style.
Examples of specific questions that might be asked are provided in Box 4.1.
Box 4.1  Questions to assess attachment

 Current relationships
 ●● What are you like in relationships?
 ●● What is it like for you when relationships end?
 ●● What is it like for you to start new relationships?

 ●● How do you perceive yourself to be around other people?

 ●● What kinds of challenges are there for you in relationships with others?

 ●● What things do you like about being in relationships?

 ●● Describe one of your best relationships.

 ●● Describe one of your worst relationships.

 ●● What things would you like to change about yourself in your ability to connect with

    others?

 Past relationships
 ●● How did other people react when you accomplished something, such as good
    marks in school?
 ●● How did other people react when you were hurt?

 ●● How did other people react when you were angry?

 ●● How did you go about asking for help if you needed it?

 ●● Were there other people besides your parents who were primary care providers for you?

 ●● How do you and your siblings get along?

 ●● What were your relationships with your siblings like growing up?




The list of potential questions is endless – the point is to gather information directly from
the patient to begin to develop hypotheses about her attachment style. Since attachment is
the basis for the way relationships are formed and maintained, this information is crucial
to develop an accurate Interpersonal Formulation, and to determine if the patient will do
well with IPT. Of equal importance is the patient’s perception of her style of relating to others.
The interactions the patient reports and her perception of her interpersonal behavior may
be congruent, or they may be entirely different. Both situations obviously provide a lot of
information. Patients whose perceptions match their reported interactions generally have
much more insight, particularly of the type useful in IPT. They are able to recognize the ways
they are communicating, and can appreciate that their communications have an impact on
others. Patients whose reports do not match their self-perceptions generally lack this kind
of insight, and the therapist will have a longer row to hoe with such patients because they
require that IPT be started at a more basic level. Consider the following two examples.
Case example 4.1: Congruent description and self-perception
Therapist: Tell me how you and your wife get along.
Patient: Up until this fight about my mother-in-law, we got along pretty well. When I get mad, she
just withdraws and gives me the silent treatment. Last week things came to a head, and we had

56
                                                                      The Assessment Process

a huge fight about whether to put her mother in a nursing home or have her come live with us. I
have to say though, from her perspective, I would have been angry too – when I get mad, I tend not
to listen, and I tend to be pretty tenacious. She doesn’t really have much choice but to keep quiet, I
suppose.

Case example 4.2: Non-congruent description and self-perception
Therapist: Tell me how you and your wife get along.
Patient: We have been having this huge fight about my mother-in-law. I have been furious
because she hasn’t considered my needs at all, and wants to have her mother live with us instead
of going to a nursing home.
Therapist: When you get mad, how do you react?
Patient: I just get mad ... you know ... you’d be mad too if your wife did that to you.

There are a lot of technical terms that can be used to describe factors which lead clinicians to
consider patients to be good, or not so good, candidates for therapy. But they all boil down
to one simple question, which is based more on intuition, experience, and clinical judgment
than anything else, and that question is:
    Would you want to work with this patient?
With respect to the specific examples above, it doesn’t take a rocket scientist to figure out that
the patient in Case example 4.1 is the best psychotherapy candidate. Technically speaking,
he is already able, without prompting by the therapist, to recognize that his communications
impact others. He is already acknowledging some responsibility for the problem, and appears
to have at least an inkling that his communication style may be a problem. Narrative and self-
perceptions are congruent.
    It is important to keep in mind that the patient’s description, though very helpful, is
usually not a complete representative of the patient’s style of interacting and her patterns
of attachment. In any therapeutic situation, there is always information that is withheld,
misrepresented, or conflated by the patient. This occurs for any number of reasons, but some
of the salient ones are that the patient may want to present herself to the therapist in the best
possible light; the patient may be motivated to blame others for her problem rather than
taking responsibility herself; the therapeutic alliance and degree of trust in the therapist is not
yet sufficient for the patient to be more revealing or open; the patient is looking to please the
therapist and is reporting the ‘right answer’ that she thinks the therapist wants to hear; or the
therapist hasn’t asked the right questions or shown enough interest for the patient to take a
risk with self-disclosure. It is simply human nature that people withhold or distort personal
information at times, and the therapeutic situation is no exception.
    As a consequence, the therapist should always be mindful of the fact that it is both
what is said, and how it is said, that forms the basis for the assessment. This is a reflection of
patients’ tendencies to withhold or distort information that they give to their therapists. This
withholding is most often a manifestation of the very difficulties which led to the patient’s
problems or led her to seek treatment. Bowlby1 summarizes this concept well:
    The fact is that much of the most relevant information refers to extremely painful
    or frightening events that the patient would much prefer to forget. Memories of
    being held always to be in the wrong, of having to care for a depressed mother
    instead of being cared for yourself, or the terror and anger you felt when father
    was violent or mother was uttering threats, of the guilt when you were told your
    behavior would make your parent ill, of the grief, despair and anger you felt after
    a loss, of the intensity of your unrequited yearning during a period of enforced
    separation. No one can look back on such events without feeling renewed anxiety,

                                                                                                  57
Assessment and Patient Selection

     anger, guilt, or despair. No one, either, cares to believe that it was his very own
     parents, who at other times may have been kind and helpful, who on occasion
     behaved in some most distressing way... (p. 425)

A significant other’s description of the patient
If information from a significant other can be obtained, the therapist can ask that person the same
questions about the patient for additional information. This is frequently the case with adolescents,
whose parents are likely to be involved in treatment; it is less common but still possible with adults.
Couples IPT also presents an opportunity to get this information bidirectionally.
     When asking significant others about the patient, the therapist must always be aware that
others also have biases, gaps, attachment quirks, and other agendas which may color their
report. Nonetheless, this is often helpful adjunct information.
The quality of the patient’s narrative
In addition to collecting information directly about the patient’s relationships, inferences
about the patient’s attachment style can be drawn from the quality of the patient’s narratives. In
simple terms, the quality of a narrative is nothing more than the patient’s ability to tell a good
story. In thinking about how to assess this, consider what it is that makes a story compelling.
Better yet, think about those times when you have been really moved by a story that a patient
has told. Those that have affected you a great deal are usually prototypes for good narratives.
A good story should have a coherent plot.
    It should make sense. It should come in context, rather than being told ‘out of the blue’. The
    story should make a point, and there should be a beginning and an end. In therapy, patients
    who tell really good stories often add an anticipatory ending – a look ahead to the way they
    want things to be when they finish treatment.

A good story or compelling narrative should have some action.
    Something should be happening between the characters. Dialog should be occurring,
    interpersonal interactions should be described. The more descriptive the action the better;
    lots of affect, both in the content of the story and in the telling, make for a good tale.

There should be details which place the story in some kind of historical framework.
   In therapy, stories should not be of the ‘once upon a time’ variety – they should specify the
   time of the event and place it in a meaningful interpersonal context. For instance, a story
   about a conflict with a spouse should be located in real time and space.

Consider the two following examples.
Case example 4.3: A less than compelling narrative
Therapist: Tell me about your father’s funeral.
Patient: I don’t remember much about it really. It was a rainy day ... Most of my family had come,
and we had a wake at the church afterwards. I don’t really remember talking to anyone. My father
and I weren’t very close.
Therapist: How did your father die?
Patient: He had cancer … prostate I believe. He was sick a long time.

Case example 4.4: A compelling narrative
Therapist: Tell me about your father’s funeral.
Patient: There’s not much to tell – it was a typical Irish affair ... actually, it was the kind of wake
that my father always wanted. He was a fun-loving man, and he had always talked about having

58
                                                                        The Assessment Process

a wake where everyone could come and remember the good times they had with him. He was an
amazing man, really – even with the prostate cancer, which he suffered with for almost two years,
he never lost his sense of humor. I remember visiting him in the hospital several days before he died.
It seemed like we talked forever, and I think that we both knew that the end was coming. It’s hard to
describe what it was like – on the one hand, I don’t think that I’ve ever felt as close to him as at that
moment, when we both just held each other and said, ‘I love you’. I still feel sad just thinking about
it, because we’ll never have any more time like that. As I was leaving, he said to me, ‘Make sure your
son knows how much you love him too’. I cried when I told that story during the eulogy ...

The ability to relate narrative in a meaningful way is important for several reasons.
First, the ability to relate interpersonal narrative is essential in IPT. Every form of
   psychotherapy requires that the patient produce some material for discussion. It may be
   dreams, it may be cognitions, it may be free associations or reports about desensitization
   exercises, but every single therapy in existence requires that the patient has something
   to say. The more information the patient is able to produce, and the more accurate it is,
   the better the patient will do in treatment., as there is more material to be examined, and
   more information which can be used to understand the patient. An integral part of IPT
   is having the patient produce narrative information – the patient will be asked time and
   again to reproduce specific interpersonal interactions, complete with dialog, emotional
   content, and non-verbal information.
Second, the ability to relate narrative in a compelling or meaningful way is intimately
   connected to the patient’s ability to communicate her experiences to others. This in turn
   has a profound impact on the quality of her social support network. Those patients who
   can describe their experiences in ways that draw others in to their stories generally have
   much larger and more intimate social support networks than those patients who do not
   have that capability.
Third, the patient’s innate ability to describe her experience is connected to her ability to
   deal with specific individual conflicts. Those patients who can convey their experiences,
   emotions, and need for support effectively will be able to resolve specific conflicts more
   effectively than patients who cannot.
Fourth, the patient’s ability to tell a compelling story makes a difference because it more
  effectively engages the therapist. Being more human than not, therapists are influenced by
  exactly the same factors which affect others in the patient’s interpersonal world. Therapists
  are drawn to listen to compelling stories – those patients who tell good stories are fun
  to work with, and therapists are more invested in them. This does, of course, subtly but
  profoundly affect outcome.
In short, the more compelling the story, the better the outcome is likely to be. The more
securely attached the patient, the more likely the story is to be compelling, and the more likely
the patient is to be able to meaningfully engage others and share her experiences. Therefore,
during the assessment, the therapist should directly ask the patient to tell some meaningful or
interesting interpersonal stories.
    In addition to the quality of the narrative in general, the way the patient describes other
people in her interpersonal world illuminates her attachment style. As with stories, the therapist
should directly ask for descriptions of others with whom the patient interacts. Those patients
who are more securely attached are generally able to describe other people in ‘three-dimensional’
terms. In other words, they are able to portray other people as real, with good points and bad,
altruistic and selfish motives, idiosyncrasies and strengths. This reflects a more accurate working
model of relationships. More securely attached people are able to ‘call it like it is’ more precisely.

                                                                                                     59
Assessment and Patient Selection

     Those patients with more preoccupied attachment styles often portray others in more
‘two-dimensional’ terms. Because such patients are constantly concerned or preoccupied
with getting their attachment needs met, they are hesitant to be critical of others who might
provide them with care. Instead, an idealized, or on occasion, a devalued description of others
will be provided. Hypochondriacal patients are classic examples of this kind of attachment
and they provide corresponding descriptions: they idealize current and potential care
providers while decrying those that have failed them. None of the figures in a preoccupied
patient’s world are complete – they have only good or only bad parts which are relevant only
as they pertain to caring for the patient.
     Patients with more fearful or dismissing styles of attachment, in contrast, will usually
describe others in ‘one-dimensional’ terms. With these patients, there is literally no detail at all.
There is literally nothing to hang one’s hat on – no information, no details ... nothing. This is a
reflection of the patient’s interpersonal world, in which relationships carry much less meaning.
     Consider the following three examples.
Case example 4.5: Secure attachment
Therapist: Tell me about your mother.
Patient: My mother ... well, she and I get along pretty well now, though she certainly has her moments.
When I was growing up, she was great. I remember when I was five and had the chicken pox, she took
time off from work and stayed home with me. We played games, read books ... it was great. During
my teen years ... well, that was another story. She was a bit old fashioned, and she and I got into some
pretty loud arguments about what I was going to wear and how late I could stay out.
I guess in general she has been pretty supportive. Like with my kids – she is always willing to lend
a hand to help watch them, and is great with them, but she still has a tendency to be critical of
some of the ways that we have decided to raise them.

Case example 4.6: Preoccupied attachment
Therapist: Tell me about your mother.
Patient: My mother ... well she is just the greatest. She is always there to help, she’s great with
the kids ... frankly, I don’t think I could have asked for a better mother. I can’t think of a single
thing I’d change about her.
Therapist: I thought just a minute ago you had mentioned that you and she were having a big
conflict about how you were raising your children.
Patient: Oh that ... well, that hardly ever happens ... it wasn’t really that important.

Case example 4.7: Fearful attachment
Therapist: Tell me about your mother.
Patient: My mother ... well, she’s 56 years old.
Therapist: What is she like?
Patient: She’s pretty nice, a good mom I guess.
Therapist: Any specific things about her come to mind?
Patient: No, not really. She was just a good mom.

These examples demonstrate the types of responses that patients with varying attachment
styles may give to direct inquiries about other people. In the first case, the securely attached
patient is able to provide a well-rounded view of her mother. She has good and bad points,
the patient is able to describe them, and the patient has integrated them into a coherent and
meaningful whole person. Even better, she spontaneously produces narrative material that
provides context and details for her description.
    In the second case, the patient’s description is idealized. When confronted by
the therapist, she seems unable to integrate the two different aspects of her mother into

60
                                                                      The Assessment Process

a coherent whole. The threat of losing her mother and the limited support she provides
leads the patient to idealize her. In addition to hypochondriacal patients, this unfortunately
happens on occasion with victims of abuse, who despite severe trauma will continue to
idealize the perpetrator of the abuse and blame themselves.
     In the third case, the fearful patient is simply unable to provide much meaningful
information at all. One can easily imagine that such a patient would be difficult to work with
in any kind of therapy. This is not only because of the poor quality of information that she is
providing, but also because she seems to have an inability to convey her inner experiences,
feelings, and perceptions to others. To make matters worse, a patient like this will quickly be
experienced as tedious by most therapists.
     There is a great deal of overlap in attachment styles. All individuals have some
combination of secure and insecure attachment traits. However, patients who are more
secure have a better prognosis in therapy.
The quality of patient–therapist relationship
The last way to assess attachment is to examine the quality of the therapeutic relationship.
As with the patient’s report about relationships and the quality of the patient’s narrative, the
patient–therapist relationship has far-reaching implications about the patient’s attachment
style and prognosis in therapy. As the assessment proceeds, and for that matter, as all of
therapy proceeds, the clinician should be finely attuned to the therapeutic relationship. In
particular, the therapist should be keenly aware of her reactions to the patient. This is crucial
because both attachment and communication can be assessed in this way.
     Attachment can be assessed because the relationship that the patient develops with the
therapist is a reflection of the attachment that the patient manifests in relationships outside
of therapy. Given enough time in therapy, the patient’s interpersonal working model will be
imposed upon the therapist. With an insecurely attached patient, the working model will
often be apparent in the first session, as it is so inaccurate that discrepancies are immediately
evident. Borderline, narcissistic, and antisocial individuals are examples of such patients. On
the other hand, those with more secure styles of attachment do not impose such distorted
attributes upon the therapist, or at least don’t do so quickly. They are cooperative, readily
accept help, and are pleasant to work with.
     Communication can be assessed because the patient’s specific communications and
metacommunications in therapy, just like all of their communications outside of therapy,
elicit a characteristic response. In therapy, they obviously elicit a response from the therapist.
Thus the therapist should be keenly aware of her reflexive responses to the patient. Does the
patient make the therapist feel helpless? Angry? Bored? Effective and helpful? Each reflexive
response is indicative of the patient’s specific communication style.
     In order to complete the assessment of attachment, the therapist should also conduct
an assessment of the match between herself and the patient. The old adage to ‘know thyself ’
cannot be overemphasized, for therapists, like patients, also have idiosyncratic styles of
attachment and communication. Therapists who tend to be overly directive may have
difficulty with fearful or dismissive patients, for example. Therapists who find it difficult to
conclude treatment may encounter problems with patients with preoccupied attachment
styles. Securely attached therapists, just like their patients, will more effectively utilize therapy.

Assessment of Attachment and Communication: Summary
The patient’s attachment and communication style should be assessed in IPT using at least
four different sources of information. First, the patient’s direct descriptions of relationships

                                                                                                   61
Assessment and Patient Selection

should be examined. Second, reports from others about the patient’s style of relating can be
collected. Third, the quality of narrative, particularly in response to direct inquiries to ‘tell
a story,’ should be assessed. Fourth, the quality of the relationship between the patient and
therapist should provide information. All of these coalesce to provide information about the
patient’s suitability for IPT and her prognosis.
     The patient’s attachment style therefore has direct implications regarding her ability to
develop a therapeutic alliance with the therapist and the likelihood that treatment will be
beneficial. Unfortunately, in IPT as in all other psychotherapies, the old saw about the ‘rich
getting richer’ holds true. Those patients with relatively secure attachment styles are usually
able to form a working relationship with the therapist, and because of their relatively healthy
relationships outside of therapy, are also more likely to be able to draw upon their social
support system effectively. Individuals with more preoccupied attachment styles can usually
quickly form relationships with their clinicians, but often have a great deal of difficulty with
the conclusion of treatment – a particular problem in time-limited therapy.
     Those with fearful or dismissing styles of attachment may have difficulty trusting or
relating to the therapist. Consequently, when working with fearful or dismissive patients the
therapist may need to spend several of the assessment/initial sessions working on nothing
more than developing a productive therapeutic alliance, waiting until it is established before
moving into more formal IPT work.
     In addition to evaluating therapeutic suitability, the therapist should use the assessment
to forecast and plan for problems which may arise during the course of therapy. For example,
since patients with preoccupied attachment styles may have difficulty in ending relationships,
an astute therapist would modify the structure of IPT so that sessions are tapered in
frequency as the conclusion of acute treatment draws near, and would discuss the conclusion
of treatment early in the middle phase. Significant others may also be included in sessions
more frequently to ensure that dependency on the therapist does not become problematic.
     When working with fearful or dismissive patients, the therapist should plan to
spend several sessions completing an assessment, taking great care to convey a sense of
understanding and empathy to the patient. Soliciting feedback from the patient about the
intensity of treatment is another tactic which may improve the therapeutic alliance.


Assessing Traditional Patient Characteristics for
Time-limited Psychotherapy
In general, patients who have characteristics that render them good candidates for any of the
time-limited therapies will be good candidates for IPT. A number of authors have described
patient selection factors, and most stress that in short-term therapy, careful selection of
patients is crucial to the success of the treatment.2–5 The emphasis on these factors rests both
on clinical experience and empirical data. The empirical evidence regarding patient selection
for short-term therapy has identified several specific factors that have been associated with
good outcome.6–12 Though most of the research that has been conducted has investigated
more psychodynamically oriented short-term treatments, the data are also useful in
considering the suitability of patients for IPT.
    The factors that are most commonly reported in the clinical and empirical literature and
are integral to the selection of patients for IPT include:
●● Severity of illness

●● Motivation



62
        Assessing Traditional Patient Characteristics for Time-limited Psychotherapy

●● The ability to form a therapeutic alliance
●● Ego strength
●● Psychological mindedness.



Severity of Illness
The data on severity of illness as a predictor of outcome in short-term psychotherapy follow
exactly the intuitively obvious conclusion that the more severe the psychopathology, the
less suitable patients are for treatment of any kind.13,14 This includes not only psychiatric
symptoms such as psychoses, but also includes more severe personality disorders.15–17 High
levels of symptomatic severity in disorders such as depression also portend poorer outcomes
in general.6

Motivation
The concept of motivation as it applies to time-limited therapy has been understood more as a
desire to change as opposed to a simple desire to be rid of symptoms.18 Elements of this kind of
motivation include the patient’s ability to recognize the psychological nature of the symptoms
with which she is struggling, a willingness to participate actively in therapy, a willingness to
explore new solutions to problems, and a willingness to extend herself in pragmatic ways, such
as sacrificing time to come to appointments and paying fees4 – the latter being paramount, of
course, for therapists as well as patients. These factors are also intuitively obvious.
     The empirical literature supports the importance of motivation as well.19 Several authors,
however, have suggested that motivation be assessed later in therapy as opposed to the
initial session, as both the empirical evidence20 and clinical experience indicate that later
assessments of motivation may be more accurate.21,22 This lends further credence to the fact
that a thorough assessment is essential prior to developing a Treatment Agreement for IPT.

The Ability to Form a Therapeutic Alliance
The ability to form a therapeutic alliance is simply the patient’s ability to work productively
with the therapist. To do so, the patient must be able to both seek and receive help, to report
feelings honestly to the therapist, and to trust the therapist. In IPT, this is conceptualized
as the patient’s ability to attach securely to the therapist. The empirical evidence supports
the importance of this factor; as with motivation, the quality of the therapeutic relationship
appears to be more clearly correlated with outcome when measured several sessions into
therapy.23,24
     The therapeutic alliance has also been correlated with outcome in IPT specifically. In the
NIMH Treatment of Depression Collaborative Research Program (NIMH-TDCRP),25 the
quality of the therapeutic alliance was found to have a significant impact on outcome.26 In
particular, the patient’s contributions to the alliance were found to carry great weight.27 The
patient’s ability to engage in a productive therapeutic relationship was also found to have
more impact upon the therapist’s ability to competently conduct IPT than the severity of the
patient’s symptoms,28 again emphasizing the importance of the therapeutic alliance.

Ego Strength
Ego strength has a long tradition as an important factor in psychotherapy. Ego strength has
been defined as the capacity to withstand internal or external stress, the ability to experience
distressing material during the therapy process, and the ability to constructively integrate

                                                                                              63
Assessment and Patient Selection

affect and experience.21,29 Specific objective measures which may serve as markers of ego
strength include the patient’s intelligence, work history, and level of education.3 Given the
abstract nature of the construct, specific empirical literature is sparse, although several
authors have found support for the concept as a positive predictive factor.

Psychological Mindedness
Psychological mindedness includes a willingness to focus on internal processes, a capacity for
introspection, and a curiosity about oneself with a willingness to explore thoughts and feelings.
Closely connected to this concept is the ability to not only be aware of one’s own thoughts and
feelings, but to be able to communicate them effectively to others. This factor is crucial in any
therapy, because if the patient is not able to describe her internal and external experiences,
therapy cannot proceed. Communicating one’s experience is essential to IPT, both in terms of
the therapeutic process and the patient’s ability to effectively engage her social support network.
     While the empirical data regarding the importance of psychological mindedness are
mixed,10 clinical experience with IPT clearly indicates that it is an important factor in
outcome. The relative lack of empirical support may be due to the fact that different qualities
of psychological mindedness may be important for different types of therapies. For instance,
in IPT patients need to make connections between interpersonal events and symptoms, while
in cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), the connections are between internal cognitions and
symptoms. Dynamic therapies require yet again a different type of insight. These propositions
remain to be empirically tested.
     Most of the predictive factors common to all short-term psychotherapies are of the
intuitively obvious type. In addition, most are abstract, which largely accounts for the relative
lack of empirical research and absolute conclusions that can be drawn from the literature.
The best way to assess patients for IPT is to use these criteria generally, operating under the
principle that ‘you know it when you see it’ – in other words, patient characteristics such as
psychological mindedness and motivation can be recognized without much difficulty, even
though they often elude more concrete description.
     It is important to note that diagnosis is not often cited as a primary basis for treatment
selection. While the empirical data for all evidence-based psychotherapies are relevant to
particular diagnoses, this is an artifact of the design of the studies. For example, most of the
IPT studies have involved patients with major depression, as have many studies of CBT.
This is because the diagnosis of depression is a specific inclusion criterion for these studies,
and because empirically supported therapies must by definition demonstrate remission
of symptoms and diagnosis. This is not to say, however, that a diagnosis is required for
treatment, nor that patients who do not meet specific diagnostic criteria will not do well with
IPT. Clinical experience suggests quite the opposite is true: patients with less severe distress or
impairment (such as those who do not meet full criteria for a psychiatric diagnosis) are likely
to do better in IPT than those who do have a diagnosable illness.

Patient Characteristics Specific to IPT
Characteristics specific to IPT which increase the likelihood that patients will benefit from
IPT include:
●● A relatively secure attachment style

●● The ability to relate a coherent narrative

●● The ability to relate specific dialogue from interpersonal interactions




64
                                                         Patient Characteristics Specific to IPT

●●   A specific interpersonal focus for distress
●●   A good social support system.

Secure Attachment Style
A secure attachment style is highly correlated with many of the factors that are associated
with good outcome in psychotherapy. Patients with a more secure attachment style generally
have more ego strength, are able to enter into therapy with a genuine desire to seek help, are
able to trust their therapists, and can form productive therapeutic alliances more quickly.
They also generally have both the internal and external resources to do well in therapy. They
are more able to take risks and are more motivated to change, and their social support systems
are usually much better than those of patients with insecure attachments. Attachment style
is likely the most important factor in determining which patients are most suitable for IPT.
There are accumulating empirical data that this is the case.30,31

Coherent Narrative
In addition to being able to recognize interpersonal issues and connect them with symptoms
and distress, patients in IPT must be able to communicate their experiences in a coherent
fashion. IPT rests largely on communication analysis, which requires that the patient be able
to relate, in detail, the communication which occurs in incidents outside of therapy. Being able
to re-create dialog, describe affect, and to literally be able to tell a good story is essential in IPT.
Specifically asking the patient to tell several stories about important interactions during the
assessment will allow the therapist to make a reasonable judgment about this factor.

Specific Interpersonal Focus
Given the time-limited nature of IPT, patients who present with more focal problems will
generally do better in treatment. Those patients who begin therapy having already made a
connection between their symptoms and interpersonal issues are even better candidates for
IPT, as they will need no convincing that IPT is a plausible and applicable treatment for their
specific problems. Patients who present for treatment with complaints such as ‘I just don’t feel
well, but I don’t know why’, are not good candidates; those who present with complaints such
as ‘I am in the midst of a divorce which is leading me to have trouble functioning and making
me feel depressed’, are.
     Patient aptitude for IPT is also important to consider. Patients who frame their problems
in interpersonal terms are more likely to do better in IPT than those that do not. The patient’s
initial description of or attributions for her problems is quite telling in this regard. For example,
a woman who describes her postpartum depression as due to ‘difficulties with conflicts with
my husband and problems dealing with going back to work after the birth of my baby’ – classic
Interpersonal Disputes and Role Transitions – is likely to do well with IPT. In contrast, a
woman who describes her problems as feelings that, ‘I don’t measure up to other women as a
mother, and I constantly worry that something bad may happen to my child’ might do better
with CBT, as her presentation is more consistent with distorted cognitive patterns. Research in
this area is ongoing, but these distinctions have been found to be quite useful clinically.

Good Social Support
The better the social support, the more likely the patient is to improve. IPT in particular is
focused on helping patients to utilize their social support systems to meet their attachment


                                                                                                     65
Assessment and Patient Selection

needs, hence the more resources that are available, the more likely that patients will be able
to get their attachment needs met. Good social support is highly correlated with attachment
security, because securely attached patients generally have better social support systems.
The therapist should assess the intimacy of the patient’s relationships – those who are able to
engage in deeper and more emotionally close relationships will do well in therapy, as they will
have others with whom they can share their experiences and call on for support. Those with
more distant relationships will have more difficulty both in establishing a therapeutic alliance
(their working model being that others are not trustworthy, including the therapist) and in
developing and utilizing social support outside of therapy.

Empirical Support for IPT
There is a great deal of research relevant to the assessment of patients for IPT.9 First, there are
a number of efficacy trials investigating the use of IPT with specific diagnoses. Second, there
are studies which have investigated the factors associated with good response to IPT. The data
from these should inform the clinician about what is likely to be helpful for a given patient, but
should by no means be the only factor in making this decision. The empirical studies are all
based on populations of patients, not specific individuals; it is a unique individual with whom
you will be working. In addition, all of the efficacy studies have limitations which restrict the
conclusions which can be drawn about non-research use of IPT. Thus while the empirical data
should be a major factor in making treatment decisions, final determination of appropriateness
should also always include clinical experience and a good measure of clinical judgment.
     Efficacy studies have been conducted using IPT to treat a number of specific diagnoses.
IPT has been demonstrated to be of benefit with depression in general,32,33 as well as
depressed geriatric patients,34,35 depressed adolescents,36,37 and patients with dysthymic
disorder.38,39 IPT has also been used for perinatal depression, including postpartum40 and
antenatal depression.41,42 In addition, it has been tested with patients with eating disorders.43,44
Despite the extensive empirical testing of IPT with a variety of diagnoses, there are much
less data regarding the use of IPT in general clinical (i.e. non-research) settings. This requires
that clinicians utilize their judgment when working with patients who would not qualify for
research, such as those with comorbid diagnoses or personality pathology, or more concisely
put, the vast majority of patients who seek clinical care.
     However, several studies have investigated patient factors which have been linked with
better outcomes in IPT. The presence of a personality disorder has been associated with
poorer outcome with treatment for depression. In the NIMH-TDCRP, depressed patients
with personality disorders had poorer outcomes with respect to depressive symptoms and
social functioning.17 The suggestion that personality disorders are likely to be associated with
a more difficult course in therapy certainly has intuitive appeal.45
     As a consequence, special attention should be paid to patients diagnosed with personality
disorders, both because of the empirical data and because of the clinical experience that has
accumulated. Those with cluster A disorders including paranoid, schizoid, and schizotypal
personality disorders may have difficulty forming effective therapeutic alliances unless the
therapist works hard to convey a sense of understanding. Those with cluster B disorders such
as narcissistic, histrionic, borderline, and antisocial personality disorders often require that
therapists work to be empathic even in situations in which they are provoked to react with
rejection or hostility. Patients with cluster C disorders probably require structural changes in
IPT, such as the gradual tapering of session frequency with dependent patients. In sum, many
patients with depression or anxiety superimposed upon a personality disorder are likely to

66
                                                                                   Conclusion

benefit from short-term therapy with IPT if the therapist is adept at being flexible and adapting
to the patient.
     Additional data from the NIMH-TDCRP indicate that there are several other factors
that are associated with a positive response to IPT.46 These include a low level of social
dysfunction at intake, as well as a high degree of interpersonal insight. Patients who report
greater satisfaction with their relationships when they begin treatment are also more likely to
benefit from IPT as compared with the other treatments. The NIMH-TDCRP results can be
summarized by stating that those patients without severe personality pathology, who have a
relatively good social support system, and who have an awareness of the way in which they
communicate in interpersonal relationships, typically fare well with IPT.
     Several personality characteristics have also been found to be associated with less optimal
outcomes in IPT. Perfectionism has been shown to have a negative impact on outcome.
Blatt et al.,47,48 analyzing NIMH-TDCRP data, noted that perfectionism began to impede
therapeutic progress in the latter half of treatment, and suggested that this may be due to the
reaction of perfectionistic patients to an arbitrary, externally imposed termination date. This
characteristic, however, is much less relevant to IPT in clinical settings, because the therapist
and patient work together to set a flexible acute treatment schedule, and because IPT is
concluded rather than terminated as was required in the NIMH-TDCRP research trial.
     In the NIMH-TDCRP, patients with more avoidant traits were found to fare better in CBT
than in IPT, while patients with more obsessive traits had better outcomes when treated with
IPT as compared with CBT.49 This finding seems rather counter-intuitive until one considers
that a patient’s coping mechanisms (avoidance or obsession respectively) are, when the stressor
is great enough, causing more distress rather than being a functional way to cope effectively.
Frank et al. also found that among women with recurrent depression who were treated with
IPT, those with higher levels of self-reported panic and agoraphobic symptoms were less likely
to respond to IPT.50 Non-remitters were also found to have higher levels of somatic anxiety.51
     Empirical data regarding biological predictors is limited, but studies investigating sleep
parameters and their association with response to IPT have found that depressed patients
with abnormal sleep electroencephalographic (EEG) profiles had significantly lower response
rates than depressed patients with more normal sleep profiles.52,53 More research regarding
the predictive value of biological measures is clearly needed.
     The empirical data regarding patient selection can be summarized as follows:
●● There are good empirical data supporting the efficacy of IPT for a number of well-specified

   diagnoses, though the effectiveness data are limited.
●● Social factors such as a good social support system have been associated with good

   outcome.
●● The presence of personality disorders, although not a contraindication to IPT, may

   complicate its course and be associated with poorer outcomes.
●● Treating patients with personality disorder comorbidity usually requires changes in

   structure, such as lengthening treatment, tapering treatment as it concludes acutely, and
   taking more time to develop an alliance early in therapy.

Conclusion
The selection of patients for IPT can best be understood to be on a spectrum, with highly
suitable patients on one end and those who are less suitable on the other. While there are no
absolute contraindications to IPT, there are patients who might benefit more from treatments
other than IPT. Clinical judgment should be informed by an assessment of the patient’s

                                                                                             67
Assessment and Patient Selection

suitability for short-term treatment, the empirical evidence supporting efficacy of the various
treatments available, and the clinical value of the treatment options.
    In sum, the assessment process should assist the therapist to evaluate the patient’s
suitability for IPT, and it should be based on empirical data, clinical experience, and
clinical judgment. An assessment of the patient’s attachment style and communication
patterns should be undertaken in addition to a thorough psychiatric assessment. The
assessment should assist the therapist to anticipate and plan for potential problems in
therapy, such as difficulty in forming a therapeutic alliance or dependency, and should
direct the therapist to modify the therapeutic approach and structure so that these
problems are minimized.

References
 1.	 Bowlby J. The making and breaking of affectional bonds, II: some principles of
     psychotherapy. British Journal of Psychiatry, 1977, 130: 421–431.
 2.	 Malan DH. The Frontier of Brief Psychotherapy. 1976, New York: Plenum.
 3.	 Marmor J. Short-term dynamic psychotherapy. American Journal of Psychiatry, 1979,
     136: 149–155.
 4.	 Sifneos PE. Short-term Dynamic Psychotherapy. 1987, New York: Plenum.
 5.	 Strupp HH and Binder JL. Psychotherapy in a New Key. 1984, New York: Basic Books.
 6.	 Elkin I, et al. Initial severity and differential treatment outcome in the National Institute
     of Mental Health Treatment of Depression Collaborative Research Program. Journal of
     Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 1995, 63: 841–847.
 7.	 Calvert SJ, Beutler LE and Crago M. Psychotherapy outcome as a function of therapist-
     patient matching on selected variables. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 1988,
     6: 104–117.
 8.	 Carroll K, Nich C and Rounsaville B. Contribution of the therapeutic alliance to
     outcome in active versus control psychotherapies. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
     Psychology, 1997, 65: 510–514.
 9.	 Eaton TT, Abeles N and Gutfreund MJ. Therapeutic alliance and outcome: impact
     of treatment length and pretreatment symptomatology. Psychotherapy: Research and
     Practice, 1988, 25: 536–542.
10.	 Lambert MJ and Anderson EM. Assessment for the time-limited psychotherapies,
     in Dickstein LJ, Riba MB and Oldham JM (eds) American Psychiatric Press Review of
     Psychiatry. 1996, Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press, pp. 23–42.
11.	 Barber JP and Crits-Cristoph P. Comparison of the brief dynamic psychotherapies, in
     Crits-Cristoph P and Barber JP (eds) Handbook of Short-term Dynamic Psychotherapy.
     1991, New York: Basic Books, pp. 323–356.
12.	 Demos VC and Prout MF. A comparison of seven approaches to brief psychotherapy.
     International Journal of Short-Term Psychotherapy, 1993, 8: 3–22.
13.	 Luborsky L, Crits-Cristoph P and Mintz J. Who Will Benefit from Psychotherapy? 1988,
     New York: Basic Books.
14.	 Hoglend P. Suitability for brief dynamic psychotherapy: psychodynamic variables as
     predictors of outcome. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 1993, 88: 104–110.


68
                                                                                  References

15.	 Shea MT. Some characteristics of the Axis II criteria sets and their implications for
     assessment of personality disorders. Journal of Personality Disorders, 1992, 6: 377–381.
16.	 Shea MT, et al. Course of depressive symptoms over follow-up. Findings from the
     National Institute of Mental Health Treatment of Depression Collaborative Research
     Program. Archives of General Psychiatry, 1992, 49: 782–787.
17.	 Shea MT, et al. Personality disorders and treatment outcome in the NIMH Treatment of
     Depression Collaborative Treatment Program. American Journal of Psychiatry, 1990, 147:
     711–718.
18.	 Lambert MJ. Psychotherapy outcome research: implications for integrative and eclectic
     theories, in Norcross JC and Goldfried MR (eds) Handbook of Psychotherapy Integration.
     1992, New York: Basic Books.
19.	 Orlinsky DE, Grawe K and Parks BK. Process and outcome in psychotherapy noch
     einmal, in Bergin AE and Garfield SL (eds) Handbook of Psychotherapy and Behavioral
     Change. 1994, Wiley: New York.
20.	 O’Malley S, Suh CD and Strupp HH. The Vanderbilt psychotherapy process scale: a
     report on the scale development and a process-outcome study. Journal of Consulting and
     Clinical Psychology, 1983, 51: 581–586.
21.	 Malan DH. A Study of Brief Psychotherapy. 1975, New York: Plenum.
22.	 Garfield SL. The Practice of Brief Psychotherapy. 1989, New York: Pergamon.
23.	 Strupp HH. Toward the refinement of time-limited dynamic psychotherapy, in Budman
     SH (ed.) Forms of Brief Therapy. 1981, New York: Guilford Publications, pp. 219–225.
24.	 Binder JL, Henry WP and Strupp HH. An appraisal of selection criteria for dynamic
     psychotherapies and implications for setting time limits. Journal of Psychiatry, 1987, 50:
     154–166.
25.	 Elkin I, et al. NIMH Treatment of Depression Collaborative Treatment Program:
     background and research plan. Archives of General Psychiatry, 1985, 42: 305–316.
26.	 Krupnick JL, et al. The role of the therapeutic alliance in psychotherapy and
     pharmacotherapy outcome: findings in the National Institute of Mental Health
     Treatment of Depression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 1996, 64:
     532–539.
27.	 Zuroff DC, et al. Relation of therapeutic alliance and perfectionism to outcome in brief
     outpatient treatment of depression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 2000,
     68: 114–124.
28.	 Foley SH, et al. The relationship of patient difficulty to therapist performance in
     interpersonal psychotherapy of depression. Journal of Affective Disorders, 1987, 12:
     207–217.
29.	 Davanloo H. Short-Term Dynamic Psychotherapy. 1980, Northvale: Aronson.
30.	 McBride C, et al. Attachment as a moderator of treatment outcome in major depression:
     a randomized control trial of interpersonal psychotherapy versus cognitive behavior
     therapy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 2006, 74: 1041–1054.
31.	 Ravitz P, Maunder R and McBride C. Attachment, contemporary interpersonal theory
     and IPT: an integration of theoretical, clinical, and empirical perspectives. Journal of
     Contemporary Psychotherapy, 2008, 38(1): 11–22.


                                                                                            69
Assessment and Patient Selection

32.	 Elkin I, et al. NIMH Treatment of Depression Collaborative Research Program: I.
     General effectiveness of treatments. Archives of General Psychiatry, 1989, 46: 971–982.
33.	 Weissman MM, et al. The efficacy of drugs and psychotherapy in the treatment of acute
     depressive episodes. American Journal of Psychiatry, 1979, 136(4B): 555–558.
34.	 Reynolds CF, et al. Treating depression to remission in older adults: a controlled
     evaluation of combined escitalopram with interpersonal psychotherapy versus
     escitalopram with depression care management. International Journal of Geriatric
     Psychiatry, 2010, 25(11): 1134–1141.
35.	 Reynolds CF, et al. Treatment of 70(+)-year-olds with recurrent major depression.
     Excellent short-term but brittle long-term response. American Journal of Geriatric
     Psychiatry, 1999, 7: 64–69.
36.	 Mufson L, et al. A randomized effectiveness trial of interpersonal psychotherapy for
     depressed adolescents. Archives of General Psychiatry, 2004, 61(6): 577–584.
37.	 Mufson L and Fairbanks J. Interpersonal psychotherapy for depressed adolescents: a
     one-year naturalistic follow-up study. Journal of the American Academy of Child and
     Adolescent Psychiatry, 1996, 35: 1145–1155.
38.	 Markowitz J. Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Dysthymic Disorder. 1998, Washington, DC:
     American Psychiatric Press.
39.	 Browne G, et al. Sertraline and interpersonal psychotherapy, alone and combined, in the
     treatment of patients with dysthymic disorder in primary care: a 2 year comparison of
     effectiveness and cost. Journal of Affective Disorders, 2002, 68: 317–330.
40.	 O’Hara MW, et al. Efficacy of interpersonal psychotherapy for postpartum depression.
     Archives of General Psychiatry, 2000, 57: 1039–1045.
41.	 Spinelli MG and Endicott J. Controlled clinical trial of interpersonal psychotherapy
     versus parenting education program for depressed pregnant women. American Journal of
     Psychiatry, 2003, 160(3): 555–562.
42.	 Grote NK, et al. A randomized controlled trial of culturally relevant, brief interpersonal
     psychotherapy for perinatal depression. Psychiatric Services, 2009, 60(3): 313–321.
43.	 Fairburn CG, et al. A prospective study of outcome in bulimia nervosa and the long-term
     effects of three psychological treatments. Archives of General Psychiatry, 1995, 52(4):
     304–312.
44.	 Fairburn CG, Jones R and Peveler RC. Three psychological treatments for bulimia
     nervosa: a comparative trial. Archives of General Psychiatry, 1991, 48: 463–469.
45.	 Shea MT, Widiger TA and Klein MH. Comorbidity of personality disorders and
     depression: implications for treatment. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
     1992, 60: 857–868.
46.	 Sotsky SM, et al. Patient predictors of response to psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy:
     findings in the NIMH Treatment of Depression Collaborative Research Program.
     American Journal of Psychiatry, 1991, 148: 997–1008.
47.	 Blatt SJ, et al. Impact of perfectionism and need for approval on the brief treatment
     of depression: the National Institute of Mental Health Treatment of Depression
     Collaborative Treatment Program revisited. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
     1995, 63: 125–132.



70
                                                                                 References

48.	 Blatt SJ, et al. When and how perfectionism impedes the brief treatment of depression:
     further analyses of the National Institute of Mental Health Treatment of Depression
     Collaborative Research Program. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 1998, 66:
     423–428.
49.	 Barber JP and Muenz LR. The role of avoidance and obsessiveness in matching patients
     to cognitive and interpersonal psychotherapy: empirical findings from the Treatment
     for Depression Collaborative Research Program. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
     Psychology, 1996, 64: 951–958.
50.	 Frank E, et al. Influence of panic-agoraphobic spectrum symptoms on treatment
     response in patients with recurrent major depression. American Journal of Psychiatry,
     2000, 157: 1101–1107.
51.	 Feske U, et al. Anxiety as a predictor of response to interpersonal psychotherapy for
     recurrent major depression: an exploratory investigation. Depression and Anxiety, 1998,
     8: 135–141.
52.	 Thase ME, et al. Which depressed patients will respond to interpersonal psychotherapy?
     The role of abnormal EEG sleep profiles. American Journal of Psychiatry, 1997, 154:
     502–509.
53.	 Buysse DJ, et al. Pretreatment REM sleep and subjective sleep quality distinguish
     depressed psychotherapy remitters and nonremitters. Biological Psychiatry, 1999, 45:
     205–213.




                                                                                           71
                                                                     5
The Interpersonal Inventory
Introduction                                               72
The Features of the Interpersonal Inventory                73
Constructing an Interpersonal Inventory                    75
Using the Interpersonal Inventory During the Course of IPT 79
Conclusion82


Introduction
The Interpersonal Inventory is a register of the key contemporary relationships in the
patient’s life. It is a unique feature of Interpersonal Psychotherapy (IPT), and is extremely
well-designed to structure the process of gathering information about social support and the
Interpersonal Problem Areas while listening well. It embodies the essence of IPT: listening to
the patient well while utilizing a structure that facilitates change. The Interpersonal Inventory
is created during the Assessment/Initial Phase of IPT, typically during the first two to three
sessions. It is best considered a ‘work in progress’ as most therapists and patients find that
their perspectives of the patient’s relationships and the interpersonal problems change during
the course of IPT.
     IPT is a focused intervention which requires that the patient and therapist maximize the
use of the limited time available to achieve meaningful change in problematic relationships.
The Interpersonal Inventory functions as the main structural component of this process by
focusing the patient and therapist specifically on:
●● Understanding contemporary relationships

●● Exploring the background of the patient’s current interpersonal problems

●● Identifying communication styles and patterns of interaction relevant to the interpersonal

   problem
●● Identifying specific IPT Problem Areas which will be foci of treatment.

The Interpersonal Inventory can be compiled in many different ways, but it is always in
principle a thorough and extended social history with two significant differences. First, as
befits the here-and-now focus of IPT, the emphasis of the Interpersonal Inventory is on
current relationships that are relevant to the patient’s current psychological distress (Box 5.1).
Second, utilizing the inventory as a method of collecting interpersonal data at the beginning
of IPT establishes the manner in which the patient and therapist will approach the therapy:
collaboratively and with structure that facilitates listening well and provides opportunity for
insight to develop.




72
                                                   The Features of the Interpersonal Inventory

Box 5.1  Features of the Interpersonal Inventory

  ●● Includes significant current relationships, including recent losses
  ●● Contains details about the development of problematic relationships
  ●● Outlines general social support

  ●● Includes current communication problems

  ●● Includes current expectations about relationships

  ●● Identifies specific Interpersonal Problem Areas

  ●● Facilitates the planning of treatment interventions

  ●● Evolves and changes during the course of IPT and serves as a monitor for progress

  ●● Provides a reference point for reorienting during therapy




The Features of the Interpersonal Inventory
Includes Significant Current Relationships, Including
Recent Losses
The Interpersonal Inventory should primarily focus on the patient’s significant relationships
in the here-and-now. Practically speaking, this usually limits the number of people to be
discussed to seven or eight, though that too can be modified for cultural reasons or to
better accommodate the attachment style of the patient. The idea is to get a bird’ s eye view
of the patient’s social support, not to extensively explore every relationship he has. Specific
interpersonal problems which are identified during the inventory will be the focus of the middle
sessions of IPT – the inventory is an assessment tool. By implication, the here-and-now emphasis
literally pushes the patient to focus on current relationships and to work on changing them.

Contains Details About the Development of Problematic
Relationships
The details that are obtained from the patient should be a reflection of his experience of
current problems rather than an exhaustive history. More details about the identified
relationship problems will be obtained in the Middle Phase. The therapist must ensure,
however, that the information gathered in the inventory is accurate, as some patients
are prone to leave out details which might implicate them as being responsible for their
problems. Past history is relevant as far as it illuminates the patient’s actions in the present,
and the extent to which past history is collected must be determined using clinical judgment,
while being mindful of the short-term nature of IPT.

Outlines General Social Support
In addition to particular problematic relationships, the therapist should collect information
about the patient’s social support in general. One of the primary goals of IPT is to help the
patient more effectively utilize his social support, so an accurate appraisal of the available
resources is crucial. This information will also help the therapist to understand more about
the patient’s attachment style and ability to enlist the support of others.

Includes Current Communication Problems
The Interpersonal Inventory should note the patient’s attempts to deal with his particular
problems as well as his associated affective response to those problems. The therapist’s
                                                                                              73
The Interpersonal Inventory

inquiries regarding disputes or transitions should also elicit examples of problematic
communication and specific interactions with others, as these frequently lead directly to IPT
interventions.

Includes Current Expectations About Relationships
In addition to examples of specific communication, the therapist should also collect
information about the patient’s expectations of others in his social network. How does he
expect others to provide support? Are the expectations realistic? Are they reasonable? What
is the patient’s perception of the expectations others have of him? This information will also
direct IPT interventions – frequently techniques to help change communication should be
coupled with those which foster changes in the patient’s expectations of others.

Identifies Specific Interpersonal Problem Areas
One of the primary goals of the Interpersonal Inventory is to identify the specific
Interpersonal Disputes, Transitions, or Grief and Loss issues that are relevant and connected
to the patient’s distress. The collection of information about relationships will facilitate
this. The goal at this point is simply to identify the salient problems; more information and
details will be gathered in the Middle Phase when the identified interpersonal problems are
discussed at much greater length.

Facilitates the Planning of Treatment Interventions
The issues highlighted in the Interpersonal Inventory will not only help the therapist and
patient understand his relationship problems and the extent of his social support, but will
also provide a guide to which particular interventions are likely to be helpful. For example,
if the patient is in the midst of an Interpersonal Dispute and, during the development of the
inventory, describes what appears to be poor communication within the relationship, the
therapist should anticipate that the best techniques to use are those focused on improving
communication. Techniques such as communication analysis (Chapter 9) and role playing
(Chapter 12) are well-suited for this. From these initial points of intervention the progress of
the interpersonal work will follow logically.

Evolves and Changes During the Course of IPT and Serves
as a Monitor for Progress
The Interpersonal Inventory is best considered an evolving story or ‘work in progress’ by the
patient and therapist. The Interpersonal Inventory as it initially unfolds may be incomplete
or distorted by the patient, sometimes by intent, as the patient wishes to avoid portraying
himself in a negative light, and sometimes because the patient is either unable to organize
the information fully or because he may be avoiding difficult issues. However, as treatment
progresses, the patient’s perceptions often change, more information typically emerges, and
the patient’s situation changes as a result.
    Near the Conclusion of Acute Treatment, the patient and therapist should refer back
to the initial Interpersonal Inventory and compare it to its current state in order to review
the progress that has been made, as well as to discuss the work that remains to be done.
The review of this material at the Conclusion of Acute Treatment reinforces the patient’s
gains, and can help him better understand the changes within his entire social network. The
Inventory can also be used as a tool to subjectively examine outcome in IPT.
74
                                                       Constructing an Interpersonal Inventory

Provides a Reference Point for Reorienting During Therapy
As IPT proceeds, particularly with a patient with multiple or complex interpersonal
problems, the patient and therapist may find themselves confused about which direction the
treatment should progress. In these circumstances it is useful to refer to the Interpersonal
Inventory for reorienting IPT. Rather than digressing or moving tangentially, the therapist
can literally remind the patient (and himself) about the specific Problem Areas that were
illuminated in the Inventory and Interpersonal Formulation. The Interpersonal Inventory
is like a beacon or lighthouse that can illuminate the path of the therapeutic process
when displacement of the interpersonal focus of IPT is threatened (Figure 5.1). As such,
it can help the therapist to navigate a clear path between listening well and maintaining
therapeutic structure, rather than straying into the Scylla of rigidity or the Charybdis of loss
of focus.




Figure 5.1  The Interpersonal Inventory as a guide for IPT


Constructing an Interpersonal Inventory
In principle, the Interpersonal Inventory is a structured method of collecting interpersonal
data. In practice, the Interpersonal Circle, a paper and pencil tool developed to collect
the information needed for the inventory, can be used. The Interpersonal Circle is a tool
which is both simple and immensely powerful – a way for the therapist to listen well while
encouraging the patient to think. As with all of the tools used in IPT, the structure of the
Inventory and the Interpersonal Circle should be used to:
●● Facilitate listening well

●● Direct the patient towards greater insight about his relationships and his communication

   style
●● Facilitate change.

All of the paper and pencil tools in IPT are structured to open the therapeutic conversation
further, to help the patient organize his thoughts and feelings, and to help the therapist
listen well. The Interpersonal Circle, like the other tools, should be used flexibly and
creatively.
                                                                                            75
The Interpersonal Inventory

    The Interpersonal Circle is nothing more than a series of concentric circles drawn on
a piece of paper (Figure 5.2). Using a blank piece of paper, the therapist draws three circles
and then asks the patient to imagine that they are in the center of the innermost circle. The
therapist then asks the patient to write down the names of seven to eight people in his social
support network – people relevant to the presenting problem specifically. The innermost circle
should include people with whom the patient feels intimate; the middle circle people with
whom the patient feels close; and the outermost area those who are extended supports. The
therapist should then hand the paper to the patient and ask him for a brief description of each
person as he writes their names on the diagram (such as husband, wife, father, co-worker, etc.).
Once seven to eight people are placed on the Interpersonal Circle, the therapist and patient
will go back to each one and collect much more detailed information about them.
                                   Interpersonal Circle




                                         Intimate
                                         supports



                                       Close supports

                                                        Extended supports

Figure 5.2  The Interpersonal Circle

Those are the instructions for the Interpersonal Circle. That’s it. Nothing more. There is power
in simplicity and in the structured way in which this diagram can elicit extremely important
and detailed information.
     There are no right or wrong answers; no right or wrong places to put other people on the
diagram. The exercise is designed to facilitate more openness and description by the patient,
and to facilitate a structured way of organizing information so that the therapist can listen
well. Many times patients will ask where a particular person should be placed on the diagram:
for instance, should a spouse with whom he is in conflict be placed on the intimate circle,
or in the outermost circle since she isn’t being supportive right now? The best therapeutic
response is simply to ask the patient to decide.
     Should the patient put people where they would like them to be ideally, or where they
are right now? Let the patient decide. Should the patient put people in family groups, or
should they be grouped in some other way? Let the patient decide. Should someone who
has died be placed on the circle? Absolutely, but let the patient decide where: open up the
discussion rather than closing it down by imposing unnecessary, rigid rules from a manual.
There are few things that will damage the therapeutic alliance more than conveying that
you aren’t interested in your patient’s perspective – telling your patient that people must
be or cannot be included in the Interpersonal Circle because ‘the protocol says so’ is
conveying exactly that. Be flexible, listen well, and during the inventory, encourage more
information, not less.
     Some Interpersonal Circles are simple, others are not. There are no right or wrong
ways to construct it. For example, in Figure 5.3 the patient has written down his important

76
                                                       Constructing an Interpersonal Inventory

interpersonal supports rather simply. Ron, Hermione, and Ginny are intimate supports
(Albus and Sirius, noted in italics, have unfortunately died but remain highly significant);
Neville, Fred, and George are close supports, while Arthur and Molly, also important people,
are perceived to be at greater distance.
                                   Interpersonal Circle




                                         Ron
                                    Hermione Ginny            Neville
                          George      Albus      Sirius
                          Fred
                                        Intimates
                                                                        Arthur
                                                                        Molly
                                     Close supports
                                                           Extended supports

Figure 5.3  Example of a completed Interpersonal Circle (1)

In contrast, in Figure 5.4, the patient has a more complex circle, with italics indicating a
significant person who has died but still has an important influence, along with arrows
indicating the movement that the patient would like to occur in the relationships. The idea
is that Charles, though at somewhat of a distance now, would ideally move closer, while
Camilla, who apparently is intolerable, would exit the scene entirely. These are the kinds of
conflicts that are often revealed only in confidence to a therapist; a stiff upper lip must be
maintained in public.
                                      Interpersonal Circle




                                              Kate
                                                                 Charles
                                         Diana     Harry

                                           Intimates
                                                                           Camilla

                    Elizabeth
                    Phillip              Close supports
                                                              Extended supports

Figure 5.4  Example of a completed Interpersonal Circle (2)

As noted, there are no right or wrong answers or ways to draw the Interpersonal Circle. In
fact, the more the patient wrestles with it, draws on it, modifies it, and marks it up, the better –
it is an indication that he is thinking and invested. The process of struggling a bit to decide
where to place people (Where should my partner go? Where should my father go? Where
should my estranged child go? Where should my boss go?) is crucial in starting the patient to
think about his relationships, and to develop some insight into how he forms and maintains
them, and the contributions that he is making to good and bad ones.

                                                                                                 77
The Interpersonal Inventory

    To start the process, the therapist can, if additional instructions are needed, ask the
patient to consider some of the questions listed in Box 5.2 to get the conversation going.
These are sample questions only – you should develop your own. The spirit of the questions,
and the depth of the questions which influence the patient to be introspective, such as ‘Who
has loved you well and how?’ are what is important.
Box 5.2  General questions about the Interpersonal Circle

  ●● Who are the important people in your life?
  ●● How would you describe your social support system?
  ●● Who do you go to for support?

  ●● Who do you support?

  ●● Who do you depend on?

  ●● Who is inside your head at the moment?

  ●● Who is taking up your mental energy?

  ●● Who has loved you well and how?

  ●● Who do you need to tell that you love?




Once the patient has written the names of significant people on the Interpersonal Circle, then
the therapist and patient should go back and review each of those relationships in detail. It is
vastly better to invite the patient to decide where to start. This both facilitates collaboration
(as opposed to the therapist dictating which person the discussion will start with) and also
allows the patient to work his way gradually into the process. For example, if his relationship
with Camilla or Charles is emotionally fraught and difficult to talk about, then he can choose
to start with an easier relationship to describe, such as his new wife Kate.
     The patient should describe each of the relationships in detail, particularly the support
received, the support wished for or desired, the support expected, and a brief history of
the relationship. Perhaps 8–10 minutes might be spent on each person. To reiterate, the
information obtained at this point is not exceedingly detailed; instead it is gathered to
develop a bird’s eye view of the patient’s relationships and social support generally. Much
more information about the conflictual relationships will be gathered in the Middle Phase
when working on specific Problem Areas. The goal in the inventory is to determine which
of the relationships should be a focus of treatment, and to understand the social context in
which the patient is immersed.
     Many patients, especially if the therapist listens well and allows stories to develop, will
be able to provide much of this information spontaneously. If additional help is needed, the
therapist can gently stimulate more thought and information by asking questions like those
in Box 5.3 about each specific relationship. These too are suggestions, not a list that must
be asked of each patient. A virtuoso therapist will develop questions of his own and modify
them depending on the patient he is working with.
Box 5.3  Specific questions about the individuals on the Interpersonal Circle

  ●● How often do you see this person?
  ●● What do you like about the relationship?
  ●● What don’t you like about the relationship?

  ●● What has changed in the relationship?

  ●● How would you like the relationship to be different?

  ●● What kind of support do you get from this person?

  ●● How do you support them?

  ●● How would you describe an argument?



78
                               Using the Interpersonal Inventory During the Course of IPT

The Interpersonal Circle is a tried and true method of collecting information from patients
in a way which is non-judgmental, encourages detailed information, gives a visual
representation of relationships, and best of all, literally requires the patient to be introspective
when determining where to place others on the circle. Patients have given amazingly positive
feedback about it; many find it was one of the most helpful things they did in therapy.
     Be creative as well as flexible – the Interpersonal Circle is not set in stone. If you prefer, you
can use triangles, or squares, or four circles instead of three. When working with adolescents we
have had patients who used different colors for different relationships; we have had patients who
included pets, and a few who have put God, on the circle. All the better: this simply speaks to the
power of the simple tool to engage people in the process of thinking about their relationships.
     There are two caveats to creative modification. The first is that the Interpersonal Circle
should always be done in session, never as homework. The reason for this is that if the patient
takes it home and fills it out, you’ll miss all of the non-verbal nuances and struggles the
patient has when doing the exercise. The therapist needs to see and talk with the patient about
why a particular person is in a particular place, and to see the scribbles and erasures, and to
see the emotions that accompany the process.
     Second, the therapist should always give the paper with the blank circles to the patient
to fill in. This is collaboration in action. Moreover, if the therapist fills in the names, all of
the spacing and placement of the people on the Interpersonal Circle will be lost. This is
very important information, and it works in a fashion similar to family modeling. Finding
out who is next to who, the people that are at a distance, and the groupings of people will
all be lost if the therapist writes down the names. And experience is clear that giving the
patient control and listening well will ultimately result in much more extensive and helpful
information. Let the circle be the structure – the therapist’s job once the circle is introduced is
simply to facilitate the discussion and listen well.

Using the Interpersonal Inventory During the
Course of IPT
In the Assessment/Initial Sessions of IPT the Interpersonal Inventory is used to gather
information. The Interpersonal Inventory also has conceptual utility, as the patient’s
descriptions of relationships will provide a wealth of information about his attachment
and communication styles. Inconsistencies in the patient’s accounts of events, or the lack
of detail about an interpersonal problem, are often very informative about his perceptions
or expectations about a relationship. The patient’s reports of his communication style or
attempts at problem solving are also informative. Moreover, the Interpersonal Inventory may
highlight problematic communication that is consistent across a number of relationships
but which is only apparent when they are scrutinized as a whole. In other words, the
Interpersonal Inventory should provide a good view of both the forest and the trees.
    When compiling the Interpersonal Inventory, the therapist should be thinking about
questions such as:
    How does the patient engage social support?
    How does the patient resolve interpersonal problems?
    How does the patient deal with loss?
    How does the patient deal with attachment disruptions?
    How does the patient care for others?
                                                                                                   79
The Interpersonal Inventory

The answers to these questions will help to identify the patient’s strengths and vulnerabilities,
and should guide the entire course of IPT so that specific interpersonal problems can be
addressed. It is the principal way in which specific interpersonal problems are identified, and
these should be noted in the Interpersonal Formulation as topics to address in detail in the
Middle Phase. The Interpersonal Inventory serves as a reference point throughout treatment
to keep IPT on track and focused on specific interpersonal issues.
     The Interpersonal Inventory also often serves as a measure of the patient’s progress
through treatment. At the Conclusion of Acute Treatment, it is helpful to review the original
circle with the patient to discuss the changes that have occurred. This includes not only
the resolution of identified problems, but also changes in the patient’s conceptualization
of relationships and problems. For instance, at the Conclusion of therapy the patient may
see an Interpersonal Dispute less as an irreconcilable conflict and more as a problem
with communication. Emphasizing areas in which the patient has gained insight into his
contribution to the problems that were discussed is very helpful, as is a review of the steps
that the patient took to solve them.
     The Interpersonal Inventory also serves as a guide to identify potential future problems.
If the initial version of the inventory indicates that a particular interpersonal problem arose
consistently or was present for a long time – for instance, a pattern of preoccupied attachment
and communication – this should suggest a focus for the future when problems in other
relationships may lead to exacerbations of the patient’s distress. The Interpersonal Inventory
also has great utility with maintenance IPT. The focus of maintenance treatment is usually upon
ongoing work in one or two Problem Areas. The Interpersonal Inventory serves to preserve the
interpersonal focus of maintenance treatment and to optimize the use of the time available.
Case example 5.1: Lana
Lana was a 34-year-old married woman who was receiving IPT in combination with anti-
depressant medication for an episode of depression. She presented for help with a conflict
with her husband which she described as one of the main contributors to her distress.
She completed an Interpersonal Circle (Figure 5.5) in session 2; her husband was notably
placed in the outer circle. Lana described wishing that he were closer but not know-
ing how to facilitate that. In the initial sessions of IPT, she appeared well engaged in the
therapy, participated in the process of the inventory and formulation (Figure 5.6;
described in detail in Chapter 6) and identified an Interpersonal Dispute with her hus-
band. She seemed to be motivated to address her interpersonal problems.
During a session in the Middle Phase of IPT, Lana asked the therapist to advise her about
whether she should disclose a previous indiscretion to her husband. The therapist sug-
gested that rather than telling Lana what to do, it would ultimately be more helpful for
her to decide, though he was very willing to spend time discussing the options and the
benefits and costs of the choices. He also stated that his role in IPT was to assist her
to determine what the best decision was rather than to make the decision for her. The
therapist also felt that this position was more ethical, and was certainly more consistent
with the approach to treatment used in IPT.
Lana became very angry as a result of the therapist’s refusal to tell her what to do, but
did not communicate this directly to the therapist. Instead, she began to withdraw from
the therapeutic relationship by becoming increasingly silent and withholding. Recogniz-
ing that this was likely to be what happened in her relationships outside of therapy, the
therapist planned to move the discussion to situations when this occurred with Lana’s
husband, and to explore the ways she dealt with her anger with others. However, the
therapist also recognized that Lana’s reaction to him was causing the therapy to move
from the established focus on Lana’s conflict with her husband, as the problematic
patient–therapist interaction was standing in the way of progress.

80
                               Using the Interpersonal Inventory During the Course of IPT

                                    Interpersonal Circle




                   Amanda                 Beth (mom)
                   (sister)
                                    Kelly          Stacy
                                                             Gary (dad)
                                            Intimates

                                                                          Michael
                                                                          (husband)


                                      Close supports
                                                            Extended supports

Figure 5.5  Interpersonal Circle – Lana


       Biological factors        Social factors                    Psychological factors
       34 years old              Good support from family and      Dependent
       Female                     close friends                    Responsible
       Family history of         Reports not feeling supported     Perfectionistic tendencies
        depression                from husband                     Married 2 years
       Antidepressant            Well educated
        medication               Employed
       Sleep problems




      Cultural factors                                             Spiritual factors
      Expectation that husband                                     Spiritual, but does not
       always knows her needs                  Lana                 attend church


                                  Acute Interpersonal Crisis
                                Interpersonal Dispute (husband)


                                            Distress
                                          (Depression)
Figure 5.6  Interpersonal Formulation – Lana
At the beginning of the following session the therapist chose to use his experience with
Lana to get more information about the style of communication that she likely used with
her husband. Rather than explore the implications of the conflict within the therapeutic
relationship, however, he shifted the discussion to similar conflicts Lana had experienced
with her husband.

    Lana, if we go back to the Interpersonal Inventory, we determined that the
    main problem was a dispute with your husband. When we did the inventory
    we identified that some of your expectations of your husband, and the way

                                                                                                81
The Interpersonal Inventory

     you communicated these to him, were a problem that we should tackle. I think
     my experience with you when you wanted me to tell you what to say to your
     husband has helped me to better understand what may be happening in your
     communication with your husband. What happens, for instance, when he
     doesn’t live up to your expectations? How do you feel about that, and how do
     you communicate it to him?
Lana began describing an incident in which she felt her husband had been unresponsive
to her requests, and went on to relate how she had ‘shut him out’ as a way of communi-
cating her frustration with him. The treatment was effectively refocused on the dispute
with her husband thereafter.


Conclusion
The Interpersonal Inventory is a critical element of IPT. The Interpersonal Circle in particular
is a simple but stunningly effective way to collect the information needed – it is a structured
way of listening well, and is also designed to influence the patient to be reflective. The
inventory should be collected in the Assessment/Initial Phase of IPT, usually in session 2
or 3, and may take a full session to complete. It provides information about social support
generally, and also helps to identify foci for treatment in the Middle Phase. The interpersonal
problems identified in the inventory should be added to the Interpersonal Formulation.
     The inventory is unique to IPT. It orients both patient and therapist to the specific
interpersonal problems that are to be addressed. Further, the inventory helps to maintain the
therapeutic focus throughout treatment, and aids in resisting the temptation to stray from an
interpersonal focus. The inventory is also a helpful tool when reviewing the patient’s progress
during therapy and when planning for problems that may arise in the future.




82
                                                                     6
The Interpersonal Formulation
Introduction                                                                                  83
The Biopsychosocial/Cultural/Spiritual Model                                                  84
The Elements of the Interpersonal Formulation                                                 85
Step 1: Development of the Interpersonal Formulation with the Patient                         85
Step 2: Completing the Interpersonal Formulation with the Patient                             89
Conclusion                                                                                    95


Introduction
The ability to develop an accurate and concise psychological formulation of a patient’s
problems is an invaluable skill for all clinicians. The Interpersonal Formulation synthesizes
information about an individual’s biological and psychological makeup, attachment style,
personality, social context, culture, and spirituality, creating a plausible hypothesis explaining
her psychological symptoms. The formulation should lead to:
●● An understanding of the patient’s experience

●● A plausible and personally meaningful hypothesis explaining the origin of the patient’s

   distress
●● A validation of the patient’s experience

●● A plausible rationale for treatment with Interpersonal Psychotherapy (IPT)

●● A mutually determined focus for intervention based on the three Problem Areas

●● A guide to the therapeutic stance to be taken in treatment

●● A guide to the use of specific therapeutic techniques

●● An accurate assessment of prognosis.

The Interpersonal Formulation is a theoretically grounded working understanding of the
unique individual with whom the clinician forms a relationship in therapy. Because IPT
is based on Attachment and Communication Theory, the formulation is an approximate
understanding of the patient’s experience from that perspective. It bridges the gap between a
general theory of human behavior and the patient’s specific and unique problems.
      It cannot be emphasized enough that working to understand the unique individual
who is seeking help is the most important therapeutic task in IPT. The formulation is
not a definitive interpretation of the patient’s problem by an omniscient therapist; it is a
collaborative process that addresses the following questions:
●● How did the patient come to be the way she is?

●● What factors are maintaining the problem?

●● What can be done about it?

If effectively and collaboratively developed, the Interpersonal Formulation should enhance the
therapeutic alliance and convey the therapist’s genuine attempts to understand the patient.
      The Interpersonal Formulation is not a diagnosis to be presented to the patient. Instead,
it is a collaboratively developed explanation of the patient’s distress which describes how
                                                                                               83
The Interpersonal Formulation

her symptoms have developed and are being maintained. The formulation emphasizes both
the interpersonal factors involved in the origin and context of the problem, as well as how
IPT will help the patient overcome her symptoms. It is a pivotal part of IPT, as the successful
collaboration between patient and therapist to provide a valid formulation sets the scene for the
conduct of treatment.a

The Biopsychosocial/Cultural/Spiritual Model
The Biopsychosocial/Cultural/Spiritual model of mental illness asserts that biological,
psychological, social, cultural, and spiritual factors coalesce within an individual to produce
a unique diathesis or response to stress. When faced with a sufficient interpersonal crisis,
vulnerable individuals are likely to have psychological difficulties. The Biopsychosocial/
Cultural/Spiritual model therefore frames psychological difficulties as the response of a
unique and multifaceted individual to a unique stressor rather than as categorical illnesses.
     The utility of this model in clinical practice has become increasingly evident as
movement towards a dimensional view of mental health has continued. This dimensional
view of Biopsychosocial/Cultural/Spiritual functioning incorporates states of ‘good’ mental
health as well as illness, acknowledging both strengths and symptoms rather than simply
identifying pathological syndromes. As a consequence, the model offers both the patient and
therapist a simple and clear way of organizing and understanding the complex and multiple
determinants of psychological symptoms and interpersonal distress.
     In contrast to the medical model of mental health which requires that an individual’s
problems be categorized as medically based syndromal diagnoses, the Biopsychosocial/
Cultural/Spiritual model emphasizes the whole person and her suffering rather than
focusing exclusively on a diagnosable disease. This by no means diminishes the importance
of diagnoses, but rather emphasizes the uniqueness of the individual who is suffering. This is
vastly more congruent with the aim in IPT that the therapist should work to understand the
patient in the context of her unique personal and social circumstances, and that the patient is
helped to appreciate the influence of these factors as well. The value of the Biopsychosocial/
Cultural/Spiritual model is that it conceptualizes distress as being determined by many
factors, none of which alone can explain the patient, the specific manifestations of her
distress, or its course.
     The Biopsychosocial/Cultural/Spiritual model as it is applied to the Interpersonal
Formulation in IPT acknowledges:
●● Biological factors – such as genetic vulnerabilities, physical illness, substance abuse,

   medication side-effects, and injuries to the central nervous system
●● Psychological factors – such as attachment style, temperament, psychological defense

   mechanisms, cognitive style, intelligence, personality, psychological development, and ego
   strength
●● Social factors – such as available social supports, financial resources, education, and work

   environment
●● Cultural factors – such as family structure, cultural meaning, and culturally recognized

   ways of coping with distress
●● Spiritual factors – such as religious communities, spiritual practices, and spiritually based

   meaning.
a	
      e Interpersonal Formulation is one of the concepts and tools in IPT which can be used with any psychothera-
     Th
     peutic approach. The collaborative development of an understanding for the patient’s distress will be helpful with
     all patients.

84
                          Development of the Interpersonal Formulation with the Patient

The Elements of the Interpersonal Formulation
The Interpersonal Formulation is built upon the foundation of the Biopsychosocial/Cultural/
Spiritual model. In addition, there is a strong emphasis on both attachment and interpersonal
theory. The formulation includes hypotheses regarding the patient’s current functioning, and
it is not static or fixed – it should be continually modified by the collaborative efforts of the
patient and clinician as therapy proceeds. The formulation will evolve and change emphasis
over time as the patient and therapist come to better understand the patient’s unique
circumstances and experience of distress.


Step 1: Development of the Interpersonal
Formulation with the Patient
At the end of the Initial/Assessment Phase, once the full clinical and IPT assessments are
complete, including the Interpersonal Inventory, the therapist should ask for the patient’s
assistance in collaboratively developing an Interpersonal Formulation. The best way to do
so is to rely once again on the ever-ready blank piece of paper and pencil. The therapist
can either draw five boxes or five columns, labeling them Biological, Psychological, Social,
Cultural, and Spiritual factors, respectively (Figure 6.1). As with all of the other IPT tools, the
paper should then be handed over to the patient to fill in.


 Biological factors            Social factors                        Psychological factors




 Cultural factors                                                   Spiritual factors




Figure 6.1  The Interpersonal Formulation


The therapist should then ask the patient to help develop a summary of the various factors
that are contributing to her problems. Examples can be given if necessary to get the work
underway. As the various factors are listed, the patient (not the therapist) should write
them on the paper in the columns that make the most sense to the patient. If prompting is
needed, the therapist can offer a few thoughts about what is likely to be contributing to the
problem – often the patient may not be aware of some of the Biological factors (for instance,
a past or current problem with autoimmune or thyroid functioning), so the therapist can
offer these for inclusion if needed. Both the patient and the therapist should contribute to the
Interpersonal Formulation, ideally with the patient taking the lead, but with plenty of input
from the therapist.

                                                                                                85
The Interpersonal Formulation

     Both strengths and vulnerabilities can be listed. Some obvious examples of strengths are
an absence of a family history of psychiatric problems, a strong social support network or
intimate relationships, a deep spiritual faith, or being well-educated or insightful. The best
way to proceed is to use the patient’s own terms as much as possible. This not only helps to
understand the way the patient explains her distress, but will also make the Interpersonal
Formulation more meaningful for her.
     The use of the patient’s own words is particularly important in the Psychological area.
While the therapist may be thinking in technical terms, such as the description of the patient’s
attachment style or personality traits, the patient’s own words can and should be used to
develop the Interpersonal Formulation in this area. The therapist can keep the technical terms
in mind, but the formulation should be in terms the patient can identify and understand.
     For example, the patient may describe her personality as being ‘perfectionistic and detail
oriented’. While the therapist may understand this as obsessive-compulsive personality
traits, the better terms to put on the Interpersonal Formulation are the patient’s. They will
be more meaningful and almost certainly more accurate – after all, the patient has spent a
lifetime with herself, the therapist only a few hours. Another example might be a patient who
describes herself as a ‘people person’ or as someone who ‘doesn’t like crowds’. Better to put that
on the Interpersonal Formulation rather than some technical jargon or interpretation. The
patient might describe herself as ‘outgoing’ – that should be put on the formulation as well.
The therapist can hold the more technical terms; the point of the Interpersonal Formulation
is to develop a meaningful explanation that both the patient and therapist have contributed
to and that has meaning for the patient.
     The five boxes imply that the therapist should have done a thorough assessment of
each of the areas. To be clear, the IPT assessment includes all of the elements of a good and
thorough psychiatric assessment. The inventory and other elements specific to IPT are simply
additions to that comprehensive evaluation. There is no need to stand on ceremony, however:
more questions can be asked as the Interpersonal Formulation is developed, and it is all the
better if more information comes out as it is being constructed. At the end of this step of the
process, the patient and therapist should have developed a solid listing of the various factors
contributing to the presenting problem – both protective factors and vulnerabilities, and
factors that are maintaining the problem.
     The therapist should develop the Interpersonal Formulation with the patient in a
collaborative fashion, posing the hypotheses as tentative and asking for the patient’s feedback.
This back and forth feedback literally occurs as the Interpersonal Formulation is being
developed, particularly as the patient is given responsibility for filling it in. The therapist can
contribute, the patient can contribute, and both should ask for feedback from the other as
the formulation unfolds. The Interpersonal Formulation, like all of the tools used in IPT, is
a structured way of listening well. Figure 6.2 gives a brief overview of some of the various
factors that might be included in each area. This list is neither comprehensive nor required –
the primary point is to develop a formulation which is relevant for the unique patient. It is,
however, a good starting point for questions and for developing a solid formulation. The
following sections describe these in more detail.


Biological Contributions to Distress
Genetic factors
Documented or suspected illnesses or symptoms in family members are of clear significance.
A common oversight is to take at face value a negative family history. The therapist should
86
                          Development of the Interpersonal Formulation with the Patient

 Biological factors             Social factors                        Psychological factors
 Age                            Intimate relationships                Attachment
 Genetics                       Social support                        Personality
 Gender                         Employment                            Temperament
 Substance use                  Education                             Defense mechanisms
 Medical illnesses              Health care system                    Trauma history
 Medical treatments             Means of communication                Stigma



  Cultural factors                                                          Spiritual factors
  Tradition                                                                 Tradition
  Family                                                                    Social support
  Cultural meaning                                                          Spiritual meaning

Figure 6.2  Some factors that may be included in the Interpersonal Formulation


not merely inquire about diagnoses or treatments, but should also ask about the presence of
symptoms or behaviors suggestive of illness in family members.
Drug and alcohol use
These may not be reported by the patient, as recreational drug and alcohol use is common in
many societies. Heavy use may not be reported for fear of reprisals or because of denial. The
therapist should help the patient understand the subtle effects of even moderate psychoactive
substance use, which may disturb psychological health and interpersonal functioning in
ways that may not be apparent to the patient. Both the contribution of these factors and the
interpersonal determinants of drug and alcohol use should be included in the Interpersonal
Formulation.

Medical illness
A comprehensive medical history must be obtained during the evaluation. Some illnesses will
be readily acknowledged by the patient, though they may not be recognized as connected to
psychological difficulties. The formulation should also include the patient’s means of coping
with the illness and its interpersonal significance. Physiological changes such as menarche or
menstrual changes may be significant biological factors that are not recognized by the patient
as relevant to her distress.

Effects of medical treatments
Many medications have psychological sequelae and are relevant to the Interpersonal
Formulation. Corticosteroids, for instance, are often in this category, as are medications
which produce sexual side-effects, such as those used for hypertension or to treat depression.
These may also lead to significant interpersonal difficulties in marital or other intimate
relationships. The issue of compliance with psychotropic medications that create these kinds
of problems should also be addressed – an antidepressant medication which causes fatigue
and sexual dysfunction is apt to have both physical and interpersonal consequences that may
affect usage.
Diet and exercise
These may be protective or may be vulnerabilities. Often they are used as coping strategies
during times of stress.

                                                                                                87
The Interpersonal Formulation

Psychological Contributions to Distress
Recall that though these are the elements that should be assessed, the patient’s words and
descriptions are much better to use in this section of the Interpersonal Formulation. The
therapist can obsess about the technical terms on her own.
Attachment style
The patient’s attachment style is usually evident in the ways the patient has functioned in previous
and current relationships. In addition to the patient’s own description of herself in relationships,
the therapist can extrapolate a lot about attachment style from the information collected in
the Interpersonal Inventory. The therapist’s experience of the patient should also help her to
understand how the patient’s attachment style has contributed to the current problems. The
therapist may find it difficult to ‘connect’ with the patient, or may find that the patient frequently
challenges her; these behaviors or evoked responses are important data regarding attachment style.
Temperament
Temperament can be considered to be the genetically and biologically determined manner
in which an individual responds to her environment. The therapist can evaluate the patient’s
temperament in a manner similar to that used to examine the patient’s attachment style.
Cognitive style
The patient may display problematic cognitive processes such as generalizations or selective
abstraction, particularly when discussing her relationships. Statements such as ‘This
always happens to me’, or ‘He only stays because of the children’, may be very informative,
as the patient’s cognitions about her relationships are often the most strongly held. The
therapist should attempt to establish whether this type of thinking pattern pervades other
interpersonal aspects of the patient’s life. Although cognitions are not a primary focus in
IPT, they certainly may be addressed. What makes IPT unique is the primary focus on
interpersonal issues outside of therapy. Methods of dealing therapeutically with these
unrealistic expectations (the IPT jargon for cognitive sets) is described in subsequent
chapters, but the primary tactic in IPT is to deal with the interpersonal aspects and
ramifications of such expectations.
Psychological coping mechanisms
The way in which a person deals with intrapsychic stress is a key determinant of mental
health. The therapist can develop an impression of the patient’s coping mechanisms by
considering how the patient describes her attempts to deal with current interpersonal
problems. Consider, for example, a patient who is dealing with an impending divorce.
She may describe frequent physical symptoms or a preoccupation with her health. She
may describe behavior such as physical aggression or substance use. While discussing the
breakdown of her marriage, she may exhibit a lack of affect, or perhaps may endow her
estranged husband with all manner of personal faults that seem more her own. In a situation
like this the therapist can infer that the patient probably relies on more immature or neurotic
coping mechanisms such as projection, acting out, or isolation of affect. This not only helps
the therapist to understand how the patient has come to be in her current situation, but also
how she is likely to deal with the challenges of IPT, and the type of obstacles that she is likely
to present to the therapist during the treatment.
    Jargon such as ‘isolation of affect’ are the therapist’s terms, however. While they are
important and carry meaning for the therapist, they do not carry meaning for the patient.

88
                              Completing the Interpersonal Formulation with the Patient

They should not be used in the collaboratively developed formulation. Instead, factors
like this can be included in the Interpersonal Formulation by literally asking the patient
questions such as ‘What are you like when you get angry? and ‘What are you like when you
get distressed?’ Her descriptions, such as ‘quick tempered’ or ‘I tend to hold in anger’, can be
written verbatim in the psychological box.

Social Contributions to Distress
The patient’s current social milieu should be summarized and included in the Interpersonal
Formulation; a thorough assessment of it should have already occurred during the
Interpersonal Inventory. The absence of support, or of people who can provide secure
attachment relationships, usually has a profound effect on the patient’s current distress.
Conversely, those patients who have extensive social support systems will be less vulnerable
to psychological difficulties when faced with crises.
     Employment status and education should be included. Access to healthcare is a
huge factor for many patients, and may have led them to defer seeking care, or limit the
care that they can obtain. Means of communication has become a much greater issue,
particularly for younger patients, since the first iteration of this text. Many people now
communicate primarily through cell phones, text, or Facebook with many of their social
supports. Assessing whether that support is meaningful and helpful, and whether more
of it would be a help or hindrance to recovery, is an important part of the Interpersonal
Formulation.

Cultural Contributions to Distress
Cultural factors may greatly influence the patient’s willingness to seek care, to engage in
particular treatments, and the value she places on professional mental healthcare. Family
structure is heavily influenced by culture, as are role stereotypes based on age or gender.

Spiritual Contributions to Distress
Religious organizations can provide great support, or can be barriers to care. Spiritual
meaning and traditions should be assessed, particularly with grief and loss issues. Social
support from spiritual and religious groups should be evaluated, as should early experiences
of religion which may have caused alienation.


Step 2: Completing the Interpersonal Formulation
with the Patient
The length of the Interpersonal Formulation will vary depending on the particular patient.
With complex patients with extensive medical and psychiatric histories and chaotic social
situations, it may include a dozen or more factors in several of the boxes. With others who
are less complex, there may only be a handful of factors, with many of them in the social and
psychological boxes. The formulation should be comprehensive, but need not be exhaustive.
As a rule of thumb, it may take 8–10 minutes to complete as a summary of the information
collected during the assessment/initial sessions of IPT.
     Once the Biopsychosocial/Cultural/Spiritual boxes are completed, the therapist can
summarize them by stating that these factors are strengths and vulnerabilities that have led
the patient to react to interpersonal crises in a particular way. Lines are often drawn from the

                                                                                               89
The Interpersonal Formulation

boxes to another box drawn in the middle of the page representing the patient as a unique
individual (Figure 6.3). The therapist should go on to explain that the particular interpersonal
crises described by the patient have interacted with these vulnerabilities to cause her distress,
and can at this point add a psychiatric diagnosis as one of the results of the crises if a diagnosis
is warranted. If not, the therapist can simply work with the patient to fully describe the
symptoms and dysfunction which are part of her distress. In either case, the distress is literally
linked by the therapist to the patient’s interpersonal problems; this is further emphasized by
the Interpersonal Formulation diagram, which reinforces their direct connection.


 Biological factors              Social factors                         Psychological factors
 Age                             Intimate relationships                 Attachment
 Genetics                        Social support                         Personality
 Gender                          Employment                             Temperament
 Substance use                   Education                              Defense mechanisms
 Medical illnesses               Health care system                     Trauma history
 Medical treatments              Means of communication                 Stigma
 Diet, exercise




        Cultural factors                                            Spiritual factors
        Tradition                                                   Tradition
        Family                        Unique individual             Social support


                                  Acute Interpersonal Crisis
                      Interpersonal Dispute, Role Transition, Grief and Loss


                                          Distress
                                (and diagnosis if appropriate)

Figure 6.3  A complete Interpersonal Formulation


The completion of the formulation should set the stage for the Middle Phase of IPT, in
which the focus will be directly on the acute interpersonal crises, that is, the three Problem
Areas as they apply to the particular patient. Only after the completion of the Interpersonal
Formulation should the therapist move to developing a Treatment Agreement with the
patient regarding the treatment focus, the approximate duration of treatment, and other
logistical issues. Done well, the treatment plan – what is to be done to help the patient – flows
naturally and obviously from the formulation. It will be no surprise to the patient, given her
presenting complaints and organized understanding of her distress and diagnosis, that the
IPT approach will be of benefit. The logical and easy-to-understand focus of IPT, flowing
from a solid assessment and formulation, is one of the great strengths of IPT.
Case example 6.1: Penny
Penny, a 32-year-old legal secretary, was referred to a psychiatrist for assessment of
an episode of depression that followed the birth of her daughter 3 months earlier. She
complained of irritability, poor concentration, self-reproach, loss of interest in her usual
activities, and excessive tearfulness. She recognized that these symptoms were a marked
departure from her usual self, and had resulted in an ongoing conflict with her husband.
Penny told her therapist that she and her husband had discussed the arrangements for

90
                              Completing the Interpersonal Formulation with the Patient

the arrival of the baby, and had agreed that she would take maternity leave for a year
while her husband, Brad, continued to work full-time. According to Penny, Brad was also
supposed to contribute to the running of the household and had agreed to take care of
the baby on weekends in order to give Penny some ‘time to herself’. Penny had also dis-
cussed babysitting arrangements with her mother, who had agreed to offer a day a week
to look after the baby in order for Penny to keep up with things at work, even though she
was officially on maternity leave.
Penny described being physically well throughout her pregnancy. She stated that during
the pregnancy she felt ‘terrific’, but since the birth had experienced a major ‘let down’,
which she felt was hormonal. She reported having intermittent mood swings during the
latter half of her menstrual cycles, though she had not sought any treatment for this
previously. The decision to have a child was, according to Penny, based largely on her age.
She stated that she had determined that if she were going to have children, it had to be
now, as it would be much more risky if she were any older.
After the arrival of the baby, Penny described that ‘she had found that she had less time to
spend with her husband’ as the demands of childcare left her tired. When asked for more
details, she disclosed that their sexual intimacy was virtually non-existent, and that she had
not felt close to him at all. Moreover, in order to keep up with the finances, Brad had started
working longer hours to offset the drop in income created by Penny’s maternity leave. Penny
found also that her mother was increasingly unreliable in fulfilling her childcare agreement.
Penny was an only child. Her mother had suffered from depression throughout Penny’s
childhood, apparently with postpartum onset. Penny’s relationship with her mother during
adolescence was described as conflicted, and she reported feeling closer to her father during
that time. She described her mother currently as helpful at times but unreliable in general. In
contrast, she stated that since she had gotten married, she had little contact with her father.
Penny said that throughout her schooling she excelled academically, although she did not
pursue tertiary studies. She stated that as a student she was always noted for her impec-
cable bookwork as well as her dedication to her chosen sport of swimming. She described
her working life as highly satisfying as she felt she was a valued member of the team at her
legal firm. She pointedly mentioned that the partners always asked her to assist with their
cases. She enjoyed work, and stated that she missed the social support she received there.
Penny had been married for eight years. She described being happy in her married life,
although she felt that the lack of time she and her husband had together, as well as her in-
ability to regularly see her friends and colleagues, was ‘taking its toll’. Her description of her
relationship with her husband was interesting: Penny said they had gotten married because,
‘they worked well together’. She reported that her husband had complained on occasion that
their relationship lacked intimacy, and was frequently dissatisfied with their sexual relation-
ship, but Penny stated that she was quite satisfied with both of these aspects of her marriage.
Penny described herself as a perfectionist and told the psychiatrist that her self-esteem was
related to her ability to achieve things. She reported being ‘in control’ of her life prior to the
arrival of her baby, but the lack of structure and continual demands of motherhood coupled
with the lack of definite goals was difficult. She reported some difficulties in breastfeeding
her child in the first few weeks, which she said made her feel ‘even less in control of things’.
Penny’s Interpersonal Circle, developed in the second session, is depicted in Figure 6.4.
The mutually determined factors contributing to the Interpersonal Formulation of Pen-
ny’s interpersonal distress and the development of her postpartum depression included
the following.
Biological factors:
•  Gender
•  Postpartum

                                                                                               91
The Interpersonal Formulation

                                      Interpersonal Circle



                                                                          Anthony
                                                                          (dad)




                                           Brad (husband)             Bill
                                                                      Stacy
                                  Claire              Kim
                                  (daughter)          Carrie


                                                Jennifer
                   Bridgett
                   (mom)                     Intimates




                                           Close supports
                                                                Extended supports


Figure 6.4  Interpersonal Circle – Penny

•  History of depression in her mother
•  Predisposition to hormonally influenced mood swings
Psychological factors:
•  Self-reliant
•  Hard worker
•  Perfectionist
•  [Dismissive attachment traits – therapist’s thoughts]
•  [Obsessive-compulsive personality traits – therapist’s thoughts]
Social factors:
•  Poor support from family
•  Fair support from husband
•  Good support from work colleagues
Cultural factors:
•  Pressure to be perfect mother, wife, and employee
•  Little expectation for childcare help from extended family
Spiritual factors:
•  Regular church attendance
Interpersonal Problem Areas:
•  Role transition into motherhood – adjusting to the physical and psychological demands
    of having a baby, as well as the loss of the benefits of full-time work
•  Interpersonal dispute with her mother – unmet expectations of childcare and support as
    well as difficulty communicating her needs



92
                                       Completing the Interpersonal Formulation with the Patient

     Biological factors                Social factors                               Psychological factors
     Age                               Fair support from husband                    Self-reliant
     Gender                            Lack of family support                       Hard worker
     Postpartum                        Good support from friends                    Perfectionist
     Family history of                 Well educated
      postpartum                       Employed
      depression
     History of
      premenstrual
      problems


                Cultural factors
                Expectation to be                                             Spiritual factors
                                                      Penny
                  perfect mother                                              Church
                Little support for
                  family help

                                     Acute Interpersonal Crisis
                    Interpersonal Dispute (husband and mother), Role Transition


                                                  Distress
                                          (Postpartum depression)

Figure 6.5  Interpersonal Formulation – Penny

•  Interpersonal dispute with her husband – unmet expectations between Penny and her
    husband
Penny’s Interpersonal Formulation is depicted in Figure 6.5.
This conceptualization of Penny’s distress and depression was compatible with several
treatment options:b
Cognitive behavioral therapy – Penny described a degree of perfectionism and in her
history highlighted a number of thoughts that seemed to reflect dysfunctional cognitive
schema. Her need for perfectionism and her tendency to ‘all-or-nothing thinking’ would
provide material for focal cognitive interventions.
Self-psychology – Penny described a distant relationship with her mother, and there
was evidence that this was re-emerging as a significant issue in the context of her
own motherhood. Self-psychology would offer Penny a therapeutic relationship
that offered opportunities for ‘mirroring’ or ‘idealizing’ transference. This would
potentially improve Penny’s symptoms and functioning, but would be primarily
focused on facilitating the evolution of her ‘disorganized selfhood.’ Despite the
fact that Penny did not show evidence of severe personality disturbance, there
would likely be benefits to this approach, although its long-term nature would be
problematic, particularly considering the logistical limitations imposed by her new
parenting responsibilities.
Family therapy – Penny and her extended family system appeared to be in crisis largely
because of the introduction of a baby as a new member in the family system, with clear
changes in the relationship between Penny and her husband and mother. There would
potentially be benefit in bringing the family into therapy in order to deal with the
difficulties that the family system encountered since Penny’s transition into parenthood.

b	
      e ask the reader for some latitude in our descriptions of treatment options – we have an obvious bias towards
     W
     IPT, but certainly acknowledge that other approaches are also of help, and encourage the reader to make his or
     her own determination about the best treatment for a given patient. Most important is to have several options and
     therapeutic tools in one’s toolbox.

                                                                                                                   93
The Interpersonal Formulation

Interpersonal Psychotherapy – While there were clearly numerous determinants
to Penny’s distress, the most pressing issues for Penny in her current situation
were the conflict in her relationship with her husband and the difficulties she was
experiencing with her mother, framed within the transition to her own new role of
mother. IPT offered Penny a framework for understanding her distress, as well a
method for helping her develop solutions to her interpersonal problems, with the
ultimate aim of symptom relief. The time-limited and focal nature of IPT was well
suited to her need to resume functioning as quickly as possible, so as to develop a
healthy attachment to her child. In addition, IPT had a great deal of intuitive appeal
to her as the concepts of Role Transition and Interpersonal Dispute were directly
relevant to her experience, especially because they were literally the problems she
was seeking help for, and were the causes in the Interpersonal Formulation to which
she attributed her distress.
After the Interpersonal Formulation diagram was collaboratively developed, the therapist
summarized as follows:

     Penny, based on our mutual understanding of the problems you are having and the
     factors that have led to your distress, I believe that you have developed an episode
     of postpartum depression, which is one way of describing all of the symptoms and
     distress that you have mentioned. Depression is a complex illness that is influenced
     by a number of things. There seem to be physical factors that are important in your
     case, such as the fact that your mother has suffered from depression. This suggests
     that there is likely to be a genetic component to your depression. In addition, the
     fact that you have had mood swings that correspond to your menstrual periods
     suggests that there may be hormonal factors involved as well.

     There also appear to be factors within your psychological makeup which are
     contributing to your problems. You’ve usually been able to deal with life very
     successfully by working hard and being a high achiever, and that feeling of
     being in control of your life has been very important to you. No doubt that
     sense of control has been changed with the arrival of your daughter – b   ­ abies
     are experts at keeping their parents on an irregular and unpredictable
     ­schedule. It’s been difficult to use your normal style of getting organized and
      ­working harder to cope with all of the changes since she’s been born.

     In going through your transition to parenthood, it seems that other r­ elationships
     have been affected as well. You were quite clear that your relationship with your
     husband, which was good before Claire was born, has been affected by the new
     responsibilities that you both face. It sounds like your relationship with your
     mother has become more of a problem since Claire was born as well.

     All of these factors are important, and it seems to me that you became
     ­depressed after the birth of your daughter because of a combination of all
      of these things. The transition to becoming a mother has clearly brought
      about major changes in your life – both the good and the stressful – and has
      ­challenged your ability to cope with things as you normally have in the past.

     I believe that it will help a great deal to work on the transition you are going
     through, and on the relationship conflicts you described with your husband
     and mother. I think that IPT is a natural fit – the primary focus of treatment is
     to help people resolve interpersonal conflicts and adjust to major life changes
     like having a child. Using IPT will also allow us to get a handle on your
     ­symptoms without needing to use antidepressant medication, since you’re
      concerned about the effect that medication might have on your baby.

     What are your reactions to this summary?


94
                                                                                      Conclusion

The summary of the Interpersonal Formulation need not be technical – it should be framed
in terms that are readily understandable to the patient, just like the terms in the formulation
diagram. Further, it is extremely helpful to emphasize the patient’s strengths. In this case,
Penny had a number of strengths; the magnitude of the transition to parenthood was simply
too great for her to deal with given her typical coping style and interpersonal resources. One
can imagine, for instance, that if she had a better relationship with her mother, she may have
weathered the postpartum period with fewer problems, or if she had been less obsessional
and less driven to be in control of everything, she may have been able to adjust more easily
to the chaos of a new baby. Framing her difficulties as a temporary reaction to a difficult
situation both reinforces her usual ability to cope with stress and implies that the difficulty is
time-limited and will be overcome.
     The discussion about the formulation and treatment planning should always be
collaborative. The therapist should always ask the patient for feedback, be receptive to it, and
be willing to incorporate the feedback. New information that emerges during the Middle
Phase of therapy can also be incorporated into the continually evolving formulation.


Conclusion
The Interpersonal Formulation in IPT is the result of a collaborative process in which the
patient and therapist arrive at an understanding about the causes of the current problems
the patient is experiencing. The formulation is the product of an integration of the
Biological, Psychological, Social, Cultural and Spiritual factors that create a vulnerability to
psychological distress, and the interpersonal crises that precipitate it at a given point in the
patient’s life. This process ultimately validates the patient’s experiences and links these factors
to her interpersonal distress. The formulation also provides the rationale for the use of IPT
as a therapeutic intervention, as well as providing information to the therapist about which
specific IPT techniques are likely to be most beneficial.




                                                                                                 95
                                                                      7
The Treatment Agreement
Introduction96
Developing the Treatment Agreement                 97
The Components of the Treatment Agreement in IPT   97
Maintaining the Treatment Agreement                99
Additional Thoughts About the Treatment Agreement 103
Conclusion104


Introduction
Interpersonal Psychotherapy (IPT), like all other psychotherapies, requires a Treatment
Agreement: a collaborative establishment of a set of guidelines for its conduct. Also like all
other psychotherapies, IPT simply does not work as well if a treatment contract is unilaterally
imposed by the therapist. The agreement should be the result of a collaborative process.
     The Treatment Agreement in IPT is for the benefit of both the patient and the therapist.
For the patient, it establishes expectations for the treatment along with the obligations of
both the patient and therapist. For the therapist, it provides a practical guide to treatment,
particularly with patients whose maladaptive attachment communication styles are likely to
require structural accommodations in the therapy. Since both the patient and therapist have
important contributions to make to the agreement, it should be collaboratively negotiated
rather than being rigidly dictated by the therapist.
     While it may seem a matter of semantics, the use of the term Treatment Agreement
instead of ‘treatment contract’ is critical in IPT. The term ‘contract’ implies that the terms
cannot be changed, and that if a specific number of sessions are contracted for at the
beginning of treatment, exactly that number – no more and no less – must be delivered.
Instead, IPT is far better delivered flexibly using a dosing range of sessions that can be agreed
on not in the first session, but after the formulation at the end of the Assessment/Initial Phase
of treatment. The term ‘contract’ also implies that the therapist dictates the terms, and the
patient has to agree to them if he wants treatment; if he does not agree, he is wished good
luck and shown to the door. In contrast, listening well to the patient, developing a strong
therapeutic alliance, and working collaboratively with him, all point clearly to negotiating a
flexible agreement for treatment.
     The term ‘contract’ also implies, incorrectly, that any attempts on the part of the patient to
modify the arrangement can be conceptualized as resistance. For example, if the patient asks
to meet for an additional session or two, a therapist can dogmatically interpret the patient’s
resistance to termination as pathological, rather than carefully and honestly working with
him to understand the patient’s request and collaboratively deciding whether additional
sessions might actually be more helpful. Resistance is a helpful concept in understanding
electrical circuits; in psychotherapy it is simply a way to label a patient rather than working
hard to understand his point of view.

96
                                    The Components of the Treatment Agreement in IPT

Developing the Treatment Agreement
Unlike human relationships outside of a clinical setting, the therapeutic relationship is
constrained by ethical and practical concerns (although one might well argue that it would
be desirable if all relationships were bound by similar ethical concerns). The concept of
clinical ‘boundaries’ is one of the best examples of this. In addition to the practical necessity
of agreeing to a specific time and place to meet for therapy, therapeutic relationships
nearly always have limits to things such as contact with the therapist outside of therapy,
arrangements for emergencies, payment for services, and so on. Ideally these are established
clearly and a priori rather than emerging as problems later in the therapy. Setting these
boundaries both preserves the integrity of the therapeutic relationship and protects the
patient and therapist from exploitation. The patient and therapist should establish the
boundaries of the therapeutic relationship as part of the Treatment Agreement. Like all of the
components of IPT, developing the Treatment Agreement is a collaborative process between
the patient and therapist. The option to revisit and renegotiate it should remain throughout
the treatment. Clinical judgment should guide this process.
     The negotiation of the Treatment Agreement is an interpersonal process between patient
and therapist. As a consequence, the agreement should be negotiated after the therapist
has had the opportunity to thoroughly assess the patient’s clinical presentation, attachment
style, and social situation. The therapist should have a fairly well-developed sense of the
therapeutic relationship after this assessment. This means that the agreement comes after the
development of the Interpersonal Formulation at the end of the Assessment/Initial Phase of
IPT – it is the last task to be completed in this phase.
     The agreement should include mutually negotiated therapeutic goals. If the patient and
therapist develop an agreement with a shared vision, the likelihood of the treatment being
successful is greatly increased. As a result, the therapist should help the patient to articulate
his specific goals – the outcomes in the relevant Interpersonal Problem Area(s) – as clearly
as possible. This mutual determination of goals is an intrinsic part of the development of the
Interpersonal Formulation.
     The patient’s attachment style should also influence the process of developing a Treatment
Agreement. Patients with more secure attachment styles are more likely to tolerate the
therapist ‘taking the lead’ in setting goals, while those with more insecure styles of attachment
will likely feel alienated or rejected if the therapist is too directive in setting the agenda. This
a catch-22 experience in all types of therapy, as securely attached patients, though able to
tolerate more directiveness from the therapist, are also more capable of taking the initiative or
working collaboratively; with the securely attached, the development of an agreement is quite
easy. In contrast, those less securely attached are more sensitive to the therapist being too
directive, while at the same time they are less likely to be able to take the lead themselves. This
is yet another reason why patients with more secure attachment styles fare well, and those
with less secure attachment styles require flexibility in IPT structure and techniques, along
with more attention to the therapeutic alliance.

The Components of the Treatment Agreement
in IPT
The core components of the Treatment Agreement in IPT are shown in Box 7.1. Depending
upon the therapist’s clinical judgment, it can be either written or verbal. Providing a written
description of the conduct of IPT and a description of the patient’s role in treatment is

                                                                                                97
The Treatment Agreement

extremely helpful with some patients, but is unnecessary and cumbersome for others.
Flexibility is the key – the way in which tools such as the agreement are used should be
determined to a large degree by the characteristics of the individual patient rather than being
dogmatically applied to everyone. Patients who are more securely attached are likely to do
quite well in therapy without the need for a written agreement, while those patients with
evidence of insecure attachment and more problematic interpersonal styles may benefit
from a clearly written description of the conduct of IPT and their specific goals. Whether
written or verbal, the agreement in IPT should specifically address the points in the following
sections.
Box 7.1  The core components of the IPT Treatment Agreement

 ●● The number, frequency, and duration of sessions
 ●● The Problem Areas to be addressed
 ●● The expectations of the patient and therapist

 ●● Contingency planning (e.g. emergencies and rescheduling)

 ●● Treatment boundaries




The Number, Frequency, and Duration of Sessions
These should be determined primarily on the basis of the severity of the patient’s problems
and his attachment style. Sessions may also vary with the style and availability of the therapist,
but in general will be within a dosing range of 6–20 sessions, usually of 50 minutes duration.
Issues of cost and payment should also be clarified.

The Problem Areas to Be Addressed
This should include the Problem Areas and relationship issues which have been
identified by the patient and therapist in the Interpersonal Inventory and Interpersonal
Formulation.

The Expectations of the Patient and Therapist
The patient is expected to take responsibility for utilizing the sessions well – being open,
honest, and on time – and for working between sessions on problems that are identified
in his social environment and interpersonal relationships. Patients frequently have the
incorrect assumption that the bulk of change in IPT will take place in the sessions rather than
in their interpersonal environment outside of therapy. The bottom line in IPT is changing
the patient’s functioning in his social environment; hence he must do some work between
sessions. The amount of work and effort the patient puts in is highly correlated with the
outcome of the therapy.

Contingency Planning
This includes matters such as missed sessions, lateness, or illness. In general, if the therapist
is late or misses a session, the time should be made good at a later time. If the patient misses
a session or is late on several occasions, the reasons should be discussed. Often there are
legitimate reasons, such as transportation problems, child illness, or even problems with
parking. Common sense suggests that sometimes a cigar is just a cigar, and needs no further
smoking.
98
                                                      Maintaining the Treatment Agreement

     In the case of repetitive problems with missing appointments or lateness, the IPT
therapist should frame the lateness or absence as an overt interpersonal communication,
rather than examining the psychodynamic underpinnings of such behavior directly with the
patient. The therapist can also use this information about the patient’s behavior to further
develop his hypotheses about the patient’s interpersonal relationships and attachment style.
The therapist can then draw attention to other circumstances in which the patient has been
late or not met obligations with others in his social network, as opposed to discussing such
issues within the therapeutic relationship.

Treatment Boundaries
‘Boundaries’ in IPT are best defined as the ethical and practical constraints that distinguish
the therapeutic relationship from other non-professional relationships. Relevant boundary
issues include clinical and non-clinical contact outside of working hours, appropriate
arrangements for emergencies, and expectations regarding substance use and aggressive or
inappropriate behavior. While many (including us) would argue that these are implicit in
any therapeutic relationship, it is worthwhile with more complex patients to discuss these
formally and negotiate them explicitly. An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure: it
is better, particularly with more complex patients, to discuss potential problems before they
arise rather than having to deal with them after the fact.
    Practically speaking, these boundaries can be established by asking more complex
patients questions such as, ‘What are we going to do if you cut yourself?’ or ‘What are we
going to do if we happen to meet in public?’ or ‘Are we going to use email to communicate,
and if so, what are the expectations we have about it?’

Maintaining the Treatment Agreement
Violations or breaches of the agreement may occur even with explicit a priori discussion.
These may range from simple matters such as lateness or delayed fee payments to more
significant problems such as inappropriate behavior in sessions or inappropriate contact
outside of therapy. While all of these problems can be viewed as having psychodynamic and
transferential significance, the focus of the IPT therapist’s responses to such occurrences is to
address them as interpersonal behaviors in the here and now.
     Agreement violations, conceptualized as conscious interpersonal behaviors, often
provide valuable information about the patient’s experience of the therapeutic relationship as
well as his behavior in relationships outside of therapy. In some cases the behavior may have
a simple explanation such as logistical difficulties (time off work, childcare, etc.) or financial
limitations that are best dealt with by the therapist pragmatically. In others, they reflect the
patient’s attachment style and corresponding difficulties with communication, and may also
reflect personality difficulties and psychological defenses. It is the therapist’s task to analyze
this information, integrate it into a coherent understanding of the patient, and use it to help
the patient improve his communications with others and relationships outside of therapy.
     Agreement violations in IPT should generally be dealt with using a three-step process.
First, the therapist should state directly to the patient that a violation has occurred.
A brief discussion should follow to ensure that the patient recognizes this, and that there is
continuing agreement on the limits in future sessions. Second, the therapist should clearly
communicate his expectations to the patient. In other words, the therapist should direct the
patient to the specific kind of behavior that the therapist would like instead of the patient’s
disruptive behavior. Third, the therapist should direct the discussion towards problems
                                                                                               99
The Treatment Agreement

that similar behaviors may have caused the patient in relationships outside of therapy. For
example, if a patient has been calling the therapist too frequently between sessions, the
therapist should directly point out to the patient that they had agreed that calls would be
limited. Next, the therapist should direct the patient to new behavior – calling the emergency
room after hours, or having the patient call at a specific time during the week as opposed
to the out-of-hours calls. The therapist should ensure that the patient understands both the
problematic behavior and the way it should be modified.
    After this, the therapist can then use the information gleaned from the violation to
begin asking questions about the patient’s relationships outside of therapy. For instance, the
therapist might ask the patient how he typically asks others for help when distressed. What
happens when he calls other people frequently? Has he ever gotten negative feedback from
others about being too persistent? How has the patient dealt with this?
    In IPT, most agreement violations can be dealt with very directly in this way. All provide
important information to the therapist about potential problems that the patient may be
having in his social relationships. Rather than using agreement violations to focus more on
the patient–therapist relationship, in IPT the discussion should be quickly turned to similar
problems outside of therapy.

Practical Reasons for Agreement Violations
Many patients have legitimate reasons for missing appointments, payments, or for not
fulfilling other parts of the Treatment Agreement. As an advocate for the patient, it is
certainly within the purview of the IPT therapist to actively assist the patient to seek out
and utilize resources in the community that might be available. Referrals for assistance with
payments for treatment, housing resources, childcare resources and the like can be provided
by the therapist. Though this is clearly not the primary goal of IPT, if the patient is unable to
come to sessions because of practical reasons such as these, treatment will obviously not be
successful. The patient is fully responsible for utilizing the resources, but the therapist can
direct the patient to them, rather than interpreting and labeling the patient’s inability to find
and use such resources as resistance to therapy.
     In some cases, the agreement violations arise as a result of a misunderstanding by the
patient, which may merely reflect his problems in communication. Reframing the problem
as a consequence of poor communication between patient and therapist may therefore
reinforce the need for clear communication in other relationships as well, and examples from
these can be discussed in therapy. When the problem arises as a consequence of unrealistic
or unreasonable expectations on the part of the patient, this too can be addressed as a process
that may be typical of the patient’s other relationships.

The Implications of the Agreement Violation for the
Patient’s Social Relationships
It is axiomatic in IPT that whatever occurs in the therapeutic relationship parallels processes
in other relationships. The therapeutic relationship is a real relationship influenced by the
same factors that affect all of the patient’s relationships. The patient’s attachment style and
experience of other relationships will affect the way he experiences the constraints of the
therapeutic agreement. If problems emerge in the therapeutic relationship, they therefore
shed light on these factors, and on the relationships that the patient is involved in outside of
therapy. The patient’s experience of, and reaction to, the Treatment Agreement is therefore
extremely valuable information about his interpersonal relationships.
100
                                                          Maintaining the Treatment Agreement

Managing Agreement Violations within the Therapeutic
Relationship
In some cases, the patient’s reactions to the therapist and the Treatment Agreement may be so
extreme or difficult to manage that the therapeutic relationship must be directly addressed.
The preservation of the therapeutic relationship must be the primary consideration in IPT –
without it, therapy cannot proceed. If the therapeutic relationship is threatened, the therapist
may choose to renegotiate the agreement with the patient. Doing so may have additional
therapeutic benefits for the patient as he may experience this process as a new way of
behaving and communicating that generalizes to other relationships. If this fails, the therapist
should strongly consider moving to another form of therapy in which the patient–therapist
relationship is more directly addressed as the focus of treatment.
     In many circumstances, the patient may be unaware of the impact of his interpersonal
behaviors. Such ‘blind spots’ or communication problems may become apparent to the
therapist when they are examined against the background of the Treatment Agreement.
Using this information, the therapist can then begin to examine other situations in which the
patient’s lack of insight about the consequences of his communication may be a problem. The
therapist can address this by hypothesizing that others are likely to respond to the patient in
the same way that the therapist has, and that situations that provoke or elicit similar responses
from others occur in the patient’s relationships. Discussing these kinds of interactions and
reflecting on the likely responses from others, informed by the therapist’s experience with
the patient in a similar interaction, is a potent way to help the patient develop insight into his
communications and what follows in their wake.
     In summary, the therapist’s actions should always reinforce the agreement by implication,
and by explicit reminder if needed. Interventions regarding the agreement should first
and foremost be pragmatic: a gentle reminder, and then discussion of the patient’s social
relationships in which similar communication problems are likely to be occurring.
Case example 7.1: Barry
Barry was a 21-year-old man who had been referred by his local physician for manage-
ment of depression. Barry described experiencing difficulties in his relationship with
his girlfriend and had suffered periods of dysphoria, leading to vague suicidal ideation.
Barry’s local doctor had started antidepressant medication, which had provided some
benefit in relieving his symptoms. His Interpersonal Circle is shown in Figure 7.1.

                                   Interpersonal Circle



                                                                       Bill
                                                                       Bryan
                                                                       (older
                                              Kayla
                                                                       brothers)
                                           (girlfriend)
                                                            Mitch
                                           Joan (mom)       (father)
                          AJ                Intimates
                            Josh


                                      Close supports
                                                           Extended supports

Figure 7.1  Interpersonal Circle – Barry

                                                                                             101
The Treatment Agreement

At the end of the Assessment/Initial Phase of therapy, after developing an Inter-
personal Formulation (Figure 7.2), Barry and his therapist negotiated a Treatment
Agreement and agreed to meet for 10–12 more sessions of IPT. They agreed that the
frequency of the latter sessions would likely be tapered. They also agreed to focus on
an Interpersonal Dispute with his girlfriend and an Interpersonal Dispute with his
mother.

            Biological factors         Social factors                  Psychological factors
            21 years old               Good support from girlfriend    Avoidant tendencies
            Male                        and family                     Fired from previous 2 jobs
            Antidepressant             Lack of support from friends    Good sense of humor
             medication                Employed as a cashier           Easy going
            Poor diet
            Does not exercise




  Cultural factors                                                Spiritual factors
  10 years younger than his siblings                              Grew up Catholic, but
  Did not have many expectations                   Barry           does not currently attend
   placed on him as a child                                        church

                                     Acute Interpersonal Crisis
                           Interpersonal Dispute (girlfriend and mother)


                                                  Distress
                                                (Depression)

Figure 7.2  Interpersonal Formulation – Barry
Barry arrived 10 minutes late for session 4, citing problems getting off from work. The
therapist conducted a shortened 40-minute session and highlighted the benefit of
taking full advantage of all of the time set aside for treatment. Barry arrived on time
for session 5, but canceled session 6, 2 hours prior to its scheduled time. The thera-
pist first arbitrarily and unilaterally decided that the session would not be made up
as Barry had not provided 24-hour notice prior to cancellation. After consideration,
however, the therapist thought better of it, recognizing that this was not a particu-
larly collaborative way to proceed, and also recognizing that doing so would miss an
opportunity to understand how Barry’s behavior and communication played out in
similar situations outside of therapy.
Instead, the therapist discussed this series of events with Barry, first reiterating the need
for Barry to be on time, as to do otherwise was limiting the benefit he was getting from
therapy. They then mutually agreed that in the future, Barry would be responsible for
paying for sessions he did not cancel with more than 24 hours’ notice. The therapist rec-
ognized that he was feeling frustrated with Barry’s behavior and was irritated that Barry
did not seem to be valuing his time or professional efforts. Being an astute therapist,
however, he recognized that his reactions were undoubtedly a reflection of the ways in
which Barry was likely to be interacting with others. Putting aside his frustration and an-
noyance, the therapist reminded himself that any course of action he took in IPT should
be gracious, therapeutic, and of benefit to the patient. The therapist realized that his re-
actions were important ‘diagnostic’ information, and could be used to address problems
in Barry’s relationships outside of therapy.
Barry arrived 10 minutes late for session 7, prompting the therapist to address the
Treatment Agreement right at the beginning of the session. He planned to move from

102
                                      Additional Thoughts About the Treatment Agreement

there to a discussion about other relationships in which Barry had difficulty in maintain-
ing his commitments.
Therapist: Barry, over the last several sessions you have had problems keeping your appoint-
ments or being here on time. I want to remind you that we had agreed that we would meet for
50-minute sessions, and when you are late we aren’t able to meet for that long. While you might
still get some benefit from the time that is left in the session, I don’t think that you are getting the
full benefit of treatment by being late. It’s almost like taking half of a dose of medicine – you might
feel somewhat better, but the effect isn’t as great as the full dose.
Barry: I can see your point ... I have just had trouble getting everything organized to get here on
time.
Therapist: We had also agreed that you would call at least 24 hours ahead of time if you had to
miss an appointment, and I want to remind you of that as well.
Barry: I’ll try my best, but the time I missed I had a real emergency at work.
Therapist: I appreciate that things come up, but I do want to make sure that we are clear
on our expectations of each other. Barry, since this has happened several times during our
work together, I wonder if this is a problem in other relationships you have. What are your
thoughts about that?
Barry: Well, my girlfriend is always getting on me about being late. She says that is one of her
main complaints with me – that if I’m late, it means that I don’t take things seriously enough.
Therapist: What’s your reaction to that?
Barry: I’ve tried to convince her that my being late has nothing to do with her – it’s just a bad
habit that I’ve gotten into. I wish she wouldn’t take it so personally.
Therapist: It sounds like she is interpreting your being late in a way that you aren’t intending.
Barry: That’s right. But I haven’t been able to convince her otherwise.
Therapist: May I give you some direct feedback?
Barry: Sure.
Therapist: I think it’s important for you to know that nearly everyone you interact with is going
to react to you being late by being irritated or upset. I have had that reaction myself when you
missed the appointment and the times you have been late. Other people do take that personally,
whether you intend it or not. That’s going to have a big impact on your relationships, and I wonder
if it’s a big factor in the disputes you’re having with your girlfriend and your mother. Were you
aware that people react to you that way?
Barry: I’m not late that much … I still don’t see why people take it that seriously, but I guess
maybe you have a point. That has probably had something to do with my jobs too – one of my
bosses got pretty mad at me for not showing up a couple of times …
Barry reluctantly agreed that some of his behavior was frustrating, and then began to
explore ways he might be able to more effectively manage his behavior, recognizing that
it was a problem for others, and was not communicating what he intended. This became
a major focus of treatment.


Additional Thoughts About the Treatment
Agreement
We have written a great deal about potential violations of the Treatment Agreement. When
violations do occur, they present real difficulties in treatment and challenges for the therapist.
However, these kinds of problems just aren’t that common. They aren’t that common in
general, and they are even less common when IPT is done well. If the therapist listens to
the patient, and honestly tries to understand him, then there are not that many times when
disagreements occur. And if the patient truly feels understood, he will make every effort to be
on time.

                                                                                                   103
The Treatment Agreement

    These kinds of problems also aren’t that common because of the flexibility inherent in
IPT. If the therapist unilaterally insists that the therapy must terminate after a fixed number of
sessions, the patient is likely to object. A poor therapist will remain intransigent and label the
patient as difficult or resistant; a virtuoso therapist will discuss problems with the patient and
come to an agreement to extend therapy if both agree it would be of benefit. Violations just
aren’t that common if IPT is conducted well and collaboratively.
    As a corollary, if the therapist finds that agreement violations occur with several of his
patients, it is worth carefully examining where the problem is originating. Therapist rigidity
will provoke patient ‘resistance’ as a reaction; therapist flexibility and listening well will
facilitate a strong therapeutic alliance.

Conclusion
The Treatment Agreement is an essential part of IPT. It should be negotiated after the
Interpersonal Formulation is completed at the end of the Initial/Assessment Phase of IPT.
Establishing a clear and consistent agreement is crucial because it is a reference point both
therapist and patient can return to if therapeutic boundaries are threatened. Since addressing
the therapeutic relationship directly is not a focus of IPT, the agreement carries even greater
weight because it allows boundary problems to be addressed a priori, ideally without
recourse to discussions of transference.




104
                                            ﻿




                                 Section 3
IPT Techniques


Chapter       8. Clarification
Chapter     9. Communication Analysis
Chapter 10. Problem Solving
Chapter 1 1. Use of Affect
Chapter 12. Role Playing
Chapter 13. Homework and Other Directives
This page intentionally left blank
                                                                        8
Clarification
Introduction                                                                                     107
Clarification in IPT                                                                             108
Clarification and the Patient’s Attachment Style                                                 108
The Art of Clarification                                                                         108
Using Clarification to Begin Sessions                                                            109
Potential Difficulties with Clarification                                                        110
Conclusion                                                                                       113



Introduction
Clarification is one of the most frequently used techniques in Interpersonal Psychotherapy
(IPT). It is the ‘heart and soul’ of the Assessment/Initial sessions, but should be used
frequently at all times during the course of IPT. Clarification is nothing more than:
●● Asking good questions so that the therapist can better understand the patient’s experiences

●● Asking very good questions so that the patient can understand his own experiences better

●● Asking extraordinarily good questions so that the patient is motivated to change his behavior.

Clarification is a ‘non-specific’ psychotherapeutic technique, and its use is not unique
to IPT. As with all IPT interventions, clarification should facilitate the IPT therapist’s
understanding of the patient, the patient’s understanding of himself, and increase the
therapeutic alliance.
     The process of collaboratively exploring – clarifying – a particular aspect of a patient’s
interpersonal experience is therapeutic in a number of ways:
●● It provides the therapist an opportunity to validate the patient’s experiences and distress

●● It provides an opportunity for the patient to explore and reflect upon his interpersonal

   experiences within a supportive therapeutic relationship
●● It helps the patient to more clearly communicate his experiences to others, as practice in

   doing so occurs first under the therapist’s guidance
●● It helps to consolidate the therapeutic alliance by emphasizing that the patient and ther­

   apist are involved in the collaborative process of exploring the patient’s experiences.
Despite the apparent simplicity of clarification, asking questions is a real art. It requires that
the therapist take a genuine interest in the patient, and that the therapist be able to convey
this interest to the patient. This is not a platitude. It is a very real and very critical part of the
therapy. To do IPT well requires – literally – that the therapist listen well, listen with genuine
empathy, and listen with genuine caring for the patient. Nothing less will do.
     Patients who are less securely attached are apt to be particularly vigilant for therapists
who are less than genuine, so clinicians will need to work diligently and creatively to use
clarification to foster a productive therapeutic relationship with them. With such patients,
clarification as a means of conveying a desire to understand the patient and to help him feel

                                                                                                 107
Clarification

less isolated is critical in developing the alliance. With such patients the structure of IPT can
be changed as well, so that an additional assessment session or two can be used to listen well
and work on the alliance before introducing more structure.
     When in doubt, listen well. When in doubt, clarify more.

Clarification in IPT
Clarification as a technique is best considered an integration of the following:
●● Directive questioning: The therapist should gently guide the patient towards pertinent

   interpersonal issues during the clarification process. The primary focus on interpersonal
   issues is an aspect of clarification that is unique to and characteristic of IPT.
●● Empathic listening: The therapist should validate the patient’s experiences and concerns

   regarding his interpersonal problems.
●● Reflective listening: The therapist should work to ensure that he is correctly understanding

   the patient, often using statements such as, ‘So what you’ve said is . . ’ . to check his compre-
   hension of the patient’s description.
●● Encouragement of spontaneous discourse: The therapist should use verbal and non-

   verbal cues to encourage elaboration by the patient.

Clarification and the Patient’s Attachment Style
During the process of clarification, the therapist can gain valuable insight into the patient’s
attachment style by evaluating the way he responds to open-ended questions about
relationships. This is particularly helpful during the Interpersonal Inventory. Such inferences
may help the therapist understand the patient’s experience of interpersonal problems, as
well as helping to anticipate potential problems in the therapeutic relationship. It should also
guide the therapist in determining to what degree close or open-ended questions should
be used, and the degree to which the questions should be directive. More securely attached
patients can generally tolerate more directiveness on the part of the therapist, while those that
are less securely attached may need more empathy and reflection from the therapist in order
to develop and sustain a good alliance, particularly early in therapy.

The Art of Clarification
The use of clarification requires a balance between encouraging spontaneous narrative by
the patient and using more directive questions to keep the discussion focused. The therapist
should be prepared to allow some degree of drift, as it may lead to the disclosure of new
material, but the general focus should be interpersonal and based on the Problem Area under
discussion.
    The artful use of clarification can be compared with a damper on a fireplace. More directive
questions can be used to ‘open the damper’ and generate a more intense fire, while less directive
and more empathically driven questions can be used to ‘close the damper’ so the fire doesn’t get
out of control. Enough heat is needed to keep the patient motivated to change; too much and
the patient will (psychologically) spontaneously combust. More securely attached patients can
generally tolerate more affective heat than those less securely attached. The therapist’s job is to
keep the fire burning at the most efficient level by directing the interview in this way.
    As an example, consider a patient in distress after being diagnosed with cancer.
Opening the damper would be asking questions such as: ‘What was it like for you when
108
                                                                    Using Clarification to Begin Sessions

you received the diagnosis?’ or ‘What do you imagine the surgery and chemotherapy will
be like?’ Closing the damper would be asking questions or making statements such as,
‘What’s been helpful to you in coping with this?’ or ‘How have others been supportive to
you?’ Empathic comments such as ‘I’m sorry that you’re struggling so much’ will close the
damper even more.
     The directive clarifications get right to the point, and ask in open-ended fashion
questions about the patient’s experience. They are the ‘What is that like for you?’
questions. The less directive clarifications ask more about support, coping, and how
the patient can manage more effectively. Both are important. Balancing them well is to
conduct virtuoso IPT.
     In contrast to IPT, therapists using more ‘expressive’ and psychodynamically based
treatments often encourage the patient to produce narrative that is free-flowing and at
times may be circumstantial or discursive. While this may be useful for uncovering latent
or unconscious psychological content, it is not so useful in IPT. There are several reasons
for this. First, expressive orientations distract from the focus on the rapid resolution of the
patient’s symptoms and distress. Allowing an open-ended focus over a longer time period is
likely to move the treatment to a transference-based therapy. That’s fine if you are doing long-
term psychodynamic work, but not so good if you are doing a short-term acute treatment
such as IPT. The acute time limit in IPT requires a more specific focus for discussion than
longer and less structured treatments. Efficiency is key in IPT.
     Second and most importantly, using more directive clarifications in IPT allows the
therapist to encourage the patient to make changes in his communication and to resolve
the problems he faces outside of therapy. This is because when the patient reflects upon
and responds to the ‘What is the experience like for you?’ questions, he is learning to
communicate his experiences differently. And he’s getting practice in talking about them,
and in helping others understand them. This happens first with the therapist, then with
others outside of therapy. The goal is to get the patient to articulate his experiences,
struggles, distress, and need for help to others in a way that they can better understand
and better respond to.

Using Clarification to Begin Sessions
Mindfula of the need in IPT to maintain an interpersonal focus and to direct the patient’s
attention to the specific problem at hand, the therapist should typically begin sessions by
avoiding general non-directive statements such as ‘How are things since we last met?’
    More appropriate and directive questions to start sessions include those that draw the
patient’s attention to the interpersonal problem last discussed, and those that clearly convey
to the patient the expectation that work is to be done on these issues between sessions.
Examples of directive questions like this are:
       Over the last few weeks we have been discussing the problem you are having
       with your partner. Can you update me how this has been progressing?
       Last week we decided that you would take on the homework assignment of talk-
       ing with your partner about finances. How did it go?
Initial questions like the above establish a focus for the discussion of interpersonal problems,
direct the patient’s attention to the specific problem at hand, lead naturally into a continuing
a	
      ou can and should be mindful in IPT just like you can focus on interpersonal issues in mindfulness oriented
     Y
     therapies – both will be the better for it.

                                                                                                                     109
Clarification

discussion of the problem in the current session, and reinforce the therapist’s expectation that
the patient will work on the problem between sessions.b

Potential Difficulties with Clarification
The Patient Who Continually ‘Wanders off Subject’
The therapist must be constantly attentive to the direction of the discussion. If the patient begins
to wander off, redirection or a gentle but direct request to return to the interpersonal topic are
helpful. The therapist should highlight the need to remain on task, and if needed can review the
Interpersonal Formulation with the patient to emphasize the specific Problem Areas that were
determined to be therapeutic foci. The use of more closed-ended questions may be helpful to
redirect the discussion to interpersonal areas, with a return to more open-ended questions once
the focus of discussion is firmly refocused upon the interpersonal problem.
      Patients who are vague at times or who have trouble organizing their thoughts well tend to
engender digression in the therapy. When a therapist finds himself following a divergent lead,
it is best to regroup by consulting the Interpersonal Inventory or Formulation. Returning to
the original Problem Areas allows the therapist and patient to refocus the discussion.
      It is also useful to examine the disorganization or digression as an interpersonal
communication, and to discuss the ways it might cause problems in the patient’s extra-
therapy relationships. For instance, the therapist might comment:
       There have been a few times now when our discussion has led us to areas that
       seem to be a little off the track. This seems to have made us both a bit confused
       about where we are heading in working with your problems. Do you find that this
       happens when you are discussing this problem with others? How does it seem to
       affect your relationships with other people?


The Therapist Who Continually ‘Wanders off Subject’
There are occasions when even the most experienced IPT therapist finds himself moving
into more intrapsychic work with the patient. Many times this is because the patient’s
psychodynamic processes are just too intriguing, and the therapist falls prey to the
temptation to ask about dreams or even the patient’s fantasies about the therapist simply
because it is so fascinating (and narcissistically gratifying). This is particularly difficult for
therapists who come from a more psychodynamic background, because there are times the
therapist may feel that he has to ‘hold back’ and not follow transferential leads that might be
used in less structured approaches. Recognizing this temptation when it occurs is the best
way to prevent drift, and if the patient begins to share a fascinating dream, the therapist can
simply ask him whether he has told anyone else about it, and how the meaning in the dream
and its ramification for relationships might be communicated to significant others.


b	
      an you set a formal agenda at the beginning of each IPT session? Yes. IPT is flexible and can accommodate that.
     C
     But use your therapeutic judgment carefully in doing so. The reason is that setting an agenda does not reflect real
     interpersonal relationships. If you are conducting a psychotherapy workshop or an administrative meeting, you set
     an agenda. If you are sitting down to coffee with a friend, it would seem artificial and awkward to set an agenda – you
     don’t say to a friend, ‘I’m going to spend 5 minutes talking about my divorce, 10 minutes on the death of my beloved
     uncle, and 7 minutes talking about my State Fair photo exhibition. Then you can talk.’ Therapy is not a friendship,
     but it is designed in IPT to facilitate the goal of helping the patient communicate better with his social supports. This
     should be practiced in therapy, then extended to the patient’s social relationships, where there is no agenda.

110
                                                          Potential Difficulties with Clarification

Case example 8.1: Henry
Henry was a 36-year-old legal assistant who presented with worsening anxiety in the
context of a marital problem. Henry had received some benefit from cognitive therapy,
although his ongoing relationship difficulties had continued to result in symptoms.
Henry complained to the therapist that his wife, ‘did not understand him’, and that he
‘didn’t want to be in the marriage anymore’. Henry gave an account of his relationship
with his wife that implied a great degree of indifference about its survival. They had
been together only 6 months before getting married; his wife had suggested marriage;
Henry described that he simply ‘went along’. The therapist asked if Henry recalled any
of his thoughts at the time of his wife’s suggestion that they get married, to which Henry
rather pointedly replied, ‘ I don’t really know, and I haven’t really given it much thought.’
His other relationships seemed to be equally ‘unimportant’ to Henry, which was also
clear in his Interpersonal Circle (Figure 8.1).


                                   Interpersonal Circle




                                                                     Bill
                                                                     (father)

                                                                   Chuck
                                                            Marcia
                                                                   (boss)
                                                            (wife)
                                           Intimates
                                                       Maryanne
                                                       (mother)
                                      Close supports
                                                          Extended supports


Figure 8.1  Interpersonal Circle – Henry

While constructing the Interpersonal Inventory, the therapist attempted to clarify the
dispute between Henry and his wife further:
Therapist: Henry, tell me more about your wife.
Henry: Well, um ... there isn’t really much to say.
Therapist: Well, perhaps you could tell me how the relationship started.
Henry: Not a lot to say really – we met, she proposed, I didn’t think too much about it, we got
married.
Therapist: Tell me more about how you met.
Henry: Like what?
Therapist: Well ... how you felt about her then for instance.
Henry: Much the same as now really.
Based on Henry’s responses and the pattern of relationships he described, the therapist
hypothesized that Henry’s style of attachment was rather fearful and a bit dismissive, and
that this was leading to his difficulty in describing any details about his relationships and
feelings. Henry’s tendency to be dismissive of relationships was clearly a potential threat
to the therapeutic relationship, just as it was to his relationship with his wife.
It soon became apparent that the therapist needed to do two things, and to do them
skillfully. First, the therapist needed to direct the therapy so that more specific
information about Henry’s interactions with his wife could be obtained. At the same time,
the therapist needed to make sure that the therapeutic alliance was strengthened so

                                                                                                  111
Clarification

that Henry wouldn’t literally dismiss the therapist and bail out of therapy. An artful mix
of directive questions, empathy, warmth, and a genuine effort to understand Henry was
required.
Therapist: Let me slow down the pace a bit – I really want to understand as best I can what your
experience with your wife has been like for you.
Henry: It’s hard to describe really, but it’s been quite frustrating.
Therapist: It sounds like it has been – it’s hard for me to imagine what it must be like for you.
Could you tell me more about your experience?
Henry: Nothing I do seems to make any difference to her. She doesn’t seem to appreciate that I
have feelings too, even though I may not be quite so direct about it as she is. I really hate it when
she says that I never talk about my feelings. I think that she just doesn’t listen.
Therapist: That does sound frustrating. If we could, I’d like to focus a bit more on one or two spe-
cific interactions you have had with her, so that I can understand the details a bit better.
Henry: Uh huh.
Therapist: Tell me about the last time you had a disagreement with her.
Henry: OK.
Therapist: Where were you?
Henry: At home.
Therapist: What was it that you were both doing at the time?
Henry: I was watching a ball game and she was talking at me.
Therapist: ‘Talking at you’ – that’s an interesting way to describe it. Can you remember some
specific things she said?
Henry: Yeah, she said, ‘You are always doing something else except talking to me!’
Therapist: How did you respond to that?
Henry: I said, ‘Well, I’m talking to you now, aren’t I?’
Therapist: What did she say then?
Henry: Well, I think she said, ‘Can you turn the damn Roosters game off and commit to the con-
versation?’
Therapist: OK, and how did you respond.
Henry: I didn’t really respond, I just kept watching the game – it was the Grand Finals after all.
The therapist continued to clarify the specific aspects of Henry’s interpersonal dispute
with his wife. He remained mindful of Henry’s attachment style, and continued to art-
fully use both open and directive questions to elucidate Henry’s interpersonal experi-
ences. The therapist’s genuine interest in understanding Henry, his real curiosity, and his
empathy was able to carry the therapeutic alliance, and ultimately to help to create a
relationship in which Henry could learn to connect better with his wife.
This was also reflected in the adaptations the therapist made to the structure of IPT.
Rather than rushing to develop a formulation, the therapist elected to spend several
sessions on the inventory. He also asked Henry to bring in some photos to help gather
more information about his relationships. They looked at these together, and then Henry
simply explained what was going on in the photos.
In addition, the therapist made sure to be as collaborative as possible. Henry was very
sensitive to not being heard, so the therapist not only listened well but acted on what he
heard by specifically asking for Henry’s input about how often they should meet, what
they should focus on, and about how long they should tentatively plan for therapy to
continue. To do otherwise would have quickly destroyed the therapeutic alliance and
would have caused Henry to dismiss the therapist as yet another person who didn’t
listen to him or understand him.



112
                                                                                  Conclusion

Conclusion
Clarification is much more than merely asking questions. Clarification involves a delicate
balance between directive queries and encouragement of narrative. That balance will vary
depending on the patient’s attachment style. Clarification is a fundamental method for
establishing and maintaining an interpersonal focus in IPT. The aims of clarification are to
foster the therapeutic alliance and to develop an understanding of the patient’s interpersonal
experiences, helping both the therapist and patient to develop insight into his problems and
ultimately motivating him to change.




                                                                                          113
                                                                    9
Communication Analysis
Introduction                                                                               114
The Goals of Communication Analysis                                                        114
Sources of Examples of Communication                                                       115
Interpersonal Incidents                                                                    120
The Process of Communication Analysis                                                      130
Conclusion                                                                                 137
References                                                                                 138


Introduction
The basic premise of Interpersonal Psychotherapy (IPT) is that individuals have difficulties
because they are faced with an overwhelming stressor in the context of insufficient social
support, both in their intimate relationships and in their general social network. Though the
lack of sufficient social support is frequently due in part to deficits within patients’ support
systems, it is also frequently due in part to poor communication. Patients – people – often do
not communicate their needs clearly, nor in a way to which their social support system can
productively respond. As a direct consequence of these maladaptive styles of communication,
patients do not get their attachment needs or their needs for emotional and physical support
met adequately, and they become distressed.


The Goals of Communication Analysis
Communication analysis is simply a formal technique for investigating the hypothesis
that the patient’s difficulties are being caused, perpetuated, or exacerbated by poor
communication. The goals for communication analysis are:
●● To help the therapist identify the patient’s communication patterns

●● To help the patient identify her communication patterns

●● To help the patient to communicate more effectively.

To do this, the therapist should work sequentially with the patient through the following steps:
1.	 Collect information about the patient’s interpersonal relationships and samples of the
    communication that occurs within them
2.	 Develop hypotheses about why the communication is going poorly
3.	 Present the hypotheses to the patient as feedback about her communication
4.	 Solicit responses from the patient about the therapist’s feedback
5.	 Revise the hypotheses if needed
6.	 Problem solve to develop and practice new ways of communicating.
A strong therapeutic alliance must undergird this process, as the patient must be able to
tolerate feedback from the therapist for it to have any impact, and for it to lead eventually

114
                                                  Sources of Examples of Communication

to change. The specific ways of giving feedback must also be selected wisely, carefully
considering the patient’s attachment style and insight.

Sources of Examples of Communication
The obvious requirement for communication analysis is that there must be communication
to analyze. In IPT, the therapist relies on five potential sources of information:
1.	 The patient’s description of her communications, both generally and specifically
2	 The quality of the patient’s narrative
3.	 The patient’s in-session communication with the therapist
4.	 Reports from or interactions with the patient’s significant others
5.	 Interpersonal Incidents.
Each of these provides extremely important information, and can literally be thought of as
providing different perspectives on the patient’s communication. Communication analysis
must be preceded by an extensive social history, a detailed description of the patient’s
relationships, and her expectations of others, all of which should be collected during the IPT
assessment. This means that communication analysis should be used primarily in the Middle
Phase of IPT to gather more detail about specific interpersonal problems.
     The therapist should also explore the patient’s perceptions of the expectations that others
have of her – this will have been done to some degree in the Interpersonal Inventory, but
should be done in more detail in the Middle Phase. The rule rather than the exception is that
interpersonal difficulties are caused not only by poor communication but by expectations
that are unrealistic or non-reciprocal.
     Most patients are able to give a fairly accurate accounting of their expectations of others,
although this will be colored to some degree by their ability to relate narrative and their
insight. Unfortunately, a patient who has difficulty in communicating directly to others in
her social network will usually also have difficulty communicating directly to the therapist.
Further, a patient who misperceives the communication or intent of others will often
report a biased view of the communication she has with others. Such patients may attribute
malevolent or uncaring motives to others when their attachment needs are not met, despite
the fact that the significant other may be communicating clearly and may be invested in
the relationship. The therapist should therefore explore the possibility that the problems in
communication arise from any or all of the following:
●● The patient is not communicating her needs clearly

●● The patient is not communicating her needs in a way to which her social support system

   can respond
●● Individuals in the patient’s social support system are not communicating clearly to the

   patient
●● Individuals in the patient’s social support system are not communicating in a way to which

   the patient can productively respond.

The Patient’s Description of Her Communications
During the initial history and the construction of the Interpersonal Inventory, most patients
will spontaneously provide the therapist with a great deal of information about their
communication patterns. This may involve direct descriptions of communication by more
insightful patients, or may come in the form of general complaints such as, ‘My husband
never understands me,’ or ‘My wife never listens to me’. Being able to draw the inferential

                                                                                            115
Communication Analysis

conclusion that communication is not going well is not difficult in the latter cases, and does
not require years of psychotherapy training. The IPT therapist should make lots of direct
inquiries about communication throughout the therapy. These direct questions might
include those listed in Box 9.1.
Box 9.1  General questions about communication

 ●  What kinds of patterns do you see in your relationships?
 ●  What kinds of patterns do you see in your communications with others?
 ●  What kinds of things do you have difficulty talking to others about?

 ●  What is it like for you to express anger or displeasure to others?

 ●  How do you respond when others get angry with you?

 ●  What kinds of relationships do you have trouble with?

 ●  What do you do when you are under stress?

 ●  How do you communicate your needs to others when under stress?

 ●  How do you typically respond to others when they ask you for help?

 ●  What feedback have you gotten from others about your relationships?

 ●  How well do you think others understand you?



The patient’s responses to these questions should lead the therapist to develop hypotheses
about the specific communication difficulties that the patient is having. This information
is particularly useful in judging a patient’s insight and her ability to be empathic and to
understand others’ points of view. For instance, if a patient recognizes when responding to
these questions that she is contributing to the communication difficulties, and if she can
understand the kinds of responses that are being elicited, therapy will be much less difficult
than with a patient who blames others for all of her problems.
     The direct report provided by a patient is colored by a number of factors that the
therapist should take into consideration. These include the patient’s insight, motivation,
ability to disclose personal information, and ability to be empathic. The patient’s
attachment style also dramatically affects her presentation. Patients who are more securely
attached are more trusting early in therapy, more able to readily disclose information,
and are generally more understanding of others’ points of view. Conversely, those with
less secure attachments have more difficulty forming an alliance, understanding their
contributions to communication problems, and in receiving feedback from the therapist.
In the latter cases, the pacing of IPT should be slowed to accommodate this, i.e. more
sessions with more of a focus on clarification rather than on using directive techniques
early in the therapy.
     Another piece of information the therapist should be attentive to is the degree to which
the patient generalizes descriptions of her communications. Patterns which are described
in absolutes, such as ‘My boss never recognizes my accomplishments’, or ‘My spouse always
criticizes me’, signify much more entrenched and less insightful ways of understanding
communications and relationships. When met with such generalizations, the therapist should
move to the use of Interpersonal Incidents (described below).
     In general, the concept that the ‘rich get richer’ applies in communication analysis as in
other areas of therapy. Patients with better communication skills are better able to describe
the relationship problems they are having, better able to listen and to understand other’s
reactions to them, more insightful, and more accepting of feedback from the therapist. In
contrast, those whose communication skills are poor manifest that communication style in
therapy, making it more difficult for the therapist to understand the problem, to give feedback

116
                                                      Sources of Examples of Communication

about it, and to assist the patient to develop insight. Consider the following examples from
the Assessment/Initial Phase of treatment with two patients with marital conflicts.
Case example 9.1
Therapist: Tell me how you react when others are critical of you.
Patient: In general, I don’t like it. I tend to take criticisms very personally ... even though I know
that the other person may be trying to give me some feedback I can use, I often see it as critical.
And then when I feel criticized, I withdraw from the other person. I remember one time when I was
getting dressed for work several days ago, and my wife said, ‘That tie doesn’t look quite right with
that shirt.’ Intellectually I knew that she was just trying to help, but it felt like she was criticizing
my competence and trying to put me down. And I was mad because she was probably right about
the tie, so I felt even worse.
Therapist: What did you do after your wife’s comment about the tie?
Patient: I reacted like I usually do – I just kind of looked at the floor and pouted. She’s got to the
point that she’s pretty fed up with that, so she started to leave. But as she was going downstairs, I
walked into the hall after her and said, ‘I know you were just trying to help, but I can’t stand
it when you criticize me.’ We talked about it for a few minutes, but then we both had to leave
for work.
Case example 9.2
Therapist: Tell me how you react when others are critical of you.
Patient: Boy, that’s a good question. My wife criticizes me all the time for no reason. She has a real
bad habit of losing her temper – you just can’t reason with her.
Therapist: Tell me about a specific time when you felt she was critical of you.
Patient: Happens all the time ... last week, yesterday, next week for sure. Maybe you should be
seeing her instead of me.
Therapist: What do you do when you feel she’s being critical?
Patient: I react like anyone would – I tell her to cut it out. In a reasonable way, of course ... I don’t
yell and scream like she does ...
As a means of making concepts such as insight and empathy more concrete, simply
consider which of these two patients you would prefer to work with. The first recognizes his
communication pattern of withdrawal under fire, has insight into his own reactions as well as
his wife’s motives, and even better, has already attempted to address the conflict directly with
his wife. In contrast, the second patient has externalized the problem, has not recognized
how he might be contributing to the communication problem and presents his wife as
completely at fault, and has no motivation to change his own behavior. There is a long line of
therapists waiting to work with the patient in Case example 9.1 instead of Case example 9.2.
    The first patient provided a very good description of the way in which communication
occurs in his relationship. The therapist can use this information directly to give feedback
to the patient, and to help him modify his communication patterns. While the therapist
must draw some inferences about the way in which the second patient is communicating,
hypothesizing that he has difficulty communicating directly, tends to be critical, and tends to
generalize, is quite reasonable and is supported by the patient’s presentation.
    The art of IPT is in helping the patient to gain insight into his communication, and
then to make changes. This is not so difficult with patients like the first securely attached,
insightful, and motivated one. But it takes a therapist who is able to modify her approach to
accommodate the patient’s attachment style and lack of insight, and one who is able to modify
the structure of IPT, knowing that the pace will need to be slower and more time will need to
be spent understanding the second patient’s experience and developing a therapeutic alliance
before more structured and directive interventions can be used.


                                                                                                     117
Communication Analysis

The Quality of the Patient’s Narrative
In addition to the information provided by the patient in response to the therapist’s direct
questions about communication, the quality of the patient’s descriptions also reflects her
communication style. The patient’s ability to produce a coherent narrative, for example, is a
reflection of the way she communicates outside of therapy. If the patient is unable to present a
clear picture of the problem to an empathic therapist who has been trained to help the patient
tell her story, it is certain that she has trouble when trying to communicate to others in her
social environment. The therapist should attempt to answer the following questions about the
patient’s narrative:
●● To what degree does the patient spontaneously produce narrative?

●● How compelling is the narrative? In other words, how well does the patient engage the

   therapist in the narrative?
●● How well are emotions conveyed by the patient?

●● How specific is the information presented? Is it simply a generalization, or can the patient

   describe specific interactions?
The quality of the narrative is also important because it directly affects the patient’s ability to
engage others for support. A clear and compelling description of the patient’s plight will tend
to effectively draw in others to help; a brief and boring description will not. A good story is
interesting to listen to and to relate to; a poor story is not. Consider another comparison, this
time new mothers with newborns in the hospital intensive care unit (ICU).
Case example 9.3
Therapist: What has the experience of having your baby in the hospital been like for you?
Patient: It’s almost impossible to describe really ... I think about her all the time, even when I’m not
in the room with her. To see all of the tubes coming out, and on the machine ... sometimes it seems
like it’s just a dream, and I’ll wake up and I’ll still be pregnant and deliver a healthy baby. I never
thought that I could care for someone else as much as I love her. Several days ago I finally got to
hold her – she’s big enough now that she can come out of the incubator for a little bit, and it was
like my heart just melted, like nothing else mattered. And then I had to put her back in after a few
minutes ... I’ve missed so much, so much of having a normal baby, but I’m so blessed that she’s
alive; that the doctors are taking care of her ... that was probably more than you wanted to hear ...
Therapist: Quite the contrary – that was a beautiful story. Tell me more about the words you’d
use to describe how you have been feeling.

Case example 9.4
Therapist: What has the experience of having your baby in the hospital been like for you?
Patient: It’s been really hard.
Therapist: Tell me more.
Patient: I’m not sure what else to say. I worry a lot about her.
Therapist: Tell me about a day or two that sticks out as difficult for you. What were they like?
Patient: Oh, mostly all days are the same. I just hang out in her room, hold her when I’m allowed to ...
Therapist: What is that like when you get to hold her?
Patient: Pretty good; she’s getting healthier I guess since they let her out.
The therapist in Case example 9.4 has to work very hard to get information, persisting despite
a desire to ask about something else, or even to do something else. This patient will have an
incredibly difficult time engaging other people for support, because it is difficult for her to pull
them into her experience. Her poor narrative is a hindrance to getting the support she needs.


118
                                                                Sources of Examples of Communication

The Patient’s In-session Communication with the Therapist
The patient’s communication with the therapist is another extremely important piece of
information. Since the patient–therapist relationship is typically not directly addressed in
IPT, this information is usually gathered by the therapist experientially rather than by direct
inquiry. A slightly different way of understanding this source of information is to think of it
as derived from the process which occurs during the therapy. In other words, how does the
patient ‘work’ with the therapist, and within that framework, how does the patient specifically
communicate to the therapist?
    For instance, when the therapist is negotiating the Treatment Agreement or constructing
the Interpersonal Inventory with the patient, how capable is she of participating in the
process? Does the patient simply passively accept the therapist’s suggestions, does she
immediately complain that there won’t be enough sessions, or is she able to productively
engage in the discussion, give input, and compromise? When discussing homework,
does the patient have the capacity to work productively with the therapist and to offer her
own suggestions, or does she resist suggestions passively or even aggressively? All of the
interactions in therapy are potential sources for this kind of information.
    One of the basic tenets of IPT is that the patient behaves and communicates consistently
across relationships, including the therapeutic relationship. Simply put, people just can’t help
but be themselves. Thus the information gleaned from the therapeutic relationship has direct
implications about the patient’s relationships outside of therapy. Questions about those outside
relationships should be directly informed by the therapist’s experience with the patient in session.

Reports from the Patient’s Significant Others
Some of the best sources of information about the patient’s communications are her significant
others. While it may not always be possible, in IPT it is strongly encouraged to meet with
the patient’s partner or spouse during the therapy. This serves as a means of providing
psychoeducational information about the treatment to the partner, serves to demystify therapy,
and also helps to enlist the partner in the recovery of the patient. Most important, however, is
the opportunity it gives the therapist to observe the couple’s communication ‘in vivo’ and to get
information from an outside observer. In fact, given all of the advantages of having the patient’s
partner participate in therapy if the issues involve them (a Dispute or Transition involving the
partner for example) there is every reason to include the partner as much as possible. That way
the communication can be directly addressed with both parties present.a
     The advantage of including a significant other can best be illustrated by noting the experience
that most therapists have had when meeting the spouse of a patient two or three sessions into a
course of individual therapy. The patient may have described her spouse in great detail, but when
the therapist has the opportunity to meet the spouse in person, rarely does the description do justice
to the reality. A patient may describe a spouse who is distant and uncaring, only to have the therapist
find after meeting the spouse that he is quite reasonable and not at all like the patient’s description.
Conversely, a patient may describe her partner in glowing terms, with the therapist only later
discovering upon meeting the spouse that the description is completely inaccurate, and that the
spouse is in reality a wolf dressed in the sheep’s clothing of the patient’s over-idealized description.

a	
      ere is accumulating evidence supporting the use of IPT with couples. Approaches currently being studied in-
     Th
     clude couples work in the context of perinatal depression, and partner-assisted IPT in which the partner is included
     as a support for the patient when they are not directly involved in the conflict. We have found a couples approach to
     be extremely effective – the opportunity to see and hear communication as it occurs is immensely helpful in under-
     standing communication problems and in helping both partners to communicate more clearly and effectively.

                                                                                                                    119
Communication Analysis

     Communication analysis is based on the premise that communication problems are
directly involved in the patient’s symptoms and interpersonal difficulties. However, an
important caveat is that the therapist must be mindful that the individuals who are the
recipients of the patient’s communications almost certainly also have limitations in their own
ability to communicate. If so, improvement in the patient’s communication skills may still be
met with rejection or misunderstanding by others.
     In addition, the motivations of others with whom the patient is communicating may
be very different from the patient’s. For instance, a patient may be attempting to get her
attachment needs met in a romantic relationship in which the other person has little or no
investment. More direct communications on the part of the patient may continue to be
met with responses that are negative. This being the case, it is nearly always helpful for the
therapist to meet with the significant others who are involved in the patient’s social support
system, particularly those which are involved in marital or intimate relationships. This is even
more desirable in an Interpersonal Dispute. Doing so allows the therapist to:
●● Observe the communication in the relationship ‘in vivo’

●● Obtain information from the significant other about his perception of the problem

●● More accurately gauge the investment of the significant other in the relationship

●● Provide psychoeducational information to the significant other

●● ‘Demystify’ the therapy experience for the significant other

●● Assign communication homework to the couple.



Interpersonal Incidents
As noted above, one of the explicit and overriding goals of IPT is to help patients improve their
interpersonal communication. The therapeutic aim, given an individual patient’s underlying
attachment style, is to help the distressed patient more closely meet her attachment needs
by communicating them more effectively to others. One of the specific techniques unique
to IPT to help do this is to collect information about particular Interpersonal Incidents. The
technique allows the therapist to more thoroughly understand the communication that is
occurring, and it is also helpful in assisting the patient to begin to appreciate the ways she is not
communicating effectively with others. Interpersonal Incidents are frequently used in IPT, and
are often the first step in the more formal process of communication analysis.
     An Interpersonal Incident is an episode in which communication occurs between the
patient and a significant other. An Interpersonal Incident is a description by the patient of a
specific interaction with her attachment figures or social contacts – it is not a description of
a general pattern of interaction. For instance, if the identified dispute is a conflict between
partners, the therapist might ask the patient to ‘Describe the last time you and your partner
got into a fight,’ or to ‘Describe one of the more recent big fights you had with your partner’.
The therapist should direct the patient to describe in detail the communication which
occurred in each of the specific incidents, taking care to re-create the dialog as accurately as
possible. The patient should also be directed to describe her affective responses as well as both
verbal and non-verbal responses, and to describe observations of her spouse’s non-verbal
behavior. The purpose of collecting and discussing an Interpersonal Incident is fivefold:
1.	 To collect information regarding the miscommunication that is occurring
2.	 To help the therapist recognize the patient’s style of communication and its consequences
3.	 To help the patient recognize her style of communication and its consequences
4.	 To motivate the patient to change her communication
5.	 To help the patient develop new ways to communicate more effectively.
120
                                                                          Interpersonal Incidents

The Interpersonal Incidents process involves three steps:
1.	 Collecting information about a specific Interpersonal Incident
2.	 Analyzing the Interpersonal Incident
3.	 Changing communication.


Step 1: Collecting Information About a Specific
Interpersonal Incident
In psychotherapy, patients will often describe interactions with significant others in very
general terms, leaving the therapist with little information about the specific communication
which has occurred. For instance, a patient may say that her husband ‘never listens to her’.
This statement strongly implies that the patient believes two things: (1) the problem is
pervasive – her husband literally never listens to her, and there are no exceptions; (2) the
situation is permanent and unchangeable – her husband not only doesn’t listen to her now,
but will continue to ignore her in the future. Given these expectations, it is no surprise that
the patient feels a sense of hopelessness. If her statement and the implications are true – if in
fact her husband never listens to her and never will – the only options left to the patient are
to put up with the relationship and continue to suffer, or to end the relationship. No middle
ground, compromise, or improvement in communication is possible.
     A general statement like this should not be allowed to stand unchallenged in therapy.
Irrespective of the approach taken, the therapist must work on the patient’s sense of frustration
and helplessness, or the relationship problem will continue, along with the psychological
distress the patient is suffering. Direct, focused, and externalized attributions of problems by
the patient must be challenged by the therapist.
     There are several different ways of approaching a patient who makes a general statement
like this. First, the therapist might choose to challenge the veracity of the patient’s statement. For
instance, the therapist might ask if it is really true that her husband always ignores her all of the
time and under all circumstances. Exceptions would be sought – perhaps there were times in the
past that were different. A cognitive therapist might challenge the distorted and absolute thinking
of a patient who made a statement like this, perhaps assigning homework with the specific intent
of challenging her cognition and determining whether her husband did in fact always ignore her.
     In contrast to an approach which questions the accuracy of the patient’s cognitions, the
IPT therapist is focused on the way the patient communicates her attachment needs. Rather
than addressing internal processes, the IPT therapist is concerned with examining the
interpersonal communication which is occurring in the relationship. In IPT, this begins with
collecting detailed dialog from a specific interaction.
     The hypothesis guiding the way an Interpersonal Incident is collected and analyzed is
that the ‘problem’ presented by the patient is the result of poor communication. Something
is not going well in the communication between the patient and her husband. This does not
presuppose blame; rather, it is assumed in IPT that the communication within the system
is maladaptive. In fact, in a situation in which there is a clear-cut dispute between two
individuals, it is preferable to meet with both in therapy to observe the communication ‘in
vivo’. Unfortunately, it is often not possible to do so – in marital disputes one partner may not
be willing to attend the sessions; in conflicts at work only one party may attend. There are a
variety of situations in which only one of the people involved in the conflict is willing or able
to come to therapy. The principle in IPT in such a situation is to work with the person who
does come, with the hope that as that individual changes her communication, the system as a
whole will change as well.
                                                                                                 121
Communication Analysis

     Thus the basic hypothesis with which the IPT therapist begins is that the patient (and
her husband) are not communicating well and that the patient’s attachment needs are not
being met. (It is, of course, quite likely that her husband’s interpersonal and emotional needs
are not being met either.) The IPT therapist works from the position that both parties are
communicating ineffectively, and that both likely have unmet needs. Both may also be
assuming that their communication is being understood and that they understand the other
person, when in fact this is almost certainly not the case.
     A general statement such as ‘My husband never listens to me’ also conveys a great deal about
the patient’s reluctance to address her own behavior and her possible contributions to the problem.
Absolute statements are at one level an attempt by the patient to influence the therapist, so that the
therapist will come to share the same absolutist view as the patient – i.e. that ‘blame’ for the problem
is external to the patient. Such a statement literally ‘pulls for’ a response from the therapist in which
she is drawn to sympathize with the patient and to say something such as: ‘If I had a husband like
that, I’d feel frustrated too.’ Thus the patient’s statement is in part an attempt to enlist the therapist as
an accomplice in blaming her husband for the problem. Consider, for example, the differences in the
presentations below. In Case example 9.5, the patient makes a general statement about her husband
which indicates a complete externalization of the problem – it is all her husband’s fault. The first
patient is literally attempting to elicit a response from the therapist which confirms her worldview
and which absolves her from responsibility for change. Conversely, in Case example 9.6, the patient
exhibits some insight, an openness to change, and enlists the therapist to help to create that change.
Case example 9.5: General statement
Patient: It’s all my husband’s fault – he never listens to me!

(Note that blame is placed on the husband with no acknowledgment by the patient of any
responsibility for the communication problem. Insight is very limited. The therapist can re-
spond by accepting the patient’s statement as fact, by challenging it, or by asking for more
information about the situation.)
Therapist: Tell me more.
Patient: Well, he has a bad habit of always ignoring people, and as soon as he thinks anyone is
being critical, he simply walks away. He’ll never change.

(The patient attempts to elicit a sympathetic response from the therapist, hoping to gain
an accomplice in blaming her husband. An IPT therapist would move here into an Inter-
personal Incident to get more information about the communication that is occurring
and to begin to examine the patient’s specific communication with her husband.)

Case example 9.6: Specific statement
Patient: My husband and I have been having some problems lately in talking about things. I feel
really frustrated.

(Note the absence of absolute conditions, the framing of the problem as mutual and
systemic, and the inclusion of a description of feeling state by the patient. The patient
moves to enlist the therapist as an expert in helping her solve the problem.)
Therapist: Tell me more.
Patient: Well, over the last several months when we try to talk about money, both of us end up
getting really frustrated. He has a tendency to withdraw when he thinks that I am getting critical,
but he doesn’t seem to understand how worried I am about our finances right now.

(The patient recognizes her husband’s response to her communication, has some insight
into her contribution to the problem, and also understands that there is a mutual com-
munication problem. This patient will be much easier to work with because she is open
to change, in stark contrast to the first patient.)

122
                                                                            Interpersonal Incidents

General statements such as ‘My husband never listens to me’, although containing a grain of
truth, almost always represent only one (very biased) side of the story. What is more likely is
that while the patient’s husband may indeed be insensitive, some of his non-responsiveness is
due to the patient’s communication style. She may, though intending otherwise, come across as
critical or uncaring, or may simply be trying to communicate at a time when it will not be well
received. She may also be unwittingly ignoring important communications from her husband.
     The general statement in Case example 9.5 does not contain any of this information. More
detail must be obtained. Therefore, when eliciting Interpersonal Incidents, the therapist’s task is
to have the patient re-create, in as much detail as possible, a specific interaction between herself
and her husband. This should not be a typical interaction, which will allow the patient to continue
making general statements – it must be a specific incident. As this is not usually what patients
spontaneously talk about, the therapist must direct the patient to produce this material. The goal is
to use this ‘step-by-step’ (or perhaps better put, ‘blow-by-blow’) report to understand the way the
patient conveys her attachment needs, acting on the hypothesis that she is communicating in such
a way that she is being misunderstood and is therefore not being responded to as she would like.
Case example 9.7: Maude
Maude was a 42-year-old woman who sought treatment for a marital conflict. She had been
married to her husband Harold for 11 years, and had two children aged 5 and 7 (Figures 9.1
and 9.2). She reported that things with Harold had been deteriorating over the last two years,
culminating with his decision to quit his job and become a day trader in stocks. She reported
that she was very concerned about their finances, and that he had not been willing to talk
to her about them. By her report he got very defensive when she questioned him about their
financial situation. She reported that she felt that the family was essentially living off of her
salary while Harold was ‘gambling’ with the family’s future.


                                 Interpersonal Circle


                                                               Elaine (mother)


                                    Logan (son)
                                  Maddie (daughter)
                                                         Harold
                                                         (husband)
                                     Rita   Shelly
                                       Intimates

                                                                 George
                                                                 (father-deceased)
                                    Close supports
                                                          Extended supports

Figure 9.1  Interpersonal Circle – Maude


Early in the Middle Phase of IPT, Maude and her therapist were discussing her conflict
with Harold. Her description of the conflict was a classic general statement about the
relationship:
Therapist: Tell me about your relationship with your husband.
Maude: He never listens to me. I am getting very worried about the finances, and he will never
talk about it. He just gets defensive. To be honest, I came to therapy in part to try to decide if it
would be better if the children and I left him.

                                                                                                   123
Communication Analysis

          Biological factors         Social factors                  Psychological factors
          42 years old               Fair support from husband       Good sense of humor
          Female                     Good support from family        Intelligent
          Healthy diet                 and friends                   Responsible
          Exercises regularly        Well educated                   Married 11 years
          High blood pressure        Employed as a librarian
          High cholesterol           Financial concerns




             Cultural factors                                    Spiritual factors
             Parents divorced when                               Does not affiliate
              she was young                   Maude
                                                                  with any religion

                                   Acute Interpersonal Crisis
                                 Interpersonal Dispute (husband)


                                          Distress
                          (Marital problems, contemplating divorce)

Figure 9.2  Interpersonal Formulation – Maude

A grid can be used to graphically display the process which drives the exploration of an
Interpersonal Incident (Figure 9.3). The patient’s communications can be divided into
general statements and specific statements, and the emotional descriptions of events can
also be either general or specific. The process with Maude began with her general state-
ment about her husband: ‘He never listens to me.’ If this was true, and if the situation is as
she describes, her concerns are quite warranted, and it is quite understandable that she
would think about divorce as a way of escaping the situation. Before accepting heading in
this direction, however, the therapist should move into a specific Interpersonal Incident to
determine how Maude’s communication is contributing to the conflict she is describing.

                             Specific incident                General statement


            Content                                      My husband never listens to me



              Affect



Figure 9.3  Interpersonal Incidents: general statement

The next step in the process is to ask the patient to describe her affective responses to
the general statement and the situation in general. The goal is to connect symptoms and
distress with the interpersonal problem, and to help the patient become more affectively
engaged in the process – it is important because it is causing distress. In this case, Maude
described feeling very hopeless, frustrated, and angry (Figure 9.4).

After obtaining information about the emotional content of the conflict and connect-
ing it to the interpersonal problem, the therapist should specifically ask the patient to
describe an Interpersonal Incident. This can be done by asking her to describe either a
recent conflict, or to describe a specific incident that is a good example of the conflict
problems. The patient should not, however, describe the ‘typical’ pattern of interaction,
as this is simply reiterating the general statement of the problem. The therapist must

124
                                                                          Interpersonal Incidents

                               Specific incident             General statement


             Content                                  My husband never listens to me



               Affect                                 I feel depressed, frustrated, angry


Figure 9.4  Interpersonal Incidents: general affect

­ irect the patient to present a specific interaction so that the specific communica-
d
tion can be examined in detail. Directives such as ‘Tell me about the last time you and
your husband got into conflict’ or ‘Tell me about one of the big conflicts you have had
recently’ are good ways for the therapist to do this.

Once the patient begins to describe the interaction in detail, the therapist must then direct
the patient to produce, as accurately as possible, the exact dialog that occurred. In addition to
the spoken communication, the patient should also be asked to describe the emotional con-
tent of the communication in detail. The task of the therapist is to get the patient to re-create,
in as much detail as possible, a precise description of the interactions that occurred during
the conflict. The therapist should ask not only about the verbal interactions that occurred,
but also the non-verbal communications that took place, such as using silence in a hostile
fashion, slamming doors, leaving the situation in the middle of an interaction, etc. This
should include a detailed description of what the patient said to begin the interaction, how
her husband responded, what she understood him to say, how she responded in turn, and
so forth until the end of the interaction. The whole interaction. In detail. Everything that was
communicated. Special note should be made of the end of the interaction, as many conflicts
may carry over to the next day, or may be brought up again in subsequent disagreements.
The end is also a time when one or both people may act out by leaving angrily, slamming
doors, giving the silent treatment, or turning to look at an interesting app on their cell phone.

The following dialog ensued when the therapist asked about a specific interaction:

Therapist: Tell me about the last time that you and Harold had a disagreement about the
finances.

Maude: Oh, we fight about it all the time.

Therapist: It would be most helpful if you could tell me about a specific time – perhaps one that
has happened recently or is clear in your mind. I’d like to know about the specific details as much
as possible.

Maude: Well, the last time that comes to mind is a fight we had last Tuesday after dinner. We
were eating late, and had put the kids to bed.

Therapist: What happened?

Maude: I asked him how his day was, and then we got into a fight.

Therapist: Tell me more about what exactly was said.

Maude: I think I said something like, ‘I suppose you’ve been making loads of money again
today.’

Therapist: That’s the way it started?

Maude: Yes, and then he said, ‘Don’t start that up again.’

Therapist: What did you say next?

                                                                                                125
Communication Analysis

Maude: I said, ‘We’ve got to talk about this sometime, so quit trying to avoid it.’
Therapist: What happened next?
Maude: He got up and left.
In contrast to Maude’s general statement, the additional information suggested that
there was much more to the story. Asking about a specific incident allowed the therapist
to more clearly examine the communication that was occurring, and to draw more accu-
rate conclusions about what was causing the conflict and what might be done to resolve
it. Maude’s responses are shown graphically in Figure 9.5.

                            Specific incident                     General statement

          Content      Tuesday evening we had a          My husband never listens to me
                       fight after dinner



            Affect                                       I feel depressed, frustrated, hopeless


Figure 9.5  Interpersonal Incidents: specific incident

The next step is to connect emotional responses to the specific incident. In addition to
the spoken words, the emotional content of the communications should be examined.
Asking questions about what kinds of emotions were conveyed, how the patient felt
about specific statements, and even the way in which she perceived her husband to be
responding emotionally are crucial. The following interaction occurred as the specific
incident was discussed further:
Therapist: Tell me about your emotional reactions during that specific interaction.
Maude: I was furious. You know, I guess I was really already mad going into the discussion – it had
been building up for a long time, and I really wanted to let him know how angry I was with him.
Therapist: What was the tone of voice that you used when you made the statement about him
making loads of money?
Maude: I was furious. I’m sure there was an edge to my voice, though I don’t usually yell. In fact,
I know that there was – I really want him to know how angry I am.

Maude’s specific affective responses are shown graphically in Figure 9.6.


                               Specific incident                 General statement

            Content       Tuesday evening we had a My husband never listens to me
                          fight after dinner



              Affect      I felt angry, hopeless         I feel depressed, frustrated, hopeless



Figure 9.6  Interpersonal Incidents: specific affect
The purpose in clarifying the specific communication and the affect involved is to examine
the ways in which the communication is going poorly or is ineffective. This should help
the therapist to draw some tentative conclusions about what is not going well, and what the
patient might do differently to communicate more effectively. The next steps involve helping
the patient to recognize this by reanalyzing the incident, and then brainstorming with the
therapist to figure out how she can communicate more effectively.

126
                                                                         Interpersonal Incidents

Step 2: Analyzing the Interpersonal Incident
Step 2 in the process of communication analysis is to help the patient understand how she
is communicating, and how her communication is keeping her from getting her needs met.
When the therapeutic alliance is strong and the patient securely attached, the therapist may
be able to give direct feedback to the patient about her ambiguous communication or suggest
specific ways to improve it. In most cases, however, an intermediate step is needed.
     After the dialog is clear, the patient and therapist can go through the incident once more
in detail. This time, however, the emphasis is on determining what the patient was trying to
communicate. The premise is that what was intended is not being communicated clearly.
Asking the patient what she intended to communicate, and what her husband may have
heard, in contrast to what was actually spoken or emoted, make the discrepancies more
apparent to the patient, or at least easier for the therapist to identify to the patient.
     It is at this point that the therapist should ask the patient how well she felt understood.
Asking this simple question is literally the most important intervention in all of IPT. It is a
concrete application of the basic principles of communication analysis specifically and of
IPT generally, namely that the patient is not getting her attachment needs met because her
communication is unclear. She is not being understood. And she is distressed and feeling
alone and isolated and hopeless and depressed because she is not being understood.
     Asking ‘How well do you feel understood?’ requires that the patient reflect upon this.
Almost invariably patients in conflict will reply that they don’t feel understood at all. That is the
core communication and attachment issue in IPT: feeling misunderstood and alone. Asking this
question serves another purpose. Since nearly all patients reply that they don’t feel understood
at all, the therapist can then respond by stating ‘That is what we are going to work on! – helping
you communicate more clearly so that you are better understood.’ And that is what IPT is
designed to do – help people communicate their attachment needs and needs for support more
clearly, and to develop and utilize a social support system that can respond to those needs.
     The patient’s response to the question ‘How well do you feel understood?’ literally
allows the therapist to get her foot in the door to influence the patient to change her
communication, and to state directly that this is the goal of IPT. While it should be
communicated much more artfully and gracefully, the bottom line is for the therapist to
respond by telling the patient:
    Since you don’t feel understood, let’s do something about it. And that something
    is figuring out how you can communicate more effectively.
In this second step of working with an incident, the goals are to collect more information
and to generate some insight and motivation on the part of the patient. The idea is to
move the patient from a feeling of anger, sadness, or hopelessness to a feeling of being
misunderstood. This allows the therapist and patient to reframe the situation as one that she
can do something about – if her communication is being misunderstood, then a change in
communication may help resolve the problem. In addition, the therapist can often (if the
alliance and patient’s attachment style can tolerate it) ask questions about how well the patient
understands the other person’s point of view or feelings about the interaction. Most patients
who are honest and non-defensive will confess that they really don’t know or understand
what the other person is thinking and feeling. Again, this leads to an opportunity for the
therapist to highlight that the communication within the dyad is unclear or ambiguous, and
that the patient may want to find out from her partner what he is thinking and feeling.
     To clarify Maude’s intent and help her understand the lack of clarity in her
communication, the therapist returned to the specific dialog and asked questions about what
                                                                                                127
Communication Analysis

Maude intended to communicate, and how well she felt understood. He also asked questions
about how well Maude understood Harold’s reactions and motivations, which were designed
to help Maude reframe the situation as a problem within the relationship rather than
externalizing it entirely to Harold. The therapist’s hope was that as Maude realized she didn’t
understand his position well, or if she at least became motivated to find out more about how
he was reacting, the communication would be improved.
     The therapeutic interaction continued:
Therapist: I’d like to go back through the interaction you described if we might. What I’m inter-
ested in is understanding more about what you were trying to communicate to Harold. When
you started the conversation with him – made the comment about him making ‘loads of money’ –
what were you trying to get him to understand?
Maude: That’s easy. I was trying to convey that I wanted to talk to him about our money situation.
I’m worried, and it feels like he is taking risks with our future.
Therapist: How well do you feel that he understood what you wanted in that moment?
Maude: [pausing for a moment] I guess not at all. I don’t think that he really understands my
point of view at all. If he did, he would take it seriously – he’d listen and stop gambling with our
money.
Therapist: It sounds like he didn’t understand your point of view well at all. That’s what I think we
can work on: helping you to communicate more effectively so that he can understand better what it
is you want and need from him.
Maude: That would be nice, but I’m not sure he’s capable.
Therapist: [consciously deciding to stay on task with the incident] You mentioned that he got up
and left after you started the conversation. What do you think he was trying to communicate to
you?
Maude: [pausing again] You know, I’m not sure. I hadn’t really thought about it that way. I just
assumed he was refusing to change, and that he wasn’t interested in listening. But I don’t really
know what he was trying to communicate.
Therapist: How well do you think you understand his point of view, and what he is trying to com-
municate to you?
Maude: [longest pause yet] I don’t know. I guess not very well. I’m not sure what he’s thinking ...
he’s not the best communicator you know ...
Therapist: It sounds like both of you had pretty strong feelings, including feelings of being mis-
understood. I suspect that neither of you really got across what you were intending. You told me
that you were trying to let Harold know how angry you were – to talk about the finances – but I
wonder if he really understood that. His reaction – walking away I mean – would sure suggest that
he didn’t understand what you wanted. That’s what I’d like to focus on: figuring out ways you can
communicate more effectively, so that the two of you can begin to bridge that misunderstanding
gap and begin to come to an agreement about what to do.
Maude’s responses are shown graphically in Figure 9.7.

Step 3: Changing Communication
At this point, the therapist elected to move on to changing communication. This is simply
working with the patient to find better ways of communicating by brainstorming and coming
up with a reasonable and feasible way of communicating differently. More of the same
communication will get the same results: the patient has to try something different. A great

128
                                                                           Interpersonal Incidents

                           Specific incident                 General statement

           Content     Tuesday evening we had a        My husband never listens to me
                       fight after dinner


             Affect    I felt misunderstood            I feel depressed, frustrated, hopeless



Figure 9.7  Interpersonal Incidents: identifying misunderstandings


analogy to use is to suggest to the patient that the conflict has arisen and been perpetuated
in part because the communication is not going well. It’s as if she’s speaking German and her
husband French. Yelling louder in German is not going to solve the problem; the couple has
to develop a common language – a common understanding – to make any progress.
     Maude seemed to appreciate that her communication wasn’t getting her what she wanted,
and was also beginning to realize that her husband was communicating something too,
although it wasn’t entirely clear to her what that was. Changing communication was focused
on two issues: first, to assist Maude to find some different ways to talk about her concerns so
that she could get a response from Harold closer to what she wanted; and second, to motivate
her to collect more information about what Harold was trying to communicate.
Therapist: Let’s do some brainstorming about how you might communicate more clearly so that
Harold can better understand what you are intending to communicate to him.
Maude: Well, I suppose I could ask him directly to spend some time talking – the last several
months I’ve been so angry I’ve just made snide remarks to get his attention. Still, it’s such a hot
topic for us that I don’t know if that will work.
Therapist: It may not work, but the results probably won’t be any worse than what is happening now.
Maude: That’s certainly true – we don’t seem to be getting anywhere now.
Therapist: How could you find out more about what he is really feeling?
Maude: I guess I’ll just have to ask him.
Therapist: When would be a good time to ask him about it, and to have the conversation?
Maude: Tuesday evenings are the best – we have dinner late, and the kids are in bed – I hope we
haven’t set a precedent with our last fight!
Therapist: Tuesday it is then. You’ll have to let me know next week how it went.
Maude: I’m a bit more optimistic now – he’s not such a bad guy, you know.
At the end of the discussion of the Interpersonal Incident, Maude had a different picture
of the interaction between herself and her husband. Rather than viewing the problem as
intractable, Maude now saw some hope that things could be different. By changing her
communication, it was possible that she could get her needs met more effectively. Further,
it was possible that her husband would do likewise in response if she were able to take an
interest in what he was feeling and thinking instead of being critical. Finally, Maude and the
therapist developed a plan of action designed to specifically address the problem, also giving
her a sense of hope that things would improve.
     The interaction can be depicted graphically – Maude’s general statement began with an
absolute assertion that her husband never listened to her. The associated affect was that she
felt depressed, frustrated, and hopeless. When discussing the specific Interpersonal Incident,
she initially described feeling angry and hopeless. As the interaction was discussed in detail,

                                                                                                129
Communication Analysis

her views changed as she began to see that she was not being understood, and that she didn’t
really have a good idea about her husband’s perspective either. She also began to realize (or at
least a seed was planted) that she could change her communication and perhaps bring about
different results. Her affect shifted to more of a feeling of hopefulness, and the hope that she
felt about the specific interaction was then generalized, so that the absolute statement, ‘He
never listens to me’ was transformed into a qualified ‘He doesn’t listen to me when I approach
him critically’. Maude’s more insightful concluding statements (Figure 9.8) contrast sharply
with her initial general statement (Figure 9.3).

                                Specific incident              General statement

            Content        Tuesday evening we had a     My husband doesn’t listen to me if
                           fight after dinner because   I am critical of him
                           I started the conversation
                           being critical


              Affect       I felt misunderstood         I feel HOPEFUL that things can
                                                        change



Figure 9.8  Interpersonal Incidents: affective shift

Maude attempted some of the communication changes that she and her therapist discussed
over the next week. Though she and Harold continued to have some conflict, she felt that
the continued refinement of her communication was quite helpful. Maude and her therapist
continued to review additional Interpersonal Incidents to explore what was working, and
what was not working, in the couple’s communication. After 8 sessions, Harold, recognizing
the changes that were occurring with Maude, relented and came in for several sessions. He
also reported that he felt the marriage had improved.
     Working with Interpersonal Incidents is an extremely useful specific form of
communication analysis. It is a formal means of investigating the hypothesis that the patient’s
difficulties are being caused, perpetuated, or exacerbated by poor communication. The
technique of examining Interpersonal Incidents expands upon this concept by focusing
on specific key interactions. It is particularly useful when dealing with Interpersonal
Disputes, and in helping patients with less secure attachments understand how their style of
communication may be contributing to their relationship problems.

The Process of Communication Analysis
To reiterate, there are five potential sources of information for communication analysis:
1.	 The patient’s description of her communications, both generally and specifically
2.	 The quality of the patient’s narrative
3.	 The patient’s in-session communication with the therapist
4.	 Reports from or interactions with the patient’s significant others
5.	 Interpersonal Incidents.
Irrespective of the source of the communication samples, the general process of
communication analysis is quite simple technically: It is nothing more than developing a
hypothesis about what is causing the patient’s communication difficulties, and reflecting that
hypothesis back to the patient in a way in which she can respond to the feedback and use it to

130
                                                                The Process of Communication Analysis

make changes. However, while the technical aspects are straightforward, the art of giving
useful feedback is much more complicated, as the therapist must be able to modify her
style to account for the idiosyncrasies of the individual patient.
     The feedback to be given is simply a synthesis of all of the information gathered from the
patient about her communications, applied to a specific situation. Data from the patient’s
direct report of communications, the therapist’s impressions of the patient’s narrative, the
therapeutic alliance, information from others if available, and from Interpersonal Incidents
should all be included. These should all be integrated and summarized for the patient,
presented in the context of a specific interpersonal relationship. For instance, with Maude, the
therapist might comment on the marital dispute as follows.
Therapist: Based on what you have told me about your relationship with Harold, it appears
to me that he doesn’t understand why you are so upset. And it sounds like you really don’t
understand his position well either – the miscommunication is going in both directions. My
impression is that when you try to talk to him, your anger leads you to start the conversa-
tion by making indirect criticisms of him, and then he just disengages or leaves. Both of you
end up feeling even more angry and misunderstood. I don’t think that way of communicating
your anger to him is going to work well. I think it would be helpful to think about different
ways of starting the conversation and being more direct about how you feel and what you
want. What are your thoughts about that?
Rather than viewing the hypotheses regarding the patient’s communication difficulties as
set in stone, the therapist should always see them as works in progress that take into account
additional information as it is developed. IPT continually revolves around the gathering
of more and more detailed information about relationships and communications; thus the
hypotheses that are developed by the therapist should be under constant revision, and always
open to input from the patient.
     Further, the presentation of the formulation of the patient’s communication difficulties is
not a one-off occurrence. It is a continuing process in which a tentative hypothesis is offered,
the patient responds to it, and more information is collected. This forms the basis for yet
another, more precise hypothesis, which is then discussed again. Wrapped into this process
are discussions about how the patient’s communication could be modified and the problem
resolved.b

Giving Feedback to the Patient
Once the therapist has gathered information from some or all of the sources noted above,
and has developed a preliminary hypothesis about the patient’s specific communication
difficulties, the interactive process of giving feedback to the patient should begin. The most
crucial aspect of this process is the therapeutic alliance. In Kiesler’s terms,1 the patient–
therapist relationship must have a high degree of inclusion in order for the therapist’s feedback
to the patient to make a difference. In simple terms, the therapeutic relationship has to be
important to both patient and therapist. The patient must attach importance to the therapist’s


b	
      is, among many other instances in IPT described in this text, is a superlative example of the way in which psy-
     Th
     chotherapy is a science. That the data are based on single case examples rather than ran­domized controlled trials
     makes it no less valid, and in contrast to the conclusions drawn from groups of patients in controlled trials, the
     hypotheses the therapist tests with her patient and the data she gathers has immediate relevance to the work with
     that patient. Thus our conviction that the clinical judgment and experience of IPT scientist-practitioners is at least
     as valuable and valid as any conclusions drawn from randomized trials.

                                                                                                                      131
Communication Analysis

feedback – it has to have an impact on the patient. If the relationship is tenuous, or if the
feedback is given prematurely, the therapist’s comments to the patient will be easily dismissed.
    The ideal outcome of the feedback process is that the patient responds to the therapist’s
feedback by literally replying, ‘You really think so?’ The emphasis is on the ‘you’ – the
therapist – who is valued and whose opinion has meaning for the patient. The degree of
importance, respect, and expertise that the patient attributes to the therapist – i.e. the quality
of the therapeutic relationship – will be the primary factor which determines how the
feedback is received. The therapist should establish this kind of relationship with the patient
by conveying warmth, empathy, genuineness, and unconditional positive regard2 – all of the
factors which, though not sufficient for change in IPT, are necessary for change in IPT.c
    As in all aspects of IPT, the therapist must modify her style to accommodate the
attachment style of the patient. More securely attached patients are able to tolerate more
direct feedback, and their security allows them to tolerate it earlier in therapy. In contrast,
those patients with preoccupied attachment styles should be encouraged to develop their
own ideas about their communication problems rather than having the therapist give them
a lot of direct feedback. They need to take ownership in order for the changes to occur. Less
directive interventions are usually warranted with them so that passivity or dependency does
not become a major issue. Those patients who are more dismissive or fearful in attachment
style require more time to develop a strong therapeutic alliance, so feedback should be
delayed until the alliance allows them to tolerate it. They too should be encouraged to develop
their own ideas, with the therapist encouraging the fearful patients and complimenting the
dismissive ones in order to facilitate the process even more.
    An important part of giving feedback to the patient is soliciting her verbal responses
to the therapist’s hypotheses. This means that the conceptualization developed by the
therapist is not a definitive ‘interpretation’ of the patient’s problems, in which the therapist
provides the patient with the ‘correct’ understanding which she must accept in order to gain
insight. Instead, the therapist should literally offer her conceptualizations as hypotheses –
concepts that offer a reasonable explanation but which are open to further investigation
and exploration. The therapist should frame feedback to the patient in a way which reflects
this. Statements such as ‘The information you’ve given me about your relationships seems to
suggest ...’ or ‘I wonder if you are having problems with ...’ should be used, rather than more
definitive statements. And each should be followed by an invitation to the patient to respond:
‘What are your reactions to this?’
    The more ownership the patient has of the conceptualization of the problem the better.
Thus patients should be asked to develop their own ideas about their communication
problems. Questions such as, ‘What do you think are the major patterns in your
communications?’ or ‘How do you see all of these things coming together?’ may be very
helpful. Input from the patient should be encouraged as much as possible.
    In IPT, communication analysis does not necessarily require an understanding of the
psychological or historical factors involved in the communication problem. While it is of
great benefit if the patient appreciates the historical precedents to the problem, it is not
necessary. What is required in IPT is that the patient recognizes her current communication
patterns, appreciates the kinds of responses that she elicits from others, and that she makes changes
in her communication to resolve the problem.


c	
     ‘You really think so?’ really is the best response, because it indicates that the patient is engaged in the process and
      thinking about the feedback. If your patient responds to you by saying ‘You know, you’re absolutely right’, you
      should forgo the narcissistic gratification and run for the hills.

132
                                                   The Process of Communication Analysis

      The implications of this statement are profound. What this means is that even though
patients who are less insightful, less motivated, and less securely attached are more difficult
to work with in therapy, they are still amenable to treatment because the IPT approach
does not require deep psychological insight. It simply requires that the patient recognize
that there is a communication problem and that by changing her communication, it can be
improved or resolved. In fact, it is even possible that the patient can still see the problem as
being external to herself (i.e. the fault of another person) but can recognize that changing her
communications will cause others to respond differently and will improve the situation. Even
very insecurely attached or difficult patients can come to this realization.
      This is not to say that insight and intrapsychic change should not be encouraged in IPT –
it is always better that these happen than not. However, IPT can be used with patients who
appear to lack the capacity for insight, who are not psychologically minded, or who for other
reasons are poor candidates for more insight-oriented therapies. Perhaps the best example
of this is the work in IPT that can be done with patients with somatization disorders.3–5 In
general, such patients are very poor candidates for therapy because they have maladaptive
attachment styles, very poor insight, a distrust of the medical system, and are poorly
motivated. Moreover, they are often hostile towards caregivers, and most importantly, are
quite fixed in their beliefs that their problems are physical rather than psychological. They are,
to state the obvious, not optimal candidates for psychotherapy.
      Nonetheless, even if such patients continue to blame their problems on a medical care
system that doesn’t respond to their needs, they can often come to recognize that changing
their communications leads to better provision of medical care. The goal in IPT is to
help such patients to recognize that changing their communications will result in more
effective responses to their attachment needs. For instance, a patient who frequently visits
the emergency room for physical complaints may come to realize in IPT that this is not an
effective way to get her physical problems addressed. Emergency rooms are very busy, so the
patient will have to wait; she is likely to see a different physician at every visit, and is clearly
not going to get the personal attention that she desires. Scheduling regular appointments with
a family physician who knows her well and is able to give more personal attention is likely to
get her attachment needs met more effectively.
      Somatizing patients may not develop any understanding of the dynamic processes that
drive their care-seeking behavior. They may continue to externalize the problem, blaming
the medical system or even individual emergency physicians who ‘don’t give patients the
time they deserve’. But most will grudgingly agree that they are more satisfied seeing a doctor
who knows them well rather than sitting for hours in an emergency room. They are able to
recognize that changing their communication results in better care.

Case example 9.8: Fred
Fred was a 32-year-old man who sought treatment for complaints of marital dissatisfac-
tion. He described that frequent fights with his wife Sandra were causing him to have
trouble sleeping, were making him more irritable, and were also affecting his work. He
stated that he was ‘fed up’, and was particularly upset about the fact that Sandra had
not been willing to go to therapy with him. He reported no previous history of psycho-
logical treatment, and denied any problems with substance abuse.

In the first session and then again during the construction of the Interpersonal Inven-
tory (Figure 9.9), Fred described that his attempts to be more intimate with his wife had
all been met with rejection. He reported that she, ‘never wants to talk, and consistently
rejects any attempts I make to be affectionate.’ He felt that the relationship was coming
to an end, but was willing to give it one last try.

                                                                                               133
Communication Analysis

                                     Interpersonal Circle




                     Mike
                                             Sandra              John (father)
                   Jeff                      (wife)              Melissa
                                                                 (sister)

                                            Intimates




                                          Close supports
                                                                 Extended supports

Figure 9.9  Interpersonal Circle – Fred

After identifying the conflict with his wife as a focal point in the Interpersonal Formula-
tion (Figure 9.10), the therapist asked Fred in session 3 to describe his relationship with
his wife in detail.


      Biological factors        Social factors                      Psychological factors
      32 years old              Lack of support from friends        Limited insight
      Male                       and family                         Dependent traits
      Sleep problems            Pathetic support from wife          Perfectionist
                                Well educated                       Intelligent
                                Employed as an actuary




      Cultural factors
      Expectation that wife                                    Spiritual factors
       understands his needs                                   Does not affiliate
       without communicating                    Fred            with any religion
       them to her

                                  Acute Interpersonal Crisis
                                  Interpersonal Dispute (wife)


                                             Distress
                                           (Depression)

Figure 9.10  Interpersonal Formulation – Fred

Therapist: Fred, tell me more about your wife in detail.
Fred: Well, when I first met her, I thought she was the greatest thing since sliced bread. We had a
really close relationship. Over the last several years, things have gotten really bad. I don’t think she
really cares about me anymore.


134
                                                      The Process of Communication Analysis

Therapist: What kinds of patterns do you see in your relationship with her?
Fred: Patterns? I hadn’t really thought about that ... I guess the main one I would say is that I
don’t get enough affection from her. Yeah, that’s pretty consistent.
Therapist: What about patterns in the way you communicate with her?
Fred: She thinks that I am too demanding – I don’t agree though – but it’s been a consistent com-
plaint of hers. She grew up in a home where there was hardly any physical affection, and I think
that has affected her a lot.
Therapist: How do you ask her for affection or let her know that you want to be closer?
Fred: Usually I feel much closer to her when we are, you know, when we get together – you know,
sleep together.
Therapist: It sounds like your sexual relationship is very important to you.
Fred: That’s right! And she hasn’t been willing to do anything at all recently – she says that she
doesn’t feel close to me and won’t even consider sex.
Therapist: How have you responded to that?
Fred: I figure that if she really cared about me, she’d know how important the sexual part of our
relationship is. After all, as long as we’ve been married, she ought to know me by now.
Therapist: So how do you tell her that you are upset about it?
Fred: I tell her that if she really loved me she’d take better care of me and pay attention to what I
need.
Therapist: How is that said exactly – I mean, tone of voice for instance.
Fred: I just say it to her in a very matter of fact way – I hardly ever get angry – so she should
certainly be aware of how I feel. It would sure be helpful if you could see her so that you could talk
some sense into her!

The therapist was able to draw several tentative conclusions from this interaction and
other information provided by Fred. The direct report that Fred gave indicated that com-
munication was occurring, but it appeared that Fred was making several assumptions
about what his wife understood. He was assuming that she should understand his needs
without communicating them when he stated that ‘She should know how important the
sexual part of our relationship is.’ He also assumed that she would behave in a par-
ticular way ‘if she loved me’. Assumptions that one’s partner should literally be able to
‘mind-read’ and respond appropriately are quite common in disputes between intimate
partners.

The narrative that Fred produced was fairly coherent, but notable for what appeared to
be a dichotomous presentation of his wife. His description of her when they met was
glowing, but he described their current relationship in very negative terms. There did
not appear to be any balance in Fred’s description of her. A two-dimensional picture was
emerging, with Fred’s wife being either idealized or devalued. Further, his entire narrative
was framed by his complaints that his wife was not caring for him. Rather than a dispute
over a particular issue, Fred’s problems seemed to be related to a general or diffuse sense
that his needs were not getting met.

Fred’s insight appeared to be quite limited as well. He made clear that his wife was
to blame for his problems, and he presented his own communications in the best
possible light: ‘I just say it to her in a very matter of fact way – I hardly ever get angry –
so she should certainly be aware of how I feel.’ Based on the other parts of Fred’s
history, the therapist strongly suspected that this was not the case, and that Fred’s
communications to his wife were neither clear nor presented in a ‘matter of fact’
way. More likely there was a lot of emotion being communicated by both Fred and his
wife. However, Fred did appear to have the potential for insight. His response to the
therapist’s question about patterns in his relationship was met positively, and seemed


                                                                                                        135
Communication Analysis

to get him thinking. The therapist was encouraged that this might be a fruitful area in
which to continue.

Fred’s in-session communication to the therapist, and the way in which he was forming
a therapeutic relationship, was also informative. Although there were few overt signs of
dependency, the therapist did note Fred’s statement that, ‘It would sure be helpful if you
[the therapist] could see her so that you could talk some sense into her!’ This struck the
therapist as more information supporting the hypothesis that Fred had some dependent
personality traits as well as some preoccupied attachment traits, and that these were be-
ing manifest in his attempts to get his wife (and the therapist) to ‘care for him’.

When evaluating the ways feedback might most effectively be given to Fred, the thera-
pist considered three options. First, he could give Fred direct feedback. This might be in
the following form:

   It sounds from what you have told me that you and your wife are clearly having
   some trouble communicating, and that you don’t feel that she is responding
   to you the way you would like. I wonder if some of the things you feel that you
   are communicating clearly might not be quite so clear to her. For instance, you
   seem to be assuming that she will know what you want, both in terms of emo-
   tional closeness and sexual response, but it doesn’t sound as if that has been
   communicated to her clearly. She may be operating under a completely differ-
   ent set of assumptions than you have been. What are your thoughts about that?

This option is completely consistent with the spirit of IPT, and might be quite reasonable
for a patient who was relatively securely attached, and who had already developed a
solid alliance with the therapist. Both would be required for the patient to be able to tol-
erate this kind of direct feedback. If the patient were able to use it productively, it would
be the most expedient and helpful way to work on the problem. In Fred’s case, however,
the therapist judged that Fred was neither able to tolerate such feedback at this point in
therapy, nor would he be able to use it – he would likely experience it as critical and as a
lack of empathy by the therapist.

Option number two, also consistent with the spirit of IPT, was to gently persist with
similar questions about Fred’s interactions with his wife, with the goal of helping him
to appreciate how his communication style and expectations of his wife were leading
to problems. The therapist would begin to move to questions that pushed Fred to think
about things in more depth, and which would (hopefully) stimulate some insight. This
might be in the following form:

   Fred, it is clear that you don’t feel that your needs are being met by your wife,
   and that you have been trying to communicate this to her, but she doesn’t seem
   to respond to you like you would like her too. I would like to try to understand
   better how this happens, and to figure out why this seems to keep happening.
   What are your thoughts about why the two of you aren’t connecting on this?

Such an approach would likely be much more tolerable to Fred, as the therapist would
carefully convey empathy rather than ‘blame’ Fred for the communication problems.
Asking for Fred to take the lead, rather than giving him direct feedback to which he
could respond, would also be more tolerable given his insecure attachment style. This
process, however, would require much slower pacing than the direct feedback approach.

The therapist would also need to be particularly careful to word his statements as at-
tempts to understand Fred. That frame – trying to understand the patient better – has to
be genuine and real. Genuineness cannot be faked, and insecurely attached patients are
experts at picking up insincerity. Virtuoso IPT therapists really do want to understand


136
                                                                                           Conclusion

their patients better. It is no act. It is sincere, and requires being present with patients
and listening well.

Option three, also consistent with IPT, was to have Fred invite his wife to therapy for a
session. This is the course the therapist elected to follow. Despite Fred’s initial protests
to the contrary, when he directly asked his wife she came quite willingly to therapy. The
therapist used this opportunity to collect information from her about Fred’s style of com-
munication, and to observe their communication directly. It quickly became clear that
Fred’s wife was invested in the relationship, but was beginning to get fed up with what
she perceived to be his unreasonable demands. She felt that he was not at all clear about
what he wanted, and tended to pout when he didn’t get his way. The interaction in the
session went as follows:
Therapist: Thanks for coming in today.
Sandra: You’re welcome. I told Fred that I’d be glad to come in for therapy – I even suggested that
we see someone together, but he said he didn’t want to do that.
Fred: I did not – I said that I wanted to work on my problems, but I never said that you couldn’t come!
Sandra: Well, that’s not what I remember.
Therapist: At any rate, now that you’re here, I would like to do two things. First, I would like to
get some feedback from you, Sandra, about your perception of the communication that’s occurring
between you and Fred. Second, it sounds like we need to do some planning about how to proceed
with therapy after this session.
Sandra: My perception is that Fred and I have had a pretty good relationship for the most part,
but that recently it has gotten worse. I can even put my finger on when I think that things started
to go badly. I had a miscarriage about 6 months ago, and we haven’t really been close since then.
Fred just kind of stopped talking after that. I’m not even sure that he knows how I feel about it –
he sure hasn’t asked.
Fred (to the therapist): Oh, I forgot to tell you about that – that was really difficult for both of us.
Therapist: That does sound like a pretty important piece of information. What was that experi-
ence like for both of you?

Both Fred and Sandra began to share their experiences with the therapist, and in the
process of doing so, began to feel that they were finally in a situation where their partner
had to listen. At the end of the session, the therapist raised the possibility that he could
meet with Fred and Sandra for two or three more sessions before returning to individual
work with Fred. Both agreed to this, and time was spent both on the grief issues sur-
rounding the miscarriage as well as the communication difficulties the couple were
having. Fred continued in individual therapy for several sessions thereafter, and at the
conclusion of treatment felt that the conflict was largely resolved. He was also able to
appreciate that he needed to be more active and clear in communicating with Sandra in
the future.

In sum, the case is an illustration of the value in obtaining information about communi-
cation from a variety of sources. It also illustrates the classic IPT paradigm in which an
acute psychosocial stressor leads to interpersonal problems in a vulnerable individual.
In this case, Fred’s insecure attachment traits and communication style led him, in the
context of the acute stressor of the miscarriage, to express his needs for connection and
support in a way that led to conflict in his marriage.



Conclusion
Communication analysis is an extremely important part of IPT because it is aimed directly
at one of the root causes of a patient’s distress – namely that her attachment needs are not

                                                                                                     137
Communication Analysis

being met sufficiently. Helping the patient to recognize patterns in communication and
understand the ways her communication is not effective, and then helping her to change her
communication is the essence of the technique.

References
1.	 Kiesler DJ and Watkins LM. Interpersonal complimentarity and the therapeutic alliance:
    a study of the relationship in psychotherapy. Psychotherapy, 1989, 26: 183–194.
2.	 Rogers CR and Truaz CB. The therapeutic conditions antecedent to change: a theoretical
    view, in Rogers CR (ed.) The Therapeutic Relationship and its Impact. 1967, Madison:
    University of Wisconsin Press.
3.	 Stuart S and Noyes R Jr. Treating hypochondriasis with interpersonal psychotherapy.
    Journal of Contemporary Psychotherapy, 2005, 35: 269–283.
4.	 Stuart S and Noyes R Jr. Interpersonal psychotherapy for somatizing patients.
    Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 2006, 75: 209–219.
5.	 Stuart S, et al. An integrative approach to somatoform disorders combining interpersonal
    and cognitive-behavioral theory and techniques. Journal of Contemporary Psychotherapy,
    2008, 38: 45–53.




138
                                                                                       10
Problem Solving
Introduction                                                                                                         139
An Overview of Problem Solving                                                                                       140
The Process of Problem Solving                                                                                       142
Potential Difficulties Using Problem Solving                                                                         146
Conclusion                                                                                                           151


Introduction
Problem solving is a fundamental intervention in IPT, and is a primary method for
helping patients to bring about change in their interpersonal relationships. It is often
utilized at the end of communication analysis, and is a way of helping the patient find
ways to communicate differently, or to develop new social support. Problem solving is of
help with all of the Problem Areas, but is particularly useful in dealing with Disputes and
Role Transitions.
    Problem solving, absent the technical jargon, is a directive technique in which
the therapist attempts to help the patient develop solutions to a specific interpersonal
problem and to implement the best of those solutions. It involves developing an accurate
understanding of the problem, brainstorming with the patient to develop possible solutions,
and motivating him to implement the solution that seems to be best suited to the situation.
Between sessions the patient attempts to carry out the solution, and reports back to the
therapist at the next session with the results of that trial.a The results are discussed in therapy,
and if needed, modifications are made or new ideas are discussed.
    Though the primary goal of problem solving is to relieve the patient’s immediate stressors,
a desirable side-effect is to teach the patient to apply problem solving techniques to other
interpersonal situations that he might face. The old adage ‘Give a man a fish and feed him
for a day; teach a man to fish and feed him for a lifetime’ is a wonderful analogy for problem
solving in IPT. The idea is both to help solve the immediate problem and to teach the patient
the process of problem solving so that he is better equipped to deal with future interpersonal
problems (Figure 10.1).
    The patient and therapist clarify a particular interpersonal problem. The patient
then brainstorms with the therapist to generate solutions to the problem (1), attempts
to implement one of them (2), and additional modifications are made if needed in the
next session (3). The feedback process may lead to new problems which can be clarified,
another round of brainstorming solutions (4), or to modifications of the solution that was
implemented. This process enables the patient to develop a greater sense of mastery over
interpersonal problems.


a	
      is is, of course, an ideal situation; the use of homework and various directives as a means of influence and
     Th
     encouraging the patient to follow through with the proposed changes is the subject of subsequent chapters.

                                                                                                                      139
Problem Solving

                                   Interpersonal problem




                                Patient and therapist clarify
                               specific aspects of the problem


                       1

                                                        Feedback and modification
                                               4

                    Brainstorming:
                    Patient generates
                    solutions with
                    therapist input                                3



                                        Patient implements solution
                           2            Changes in communication
                                        Changes in expectations
                                        Changes in social circumstances


Figure 10.1  An overview of problem solving in IPT



An Overview of Problem Solving
Problem solving has five basic components:
1	 Detailed examination of the problem
2	 Generating (brainstorming) potential solutions
3	 Selecting a course of action
4	 Monitoring and refining the solution
5	Practicing

Detailed Examination of the Problem
The examination of the specific interpersonal problem should include all relevant historical
aspects as well as the patient’s attempts to resolve it. Approaches he has taken to similar
problems in the past, successful or otherwise, should be explored. Throughout the process,
the problem should be linked to the patient’s symptoms and distress. The therapist should
also help the patient to define the problem as specifically as possible. Attempting to address
a general complaint that ‘My marital relationship is going badly’ is extremely difficult,
as opposed to addressing a specific problem such as ‘My spouse and I are having trouble
talking about our finances’. The more specific the problem, the easier it is to address. It is
the therapist’s task while problem solving to help the patient break the problems down into
manageable pieces. Consider the following situation in which the therapist is actively trying
to narrow the focus of a marital dispute:
Patient: My husband never seems to want to spend time with me – he’s not interested at all in my
day or what’s happening with me.


140
                                                              An Overview of Problem Solving

Therapist: Sounds like the two of you don’t talk much.
Patient: My whole life and schedule is totally messed up – he doesn’t understand at all.
Therapist: I can imagine how difficult it must be to juggle all the responsibilities you have. ­Going
back to the dispute with your husband, can you tell me how you have tried to approach your
­communication problem with your husband thus far?
 Patient: Well, I have told him his work has to come second to his marriage!
 Therapist: How has that worked thus far?
 Patient: Not well – he just gets defensive.
 Therapist: I think that if we concentrate on a specific communication problem the two of you are
 having the problem might be easier to address, and may also go a long way towards resolving the
 dispute with your husband. What seems to be the primary issue that leads the two of you to get
 into conflicts?


Generating (Brainstorming) Potential Solutions
Solutions to interpersonal problems should be based on the patient’s own ideas as far as
possible, and the ownership of the process should remain with the patient. The therapist
should try, wherever possible, to have the patient generate the ideas to be discussed, as the
aim of the intervention is not merely to resolve the acute crisis, but also to help the patient
develop problem solving skills.
     Brainstorming solutions to interpersonal problems is basically a technique within the
general rubric of problem solving. The patient should be encouraged to develop any and all
ideas, even ones that at first may seem impractical. The goal at this stage is to develop a list
of alternative solutions from which he can choose the one most likely to be effective. During
this process, the therapist can also introduce new solutions to the patient without directly
telling him what to do. For instance, the therapist may (maintaining confidentiality) share
possible solutions developed by other patients with similar problems. The therapist could, if
therapeutic judgment suggests it would be helpful, also offer suggestions which are framed as
questions. Questions such as ‘Have you considered...?’ or, ‘I wonder if this approach might be
helpful?’ are less direct than giving advice, or than statements that tell the patient what course
to follow. Introducing suggestions at this point also allows the patient to consider them as
one of many options, and allows the patient to retain a sense of autonomy when choosing the
option he wishes to follow.

Selecting a Course of Action
The bottom line in IPT is that the patient must take action to resolve his interpersonal
problems. This may take many forms – often a change in communication or an
extension of social support – but action must occur. The process at this point involves
evaluating the relative ‘pros and cons’ of the potential solutions, and then deciding upon
a course of action. Unless there is a direct threat to the patient’s well-being, it is nearly
always best to encourage the patient to make an autonomous decision about which
course to follow.
    If it suits the individual patient, the discussion can be summarized in written form. Doing
so may, with some patients, provide further impetus to complete the task. In some cases the
therapist could even give the paper to the patient as a homework assignment.


                                                                                                 141
Problem Solving

Monitoring and Refining the Solution
At the beginning of the session after a solution is chosen and a course of action is agreed
upon, the therapist should always ask the patient about the implementation of the solution.
This reinforces the therapist’s expectation that the patient will work on the problem between
sessions, and that implementation of the specific solution is expected as well. This also implies
to the patient that he has the capacity to make changes and to resolve his problems.
     The patient should report back to the therapist with information about how he
implemented the proposed solution. The patient may have enjoyed some degree of success, or
he may have encountered some difficulties or unforeseen contingencies. The therapist should
direct the patient to ‘walk the therapist through’ the application of the proposed solution,
including the details of conversations and interpersonal interactions. Specific Interpersonal
Incidents in which the patient has attempted to implement the solution are helpful to discuss.
Throughout the entire process the therapist should positively reinforce the patient’s attempts
to implement solutions, emphasizing his strengths and minimizing or ‘shoring up’ the patient’s
relative weaknesses. For example, the therapist might start a subsequent session as follows.
Therapist: Last week we developed a plan that you would talk to your wife about your desire to
change jobs. How did it go?
Patient: Not too bad, but not so well either, I guess.
Therapist: I’d like to hear about all of it – can you walk me through the process from start to
 finish.
Patient: What, the whole thing?
Therapist: [directing the patient towards an Interpersonal Incident] Sure, the whole thing, step by
step, from beginning to end. It would be good to start with how you brought the subject up with
her.


The Process of Problem Solving
The Spectrum of Interventions
There is a continuum of specific interventions that fall within the scope of problem solving.
The spectrum extends from more directive interventions, such as the therapist offering direct
advice, to interventions which encourage the patient to be autonomous in both developing
and choosing the solutions to be implemented. Determining which level of intervention to
use depends on a number of factors, including the point in time in the therapy, the patient’s
attachment style, the patient’s ability to realistically develop solutions, and the degree the
patient can tolerate directives from the therapist.
    As with all therapeutic interventions, the therapist should be guided by the patient’s
attachment style when engaging in problem solving. When working with patients with
more secure and flexible attachment styles, the therapist is likely to be able to operate along
the entire range of the spectrum. A more securely attached patient is usually better able to
use suggestions and directives from the therapist than a less securely attached individual,
and ironically is also more likely to be able to function more independently and to more
effectively generate his own solutions. As is the case with other techniques, security of
attachment is a clear prognostic indicator.
    Patients with less secure attachment styles often may have more difficulty with
therapist directives that may be seen as non-empathic or authoritarian. A patient who

142
                                                           The Process of Problem Solving

has traits of preoccupied attachment may develop an excessive dependency or a passive
hostility if a therapist is overly directive, and may not complete homework or initiate
change as a result. The therapist should be mindful of the possibility of generating
problematic transferential reactions if he uses explicitly directive interventions
uninformed by clinical judgment. When working with less securely attached individuals,
the therapist is usually best advised to use interventions which encourage the patient to
be autonomous, doing so by providing lots of positive reinforcement and encouragement
without offering direct advice.
    The use of more directive problem solving interventions also raises the risk that the
therapist’s own personal feelings or judgments will unduly influence the patient’s choices.
This is a threat particularly when the patient’s problem resonates with the therapist’s own life
experience and the therapist offers directives that are based on this, rather than attending to
the patient’s unique situation. As in any kind of therapy, the therapist is well-advised to be
very aware of his personal reactions to the patient and the patient’s story.

Developing New Solutions
Solutions to problems can be developed using many specific interventions. Various
interventions which range from more directive to autonomous include:
●● Therapist direct advice

●● Therapist-directed brainstorm

●● Therapist self-disclosure

●● Patient-initiated brainstorm

●● Drawing on the patient’s past experiences.


Therapist direct advice
The therapist may choose to be explicitly instructive with some patients. Being more directive
usually works best with more securely attached patients who are able to tolerate and use
direct advice, but is sometimes necessary with patients who are simply unable to generate
any solutions to their problems. The therapist should always be aware, however, that a patient
who claims to be unable to generate any ideas may be setting a trap for the therapist similar to
those that he has laid for unsuspecting significant others in his social relationships. Pushing
the therapist to generate the ‘answer’ to the problem may allow the patient to be passive and
may foster more dependency.
     Some patients, however, because of state dependent factors such as a severe depression,
are temporarily unable to generate enough momentum to brainstorm with the therapist.
If this is the case, particularly early in therapy, the therapist may want to offer more
behaviorally oriented suggestions or directives to the patient. This is completely compatible
with IPT, and is reflected in a much greater emphasis on behavioral interventions and
activity scheduling (activities with other people or in a social context to be consistent
with the spirit of IPT) which are appropriately used with severely depressed inpatients, for
example.
     When being more directive and even when assigning specific tasks, the therapist should
model the process of problem solving, explicitly using the process of listing options and
evaluating the relative pros and cons of each. The therapist should frame this as a process to
which the patient can contribute. Some useful statements and questions are:
    I’d like to offer you some suggestions as to how you might approach this
    ­problem – you can contribute your own as you feel you are able.

                                                                                            143
Problem Solving

   Which of the ideas that I mentioned seem plausible to you?
   What ideas can you think of that I may have missed?

Therapist-directed brainstorm
Most patients have an intrinsic capacity to generate solutions to their problems. Their
responses to queries about previous attempts to solve their problems is often a good indicator
of how willing they are to exercise that capacity. The therapist should explicitly invite
patients who are able to problem solve into the brainstorming process. Positive feedback and
encouragement will further foster the patient’s attempts to develop a solution and implement
it. This should enhance the patient’s sense of competence. Useful phrases include:
   Why don’t you run some ideas by me, and then we can try to find some solutions
   by looking at how each of them may affect your relationship problem.
   The approach you used before sounds like it would work really well for you. What
   might be some of the advantages/disadvantages of trying something similar
   now?
For each idea generated by the patient, the therapist should lead the patient through the
process of evaluating the option, and then decide together upon the most suitable approach.
The therapist might also review with the patient the steps to take in the problem solving
process:
●● Specify the problem

●● Break it down into smaller problems which can be addressed

●● Brainstorm – list all the possible solutions, no matter how implausible

●● Identify the pros and cons of each

●● Decide on a solution that can be implemented

●● Apply the solution

●● Review what happens so that it can be fine-tuned if needed

●● Practice.


Therapist self-disclosure
For patients who are less likely to develop problematic transference, and for situations
that are not too personal, the therapist may elect to disclose some of his foibles as a
way of suggesting solutions to the patient’s problem. To be crystal clear, this is not a
recommendation that the therapist self-disclose about any meaningful personal issues.
However, comparatively neutral topics may be suitable pretexts for self-disclosure – if the
therapist chooses to use this intervention – and may include things like minor household
or workplace problems, common difficulties in child-rearing, or managing busy family
schedules.
     As an example, one of the self-disclosures I use quite commonly to emphasize the
need for persistence and practice is my experience with flossing my teeth. Though I
have the best of intentions, I often am too tired at night to take those few extra minutes
to floss – it’s just too easy to put it off. There’s no immediate consequence, no one to
scold me if I don’t do it, and most importantly, it is not a well-developed habit. I haven’t
practiced it well. Of course when I have a dental appointment coming up in a few days,
my guilt takes over and I’ll floss vigorously for a day or two, and then be embarrassed
when my dental hygienist asks whether I have been flossing regularly. The point? Making
changes takes hard work and persistence – there’s no easy or magical solution. Practice
makes perfect.
144
                                                           The Process of Problem Solving

     With proper timing and judicious use, self-disclosures like this can enhance the
therapeutic alliance and convey a sense of understanding and empathy; the risk is that poor
timing and judgment about when to use disclosure, and especially what to disclose, can lead
to disastrous consequences. Therapeutic judgment should rule the day, with non-disclosure
being a very good default in nearly all cases. When it is not clear what to do, err on the side
of not self-disclosing. But it is a good idea to have one or two good benign and humorous
self-disclosures in your back pocket; just be prepared for the patient to ask you if you floss
regularly now, or are still having trouble doing it every day.

Patient-initiated brainstorm
In many cases the patient will readily engage in the problem solving process, and will report
progress to the therapist. In this situation the therapist should support and encourage the
patient, reinforcing the gains made and the fact that the patient has been diligent in tackling
the problem directly. The therapist can also review the process by which the patient came to a
particular solution, further reinforcing it:
    That seems like a great idea. Could you walk me through the process you used
    to come to that decision?

Drawing on the patient’s past experiences
One of the most useful and helpful ways to facilitate problem solving is to simply ask the
patient questions such as:
    What have you done to resolve similar situations in the past?
    How could you apply this to your current problem?
These questions reinforce the idea that the patient is capable of solving his problems,
support his strengths, and help him to develop solutions that enhance his sense of autonomy
and competence. In circumstances in which the patient insists the problem is unique, the
therapist may generate some response from a question like this:
    What usually works for you when you find yourself in other difficult situations?

Homework
All of these problem solving strategies can be coupled with a homework assignment as a way
of increasing the likelihood that the patient will successfully follow through with the solution
that is agreed upon. Homework is not necessary in IPT, but is often a great way to facilitate
interpersonal change – the details of this technique are described in Chapter 13. The ‘in vitro’
process of directed problem solving in therapy can be coupled to an ‘in vivo’ homework
component in which the patient applies the solution to the problem outside of therapy and
monitors the results. This can literally be assigned as homework, or the directive given to the
patient to attempt the solution between sessions can be implied. In either case, the patient
should report the results to the therapist at the next session.
    As therapy progresses, the patient may demonstrate increased competence in solving
problems. If so, the therapist can give the patient a homework assignment to apply the
method to other problems outside of the therapeutic relationship. This might be framed in
the following way:
    You certainly have been able to approach problems and evaluate potential
    solutions here in our sessions. I would like to suggest a homework exercise that
    might help you consolidate this skill even further. You mentioned that there were

                                                                                             145
Problem Solving

       problems related to your mother-in-law, though we haven’t had a chance to dis-
       cuss them yet in therapy. Why don’t you, between now and our next session, try
       to apply the problem solving techniques we have been discussing with respect to
       your wife to the problem with your mother-in-law. Then we can review how things
       went next week.


Potential Difficulties Using Problem Solving
The Patient Has Difficulty Engaging in the
Problem Solving Process
To state the glaringly obvious, all of the IPT techniques work better when the patient
is motivated and engaged. In our initial iteration of this guide, we wrote that ‘excessive
passivity by the patient should be discouraged’. That stunningly useless comment is
problematic both because it lays the responsibility entirely on the patient (i.e. ‘passivity
by the patient’) and gives absolutely no guidance to the therapist about how it should be
discouraged even if that were a reasonable and desirable thing to do. Our experience since
that initial iteration is that telling the patient directly to ‘stop being passive!’ is usually
not very effective. A second and more subtle strategy employed by quite a few therapists,
namely attempting to ‘out-passive’ the patient by being even more inert than he is, usually
doesn’t work well either.
     This clinical experience (and common sense) has led to a major shift in the therapeutic
approach to IPT.b Specifically, in IPT and other short-term therapies, it is now understood
that the therapist also bears responsibility for the patient’s engagement in therapy and
motivation for change. To make the implicit explicit, this means that engagement problems
are seen as a function of the therapeutic alliance – a dyadic relationship to which both
participants contribute – rather than ‘resistance’ on the part of the patient.
     Some of the reasons a patient’s engagement and motivation to change may be poor are
obvious and have nothing at all to do with the alliance. They may be due to the effects of
depression or severe anxiety, or may reflect realistic fears about change. The patient’s real-
life experiences to date, reflected in his attachment style, may well be that change is risky,
that support from others will not be there if needed, or that he is not capable of managing
change.
     The therapy process, particularly the pacing of IPT by the therapist, may also negatively
influence engagement and motivation. Pushing change too quickly with an incomplete
understanding of the patient’s experience – not listening well before being directive – will
impact engagement. That is why IPT is flexible – the therapist can take an extra session or
two in the Assessment/Initial Phase, or add a session or two in the Middle Phase if more
gradual change is needed. The therapist can also bolster the therapeutic alliance by providing
support and positive reinforcement for the patient if his social support network is not yet able
to do so. The therapist can focus early in therapy on more simple and concrete changes. The
therapist can back up and encourage the patient to take smaller steps. These are just a few of
many adjustments that may be helpful.
     For instance, the therapist may choose to select an issue that is less difficult and encourage
the patient to achieve mastery with that problem first, aiming to develop momentum for

b	
      et again an example of the way that clinical science proceeds from clinical observations to more effective
     Y
     ­interventions.

146
                                                  Potential Difficulties Using Problem Solving

more difficult problems or tasks later. It may be helpful for the therapist to be more directive
and active in the problem solving process early in the therapy as a temporary measure in
order to get some momentum going. When the therapist does need to artfully step in to be
more directive early in therapy, he should ensure that additional instances of problem solving
occur later in order to support the patient’s autonomy and enhance his sense of competence.
This can be a gradual shift which fosters the patient’s growing sense of efficacy.
      It is critical to note that efficacy and self-esteem are understood in IPT as both internally and
externally derived constructs. They are understood as part of the patient’s lived experience, and
are influenced both by his internal working models and ongoing external relationships with
others. Efficacy, self-esteem, and even autonomy are derived from lived social experience.
They are derived from relationship.
      Thus IPT recognizes that it is simply not possible for anyone (and certainly not a
distressed patient who is feeling misunderstood, isolated, and insecure) to take a mental
wrench and pry his sense of self from negative to positive. Our plumbing doesn’t work that
way: we are intimately connected to others, or at least wish to be, and our sense of self-esteem,
self-value, and of being loved is developed and sustained within relationships. So instead of
conceptualizing the patient’s difficulties in engaging in problem solving as resistance, in IPT
it is the therapist’s task to step into the patient’s attachment void for a while and to provide
some support. This is what we do as real human beings in our role as therapists: we care for,
support, empathize with, and even love our patients with all of the agape we can muster.
And then we help them connect with others who can do the same, and with whom they can
reciprocate that care and love.

There Do Not Appear to Be Any Solutions to the Problem
There are some circumstances in which the problem does not have a clear solution, or in
which the patient is simply unable to generate a solution. In the first instance the patient
and therapist should return to clarification of the problem and re-evaluate the patient’s
expectations for change. It may be that a minor alteration in the severity of the interpersonal
problem, or a less substantial change in the way the patient deals with it, may be sufficient
to bring about relief. At other times, appropriately implemented solutions may fail to bring
about improvements in the patient’s interpersonal problems, and the focus of intervention
may need to shift to altering the patient’s expectations about the situation or to looking for
social support elsewhere.

The Implementation of the Solution Results in a
Worsening of the Situation
Change may have an adverse effect rather than a beneficial one. Interventions in
Interpersonal Problem Areas may intensify problems, lead to dissolution of relationships,
or lead to an increase in distress. The ‘pros and cons’ of any potential solution require
careful consideration. If the intervention has a risk of backfiring, then the patient and
therapist should generate contingency plans for this possibility. If the adverse outcome was
unexpected, the therapist should inquire about the details of the implementation of the
solution, and also what transpired afterwards – another Interpersonal Incident regarding
the attempted solution is often helpful. In all circumstances, the therapist should reinforce
that the patient should persist with the problem solving approach, and that the setback is
new information which can be used to understand the problem more fully and to develop
modified and improved solutions.
                                                                                                  147
Problem Solving

Case example 10.1: Anne
Anne was a 46-year-old self-employed woman who had been referred for management
of generalized anxiety in the context of significant conflict with her husband. Anne
described her husband as having an ‘awful temper’, and as having a tendency to ‘put her
down’ and ‘speak badly to her’. She identified a number of supportive relationships and
good social support outside of the relationship with her husband (Figure 10.2). At the end
of the Assessment/Initial Phase, she clearly identified her problem as an Interpersonal
Dispute with her husband (Figure 10.3).
Anne was quickly able to recognize that there was a clear pattern to her interactions
with her husband. He would become angry and verbally hostile when he was frustrated,
and this led to outbursts which caused Anne great anxiety. Anne described that her typ­
ical response to his rages was to feel intensely angry herself, but rather than express that
anger to her husband, she would withdraw and try to pretend that nothing had hap-
pened. Not surprisingly, she noted that her own father had been controlling and verbally
abusive with her mother, and that this had an influence on her reaction to conflict. The
therapist and Anne discussed this in detail in the Middle Phase of IPT:
Therapist: It seems the question is how you should respond to your husband’s angry outbursts.
Anne: How to stop them?
Therapist: Well yes, but perhaps more how to respond to them.
Anne: Uh huh…..
Therapist: What have you tried to do in the past when he gets angry?
Anne: I usually run for cover and end up with a migraine.
Therapist: What has been the result?
Anne: Well, he quiets down, but we usually don’t speak for days. I end up feeling worse because I
know that it’s just going to happen again – it’s only a matter of time.
After exploring the communication further by developing an Interpersonal Incident, the
therapist suggested that they attempt to solve the communication problem together, and
that the next step was to brainstorm about potential solutions. She first asked Anne how
she had dealt successfully with similar problems in the past. Anne described how she



                                    Interpersonal Circle




                                                         Barbara         Bob
                                                          Rebecca        (father)
                     Caroline                Jeremy
                                           (husband)

                                  Sheila         Joleen (daughter)
                                                 Kyle (son)
                                           Intimates

                                                        Mary
                                                        (mother)
                                       Close supports
                                                             Extended supports


Figure 10.2  Interpersonal Circle – Anne

148
                                                  Potential Difficulties Using Problem Solving

       Biological factors        Social factors                      Psychological factors
       46 years old              Good support from family            Self-reliant
       Female                     and friends                        Hard worker
       Family history of         Lack of support from husband        Aversion to conflict
        anxiety                  Close to adult children             Intelligent
       Exercises daily           Well educated
                                 Owns successful flower shop
                                  business




        Cultural factors
                                                                Spiritual factors
        Her father was controlling
                                                                Does not identify with
        and verbally abusive to her             Anne
                                                                any religion or attend church
        mother

                                   Acute Interpersonal Crisis
                                 Interpersonal Dispute (husband)


                                            Distress
                                           (Anxiety)

Figure 10.3  Interpersonal Formulation – Anne


often dealt with difficult and irate customers, which seemed to her to roughly parallel
the problem with her husband. Anne generated her possible responses to an angry and
hostile customer. She came up with the following options:
●● Asking the customer to leave
●● Ignoring the hostility and continuing as if there were no conflict
●● Asking the customer to refrain from aggressiveness in her place of business
●● Inquiring what the customer was angry about and offering a compromise.

The therapist then asked Anne how she might apply the same problem solving approach
to her husband’s hostility. Anne stated that she felt the best option with her husband was
to simply ignore the hostility and continue as if nothing had happened. The therapist felt
that this was a poor choice, as it seemed largely to be the same strategy that Anne had
unsuccessfully used to that point. Noting that Anne had a long-term aversion to conflict,
she recognized that giving Anne a concrete directive to follow a different course would
likely provoke a superficial agreement from Anne without a real commitment to change.
Therefore, she bit her tongue and encouraged Anne to try this the next time her husband
became angry. The therapist was primarily concerned at this point with engaging Anne in
the problem solving process, and in fostering her sense of ownership of the solution.
At the next session, Anne reported that ignoring the problem had not been helpful, and
that her husband’s outbursts seemed to have worsened. The therapist inquired about
what had not worked, and Anne reported that she had not been able to ‘ignore his temper
long enough’. They worked through another Interpersonal Incident involving this specific
interaction, and it appeared that as Anne ignored his anger, he had responded by becoming
even more irate. Eventually she had, as in the past, left the room and gone to bed with a
migraine. Despite further discussion about the available options, Anne insisted on persist-
ing with the option of ignoring his anger. The therapist then chose to encourage Anne to
refine the way in which she implemented the approach of ignoring her husband, again
comparing it to the way Anne had customarily dealt with these types of problems at work.

                                                                                                149
Problem Solving

At the next session, Anne reported that she had come to an important realization: there
was a key difference between her customers and her husband. She didn’t have to live
with her customers, and if they got too unruly, she could ask them to leave. In contrast,
she was literally ‘stuck’ with her husband, and the relationship problems were too im-
portant to ignore. It had become apparent to Anne that her approach was not bringing
satisfactory results.
Anne: I’ve tried ignoring him, but he is still getting angry all the time, and now I’m even more
frustrated.
Therapist: Based on your description of your last interaction with him [Interpersonal Incident] I
think I can understand why you are feeling that way. Perhaps we should go back and reassess the
options you have to communicate to him differently.
Anne: OK.
Therapist: You recall the options we discussed? [Opens file and produces original paper with
­options].
Anne: Oh yes.
Therapist: What are your thoughts about what you would like to try?
Anne: I suppose that the best option would probably be to ask him what he is angry about, but
when he’s in one of his rages, he simply isn’t reasonable. I just don’t think that will work.
Therapist: I agree – trying to talk to someone when they are in that state won’t get you any-
where. This brings to mind, however, a woman I was working with several months ago. Her
circumstances were quite different from yours, but she did have problems communicating with her
husband when he got angry. She landed on the idea of approaching him about the anger after he
had cooled down, since he just wasn’t reasonable when he was mad. I wonder if that might be of
some help to you?
Anne: I am skeptical, but I simply can’t ignore it any longer.
Therapist: How do you imagine you might do that with your husband?
Anne reported at the next session that she had spoken with her husband about her
response to his anger. He had been somewhat responsive, but had another ‘episode’
during the week, which left Anne feeling discouraged. However, she did note that though
her husband was still ‘rude’, his anger was less intense. Although still unhappy with the
situation, Anne did report feeling a bit more hopeful that things might change. Several
sessions later, her expectations about the relationship were discussed.
Therapist: It sounds like you have done a nice job of talking with your husband about your frus-
trations and your response to his anger outbursts.
Anne: I think so. He has listened, and it has gotten better. But I’m still not satisfied – he still gets
angry, and every time he does, I keep getting frustrated.
Therapist: Realistically speaking, how much more do you think that his behavior will shift?
Anne: Probably not much more – it’s hard to know – I suppose only time will tell.
Therapist: Well, perhaps we should shift the focus of our discussion a bit. What are your expecta-
tions about how he will behave?
Anne: I think originally I was expecting that he would stop altogether, and that there wouldn’t be
any more of the outbursts. He seems to be working on it, but I just don’t know if he can completely
contain them. He has always had a pretty quick temper. Maybe it’s unrealistic to think that he can
control them completely.
Anne and the therapist focused on her explicit expectations of her husband and their
relationship, and how these might be modified given that her husband was unlikely to
change completely. As therapy continued, Anne was able to come to a more balanced
view of her husband – as his outbursts diminished, she began to realize that there were
many good things about their relationship. She ultimately elected to remain in the rela-
tionship, and though at the end of therapy she continued to express some dissatisfaction



150
                                                                                         Conclusion

with his temper problems, she felt on balance that the relationship had improved and
that she had the ability to address his temper directly when it flared.


Conclusion
Problem solving is a very effective way of generating productive change in the patient’s
interpersonal relationships. The therapist should ensure that the patient is active and
contributes to the process as much as possible. A successful problem solving intervention
usually helps the patient develop a sense of mastery over his problems, as it allows him to
experience the benefits of his self-initiated efforts and fosters self-efficacy. It is also likely to
lead to significant relief of symptoms and distress. The ultimate goal when using problem
solving in IPT is to assist the patient to creatively solve his problem as well as to develop the
skills to address other problems in the future.




                                                                                                  151
                                                                       11
Use of Affect
Introduction                                                                                   152
Content and Process Affect                                                                     152
Conclusion                                                                                     158


Introduction
The more affectively engaged the patient is, the more likely it is that change will occur.
Drawing attention to the patient’s affect, understanding it better, and helping the patient use it
to graciously communicate more effectively, is critical in Interpersonal Psychotherapy (IPT).
     In IPT, there are three goals regarding affect:
1.	 To assist the patient to recognize complicated affective and emotional reactions
2.	 To help the patient describe her affect and emotional state
3.	 To assist the patient to communicate her affect and emotions more effectively to others.
The therapist’s tasks to accomplish these include:
1.	 Recognizing discrepancies between content and process affect
2.	 Identifying these differences for the patient
3.	 Facilitating discussion of affect and emotion and understanding them more completely.


Content and Process Affect
The most obvious technique that the therapist can use to reach these goals is to give direct
feedback to the patient regarding the therapist’s observation of the patient’s affective state. This
must be done, of course, in the context of a therapeutic relationship in which the patient can
tolerate this feedback, and in which the patient can make use of it. This requires a high degree
of inclusion in the treatment relationship – a strong therapeutic alliance. If these conditions
are met, remarking to the patient that she appears sad, angry, pleased, or demonstrates other
affective states may be of great help.
     In IPT, the therapist should be aware of, and draw the patient’s attention to, two kinds of
affect: process affect and content affect. Process affect is the affect and emotions that the patient
displays while talking about a particular issue during therapy, for instance, the death of a
parent. Content affect, on the other hand, is the affect and emotions that the patient reports
she experienced at the time of the event, say when she received news of her parent’s death, or
at the funeral. Process affect develops as the story is told in the therapeutic present; content
affect is what was experienced as the event happened in the past.
     These two types of affect may be congruent, or they may be dissimilar. For instance, when
describing the death of a spouse a year previously, a patient may describe the following:
    When my husband died, I was an emotional wreck. I was really depressed,
    I couldn’t eat for several days, and I slept terribly for a month.


152
                                                                 Content and Process Affect

The content affect, or the emotional state reported at the time of the death, was further
described by the patient as sad, upset, and depressed.
     When describing the experience in therapy, however, the same patient may display a
process affect very different from the content affect that she described occurring at the time of
the event. For instance, the therapist may note that as the patient describes the event in the
therapy session, she speaks in a very flat or monotonous voice, or is telling the story as if she
is reporting that it happened to someone else. In a case like this, the process affect would be
described as neutral or flat. The converse might also occur. The patient might describe the
death of her spouse in the following way:
    When my husband died, I was the one who kept the family together. I took care
    of all of the arrangements – I was so busy I never had the chance to cry. I mostly
    remember feeling numb.
The content affect in this case would be described as flat, neutral, or non-reactive. The
therapist should elicit more description about it from the patient. When describing the
experience in therapy, however, the patient might be upset, sad, or even tearful; the observed
process affect might be sad or depressed.
    When working with content and process affect, it is extremely important for the therapist
to be aware of incongruities in the patient’s presentation. When process and content affect
are dissimilar, it signals to the therapist that the topic under discussion should be explored
further. It also signals that the therapist, when the patient is able to tolerate the feedback,
should point out the incongruity to her. This will assist the patient to become aware of
emotions that she may be suppressing, or that she may be aware of but is finding difficult to
experience or describe.
Case example 11.1: Joe
Joe was a 45-year-old man who came to therapy following the death of his father, which
he identified as the primary issue leading to his depression. His father had died a year
previously, and Joe had avoided coming to therapy until his wife had finally insisted that
he do so. Though he reported being able to function both at home and work, he reluctantly
admitted that his productivity had gone down, he was having trouble concentrating and
sleeping, and his libido was greatly decreased. Though he was reluctant to come to treat-
ment, he did admit that, ‘my wife was right, I should have come to therapy a long time ago’.
After completing the Interpersonal Inventory (Figure 11.1) and Formulation (Figure 11.2),
both Joe and his therapist agreed that the primary Problem Area was Grief and Loss, and
that further discussion about the death of Joe’s father would be helpful.
In the third session, the therapist asked Joe to describe in detail the circumstances sur-
rounding his father’s death, to which Joe replied:

    My father died quite suddenly of a heart attack.... he had been in good health,
    and no one expected it. My mother found him outside in the yard where he
    had been gardening, and he was already gone.

    My mother must have felt really guilty somehow, because she insisted that
    they do everything they could to save him, even though he had probably been
    dead for several hours. When they brought him to the hospital, they tried to
    do CPR [cardiopulmonary resuscitation] and stuck him full of tubes and lines
    ... When I finally got to the hospital they wouldn’t let me in to see him. It was
    several hours later that I got in, and by then, he had wires and tubes stuck
    everywhere – it didn’t even look like my dad.




                                                                                              153
Use of Affect

                                      Interpersonal Circle




                                                                   Jacob
                                             Jennifer              Joshua
                 Fred                         (wife)               (brothers)


                                       Jackie (daughter)
                                          Jason (son)

                    Richard
                                            Intimates
                    (father)
                                                           Sandy
                                                           (mother)

                                          Close supports
                                                                   Extended supports


Figure 11.1  Interpersonal Circle – Joe


           Biological factors       Social factors                    Psychological factors
           45 years old             Good support from friends         Self-reliant
           Male                     Good support from wife            Responsible
           Family history of        Fair support from family          Hard worker
            depression              Employed at job for 27 years      Oldest child (3 brothers)
           Sleep problems




      Cultural factors
      Expectation to be perfect son                              Spiritual factors
      Family of origin did not                   Joe             Church
       openly talk about feelings
                                    Acute Interpersonal Crisis
                                   Grief and Loss (father died)

                                               Distress
                                             (Depression)

Figure 11.2  Interpersonal Formulation – Joe


    I don’t remember feeling anything when I saw him, just thinking, ‘This
    isn’t really him – I just need to get this mess cleaned up.’ So I started throw-
    ing all the needles and tubes and stuff away until a nurse came in and told
    me to stop.

    I didn’t feel anything at the funeral either – I was too busy trying to help my
    mom, and I had to take care of all the funeral arrangements. I haven’t even
    been to the cemetery since he was buried ...


154
                                                                   Content and Process Affect

During this description, the therapist noted that Joe’s affect when relating the story was
extremely sad and tearful. His voice was quivering, and he clearly had a great deal of dif-
ficulty in telling the story without breaking down. Noting the discrepancy in process and
content affect, the therapist remarked:

    As you’re telling the story, I can really begin to understand what that must
    have been like for you. It’s clearly difficult to talk about – you even look sad and
    tearful as you’re speaking. There is clearly a lot of emotion you’re experienc-
    ing now (process affect). At the time he died though, it sounded very different,
    almost as if you weren’t feeling at all (content affect).

    Help me to understand more about the difference between the way you felt then, and
    the way you are feeling right now as you’re telling me about your father’s death.
The content and process affect incongruity was a clear signal to the therapist that the
grief experience was at the core of Joe’s difficulties. Further work needed to be done in
helping Joe to express his emotional reaction to his father’s death – both his reactions
to the immediate circumstances surrounding it, and his current feelings. The therapist’s
open-ended directive to, ‘Help me understand more about the difference …’ was designed to
get that process started. Simply pointing out the discrepancy also avoids any judgment –
it is an opening of discussion, especially when coupled with the therapist’s genuine
desire to understand more.
Subsequent sessions, consistent with the IPT goals of helping patients to better com-
municate their needs and to build a more effective social support network, focused on
a discussion about friends and family members Joe could talk to about his experience
and his feelings about his father’s death. He was very willing to share his feelings with
his wife, who he found to be extremely supportive. He also approached a friend at work
who had lost his own father recently, and felt very supported in that relationship as well.
Towards the end of therapy, he made a decision to speak with his mother, whom he had
largely avoided, about his anger that she had not let his father ‘die in peace’ in the hos-
pital. Though this issue was not resolved when therapy was concluded, he did feel that
he had made some progress with her, and had at least ‘opened the door’ to developing a
better relationship with her.
     In addition to being an extremely useful technique when dealing with Grief and Loss
issues, the use of content and process affect is also very helpful in dealing with Interpersonal
Disputes. The technique is particularly effective when combined with the use of Interpersonal
Incidents.
     Many patients who report Interpersonal Disputes will do so in a dispassionate way. A
patient will ‘present the case’ to the therapist in a logical and unemotional way, largely because
one of her motivations in relating the conflict to the therapist is to externalize the blame
for the problem. The goal is to convince the therapist that she is not to blame – it is the fault
of the ‘other person’ with whom she is in conflict. The story gets modified to convince the
therapist that the patient’s point of view is correct. In order to do this dispassionately, patients
will often report the emotional content of an Interpersonal Incident with a neutral process
affect, despite reporting a very angry or hostile content affect. Stories of conflicts with content
affect such as anger expressed by yelling and screaming are often reported by the patient with
neutral and unemotional process affect.
     When there is a clear discrepancy between the reported content affect in a conflict-laden
Interpersonal Incident and the process affect that is apparent in therapy (typically lack of
strong affect), it is a signal to the therapist to delve more into the conflict – to have the patient
describe it more. The discrepancy should also direct the therapist to reflect the difference in
content and process affect to the patient. The purpose in doing this is twofold: (1) it leads the

                                                                                                155
Use of Affect

patient to become more affectively engaged in the process of therapy, and as a consequence
more likely to be motivated to change; and (2) it gives the therapist a much more accurate
report of the emotions that were expressed in the Interpersonal Incident, allowing both
therapist and patient to more accurately understand her communication.
Case example 11.2: Debbie
Debbie was a 32-year-old woman who reported difficulty and distress in her relation-
ship with her husband (Figures 11.3 and 11.4). Though she denied specific symptoms of
depression and did not meet diagnostic criteria for any major psychiatric disorder, both
she and her therapist felt that she would benefit a great deal from IPT with a focus on
her relationship with her husband. While he was perfectly happy to have her come to
therapy, she reported that he had no interest in attending sessions himself.

                                      Interpersonal Circle

                  George

                Kim


                                               Sean
                                             (husband)


                                       Jason        Sarah
                                       (son)

                                             Intimates       Jean (mom)
                                                             Dan (dad)
                        Kelsey


                                        Close supports
                                                               Extended supports


Figure 11.3  Interpersonal Circle – Debbie

Early in therapy, Debbie related an incident which she felt characterized the communica-
tion with her husband. The conflict involved the care of their 1-year-old son: several days
before the session, her husband had called her at her workplace late in the afternoon to
tell her that he had ‘forgotten’ he had a meeting that evening, and would be unable to
pick up their son from daycare. After a brief phone call which concluded with her hang-
ing up on him, she canceled her last meeting of the day in order to be able to pick up
her son herself. She reported that she felt her meeting was at least as important as that
of her husband’s, and that she was furious about his refusal to keep his commitment to
pick up their son. The following therapeutic dialog ensued:
Therapist: Tell me more about the incident between yourself and your husband.
Debbie: I was in the midst of an important meeting when the secretary interrupted me to tell me
I had an important call. At first, I was afraid that something serious might have happened to my
son at daycare – calls like that always worry me. When I got on the line and found out it was my
husband, I felt relieved at first.
Then he told me that he had a late meeting that he had forgotten about, and wouldn’t be able to
pick up Jason from daycare. My first reaction, of course, was to make sure that Jason was alright –
that someone would pick him up. Then I thought, ‘My husband always does this – he never follows
through on things or keeps his commitments.’ I felt really angry at him (spoken with virtually no


156
                                                                    Content and Process Affect

       Biological factors           Social factors                    Psychological factors
       32 years old                 Fair support from husband         Good sense of humor
       Female                       Fair support from family          Intelligent
       Postpartum                   Good support from friends         Hard worker
       History of anorexia          Well educated                     Perfectionistic tendencies
                                    Employed as a marketing           Married 5 years
                                     analyst




      Cultural factors
      Expectation to be a perfect                               Spiritual factors
       mother                                                   Jewish, attends
      Lives far from her and her            Debbie               Synagogue
       husband’s families
                               Acute Interpersonal Crisis
             Interpersonal Dispute (husband), Role Transition (birth of son)


                                           Distress
                       (Difficulties with relationship with husband)

Figure 11.4  Interpersonal Formulation – Debbie

process emotion), but then I thought things through logically, and decided that if I didn’t pick up
Jason myself, no one would.
Therapist: How did the phone call end?
Debbie: Oh – I hung up on him ... slammed down the phone I think. My husband is always doing
things like that, you know. (Again spoken completely dispassionately, almost matter-of-factly.)
It was clear to the therapist that there was much more to the story – Debbie’s process
affect was quite neutral and objective, and she was communicating to the therapist that
she was behaving logically and rationally. The fault, as she presented it, was entirely
with her husband. However, there was a clear discrepancy between Debbie’s content and
process affect, as the content of her story revealed a great deal of anger that Debbie was
not displaying as she recounted the incident in therapy. Slamming down the phone, for
instance, was likely a very forceful communication of anger or hurt, but that affect was
not apparent as Debbie was describing the incident to the therapist. The therapist felt that
helping Debbie to recognize the incongruity between her content and process affect would
help her to better understand how she was communicating, and how her communications
might be misunderstood by her husband. Further, the therapist believed that it would
help her to become more engaged in therapy and increase her motivation to change. The
therapist intervened in the following way:
Therapist: It sounds like there was quite a bit of conflict between the two of you even during
that brief phone call. I noticed, however, that as you were relating the story, it was almost as
if you were telling the story about someone else. I didn’t get much of an idea about how you
were really feeling. It would help me to understand better what that was like for you if you
could tell me more about how you are feeling about that incident right now as we’re talking
about it.
Debbie: Well ... actually I am pretty angry about it. I don’t like to think about that though,
because I’m afraid that if I think about how angry I am, I won’t be able to control it. One time that
actually happened ...
Debbie went on to relate an incident during which she felt she had gotten really angry
at her husband, and as she did so, became much more affectively engaged in telling the
story. With an emerging recognition of her feelings, Debbie and the therapist were able to


                                                                                                   157
Use of Affect

examine how she was (or was not) accurately communicating her feelings to her
husband, and they were able to explore ways that she might be able to communicate
more directly and effectively.


Conclusion
The recognition of incongruity between content and process affect is extremely important
in IPT. Identifying these discrepancies will help both patient and therapist understand the
ways the patient is communicating, and will also draw the patient more into the therapeutic
process – the more affectively engaged the patient is, the more likely that change will occur.
The technique is particularly helpful when dealing with Grief and Loss and Interpersonal
Disputes.




158
                                                                    12
Role Playing
Introduction	                                                                                159
Therapeutic Uses of Role Playing	                                                            159
Conducting a Role Play	                                                                      160
Potential Difficulties Using Role Playing	                                                   162
Conclusion	                                                                                  166


Introduction
Role playing is a technique in which the patient and therapist create an ‘in vitro’ interaction
in therapy to reinforce behavioral change outside of therapy. While role playing, the patient’s
communication style and his mode of affective interaction can be examined in detail. In
addition, the patient can often gain a better understanding of the experience of others
involved in his social relationships.
     Role playing is best used to model and practice past or future interactions between the
patient and his significant others. Role playing allows more effective communications to be
discussed, demonstrated, and practiced. Role playing doesn’t have to be used in Interpersonal
Psychotherapy (IPT); it is best used with selected patients and with selected problems. It
tends to be most effective when the therapeutic relationship is good enough that the patient
is feeling supported and can tolerate a degree of confrontation by the therapist. Patients with
more secure styles of attachment are more likely to benefit from role playing, but it can be
used with a wide variety of patients if done with a bit of curiosity, support, and humor.
     The goals of role playing in IPT are:
1	 To gather more information about the patient’s style of communication
2	 To help the patient develop new insights into his interpersonal behavior
3	 To help the patient understand the reactions of others to his communications
4	 To allow the therapist to model new modes of interpersonal behavior and communication
5	 To allow the patient to practice new interpersonal communication skills.

Therapeutic Uses of Role Playing
Role playing is extremely helpful when used as a tool to gather information. The therapist,
while observing the patient playing himself, can learn a great deal about the patient’s
style of communication, particularly the way affect and emotion are communicated.
Problematic interactions can also be re-enacted and examined for specific instances of
miscommunication.
    It can also be used as a way to help the patient develop insight into his own interpersonal
behavior. As he observes himself interacting in a role playing situation, he can reflect upon
what is being communicated, what he really wants to communicate, and how clear the
communication is. Role playing literally requires that the patient enlist his ‘observing ego’ as
the communication occurs, and requires that he stop and think about what is being said.
                                                                                            159
Role Playing

    Great insights can also be developed when the patient plays the significant other. It is an
experience of ‘being in the other person’s shoes’ for a while, and the patient can often much
more fully appreciate how the other person is hearing communications, and what she may be
wanting to communicate herself. The motives of the other person may become clearer as well.
    Role playing can be used as a tool for implementing changes. In addition to modeling
new ways to communicate, the therapist can give the patient direct constructive feedback
about his communications which can then be incorporated into new ways to communicate
more effectively. And of course role playing can be used as a means of practicing and
reinforcing communication. New styles of communication can be practiced before extending
them to the patient’s social relationships. Practicing in session will increase the likelihood that
the patient attempts new communication and communicates differently outside of therapy.

Conducting a Role Play
Role playing should almost always be structured with the therapist playing the role of the
patient and the patient taking the role of the significant other first, especially early in therapy.
There are several important reasons for this.
    Having the therapist take the role of the patient first allows the therapist to demonstrate
or model new ways of communication without being critical of the patient. He can
demonstrate being more open, less defensive, and describing things more – any number
of things can be modeled. If the patient plays himself first, the therapist is then left with
having to correct or be critical of the patient if the communication is not going well. It is
much better to have the therapist demonstrate, discuss the interaction, and then have the
patient give it a try. A virtuoso therapist could even ask the patient to critique his role playing
communication if he plays the patient first.
    Having the patient play the significant other also promotes a different understanding by
the patient. It is an experience similar in concept to gestalt techniques, in which the patient
may get a different perspective about what the other is experiencing. The therapist can
enhance this by stopping the role play at opportune times to ask the patient to reflect on the
experience of playing the other. This is an extremely effective way to generate insight, and to
get the patient to think about the impact his communication has on others.
    It is critical that the therapist, when playing the patient, never acts out what the patient is
doing wrong. This may come across as demeaning or humiliating, and will have enormous
negative impact on the therapeutic alliance. Moreover, it is communicating in exactly
the opposite way from what should be modeled, i.e. the therapist should always model
graciousness and genuineness in all interactions, but especially when playing the role of the
patient.

The Therapist as Patient
Playing the patient role affords the therapist the opportunity to demonstrate different
styles of communication. The therapist may model communication techniques such as
reflective listening by paraphrasing what was said by the other person. Techniques such as
assertiveness, non-confrontational feedback and appropriate handling of aggression may also
be modeled by the therapist, and then reinforced by switching the roles so that the patient
plays himself and can practice the techniques that have been demonstrated.
     A portrayal of the patient which emphasizes his relative strengths in interpersonal
interactions may be greatly reassuring for the patient, particularly when the patient is
insecurely attached. Positive reinforcement is nearly always therapeutic if honesty delivered.
160
                                                                     Conducting a Role Play

The therapist should, however, generally avoid depicting negative aspects of a patient’s
behavior, such as poor communication or maladaptive non-verbal communication, because
it risks appearing insensitive at best and derisive at worst.
     There is certainly good reason, however, for the therapist to model new and more positive
ways of communicating. This can be done either subtly without calling direct attention
to the new communications, or can be done after bringing the patient’s attention to the
new communication that is being demonstrated. The therapist should use his judgment to
determine which is most suitable at any given moment in therapy.

The Patient as Other
Having the patient depict a significant other while role playing can provide the patient with a
unique window into the experience of that person and the interpersonal problem in which he
is engaged. Patients frequently become more affectively charged as they engage in role playing
and more accurately convey the types of behavior exhibited by others – this is often quite
enlightening for the therapist. As noted, the therapist can break the role play at times and ask
the patient about his experience of playing the other person.
     The patient may also alter his impressions of the significant other when depicting that
person during a role playing exercise. For instance, a patient may describe the other person
to the therapist as unreasonable, but when depicting the other in the context of a role play,
may recognize that some of the other person’s responses may be provoked by his own
communication.
     There is risk in having some patients play a significant other. If the patient is somewhat
passive-aggressive, he may be bent on ‘proving’ to the therapist that the other person, not the
patient, is completely to blame for the interpersonal problem. The patient may then portray
the other as completely unreasonable in an attempt to convince the therapist that this is the
case. The patient may, by dramatically portraying a hostile significant other, make it nearly
impossible for the therapist (playing the role of the patient) to respond. Therapeutic judgment
should rule the day – if an aggressive, hostile, or histrionic patient is bent on proving to the
therapist that the other is at fault, the therapist should beat a hasty retreat and move on to
other techniques.

The Patient as Self
Having the patient play himself while role playing is useful in two ways. During the initial
phases of IPT, when the goal is to better understand the nature of the patient’s interpersonal
problems, role playing can provide very useful information about the way the patient really
communicates, as opposed to simply relying on the patient’s self-report. The patient’s particular
style of communicating with, interacting with, and approaching others is often readily
apparent during role playing. Affect is often more apparent as well. Role playing often reveals
discrepancies between a patient’s report of his communications and what is actually occurring.
    In later sessions, role playing may be an ideal medium for the rehearsal of new
communication skills. Behavioral changes such as anger or anxiety management can be
practiced. Specific situations, such as confrontations or interviews, can also be practiced.
Role playing is enhanced if the therapist is able to give the patient direct feedback about his
specific communications. Doing so requires a solid therapeutic alliance, as this feedback
can be threatening to some patients, particularly those with less secure attachment styles.
Nonetheless, in such instances where the therapist judges that it will be helpful, interrupting
the role play periodically to give direct feedback can be quite helpful.
                                                                                            161
Role Playing

    An example in which direct feedback can be productively used is a role play of a job
interview. As the patient plays himself, the therapist can intermittently step out of the
interviewer role to give direct feedback to the patient about verbal communication, such as
being too soft-spoken or too digressive. Non-verbal communication can also be addressed,
and is often even more important in such situations. The therapist might reflect, for instance,
that maintaining more direct eye contact or giving a firmer handshake might better impress
prospective employers.
    This feedback need not be given harshly. The therapist can give it directly if the patient
can utilize the feedback well, but could also be framed more gently. For instance, the therapist
might say, ‘I wonder what would happen if you really focused on being concise?’ or ‘What do
you think about keeping more eye contact?’ Or the therapist can simply reflect his experience
and ask the patient to brainstorm ways to improve communication further, for example
saying, ‘As you are talking, I find myself getting a bit confused about where you are heading.
Could you help me to stay on track a bit more? Let’s try that last interaction again’.

The Therapist as Other
In this mode, the therapist depicts one of the patient’s significant others. In the early stages
of IPT this may be useful to gain insight into the patient’s typical style of communication
beyond what is obtainable through the patient’s self-report; later in therapy it is useful as
a means of having the patient practice new communication skills. New situations which
the patient might encounter can also be enacted. In all of these situations, the therapist
can intermittently stop the role play to give direct feedback to the patient about his specific
communications.

Potential Difficulties Using Role Playing
The Patient is Reluctant or Unwilling to Role Play
As role playing is an active and potentially anxiety-provoking process, some patients may
be reluctant to participate in it, or may find it difficult. In these circumstances the therapist
may choose to postpone the role play and move to a less confrontational intervention. The
therapist should also consider that the therapeutic alliance may not be sufficiently strong
for the patient to feel comfortable role playing, and if that is the case, he should delay the
intervention and work on fostering the alliance.
     The therapist may also explore the possibility that the patient’s reluctance to participate
in role playing is a manifestation of his interpersonal difficulties, and that these should be
further explored in therapy. Among other possibilities, he may be anxious about meeting
the therapist’s expectations, fearful of negative evaluation by the therapist, or anxious about
‘performing’. If so, the therapist can gently discuss with the patient the factors that seem to
make engaging in role playing difficult, work to understand what the experience is like for the
patient, and take care not to blame the patient nor frame the difficulty as a therapeutic failure.
The therapist can then question how such factors affect the patient’s relationships outside of
therapy.
     As with all interventions, the therapist can anticipate problems in advance by considering
the patient’s attachment style. Those patients who tend to be insecurely attached may find role
playing distressing or anxiety provoking. In these cases the therapist may opt to postpone
the role play or consider a shorter role play about a less critical issue. In some situations the
therapist might opt to use a one-sided form of role play, such as asking the patient to imagine

162
                                                      Potential Difficulties Using Role Playing

his or her spouse was present and could be directly addressed. Such a modification, however,
will nearly always lose some of the affective impact of a true role playing intervention, as the
patient will often be looking to the therapist for the ‘right’ way of saying things rather than
being more spontaneous and engaged in his part. While an option, this modification should
be used sparingly.
    Nearly all patients are a bit reluctant to engage in role playing initially (so, for that matter,
are therapists who have little experience with it). Leavened with a bit of humor, and supported
by a strong alliance, patients usually warm up to it quite quickly. Repeat performances
are usually well met. Keep in mind that the role play need not be long – 8–9 minutes of
interaction is quite sufficient, and even that should be split up into 2–3 minute increments of
role playing with discussion in between. Going longer than 2–3 minutes without breaking
will diminish the immediate impact of the feedback; most patients (and therapists) have
trouble sustaining attention for more than 2–3 minutes without a break in any case.

The Therapist Cannot Accurately Depict the
Significant Other
The therapist can only base his rendition of the significant other upon the account the patient
offers; although if structured correctly, the therapist will have already seen the patient play the
significant other in the first part of the role play while the therapist was playing the patient. If
the therapist depicts the patient’s significant other in a way the patient deems inaccurate, the
therapist can use the opportunity to explore the basis of the inaccuracy. This can often lead
naturally into asking the patient about how his partner behaves and communicates, followed
by an invitation to the patient to play the role of the other to demonstrate. It may also be
an opportunity to ask the patient, once he describes the partner in more accurate terms, to
describe how he responds to the difficulties presented by her.
    For instance, if the patient tells the therapist that he is not accurately portraying the anger
that his wife usually displays, the therapist can ask the patient for more details about how that
anger is expressed. This can be followed with queries about how the patient deals with the
anger:
    What does he do when confronted by his wife?
    How does the anger affect the relationship?
    How does the patient feel in response, and how is that communicated?
In sum, though the therapist should certainly attempt to get it right the first time, there is a
great deal of material that can be gleaned from unintentional poor acting.

The Therapist Depicts the Patient in a Manner
that the Patient Perceives as Critical
When role playing, an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure. This situation should
be avoided at all costs, and can best be averted by keeping to the rule that the therapist’s
task in playing the patient’s role is to reinforce the patient’s strengths and to model new
communication techniques. In IPT, the therapist should never portray the patient in a
negative fashion, nor use the patient role to point out the patient’s faults. There is simply
no justification for doing so, as it will invariably come across to the patient as demeaning.
Further, this type of indirect and critical communication is a very poor example for the
therapist to set. In cases in which feedback to the patient about his communication style

                                                                                                163
Role Playing

would be helpful, the therapist can provide this directly and constructively while the patient
is playing himself, rather than when the therapist is playing the patient.
Case example 12.1: Sarah
Sarah was a 34-year-old woman who had been referred for IPT for marital problems. She
complained that after the birth of her daughter Jenny, her husband James had failed to
contribute to the care of their baby as he had agreed to do. While Sarah initially reported
in the first session and Interpersonal Inventory that this had been the first major dispute
during their relationship, there were, after a careful history was taken, several other con-
flicts which became apparent. In each, Sarah’s typical style was to attempt to avoid the
conflict by ignoring it, and she was rarely able to communicate her anger to James. The
couple had been able to ‘bypass’ the specific postpartum conflict with Sarah avoiding the
issue, although it left her with all the work as well as feeling misunderstood and without
support (Figure 12.1).


                                      Interpersonal Circle




                       James                  Jenny                      Maria
                       (husband)            (daughter)                   (mother)

                                             Kirsten                     Pat
                                                                         (father)
                                             Sabrina
                                            Intimates




                                        Close supports
                                                             Extended supports


Figure 12.1  Interpersonal Circle – Sarah


In contrast to previous situations, however, her anger about the lack of help with child-
care, though not expressed to James, had gotten to the point that she was considering
leaving the relationship. She had yet to express this to James, who had apparently only
noticed that she was much more sullen and withdrawn than usual (Figure 12.2).
In her accounts of her interactions with James, Sarah had found it difficult to describe in
detail the character of James’s interactions with her. More importantly, she had trouble
identifying the specific aspects that distressed and angered her. In order to further clarify
this, the therapist proposed a role playing exercise in which Sarah depicted her husband.
The following exchange took place during the role play:
Therapist (as Sarah): James, I want to talk about Jenny.
Sarah (as James): [Sarah pretends to pick up a newspaper and is holding it to obscure her face]
Hmmm?
Therapist: Can we talk about Jenny?
Sarah: Um hm.
Therapist: Does that mean yes?
Sarah: What?

164
                                                       Potential Difficulties Using Role Playing

        Biological factors        Social factors                        Psychological factors
       34 years old               Lack of support from husband          Avoids conflict
       Female                     Lack of family support                Married 1.5 years
       Postpartum                 Good support from friends
       Recently stopped           Well educated
        breastfeeding             Stay-at-home mom
       Sleep deprivation




          Cultural factors
                                                                 Spiritual factors
          Worries about future
                                                                 Spiritual, but not
          implications of daughter’s          Sarah               religious
          club foot

                                Acute Interpersonal Crisis
           Interpersonal Dispute (husband), Role Transition (birth of daughter)


                                             Distress
                                  (Difficulties with husband)

Figure 12.2  Interpersonal Formulation – Sarah


Therapist: Does that mean yes we can talk?
Sarah: [still buried in the newspaper] About what?
Therapist: Jenny.
Sarah: [Still behind newspaper] Our daughter Jenny.
Therapist: YES!!!!
Sarah: Mmm hmm.
Therapist: [secretly wishing that a projectile was close at hand] I would appreciate it if you would
stop reading the paper for a minute and participate in the discussion. When I feel that you aren’t
paying attention to me when I’m trying to talk to you, it makes me feel very angry.
Sarah: No, I’m listening.
The therapist then suggested they stop the role play.
Therapist: Is that how it really is?
Sarah: (with satisfaction) Oh yes.
Therapist: If he truly communicates like that, I can understand why you must feel so frustrated.
Sarah: Anyone who had to live with that guy would be frustrated, believe me!
Therapist: When he behaves like that, how does it make you feel?
Sarah: Incredibly angry!!! I feel ignored and unimportant, as if I don’t matter at all.
Therapist: So what do you do?
Sarah: I usually just walk away – there’s no point in talking to him.
Therapist: How well do you think that he understands how angry you are?
Sarah: Probably not at all – he doesn’t seem to notice when I leave, or at least it doesn’t seem to
bother him.
Therapist: I wonder if there might be another way of communicating how you’re feeling – let’s
try the role play again. By the way, you made it pretty tough on me when you were playing your
husband – if you could help me out just a bit I think we could get a little farther.

                                                                                                 165
Role Playing

Therapist (as Sarah): OK – let’s get back to the discussion.
Sarah (as James): I thought I was discussing things.
Therapist: I think we need to get some things out on the table. I want you to know that I feel
ignored and very angry when I try to talk to you and you don’t look at me. I would appreciate it if
you would put your paper down when we talk.
Sarah: But I like to unwind when I get home! All I need is 15 minutes by myself with the paper.
You hit me with stuff right when I get in the door.
Therapist: Fair enough. If I agree to give you that 15 minutes uninterrupted, will you agree to
spend some time talking with me about how we are splitting up the childcare duties?
Sarah: I guess so.
Therapist (out of role play again): What did you think of that?
Sarah: Well first, I don’t think he’d be so reasonable. But it is true that I usually try to corner him
right when he gets home – I’m so exhausted by that time that I just want to hand Jenny off and
take a break myself.
Sarah was able to gain some insight into her husband’s position, and to reflect on the
ways in which she might be communicating ineffectively with him. In addition, the role
play afforded the therapist the opportunity to model some new communication for
Sarah. In subsequent role plays, the therapist was able to help Sarah develop communi-
cation and behavioral strategies to engage James more effectively, which allowed her to
communicate her feelings and needs more clearly to him.


Conclusion
Role playing is one of the most demanding techniques in IPT, as well as being one of the
most rewarding. It is invaluable as a tool for gathering information, particularly about the
patient’s communication and style of interpersonal interaction. As a tool for creating change,
it provides a supportive ‘in vitro’ environment for the therapist to model new ways to
communicate, and for the patient to modify and practice them. Role playing will work well as
a tool to help the patient resolve his interpersonal problems as long as it is used with a good
measure of clinical judgment.




166
                                                                    13
Homework and Other Directives
Introduction167
Homework in IPT: What Is It?             168
Homework in IPT: Patient Selection       170
The Process of Assigning Homework in IPT 171
Conclusion175
References175


Introduction
The term homework has many connotations, conjuring up for some unpleasant reminders
of tests and papers, often put off until the last minute. Psychotherapeutically, homework has
a long but mixed history, and its use has ranged from the ‘requirement’ that it be applied in
behaviorally oriented therapies to a complete exclusion in psychoanalytic treatments.
     Homework is but one of many variants we refer to as directives. Used as an adjective,
‘directive’ refers to ‘a type of psychotherapy in which the therapist actively offers advice and
information rather than dealing only with information supplied by the patient’. By that
definition, every single therapy that exists is directive. Granted, some are more so than others,
but in every therapy that exists, the therapist actively offers information, if only to tell the
patient that the hour is up and it is time to finish.
     The structure of Interpersonal Psychotherapy (IPT) is directive, just like the structures of
all other therapies. The clearly stated goals of IPT – to reduce distress, improve interpersonal
functioning, and increase social support – are directive. So are the goals articulated in other
psychotherapies such as changing cognitions, discussing values, or talking about dreams: they
imply at the very least that the patient should have cognitions and values and dreams, not
to mention that they should be discussed in therapy. It is a simple and undeniable fact that
all therapies are directive and that all are laden with implicit or explicit expectations about
what the patient should be doing. So let’s call a spade a spade: in IPT the therapy is generally
directed towards change in communication and social support, and it is generally expected
that the patient will participate in that process.
     A directive as a noun can be defined as any intervention by the therapist that increases
the likelihood that the patient will engage in behavioral change. Understood broadly,
there is a spectrum of interventions which are more or less overt or directive. For example,
as the patient is talking about interesting or pertinent material, the therapist might nod
encouragingly: a subtle but effective directive to continue to produce more of the same. At the
other end of the spectrum, the therapist might explicitly tell the patient to do something, for
instance, to pay her bill, take her medication, or stop whining.
     Understood in this way, the use of directives in therapy is a direct extension of the
Interpersonal Theory described in Chapter 2. Everything – literally everything – the



                                                                                            167
Homework and Other Directives

therapist does elicits a response from the patient. The key in IPT (and of course other
therapies as well) is that the therapist should think about what she is saying and be
constantly aware of the responses it may be eliciting. The use of homework and other more
overt directives in IPT follows directly from its undergirding theory and interpersonal
orientation. In essence, more overt directives such as homework or advice giving should
be utilized when, in the therapist’s judgment, it increases the likelihood that the patient will
make productive changes in her interpersonal functioning and communication. The time-
limited nature of IPT makes the logic of homework obvious – if it can facilitate more rapid
improvement, then it should be used.
    Since brief psychotherapies are inevitably more directive, particularly a therapy such as
IPT which is explicitly directed towards improvement in current functioning, the therapist’s
job is to persuade or influence the patient to make changes to bring this about as quickly as
she is able. This includes enlisting the patient as a cooperative participant in the process, and
in many cases involves helping the patient become the primary agent of change. Nevertheless,
this cooperative endeavor always includes directive interventions by the therapist – it is
simply a matter of degree whether this takes the form of more subtle techniques within the
therapy session or takes the form of overt homework assignments. Homework is a natural
extension of the therapeutic process used in IPT.

Homework in IPT: What Is It?
Homework is nothing more than a task that the patient is expected to do in the interval
between sessions. The goal of homework assignments in IPT is to increase the likelihood that
the patient will engage in constructive communication change, that her symptoms will be
decreased, and that her interpersonal functioning will be improved.
    This broad definition leaves open a multitude of possibilities, all of which may be
used as long as they adhere to the basic tenets of IPT. Homework assignments and other
directives are congruent with the spirit of IPT as long as they are interpersonal in nature.
A variety of techniques consistent with these principles might be used in IPT. For instance,
an intervention in which the patient is asked to schedule pleasurable activities would be
outside of the scope of IPT, but an assignment in which the patient is to schedule pleasurable
activities with a significant other is well within the scope of IPT. Requesting that the patient
engage in a relaxation procedure as a stand-alone intervention would be outside of the
scope of IPT, but asking the patient to explain to a significant other why time alone and
meditation are important to the patient is completely consistent with IPT.
    It is critical to clarify at this point what is, and what is not, within the realm of IPT, and to
clarify what is consistent with the spirit of IPT and its interpersonal focus. This is not to say
that other interventions may not be helpful as an adjunct or addition to IPT, but rather to say
that they are not within the IPT circle of interventions. Our intent is simply to be precise in
how IPT is defined and described, and to be precise in describing other interventions that
a therapist may choose to use with IPT. For the purpose of describing exactly what is being
done in therapy or in research, this precision is necessary.
    One can well imagine that using motivational interviewing1 techniques during the course
of IPT would be extremely useful in some cases.2 So would discussing the patient’s cognitions
or values, and so would some relaxation or exposure work. But it would be disingenuous to
suggest that all of these things are IPT, just as it would be disingenuous to suggest that IPT is
really just a subset of some of the other approaches to therapy. The differences in foci, targets,
and tactics are readily apparent. We simply encourage therapists (and advocates of particular

168
                                                                                     Homework in IPT: What Is It?

psychotherapies, including IPT) to be fair and clear and honest in their descriptions of the
therapy they are conducting.a
    The general guideline is that tasks which involve communication and interaction with
other people are within the scope of IPT. These homework assignments can be categorized as:
●● Direct communication assignments

●● Appraisal assignments

●● Activity and behavioral assignments.



Direct Communication Assignments
These are perhaps the most obvious of all of the homework assignments, and simply involve
having the patient engage in direct communication with others. A patient with a dispute
about finances, for example, might be given the assignment to have a conversation with his
partner about his concerns at 7 pm on Wednesday evening. A patient with social phobia
might be given the assignment to go to a social engagement and to attempt to speak to at least
one other person while there. The essence is that the assignment is directed towards a specific
direct communication.

Appraisal Assignments
Rather than assigning a direct communication, the patient may be asked instead to monitor
and record her communications. The purpose of this is twofold. First, it provides important
information about the patient’s interactions and communication patterns to both the patient
and therapist. Second, it has the effect of raising the patient’s awareness of her communication.
Asking the patient to record her conversations draws attention to her communication, and
makes her more aware of what she is saying, how well she feels understood, and the responses
of others. In essence, it enlists the patient’s observing ego. This is a very effective way of helping
the patient develop some insight into her communication patterns, and the self-monitoring
which occurs may also be a very effective mechanism for change.

Activity and Behavioral Assignments
Having the patient engage in specific activities, such as exercise, is by itself outside of
the scope of IPT. This is not to say that it ought not to be done, but rather that it is better
conceptualized as an adjunct to IPT. There is no doubt that such activities may be very helpful
for selected patients. If the therapist’s judgment is that activity scheduling would be of help
to the patient, then it can certainly be added to IPT. In addition, assignments like these can
be brought within the scope of IPT by focusing the primary point of the intervention on
improving communication and building social support.
    Practically speaking, this means that giving a narrow assignment to practice relaxation
techniques is not, precisely speaking, consistent with IPT, while requesting that the patient

a	
       nfortunately, parochialism and universalism have been a great hindrance to progress in psychotherapy research
      U
      and dissemination of effective treatments. Parochialism has been a problem because many devout adherents to a
      particular therapy, including IPT, have insisted that their therapy be delivered precisely as specified, and that no
      other contaminants be included. Universalism has been a problem because some adherents to particular schools
      of therapy insist that their therapy really encompasses all the others, for instance, that all therapies are really behav-
      ioral therapies. Open-mindedness and flexibility are called for in religion, politics, and psychotherapy: after all, in
      each, the common goal is to serve the wonderful and complex array of people we are fortunate enough to develop
      relationships with, a goal not well met with arguments placing purity above practicality.


                                                                                                                          169
Homework and Other Directives

ask someone else to participate with her in relaxation does address the goal of increasing
social contact and support. Similarly, asking the patient to exercise alone would be outside of
the spirit of IPT, while assigning a patient the task of finding someone to exercise with, or of
joining a health club with the goal of meeting other people as well as exercising, would be well
within the realm of IPT.

‘Paradoxical’ Assignments
These types of assignments, though they have been widely used in strategic therapies to great
effect, are not within the realm of IPT. Though they may be directed at relationship change
and communication specifically, they should not be utilized in IPT because they do not allow
the therapist to model direct communication. In IPT, the therapist should constantly and
consistently model effective communication for the patient – a paradoxical directive does not
do this, and therefore undermines one of the basic principles of IPT.

Homework in IPT: Patient Selection
The obvious criterion for homework is to consider it for anyone whom the therapist believes
will benefit from a specific assignment. Several additional guidelines are useful in IPT.
     The primary consideration in IPT is to assign homework to patients who are likely
to complete it. While this seems obvious for all therapies, it is extremely crucial in IPT and
other short-term therapies. This is because if the homework assignment is not completed,
non-compliance is likely to become the dominant issue in the therapy. Not only does this
shift the focus to the patient–therapist relationship, as the non-completion of the homework
assignment must be discussed within the therapeutic relationship, it also detracts from the
focus on immediate symptom resolution and improvement in interpersonal functioning.
     Directives such as the assignment of homework subtly shift the therapeutic relationship.
As understood from the perspective of Interpersonal Theory, giving a directive is a
communication which shifts the therapist to a more powerful or a higher status in which she
is telling the patient what to do, with the expectation that the patient will complete the task
assigned. While this shift is quite tolerable to some patients, some will withdraw, and others
will be provoked by the challenge for higher status and contend with the therapist. The latter
responses change the therapeutic relationship in ways that make the alliance more difficult to
manage.
     With more passive-aggressive patients, for example, the assignment of homework is
likely to elicit passive-aggressive behavior towards the therapist. Not only is it unlikely that
the homework will be completed, but the assignment itself – putting the therapist in a more
dominant position – is likely to cause problems in the therapeutic relationship.
     Assigning homework to some preoccupied patients may also cause problems in the
therapeutic relationship. If the therapist takes on a more dominant role, she may elicit even
more dependent behavior from the patient. As opposed to the passive-aggressive patient,
who often will not even attempt the assignment or complain that ‘the dog ate it’, dependent
patients will often complain that the assignment is too difficult, and use the failure as a means
of reinforcing their dependency on the therapist.
     There are many patients, however, who benefit a great deal from homework and other
overt directives such as advice giving. In general they tend to be quite motivated, relatively
securely attached, and may even ask the therapist for additional work between sessions. In the
best of circumstances, the patient will even go beyond the assignment, or modify it in creative
ways that bring about even more positive change.

170
                                               The Process of Assigning Homework in IPT

     By way of analogy, imagine that the therapist is a University Department Chair who
is able to influence her faculty, but unlike a real Chair, is unable to enforce direct orders
by cutting salaries, assigning faculty to broom closet offices, or denying tenure. Thus the
therapist/Chair can rely only on personal persuasion, charisma, and charm (as well as
therapeutic techniques) to get patients/faculty members to leave their offices and generate
more clinical income. For more courageous patients/faculty members (i.e. those more
securely attached), giving a direct command to see more patients is sufficient, and is the
best and most direct way to bring about change. For other faculty/patients, a direct order
will increase anxiety and fear, and result in the patient digging in even more deeply to seek
protection. Dependency will be exacerbated. For some faculty/patients, the therapist/Chair’s
command to leave the relative security of their offices will be met with disdain, with the
patient saying in a passive-aggressive way, ‘I’ll show the arrogant dag who’s boss.’
     While the analogy may be a bit too far-fetched for some, it nonetheless illustrates the
principle that the therapist should assign homework that is likely to be completed, and
homework that is in the patient’s interest. The therapist should also very carefully select
those patients to whom she assigns homework. To do otherwise is to risk iatrogenically
causing more transferential difficulties in a therapeutic context in which examination of the
transference is not only outside of the scope of the treatment, but detracts from the aims of
the therapy. There is no reason to do this in IPT. As a general rule, patients who are more
securely attached are more likely to benefit from directives, while those who are less securely
attached should be approached with caution.

The Process of Assigning Homework in IPT
There are a number of ways homework can be assigned, but they all ultimately depend upon
the therapist persuading the patient to undertake the task. The difference is simply a matter of
degree, with the spectrum running from therapist-generated to patient-generated tasks. The
point at which the therapist intervenes along that spectrum, however, has great impact on the
likelihood that the homework will be completed; great care should be taken to ensure that the
level of intervention matches the individual patient.
    The best assignment is one which is initiated by the patient. An astute and motivated
patient, for example, might remark to the therapist that it would be helpful if she initiated
a conversation with her partner to resolve a conflict. The therapist need only concur and
encourage the patient. Patients like this are, unfortunately, few and far between, though they
are much sought after by therapists. Nonetheless, the more the homework is generated by
the patient, the more likely it is to be accomplished. The therapist can encourage this kind
of patient-initiated problem solving by using non-specific directives with the patient. For
example, the therapist might ask questions such as:
    What do you think would be helpful to accomplish between sessions?
    How do you think you can best initiate the communication changes we’ve been
    working on?
    How do you think this problem might best be addressed between now and next
    week?
This type of implicit directive accomplishes two things. First, it clearly implies to the patient
that she is expected to work between sessions. While doing so, however, it also gives the
patient a great deal of autonomy in developing solutions. Gentle guidance by the therapist,
or collaborative work to refine the homework following the patient’s suggestion, can be used.

                                                                                             171
Homework and Other Directives

Special care should be taken to ensure that the patient’s assignment is not overly ambitious –
homework should always be within the ability of the patient. The goal of homework in IPT is
not to frustrate the patient but to maximize productive change.
     Further along the spectrum towards specific therapist-generated directives are those
such as psychoeducation. For instance, the therapist might tell the patient that increasing
activity and decreasing isolation is helpful to most depressed patients. Acknowledging the
fact that it is difficult to do some of these when depressed, the therapist might then ask the
patient for ideas about how these general goals could be accomplished between sessions. The
therapist is, with intent, influencing the patient to begin to generate specific solutions which
can be collaboratively refined. Giving the patient ownership and working collaboratively will
increase the likelihood of completion.
     More specific directives can be given by the therapist using examples gleaned from other
patients. Maintaining confidentiality, the therapist might find it useful to mention strategies
that other patients have used to deal with similar problems. A postpartum woman who is
dealing with a conflict with her partner, for instance, might be influenced to address the
conflict with her partner more directly if the therapist describes a situation in which a similar
problem was successfully addressed by another patient. The use of details which are like those
of the patient will enhance the power of the intervention, as the patient recognizes similarities
with her own situation.
     As with all interventions, care must be taken with such approaches. The more overtly
directive the therapist, the greater the risk of rupturing the therapeutic alliance. Though the
specific interventions noted above may be quite beneficial and help some patients feel better
understood, others may feel alienated, thinking that the therapist is not understanding them
as individuals.
     The most overtly directive intervention is simply for the therapist to tell the patient
exactly what to do between sessions. While some patients will benefit a great deal from
this, and a few will even honestly ask for homework to do, the therapist must take
great care to ensure that taking a more dominant role does not precipitate transference
problems.
     In sum, the therapist is generally best served by using the least directive approach
that is feasible and effective. Allowing the patient to take the lead encourages her to take
responsibility for the task, and increases her sense of ownership. Moreover, it keeps the
therapist from assuming that she ultimately knows what is best for the patient instead of
listening well to the patient for her ideas about solving the problem.
Case example 13.1: Tom
Tom was a 40-year-old business executive who had come to therapy for help with marital
problems. His wife of 15 years was threatening to leave him, stating that he was too
invested in his work and didn’t prioritize her or the family. Tom had a very high-powered
job with a legal firm, and though he claimed he ‘intellectually recognized’ that his wife
had a good point, he also felt that she didn’t understand how stressful his job was.
In the Interpersonal Inventory (Figures 13.1 and 13.2) the therapist learned that Tom
had a number of social relationships, mostly at work, and mostly with men. Like
Tom, most of them were also devoted to their work, and expected everyone else to be
equally obsessed. The culture was that men were not supposed to show weaknesses;
any discussion of emotion was taboo. Tom described himself as having difficulty
with emotional expression outside of this setting as well – though very articulate, he
described never having had close relationships in which he could discuss his feelings.




172
                                                   The Process of Assigning Homework in IPT

                                     Interpersonal Circle




                                                                           Parker
                       Karl
                                                Claire                     (son)
                       Jeff
                                                (wife)         Mike
                                                                           Isabelle
                                                                           (daughter)

                                          Intimates
                       Ian



                                       Close supports
                                                             Extended supports

Figure 13.1  Interpersonal Circle – Tom


              Biological factors          Social factors                   Psychological factors
              40 years old                Fair support from colleagues     Intelligent
              Male                        Good support from family         ‘Workaholic’
              Family history of           Well educated                    Type-A personality
               substance abuse            Employed as a lawyer at a top    Dominant
              Drinks 4-5 cups of           firm                            Dismissive of others
               coffee/day                                                  Married 15 years
              Takes sleeping pills
              Does not exercise



    Cultural factors
    Expectation to not show weakness                  Tom             Spiritual factors
     or discuss emotions at work                                      Stopped attending
    Expectation that wife’s role is                                    church many years ago
     to care for the family
                                         Acute Interpersonal Crisis
                                        Interpersonal Dispute (wife)


                                                  Distress
                             (Marriage difficulties, wife threatening to leave)

Figure 13.2  Interpersonal Formulation – Tom


The therapist noted that Tom was very goal-oriented, and that he tended to be fairly
dominant. This was apparent in both subtle and direct ways within the therapy itself.
Near the end of the first session, for instance, Tom rather adamantly told the therapist
that they ‘needed to meet again the next week’, before the therapist had the chance
to bring up the topic of future appointments. Tom always had a particular agenda to
discuss, and always brought in a written list of materials to cover, somewhat like a




                                                                                               173
Homework and Other Directives

business meeting. Typically the sessions would begin with Tom setting out his agenda
and informing the therapist that this was how they would spend the session.
At the end of the third session the topic of homework arose at Tom’s instigation.
Tom: We’ve met for 3 weeks now, and you still haven’t given me any assignments to do. That
would never happen in my company – if you were working for me, I’d be giving you a lot of stuff to
take home!
Therapist: [fighting off the temptation to say, ‘I’m glad I don’t work for you!’] Many people I
work with do find that having something specific to accomplish between sessions is very helpful
in achieving their goals. Before thinking about a specific task, let’s think those through. What are
your goals for the next week?
The therapist was well aware of several things at this point in therapy. First, Tom’s at-
tachment style was somewhat dismissive; given this, Tom was likely to disengage from
therapy if he felt that the therapist wasn’t being responsive to his requests. At the same
time, the therapist also recognized that giving a direct and specific assignment to Tom
was fraught with danger, as Tom was used to being in charge and was not likely to
respond well to the therapist taking a more dominant position within the therapeutic
relationship.
The therapeutic challenge, then, was to assist Tom to develop an assignment for him-
self that both maintained a productive therapeutic alliance and helped Tom to discuss
his feelings and to communicate better with his wife. If Tom experienced some success
with this, the therapist hoped that he would begin to develop some insight into his
communication style as well, ultimately leading to a more permanent change in his
communication and a deepening of his relationships. The therapist hypothesized that
Tom would benefit from talking directly to his wife about his feelings of conflict and stress
about work and their relationship, but he realized that simply giving Tom a directive to do
so would likely be disruptive to the therapeutic alliance as well as unlikely to succeed.
The therapist chose, therefore, to use Tom’s own vocabulary at this point in the therapy,
choosing to more subtly influence Tom rather than confront him directly about the
need to express his feelings more openly. Using words like ‘people I work with’, ‘goals’,
and ‘tasks to accomplish’, the therapist framed the issue in terms that were comfortable
to Tom, all the while moving him slowly but inevitably towards improving his
communication.
Tom: Well, my main goal is to save my marriage. And my wife has made it pretty clear that she
isn’t happy.
Therapist: The goal to save your marriage sounds like a very good general goal – kind of like a
business plan, I guess. How do you usually approach a general goal like that?
Tom: In my business, we start by breaking it down into smaller steps. Then you can set some
specific deadlines to get each one done.
Therapist: Sounds good – what specific steps do you see that need to be accomplished in this
case?
Tom: First, I need to set up some time to talk with her – I still don’t quite know what she sees as
the specific problem. She just keeps saying that she doesn’t feel ‘close’ anymore. Then I guess I bet-
ter communicate what I’m thinking more clearly to her.
Therapist: Sounds good so far – what is it that you’d like to tell her, exactly?
Tom: The main thing is that I don’t feel like she understands all the stress that I’m under. Work
is difficult enough, but now to have to deal with this kind of dissatisfaction at home too ... and I
want her to know that even though she may not think so, I do still love her very much.
Therapist: It seems to be helpful to you to have a kind of written agenda to get things done – I
noticed that you have used that for our sessions. Would it be helpful to write down what you want
to tell your wife?



174
                                                                                         References

Tom: Great idea doc! [takes out a sheet of paper from his briefcase and proceeds to write several
notes].
Therapist: Now that you’ve got a good idea of where you’re heading, what’s the next step?
Tom: Setting some specific deadlines. Why don’t we say that I should have a good conversation
with her by this time next week?
Therapist: Sounds ambitious, but you seem like the kind of guy who gets things done when he
sets his mind to it. Do you think figuring out a specific time would be of help?
Tom: Now I know why they pay you the big bucks, doc. Yeah, Thursday night is usually fairly
free – no meetings or any activities with the kids. I’ll talk to her after we get the kids to bed.
Therapist: Sounds like a plan. I’ll look forward to hearing how it turns out.
Tom approached his wife the next Thursday. He reported in the next session that the
attempt wasn’t very successful – his wife had been put off by his ‘demand’ that they
talk, and more so by the fact that he had a written agenda for the conversation. Accord-
ing to Tom, she said that having an agenda made her feel like he wasn’t listening to her.
Though the attempt was not as successful as it might have been, the therapist pointed
out that Tom had made a strong effort. Further, Tom was now more open to other sug-
gestions about how he might approach his wife differently.


Conclusion
The intent of homework and other directives is to increase the likelihood that the patient
will engage in communication or social activity that will lead to improved functioning and
symptom resolution. Though homework is not required in IPT, it is extremely helpful for
many patients. The therapist should tailor the tasks in the directive, and the way it is delivered,
in order to maximize the likelihood that the assignment is carried out. Refusal of homework
or a passive-aggressive response to it will shift the focus of IPT away from improvement
in external relationships to a focus on transferential issues. When used, homework in IPT
should be interpersonal in nature, and ideally should be generated by the patient.

References
1.  Miller WR and Rollnick S. Motivational Interviewing: Preparing People for Change,
    2nd edn. 2002, New York: Guilford Publications.
2.  Swartz HA, et al. Engaging depressed patients in psychotherapy: integrating techniques
    from motivational interviewing and ethnographic interviewing to improve treatment
    participation. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 2007, 38(4): 430–439.




                                                                                                     175
This page intentionally left blank
                               Section 4
Problem Areas


Chapter 14. Interpersonal Disputes
Chapter 15. Role Transitions
Chapter 16. Grief and Loss
This page intentionally left blank
                                                                      14
Interpersonal Disputes
Introduction	                                                                                  179
Identification of Disputes in the Assessment/Initial Phase	                                    181
Interpersonal Disputes: Exploration in the Middle Phase	                                       182
Graphing the Interpersonal Dispute	                                                            183
Interpersonal Disputes: Techniques	                                                            186
Interpersonal Disputes: Additional Therapeutic Tactics	                                        188
Conclusion	                                                                                    201
References	                                                                                    201


Introduction
Disputes, arguments, disagreements, and differences of opinion are intrinsic to all human
relationships – the ‘seasoning,’ so to speak, of human life. At times, more piquant life-
seasonings may lead to problems. Interpersonal Disputes may be utilized as a Problem Area
in interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT) when they are relevant to the patient’s acute distress.
They should first be identified in the Assessment/Initial sessions, then collaboratively
determined to be a focus of treatment during the Interpersonal Formulation. As with all of
the Problem Areas, ‘Interpersonal Dispute’ is not a diagnosis. It is simply a shorthand way
of describing the interpersonal issues involved in the patient’s acute distress, and a way of
maintaining focus over the course of treatment.
    The Interpersonal Dispute that is identified is understood as one leg of the Interpersonal
Triad; namely the acute crisis that has precipitated the patient’s distress. The patient’s response
to this crisis – divorce, family conflict, conflict at work or school, or any other specific
problem – is influenced by the other two legs of the triad. Biopsychosocial/Cultural/Spiritual
vulnerabilities, including the patient’s attachment style among many others, are the diathesis
or predisposition to respond with distress. The context for the Interpersonal Dispute is the
patient’s social support, which often is lacking and therefore exacerbates the distress.
    The general approach to Interpersonal Disputes, moving from identification to
exploration to acute resolution, is displayed in Figure 14.1.
    During the Assessment/Initial Phase, and particularly during the Interpersonal
Inventory, the therapist should explore the possibility that an Interpersonal Dispute is the
acute crisis that brings the patient to treatment. This can be collaboratively agreed upon as a
focus of treatment when constructing the Interpersonal Formulation. To further assess the
Interpersonal Dispute, the therapist can use the Conflict Graph to help the patient describe
the conflict and clarify communication. Communication styles are analyzed to identify
problems. Problem solving then follows to help the patient determine a course of action.
Modification of communication or expectations about the dispute can be achieved using role
playing or problem solving.


                                                                                              179
Interpersonal Disputes

                                    Interpersonal Inventory
                                Assess for Interpersonal Dispute


                                  Interpersonal Formulation
                             Dispute identified as treatment focus


                                          Middle Phase
                                      Exploration of dispute


                                         Conflict Graph


                                Further exploration of dispute
                                         Clarification
                                   Communication analysis
                                    Interpersonal Incidents


                                 Interpersonal problem solving
                                          Role playing
                                           Directives


                                Conclusion of Acute Treatment
                                          Resolution


Figure 14.1  Interpersonal Disputes


IPT is designed to assist the patient to resolve the acute Interpersonal Dispute crisis. There are
three specific goals:
1	 To help the patient understand the dispute more fully
2	 To work towards resolution by improving interpersonal communication
3	 To enlist any social support that is needed.
The IPT therapist should not enter into therapy with a prejudice about the outcome of the
relationship. There is a spectrum of outcomes for any given relationship which will differ
depending on the individual and his circumstances. These can be roughly categorized as:
(1) the patient may elect to end the relationship and move to other social supports and
relationships; (2) the patient may decide to maintain the relationship with a change in
expectations and an increase in social support external to the relationship; (3) the patient may
elect to maintain the relationship after making positive changes in it. In each case, the goal in
IPT is for the patient to make an objective, well-considered decision about how to manage
the relationship, as opposed to an uninformed, impulsive one.
     Interpersonal Disputes can be overt and obviously related to the onset of distress, or may
be subtle and not immediately apparent in the compilation of the Interpersonal Inventory.
Overtly hostile conflicts such as abusive or violent relationships are usually obvious in the
early stages of history gathering, but may not be disclosed by the patient. In some cases, the
dispute is in the form of a ‘betrayal’ of trust; in the case of intimate relationships, for instance,
this might be a sexual affair. ‘Disappointments’ may occur at any stage of a relationship and
are often more subtle, particularly when expectations are not clearly communicated. In some
180
                                 Identification of Disputes in the Assessment/Initial Phase

cases factors peculiar to the patient, such as personality or cultural context, or specific to the
dispute, such as physical or psychiatric illness in a partner, may preclude it becoming overt.
Some disputes are subtle and may only become apparent incidentally; for instance, a patient
may inadvertently disclose a conversation or Interpersonal Incident that uncovers the dispute.
    Interpersonal Disputes may also be developmentally determined. In many of these cases,
the disputes arise as part of the lifecycle and the therapist should aim to help the patient place
the dispute within this context. Role Transitions may also be considered as a Problem Area in
such cases. Box 14.1 lists some examples of common disputes.

Box 14.1  Examples of Interpersonal Disputes

  ●● Overtly hostile conflict: domestic violence, verbal abuse
  ●● Betrayals: infidelity, impropriety, conflicting loyalties within a family
  ●● Disappointments: unmet expectations at work or school

  ●● Inhibited conflicts: anger at partner’s illness or disability

  ●● Subtle mistreatment: verbal abuse, denial of intimacy

  ●● Developmental conflict: separation-individuation issues




Identification of Disputes in the Assessment/
Initial Phase
Interpersonal Disputes often become evident while the initial history is being taken, and may
well be the presenting problem. Some disputes may only emerge during the construction of
the Interpersonal Inventory. Box 14.2 lists some specific questions that can be used during
history taking or the Interpersonal Inventory to identify a dispute.

Box 14.2  Questions for eliciting Interpersonal Disputes as a treatment focus

  ●●  How have things been with your spouse/partner?
  ●●  How have you been getting along with your family?
  ●● How are things going with colleagues at work?

  ●● Are you having difficulty communicating with people around you? Anyone in

     ­particular?
  ●● Have you found yourself unhappy or disappointed with anybody around you?

  ●● Are you finding yourself in more arguments with people than usual?

  ●● How do you express anger to others?

  ●● Are you happy with the way people treat you? Anyone in particular?

  ●● How well do you think that others understand you?




The therapist should never rigidly impose a Problem Area as a treatment focus upon the
patient at the expense of the therapeutic alliance, particularly given the overlap of the areas.
The goal when working with the Problem Areas is not to be dogmatic nor to make a correct
‘diagnosis’ but rather to maintain the therapeutic focus on interpersonal problems. The
specific Problem Area is less important that maintaining a general interpersonal focus.
    So if a patient conceptualizes his problem as a Role Transition while the therapist
thinks it is better understood as a dispute, it should be dealt with under the rubric of a
transition. Conversely, the therapist may view the patient’s problem as a Role Transition
while the patient describes the issue as an Interpersonal Dispute; the experienced
therapist will go with the patient’s conceptualization. After all, one of the primary goals in

                                                                                             181
Interpersonal Disputes

IPT is to understand the patient better; that can hardly be done well if the therapist begins
rigidly imposing his terminology upon the patient.

Interpersonal Disputes: Exploration in the Middle
Phase
Once a dispute is identified and agreed upon as a Problem Area, the therapist should begin to
collect information regarding the following questions during the Middle Phase of IPT.

When did the patient first become aware of the dispute?
  The therapist should explore how the patient recognized that there was a dispute, as well as
  whether the patient has been able to link the dispute and the onset of psychological distress.

What are the patient’s expectations of the other person or situation and how did these change over
time?
    The therapist should establish whether the patient’s expectations are unrealistic in
    the context of the relationship. He should clarify the ways any changes in expectations have
    resulted in improvement or worsening of psychological symptoms and distress.

What attempts has the patient made to try to resolve the dispute, and what has kept a resolution
from occurring?
    The therapist should explore the ways the patient has attempted to resolve the dispute
    prior to therapy. On occasion, the patient’s attempts will have exacerbated the problem.
    Exploring these is a good way to further establish the patient’s style of communication
    and motivation for change.

How does the patient communicate his needs in the relationship, and how has this changed over
the course of the dispute?
    The therapist should establish how the patient’s communication style has contributed to
    the development of the dispute. Information gathered using communication analysis will
    help to establish how dysfunctional communication has contributed to the development
    and persistence of the dispute. This should also provide guidance regarding which
    specific interventions, aimed at improving the patient’s communication, may help bring
    about a resolution.

What is the patient’s attachment style, and how has it contributed to the development of distress in
the context of the dispute?
    The Assessment/Initial Phase of IPT should clarify the patient’s basic attachment style,
    but it can be clarified further when discussing disputes. This style – a diathesis for the
    distress – should inform the therapist about the way the patient’s distress and problems
    in communication have developed. The patient’s attachment style should influence the
    interventions chosen by the therapist; it also has implications regarding the development
    of the therapeutic relationship.

What does the dispute suggest about how the patient will function within the therapeutic
relationship?
    The therapeutic relationship will be influenced by the same factors that operate
    in the patient’s other relationships. The therapist should take care to note the style

182
                                                          Graphing the Interpersonal Dispute

    of communication the patient uses in therapy, the patient’s expectations of relationships in
    general, and how these expectations are communicated, in order to anticipate and deal
    with parallel problems which may develop in the therapeutic relationship.

Graphing the Interpersonal Dispute
The initial iteration of IPT in 19841 and our first edition of Interpersonal Psychotherapy:
A Clinician’s Guide2 both described a process of ‘staging the dispute’ as a required step in
characterizing it. Disputes were staged as either in negotiation, impasse, or dissolution.
Clinical experience and more recent research have led to an important shift in the therapeutic
approach to disputes, which has discarded the staging process.
     The shift is due largely to the theoretical and clinical emphasis in IPT on listening well
to the patient. Categories, such as the dispute ‘stages’, have the effect of constricting further
communication rather than expanding it. The goal in IPT is to have the patient more fully
describe his experience, not place it in an arbitrarily defined category. As this description and
expansion occurs, the therapist can better understand the patient’s relationship problems, and
the patient can also develop more insights into his contribution to it, and to solutions for the
problem. Moreover, the process of expanding and describing more to the therapist can be
carried over to the patient’s relationships outside of therapy, helping others to understand him
better and to respond to him differently.
     Reliability may come from categorization, but validity and meaning come from detailed
description and stories. It is far better to start working with Interpersonal Disputes by asking the
patient to describe the dispute in his own words, and in terms that have meaning for him, than
to require him to fit it into a category. It is far better to have him describe more, to elaborate on
what he is thinking and why, and to have him give details about his experience and perspective.
That is communicating well, and the therapist should encourage it at every possible opportunity
in IPT. The key in IPT is to provide structure that facilitates more description and listening well.
     The method used in IPT to more completely understand disputes and listen well while
providing structure is to graphically diagram them. Figure 14.2 illustrates the Conflict Graph,
the clinical tool that has been developed to facilitate this. It is designed to be very intuitive
and easy to use, particularly for patients. It is also designed, unlike the old staging method,
to open the conversation, to invite the patient to describe more, to explain more fully, and to
help the therapist understand the patient’s problem and perspective more completely. It is a
structured way to obtain more information efficiently while listening well.
     When an Interpersonal Dispute is identified, the therapist can use the Conflict Graph to
help the patient visualize and describe the conflict. The first step in the graphing process is to
introduce the Conflict Graph to the patient as a way of more fully understanding the conflict.
The x-axis represents the importance of the relationship, while the y-axis represents the severity
of the conflict. The therapist can then hand the graph to the patient, and ask him to plot the
dispute on the graph, using a single point to note his perspective regarding the severity of the
dispute and the importance of the relationship. After further exploration, the patient is then
asked to plot the perspective of the significant other – i.e. how the other person in the conflict
perceives the dispute severity and relationship importance. Further clarification can help to
understand the differences in perspective and suggest how communication can be changed.
     A critical part of the graph is that there is no scaling or numbers. That is because the goal
is to help the patient to describe the conflict in words, not to categorize it or to use an arbitrary
rating scale. As an IPT therapist I want to know what the conflict is like; I am not interested in
knowing that the patient rates the severity of the problem a 7 or an 8 or any other number. I am
listening for words and descriptions, not ratings. Numerical ratings have no point of reference,
                                                                                                183
Interpersonal Disputes




               Severity of dispute




                                        Importance of relationship

Figure 14.2  The Conflict Graph

no anchor. There is no shared meaning for a rating of ‘8’. Similarly, using staging categories has
little shared meaning: what does a conflict in the now discarded category of ‘impasse’ really
mean? The therapeutic goal in IPT is to have the patient describe, not to categorize.
     The eventual goal of describing the patient’s experience – communicating more
effectively – with his significant other makes this opening up and sharing of individual
experience even more critical. A patient telling his significant other that there is a problem
because the severity of their conflict is an ‘8’ is not helpful – there is no shared meaning.
A rating won’t allow the patient to be better understood; instead, it will actually hinder
communication. The dispute won’t change or shift without words and descriptions and
communication. In contrast, having the patient describe in detail why the conflict is so
important to him, the nuances of how he is feeling about it, the impact it is having on him –
these are the seedlings of new and different communication that will grow into more
complete understanding. That is how social support is enlisted.
     Plotting the conflict also facilitates two other aspects of change. First, it forces the patient
to think about the dispute differently. Not in a confrontational way, but in an open and
inquisitive way. It forces the patient to struggle with questions such as: ‘What makes the
dispute so severe?’ ‘What makes the relationship important?’ ‘Why have I plotted the conflict
here?’ The process literally enlists the patient’s observing ego, and should lead the patient to
‘look over his own shoulder’ at how he is perceiving the relationship and the conflict. It gently
forces an internal shift from a fixed understanding of the relationship to an open examination
of it. The second aspect of change is that the graphing process – with no scales – shifts the
perspective on resolution from ‘all or nothing’ or a categorical outcome to one of degree.
Rather than all or nothing, perhaps a moderate shift might be sufficient. Rather than a
categorical change, perhaps there is room for compromise. Perhaps it is possible to be met
halfway. Perhaps it is possible simply to understand more fully.
     Both of these aspects of change are enhanced even more when adding the second step
of the graphing process, which is to ask the patient to plot on the same graph the perspective
of the other person in the dispute. Again this forces the patient to confront questions such
184
                                                         Graphing the Interpersonal Dispute

as: ‘Where would she plot the dispute?’ ‘How severe is it for her?’ ‘How important is the
relationship to her?’ ‘Why would she plot it there?’ ‘Why are our perspectives different?’
     Both after the patient plots his own perspective, and after he plots the perspective of the
significant other in the dispute, there should be an opening of discussion facilitated by lots of
clarifying questions. Questions like these are often helpful as a start:
    What has changed?
    Where would the dispute have been plotted a month ago? A year ago?
    Has anyone’s perspective shifted?
    Why is the relationship so important, and why is the conflict so important?
The plotting of the other person’s perspective gently encourages yet a third element of
change: it requires the patient to step out of his own shoes for at least a few moments and
imagine what others might be thinking and feeling. It requires the patient to take a different
perspective and observe from that perspective. It is literally a technique to help the patient
think about the thoughts, emotions, wishes, desires, and needs that he has as well as those
of the significant other. When there is a discrepancy between the points plotted for each
individual, it should lead directly to the therapist asking the question:
    What does the other person need to know to understand your perspective?
And these secondary questions:
    What do you need to know to understand the other person’s perspective better?
    What is leading to the gap in understanding?
These questions are critical in IPT, because they all lead to change in insight and
communication. Asking what the other person needs to know to understand the patient
leads straight to directives to the patient to describe his experience to his partner. Asking
what the patient needs to know to understand his partner leads straight to directives to have
him ask her about her perspective. And asking what is causing the gap in understanding leads
straight to directives to discuss the conflict and introduces the possibility of compromise. All
foster change in insight and communication.
    Further exploration of the communication problems in the relationship can be examined
using techniques such as Interpersonal Incidents and communication analysis. The patient
and therapist should clarify all aspects of the dispute as well as the affect which is generated
by it. This should include both the content affect which the patient reports when describing
various conflicts, as well as the process affect observed by the therapist as the patient discusses
the dispute in therapy. The therapist should also address the patient’s communication style to
help identify the ways in which the patient’s communications are contributing to the dispute.
Modification of communication or expectations about the dispute can be achieved using role
playing or problem solving.
    Utilizing techniques which help the patient generate solutions to his relationship disputes
enables the patient to improve his ability to deal not only with the ‘acute’ aspects of the
specific relationship dispute, but also to develop skills to deal with problems which may
develop in the future. This will ultimately help to prevent the relationship from deteriorating
after treatment has ended. It should help with new relationships as well. Even in those cases in
which the patient is in a relationship which he ultimately chooses to end, the goal in IPT is to
help him to better understand how he has contributed to the conflict. If this is accomplished,
the patient will be better positioned to enter into new relationships without making the same
mistakes. This is particularly crucial, given that patients tend to manifest the same attachment

                                                                                              185
Interpersonal Disputes

styles, and develop relationships in the same way, across time. If insight is not forthcoming,
the patient is likely to step from the frying pan of one bad relationship into the fire of another
just like it.

Interpersonal Disputes: Techniques
After establishing that a dispute exists, graphing it, and exploring it in detail, the therapist
and patient should work to resolve the acute crisis which has led to the dispute (Figure 14.3).
There are a number of techniques that can be used in the Middle Phase of IPT to collect
information and to help resolve the dispute.

                                   Interpersonal Disputes


                                                    Specific IPT
                                                    Techniques
           Interpersonal dispute
                                                                     Improvement
        (Identified in Interpersonal
               Formulation)
                                                   Clarification




              Dispute graphed                       Expression
               Conflict Graph                       of affect

                                                                             Acceptance of
                                                                              relationship
                                                  Communication           limitations; social
      Dispute explored and clarified
                                                     analysis               support sought
                                                                               elsewhere

                                                      Problem
                                                      solving



                                                        Role
                                                      playing

                                                                      Ending of
                                                                     relationship
                                                    Relationship
                                                     appraisal


Figure 14.3  Therapeutic interventions in interpersonal disputes


The dispute is identified in the Assessment/Initial Phase and included in the Interpersonal
Formulation. After graphing the dispute, it is explored in detail during the middle sessions.
The therapist helps to bring about change by altering the patient’s communication patterns
(using communication analysis and Interpersonal Incidents), using problem solving, or
helping the patient modify his expectations about the relationship. The dispute either begins
to improve, or the patient may decide to end it or invest less in the relationship. Regardless of
the outcome of the dispute, a primary goal of IPT is to help the patient emerge from it with
increased social support.
186
                                                        Interpersonal Disputes: Techniques

Clarification
The use of open-ended questions and empathic listening will help build a therapeutic
alliance with a patient who is experiencing Interpersonal Disputes. This is the foundation
of all interventions in IPT, but is particularly important when dealing with disputes. This
is in large part because a patient in a dispute often comes to therapy feeling frustrated and
misunderstood, an experience which is likely to be imposed upon a therapist who neglects to
establish a good alliance and doesn’t listen well.
     Clarification will help identify specific aspects of the patient’s dispute, which is crucial
given that the patient’s report to the therapist is likely to be biased. The reports of less
insightful patients will often convey an implicit message that the other person is to blame,
and at least part of the communication to the therapist about the dispute is an unspoken
invitation to the therapist to side with the patient against the ‘oppressive other’. The therapist
should therefore take care to expand on these areas further, as ‘what is not said’ is often
extremely important in determining the nature of the dispute.
     Clarification is also helpful as a way of practicing different ways to communicate with
a significant other. The simple principle is to describe and clarify to the therapist first, and
then to share the more complete and detailed description of the patient’s unique story with
significant others.

Expression of Affect
When relating the history of the dispute the patient may begin to experience emotions such
as sadness or anger. It is vital for the therapist to help the patient recognize these – this can
often be accomplished by exploring both process and content affect as the history unfolds.
The affect can best be elicited simply by having the patient discuss the relationship – in
particular, focusing on specific Interpersonal Incidents in which conflict has occurred will
often help the patient to recognize and express emotional reactions. Once identified, these
emotions can be used to motivate change in the conflicted relationship.

Communication Analysis
Disputes may arise out of poor or maladaptive communication, or they may lead to
ineffective communication in a situation in which the communication was once much
better. The therapist should direct the patient to report verbatim conversations and
Interpersonal Incidents that he has had with others. This will provide material so that
the patient’s communication style can be examined, and hypotheses can be drawn
about the ways the patient’s communication is contributing to the perpetuation of the
problem.

Problem Solving
Once the history of the patient’s relationship problem is well understood and the therapist
has a good understanding of the patient’s communication style, the therapist and patient
can collaborate on generating potential solutions. Both old strategies for dealing with
similar problems as well as new approaches should be discussed. It is important for the
patient to be as active as possible in this process in order to increase his sense of mastery.
This should also help the patient to develop the skills to address other problems in the
future.

                                                                                              187
Interpersonal Disputes

Role Playing
Role playing can be a valuable intervention when dealing with Interpersonal Disputes.
The patient can first play the role of the significant other, which is a helpful strategy for the
patient to gain insight into the other’s experience. The therapist can demonstrate new ways
of communicating when playing the patient. The therapist can then play the role of the
significant other to gain further insight into the patient’s communication style, and can give
feedback to the patient so that his communication can be discussed. Role playing may also be
used to help the patient develop assertiveness or communication skills, providing an ‘in vitro’
environment in which to practice them.

Relationship Appraisal
Disputes are often based on expectations about the relationship that are non-reciprocal.
Unrequited love, unrealistic expectations, or conflicts about the role that each person is to
assume lead to conflict because of differences in expectations. In addition, conflicts can be
exacerbated because the patient’s expectation of the other exceeds what she is capable of
doing, or exceeds what is possible to do in the particular situation.
      For instance, a woman having postpartum difficulties may expect her husband to take
over the childcare responsibilities when she returns to work. If he is working as well, this may
simply prove to be unrealistic, as it is literally not possible for him to fulfill her expectations.
A patient with a spouse who is relatively detached and who may have avoidant traits may
expect her spouse to be able to communicate deep emotional feelings – this too may be
an unrealistic expectation given the limitations inherent in the spouse. Conversely, the
husband’s expectations that his wife will only need the amount of communication that he is
comfortable with may also be unrealistic. In these situations, the therapist should examine
the expectations of the patient in detail, and help to determine whether they are realistic.
If they are not, then the patient is bound to be disappointed no matter how much her
communication improves. The therapist can give direct feedback to the patient about the
expectations in some circumstances, or in others may want to let the patient take the lead. In
either case, the goal is to help the patient realistically appraise her situation.
      This particular technique bears many similarities to approaches taken in cognitive
therapy. Technically speaking, IPT and cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) utilize a similar
technique: the therapist is challenging the patient’s expectations. Tactically speaking, however,
IPT and CBT are very different. In IPT:
●● The primary goal is change in communication and increase in social support and not

    ­challenging the patient’s underlying cognitions or maladaptive schemas.
●● The therapist helps the patient to examine his expectation about a specific relation-

     ship to effect interpersonal change and is always concerned with expectations about
   ­relationships.

Interpersonal Disputes: Additional
Therapeutic Tactics
The Patient Reports an Absence of Disputes
During the Assessment/Initial Phase of IPT, a patient may fail to acknowledge the
presence of significant Interpersonal Disputes, despite the fact that elements of the history


188
                                  Interpersonal Disputes: Additional Therapeutic Tactics

strongly suggest a serious conflict is present. Possible reasons for this may
include the patient’s attachment style (often preoccupied if he over-idealizes and is
reticent to criticize significant others), his personality, psychological defenses, cultural
factors, or a reluctance to ­self-disclose during the early stages of the therapeutic
relationship.
    In these circumstances, the therapist should retain a high degree of curiosity about the
presence of a dispute without ‘pathologizing’ the situation and potentially damaging the
therapeutic alliance. In other words, the therapist should continue to listen well. Disputes
should be reframed as common and reasonable parts of relationships; moreover, their
presence should not imply that the relationship is doomed or dysfunctional. The therapist
should look for inconsistencies reported by the patient, as well as examining the patient’s
communication and problem solving styles. If an interpersonal conflict becomes apparent,
the therapist can suggest to the patient that working on the dispute can improve the
relationship and help relieve symptoms.

The Patient who Appears Unmotivated for Change
Needless to say, a patient who is unmotivated can be very difficult to work with in IPT. Such
patients are, of course, not highly sought after by therapists who use other modalities either.
Lack of motivation can be a significant phenomenological feature of a mood disorder, or
may be a reflection of the characterological qualities of some individuals, such as those with
avoidant or dependent personalities.
     If the therapist and patient recognize amotivation as a feature of the patient’s illness, the
initial stages of therapy should focus on achieving more limited goals or achieving change
in smaller, more manageable aspects of the patient’s interpersonal problem. As the patient
experiences success, his motivation may well improve in tandem with mood. The therapist
should continually emphasize the patient’s gains, and use this to reinforce motivation over
time. If the amotivation is related to attachment style, the therapist should adapt his own style
to accommodate it. This means setting more realistic goals for treatment, slowing the pace to
focus on the therapeutic alliance if needed, and engaging the patient collaboratively to solve
problems.
     An important distinction is the patient’s motivation to engage in therapy and his
motivation to work in therapy. Dependent patients, for example, are often quite willing to
seek help (i.e. to engage in treatment) but may not be motivated to change once some of
their dependency needs are met by entering a therapeutic relationship. Fortunately, with
therapeutic effort such patients can usually be influenced to work once they are engaged
in therapy. While threatening termination of therapy with a rigid time limit is a tempting way
for the therapist to make the patient change, the damage done to the therapeutic alliance,
the anxiety produced in the patient, and the empathic misfire all suggest that threatening or
imposing termination is a very poor tactic indeed. In contrast, persistence and the techniques
described in previous chapters can be much more helpful in increasing motivation in these
situations.
     Put simply, patients who are able to walk through the door for the first appointment and
return for subsequent sessions are at least motivated to engage in therapy, and therefore have
the opportunity to benefit from it. Those who do not seek treatment, who are not able to
tolerate therapy, or who are sporadic in their attendance and commitment to therapy usually
don’t do well. There is simply no therapeutic technique that is effective if the patient is not
present.


                                                                                             189
Interpersonal Disputes

The Patient with Overwhelming Social Adversity
The presence of overwhelming social adversity, such as financial deprivation or poor
social support, coupled with chronic and seemingly intractable Interpersonal Disputes
may precipitate a sense of hopelessness for both the patient and therapist. That ought not,
however, limit the implementation of IPT. Despite apparently overwhelming social problems,
such patients are often motivated for change, often have a specific interpersonal focus, and
often have the capacity to work towards realistic goals. Our experience with indigent patients
and others with difficult social circumstances suggests that there is no reason to assume that
these factors alone will adversely affect outcome.
    In such cases, the therapist should avoid suggesting that all of the patient’s problems
will be addressed and can instead work collaboratively to set modest and achievable goals.
Working towards outcomes such as developing attachments and social supports outside
of the problematic relationship, or improving assertiveness and problem solving skills, is
appropriate. The therapist should also provide the patient with a warm and collaborative
relationship which supports the patient in his efforts to deal with these difficult situations.
The combination of empathy and an interpersonal problem focus may well contribute to
improving psychiatric symptoms in illnesses previously regarded as ‘chronic’ or ‘treatment
resistant’.

The Patient Who Has Difficulty Communicating Well
Difficulties in communicating often reflect both the patient’s attachment style and his
dysfunctional way of communicating attachment needs. The silver lining to these behaviors
is that they can, when they occur in therapy, be a veritable gold mine of information, as
the patient’s interactions with the therapist will reflect his interactions with others. If the
therapist can identify these behaviors in a constructive and non-critical way in the patient’s
interactions outside of therapy, he can then help the patient to alter problematic interactions
in communication or interpersonal behavior in these relationships.
     In IPT, difficulty in communicating within the therapeutic relationship should
be promptly extrapolated to real relationships in the patient’s life to avoid shifting to a
transference-based treatment. If the patient’s behavior in relationships outside of therapy
remains the focus of treatment, significant progress can be made in helping the patient
understand his contribution to the interpersonal problem.
Case example 14.1: Donna
Donna was a 41-year-old woman who sought counseling for a marital conflict. During
the Interpersonal Inventory, Donna reported that she felt a profound lack of intimacy in
her relationship with her husband, Blake (Figure 14.4). Donna reported that their com-
munication was quite limited, that they didn’t seem to have much in common any more,
and that their sexual relationship was very poor. Donna reported that she had attempted
to talk to Blake about this, but reported that the conversation ‘just didn’t get anywhere’.
During the Interpersonal Formulation (Figure 14.5), Interpersonal Disputes was chosen
as a Problem Area.
In the next session, Donna and the therapist graphed the interpersonal conflict (Figure
14.6). She reported that she was far more invested in the relationship than Blake was,
and that the problem was much greater for her as a result. She had quite a bit of dif-
ficulty articulating why that was the case, and when asked about what Blake needed to
know to understand her perspective better, was unable to provide much information.
Instead, she seemed to think the problem was intractable, and that he would never really
understand her.

190
                                       Interpersonal Disputes: Additional Therapeutic Tactics

                                          Interpersonal Circle
                                                                            Blake
                                                                            (husband)




                                                 Misty
                            Max
                            (father)
                                         Deb           Melinda

                                               Intimates
                Karen
                (mother)

                                            Close supports
                                                                    Extended supports

Figure 14.4  Interpersonal Circle – Donna



        Biological factors        Social factors                        Psychological factors
        41 years old              Good support from friends             Low self-esteem
        Female                    Lack of support from husband          Intelligent
        Family history of          and family                           Dependent traits
         depression               Employed as a receptionist, but       Loyal
        Vegetarian diet            has a degree in biology
        Exercises 1–2
         times/week




          Cultural factors
          Parents didn’t communicate            Donna
                                                                 Spiritual factors
           openly
                                                                 Never attended church
          Experienced sexual abuse
           in childhood

                                    Acute Interpersonal Crisis
                                  Interpersonal Dispute (husband)


                                                Distress
                                       (Difficulties in marriage)

Figure 14.5  Interpersonal Formulation – Donna



During both this exercise and the Assessment/Initial Phase of IPT, the therapist had dif-
ficulty getting Donna to engage in the therapeutic process. The therapist found herself
frustrated and at times irritated with Donna, as she typically answered queries with only
brief or incomplete responses. The therapist began to work on the hypothesis that this
same style of communication was impairing Donna’s relationship with her husband, and
decided to get more information by reflecting briefly on the in-therapy communication,
and extending it to her relationship and communication with Blake.

                                                                                                191
Interpersonal Disputes



                                                                        Donna




                          Severity of dispute
                                                Blake



                                                Importance of relationship

Figure 14.6  Conflict Graph – Donna

Therapist: Donna, tell me about the last time you felt that you and Blake really talked.
Donna: [Long pause, then softly] A few weeks ago.
Therapist: What happened?
Donna: [Long pause, then softly] Um ... we ... um ... talked about our relationship a bit.
Therapist: Was it like this?
Donna: Hmm?
Therapist: Was it like you and I are talking now?
Donna: [softly] I don’t understand.
Therapist: My experience has been that there are times when we talk together that there is a lot
of non-verbal communication, but not much is spoken.
Donna: … Um, yes.
Therapist: When that happens, I find it very hard to understand well what you are thinking or
experiencing. I wonder if that might be happening when you are communicating with Blake?
Donna: I don’t know ... he does often say that he is frustrated when I shut down I guess ...
Therapist: I wonder if Blake really understands how you are feeling and thinking. It’s difficult at
times to communicate in words, and to provide details, but that is how we come to understand
others better. How well do you think he understands what you are experiencing?
Donna was able to link her feelings of isolation from Blake with her communication
problems, particularly identifying with the thought that Blake had no idea what she was
feeling. As the focus of the treatment shifted to her communication, Donna also reported
feeling angry and frustrated with herself and with Blake, but felt at a loss as to how to
proceed. The therapist and Donna agreed that it was important for Blake to know that
she was feeling isolated and alone, and that this had affected her desire to communicate,
which in turn had a deleterious effect on the relationship.
A conversation was enacted using a role play. First, the therapist played Donna, and
modeled some different and more direct ways of communicating. Next, the therapist
played Blake. During the process the therapist became even more aware of how Donna’s
communication elicited a frustrating response from others. She commented on this
­experience while role playing, and asked Donna how Blake typically responded to her
 communication. The therapist and Donna continued to rehearse her communication
 over the next few sessions, using the role playing technique to improve her ability to
 describe how she was feeling.
Towards the end of the therapy, Donna described a number of conversations in which
significant improvements in her communication style were evident. She reported an

192
                                 Interpersonal Disputes: Additional Therapeutic Tactics

i­mprovement in her dispute with Blake and also a significant improvement in her sense
 of isolation. The therapist encouraged Donna to begin to utilize other social supports
 during this time, including several friends who were receptive to providing her with
 ­support.


The Patient with an Impaired Significant Other
There are often instances in which the IPT therapist will encounter a patient with a
significant other who may have psychological difficulties – adversity affects families as well
as individuals. The burden of caring for or interacting with an impaired partner or family
member can often lead to interpersonal problems for the caregiver. Family therapists often
use the term ‘identified patient’ to describe a particular family member who presents or is
brought for treatment for a problem that has complex origins in a dysfunctional family.
These kinds of systemic problems are often encountered in IPT.
     The clinician has a number of options in such cases, including inviting the impaired
partner to a session, conducting couples therapy, seeing the partner separately, or providing
a referral for the partner if warranted. When the significant other is reluctant to address her
psychological problems, the therapist may have to help the patient reframe the behavior
or responses of the significant other as maladaptive communications, and encourage the
patient to find out what they are intended to convey. In cases in which the significant other
refuses treatment, changes made by the individual seeking treatment will hopefully affect
both parties in the relationship, and may have benefits for the significant other as well. Even
in the most difficult cases in which the significant other is impaired and not willing to seek
treatment, the therapist should never withhold treatment from the individual who is seeking
it simply because the significant other will not attend.
Case example 14.2: Peter
Peter was a 44-year-old man who presented to a psychologist with a history of feeling
­excessively sad and hopeless over the previous few months. He told the therapist that
 this had developed as a result of an argument he had with his 19-year-old daughter,
 ­Cassandra. He described his symptoms as fluctuating with the vicissitudes of the prob-
  lems with Cassandra. Though Peter’s symptoms were not intense enough to constitute a
  depressive episode, his distress was marked, and as a result he was highly motivated for
  treatment. Peter’s previous physical and mental health had been good.
The problem between Peter and Cassandra appeared to be related to the breakdown of
Peter’s marriage to Cassandra’s mother 3 years earlier. Since that time Cassandra had
spent most of her time with her mother, who had apparently depicted Peter’s contribu-
tion to the failure of the marriage in a one-sided manner. Cassandra herself had experi-
enced difficulties with her health (complaining of chronic fatigue) and had also engaged
in a number of problematic behaviors including several self-harm incidents, substance
abuse, and suicidal ideations. Despite the seriousness of her distress, Cassandra had not
sought help. Peter had encouraged Cassandra to get some treatment, but had received an
indifferent and at times a hostile response from her.
Peter also complained that he felt stressed because of demands being placed upon him
by his partner, Jane. Peter and Jane had been together for 12 months and Jane had been
offered a job in another city. As a consequence, Jane had been pressuring Peter to marry
her in order to ‘cement their relationship’ and to ‘let us get on with our lives’.
After completing the Interpersonal Inventory (Figure 14.7), Peter and the psychologist
agreed that the difficulties he was currently experiencing with Cassandra and Jane were
best conceptualized in the Interpersonal Formulation as Interpersonal Disputes (Figure
14.8). Peter was most concerned with his difficulties with Cassandra, and opted to focus

                                                                                           193
Interpersonal Disputes

                                      Interpersonal Circle




                                                                  Andy
                          Katie
                                            Cassandra
                           Brad             (daughter)              Jessica

                                        Jane
                                                          Steve
                                      (partner)
                                                                  Marcia
                                            Intimates             (mother)



                                         Close supports
                                                                   Extended supports

Figure 14.7  Interpersonal Circle – Peter



           Biological factors         Social factors                     Psychological factors
           44 years old               Fair support from partner          Good father
           Male                       Good support from friends          Divorced 3 years ago
           Family history of           and family                        Artistic
            depression                Employed as an English             Intelligent
           Healthy lifestyle           professor




             Cultural factors
             Before divorce, had                                    Spiritual factors
              very little parenting               Peter             Attends church
              responsibilities
                                    Acute Interpersonal Crisis
                           Interpersonal Dispute (daughter and partner)


                                             Distress
                                      (Depressive symptoms)

Figure 14.8  Interpersonal Formulation – Peter


on these first. A Conflict Graph was constructed, and clarification of the problem started
(Figure 14.9).
Peter and the therapist were able to clarify the nature of the dispute with Cassandra in
detail. Peter felt that Cassandra was nearly equally invested in the relationship, and that
she also saw the disruption in their relationship as very serious and distressing. Despite
having plotted both of them quite close, Peter was still able to describe a lot of misun-
derstanding and communication problems. He reported that the visual picture of their
relationship highlighted the problems – Cassandra had largely shut down her communi-
cation, which he saw as a signal of her distress. He also believed this to be the case with
her self-injurious behavior. He was convinced, however, that she would be able to change

194
                                                Interpersonal Disputes: Additional Therapeutic Tactics

                                                                       Peter




                          Severity of dispute
                                                                     Cassandra




                                                    Importance of relationship

Figure 14.9  Conflict Graph – Peter and Cassandra

if he could convince her that he really cared about her. He also realized that he would
have to initiate the process of opening communication again.
Peter described that his expectations of Cassandra were that she should ‘try and hear
my side of the story’ and also ‘look after herself more effectively’. He also felt she should
realize that his suggestion that she seek treatment was well intended, and was a reflec-
tion of his concern for her. He felt that he had great difficulty communicating this to
Cassandra. As Peter described the situation in detail, the therapist noted that he became
quite tearful and agitated. The therapist called attention to Peter’s process affect, noting
the discrepancy in his rather factual presentation of the story in the presence of obvious
sad affect. Recognizing and admitting to his sadness helped motivate Peter to further
address the dispute.
In the Middle Phase, the therapist and Peter discussed an Interpersonal Incident with
Cassandra that had taken place prior to the session.
Therapist: Can you tell me about the last time you and Cassandra spoke?
Peter: Yes – it was a disaster.
Therapist: That’s an interesting word to describe it. Perhaps we could consider that interaction
in detail, so that we can better understand the problems with communication and how you might
resolve them.
Peter: OK. I’ll try to remember what happened.
Therapist: Fine. Can you describe the context of the conversation?
Peter: Yes. I rang Cassandra.
Therapist: What did you say exactly when you spoke to her?
Peter: What I said? ‘Cassandra, it’s Dad’.
Therapist: And what did Cassandra say then?
Peter: She said, ‘What do you want?’
Therapist: How did you respond to that?
Peter: I think I said, ‘What do you mean, what do I want?’
Therapist: Was that how you sounded?
Peter: [confused] What do you mean?
Therapist: As you’re relating it to me, it sounds very neutral and without emotion. What was the
emotion that was communicated?
Peter: Well, now that you mention it, I was pretty hot. I think I was shouting.
Therapist: OK. Can you tell me how Cassandra responded to you after that?

                                                                                                 195
Interpersonal Disputes

The discussion revealed that Peter had reacted to Cassandra’s hostile responses in kind,
and that his responses had inflamed the situation further. The therapist and Peter agreed
that his communication with Cassandra needed further work, and the next few sessions
focused on clearly communicating his feelings directly to Cassandra.
When exploring his relationship with Jane, Peter described that he expected Jane to ‘give
me some space’ and to ‘let me deal with the problems with my daughter first’. Peter
felt slightly more confident in his ability to communicate these to Jane, but felt that she
still didn’t understand his point of view. The therapist asked Peter to construct another
Conflict Graph, which Peter remarked had a significant discrepancy in the respective
importance they attached to the relationship (Figure 14.10).




                                                                            Jane
                         Severity of dispute




                                                     Peter




                                               Importance of relationship

Figure 14.10  Conflict Graph – Peter and Jane

Peter and the therapist opted to work on clarifying his expectations of Jane and on
rehearsing his communication to her. The therapist and Peter agreed that the particular
problem was how to reconcile Jane’s wish to move interstate without the need to force
the issue of her wish to marry Peter, who stated, ‘I am still getting over my last mar-
riage.’ The therapist and Peter discussed a number of potential solutions including a trial
period of living apart with arrangements to meet every weekend, Jane looking for similar
employment close to home, and Peter relocating to another city with or without getting
married.
Peter rejected the last option given it would further distance him from Cassandra and
make the resolution of that dispute more difficult. Peter then communicated this to
Jane and a decision was reached to temporarily live apart. He then applied similar
problem solving strategies to his conflict with Cassandra, in particular brainstorming
about how to approach her most effectively, and how to communicate his desire that
she seek help for her problems. Peter was able to communicate with Cassandra in a way
that ­acknowledged her anger but also conveyed his message clearly. Cassandra then
agreed to see a psychologist. With the resolution of both disputes, Peter felt a significant
­improvement in his functioning.
When working with Interpersonal Disputes it is important for the patient and
­therapist to clarify as explicitly as possible the core expectations of the other person
 in the dispute. This should be coupled with an exploration regarding the way the
 patient communicates his expectations and attachment needs to the other person.
 Once this is done, problem solving work can commence with the goal of improving
 communication.



196
                                    Interpersonal Disputes: Additional Therapeutic Tactics

Case example 14.3: Gerry
Gerry was a 45-year-old single man who lived alone and worked as a costume designer
for a large theater company. He was referred by his local medical officer for worsening
depression and anxiety. Gerry stated that he had been quite successful working as a cos-
tume designer, and that his work had been much appreciated by those working with him.
However, a new director for the company had recently been hired, and Gerry described
her as demanding and emotional. She was, according to his report, ‘micromanaging
­everything and getting into my business. Nothing I do is ever good enough.’
Gerry described a long-standing pattern of social anxiety to the therapist. He described
that literally any form of intimate social contact was anxiety provoking, and stated that
at times he would have quite severe panic episodes in response to perceived negative
evaluation by others. He found that while he was quite comfortable working on his own
in the costume department, the new director had caused him serious problems, as it
placed him outside of his ‘comfort zone’. His mood had deteriorated, he had developed a
great deal of anxiety, and he reported that he had been drinking more in order to cope.
Gerry had no psychiatric history. His local medical officer had prescribed an antidepres-
sant medication which had been of some benefit in reducing his symptoms of depres-
sion, although he still remained depressed and anxious about his work in particular.
Gerry was the only child in his family, and spent his formative years growing up in a
communist country in Europe. He described his father, a local communist party official,
as a ‘harsh and distant man’. His recollections of his mother throughout his childhood
and early adulthood were of a long-suffering, sad woman who was unhappy in her mar-
riage. He had immigrated to Australia as a young adult.
Gerry had no intimate relationships apart from a platonic relationship with a woman
at work who worked on scenery projects (Figure 14.11). He was also very clear that he
had no particular desire for more relationships, and that he was quite happy with his
solitary life. He enjoyed his designing work, and found meaning in his hobbies of reading
and cinema. He was very clear that it was the conflict with the new director that was the
problem (Figure 14.12).

                                  Interpersonal Circle

                                                              Meredith
                                                              (new boss)




                                      Mimi (dog)
                                                              William (father)
                                                              Laney (mother)
                                       Intimates


                                    Close supports
                                                         Extended supports

Figure 14.11  Interpersonal Circle – Gerry

At the end of the Assessment/Initial Phase, the therapist and Gerry discussed options
for treatment. Though the therapist was aware that one option was cognitive therapy,
which was clearly indicated for social phobia, social anxiety was not Gerry’s complaint
nor his conceptualization of the problem. Further, Gerry had made clear that he was not


                                                                                      197
Interpersonal Disputes

          Biological factors        Social factors                     Psychological factors
          45 years old              Little support from friends        Social anxiety
          Male                      Little support from family         Conscientious
          Family history of         Only child                         Likes to be alone
           alcohol problems         Never been married
          Family history of         Employed as a costume
           depression                 designer
          Antidepressant
           medication




       Cultural factors
       Mother who was depressed                   Gerry           Spiritual factors
        and father was harsh/distant                              Never attends church
       Grew up in Romania

                                     Acute Interpersonal Crisis
                                  Interpersonal Dispute (new boss)


                                            Distress
                     (Social anxiety, panic attacks, depressive symptoms)

Figure 14.12  Interpersonal Formulation – Gerry


interested in or motivated to develop more social relationships. The therapist suggested
that the immediate crisis – the dispute with the new director – would be a good focus for
treatment. Gerry agreed to IPT with the goal of resolving the immediate job crisis, and
also agreed to continue with antidepressant medication and cut down on his drinking.
The therapist made a mental note to add Gerry’s fearful attachment style to the Inter-
personal Formulation. They had used Gerry’s description that he ‘liked to be alone’ in the
formulation they developed together. The therapist noted in the Assessment/Initial ses-
sions that Gerry seemed uncomfortable relating to him, and that he felt somewhat bored
when interacting with Gerry. He also noted that Gerry seemed unable to accept positive
comments, such as statements expressing optimism about the benefit of treatment or
positive comments about the quality of Gerry’s work. This information, along with data
gleaned from Gerry’s description of his few current and early relationships, made it clear
that Gerry was likely to form a fearful attachment with the therapist and was likely to
have difficulties engaging in therapy.
As a result, the therapist consciously altered his style of interaction with Gerry. He used
primarily open-ended questions, and made a point of emphasizing that Gerry’s responses
helped him to understand Gerry much better. The therapist also slowed the pace of
therapy, and elected not to give Gerry any homework assignments in the early sessions
of treatment. He asked Gerry to bring some of his design work to an early session, and
spent time having Gerry explain the work he did in detail. The latter intervention was
particularly helpful, and as the therapist expressed genuine interest in his work, Gerry
began to engage more in the relationship and in therapy.
Gerry’s description of his relationships prior to the onset of his symptoms highlighted
his avoidance of intimacy. Gerry found initiating and maintaining relationships dif-
ficult, and had not found any of his previous relationships particularly gratifying. The
therapist asked Gerry about his current relationship with his parents who had remained
in ­Europe; Gerry stated that he had little or no contact with them as he had feared his
father’s disapproval of his leaving his homeland. There simply did not appear to be much

198
                                                 Interpersonal Disputes: Additional Therapeutic Tactics

in the way of meaningful relationships, and Gerry did not appear interested in develop-
ing any.
The Conflict Graph (Figure 14.13) was interesting because Gerry placed the importance
of the relationship with his new director at the very bottom of the scale, commenting,
that ‘if he didn’t have to put up with her because of work, he’d be rid of her entirely’. The
importance of the conflict was very high, however, as he recognized that it was not only
causing him distress, but that his job might be at risk if he did not come to an accommo-
dation with her.




                                         Gerry
                   Severity of dispute




                                               Fiona
                                             (Director)



                                                     Importance of relationship

Figure 14.13  Conflict Graph – Gerry


In session 6 the therapist suggested that they address the dispute with his supervisor
head on. After brainstorming ways that he might initiate a discussion with her and ad-
dress his sense that she was interfering with his work, they engaged in some role playing.
The therapist took Gerry’s role first, and demonstrated some pleasant and graceful ways
of asking the director to allow him more autonomy. Gerry was able to utilize some of
these when he played himself in the role play.
The day before the next session, Gerry called the therapist and left a message that he
was canceling all further appointments. The therapist noted the obvious: the cancella-
tion followed a session in which a role play was used, and that the implication at the end
of the session was that Gerry would follow-through and initiate a conversation with the
director about his dissatisfaction. The therapist telephoned Gerry at his home and the
following conversation took place:
Therapist: Gerry, I got the message that you wanted to cancel our appointments – is everything OK?
Gerry: [long pause] Well, I went home after our last session and was very upset and started to
drink again. I ... I didn’t want to tell you. I just don’t know if I can do what you want me to do and
talk directly to that woman. I find this really hard.
Therapist: Gerry, I really appreciate that feedback from you. In retrospect I think I may have been
pushing too hard – I was paying more attention to my agenda for treatment rather than yours. I
was very impressed with the way you were able to handle the role play that we did, but I don’t
think I realized how difficult it is for you to do that with other people.

                                                                                                  199
Interpersonal Disputes

Gerry: You must be really disappointed with me – I know that you were expecting me to talk to
her, and I just can’t do it.
Therapist: I think I understand much better how hard it is for you to talk to her right now. I
think I can also understand now how concerned you must be about my reaction to all of this, but
I missed recognizing that at our last session. Again, I appreciate your feedback – had you not said
something, it would have left me wondering what had happened. Now I think I understand much
better where you’re coming from, and also understand that I need to slow down and listen more
carefully to what you want to accomplish in therapy. As far as I am concerned we still have work
to do, and I would very much like to meet with you. Why don’t we plan to meet at our regular time
next week and we can continue to work on solving the problem with your director.
Gerry returned for the next session, and discussed further his concerns that he was
being pressured to do what the therapist wanted him to do. The therapist responded to
these comments in two ways. First, he used the occasion to genuinely praise Gerry for
giving him the feedback. The therapist recognized that it was difficult for Gerry to do
this, but that he had been able to communicate his needs directly to the therapist in a
very productive way. The therapist pointed out that this would have been very difficult
for Gerry early in treatment, and that he had made a great deal of progress.
Second, the therapist agreed that there was a discrepancy in the pacing of the therapy.
He related that he had been concerned about Gerry’s distress, and had thought that it
would be most helpful to push things along quickly so that Gerry could confront the
director. On further reflection after Gerry’s comments, he now realized that he was not
listening well, and that he was imposing his pacing on Gerry. It was clear that more
preparation would be needed, and that they needed to have a mutual plan about how
fast to go.
They then addressed several specific interactions which Gerry had had recently at work
with his director. Gerry reported that though he did not enjoy or want any extra contact
with her, he had come to the realization that it was part of his job. It seemed to be help-
ful to him to consider it as a necessary part of his work and to use this as motivation to
‘put up with her’. He realized that he could deal with her professionally and only had
to communicate about work, and could keep his feelings and frustrations to himself.
Gerry did not feel obligated to talk about anything personal, nor to develop any personal
relationship with her.
At the next session, Gerry reported that he seemed to be able to get along a bit better
using this style of interaction. He suspected that she saw him as a ‘bit of an ass’ but he
felt the same about her, and she had begun to realize that his work was good and to ac-
commodate him. As he began to see this as a viable solution to his work problem, he had
begun to feel somewhat hopeful that things would ‘return to normal’ and that he could
get back to the solitary work and pursuits he enjoyed. The therapist went over several of
these interactions with Gerry in detail, and highlighted how he had used his interperson-
al strengths. As the Acute Phase of Treatment approached its conclusion, the therapist
had the following interaction with Gerry.
Therapist: Gerry we are coming to the end of the time we had agreed to meet. It seems to me that
you are much less anxious and depressed since you started coming here.
Gerry: Well … work is much more tolerable at least.
Therapist: I think you have managed to adapt to the change at work quite well. I also appreciate
the direct feedback you were able to give to me about feeling pushed to do something you didn’t
want to – slowing down the pace was clearly the right thing to do. I appreciate the effort you made
to communicate that to me.
Gerry: It was really unusual for me to be able to talk that way. I’m still not sure how other people
might take comments like that, but I appreciate you sticking with me.




200
                                                                                          References

Therapist: Before we conclude, I wanted you to know that I would be glad to meet with you again
if you would like. Things seem to be going quite well now, but I can imagine other circumstances
that might be a problem – another director for instance?
Gerry: I’ll call you if I need to. This was helpful – not that I want to continue mind you, but I’ll
probably give you a call if something comes up in the future.


Conclusion
Interpersonal Disputes are frequently encountered in IPT, and are the bread and butter of
therapy, as nearly all interpersonal relationships engender conflict at some point. The goals in
IPT are to identify the dispute, assess it fully using the Conflict Graph as a visual aid, and then
to help the patient move to resolve the dispute, modify communication, and increase social
support. The therapist should pay particular attention to the patient’s style of communication
and his expectations about the relationship; both are frequent contributors to the problem as
well as factors that maintain the dispute.

References
1.	 Klerman GL, et al. Interpersonal Psychotherapy of Depression. 1984, New York: Basic Books.
2.	 Stuart S and Robertson M. Interpersonal Psychotherapy: A Clinician’s Guide. 2003, London:
    Edward Arnold Ltd.




                                                                                                   201
                                                                    15
Role Transitions
Introduction	                                                                               202
Role Transitions: Identification in the Assessment/Initial Phase	                           203
Role Transitions: Exploration in the Middle Phase	                                          204
Constructing the Life Events Timeline	                                                      205
Role Transitions: Techniques	                                                               210
Describing the Patient’s Experience After the Transition	                                   212
Role Transitions: Additional Therapeutic Tactics	                                           213
Conclusion	                                                                                 222


Introduction
Change happens. It is inevitable. In many ways adaptation to change both determines and is
determined by one’s physical and mental health. In most circumstances change is dealt with
successfully, and individuals adapt to their new conditions without developing psychological
problems. In others, individuals with poor interpersonal resources or who are faced with
overwhelming change become distressed.
    All interpersonal relationships occur in complex psychosocial contexts. When the context
changes, as in a Role Transition, relationships change. An example of this process is the Role
Transition faced by a young adult who graduates from high school and leaves home to go to
college. While there may be no major intrapsychic changes in the person or in those around
her, the context of relationships with parents, siblings, and others changes, and the transition
leads to dynamic changes in those relationships. The young adult becomes less dependent
upon her family, moves towards more adult responsibilities, and begins to relate differently
to her parents in her new role. In other circumstances lifecycle transitions or deterioration in
health may be significant contextual changes which also affect relationships. In interpersonal
psychotherapy (IPT) the process of change within relationships which occurs as a
consequence of contextual changes in the patient’s life is conceptualized as a Role Transition.
    Though some transitions, such as loss of health, may be seen as wholly negative by the
patient, most change involves both good and bad elements. When working with a patient
who is experiencing a Role Transition, the therapist should first work to understand what
the transition has been like for the patient – to listen well. The Life Events Timeline is a tool
developed specifically for this purpose; it is designed, like all of the tools in IPT, to provide
structure which facilitates listening well. While constructing the timeline, the goals are:
●● To help organize the patient’s narrative about the transition in a balanced and realistic way

●● To help the patient tell her story more effectively to others

●● To enlist social support that is needed to manage the transition well.

The discussion of the transition should certainly include a review of all of the good, bad,
and indifferent feelings the patient may be having as she goes through it, but there is no

202
                           Role Transitions: Identification in the Assessment/Initial Phase

presupposition that the transition is problematic because of some sophisticated intrapsychic
processes. Having difficulty with a transition to poor health following a heart attack, for
instance, doesn’t involve repression or undoing or any unconscious mechanisms, nor does
it involve difficulty resolving ambivalent feelings about the change. No one wants to have
a heart attack or the resulting physical disabilities. In IPT, it is understood simply that the
transition – the deterioration in health status – is an acute crisis which has led a vulnerable
patient to become psychologically distressed, and that improving her interpersonal
functioning and social support as she manages the transition will be of help.
     Role Transitions can be developmental life events, such as adolescence, pregnancy, or
aging, or situational changes such as unemployment or divorce (Box 15.1). As in all life
events, Role Transitions should be viewed in the context of the person’s interpersonal and
socio-cultural environment, and in light of psychological factors such as personality and
attachment style. Seemingly minor Role Transitions can be experienced as major crises by a
patient who has poor social support or attachment vulnerabilities. In other situations such
as forced immigration, the loss of a known old role and the advent of a formidable new role
literally force the patient to move from conditions in which she felt comfortable and able to
function into a new environment which is perceived as overwhelming.

Box 15.1  Examples of Role Transitions

  ●●  Life stage Role Transitions: adolescence, parenthood, aging, retirement
  ●●  Situational Role Transitions: job loss, promotion, graduation, migration
  ●● Acquisitive Role Transitions: career advancement, new house, financial windfall

  ●● Relationship Role Transitions: marriage, divorce, step-parenthood

  ●● Illness-related Role Transitions: diagnosis of chronic illness, adaptation to pain or

     ­physical limitations



Role Transitions: Identification in the
Assessment/Initial Phase
Role Transitions may be apparent during the initial history or may only emerge after careful
exploration of an event or aspect of the patient’s life and its significance to the patient. The
therapist can ask questions like those in Box 15.2 to elicit information about potential
transitions. This is typically done in the Assessment/Initial sessions of IPT, and may be
developed further during the Interpersonal Inventory.

Box 15.2  Questions to elicit Role Transitions as a treatment focus

  ●● What changes have occurred recently in your life?
  ●● What changes have there been in your home, work, or social life?
  ●● Have you recently passed any milestones in your life?

  ●● Have you recently started (or talked about starting) a family?

  ●● Are you expecting any major changes in your life over the next few months?

  ●● Have there been any changes in your physical health?




Occasionally, Role Transitions may not become apparent until well into the course of therapy.
As the patient and therapist clarify and develop a better understanding of the patient’s
interpersonal problems, or as interpersonal work proceeds and changes to relationships

                                                                                             203
Role Transitions

occur, the use of the Role Transition Problem Area may become more appropriate. Examples
of this include the reformulation of a relationship dispute which is culminating in the ending
of the relationship as a Role Transition, or the acceptance of a diagnosis of depression as
a chronic recurrent illness requiring a Role Transition in the patient’s thinking about her
physical or mental health.

Role Transitions: Exploration in the Middle Phase
Once a Role Transition is identified and agreed upon as a Problem Area, the therapist should
begin to collect information regarding the following during the Middle Phase of IPT.

When did the patient first become aware of the transition?
  Though many transition points, such as moving to a different city, are obvious markers,
  there are often many others along the way that the patient may not recognize. For
  example, moving to a new city involves a point at which the possibility of moving arises.
  Then there is the process of making a decision to move, the preparation of finding a
  new place to live and making arrangements to move, the actual event, and then lots of
  adjustments afterward. What are the relevant transition points for the patient? Has she
  been able to link the transition and the onset of psychological distress?

What are the patient’s expectations of other people or situations and how did these change over
time?
    The therapist should establish whether the patient’s expectations are unrealistic. This
    includes both expectations of self and others in the context of the transition. He should
    clarify the ways any changes in expectations have resulted in improvement or worsening
    of psychological symptoms and distress.

What attempts has the patient made to try to adjust to the transition, and what has kept a
productive adjustment from occurring?
    The therapist should discuss the ways the patient has attempted to adjust to the transition
    prior to therapy, including their effects. Exploring these is a good way to further establish
    the patient’s internal working model of self, and her sense of self-efficacy.

How does the patient communicate her needs during the transition, and how has this changed
over time?
    The therapist should establish how the patient’s communication style has contributed to
    the difficulty with the transition. Information gathered using communication analysis
    will help to establish how the patient has solicited support and how effective she has been
    in eliciting it. This should also provide guidance regarding which specific interventions,
    aimed at improving the patient’s communication, may help garner additional support.

What is the patient’s attachment style, and how has it contributed to the development of distress
during the transition?
    The Assessment/Initial Phase of IPT should clarify the patient’s basic attachment style,
    but it can be clarified further when discussing transitions. This style – a diathesis for the
    distress – should inform the therapist about the way the patient’s distress and problems
    in communication have developed. The patient’s attachment style should influence the
    interventions chosen by the therapist; it also has implications regarding the development
    of the therapeutic relationship.
204
                                                        Constructing the Life Events Timeline

What does the transition suggest about how the patient will function within the therapeutic
relationship?
    The therapeutic relationship will be influenced by the same factors that operate in the
    patient’s other relationships. With respect to transitions, this should give the therapist
    information about how the patient is likely to handle the transition that will occur at the
    Conclusion of Acute Treatment. Are there indications that the patient will have difficulty
    with that conclusion? If so, the therapist can adjust the structure of IPT so that sessions are
    tapered in frequency as conclusion nears, and can include Maintenance Treatment as needed.

Constructing the Life Events Timeline
The Life Events Timeline is a simple but powerful tool (Figure 15.1). This tool, and the other
simple tools that are used in IPT, have proven to be great ways to elicit information in an open
and non-judgmental way while helping to open the conversation and get more information.
They also facilitate more insight. By insight, we do not mean any sophisticated intrapsychic
process, but simply a realization that the transition is more complex and more nuanced than
the patient originally thought it was.




Life Events Timeline

Figure 15.1  Life Events Timeline

As with all of the tools in IPT, the Life Events Timeline can be drawn very informally on a
piece of blank paper. The therapist simply draws a horizontal line with an arrow, and then
draws a vertical line to intersect it. The vertical line is the identified Role Transition. The
therapist then instructs the patient to use the timeline to note the events that proceeded, and
followed, the acute transition, hands the paper over to the patient, and settles in to listen well.
     There are two critical elements of the Life Events Timeline. The first is that there is no
scaling on the horizontal line. There is no demarcation of weeks, years, etc.; the instructions are
simply for the patient to note relevant events leading up to and following the transition. It is up
to the patient to think about and determine what should go on the timeline. Second, the arrow
to the right is critical. Many times transitions are difficult because the patient experiences them
as endpoints. In fact, there is always more to the story. A divorce might seem like an endpoint,
but life continues beyond that transition. The arrow implies that there will be more to the story,
and the therapist can draw the patient’s attention to that graphically. Even in the most desperate
situations, such as a terminal diagnosis of medical illness, there is still more of the story to be
written. A transition point – the diagnosis – is apparent, but what will the days left be like?
What will happen after the patient has died? There is always more to the story, always the
possibility of hope, and always the opportunity to transcend whatever transitions are occurring.
     The idea is to get the patient to use the graph to more fully describe her experience, in part
for the benefit of the therapist, but also for the benefit of the patient herself. It is a structured
way of listening well. The benefit to the patient is the opportunity to work to tell her story in
detail to the therapist first, and then to tell it to others who can understand and respond to
the patient’s needs as the transition is occurring. In addition, the reconstruction of her story
allows the patient to bring more coherence to it, and to infuse it with meaning. This meaning
                                                                                                205
Role Transitions

is not a sense of cosmic or spiritual explanation; it is meaning in the sense of a cause and effect
timeline or chain of events.
     A good example of this is the Role Transition that women and men go through as they have
a baby. Often the Role Transition is framed initially as a simple event: the birth of the baby. This
single event is quite obvious – either you have a baby or you do not. But there are many events
leading up to that transition point. Deciding (if such was the case) to try to become pregnant.
Finding out that the pregnancy is underway. Telling others about it. Doctor’s appointments,
sonograms, decisions about testing. Planning for the baby, labor, and delivery. Holding the baby
for the first time. Being in the hospital. Maternity or paternity leave. What seems an endless
stream of sleepless days and nights. Grandparent visits (and interference).
     Even in the most obvious transitions there are many, many additional events that lead to
the identified transition and follow it. The timeline requires the patient put the transition into
some kind of historical context, to give it coherency, and to understand why the transition
stressor has arisen.
     An additional note: the Life Events Timeline can also be modified and adapted to
particular patients or cultures. For example, some therapists working with adolescents like to
draw the timeline around the edge of a round table, and then physically walk around the table
with the adolescent as she describes her experience, stopping at the various time points along
the way. Some patients will modify the timeline as they draw it, making multiple marks, or
stacking transitions upon one another. As with the Interpersonal Circle and Conflict Graph,
the important point is to use the tool to listen well in a structured fashion. It is not to be
rigid and insistent that the patient does the exercise in a particular way. Those patients who
scribble on the timeline, change it, mark it up – they are the ones who are really invested in
telling their story and are desperate to be understood. Listen to them.
Case example 15.1: Maria
Maria was a 27-year-old woman presenting for help at 2 months postpartum. She
described feeling overwhelmed and completely exhausted. She noted that she wasn’t
enjoying anything; though she could identify a few times in the quiet of the night when
she was breastfeeding her newborn daughter that were meaningful to her, nothing else
seemed to feel right. It was, in her words, ‘all gray’.
She quickly identified her husband of 4 years as being responsible for many of her prob-
lems. She noted that he had ‘made a commitment’ to do half of the childcare, but was
instead working more. She did not feel that he was invested or contributing. She felt that
he not only did not understand what she was going through, but that he was actively
avoiding her and intentionally making things worse. Maria and the therapist completed
the Interpersonal Inventory (Figure 15.2) and Formulation (Figure 15.3) and identified the
birth of her child as a Role Transition and a focus of treatment.
In the Middle Phase of IPT, Maria and the therapist began discussing the transition in
­detail. As a way of organizing the narrative and obtaining more information, the ­therapist
 introduced the Life Events Timeline. Maria had a bit of trouble getting started, so the
 therapist suggested that she might think about other events surrounding the identified
 transition such as the decision to try to get pregnant and note them on the timeline. ­After
 a brief pause, Maria drew several points on the timeline (Figure 15.4). These included the
 discussion of becoming pregnant, the discovery of the pregnancy (it was planned for her,
 but not for her husband), telling her parents, and the time in hospital before and after
 delivery. The therapist asked her about any significant points after delivery. Again, after
 some thought, she identified a visit from her parents as an important point.
After Maria noted the specific points on the timeline, the therapist proceeded to ask her
about the details of each, starting with the first (far left) and moving chronologically.

206
                                                          Constructing the Life Events Timeline

                                     Interpersonal Circle


                                                                          Tammy




                                        Jose (husband)

                                               Juanita (mother)
                                    Olivia     Carlos (father)
                                    (daughter)
                        Mia
                                             Intimates
                        Tracy


                                        Close supports
                                                                Extended supports


Figure 15.2  Interpersonal Circle – Maria


          Biological factors          Social factors                       Psychological factors
          27 years old                Fair support from family             Married 4 years
          Female                      Fair support from husband            Responsible
          2 months postpartum         Lack of support from friends         Caring
          Sleep deprivation            since giving birth                  Committed to marriage
          Breastfeeding               Stay-at-home mom, plans to
          No family history of         go back to work as a teacher
           depression                  someday




       Cultural factors
       Expectation to have a large family         Maria           Spiritual factors
       Expectation to have close                                  Attends Catholic church
        relationships with extended family
                                       Acute Interpersonal Crisis
                                    Role Transition (birth of daughter)


                                               Distress
                                       (Postpartum depression)

Figure 15.3  Interpersonal Formulation – Maria

The therapist planned on devoting at least an entire session to developing the timeline
with her, and on utilizing it as a reference as they moved forward. Maria described that
several months before she became pregnant, she and her husband had a long ­discussion
about having children. Her husband, who was early in his professional career, was
reluctant to start a family, and had suggested that they wait several years before trying.
Though Maria was working at the time as a teacher, her long-term goal was to have a big
family, and she was eager to get started. They ended the discussion without coming to a
compromise.
                                                                                                   207
Role Transitions




                                                               t
                                                           nan




                                                                              ital
                                                             y
                                                         anc

                                                           y
                                                       anc




                                                                         hosp
                                                       reg
                                                     egn
                                                  egn
                                                   gp

                                                   r




                                                                       and




                                                                                              sit
                                              ut p
                                              ttin


                                             t pr




                                                                                         ts vi
                                         t ge




                                                                       very
                                            o
                                        bou
                                          b




                                                                                       aren
                                      ut a
                          u




                                                                   Deli
                                    le a
                      abo
                                 go




                                                                                          p
                                eop




                                                                                     ia’s
                      sion

                               d in
                             gp




                                                                                 Mar
                             Fin
                  cu s


                                      lin
              D is


                                  Tel




               Life Events Timeline (Maria)

Figure 15.4  Life Events Timeline – Maria


It was about a week after that discussion that Maria decided to stop taking her birth
control pills, though she did not tell her husband about her decision. As she described
it, she had told herself that her decision to stop was not an active decision to get
pregnant, but a decision to simply ‘let things be in God’s hands: if He wants us to have
children then I’ll get pregnant, and if not, then I won’t’. Three months later she missed
her menstrual period, and 2 weeks after that she discovered, to her delight, that she
was pregnant.
The second transition point on the timeline was a huge disappointment for her. She
­described herself as being ecstatic that she was pregnant, but when she told her hus-
 band, he responded with great anger when she confessed to him that she had stopped
 her birth control. There was never any consideration that they would not continue with
 the pregnancy, but her experience of his reaction devastated her: she was happy and
 wanted to have a ‘big happy family’ but her husband’s anger overwhelmed her experi-
 ence of the excitement of the pregnancy.
Telling other people was another critical point: in contrast to her husband, her parents
were also extremely excited, particularly because this was their first grandchild. They
were quite critical of her husband’s reaction, and frequently told Maria that it was ‘too
bad that he is ruining the experience for you’. A bit more history revealed that they had
‘never really approved of him’ as he was from a different religious background, and that
they saw this as yet another failing on his part. She increased her contact with them dur-
ing the pregnancy, planning and going shopping with her mother for baby things because
her husband’s reaction was ‘so disappointing’.
As the story developed, the therapist artfully guided Maria to provide more information
about her experience, asking questions such as:

    What was that like for you?

    How did you manage that?

    How did you communicate that to your husband?
Gradually she also began to ask Maria to think about how her husband was reacting, and
what he might have been thinking and feeling. The goal was to foster a different perspec-
tive for Maria: though her original conceptualization had been a very simple statement
that her husband was not helping, there was clearly much more to the story, and a
history that influenced everyone’s reactions. Helping Maria to understand first that the
story was more complex, and second to understand how her husband (and others) might
have been reacting, was the goal.

208
                                                      Constructing the Life Events Timeline

Maria finished the timeline by talking about how her husband had ‘really pulled things
together’ at the delivery and in the hospital, and how she had felt that he was very
supportive in being with her and coaching her. The day after the delivery, however, her
parents had arrived with the intention of staying for a month to help care for their new
grandchild. Her mother ‘swooped in and took things over’. While she appreciated this ini-
tially, as the story unfolded Maria began to describe that she resented her mother ‘telling
her how to do everything’ and that her mother did all of the fun things like holding and
playing with the baby, but was not helping out at all at night.
As the discussion unfolded further, Maria stated that she could understand a bit more
about how her husband might have felt displaced by her parents, though ‘he still
should be helping more’. The therapist asked her how well she felt her husband understood
her experience, to which Maria replied that he clearly did not understand what it was
like to be a mother nor what it was like to be responsible for all of the childcare. The
therapist also asked her how well she understood her husband’s point of view. After a pause,
she responded that she really hadn’t thought much about how her husband might be
reacting to things until the discussion in therapy.
The obvious point of intervention was to ask Maria what she thought might be helpful to
deal with the transition and to foster better understanding with her husband. Appearing
somewhat reluctant once again, she responded that perhaps it might be helpful to
have another discussion with him about their experiences through the pregnancy and
postpartum. The therapist considered giving Maria a homework assignment, but given
her reticence about wanting to talk to her husband, elected to simply make a suggestion.
Specifically, she suggested that Maria might want to take the Life Events Timeline with
her to use as a way of introducing the topic with her husband; other patients, said the
therapist, had found it quite useful as a start to discussions, and some had even asked
their partners to mark up the timeline with points that they thought were important.
One of the critical things increasing the likelihood that she would open the discussion
with him was that Maria now had practice in telling the story and relating her experi-
ence in a different way. Working through the timeline with the therapist had literally
given her practice in presenting things in a more introspective way, and in a way that
was not confrontational. Constructing and discussing the Life Events Timeline was prac-
tice in putting the transition into context and describing its complexities and nuances.
Consistent with all of IPT, one of the goals was to have her tell that story – to describe
her experiences – to her husband, and to help him understand what her experience and
thoughts and emotions were like, and to ask him to help her understand his experiences
as well.
A very wise patient once described the transition she was going through with her husband
as a dance. Prior to the transition – in this case having a baby – she and her husband had
a very good relationship. They were both dancing the tango, had learned to adapt to one
another, and knew each other’s moves. It was effortless and beautiful. Once the baby came,
it was as if a third partner entered the dance. The couple was disrupted, and in order to try
to accommodate the change, her husband had started dancing the waltz while she had been
dancing the foxtrot. They were struggling because they were stepping on each other’s feet, and
needed to learn to dance together, and as a threesome, once again.
    This magnificent metaphor was from a patient who was gracious and insightful; who saw
the problem not as one that she was going through alone, but one that she and her partner
were experiencing in different ways. Her partner was in session to hear it, and to appreciate
her desire to understand him as well as to tell him her story. Needless to say, they did very well
in therapy.


                                                                                             209
Role Transitions

Role Transitions: Techniques
Clarification
The process of more fully understanding the patient’s experience relies heavily upon
the technique of clarification. The therapist should generally maintain the focus of
discussion upon the transition, and explore details about the specific aspects of the
patient’s roles both before and after the transition and associated points on the Life
Events Timeline. The therapist should also ask questions which clarify how the patient
has come to see things as they have historically. When clarifying the transition, the
therapist’s tasks are to:
●● Understand the patient, and to help the patient better understand the details of the

   ­circumstances and transition
●● Engage the patient’s affect so that change is facilitated

●● Help the patient recognize and describe any sense of loss and subsequent ambivalence or

    anxiety about her transition
●● Help the patient to conceptualize the transition in a more balanced, realistic, and

    ­meaningful way
●● Help the patient develop new social supports.

To an untrained observer (including many in the patient’s social network), a Role
Transition might not appear to be a loss experience at all, and in some cases it may
be seen by others as an overall positive change. In contrast, the therapist must work
to understand the nature of the Role Transition from the patient’s perspective, and to
understand its meaning in the patient’s life. As the therapist does so, not only will the
patient’s perspective become clearer to the therapist, but the patient should also come to
understand her circumstances more fully. The Life Events Timeline is a tool to facilitate
this: a structured way to listen well.
      As an understanding of the patient’s perspective develops, the therapist is more able
to empathize with the patient’s experience in the change of roles. As empathy develops, it
can be communicated to the patient and can validate her sense of loss and her anxiety or
ambivalence about undertaking the new role. The communication of empathy will foster the
therapeutic alliance, and the recognition and management of anxiety about the future is also
greatly therapeutic.

Engage the Patient’s Affect so that Change
Is Facilitated
The patient’s emotional reactions in all of their detail should be discussed and described.
Among many may be the patient’s sadness at the loss of the old role and anxiety about the
new role. There are likely many others, all of which are important to elucidate so that the
therapist can understand the patient better, help her to understand her own experience
better, and help her to tell the story to others and to communicate her need for support and
understanding to them. All of the complex and conflicting thoughts and feelings should
be acknowledged and explored by the therapist and used as motivating factors to help the
patient manage the role transition.




210
                                                                Role Transitions: Techniques

Recognize and Describe Any Sense of Loss and
Subsequent Ambivalence or Anxiety About the
Transition
Even in the best of circumstances, change is stressful. Patients nearly always have a sense of
loss or ambivalence about the old role, though social pressure or relationship factors may lead
the patient to feel that her mixed or negative feelings are difficult or impossible to discuss with
others. Creating a therapeutic space to talk about these feelings and providing a listening ear
is always helpful. As in other areas of IPT, the therapist should help the patient organize her
narrative, and then encourage her to share it with others in her social support network.

Help the Patient to Conceptualize the Transition in
a More Balanced, Realistic, and Meaningful Way
The therapist should attempt to clarify the patient’s perceptions of the positive and negative
aspects of the old and new roles in order to help the patient develop a more balanced and
realistic view of the transition. ‘Realistic’ refers to an understanding of the complexities
of the change: rather than a simple single transition point, nearly all transitions include
multiple meaningful events both prior to and after the identified transition. In this way the
patient may come to see that the loss of the old role is a complex experience that may have its
advantages as well as its disadvantages. The same is true for the new role – the patient should
be encouraged to explore and articulate the positive and negative aspects of the new role.
Helping the patient to recognize her ambivalence and to develop a balanced and meaningful
view of both roles is the goal.
     As described above, a classic Role Transition is childbirth. A new mother may see
that her life before having a child had the advantages of freedom, career progression, and
ample leisure time. Intrinsic to the old role is a comfortable and familiar social support
system which may be dramatically affected by change in child status. She may also feel that
parenthood leaves her tired, with little freedom, and with less time to spend with her partner.
After conceptualizing the passage into parenthood as a Role Transition, the patient and her
therapist review and clarify the positive and negative aspects of both the old and new roles.
While doing so, the woman may recognize that, from a different perspective, she greatly
enjoys being a mother, and in her old role had lost touch with friends who had entered
parenthood. Despite the loss of some social support, she may recognize that having a child
leads to new social connections as she spends more time with friends who have children
(Figure 15.5). Insightful patients will also recognize that their partners also undergo major
Role Transitions, though the experiences of those transitions vary greatly.
     The patient and therapist should review the details of the Life Events Timeline, and can
also develop a list of the positive and negative aspects of the old and new roles to develop
a more balanced and realistic view of the transition. By doing so, the therapist can be most
effective in helping the patient come to a resolution in the transition by helping her describe
her transition experience. Becoming a parent is a profound transition, and one which is often
difficult to describe. A therapist who is genuinely interested in the patient’s unique experience
can bring about tremendous change simply by encouraging the patient to talk about what
having a baby is like – the therapist’s empathy, warmth, interest, and caring go a long way.
Asking questions such as ‘What is it like to be a new parent?’ ‘What is it like to hold your
child?’ ‘What about parenthood is different than you expected?’ ‘What does it feel like to care


                                                                                              211
Role Transitions


                                              Role Transition
                                              Motherhood



                             Old Role                               New Role
                  Positive       Negative                Positive        Negative
                  *Freedom      *Want baby               *A child       *Tired
                  *Career       *Desire for              *Being a       *Not free
                  *Money         Children                 Mom           *Can’t
                             *Lose touch                 *Be with        travel
                  *Travel
                              with friends                friends who *No time
                  *Free Time  who have kids               have kids      with partner
                                                         *Lots of free hugs




Figure 15.5  Role Transition of motherhood



for your baby?’ and especially, ‘What is it like to love someone like you do your child?’ are
literally life-changing ways to get the patient to think and talk about her experience.

Help the Patient Develop New Social Supports
The transition to parenthood is also an excellent example of the need to address social
support in the new role. In addition to coming to a more balanced view of the transition,
the patient should be encouraged to develop new social supports – people who can connect
with her experience and whom she feels understand it better. New relationships provide both
emotional support and help to meet the patient’s attachment needs in the new setting.

Describing the Patient’s Experience
After the Transition
Patients who present for treatment tend to view their new roles as difficult and laden with
challenges that they may feel incapable of meeting. Patients with less secure attachment
styles may overestimate the scope of their challenges and underestimate their capacity to
meet them. New roles become stressors for these patients as they attempt to cope with
challenges they feel that they are not able to overcome. The therapist must help such patients
to reappraise the challenges of the new roles and their ability to deal with the transitions,
and should also help them develop new social supports. Consider as an example a patient
who has developed depression in the context of being diagnosed with adult-onset diabetes
mellitus. His appraisal of the new role he has been forced to assume – ‘a diabetic’– may be
that it is a process of increasing ill health and disability, full of difficulties such as the need
to adhere to demanding lifestyle modifications, to take medications, and to make multiple
visits to doctors, podiatrists, and dieticians. Many people would see this new role as an
overwhelming challenge they felt poorly equipped to meet.
     In cases like this, the therapist should first help the patient to develop a Life Events
Timeline, which likely includes onset of symptoms, health concerns, diagnosis of diabetes,
and other significant events before and after the actual diagnosis. As with all transitions, the
212
                                          Role Transitions: Additional Therapeutic Tactics

timeline arrow pointing to the future is critical, because it allows the therapist to ask questions
about what lies ahead, as well as to make explicit that the future is not yet written in stone –
there are choices still to be made and hope on the horizon.
     The therapist should then work back through the timeline and elicit descriptions from
the patient about his old ‘healthy’ role, encouraging him to describe the experience of loss
of the healthy old role, and to discuss how the change has affected his sense of self and
his relationships with others. The therapist should also help the patient to develop a more
balanced view of the new role. While this may be difficult in a situation in which the patient’s
appraisal that the new situation is mostly negative is accurate, the therapist can often discuss
the life change as a point at which the patient can reassess his priorities and make a conscious
decision about how to structure relationships and life in the future. Many patients are able,
after working through the loss of health, to use the change as a point of transformation – a
‘wake-up call’ – and to use it to reassess their life goals and priorities.
     The therapist should help the patient to consider some of the other potential positive
aspects of the new role and future transition points, such as the opportunity to adopt
a healthier lifestyle, and the recognition of a potentially fatal medical condition which
had previously been unrecognized and can now be safely treated. The therapist should
also help the patient to reassess the challenges of the new role, such as adherence to
lifestyle adjustments such as dietary requirements, and should help the patient develop
the interpersonal support needed to put these into practice. For instance, the patient
may want to enlist his wife for both interpersonal support and practical support with his
new dietary requirements. Other friends may be enlisted for help with exercise and other
lifestyle changes.
     The therapist can also help the patient to begin to communicate his experience of illness.
In addition to enlisting social support, the patient can also begin to more fully meet his
attachment needs by communicating his experience in a way that others can understand
and can respond to. As a therapist, asking questions such as, ‘How well do you think others
understand your experience?’ and ‘What can you do to help others to understand your
experience more fully?’ are of great benefit.


Role Transitions: Additional Therapeutic Tactics
Patient Does Not Conceptualize the Problem as a
Role Transition
As with all IPT Problem Areas, the patient’s perceptions and expectations of particular events
in her life may be vastly different from the inference drawn by others. It is the task of the
therapist to help the patient recognize that her distress is temporally related to a particular
acute event or change in circumstances, and to help the patient conceptualize this connection
as a Role Transition. The Life Events Timeline is an obvious concrete way to do this. However,
as with other Problem Areas, it is not necessary to ‘diagnose’ a Role Transition – it is vastly
better to allow the patient to use terms which are meaningful for her. The interpersonal
areas should be used flexibly with the primary goal of maintaining an interpersonal focus.
For example, a woman who has become depressed in the context of her daughter leaving
home for college may not choose to conceptualize this as a Role Transition, but see it
instead as a Grief and Loss issue or perhaps an Interpersonal Dispute with her daughter
who is attempting to establish herself as an adult in a context outside of the family. The
therapist should acknowledge the patient’s view of the problem, and work with the patient
                                                                                              213
Role Transitions

collaboratively rather than attempting to diagnose or impose the term Role Transition at the
risk of damaging the therapeutic relationship.
    There is a great deal of overlap between all of the Problem Areas in IPT. For instance, a
divorce could be considered a Grief and Loss issue, a Role Transition, or an Interpersonal
Dispute. All of these may be complicated further by being intertwined with fearful or
dismissive attachment styles. Similarly, the death of a significant other may involve Grief and
Loss issues, or involve transition issues as new responsibilities are assumed and new social
supports are needed. The primary purpose of the Problem Areas in IPT is to focus both the
patient and clinician on specific interpersonal problems and to maintain the interpersonal
focus of treatment. For the clinician to insist on diagnostic specificity is simply to assume that
the clinician is more familiar with the patient’s problems than the patient is, an assumption
which keeps the clinician from truly listening to the patient. The therapeutic alliance should
never be sacrificed in order to force a patient into a particular conceptualization of her
problem.
    An astute therapist can use the discussion about how to conceptualize the patient’s
interpersonal problem as a means of enhancing the alliance by further clarifying the issue
with the patient. For example, rather than rigidly interpreting for the patient that her problem
must be a Role Transition, the therapist can ‘offer’ a tentative view which the patient can then
accept or reject. This has the benefit of conveying to the patient a desire to understand her
perspective more fully, and will go a long way towards enhancing the alliance. Further, this
also allows the patient a more collaborative role in the therapy, and encourages her to offer
the therapist important clarifications or additional information about how she perceives the
problem.
    The therapist might say to the preceding patient, for example:
    We have approached the problem with your daughter as a ‘dispute’, and your
    communication and problem solving skills have really improved. I think I sense
    that there are still some things distressing you about the change – you’ve said
    on a few occasions that ‘Maybe she needs to get on with her own life’. Perhaps
    it would be helpful to think about how the change in your relationship with your
    daughter has affected you and how you might be feeling about being the mother
    of a college student. What are your thoughts about looking at some parts of your
    experience as a Role Transition in addition to a dispute?


The Patient Does Not Recognize the Complexity of the
Role Transition
Patients may have difficulty in understanding the transition as complex as opposed to
seeing it as a single transition point. The use of the Life Events Timeline will help to deal
with this, as it implies that there is a chronological flow to events, and that preceding
events influence those that come after. Patients may also over- or underemphasize the
positive or negative aspects of the transition. The effects of the patient’s mood upon her
thinking patterns may be particularly significant in influencing this assessment. In these
circumstances the therapist can:
●● Review and further clarify the aspects of the transition

●● Highlight the likely effect of depression or anxiety on the patient’s view of the role

●● Empathically and gently note that despite her feelings about the lost or gained role, the

   transition has occurred, and the goal is to help the patient cope as well as possible with a
   difficult change.
214
                                          Role Transitions: Additional Therapeutic Tactics

The last point is particularly salient in IPT. The bottom line is action – the therapy is designed
to help the patient cope and function maximally given the change.

The Patient Describes or Displays Little Affect
when Describing the Transition
Some patients have difficulty experiencing or expressing emotion within the therapy sessions
or in their life in general. This may be addressed by examining Interpersonal Incidents in
which the patient may have experienced distress or other relevant affect. The patient will
likely exhibit some degree of affective shift using this technique. The therapist can also
use the technique of highlighting content and process affect. The question ‘What are you
experiencing as you are describing your experience right now?’ is often very helpful. If the
patient continues to have problems despite these techniques, the therapist can focus upon
the more practical aspects of helping the patient to adapt to the transition, in the expectation
that this, even in the absence of affective involvement, will aid in the reduction of symptom
severity.
    As a general rule in all therapy, and in IPT in particular, the more affect that is
experienced by the patient, the more likely change is to occur. Therefore asking questions,
with genuine interest, about how the patient feels or reacts emotionally to situations should
be a focal and frequent intervention.
Case example 15.2: Terry
Terry was a 49-year-old married business executive who had been admitted to a general
hospital with severe chest pains. Investigations demonstrated Terry had suffered a
significant anterior myocardial infarction. Terry was also found to have elevated blood
glucose and to be moderately hypertensive. After 3 days in the hospital’s coronary care
unit, Terry was seen by an endocrinologist, who diagnosed type 2 diabetes mellitus and
instituted management with diet and oral hypoglycemic medication. After being exam-
ined by his cardiologist, Terry was also started on antihypertensive medication.
After being visited by his cardiologist, Terry complained to the nursing staff that he was
unhappy with the consultation and wanted a second opinion. This was arranged, and
another cardiologist confirmed the diagnosis of hypertension and also concurred with
the recommended treatment. Terry became angry with the second cardiologist, and
attempted to discharge himself against medical advice. A psychiatrist was called to see
Terry in the coronary care unit. She gave Terry an opportunity to ventilate his frustra-
tions and discuss his feelings about the situation. He reluctantly agreed to remain in the
hospital, and she left Terry her details should he wish to contact her again.
Several days later, Terry was discharged and referred to a cardiac rehabilitation facility.
After about 3 weeks, the psychiatrist received a phone call from the cardiac rehabilita-
tion nurse, who had observed deterioration in Terry’s mood. The therapist arranged for
an ­outpatient appointment with Terry. At the conclusion of the evaluation, the therapist
­noted that Terry now endorsed numerous symptoms consistent with a depressive ­disorder.
 Terry told the therapist that he had not had any previous difficulties with his mental
 health, and that he had been physically well prior to his heart attack. Terry felt that he
 was unable to deal with the ‘triple whammy’ of ischemic heart disease, ­hypertension,
 and diabetes, as well as the fact that he was now taking so many ­medications that he
 ‘rattled’.
After further discussion with the therapist it became apparent that Terry was quite
driven in his work – he had been a highly successful businessman running his own chain
of electronic stores for 20 years prior to his illness. Terry spent a great deal of time during
the Assessment/Initial sessions (Figure 15.6) discussing how he had built up his b    ­ usiness

                                                                                             215
Role Transitions

from ‘small beginnings’ and how it had become a successful chain of stores. Terry
­described himself as a ‘hard-nosed professional’ who had no time to be ill. To illustrate
 this, Terry stated to the therapist, ‘in small business the weak are killed and eaten by
 their competitors’.


                                      Interpersonal Circle




                                                                          Bill

                                                                           Ed
                                             Diane
                                                             Jill
                                             (wife)
                                                             (daughter)
                                     Matt (son)
                                                  Max
                                            Intimates
                           Patrick                           Stu


                                        Close supports
                                                             Extended supports

Figure 15.6  Interpersonal Circle – Terry

When the therapist inquired about Terry’s feelings about being diagnosed with heart dis-
ease and with diabetes, she noted a marked shift in Terry’s affect. Terry became tearful
and dysphoric when discussing the impact of the event on his life. The therapist reflected
the following to him as they were developing an Interpersonal Formulation:

    Terry, it seems that you have developed a number of symptoms that I think
    indicate you have developed a clinical depression. You have obviously been a
    strong and capable man throughout your life, and this catastrophic develop-
    ment in your physical health seems to have really overwhelmed you. I can
    certainly understand that this is your first experience with ill health, and it is
    a massive one at that. There are many reasons why people become depressed,
    but it seems that for you – quite understandably – that this particular event has
    been the main cause.

    I think that you would benefit from some counseling that focuses on how you
    can best adjust to your new health circumstances, and the impact that your
    health problems are having on your life. I think that there is also good rea-
    son to consider trying an antidepressant medication, and I think this would
    be of benefit to you. However, I also understand that you are reluctant to take
    yet another pill. I think that if we were to meet for about 12–14 sessions of
    interpersonal psychotherapy we would be able to address this issue in a more
    structured way, which would be of great benefit to you.

    What are your reactions to that?
The therapist’s presentation captured many of the elements of a good formulation, and
highlighted the importance of the delivery. First, she allowed Terry to respond to her
tentative hypothesis regarding his Role Transition. This was particularly important given
the fact that Terry described himself as fiercely independent. The therapist realized that
she needed to give Terry even more of a sense of control than many other patients might

216
                                             Role Transitions: Additional Therapeutic Tactics

need. Second, there was a clear sense of developing a collaborative relationship. The ther-
apist was able, however, to maintain her role as a ‘benevolent expert’, setting up a positive
transference relationship which could be maintained through the brief course of therapy.
As they further discussed the Interpersonal Formulation (Figure 15.7), Terry stated that
he felt a strong sense of grief and loss at the change from his previous ‘perfect physical
health’. The therapist agreed that there were certainly significant Grief and Loss issues
present, and she agreed that would be a reasonable way of conceptualizing the problem.
The therapist also suggested the possibility that viewing the loss of health as a Role
Transition would also be helpful, as it offered a way Terry could talk about the loss
of his ‘healthy self’ while helping him to acknowledge the need to adjust to his new
circumstances.


            Biological factors           Social factors                       Psychological factors
            49 years old                 Married 25 years                     Good businessman
            Male                         Strong support from family           Strong
            Heart problems               Strong support from friends          Independent
            High blood pressure          Self-employed (owns chain            Intelligent
             (on medication)              of electronic stores)               Hard worker
            Type 2 diabetes
             (on medication)
            Unhealthy habits –
             little sleep, poor
             diet, no exercise



   Cultural factors                                                           Spiritual factors
   Father immigrated from Germany                                             Attends church
    and valued strong work ethic                     Terry                    on holidays


                                        Acute Interpersonal Crisis
                   Grief and Loss (chronic physical illness), Role Transition (loss of health)


                                                 Distress
                                        (Major depressive disorder)

Figure 15.7  Interpersonal Formulation – Terry

Terry initially described his old role as being one of ‘strength and invulnerability’. Terry
recalled being able to work 16-hour days, 7 days a week:

    I could get by on almost no sleep – I vowed that no one would every outwork me.
Initially, Terry’s Life Events Timeline (Figure 15.8) was minimal: he identified only the
acute medical symptoms and time in the hospital as additional significant time points,
and had also drawn a very large and dark mark in the future. The mark was labeled
‘BACK TO WORK!!!’ which he had underlined several times as well. Terry further under-
scored it by loudly proclaiming ‘That’s my only goal’.
The therapist thought about asking Terry directly whether he had any reservations about
how his life was before the heart attack, and what might have changed, but on reflection,
she realized that this was likely to be too confrontational given Terry’s investment in his
work and his attachment style. Instead, she simply asked him to describe in more detail
what things were like prior to his heart attack. She also directed him to describe more
about all of his roles: businessman, husband, and father. Terry responded that

                                                                                                  217
Role Transitions




                                                                       ure
                                                                   ress
                                                     Hig etes k
                                                                  c

                                                                dp
                                                      Dia rt atta




                                                                l
                                                            pita
                                                            loo
                                                         hb

                                                        hos
                                                        Hea
                                                          b


                                                    ith
                                                  ew
                                              Don
                                                                             BACK TO WORK!!!

               Life Events Timeline (Terry)

Figure 15.8  Life Events Timeline – Terry


    It wasn’t all beer and skittles, but at least I was able to get things done my way.
Terry spontaneously began talking about some of the ways things before his health
crisis ‘might have had’ some negative aspects, including some detrimental effects on
his marriage and his relationship with his children. Terry was able to acknowledge that
these may have been drawbacks of his old role; as he described this in more detail,
he was able to begin to appreciate the complexities of his experience, as well as how
previous decisions were entwined with the transition. As his narrative developed, he
began to feel less aggrieved by the change and his sense of loss. He was also able to see
the transition as a way of reprioritizing these relationships.
With recognition of some of the negative aspects of the old role, some patients often have
a sense of grief or loss as well. This is of the ‘I wish I had done things differently’ type.
Thoughts such as, ‘I wish I had been a better father’ or ‘I wish I hadn’t gotten divorced’ of-
ten lead to a sense of guilt or remorse. The art in IPT is to help the patient to express these
feelings in a supportive therapeutic relationship while at the same time recognizing that
the time limit and relationship focus of IPT require that the therapist maintain the pace of
the therapy. While grieving and dealing with remorse is an essential part of the therapy, the
ultimate aim of IPT when dealing with transitions is to help the patient address the ques-
tion: ‘Given my change in circumstances, how can I function most effectively right now?’
The ideal outcome would be for the patient to come to an epiphany and see the crisis as
an opportunity for re-evaluation and change. The therapist, taking care to be empathic,
can often reflect this directly to the patient. For instance, the therapist might say:

    Despite the loss of health you have experienced, the ‘silver lining’ is that it has
    now forced you to think about what you want to do with your life. It has taken
    you off the ‘fast track’, and you can now spend some time thinking about how
    you want your relationships to be. That’s what we should focus on in therapy, so
    that I can help you to follow through with the changes you would like to make.
The therapist and Terry also discussed his new role. Terry acknowledged that his cardiac
rehabilitation specialist had strongly urged him to limit the number of hours he worked,
improve his sleep, allow time for exercise, and modify his diet. This would require that he
work more routine hours and be home for meals rather than eating restaurant and take-
out food. These lifestyle modifications were seen by Terry as important to his health.
Terry also felt ‘washed out’ by his medication. The therapist and Terry engaged in a role
play regarding how he might approach his cardiologist (with whom he had the initial
disagreement) about changing his antihypertensive medication or looking at alternative
interventions without getting angry or appearing demanding.


218
                                           Role Transitions: Additional Therapeutic Tactics

The focus of discussion then shifted to Terry’s business and the need for him to modify
his hours. The therapist suggested that Terry might benefit from a problem solving
approach:
Therapist: Perhaps we could brainstorm a few solutions to the problem.
Terry: Guess so, wouldn’t hurt.
Therapist: OK. You’ve said that the problem is basically the business needs to be manned at least
12 hours a day to maintain the edge over your competitors.
Terry: That’s right.
Therapist: And that you really need to limit your working to six to eight hours per day as well as
taking time out to eat a healthy lunch and make sure that you’re home in time to do some exercise.
Terry: That’s right.
Therapist: OK. Well, what do you see as potential solutions to this?
Terry: Well, I guess one might be to hire some help.
Therapist: What would that involve?
The therapist and Terry then developed four or five potential solutions to the problem.
In each instance they evaluated the positives and negatives of the particular option, and
Terry chose the one he thought most reasonable. Terry went about implementing this
and reported back to the therapist. As Terry was able to make the appropriate lifestyle
modifications needed for his health without compromising his business, he described his
mood as improving. Terry stated that he still felt a great sense of loss when he reflected
on his previous physical health status, but he was able to state that, ‘at least I know I’m
human’.
IPT offered Terry a way of concretely understanding the change in his life occasioned
by his physical health problems. Terry had been provided with an opportunity to
reflect on his old physically healthy role and describe in detail to the therapist and
others what the loss was like, and also came to realize that his old role was ‘not as
mentally and relationship healthy as I thought it was’. He had also been provided
with a collaborative working relationship which helped him formulate strategies to
deal with his new role, which he felt poorly equipped to deal with. The therapist was
able to help Terry regain a sense of control over his situation, which was a core loss
for him.
Therapy was concluded after 12 sessions. The last two were held biweekly; given his
experience in therapy Terry was quite willing to meet with the therapist in 3 months to
‘check in’ for a maintenance session, with the plan to re-evaluate the need for ongoing
maintenance at that time.

Case example 15.3: Bob
Bob was a 40-year-old accountant who was referred by his local doctor for chronic
symptoms of low mood. He was amenable to treatment with IPT as well as
antidepressant medication. He had difficulty in describing a primary problem, stating
that he had felt depressed for a long time and had simply decided that he should
come in for treatment. His Interpersonal Circle had a paucity of relationships (Figure
15.9), and included only his parents and an older brother whom he placed in the
middle circle and a few friends at work that he placed in the outer circle. Among the
interpersonal issues identified during the Interpersonal Inventory were problems he
had experienced forming intimate relationships with women. Bob had no current
intimate romantic relationships, and was only moderately interested in developing
new ones. He also described frustration at work, saying that he felt that he was in a
dead end job he’d be doing for the rest of his life, and that he was ‘doomed to boredom
and a mundane life’.


                                                                                             219
Role Transitions

                                          Interpersonal Circle




                                                                          Dean
                                          Marge (mother)                  Monty
                   Larry                  Steve (father)
                                          Rich (brother)
                                               Intimates


                                            Close supports
                                                                 Extended supports

Figure 15.9  Interpersonal Circle – Bob

The therapist was tempted to move into Bob’s intimate relationships (or lack thereof),
but recognized that it was not likely to be very productive given Bob’s apparent lack of
motivation and his very clear fearful attachment style. Instead, he worked with Bob
to pinpoint what it was that led Bob to come to therapy at this particular time – the acute
crisis; after all, Bob had been depressed for a long time according to his report, but had
never sought treatment until now. What specifically was different? What had changed
acutely?
As they talked more, Bob began to describe that things had begun to be more distressing
as he was nearing his fortieth birthday. He recounted the day of his birthday: he had
received a call from his mother and a note from his brother, and his father had signed
the card his mother had picked out. No friends had called, and he had spent the day at
home reading a book he had read before and having a TV dinner while watching reruns.
It dawned on him that day that this was his life, and even worse, that it was likely to be
his life forever. He called in sick the next day and spent the day in bed feeling lonely;
although he had ‘pulled it together and been responsible’ and had only missed one day
of work, he had continued to feel dejected and demoralized since.
The fortieth birthday was also significant because his brother at age 40 had already
been married for 12 years, had a great job and two kids, and Bob felt by comparison
that he simply had not accomplished much. The therapist was tempted to move to a
more cognitive approach to address what appeared to be the distorted comparison that
Bob was making between himself and his brother. He also found it tempting to use this
approach so he would have something or some kind of procedure he could do to Bob to
make him feel better. Going through specific tasks and assigning homework would be
active, and would help avoid the awkward silences that were occurring in therapy as Bob
struggled for words. It would be much easier to ‘do to’ Bob rather than to ‘be with’ him. He
was concerned, however, that such an approach, while intellectually appealing, would
leave Bob with the same sense of isolation and hopelessness that he brought to therapy.
He also felt that using a more cognitive approach would make it difficult to listen to Bob
and to really understand what his sense of isolation was like.
Once the time frame of the symptoms were clearer, the therapist suggested as they were
developing the Interpersonal Formulation (Figure 15.10) that they think about Bob’s
experience as a Role Transition. The transition, turning 40, was an acute crisis that had
led a smoldering distress to flare up. Turning 40 had provided a different context for Bob,
and the realization he had on his birthday was a new and much more dismaying way of
thinking about and feeling about his life.

220
                                             Role Transitions: Additional Therapeutic Tactics

        Biological factors        Social factors                      Psychological factors
        40 years old              Strong support from family          Isolated
        Male                      Lack of friends                     Many interests/hobbies
        Long history of           Well educated                       Single
         depression               Employed as an accountant           Intelligent
        Antidepressant                                                Good sense of humor
         medication
        Does not exercise
        Poor sleep hygiene




 Cultural factors                                                     Spiritual factors
 Moved around a lot as a child and                                    Does not attend
 never had many close friends                 Bob                     church


                                 Acute Interpersonal Crisis
                             Role Transition (turning 40 years old)


                                         Distress
                                (Major depressive disorder)

Figure 15.10  Interpersonal Formulation – Bob

They agreed to meet for about 20 sessions of Acute Treatment, with the plan of taper-
ing sessions about halfway through the course. The therapist, slowing the pace, made
great use of the techniques of clarification and empathic listening. He encouraged Bob to
explain and describe what his situation was like. They developed a Life Events Timeline
(Figure 15.11) which was at first quite cursory, but continued to work on it and elaborate
it through several sessions. Bob gradually became more comfortable with the therapist,
and began to disclose his feelings of isolation and loneliness. He described coping with
them largely by convincing himself that he didn’t care and wasn’t invested in relation-
ships, but that this covered a great deal of pain. The boredom the therapist had once felt,
and the long uncomfortable silences, were gradually replaced with a deep sense of caring
for Bob as he began to understand his distress.
                                       40
                                       ing
                                   Turn
                      ried
                      k
                  mar
                  wor
            ther
              ted
         Star
         Bro




                                                Nothing; more of same
Life Events Timeline (Bob)

Figure 15.11  Life Events Timeline – Bob

The therapist made use of the developing therapeutic alliance to suggest to Bob that he
still had much of his future ahead of him. The arrow, so to metaphorically speak, was
headed into the future. What did Bob want to do? What were his goals? Bob related that

                                                                                               221
Role Transitions

he was interested in making some new friends; perhaps a few to go out to dinner with
every once in a while, or to talk about books or movies with. Taking care not to assign
any overt homework or be too directive, the therapist asked Bob to help him brainstorm
some small steps that might get him started in that direction. Bob came up with sev-
eral: going to a book discussion at the local library, joining a movie group, and asking a
woman he knew at work to dinner. The latter two seemed far too difficult to Bob, but he
agreed to consider the book discussion.
At this point in the therapy (the latter 10 sessions) Bob and the therapist were meeting
every 2 weeks, giving Bob plenty of time to try some social interactions, and gradually
lessening the attachment support the therapist was providing. Bob reported in the next
session, 2 weeks later, that he had gone to the book discussion, and though he had not
spoken much, did enjoy being out and having something different to do. He was planning
on going to another one the next week. The next two weeks he set the goal of joining a
movie group; this was more serious as it required a commitment to attend regularly rather
than simply showing up as Bob was able to do with the book discussion. As ­therapy moved
along, Bob continued to make slow but steady changes in his social activities. The 2-week
intervals seemed to match his pace well, and helped him develop a sense of mastery and
independence more easily.
At the Conclusion of Acute Treatment, Bob had not yet asked out the woman at his
work, but was more confident he would be able to do so. Other social interactions had
increased, but most importantly he felt less distressed and that there was hope for the
future. The therapist, knowing that his support was still crucial to Bob, suggested that
they plan on meeting once every 2 months for Maintenance Treatment. The decision was
based on Bob’s risk for relapse, an accommodation to Bob’s fearful attachment style, and
the therapist’s recognition that an abrupt termination would be extremely difficult and
unnecessary for Bob. In fact, given his chronic depression, all of the empirical evidence
pointed towards Maintenance Treatment. Bob readily agreed, saying that he didn’t think
he needed to come in often, but that he was glad that he could stay in contact with the
therapist.


Conclusion
Role Transitions are frequently presenting problems in IPT. Patients are usually able to make
connections with the life events which have led to their distress. The strategy in dealing with
Role Transitions is to utilize the Life Events Timeline to assist the patient to describe his
experience and to begin to appreciate the complexities of the change, as well as to develop a
hope for the future. Discussing and describing the loss of the old role through the transition
is helpful, as are discussions about the experience of the new and any associated ambivalence.
The goal is to develop a more balanced and realistic view of both the old and new roles, and
to connect the patient to social supports who can understand his experience and provide the
support he needs as he is going through the transition. Encouraging the patient to develop
new social supports in his new environment is also crucial.




222
                                                                     16
Grief and Loss
Introduction	                                                                                223
Grief and Loss: Identification in the Assessment/Initial Phase	                              224
The Features of Grief and Loss	                                                              225
Grief and Loss: Exploring in the Middle Phase	                                               226
Grief and Loss: Additional Therapeutic Tactics	                                              230
Conclusion	                                                                                  235
References	                                                                                  235


Introduction
Loss is a fundamental part of human experience. We live, we die. Those close to us die. And
in a myriad of other ways we experience loss: loss of relationships, loss of health, expectations
of loss and death of ourselves and others to name just a few. Grief and loss is encountered
throughout life.
     Human beings who suffer loss endure despair, separation, and a profound sense of
isolation, not only from the loss itself, but from a deeply rooted sense that no one else
understands them. It is the experience of being alone, of not being connected to others,
that makes grief unbearable. A patient described the depth of her isolation after the death
of her husband when she told a story of a beautiful sunset. As she sat watching the sun go
down and the sky turn a beautiful rainbow of red, orange, and purple against a cloud-filled
sky, she had a moment of respite, of wonder, a sense of connectedness to God and humanity
that transcended her loss. She turned to her right before she even noticed she was doing so
to grasp her husband’s hand so that she could share the moment with him, only to have the
moment crash into despair as she remembered he was no longer there.
     Many theorists and academicians speak of the resolution of grief and loss, as if there were
a specific process or set of steps that people should follow. Many, as specified in the Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM)-IV, use a time frame to determine if the
grieving has been too long, terming it ‘pathological’ if it goes beyond some arbitrary time
limit. And many who do not sit with and listen to those who grieve and mourn imply, or even
impose, the notion that there is an end to grief, or that there is a way to ‘process’ it or ‘work
through it’.
     What does this ‘working through’ really mean? In Interpersonal Psychotherapy (IPT),
there is no imposition; no specific way or process that people must follow. Each loss is
understood as unique – it is the individual’s experience that is important. The therapeutic task
is to help the patient develop and, utilizing social support, to communicate his experience of
loss, to find connection, and diminish isolation. In the beginning of the process, the therapist
steps into the attachment void, providing a human connection with whom to share the
suffering. A listening pair of ears, a caring and compassionate soul. Therapist warmth and
empathy are crucial to this process.

                                                                                             223
Grief and Loss

    As the patient tells his story, and his emotions are described and experienced in
therapy, the therapist works to help him extend the expression of his loss experience
to social supports outside of therapy. The goal is to help the patient understand
the loss, to bring coherence to the story, and then to share that story with others.
The process of sharing with others will begin to engage social support, diminish the
patient’s sense of isolation, and begin to help him connect once again – to be in
community. While describing, discussing, and sharing the loss in therapy is extremely
helpful and is a necessary part of IPT, it is the communication of the experience to
others and the development of social support surrounding the loss which
characterizes IPT.
    IPT is designed to assist the patient to resolve the acute Grief and Loss crisis. There are
four specific goals:
1  Facilitate the patient’s grief and loss process by listening well
2  Help the patient describe his loss experience
3  Assist the patient to tell others about the experience as a way of connecting and finding
   meaning
4  Assist the patient to develop new interpersonal relationships if needed, or to modify his
   existing relationships so as to obtain increased social support.

Grief and Loss: Identification in the
Assessment/Initial Phase
In life, there are a myriad of experiences that involve grief and loss. IPT, which deals
with real life and real people, should be open to all of these experiences. That means
that if the patient conceptualizes or describes his experience as a Grief and Loss issue,
then it is. It is not for the therapist to challenge or contend, it is the patient’s experience
that is important. The grief and loss experience of the patient is for the patient to define,
not the therapist. The therapist’s role is to understand and connect, to listen well, and to
care deeply.
     Practically speaking, the Grief and Loss issues in IPT can include, but are certainly not
limited to, things like the death of a significant other, loss of physical health, divorce, or
even loss of employment. Anticipating one’s own death or that of a loved one, a severing of a
relationship, or a crisis resulting in a loss of faith may be grief issues. It is always best for the
therapist to place the patient’s problems within the Problem Area that is the most meaningful
for the patient.
     Most frequently in IPT the identification of a Grief and Loss issue is readily apparent – it
is the problem that has led the patient to seek therapy. On occasion, if the loss involves loss
of health, anticipated loss, or loss of relationship, the therapist can gently point out a possible
connection for the patient between life events and distress. In either event, the Grief and Loss
issue should be identified in the Interpersonal Inventory and Formulation, and agreed upon
as a focus of treatment.
     In IPT grief need not be categorized as ‘normal’ or ‘abnormal’– it is the task of the
therapist to attempt to understand the patient’s experience, not to pathologize or label it.
To do otherwise leads to tremendous breaches in the therapeutic relationship, conveys to
the patient that the therapist is not interested in listening but in diagnosing, and that the
therapist, like others in the patient’s social network, simply doesn’t care. There is no need to
categorize grief – listen well instead.

224
                                                              The Features of Grief and Loss

The Features of Grief and Loss
The experience of grief and loss shares much phenomenologically with depression, and
their clinical differentiation is often challenging. While clinicians should not pathologize
the experience of grief, constant vigilance should be maintained for the development of
depression and other psychiatric difficulties in the context of grief. The closer the attachment
and the more traumatic the circumstances surrounding the loss, the more vigilant the
therapist should be.
     While diagnosing depression in a bereaved individual is a complicated process, a few
phenomenological features are useful clues to the presence of depression. These include:
●● Self-reproach: In contrast to individuals with depression, individuals who are grieving are

   able to retain an intact sense of self and maintain their sense of self-esteem, and generally
   do not develop excessive guilt.
●● Suicidality: While bereaved individuals may experience a sense of ‘indifference to life’ for

   a time after the loss, this seldom evolves into suicidal ideation or intent.
●● Psychomotor retardation or agitation: Psychomotor agitation and retardation have

   been noted to be indicators of severe endogenous or ‘melancholic’ depression, and do not
   typically appear as physiological features of grief.
●● Psychotic symptoms: Individuals with auditory or visual hallucinations should be evalu-

   ated for underlying psychotic processes.
●● Lack of reactivity: Many bereaved individuals will describe a marked loss of interest in

   their usual activities, but the complete absence of reactivity should be regarded as clinically
   significant.
Box 16.1 lists additional features which are characteristic of both grief and loss and
depression.

Box 16.1  The phenomenology of grief and loss

 ●● Depressed mood or sadness
 ●● Irritability
 ●● Poor sleep

 ●● Loss of appetite

 ●● Loss of interest in usual activities

 ●● Indecisiveness

 ●● Anxiety symptoms such as panic attacks or obsessional thoughts




In IPT, there is no meaningful distinction between ‘normal’ and ‘abnormal’ grief. Grief is
simply the experience of a patient following or anticipating a loss; there is nothing normal
or abnormal about it. The primary goal of the IPT therapist is to understand the patient’s
experience with grief, not to pathologize it, and certainly not to dismiss it by describing it to
the patient as ‘nothing more than a normal reaction’. Patients request treatment for a variety of
Grief and Loss issues; it should be assumed that patients who present for treatment with such
issues will benefit from IPT, particularly if the grief or loss is identified as a significant issue
from the outset of treatment. As it is not necessary for a patient to have a psychiatric diagnosis
to benefit from treatment with IPT, self-identification of a Grief and Loss issue by the patient
is sufficient grounds for evaluation for treatment.
     Grief and Loss problems are conceptualized in IPT as resulting from two factors, both
of which may be operative for the patient who seeks treatment surrounding a loss. The first

                                                                                               225
Grief and Loss

factor is that the patient’s social support system is not sufficient to sustain him through the
loss experience. The second is that the patient may not be communicating his needs for
support in a way that means others can respond effectively. Both of these factors are obviously
strongly influenced by the patient’s attachment style, as it influences the extent of the social
support the patient has, as well as his capacity to utilize it.
     In IPT, the therapist takes the temporary role of a support figure for the patient, and
forms a relationship in which the patient can describe and work through his feelings about
the loss. While this process might take place in social relationships, it often needs to occur
first in the therapeutic relationship, particularly if the patient has difficulty utilizing his social
support system. Similarly, those patients who have a limited social support network may
also need to use the therapeutic relationship in this situation. Given this conceptualization
in IPT, the terms ‘complicated’ or ‘delayed’ or ‘prolonged’ have no relevance. It is simply grief
and loss. It is an individual experience. While grief and loss may have common themes, each
experience is unique, and each requires careful and empathic exploration.
     IPT places the different experiences of grief and loss in a context, a particular social
environment: the patient’s current social support system. For instance, grief that is
experienced long after the physical loss or death is not conceptualized as ‘delayed’ but
rather as an experience of grief and loss in a new social context. An obvious example
of this is the experience that some women have following the birth of a child. After
a live child is born, the woman has an entirely new experience of connection with
her newborn – one she has never had before. As a result, she may experience earlier
pregnancy losses such as miscarriages or abortions in a much different and deeper
way than before. It is not that some complex repression or intrapsychic process has
occurred; it is simply that the birth of her new baby and her experience of connection
puts the previous loss in a perspective that was simply not possible before. And the loss is
experienced in a new way.
     Another example might be a man who has lost his father at a young age. He may have
adapted to the loss, gone on to have many other productive and intimate relationships, and
by his own estimation and that of friends and family, dealt with the loss well. Then an acute
event occurs: graduation from college, or marriage, or perhaps even the birth of his first
child – life events at which the absence of his father is acutely and painfully felt. As humans
we yearn for our parents to be there – to be present and to share in our success; to have a
father’s hand on our shoulder as we celebrate our life events; to have a father tell us he is
proud and loves us and that we have done well. No repression needed; the loss is simply
experienced in new ways that are impossible to anticipate outside of the new context.
It is not pathological or delayed or any other fancy psychological label; it is simply the
individual’s experience of loss.

Grief and Loss: Exploring in the
Middle Phase
The basic tasks of working with grief in IPT are:
1  Clarifying the circumstances surrounding the loss
2  Helping the patient describe his experience of loss
3  Creating an environment of acceptance and connection with the therapist
4  Helping the patient tell the story of his experience to others to reduce isolation and
   facilitate connection.

226
                                           Grief and Loss: Exploring in the Middle Phase

Clarifying the Circumstances Surrounding the Loss
In the initial sessions, including the process of completing the Interpersonal Inventory,
and more so during the middle sessions of IPT, the therapist must often rely heavily on
clarification to help the patient better understand the circumstances of his loss. When the
patient is in a markedly dysphoric or distressed state, the therapist should usually be less
directive while encouraging more information and affect with empathic remarks. In contrast,
if the patient’s process affect is minimal, more directive questions about the circumstances
surrounding the loss and his emotional reaction to it is quite helpful. Specific questions which
may be helpful are listed in Box 16.2.

Box 16.2  Questions about grief and loss

 ●● What has this loss been like for you?
 ●● How were things with (the lost individual) around the time they died?
 ●● What are your feelings about (the lost individual)?

 ●● What are the most difficult things about (the lost individual) not being present any-

    more?
 ●● What kind of support do you have now?

 ●● What have you shared with others about your experiences with your loss?*

 *The last question is particularly important as it focuses the patient on developing
 social support and extending his experience to others.


As the patient clarifies and describes his experiences, he has the opportunity to begin to share
those experiences with the therapist, who serves in IPT as an empathic and understanding
(but temporary) attachment. The therapist literally steps into the role of a support person
for the patient: one who can empathize, understand, connect with, suffer alongside, and
be with the patient. The extension of this process is the critical second stage of dealing with
grief and loss in IPT, as the therapist should encourage the patient to begin to share the
experience with others as well. The communication which occurs in therapy sets the stage
for the communication which occurs later in the patient’s social relationships. In essence, the
therapist is literally helping the patient to reconstruct the experience in a way that it can be
communicated meaningfully to other people.
     Specific questions about the actual loss experience and the events surrounding the loss
may be of great help in this process (Box 16.3). This is because the process of thinking about
and describing concrete events and the circumstances surrounding them leads easily into the
process of describing emotions and psychological reactions to the loss. Beginning with the
facts usually leads the patient fairly rapidly into the emotions that accompany them.

Box 16.3  Questions about the loss experience

 ●● How did you find out (the lost individual) had died?
 ●● What was your reaction to this news?
 ●● What was the funeral like?

 ●● What was your mourning process like at the time?

 ●● What kind of support did you get at the time?

 ●● What would you have liked from others at the time?

 ●● What kind of support are you getting now?

 ●● What kind of support would you like now?




                                                                                            227
Grief and Loss

Helping the Patient Describe his Experience of Loss
The presence of painful and strongly felt emotions is for many patients the most distressing
aspect of grief. Invariably, a patient’s psychological coping mechanisms and attachment
style will moderate how this manifests clinically. While the IPT therapist should not aim
to overwhelm the patient, it is often helpful for the therapist to ask the patient to describe
his experiences despite the temporary distress it may produce. In order for the patient to
experience the affect associated with the loss within the session, he will need to feel secure
within the therapeutic relationship.
     The description of experience and connection with the empathic listener is conceptually
important in IPT; it is not a matter of ‘acceptance’, ‘resolution’ or ‘catharsis’. ‘Acceptance’ of the
loss is not a goal because the term has no meaning across the experiences of different people.
To some, acceptance might be experienced as a peace of mind, or seeing a greater purpose in
a loss. To others, it may be a grudging acknowledgment that since the loss occurred, the best
course is to cope with it and adapt as best as possible. To others, it may mean the realization
of human frailty – a recognition that we cannot control our own destinies. Each individual
is different; there is no target outcome or ‘acceptance’ that is optimal, and it is not for the
therapist to impose one.
     Likewise the concept of ‘resolving’ grief is not meaningful across experiences. The term
implies that the grief will come to an end; that it will go away and not be experienced any
more. Those of us who have lived real lives can attest to the fact that this is not the case.
Simply asking someone to ‘tell me about someone close to you that you have lost’ will
inevitably call back to mind difficult or painful losses. In IPT, these losses are seen as all the
more beautiful because they can be experienced: they are testaments to the lost person. There
is, to be sure, a qualitative difference between recalling a loss and feeling overwhelmed by
it. But the goal in IPT is not to make the feelings or the experiences go away, nor to resolve
the grief, but to connect with others as we share the human experience of loss, and to find
meaning in the connections.
     ‘Catharsis’ implies that some intrapsychic processes have led the patient to repress or
suppress the experience of loss, and that if they can simply discharge it, like water down a drain,
the distress will diminish or go away. ‘Catharsis’ in this sense is an impossible goal. Instead,
telling others about the loss is important. There is healing simply in connecting with and telling
to someone else who cares. Telling others – first the therapist and then other people –
is a way of gaining support and understanding of our experience, of decreasing our sense of
isolation, and of finding meaningful connection in our shared experience of loss. It is forming
community with fellow human beings in the deepest sense. It is attachment.
     Because of this, the importance of developing a productive therapeutic alliance cannot
be overstated. While recognition of grief and loss and therapeutic techniques are all helpful,
the therapist must establish a caring and empathic relationship with the patient. There is
great value in helping the patient to describe his experiences of grief to an empathic and
understanding listener – this is the therapist’s primary task when working with grief and loss.
Once the patient begins to communicate his experience with loss in therapy, the therapist can
help direct the patient to begin to share his experience with others outside of therapy as well.
     The experience of grief commonly involves layers of feelings surrounding the loss.
Assisting the patient to describe his experience in detail, to develop a ‘three-dimensional’
picture of the lost person, including a realistic assessment of the person’s good and bad
characteristics, is a helpful process in working with grief. On occasion, the patient will
initially describe the lost person in idealized terms, and be unaware that this idealization

228
                                             Grief and Loss: Exploring in the Middle Phase

(or devaluation) covers other feelings which may be difficult to accept. The discussion of
and development of a balanced view of the lost individual greatly facilitates the mourning
process. In essence, part of the grief work involves moving the patient to a securely attached
way of experiencing, thinking about, and describing the lost individual as a ‘whole person’
with both positive and negative qualities.
    This same process can be used for other losses as well, for example, the loss of a job, a
divorce, or loss of physical functioning. In such instances it is also helpful for the patient to
describe his experience of loss, and to move towards establishing new social relationships
which will provide more support. Encouraging the patient to develop a more realistic and
balanced view of his loss, then sharing it with others, will be of help.

Creating an Environment of Acceptance and
Connection with the Therapist
Bowlby has described a ‘secure base effect’ in attachment relationships, in which the sense
of emotional security in the relationship allows an individual to explore and take emotional
risks that might otherwise be difficult.1 This is absolutely crucial in IPT (and in all other kinds
of therapy as well), and forms the basis for the therapeutic alliance. All of the interventions
used in IPT rest upon this foundation.
    The therapist should be sensitive to the profundity of the loss for the patient. Some
patients may have a very deep sense of grief to losses others may consider minimal. As always
in IPT, the therapist’s job is to understand, not to diagnose, minimize, or prematurely reassure
the patient. To minimize the importance of a loss, even with a well-meaning reassurance that
‘things will get better’ or ‘thing will pass with time’ serves only to cut off the conversation and
to sever understanding. It is not helpful for the patient.
    Moreover, the use of IPT should be open to anyone requesting help with a Grief and Loss
issue. Whether depressed or not, patients requesting help with their grief experiences deserve
help. It is what we do – it is what we are called to do. IPT is extremely well suited to working
with grief and loss, to listening well, to providing support, and to caring for the people we
work with. Those without ‘diagnosable’ depression are likely even better candidates for IPT
and are likely to respond to brief treatment with it.

Helping the Patient Tell the Story of His Experience to
Others to Reduce Isolation and Facilitate Connection
As the patient begins the process of understanding and integrating his grief experience, the
distress of being isolated is often the most difficult experience of all. This is nearly always
coupled with a sense that no one else can understand the depth of the loss, nor the depth of
the patient’s personal experience with it. The first step in IPT is for the therapist to literally
step into this void and to provide support and understanding to the patient. If this is done
well, the experience of connecting with the therapist and feeling better understood should
lead the patient to want more of the same outside of therapy. The therapist can help the
patient to initiate and develop new relationships (attachments) that help to reduce isolation,
fulfilling many of his emotional, physical, attachment, and social needs.
     No one can ever replace a loved one who is lost. There are no substitutes. Each person
is unique; each relationship is unique. The therapist must take care never to state or even
imply to the patient that the lost person can be replaced – to do so will destroy any sense
of empathic resonance that has been established. Instead, it should be acknowledged that

                                                                                               229
Grief and Loss

human relationships and social connections and attachment are important to everyone, and
that the patient still has the need and the capability to maintain old relationships as well as
to develop new ones – support and connection are to be found in them. Relationships give
meaning and purpose to life, and the isolation that often occurs following a loss can leave the
patient bereft of meaning as well as experiencing grief over the lost individual.
    Grief work in IPT therefore involves helping the patient to begin to reconnect with others,
and to form new relationships as well. This can be done in large part by encouraging the patient
to begin to share his experience of loss with others. This accomplishes two things: it helps
develop needed social support, and as the patient describes the experience to others, he will
continue to understand it more fully and integrate it more fully into his own experience.

Grief and Loss: Additional Therapeutic Tactics
Dealing with Anticipatory Grief
Anticipatory grief and loss is not a diagnosis or category, but it may be used by some patients
to describe their experience as they deal acutely with their own dying or the inevitable
death of others they love. Patients whose spouses or parents are disabled with progressive
dementing illnesses, or are dying of chronic or malignant diseases are examples of this kind of
grief. The grief and loss Problem Area is extremely appropriate to use as a means of focusing
treatment in IPT on experiences like these; helping patients to cope with anticipatory grief
issues allows patients to describe and share their experiences with the anticipated loss as it is
occurring. There may also be opportunities to discuss the upcoming loss with the person who
is dying, giving patients the opportunity to attempt to address interpersonal conflicts with the
involved person, rather than regretting not having done so.
    When the anticipated death is caused by a process that allows the dying significant other
to interact and communicate with the patient in a meaningful way, the patient can address
the issues in the relationship that are conflictual both in therapy and with the significant
other, working to put emotional affairs in order. Many patients will value the opportunity
to explore this aspect of the loss, and this clinical situation is often one of the most fertile
grounds for achieving change in IPT.
    All of the techniques used for grief and loss can be used when dealing with anticipatory
loss. For example, asking the patient to describe his reaction to the news of cancer, to a
terminal diagnosis, or to a progressing dementia, can be very helpful. Asking what the patient
expects to happen over the next few months or years, and even expectations about the
funeral, are also useful. The utility of discussing these issues should be clear – dealing with
them in an anticipatory fashion allows the patient to construct support before the fact, and to
talk about what kind of support is needed and how it might be obtained ahead of time. This
allows the patient and therapist to literally preempt potential problems that must be dealt
with retrospectively in cases in which the death has already occurred.

Working with Dying Patients
The IPT therapist can use the anticipatory grief approach when working with patients who are
anticipating their own deaths. The goals are to help the patients enlist social support during
the end stages of their illness, and to communicate their experience to others. Further, creating
a therapeutic relationship in which they can literally grieve their own anticipated loss is also
extremely important. Several writers have described the pathway to accepting death,2 perhaps
the most well-known being Kubler-Ross,3 who described a process of ‘anger’ giving way to

230
                                            Grief and Loss: Additional Therapeutic Tactics

‘denial’ which proceeds to ‘bargaining’ and ultimately ‘acceptance’. In IPT, though this theoretical
perspective is helpful, it is critical not to impose a rigid structure or expectations for grieving
upon the patient. To do so, particularly to convey or directly tell the patient that he has to go
through particular ‘stages’ of grief, invalidates his personal and unique experience with grief. The
therapist should serve instead as a listening ear for the patient, working towards encouraging
and helping the patient to extend communication outward to his social support network.


The Patient Who has Difficulty Experiencing
or Expressing Emotions
Some patients’ affective experience may be so tightly defended psychologically that
there appears to be little or no meaningful affect to work with. Those with fearful styles,
though suffering immensely, may lack the vocabulary or ability to coherently describe
their experience. In such cases, the therapist should slow the pace and work even harder
to understand the patient. In situations like this, the temptation to reassure, normalize, or
suggest that the patient is being defensive will only serve to cut off communication from a
very sensitive and distressed patient – the exact opposite of the goal in IPT.
     If the therapist believes that the patient is expressing distress as physical symptoms rather
than affect, the therapist may choose to connect these symptoms to the loss experience.
For instance, a patient with a more dismissive attachment style might present with somatic
features such as pain or headache following the death of a parent. Such an individual will
likely tolerate the therapist’s attempts to link these physical symptoms with his loss experience
if they are framed as part of the stress response that all people experience after a loss. A
discussion about the patient’s experience of stress would then lead naturally into the more
affective components of the experience.
     It is of paramount importance to pace the therapy appropriately with patients
experiencing grief and loss. Rather than insist that the patient ‘must resolve’ his grief issues,
the primary goal of the therapist should be to create an environment in which the patient
can begin to share his experiences. This involves active listening, warmth, acceptance, and
the conveyance of positive regard to the patient. The therapist should in essence create an
attachment relationship with the patient to facilitate this process.
     The therapist must not push the patient too quickly or beyond what he is able to tolerate.
The goal of IPT is not to iatrogenically create anxiety about an issue to force the patient
to confront it, and it is certainly not to precipitate more symptoms. The pacing should be
determined by the patient’s ability to tolerate the discussion rather than the therapist’s agenda.
Like other structural adaptations and pacing in IPT, this should be heavily influenced by the
patient’s attachment style and the therapist’s accommodation to it.
     There are several options for modifying IPT with patients who have difficulty in
recognizing conflicted feelings about a loss. The first is to simply take more time. Rather than
rush through therapy in a particular number of predetermined sessions, the therapist can
slow down, spend more time exploring the details of the experiences around the loss, and
simply be with the patient during times of silence. Simply being with is a way to listen well.
Another option is to change the structure of the sessions so that they are more frequent but
shorter, lessening the intensity to a level the patient can tolerate.
     A medical analogy is helpful in clarifying this further. There are no elective medical
procedures in which a physician can or should impose his agenda on the patient. Patients
who are undergoing procedures such as lumbar punctures or endoscopy will often tell
their doctor to ‘slow down,’ or remark, ‘that hurts’. Physicians are obligated to slow down or

                                                                                               231
Grief and Loss

even desist in such cases; it would be completely insensitive to press on despite the patient’s
distress. The patient–physician relationship demands that the patient give informed consent
for the treatment; the therapeutic alliance demands that the physician be sensitive and caring,
and not go faster than the patient can tolerate.
     In the same way, when patients have difficulty in expressing or recognizing emotion, the
therapist should not artlessly impose his agenda or interpretations upon the patient. The
patient is in essence saying, ‘slow down’, and ‘that hurts’. No psychotherapeutic treatment
should inflict the therapist’s agenda upon the patient. Pacing should be determined by the
patient’s needs in conjunction with clinical judgment.

The Patient Has Difficulty Connecting with Others in His
Social Network
When offering the patient a supportive relationship that is in essence a ‘secure attachment
base,’ the therapist is – literally and with intent in IPT – temporarily meeting the patient’s
attachment needs for support and understanding. This is a completely appropriate response
by the patient to a severe interpersonal stressor, and a completely appropriate stance on
the part of the IPT therapist. Therapy always involves some degree of dependence on the
therapist. Patients who do not have social support networks they can depend on during
crises, or who are unable to effectively enlist the support that they do have, are behaving
productively when they use therapy and the therapist to help resolve their crises.
     The issue is not, therefore, dependency on the therapist, but rather dependency for a
prolonged period. In IPT the therapist steps into the void to meet the patient’s attachment
needs for a brief period of time, gradually transitioning to a less intense relationship as the
patient engages others in his social network for support and understanding. This should be
done as quickly as the patient can tolerate, and will depend on his attachment style and social
supports to a large degree. The key in IPT is that the therapist meets the patient’s attachment
needs for a short time.
     Since IPT is conducted with a Maintenance Phase negotiated explicitly by the patient
and therapist, there is much less pressure on the Conclusion of Acute Treatment. Were
more dependent patients required to terminate with the therapist this might raise all kinds
of transference issues and lead to return of symptoms or distress as termination looms. In
contrast, the tapering of acute treatment followed by periodic maintenance allows a much
more gradual and tolerable transition for the patient from the therapist to social supports
outside of therapy.
     Direct inquires about the patient’s attempts at social connections, as well as assistance
in finding appropriate venues for support, such as support groups or religious groups,
are helpful in facilitating extra-therapy support and building attachments outside of the
therapeutic relationship. The therapist can also give homework assignments to the patient to
attend or become involved in such activities.
Case example 16.1: Rob
Rob was a 38-year-old man referred by his local doctor for a depressive illness with
which he had struggled for the past 6 months. His local doctor had prescribed an
antidepressant for him, although this had done little to alleviate the severity of his
symptoms of depression. He described in the Interpersonal Inventory having a few male
friends but otherwise little social support (Figure 16.1), and had not been engaged in any
­meaningful intimate relationships. Though living in his own apartment, he had a great
 deal of contact with his mother, who lived in the same city.


232
                                               Grief and Loss: Additional Therapeutic Tactics

                                    Interpersonal Circle

                                                                        Michelle
                                                                        (mom)

                                                                        Peter
                                                                        (dad-
                                                              Lee       deceased)
                                      Derek

                                                             Max
                                           Intimates         (boss)
                            Brett


                                      Close supports
                                                             Extended supports

Figure 16.1  Interpersonal Circle – Rob


Rob described that he and his mother were constantly at odds, particularly since his
father had died of colon cancer about a year earlier. Rob told the therapist that he had
not been particularly close to his father, but felt ‘sad that he had died’. He felt that there
may have been some connection between his father’s death and his depression, but had
trouble describing in any detail how it was affecting him. The therapist was able to iden-
tify with Rob in the Interpersonal Formulation (Figure 16.2) that the onset of his mood
symptoms did seem to correspond to his father’s death, and that Rob’s psychological
distress was clearly impairing his ability to function.


                Biological factors          Social factors                Psychological factors
                38 years old                Fair support from friends     Isolated
                Male                        Lack of family support        Many interests/hobbies
                Family history of           Well educated                 Single
                 depression                 Employed as an engineer       Intelligent
                Family history of                                         Good sense of humor
                 suicide (2 uncles)
                Antidepressant
                 medication
                Trouble sleeping




      Cultural factors                                                      Spiritual factors
      Men do not talk about emotions
                                                                            Former member of
      Expectation to be ‘strong’ for his               Rob                   Jehovah’s Witnesses
       mother


                                      Acute Interpersonal Crisis
                     Grief and Loss (death of father),Interpersonal Dispute (mother)


                                                Distress
                                       (Major depressive disorder)

Figure 16.2  Interpersonal Formulation – Rob


                                                                                                   233
Grief and Loss

Rather than considering his grief as ‘normal’ or ‘abnormal’, the therapist simply noted
that Rob had identified issues related to the loss of his father, was having difficulty func-
tioning since that time, and was seeking help. IPT was presented as a treatment likely
to be beneficial in dealing with Rob’s loss. The therapist and Rob agreed to about 12–14
­sessions of IPT focusing primarily on Grief and Loss issues; Rob also wished to devote
 some time to resolve the Interpersonal Dispute with his mother.
As they discussed things in detail in the middle sessions of IPT, Rob told the therapist
that he had not been close to his father as a teenager, and had difficulty recounting any
specific interactions with his father during his childhood or teen years. He reported that
he had contact with his father throughout his adult life, but spoke to him mostly about
‘guy stuff’ such as sports or home improvement projects. Rob stated he didn’t feel losing
his father was a particularly devastating blow, but noted that he had at times tried to
‘convince himself’ that it should have been. The therapist continued to explore Rob’s
relationship with his father with the goal of helping him to describe his experience more,
and to bring coherence and understanding to his experience of the loss.
Therapist: Rob, we’ve talked a lot about how things were with your father, including some of
your regrets about the relationship. Perhaps we could talk more about the positives?
Rob: If there were any.
Therapist: I can’t help but imagine that there were at least a few. You said as a boy you and he
spent time together.
Rob: Yeah. We did a lot together.
Therapist: How did things change as you got older?
Rob: Well, we just didn’t really ‘connect’ like we did when I was a kid.
Therapist: How did you connect back then?
Rob: Well, we didn’t really. We just sort of talked about nothing.
Therapist: Tell me about a time you remember when that happened [Interpersonal Incident].
Rob: Well, there was one time when I invited my dad to a basketball game. I was about 20 or
so, and was at college. My dad came up to visit, and we went to see the Hawkeyes. I was really
hoping that we’d be able to have a good conversation ... we hadn’t really connected for a long time.
Mostly what I remember is how we just spent time together, not really talking about anything
important, but just being together to watch the game and talk about sports. I really regret that I
didn’t do more of that later – my dad was never one to initiate things, so I would have had to do it.
I never really did though, and now I wish I had ...
Rob spontaneously recognized that he was feeling very different when relating this story
(content and process affect), and began to discuss his feelings of loss, guilt, and regret
with the therapist. He was also able to discuss his feelings about his dad not being the
‘perfect’ dad for whom he had wished.
The therapist noted that Rob had, with only one or two exceptions, displayed little or
no emotion when discussing his father’s loss. When he asked about this, Rob told him
that he felt uncomfortable discussing more emotional subjects, and had ‘not really
cried’ about the loss of his father. Hoping to understand Rob’s experience better, the
therapist chose to move to a discussion about some of the details of the loss to engage
Rob and help him to develop his story. Later in the sessions he asked Rob about the
funeral.
Therapist: I’d really like to understand more about what your experience was like. Tell me about
your Dad’s funeral.
Rob: It was pretty horrible really. I’ve never liked funerals.
Therapist: I can understand that – funerals are almost always sad occasions, though many people
do find them comforting as well. Tell me more of the details – what comes to mind? [Note the
empathy with an invitation to extend the experience to comforting aspects as well. The therapist
specifically asked Rob to tell him simply what came to mind rather than asking about a particular

234
                                                                                          References

interaction or a difficult interaction – the pacing is given to Rob to share as he is able rather than
forcing the issue.]
Rob: I guess what comes to mind was when they closed the curtain and the coffin disappeared.
Therapist: What was that like for you?
Rob: [Starting to cry] I thought that ... that ... I would never see him again.
The therapist sat quietly with Rob while he wept and then began to compose himself.
Rob told the therapist that he hadn’t been able to cry about his father or the sadness
he felt until that moment in therapy. The therapist then highlighted to Rob that it had
only been recently that he had begun to describe his relationship with his father in more
detail, and that the emotion had soon followed.
In later sessions, Rob and the therapist discussed the newly recognized impact of his
father’s loss. Rob recognized that he derived comfort from connecting with male friends,
and he had begun to share his experiences with the loss of his father with a few of them.
One friend in particular seemed to be able to connect well with Rob – this friend had
also lost his father and had a similar experience with a father with whom he didn’t feel
connected. As Rob became more aware of his own reactions to his father’s death, his
relationship with his mother also improved. Rob’s depressive symptoms improved, and
in the concluding session he reported feeling ‘sad rather than depressed’. This was an
important qualitative difference for Rob, as he was able to identify and characterize his
emotions, and he reported being able to experience them more fully. The ‘sadness’ felt
appropriate to him, and he no longer had pervasive problems in functioning at work or
socially. He told the therapist that the ability to explore his relationship with his father
was critical to how he felt and that he was glad to have had the chance to ‘put things
right in his mind’. They agreed that maintenance sessions would be of help to ‘check in’,
and made plans to meet again in 3 months.


Conclusion
In IPT, Grief and Loss is broadly conceptualized. It includes reactions to a death as well
as anticipatory grief of another’s or of one’s own death. Loss of physical health, loss of
relationships as a result of divorce, and a myriad of other types of loss can also be considered
grief issues. As with the other Problem Areas, the primary point in IPT is to use the area to
maintain the interpersonal focus of treatment rather than to make a ‘correct’ diagnosis. Listen
to the patient and let him decide – it is, after all, his experience.
     When working with a patient who is experiencing grief and loss, the therapist has two
essential tasks. The first is to help the patient to begin to describe his experience, including
emotional reactions in particular. This is done largely through the creation of a therapeutic
relationship in which the patient feels secure in dealing with and sharing his experiences and
feelings. The second task is to help the patient extend this process outside of therapy. The
development of social support is crucial, and can be encouraged by having the patient begin
to share his experience of loss with others.

References
1.	 Bowlby J. Attachment. Attachment and Loss. Vol. 1. 1969, New York: Basic Books.
2.	 Raphael B. The Anatomy of Bereavement. 1983, New York: Basic Books.
3.	 Kubler-Ross E. On Death and Dying. 1969, London: Macmillan.



                                                                                                   235
This page intentionally left blank
                            Section 5
Concluding IPT


Chapter 17. Concluding Acute Treatment and
             ­Maintenance Treatment
This page intentionally left blank
                                                                                      17
Concluding Acute Treatment and
Maintenance Treatment
Introduction                                                                                 239
Concluding Acute Treatment                                                                   239
Conducting Maintenance IPT                                                                   240
Conducting Maintenance Treatment                                                             248
Conclusion                                                                                   253
References                                                                                   253


Introduction
Acute Treatment with Interpersonal Psychotherapy (IPT) comes to a conclusion, not a
termination. Rather than using the traditional psychoanalytic model in which ‘termination’ is
a complete severing of the therapeutic relationship, the completion of Acute Treatment with
IPT simply signifies the conclusion of a specific intensive phase of treatment. In IPT this does
not signify the end of the therapeutic relationship – in fact, it is often agreed that the patient
and therapist will have therapeutic contacts in the future, and provision is specifically made
for these. Clinical experience has consistently demonstrated that a longitudinal therapeutic
relationship is beneficial for most patients, and this is also clearly supported by empirical
evidence. Not only are many of the major psychiatric disorders (such as depression and
anxiety disorders) relapsing and remitting in nature, there is also clear evidence that provision
of IPT as a maintenance treatment after recovery from depression is helpful in preventing
relapse.1,2 Because of the therapeutic benefit of maintenance treatment and the evidence
supporting its utility, the therapist is obligated to discuss continuing Maintenance Treatment
with all patients treated with IPT.a

Concluding Acute Treatment
Clinical experience and empirical evidence both make clear that IPT should be
conceptualized as a two-phase treatment, in which a more intense Acute Treatment focuses
on resolution of immediate symptoms and distress, and a subsequent Maintenance Phase
follows with the intent of preventing relapse and maintaining productive interpersonal
functioning. There are both theoretical and practical reasons for keeping Acute Treatment
with IPT time-limited. The time limit theoretically may be effective in generating change, as
it is often hypothesized that having an end point helps drive the patient to work more rapidly
on improving her communication skills and on building a more effective social network. It
should be noted, however, that despite the tempting intuitive conclusion that this is helpful
with some patients, there is in fact no data supporting this claim.3
a	
     Maintenance treatment should actually be discussed with all patients in all therapies.

                                                                                              239
Concluding Acute Treatment and Maintenance Treatment

    With the exception of a few psychotherapies, there are no medical treatments which are
terminated. It simply isn’t done. Oncologists never tell their chemotherapy patients that they
only get 16 sessions of chemotherapy and then they are terminated. Oncologists continue
working with their patients acutely until they are well, then they provide follow-up care as
needed. Surgeons don’t tell their patients they only get 4 hours in the operating room and
then surgery is terminated irrespective of the outcome. Surgeons continue working until
the wound is closed. Once acute care is done, post-operative care is provided. Since there is
no evidence that termination in IPT is of benefit, and since there are lots of data supporting
Maintenance Treatment, IPT should not be terminated either.
    There are reasons, however, to keep acute IPT time-limited and to make a distinction
between Acute Treatment and Maintenance Treatment. The acute time limit influences both
the patient and the therapist to focus on acute symptoms rather than on personality change
or change in attachment style. In addition, to extend treatment beyond the 6–20-session limit
that is typical of IPT is likely to lead to a shift in treatment as the therapeutic relationship
becomes more prominent. As the relationship between patient and therapist assumes greater
importance over time, transference moves to the fore and becomes the focus of treatment. In
IPT, in contrast to more psychodynamic therapies, the goal is to avoid dealing directly with
transference if possible, because it shifts the focus away from the patient’s social relationships.
While it is appropriate for the therapist to step in as a temporary attachment figure during
a crisis, the point in IPT is to transition from support provided by the therapist to support
provided by others as quickly as the patient can tolerate and manage it.
    The development of transference as a focus of treatment is a function of three factors:
1  The patient – the more insecure the patient’s attachment style, and the more maladaptive
   her communications, the more likely transference will become problematic and need to be
   addressed.
2  Treatment intensity – the more often therapy sessions are held (e.g. five times a week versus
   once weekly versus bimonthly) the more important transference becomes as a therapeutic
   issue.
3  Treatment duration – the longer intensive treatment continues, the more likely transference
   is to become a focus.
IPT is intentionally structured to minimize the likelihood that these factors will shift
treatment from the patient’s social relationships to a focus on the therapeutic relationship.
This is why IPT is time-limited in Acute Treatment (treatment duration), why it is once
weekly with tapering of frequency of sessions as conclusion nears (treatment intensity) and
why treatment is not terminated (accommodating patients’ insecure attachment styles).

Conducting Maintenance IPT
IPT can be conceptualized as a ‘family practice’ or ‘general practitioner’ model of care, in
which short-term treatment for an acute problem or stressor is provided until it is resolved,
and then maintenance or follow-up treatment is provided as needed. The relationship
is ongoing: the patient is welcome to return should another acute problem arise, and is
encouraged to return for periodic health maintenance. In IPT, once the acute crisis is
resolved, the therapeutic relationship is not terminated; as does a general practitioner, the
therapist makes herself available to the patient should another crisis occur, at which time
another time-limited course of Acute Treatment can be undertaken. In the interim, the
patient and therapist may elect, in the same fashion as the general practitioner, to schedule
preventive sessions periodically.

240
                                                                Conducting Maintenance IPT

     In addition to providing quality clinical care, this model also meets the needs of a
managed care practice. When there is a limit to the number of sessions that can be provided,
whether because of financial limitations, insurance restrictions, institutional rules, or one of
the many other irritating and arcane restrictions that may be in place, providing time-limited
courses of therapy during crises is a viable way to maximize patient functioning.
     This model of intermittent treatment is also extremely helpful in positioning the
therapist as a stable attachment figure for the patient. Rather than completely terminating
the therapeutic relationship, the therapist can simply make herself available for the patient
should other crises occur in the future. Both theoretically and practically there is great benefit
within an IPT framework in having the therapist serve as a stable attachment figure for the
patient. Many of the patients who come to treatment have attachment styles which incline
them to be overly sensitive to threats of abandonment, and forcing a complete ‘termination’
at the conclusion of Acute Treatment will iatrogenically move the therapy from symptom
resolution and the patient’s social relationships to a focus on the termination and the
transference involved in this very real abandonment by the therapist. There is no compelling
clinical or theoretical reason to come to a complete termination with patients in IPT, and the data
clearly support the benefit of Maintenance Treatment.

Deciding When to Conclude Acute Treatment
In general, the best approach in IPT is to stick to the dosing range in the Treatment
Agreement that was collaboratively established at the end of the Assessment/Initial Phase.
The most important reason for this is to maintain therapeutic integrity. On the one hand, one
of the most important qualities that the therapist brings to treatment is her integrity – the
patient must believe that the therapist will follow through with what she agrees to do. Without
this trust in the therapist, therapy will fail. On the other hand, the success of therapy is also
dependent upon the patient’s belief that the therapist is absolutely committed to helping her,
and that her needs supersede nearly all other considerations, including a flexible agreement
to conclude therapy after a particular number of sessions. Therapy is designed to benefit the
patient, not the therapist; IPT should prioritize helping the patient instead of demanding
rigid adherence to a manualized protocol, or rigidly demanding that only the exact number
of sessions agreed upon can be used. If extending the therapy beyond the number of sessions
initially agreed upon is clearly in the patient’s best interest, then it should be extended.
     The apparent conflict between maintaining the agreement and extending sessions when
needed can be resolved quite simply by renegotiating a new Treatment Agreement with the
patient when indicated. Clinical judgment and common sense should be used to make such
decisions. The following case examples illustrate these practical issues.
Case example 17.1: Joe
Joe was a 38-year-old man who came to treatment for a mild depressive episode which
he linked to the death of his father a year ago. Over the course of therapy, it became clear
that despite a conflicted relationship with his father, Joe had maintained a mutually
supportive marriage of 14 years, had developed a reasonable social support network, and
had been productive at work. Joe and his therapist agreed at the end of the assessment
to meet for about 12 sessions of IPT.
After making great progress in working through his grief, talking with his wife about his
reactions to his father’s death, and talking to a male friend who had also recently lost his
father, Joe reported that his depression was essentially resolved and that he was doing
well. At session 11, however, he requested that therapy be continued indefinitely, as he
had ‘really enjoyed talking to the therapist, and wanted to meet just in case something

                                                                                              241
Concluding Acute Treatment and Maintenance Treatment

else came up’. He began addressing the therapist by his first name, and also began
to inquire about the therapist’s personal life, such as whether the therapist enjoyed
fishing and other outdoor activities Joe enjoyed. While much transference ‘grist for the
mill’ was clearly developing, the therapist determined that Joe had benefited from the
acute treatment and was functioning well. As Joe and the therapist had not agreed to
long-term intensive treatment, nor did Joe appear to need it to maintain his level of
functioning, the therapist determined that sticking to the initial agreement outweighed
the potential benefits of continuing therapy. Moreover, the therapist also recognized
that continuing therapy would involve a departure from IPT and a move to a more
psychodynamic transference-based therapy.
The therapist responded to Joe’s personal inquiries with pleasant self-disclosure,
indicating that he did indeed enjoy fishing and camping. This comment was immediately
followed by a statement from the therapist that such activities were clearly important
to Joe, and that it would be of benefit to think about other friends with whom Joe could
share these, particularly as they would be a great way to continue to build meaningful
interpersonal relationships. Thus the therapist quickly shifted a potential transference
encounter to a focus on continuing to develop interpersonal connections outside
of therapy. The therapist also reiterated his opinion that it was best to stick to their
therapeutic agreement, emphasizing that Joe had both done well in therapy and clearly
had the ability to connect well with people.
At session 12, Joe indicated that he felt ready to conclude Acute Treatment. The therapist
responded by reiterating that Joe could return in the future if needed – they had already
discussed the fact that the death of Joe’s mother, among other events, might be a point at
which he could return should his symptoms recur.

Case example 17.2: Penelope
Penelope was a 27-year-old woman who entered IPT for the treatment of an acute and
severe episode of postpartum depression. Because she was breastfeeding, she declined her
physician’s recommendation to use antidepressant medication, but did agree to start IPT.
During the course of therapy it became apparent that Penelope had a tendency to be
somewhat passive in asking others for help. She tended to expect others to anticipate her
needs, and when they did not, she tended to withdraw and isolate herself further. This was
evident in her relationship with her husband: she described several instances in which she
wanted him to help with household tasks and childcare but had not specifically asked him
to do so. When he had not ‘read her mind’ and done these, she withdrew and described
feeling more depressed. In addition, this style was manifest in therapy – early in treatment,
she had been quite passive and somewhat difficult to engage as an active participant in
solving her problems, often looking to the therapist to ‘tell her what to do’.
Despite these tendencies, Penelope had done well in treatment. She had recognized
that her communications with her husband were not effectively getting her needs met,
and with encouragement, had begun to address her need for help with him directly. He
had responded quite positively to her requests, and as she became more direct in her
communication, she began to feel more supported and less depressed. With this success,
she also changed her in-session behavior, and became more of an active participant in
developing new ways to communicate more effectively. She also became involved in a
postpartum support group, which she found to be of great help.
After 16 sessions of IPT, she indicated that she was doing well and was somewhat
indifferent to continuing in treatment. Despite the transference implications of this
statement, the therapist pointed out to her that her depression had been severe, and that
both the research on postpartum depression and the therapist’s own clinical experience
suggested that relapse was a distinct possibility. This was a particular concern because
she was not taking antidepressant medication. The therapist took the initiative to

242
                                                            Conducting Maintenance IPT

suggest monthly maintenance sessions over the next year, with the understanding that,
should the depression recur, Acute Treatment would be reinstituted. Additional discus-
sion focused on the possibility of returning to treatment even after the Maintenance
Treatment was concluded, as Penelope was at risk for depression during subsequent
postpartum periods, and she was planning on having more children.

Case example 17.3: Jane
Jane was a 35-year-old woman with what appeared to be a relatively straightforward
episode of depression resulting from her divorce. She had been married for 5 years, and
reported that she had felt that she had been cast adrift when her husband unexpectedly
left. She had depended on him as her ‘best friend’ and had cut off several important
relationships with female friends in order to be with him. She initially reported confusion
about why he had left, and wanted to understand what had happened. An agreement to
meet for about 12 sessions of IPT was established at the end of the assessment.
At session 3, Jane revealed that her ex-husband had been a heavy drinker; session 5
brought the revelation that he had been physically abusive to her. He had also been
very adamant that she limit her contacts outside of the marriage, which had resulted
in a constriction of her social network. In addition to exploring her ambivalent feelings
about her ex-husband, therapy focused on re-establishing her social support network.
She contacted several of her female friends and began socializing with them, including
one woman who had also recently been through a difficult divorce. As her interpersonal
support improved, her symptoms did as well, and she reported at session 10 that she felt
she was functioning well and was no longer depressed.
During treatment, her fear that others would not meet her needs was manifest
in therapy by a reluctance to disclose personal feelings to her therapist. This was
evident in the delayed disclosure of the abusive relationship with her ex-husband,
and in her concern that ‘therapy might not be of help to someone like me’, a
statement she made early in treatment. At that time, the therapist chose to respond
to her comment with reassurance that therapy was indeed quite likely to be of help,
and that the therapist had previously had great success with other patients with
problems similar to Jane’s.
Near the end of session 11, when the conclusion of acute treatment was being discussed,
Jane revealed to her therapist that she had been a victim of sexual abuse during her
childhood. While the therapist appreciated that sticking to the original Treatment
Agreement was important, she felt that it was far outweighed by the importance of
this disclosure, and by the distress that Jane was experiencing in discussing it. Further,
given Jane’s difficulty in disclosing personal issues and the time invested in building a
therapeutic alliance with her, the therapist judged it was best if she worked with Jane
on the abuse issues rather than referring her to someone else. The therapist initiated
a discussion with Jane about this, and they agreed to end IPT and move to open-ended
work on understanding the impact of her abuse experience.
There are many other situations in which adding a session or two is of great benefit and
clinically indicated. For instance, when working with women who have a pregnancy loss near
the conclusion of therapy, when working with patients with new medical diagnoses which
arise near the conclusion of therapy, or when working with patients with any variety of life
events that happen near the conclusion of treatment who would benefit from several more
sessions. Life events happen, and they are just as likely to happen near the conclusion of
therapy as at any other point.
    In sum, it is generally most beneficial to conclude Acute Treatment as agreed upon by
the therapist and patient at the end of the Assessment/Initial Phase. The vast majority of
well-selected patients will respond within this time frame and will be able to conclude Acute

                                                                                        243
Concluding Acute Treatment and Maintenance Treatment

Treatment without difficulty. There are both theoretical and practical reasons for concluding
Acute Treatment as agreed; however, there are circumstances in which patients will clearly
benefit from additional treatment, and in which more treatment is indicated. There will also
be cases in which the patient has fully engaged in treatment with IPT, has not responded,
and continues to need additional treatment, either from the therapist who provided IPT or
from another clinician. In such cases, clinical judgment and common sense should be used to
determine the best course of action.

Concluding Acute Treatment: Tactics
In addition to determining whether to conclude Acute Treatment, the therapist must also
use clinical judgment to decide how to schedule sessions near the end of the Acute Phase.
The clinician should be guided, as in other aspects of IPT, by both clinical experience and
empirical data.
     The empirical efficacy studies of Acute Treatment with IPT have all relied upon protocols
which strictly dictate the use of weekly sessions of IPT, followed by an abrupt termination
after a specified and inflexible number of sessions. In these studies, there is no latitude for
therapists: sessions must be conducted weekly, and termination must occur – no treatment
may be offered to patients at the end of the specified number of sessions, even if they remain
symptomatic. These protocols have been used solely to maximize the internal validity of the
research (i.e. its replicability), not because they reflect best clinical practice.
     In contrast, clinical experience with IPT and other therapies strongly suggests that the best
clinical practice is to extend the interval between Acute Treatment sessions once the patient is
in recovery. Rather than continuing to meet weekly for the duration of treatment, the patient
and therapist may choose to meet biweekly or even monthly towards the latter parts of Acute
Treatment if the patient has recovered. Six to eight weekly sessions may be sufficient for more
highly functioning patients to resolve their acute problems, but they often derive additional
benefit from extending session intervals to biweekly or monthly once their functioning
has improved. This gives them the opportunity to further practice communication skills,
reinforce the changes that they have made, and develop more self-confidence while remaining
in a supportive relationship – all of which facilitate better and more stable functioning.
     It is also helpful to negotiate the number of sessions of therapy rather than a specified
number of weeks of therapy. Therapy can be conducted weekly until the patient begins to
improve; later sessions can be scheduled further apart after discussing the change with the
patient. Most patients, if doing well, are quite happy to meet less frequently, and often initiate
the discussion about doing so when they are feeling better.
     In addition to providing more longitudinal care than acute weekly sessions can offer,
coming to a gradual conclusion in Acute Treatment rather than an abrupt termination has
other advantages. First, there is less need to focus on the sense of loss that the patient may
experience at the conclusion of treatment, as the process is gradual rather than abrupt.
Consequently, there is also little concern about the problematic transferential issues that
would arise were a complete termination to occur. Second, the gradual conclusion more firmly
fixes the therapist as a stable attachment figure while encouraging the patient to function
independently. The therapist should be available, but not necessary, for the patient.
     Finally, a gradual conclusion fosters the patient’s hope for recovery and her faith in the
treatment. Psychotherapy (at least some non-IPT forms) is the only form of treatment offered
by healthcare providers in which an iatrogenically created abrupt termination to treatment
is imposed. Instead of being terminated, patients expect that they will be provided with

244
                                                               Conducting Maintenance IPT

help as long as they are suffering – they do not expect that the dictates of a protocol will
take precedence over their personal and individual needs. This is a reasonable and humane
expectation, and one that is met in IPT.
    While an abrupt termination can be theoretically justified as a means to increase the
intensity of the transference reaction in long-term psychodynamic psychotherapy, there
is no theoretical justification for artificially imposing an abrupt and potentially counter-
therapeutic termination in time-limited non-transferential treatments such as IPT. The
therapist should use her clinical judgment to determine if and when to schedule sessions at
greater intervals as the patient recovers.

Goals for the Conclusion of Acute Treatment
A good conclusion to the intense therapy relationship which develops in IPT is of utmost
importance, particularly as the focus of treatment is the patient’s relationships and
communication with her primary attachments, one of whom, at the conclusion of therapy,
is the therapist. As a result of their attachment styles, many patients will be sensitive to the
conclusion of the therapeutic relationship even if it is not terminated, and will experience
feelings of loss or possibly even rejection. Thus handling the conclusion of therapy well is an
essential task for the IPT therapist.
     The primary goals of IPT are symptom relief, improvement in interpersonal functioning,
and increased social support. A corollary of this is that the specific goals at the time of
treatment conclusion are to foster the patient’s independent functioning and to enhance
her sense of competence (Box 17.1). The task is to help the patient appreciate that she has
resources and skills to manage problems, and to squarely attribute therapeutic gain to the
patient. As Acute Treatment ends, the therapist should make clear that the patient has
improved, has made changes, and has the capability to function independently. The therapist
is still available in the background should a future emergency arise, but the expectation is that
the patient will not only function independently but do so quite capably.
Box 17.1  Goals of Conclusion of Acute Treatment

 ●● To facilitate the patient’s independent functioning
 ●● To enhance the patient’s sense of competence
 ●● To reinforce new communication behavior

 ●● To reinforce the use of social supports

 ●● To contract for the provision of continuing Maintenance Treatment as needed



Metaphorically, IPT follows the old adage ‘give a man a fish and he will eat for a day, teach
a man to fish and he will eat for a lifetime’. Ideally, patients learn new communication skills,
develop insight into how they communicate their needs, and establish more functional social
support networks, all in the service of improving interpersonal functioning. These are all new
or improved fishing skills. The metaphor can, however, be extended further in a way consistent
with IPT. As with a fishing mentor or teacher, new situations arise in which the student or
patient may again desire some expert help. When a patient is fishing for bass, a shark might
appear on the line – if so, asking for additional advice is not only helpful but a darn good idea.
When appropriate, patients should be encouraged to ask for additional therapy: recognizing
when help is needed and asking for it in a gracious and effective manner is a goal in IPT.
    At the Conclusion of Acute Treatment the therapist should take the stance that
she is available to the patient should difficulties arise in the future. It is essential for the

                                                                                             245
Concluding Acute Treatment and Maintenance Treatment

therapist to be experienced by the patient as a stable attachment figure even after Acute
Treatment concludes – an attachment figure that should be called upon for help only when
circumstances are dire, but one which is available nonetheless. The therapist is, temporarily
at least, an important and appropriate part of the patient’s social support network. If future
crises arise, the ability to effectively call upon extended social support, including the therapist,
should be reinforced.


Conclusion of Acute Treatment: Key Issues
The therapist should specifically discuss a number of issues with the patient prior to
concluding Acute Treatment. These are:
●● Maintenance Treatment

●● Continued use of medication

●● Discussion of potential future problems and signs of recurrence of distress.

The most important among these is a discussion about Maintenance Treatment. There are many
alternatives for this, and a specific and concrete agreement should be established with the patient
for whichever option is chosen. Options range from scheduling maintenance sessions at
monthly intervals for patients at high risk to concluding Acute Treatment with an agreement
that the patient will contact the therapist should problems recur for those at low risk.
     Decisions about how to structure Maintenance Treatment should rely on clinical
judgment. Often, they are also guided by logistical and other considerations. For instance,
some patients will be receiving medication from a healthcare provider other than the
therapist – in this case, there may be less concern about scheduling maintenance sessions
as the physician can observe the patient for signs of relapse. Distance is another concern,
as is cost; while the benefits of Acute Treatment may make the investment of time required
to travel to appointments and the cost of Acute Treatment a wonderful investment for the
patient, the cost-benefit equation may not support continued Maintenance Treatment at long
distance or great financial cost.
     Continued use of medication should also be discussed with the patient. Physicians
conducting IPT can do this in the context of the therapy. Other mental healthcare providers
should emphasize the need to continue medication even after the conclusion of IPT –
patients should be firmly directed to continue medication until they have discussed stopping
it with their physician.
     The last item which should be discussed with the patient is the recognition of early
symptoms of recurrence, which may signal another episode of illness or a return of
interpersonal problems. Along with this, therapists should explicitly discuss future
events which may lead to relapse or recurrence. Many of these will be obvious. A review
of the onset of depression may reveal that sleep problems appeared before the full-
blown episode occurred; if so, patients should be counseled to watch for such signs and
to seek help should they return. In addition, there may be future life events or stressors
during which patients are likely to have difficulties and would benefit from maintenance
treatment. For example, a woman experiencing postpartum depression may have similar
difficulties if she is planning subsequent pregnancies; a patient who has had difficulty
grieving the loss of a parent may have similar problems at the death of her remaining
parent; a student having difficulty making the transition to university life may have
similar problems when beginning his first job. In IPT, therapists should anticipate these
potential problems, discuss them with their patients, and plan for treatment in the future
should they arise.
246
                                                                Conducting Maintenance IPT

Conclusion of Acute Treatment: Techniques
Several specific techniques can be utilized to great effect during the Conclusion of Acute
Treatment (Box 17.2). Primary among these is giving direct feedback to patients. In IPT, the
therapist should review the progress made in therapy, giving as much positive feedback to
patients as is genuinely possible. A review of the problems identified in the Interpersonal
Inventory and progress in dealing with these, as well as a review of the associated
symptomatic improvement, should be conducted. A specific summary of the positive
changes that the patient has made in improving her communication and in developing a
social support network should also be provided. Credit for change should be given to the
patient – though the therapist has served as a ‘coach’, the patient has done the difficult work
and has implemented the changes.

Box 17.2  Therapeutic techniques for concluding Acute IPT

 ●● Positive reinforcement of the patient’s gains
 ●● Discussion of the patient’s reactions to the Conclusion of Acute Treatment
 ●● Therapist self-disclosure of reactions to the Conclusion of Acute Treatment

 ●● Solicitation of feedback from the patient about the therapy



It is important to discuss the patient’s reactions to the Conclusion of Acute Treatment. These
are usually quite positive if sessions have been tapered as conclusion nears, and if the therapist
makes clear that the patient can return in the future should the need arise. An iatrogenically
created abrupt termination will lead to more difficulties at the termination of therapy. Even in
cases in which the conclusion is handled well, however, the patient may have a significant sense
of loss which should be directly discussed. The therapist may be one of the few people who have
taken an active interest in the patient, or may be one of the few people who have treated her
with unconditional positive regard. It is often the case that therapists underestimate the impact
of concluding therapy: therapists have many patients, while a patient has only one therapist.
      Discussion and acknowledgment of the patient’s experience in the concluding phase is a
key tactic when concluding IPT. The therapist should continue to listen well, and acknowledge
that many people feel a sense of loss at the Conclusion of Acute Treatment, and that this
reaction signifies both the effort that the patient has put into the work and the relationship that
she has built with the therapist. The therapist should try to link these feelings with the sense of
concern that some patients may experience as they fear that they will not be able to maintain
their gains without the therapist’s support. The therapist should also feel free to use judicious
self-disclosure when discussing the end of therapy, and can relate her personal feelings about
concluding treatment (assuming that they are positive). This serves three purposes:
1  It further acknowledges the patient’s experience of loss
2  It models the direct communication of feelings
3  It reinforces the patient’s ability to connect in a meaningful way with others.
For example, a therapist might state to her patient:
      I have really enjoyed working with you, and will miss the interaction. I often find it
      difficult to conclude treatment with the people with whom I work, as I find myself
      feeling close to them and very invested in their success.
As IPT does not typically focus directly on the patient–therapist relationship, the discussions
about concluding should not include questions about the patient’s feelings about the
therapist on a transference level, nor should they include questions which invite speculation
                                                                                               247
Concluding Acute Treatment and Maintenance Treatment

by the patient about the therapist. Patients may ask personal questions of the therapist
as the conclusion draws near – the therapist should respond openly and honestly with
judicious self-disclosure, and may then redirect the patient to relationships outside of the
treatment instead of querying the patient about their motives for asking, or interpreting any
transference reactions.
     Another helpful intervention when concluding is to ask for feedback from the patient
regarding her experiences in therapy. One of the obvious benefits is that the therapist gets
important information about what did and did not work well – invaluable information
for a true scientist-practitioner, and wonderful information to add to one’s store of clinical
experience. Asking for feedback is also a great way of modeling, further encouraging
the patient to do the same. It also emphasizes the collaborative nature of the therapeutic
relationship, and reinforces the value of the patient’s input to others.
     A final consideration when concluding IPT is the management of post-therapy contacts.
In traditional psychodynamic psychotherapy, such contacts are strictly prohibited. Research
protocols also prohibit post-therapy contact of any kind. As the goals at the Conclusion
of Acute Treatment with IPT are to facilitate independent functioning and reinforce the
gains made by the patient, being receptive to the patient’s request for post-therapy contact,
or, in some cases, initiating a discussion about post-therapy contact, may be very helpful.
For example, the therapist may determine that it would be helpful to have the patient call
or emailb the therapist a month or two after the conclusion to check in with the therapist. If
there is concern about relapse with a patient who is unable to attend Maintenance Treatment,
the therapist may even choose to call the patient a month or two after Acute Treatment
has concluded. Requests by the patient to call or email (but please no texting) the therapist
can generally be met positively as well. Clinical experience clearly indicates that for many
patients, this kind of contact is very helpful.
     Several principles need to be kept in mind, however. First, post-therapy contact of
this kind should be mutually agreed upon. The therapist must keep up her end of the
bargain – if she agrees to call the patient after a month, the therapist must follow through.
Second, this type of post-therapy contact should be conceptualized by the therapist as a
literal Maintenance Treatment, meaning that all of the therapeutic boundaries must be
maintained as when face-to-face sessions were taking place. The same kind of therapeutic
goals and techniques should also be in force. Therapists choosing to utilize this structure
for concluding Acute Treatment and providing maintenance contact will also find that it
generally diminishes the intensity of the conclusion as well, which is consistent with the non-
transferential and supportive nature of IPT.


Conducting Maintenance Treatment
There are two primary differences between Acute and Maintenance IPT. The first is simply
a quantitative matter – Maintenance IPT is less frequent and less intense. In some cases, the
therapist may even choose to have maintenance sessions of shorter length – 20-minute or
half-hour appointments may be sufficient for some patients who are doing well. The other
difference is qualitative, as the goals of Acute Treatment are to resolve an interpersonal crisis,
while Maintenance Treatment is designed to maintain functioning and prevent a return of
symptoms (Box 17.3).

b	
      ur 2003 book noted that the therapist may ask the patient to call or write to the therapist; sadly this very personal
     O
     and meaningful way of communicating has been replaced by texting or email.

248
                                                      Conducting Maintenance Treatment

Box 17.3  Goals of Maintenance Treatment

 ●● To review the original problem and the progress being made
 ●● To consider new problems that can be dealt with preventively
 ●● To continue to maximize the patient’s interpersonal functioning

 ●● To provide a continuing relationship for the resumption of Acute Treatment if needed




The first goal of Maintenance IPT is to review the patient’s presenting problem and the
progress that is being made. The therapist can make formal reference to the Interpersonal
Inventory, or can simply update the status of the interpersonal problems the patient was
struggling with prior to Acute Treatment. The purpose of this is both to imply to the patient
that she should continue working on interpersonal communication, and to ensure that the
problem has not resurfaced.
    New problems which do not require acute intervention may also arise. The most
common (and gratifying) is when patients bring new interpersonal problems to maintenance
sessions after they have already started to resolve them. For instance, a patient who originally
presented with a marital conflict may bring a conflict with an employer to a maintenance
session. Ideally, the patient will have already started to apply some of the IPT problem
solving techniques to the new problem, and will simply be informing the therapist about
that work or asking for specific advice, as opposed to needing a burst of Acute Treatment. In
other situations, the therapist may need to reinforce the patient’s ability to cope with the new
problem without needing to return to an Acute Treatment mode. More dependent patients,
or those with preoccupied attachments, may feel less competent to deal with new problems,
and their natural tendency is to flee back to treatment. The therapist should use her judgment
to determine whether a resumption of Acute Treatment is needed.
    The contract for Maintenance Treatment should be flexible, but all changes should be
specifically discussed with the patient. For instance, a patient may come to a bimonthly
maintenance session with a conflict in a new relationship. The therapist and patient may
agree that since the patient is already familiar with IPT and has already put into practice
some problem solving skills, three weekly sessions might be helpful. This is in contrast to a
resumption of a ‘full’ course of 12–20 sessions of IPT, and also contrasts with the bimonthly
sessions which had been established in the original Maintenance Agreement. The primary
consideration is that changes in the agreement be specifically discussed and mutually agreed
upon. Such changes should always be made if they are in the patient’s best interest – it is the
patient’s needs rather than the agreement that is paramount. Clinical judgment should be
used in making such decisions.
    In situations in which the patient continues to function well, the therapist can help the
patient to maintain this level of functioning with maintenance sessions. The therapist should
be strongly encouraging and positively reinforcing, and should encourage the patient to be as
independent as possible. This independence is important not only in the patient’s social setting,
but should be encouraged in session as well. For instance, rather than taking a more active
stance while problem solving, the therapist should guide the patient to apply what has been
learned in the Acute Treatment phase, and to generate her own solutions to new problems.
    Finally, the provision of maintenance sessions gives the patient and therapist a platform
from which they can resume Acute Treatment if needed. Continued contact, or the possibility
of resuming contact if needed, makes the therapist a real attachment figure to whom the
patient can return during a crisis. Continued contact also allows the therapist to monitor the
patient’s functioning, and for the therapist to suggest a return to more Acute Treatment if the
patient appears headed for a recurrence of symptoms.
                                                                                            249
Concluding Acute Treatment and Maintenance Treatment

Maintenance Treatment: Tactics and Techniques
The basic techniques used in Maintenance IPT are no different from those used in Acute
Treatment. The therapist’s stance should be slightly less active, however, as the goal is to maximize
the patient’s independent functioning. Less activity in problem solving in particular is helpful, and
encouragement that the patient ‘knows how to solve the problem’ is usually therapeutic as well.
Case example 17.4: Mary
Mary was a 27-year-old woman who presented for treatment following the death of her mother
in an automobile accident. Her mother, who had been in good health, had been killed by a
drunk driver about 3 months earlier. Mary described increasing problems with low mood, crying
spells, feelings of guilt, and poor sleep. Though she continued to function at work, she felt that
the quality of her work had deteriorated. The incident that compelled her to seek treatment
was her anxiety about facing the driver of the other car for the first time at the upcoming trial.
Mary had no psychiatric history, and described an unremarkable childhood. She had been
close to her mother, and had last seen her 2 days prior to the accident. She was able to
relate a number of stories about her mother in great detail, and seemed to have a very
balanced picture of her mother as a ‘whole’ person. Mary’s father had been devastated
by the death, and Mary described having for the first time to ‘care for’ her father. She
described him as somewhat distant but strong – he was always there when others needed
help. She had never seen him cry prior to her mother’s funeral, and since then he had
been unable to go back to work. He appeared to be severely depressed, and Mary had taken
on the role of caring for him. She noted in the initial session that she felt that her concern
for her father had made it difficult to think about her own reactions to her mother’s death.
Mary had one brother who lived some distance away, and though they were not close,
she felt they had connected when he had returned for the funeral. He had, however, re-
turned home, leaving her to care for her father. Mary had been married for about 4 years,
and described her husband as very supportive. Her husband attended an early session,
and left the same impression with the therapist. Her social support was good – she was
very involved in her church and had numerous friends at work and in her neighborhood.
As the Interpersonal Inventory (Figure 17.1) and Formulation (Figure 17.2) took shape, the
therapist began to conceptualize the case as one in which a high-functioning, relatively
securely attached individual was faced with an overwhelming interpersonal crisis. Mary’s
interpersonal relationships were good, her insight was quite good, and she seemed
securely attached in her relationships.

                                     Interpersonal Circle

                      Samantha
                                                              Mark
                   Allison                                    (brother)


                                               Jacob
                                             (husband)

                                           Eleanor (mom)     Sarah
                                           Herb (dad)        Rachael
                                                             Leah
                                              Intimates
                                                             (church)
                             Jonathan


                                           Close supports
                                                             Extended supports

Figure 17.1  Interpersonal Circle – Mary

250
                                                        Conducting Maintenance Treatment

         Biological factors       Social factors                       Psychological factors
         27 years old             Excellent support from husband       Good sense of humor
         Female                   Caring for father emotionally        Intelligent
         No psych history         Not close with brother               Caring person
         No family history        Well educated                        Likes people
                                  Employed as a teacher                Enjoys teaching others




     Cultural factors                                          Spiritual factors
     Expectation that as a daughter
                                                Mary           Very involved in church and
      she should care for her
                                                                fellowship
      father

                                   Acute Interpersonal Crisis
                          Grief and Loss (mother’s death; upcoming trial)

                                             Distress
                                         (Grief and Loss)
Figure 17.2  Interpersonal Formulation – Mary

Mary and her therapist agreed to meet for about 12 acute sessions of IPT with the goal
of helping her to deal with the grief and the anxiety of the upcoming trial. Mary was
able to make great progress – she was in touch with her emotions and could describe
them in detail when recounting her experiences with the news of her mother’s death
and her funeral. With the therapist’s encouragement, she talked in more detail about
her feelings with her husband, then with several other close friends who were very
supportive.
Mary also arranged for psychiatric treatment for her father after having used role
playing in the session to work out more fully how she wanted to approach her father. He
was willing to go to treatment, and appeared to be responding to antidepressant medica-
tion. She felt that she could be less physically involved in his care, and they began to talk
about their experiences with her mother’s death as well.
The most difficult situation was dealing with the driver who had killed her mother. After
much discussion with the therapist and with others, Mary elected not to have any com-
munication with him. She did attend the court proceedings (along with several friends
she had asked to attend for support) but did not feel that it would accomplish anything
to have further contact after he was sentenced. She spoke with her pastor about the
anger she felt about the event, and her anger at God for allowing the accident to happen.
Though she did not feel that she had ‘resolved’ the spiritual question, she seemed to be
comfortable with the ambiguity the situation had caused, and continued with her reli-
gious activities.
Therapy was conducted once weekly until after the court hearing, and thereafter Mary
requested that the therapy switch to once every 2 weeks. Since she was doing well and
seemed to have very supportive relationships, the therapist agreed, and a new agree-
ment was established to meet biweekly for the remaining five sessions. Towards the
Conclusion of Acute Treatment, Maintenance Treatment was discussed in detail.
The Maintenance Agreement that was mutually established at the end of Acute
Treatment was that Mary would return once monthly for 2 months, and then would
return in the future if she felt that she needed to do so. Based on her solid attachments,
social support, and lack of previous problems, the therapist was quite comfortable with
this plan. The maintenance sessions were quite unremarkable, with the therapist simply

                                                                                                251
Concluding Acute Treatment and Maintenance Treatment

reviewing Mary’s general functioning, which continued to be quite good. At the end of
the second maintenance session, both agreed that there was no need to schedule further
meetings. However, Mary did ask for the therapist’s email address, stating that she
frequently corresponded with people via email and could envision that email would be a
nice way to stay in touch.
The therapist had two reactions to this request. The first was a bit of anxiety and
irritation at the fact that she had asked this at the end of the session. There were obvious
transferential implications to her request which could not be addressed in therapy at
this point. The irritation was also in part due to the fact that the therapist had extensive
psychodynamic training, and was literally itching to ask more about Mary’s request. The
anxiety was largely because of the need for a rapid response.
Holding his psychodynamic tendencies in check, the therapist based his response
upon his second reaction. This reaction was that there was likely to be some
therapeutic benefit in giving Mary a ‘transitional object’ – the email address – which
she could keep as a concrete way of continuing to feel attached to the therapist. The
risks involved were minimal, and the benefits great. First, the entire therapy had been
conducted without directly addressing the therapeutic relationship – now did not
seem to be a good time to start. Second, responding to her request in light of the fact
that there were no future contacts planned would increase the likelihood that Mary
would contact the therapist if she needed help. Finally, denying her request would
risk being perceived as rejecting right at the end of therapy, and would be completely
inconsistent with the supportive therapeutic stance that the therapist had maintained
throughout treatment.
The therapist did not hear from Mary until about a year later, when he received a
short email with the news that she was doing well and that she and her husband were
expecting their first child in several months. The therapist replied with a brief personal
note that he was glad to have heard from her, congratulated her, and wished her well
during the remainder of the pregnancy. A fleeting wish to ask Mary to write back after
the delivery to update him about the birth and her new child was quashed on the
grounds that an old supervisor wouldn’t have approved, but the therapist did recognize
that this would also have been consistent with Maintenance Treatment in IPT.
About five months later Mary called the therapist to set up an appointment. She had
delivered a healthy baby boy, but had experienced a profound sense of sadness several
weeks after the delivery. Though she did not appear to be depressed, she described that
the birth had reactivated her feelings of loss regarding her mother. She stated that she
had not expected the reaction, but after the birth had really wanted her mother, both to
be there to see the baby as well as to provide physical help to her. A good friend of hers
had recently also had a child, and Mary felt somewhat envious about the fact that this
woman’s mother had been there to help for about 2 weeks after the birth.
Mary and the therapist agreed to meet for four weekly sessions, during which they
discussed Mary’s reactions to the new circumstances. Once again, she was very
articulate and was able to describe her emotional reactions, and shared these with
other friends in detail. On a practical level, she invited her mother-in-law to stay for a
week as she was making the transition back to work, which she felt was quite helpful
even considering the fact that it was her mother-in-law. The therapist made a point
of asking Mary to bring her child to one of the appointments, and spent quite a bit of
time simply enjoying the experience with her. He had the impression that this was
tremendously valued by Mary.
With the second Acute Treatment phase concluded and Mary recovered, Mary and the
therapist agreed to continue the Maintenance Agreement as before.



252
                                                                                   References

Conclusion
Though there are many similarities, Acute Treatment and Maintenance Treatment are
conceptualized in IPT as two distinct phases of therapy. The goals and intensity of each
differ significantly: the goal of Acute Treatment is to resolve a current interpersonal crisis
and improve social functioning, while the goal of Maintenance Treatment is to prevent
recurrence of symptoms. While the techniques used in both are the same, Maintenance
Therapy generally allows the therapist to be less active and to encourage the patient to
apply the problem solving skills that she has learned. While discussion of Maintenance
Treatment is literally mandatory for all patients, clinical judgment should guide the
decisions that need to be made about the frequency and type of contact that will occur
following Acute Treatment.

References
1.	 Frank E, et al. Three-year outcomes for maintenance therapies in recurrent depression.
    Archives of General Psychiatry, 1990, 47(12): 1093–1099.
2.	 Frank E, et al. Randomized trial of weekly, twice-monthly, and monthly interpersonal
    psychotherapy as maintenance treatment for women with recurrent depression. American
    Journal of Psychiatry, 2007, 164: 761–767.
3.	 Gelso CJ and Woodhouse SS. The termination of psychotherapy: what research tells us
    about the process of ending treatment, in Tryon GS (ed.) Counseling Based on Process
    Research: Applying What We Know. 2002, Boston: Allyn and Bacon.




                                                                                           253
This page intentionally left blank
                             Section 6
Additional Aspects of IPT


Chapter 18.  Psychodynamic Processes	
Chapter 19. Applications of Interpersonal
             Psychotherapy
Chapter 20.  Research in Interpersonal Psychotherapy
Chapter 21.  Integrated Case Example
This page intentionally left blank
                                                                18
Psychodynamic Processes
Introduction                                                                                257
Transference                                                                                257
Countertransference                                                                         260
Resistance                                                                                  262
Conclusion                                                                                  264
References                                                                                  265


Introduction
All human interactions have psychodynamic determinants. Whether it is a conversation with
the milkman or an intensive psychotherapeutic exchange, psychodynamic processes influence
all interpersonal interactions. The interactions that occur in Interpersonal Psychotherapy (IPT)
are no exception to this rule, and in many ways the successful delivery of IPT hinges on the
ability of the therapist to understand and manage them. This demands a great deal of skill as the
time limit used in IPT requires that these processes be recognized and dealt with quickly.
     Psychoanalysis and other psychodynamic approaches rest on two fundamental
principles: psychic determinism and the proposition that unconscious mental processes
are a primary influence on an individual’s conscious thoughts and behaviors. According
to psychoanalytic theory, people are largely unaware of the processes that drive their
behavior, and it is these unconscious factors that lead to neurosis and psychopathology.1
Freud emphasized the special therapeutic significance of these elements by stating that the
term ‘psychoanalysis’ could be applied to every type of psychotherapy which recognizes
the problems of transference and resistance, the basic importance of the unconscious, and
the importance of early developmental history.2 While recognized as important factors, in
IPT these core principles are conceptualized somewhat differently, and are addressed in
fundamentally different ways.


Transference
Transference in its most general sense refers to the repetition of early patterns of
interpersonal relatedness with current partners.3 The phenomenon is universal, and takes
place in all relationships. Transference in its special application to the therapeutic process
involves the patient transferring onto the therapist, as a specific interpersonal partner,
his early experiences in interpersonal relationships. It is assumed in analysis to be an
unconscious process outside of the awareness of the patient.
    In psychodynamic psychotherapy, the transference of the experiences of early life
relationships onto the therapist can be examined ‘as if under a magnifying glass’.3 The
therapeutic task in psychodynamic psychotherapy is to create conditions in which the
transference will be enhanced, so that it is more easily recognizable as such to the therapist.

                                                                                             257
Psychodynamic Processes

A detailed examination of the therapeutic experience of the patient and his relationship
with the therapist, particularly the transferential experience of the patient, is an essential
element of psychodynamic psychotherapy. The therapist, as a neutral observer of the patient’s
reactions, is able to interpret, or give feedback, to the patient about his transferential reactions
to the therapist, so that the patient can come to recognize the unconscious determinants of
his distorted reactions to others.
     A cardinal element of all psychotherapies (including IPT) is that the therapist should
develop an understanding of the way he is perceived by the patient. A major task of the
psychodynamic therapist is to help the patient discover how and why he experiences the
therapist in a particular way.4 In psychoanalytic therapy, this is hypothesized as the key to
unlocking early experiences which have distorted the patient’s subsequent relationships. All
of the patient’s responses to the therapist are colored by the transference and will therefore
affect the outcome of treatment. If the patient’s transference to the therapist is positive, the
patient will experience the therapist as helpful and well-intended, and is likely to ‘comply’
with treatment interventions. On the other hand, if the patient’s transference is negative or
suspicious, all of the therapist’s statements and interventions will be perceived in that light –
the patient will not trust the therapist.
     David Malan5 has referred to a ‘triangle of insight’ in which the past and present
experiences of relationships (in particular a parent figure) are linked through the experience
of transference within psychotherapy. As the patient comes to an understanding of the way he
reacts transferentially to the therapist, this understanding is generalized to other relationships
in both the past and the present. It is the therapist’s task to bring into the patient’s conscious
awareness these transferential patterns of behavior.
     The concept of transference is quite similar to Sullivan’s concept of parataxic distortion.6
Sullivan believed that individuals form and maintain relationships with distortions or
inaccuracies about the real qualities of the relationships, and that these distortions were the
product of previous relationships. Like Freud, Sullivan also believed that these distortions
were largely unconscious. Sullivan extended the concept of transference, however, by
recognizing and emphasizing that transference, or parataxic distortion, does not occur in a
vacuum – it is heavily influenced by the other individual in the relationship. In other words,
the transference or distortion is affected by the ‘real’ qualities of the other individual – in
the case of psychotherapy, by the therapist. Sullivan also recognized that both individuals
in a relationship have parataxic distortions (including therapists) and that these reciprocal
distortions also influence one another.
     Bowlby’s model of attachment takes this concept one step further.7 Bowlby, in framing
attachment behavior as a fundamental neurologically and physiologically based drive,
largely dismissed the importance of the unconscious in relationships. Bowlby argued
that rather than being held in the unconscious, the working model of interpersonal
relationships that an individual develops is based on his real experiences, and reflects an
accurate appraisal – accessible to the patient – of his prior relationships. The implications of
Bowlby’s model were profound from a theoretical standpoint, but did not lead to a dramatic
shift in therapeutic technique. Using Bowlby’s approach, the therapist still focuses on the
therapeutic relationship as a means of understanding the patient’s interpersonal distortions
and characteristic pattern of engaging in relationships. This is because the patient’s working
model of relationships – his typical style of relating to others – is imposed upon the
therapist, just like it is imposed on all other relationships. In contrast to psychoanalysis,
however, the therapist helps the patient appreciate this pattern directly rather than
interpreting the underlying unconscious elements of it.

258
                                                                                    Transference

     IPT is based largely upon Bowlby’s theories of attachment. While recognizing that there
may be unconscious elements which influence an individual’s interpersonal behavior, IPT
focuses on those elements which are accessible to the patient. While a patient may initially
have limited insight and not be aware of the patterns of behavior in which he engages, these
interpersonal patterns are not presumed to be driven primarily by unconscious factors.
Therefore, the therapist can help the patient to appreciate, and subsequently change, his
behavior by examining patterns in the patient’s relationships without the need to ‘interpret’
any unconscious motives which lie behind the patient’s behavior. In simple terms, IPT is
based on the premise that early life experiences have a profound impact on the patient’s
attachment style. A patient’s real-life experiences lead him to his attachment style: in the case
of abusive, critical, or absent relationships with parents, to an insecure attachment; in the
case of warm and supportive relationships with parents, to a more secure attachment. This
style is then pulled through adolescence and adulthood. Though heavily influenced by early
experiences, all of the patient’s relationships over time continue to influence it.
     The attachment model – the working model of relationships – that the patient has developed
is then imposed on current relationships, often inaccurately. In the case of insecure attachments,
the working model makes it difficult for the patient to graciously ask for support and to give it to
others. It takes a great deal of time and much lived experience to change a patient’s fundamental
attachment style, particularly give the time over which it has developed and solidified. Thus IPT,
as a time-limited treatment, is not designed to change attachment style, but rather to help patients
communicate more effectively given their underlying attachment style.
     IPT also differs from psychodynamic approaches because it does not utilize the
therapeutic relationship as the primary means of examining and understanding the
transference, parataxic distortions, or maladaptive working models that the patient imposes
upon relationships. Instead, IPT is concerned with the way the patient manifests these
elements in his current interpersonal relationships. This is possible because all of the same
factors (i.e. transference, parataxic distortions, and maladaptive working models) are
operative in the patient’s relationships outside of therapy. Focusing on the patient’s current
interpersonal relationships is desirable in IPT because it allows the patient and therapist to
work on the most immediate problems the patient is experiencing, and allows the therapy to
focus primarily on rapid symptom resolution rather than intrapsychic change.
     Though IPT focuses on the patient’s current social relationships, and though the
treatment relationship is not a point of intervention in IPT, it cannot be emphasized enough
that the therapeutic relationship is a veritable gold mine of information for the therapist. The
therapist’s experience of the patient provides information about the patient’s attachment and
communication style, informs the therapist about potential problems in therapy and how to
flexibly structure treatment, about the patient’s prognosis, and about specific problems that
the patient is likely to be having with others outside of therapy. Though not directly addressed
in therapy, it is crucial in IPT to have an appreciation of the transference and therapeutic
relationship. This is best understood in IPT as being ‘psychodynamically informed’ as
opposed to being ‘psychodynamically focused’. Being psychodynamically informed is to
acknowledge and consider psychodynamic processes such as transference without discussing
them explicitly with the patient or considering them to be a focus of intervention. Being
psychodynamically focused is not only to acknowledge the presence of transference and
other factors within the therapeutic relationship, but also to discuss them explicitly as the
primary mode of intervention within the treatment.
     The difference between being psychodynamically informed and being psychodynamically
focused in treatment can be illustrated metaphorically (Figure 18.1). In this analogy, the

                                                                                               259
Psychodynamic Processes

sharks represent problematic psychodynamic processes as they relate to the conduct of IPT
or any other therapy. The psychodynamically informed swimmer on the surface of the water
is aware of the sharks, and if they approach too closely will swim away or take appropriate
measures to evade them. The goal of the therapist is to cross with the patient to the other side
of the harbor while avoiding the sharks if at all possible. The scuba diver, on the other hand,
is psychodynamically focused, and is not only prepared to swim with the sharks, but has
the goal of seeking them out. To swim with sharks without being eaten takes many years of
psychodynamic training and a working knowledge of the proper techniques to deal with them
– sharks are very primitive and instinctual creatures with nasty aggressive streaks.




Figure 18.1  Psychodynamics and IPT.


Metaphorically, the goal of treatment is to cross a harbor full of sharks with the patient
without being eaten. The goal in IPT is to get across the harbor by avoiding the sharks;
the goal of psychoanalytic therapy is to root out and interpret the sharks. IPT is well
suited to waters which have a few small sharks; a psychoanalytic approach is necessary
in shark-infested waters as there is simply no way to avoid them all. Swimming in shark-
infested waters is thus a useful metaphor for conceptualizing the difference between
being psychodynamically informed and being psychodynamically focused: to be
psychodynamically informed is to swim above the sharks and to be aware of their presence,
taking evasive action when necessary; to be psychodynamically focused is to swim with the
sharks and to be properly prepared to deal with sharks who bite!

Countertransference
In his writings about countertransference, Freud8 conceptualized it as an unconscious
interference with the therapist’s ability to objectively understand his patients.
Countertransference is the literal counterpart to transference – it involves the transferring of
the therapist’s experiences in early childhood relationships onto the therapist’s relationship
with the patient.9 As with transference, the process is understood to be unconscious. As


260
                                                                          Countertransference

such, Freud regarded countertransference as at best a nuisance, and at times a barrier to the
appropriate conduct of psychotherapy, because it prevented the therapist from objectively
understanding the patient. Countertransference, if active, could lead the therapist to
make inaccurate interpretations to the patient. The means to eliminate or minimize these
countertransferential reactions was for the therapist to undergo analysis himself so that these
processes could be brought into conscious awareness.
     This conceptualization has been broadened by some authors so that it includes all of
the reactions of the therapist to the patient, rather than just those that are believed to be
unconscious and are derived from the therapist’s early experiences.10 Many authors have also
argued that countertransference is as much a factor in therapy as transference, and that the
broader countertransferential reactions of therapists should be examined by the therapists as
part of the therapeutic process.10,11
     Authors such as Ogden12 conceptualize countertransference as psychodynamic
phenomena in which the patient, through the process of projective identification, makes
the therapist ‘feel’ his own intrapsychic experience. This process is the basis of some of the
interventions used in object relations therapy. Similarly, self-psychology acknowledges
countertransference as a pathway to empathy, a concept which is fundamental to some
psychotherapies.13 It is this process of empathic resonance – the product of the patient’s
projection of his experience onto the therapist – which forms the basis for the therapeutic
relationship and subsequent change. In this model, the process is largely unconscious –
the patient’s projections upon the therapist are outside of the patient’s awareness, and the
therapist’s task is to bring them into the patient’s consciousness.
     While recognizing the value of this broader conceptualization of countertransference, in
IPT it is most useful to use a narrower concept. This is important so that a distinction can be
made between those reactions which are ‘native’ to the therapist and those which are elicited
by the patient. Those reactions to others which are intrinsic to the therapist or are ‘classically’
countertransferential do in fact interfere with the therapy, because they cause a distortion of
the therapist’s perception of the patient and his experience.
     To put it in an attachment framework, the therapist’s working model of relationships –
just like the patient’s – is influenced by his cumulative experiences. If this working model is
not an accurate representation of the patient, it will color or distort the relationship between
therapist and patient every bit as much as the relationship model imposed by the patient.
If a therapist tends to have difficulty trusting others, tends to be overly self-reliant, or has a
need to care for others, these tendencies or models will be played out in the therapy unless
the therapist is aware of them and takes steps to counteract them. The obvious corollary
to this is that IPT therapists need to have insight into their own attachment behavior and
communication so that they can minimize the distortions in their interpersonal models and
more accurately understand the experience of their patients. This clearly implies that personal
psychotherapy should be encouraged for all therapists who wish to do IPT well.
     As a complement to the more narrow view of countertransference, IPT also recognizes and
strongly relies on the concept that the patient literally elicits reactions in the therapist during
the course of therapy. This elicitation is not unique to the specific therapist; it is a reaction
that nearly all therapists or people generally would have to the patient. This phenomena is
described in Interpersonal Theory: the patient’s direct and metacommunications in therapy
pull for or elicit complementary responses from the therapist. For example, a patient who
is hostile will likely elicit a hostile response from the therapist; a patient who is passive will
tend to elicit a more dominant response from the therapist (at least initially); a patient who is
dismissive will elicit a similar dismissive reaction from the therapist. These reactions are not

                                                                                              261
Psychodynamic Processes

considered to be countertransferential in IPT; they are natural responses that the patient elicits
in the therapist. By extension, the patient is almost certain to be eliciting similar responses in
others with whom they interact.
      The key distinction in IPT is therefore to distinguish between those reactions that
are generated because of the therapist’s experiences independent of the patient which are
unique to the therapist and his personal experiences, and those that are being elicited by the
patient directly, to which nearly everyone would react. The former reactions, native to the
therapist, are ‘countertransferential’ in IPT; the latter are responses elicited by the patient.
The former are a barrier to a more accurate understanding of the patient and to developing a
therapeutic relationship; the latter are an extremely important way to more fully understand
the patient’s attachment and communication style, and to begin to draw hypotheses about the
interpersonal problems that the patient is having outside of therapy. Countertransference as
it is narrowly conceptualized in IPT actually inhibits the development of empathy because
it interferes with understanding, while appreciating the responses the patient is eliciting
in the therapist (and by extension the responses they almost certainly elicit in others) is
information used in developing a formulation of the patient’s communication problems and
for subsequent intervention.
      This distinction between ‘countertransference’ and ‘elicited response’ is somewhat
arbitrary and artificial, for the therapist (since he is a real human being with real experiences)
always comes to therapy with a few attachment insecurities and slightly distorted relationship
models which are influenced by his previous and current relationships. These interact
with the patient’s models and communications, which in turn influence the perception
that both individuals have of each other. One can almost envision a spiraling maelstrom
of elicited parataxically distorted relationship models whirling around the therapist’s office
with no possibility of determining whose distortion is whose. Rather than engaging in
such therapeutic nihilism, however, it is best in IPT to simplify things to two fundamental
principles: individuals (including therapists) can never fully understand one another; but as
real people (and therapists) we do the best we can, and there is great beauty and value in the
connections we form.
      As a corollary to these concepts of countertransference and elicited responses, structured,
focal, and time-limited treatments such as IPT offer an intervention that minimizes the
impact of the negative responses that patients precipitate in the therapists with whom they
work. Patients who are difficult to relate to or work with may benefit from a time-limited
intervention in part because the time limit minimizes therapist ‘burn out’ by the patient. An
angry borderline patient is much easier to tolerate for 15 sessions as opposed to 4 years. Of
course, these more difficult patients may ultimately require long-term treatment with heroic
therapists. However, the structured nature of IPT often allows the therapist to offer a patient
who might otherwise be labeled as ‘difficult’ or ‘unlikable’ the opportunity for a collaborative
interaction and perhaps his first experience of a warm and caring relationship.

Resistance
In 1892, Freud’s description of ‘Elizabeth von R’ introduced the concept of resistance to
psychotherapists.8 As a construct in psychotherapy, resistance is perhaps best considered
as the patient’s attempts to maintain his intrapsychic status quo. As applied to the analytic
situation, resistance can be broadly construed as any action or attitude of the patient that
impedes the course of the therapy.14 From a psychoanalytic standpoint, resistance is pervasive
in all therapies as it is theorized that all patients have an unconscious desire to avoid change

262
                                                                                   Resistance

and to avoid the recognition of painful, shameful, or embarrassing affect, memories, or
fantasies. Fromm-Reichmann3 defines resistance as:
   the reactivation, outside of the patient’s awareness, of the motivating powers
   which were responsible for the patient’s original pathogenic dissociative and
   repressive processes.
In her view, it is an unconscious process which protects individuals from overwhelming or
unacceptable anxiety, and is a mechanism of literal ‘self-preservation’. Psychological defenses
outside of the patient’s awareness are responsible for the resistance. In therapy, resistance
is manifest in many ways, but all are characterized by avoidance in one form or another of
issues which cause the patient to feel anxious.
    A primary goal of psychoanalytically oriented psychotherapy is to uncover the genesis
of a patient’s anxiety – i.e. the unacceptable underlying impulses which the patient is unable
to successfully defend against – and it is therefore focused on revealing and understanding
the nature of the patient’s resistances. In contrast to other therapies that evade or ignore
resistance, psychoanalytically oriented therapies seek to uncover the ‘cause, purpose, mode,
and history’ of resistances.11 Freud4 stated that the working through of resistances:
   is a part of the work which effects the greatest changes in a patient and which
   distinguishes analytic treatment from any other kind of treatment.
In IPT, it is the conscious elements of resistance that are therapeutically important. In simple
terms, ‘resistance’ in IPT means nothing more than a patient’s natural inclination to avoid
change. There is no need in IPT to pathologize it; all humans are resistant to change to some
degree, and it is a natural and normal reaction. Those patients with less secure attachment
styles will be less likely to adapt well to change, and have likely had bad experiences with
change previously. Their reactions are therefore understood as a natural reaction, and as an
extension of their attachment style. There is no need in IPT to invoke a more complex model,
and viewing the patient as actively attempting to undermine or resist therapy is not only not
necessary, but is detrimental to the therapeutic relationship.
     As an example, what might in psychodynamic psychotherapy be labeled ‘resistance’
is often apparent in situations in which treatment is compulsory – patients who are
legally required to be in treatment but who do not want to be may intentionally withhold
information, refuse to answer questions, or be generally uncooperative with treatment,
and be fully aware that they are doing so. In IPT, the therapeutic perspective is that this is
a normal and expected reaction given the patient’s experience to date. Why should he be
any more trusting of the therapists than other authority figures, many of whom have been
unreliable or untrustworthy. The dismissing or fearful attachment style has developed
because the patient has been in many relationships in which he could not trust others, or if he
did, that trust was abused. What would be unusual would be if the patient suddenly entered
therapy securely attached and fully trusting. Other examples might be a patient involved in
marital therapy who intentionally withholds information about a current affair, an adolescent
patient who refuses to speak in a family therapy session, or a patient who intentionally misses
an appointment because he is angry at the therapist. Again, these are understood in IPT
as flowing from a maladaptive attachment style that the patient has come by honestly. The
dissembling, refusal to cooperate, or acting out is communication based on a maladaptive
and insecure attachment style.
     ‘Resistance’ in IPT can also be understood as a natural reaction to change that is common
to all individuals, even the most securely attached. This reaction is particularly common
among psychotherapy patients, as the fear of the unknown, and the fear of change, is often

                                                                                           263
Psychodynamic Processes

what drives patients to seek treatment. It can even be conceptualized as an acute crisis – a
Role Transition. This difficulty in changing behavior is conceptualized in IPT as something
that the patient is aware of and has come by honestly – in other words, the patient’s real-
life experiences have led to an understandable fear of particular kinds of change. This is
influenced in large part by the patient’s attachment experiences and his attachment style.
For instance, if the patient has had real experiences of rejection by others, it is completely
understandable that he would have difficulty in forming new relationships, and would feel
that doing so would be very threatening. A patient who has had experiences with others
in which he has been abused would have a natural and understandable fear of being in a
position in which he has to trust others. As with Bowlby’s concept of attachment behavior,
this is based upon real-life experiences, and does not require unconscious processes.
     In IPT, the therapeutic response which this conscious fear of change calls forth is
very different from that which is indicated in psychodynamic psychotherapy. Rather
than intervening by interpreting the patient’s unconscious resistance, the IPT therapist
can respond to the patient’s difficulties with empathy. Given the patient’s experiences, it is
little wonder that he finds a particular kind of change difficult. The IPT therapist’s job is
to understand the difficulty, to empathize with the patient, and to help problem solve and
provide positive reinforcement for attempts at change. As a stable attachment figure who
provides the patient with unconditional positive regard, the therapist can empathically
facilitate change on a conscious level.
     In sum, people change for one of two reasons. Either their suffering has become
intolerable, or they are able to recognize that they will benefit from the change. The latter
requires a fair amount of insight and a high capacity for delayed gratification – changes such
as subjecting oneself to graduate school to facilitate a long-term goal would fall into this
category. Nearly all psychotherapy patients, however, change because they are in intolerable
circumstances – they come to treatment because they are suffering, not because they are
seeking greater insight or self-actualization and are eager to undergo a lengthy and expensive
process. Even in Iowa, the complaint that, ‘I’m suffering because I’m having an awful dispute
with my spouse’ is heard far more frequently in the therapist’s office than the statement, ‘I’m
here for therapy because I want to be self-actualized!’
     In medicine, decisions are made with reference to a ‘risk–benefit’ assessment. In this
process, the desired clinical outcome, e.g. abolition of a bacterial infection with antibiotics, is
pursued using a treatment at a predetermined dose or level based on the empirical literature
and clinical experience. Just as some patients may be sensitive to the average recommended
doses of antibiotics, some patients may also be sensitive to therapeutic interventions which
are designed to foster interpersonal change. As the dose of antibiotics may need to be
decreased for some patients, so the pacing of therapy may need to be modified for patients
for whom change is difficult. This type of ‘resistance’ or sensitivity to change calls not for
interpretation but for empathy, and for positive reinforcement of the change that the patient
is able to attempt.

Conclusion
IPT is subject to the same psychodynamic processes that affect all psychotherapies and
all clinical interactions. In IPT these are generally not specifically addressed as part of the
treatment unless they appear to threaten the patient’s ability to engage in treatment. All
of the processes, however, are important as sources of information for the therapist, and
understanding them is integral to IPT.

264
                                                                                 References

References
 1.	 Brenner C. An Elementary Textbook of Psychoanalysis. 1973, New York: Anchor Press.
 2.	 Freud S. The history of the psychoanalytic movement, in Freud S (ed.) The Basic Writings
     of Sigmund Freud. 1938, New York: Random House.
 3.	 Fromm-Reichmann F. Principles of Intensive Psychotherapy. 1960, Chicago: University of
     Chicago Press.
 4.	 Freud S. Remembering, repeating, and working through, in Strachey J (ed.) Standard
     Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud. 1962, London: Hogarth
     Press.
 5.	 Malan DH. A Study of Brief Psychotherapy. 1975, New York: Plenum.
 6.	 Sullivan HS. The Interpersonal Theory of Psychiatry. 1953, New York: Norton.
 7.	 Bowlby J. Attachment. Attachment and Loss. Vol. 1. 1969, New York: Basic Books.
 8.	 Freud S. The Complete Psychological Works. 1946, London: Hogarth Press.
 9.	 Freud S. The future prospects of psycho-analytic therapy, in Strachey J (ed.) Standard
     Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud. 1962, London: Hogarth
     Press.
10.	 Abend S. Countertransference and psychoanalytic technique. Psychoanalytic Quarterly,
     1989, 58: 374–395.
11.	 Greenson R. The Technique and Practice of Psychoanalysis. 1967, New York: International
     Universities Press.
12.	 Ogden TH. The concept of internal object relations. International Journal of
     Psychoanalysis, 1983, 64: 227–235.
13.	 Kohut H. The Analysis of the Self. 1971, New York: International Universities Press.
14.	 Strean HS. Essentials of Psychoanalysis. 1994, New York: Brunner Mazel.




                                                                                         265
                                                                  19
Applications of Interpersonal
Psychotherapy
Introduction                                                                                  266
IPT for Depression                                                                            266
IPT for Bipolar Disorder                                                                      268
IPT for Non-affective Disorders                                                               269
Conclusion                                                                                    277
References                                                                                    278


Introduction
Interpersonal Psychotherapy (IPT) has been easily adapted to different populations because
of its universally applicable interpersonal orientation. The three IPT Problem Areas
are relevant to many different diagnostic categories, relationship problems, and distress
generally. Because of its flexibility and range, once the basic IPT is model is mastered, clinicians
should be able to easily apply it to a variety of populations and disorders. It is advisable,
however, to develop expertise in the particular area in which IPT is being used: e.g. to have
experience with adolescents if applying IPT to adolescents, perinatal women if applying to
postpartum depression, or geriatric patients if applying IPT to older patients.

IPT for Depression
IPT for Adolescent Depression
IPT has been adapted for use with adolescents.1–3 IPT is efficacious in treating adolescent
depression, and a number of randomized controlled clinical trials have demonstrated
its efficacy.4–6 Key modifications of IPT for adolescents address developmental aspects,
including the emerging autonomy of the adolescent and the development of more intimate
and affiliative relationships. The need to integrate the patient’s unique family ecology into the
treatment is also emphasized.
     IPT for adolescents typically utilizes a 12–16-session model; within this there is scope
to integrate the patient’s parent(s) into the therapeutic process during both the Initial/
Assessment and Middle Phases. IPT has been validated for children aged 9 and above when
a parent or caregiver is included throughout treatment.7 All of the adolescent modifications
utilize more psychoeducation and interventions such as communication and problem
solving in addition to regular mood monitoring.

IPT in Late-life Depression
Reynolds and colleagues have adapted IPT for geriatric patients.8 Their modifications place
particular emphasis upon Grief and Loss and Role Transitions. This includes complex
266
                                                                         IPT for Depression

themes such as retirement, aging, and distress when one partner becomes ill or shows signs
of dementia. IPT is usually provided in shorter sessions and is flexible with problems such as
hearing impairment or decreased mobility.
    There is a great deal of research supporting IPT for older adults,8–10 including the
Maintenance Therapies for Late Life Depression study, a randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial comparing nortriptyline, IPT (alone or in combination) and treatment as
usual.11 The IPT-nortriptyline combination was superior to the other conditions; patients in
the 60–70-year-old category fared better than patients 70 years and older.

IPT for the Cognitively Impaired Elderly
Many depressed geriatric patients show evidence of cognitive decline such as memory loss or
impaired executive dysfunction. The latter deficit is a common precipitant of Role Disputes
between patients and caregiving family members. These can occur because caregivers often
misattribute features of executive dysfunction as willful opposition. Miller and colleagues
adapted IPT for the cognitively impaired elderly by engaging both caregivers and identified
patients throughout therapy.12,13 This approach uses flexible individual or joint meetings as
the clinical situation dictates. A great emphasis is placed on providing the caregiver with
extensive education about depression, dementing illnesses, cognitive impairment and its
potential effect upon interpersonal functioning. IPT with the cognitively impaired works
towards a ‘steady state’, after which the frequency of visits can be lengthened. As cognitive
impairment worsens, therapy is restructured to address the emerging challenges for the
patient and his family.

IPT for Perinatal Women
A number of studies have used IPT for perinatal women and their partners. These
include IPT for pregnant women14–17 and for the postpartum.18,19 Perinatal modifications
include the integration of partners,20 the addition of ethnographic interviewing
as a means of enhancing engagement in treatment,16,21 and groups for postpartum
depression.22,23 General modifications include a focus on psychoeducation about child
development and perinatal sexual functioning, and recognition of perinatal losses that
might impact the current depression. IPT is being used in clinical settings for infertility
and pregnancy loss.

IPT for Dysthymic Disorders
IPT has also been adapted for patients with dysthymic disorder.24 In the original description
of this work nearly two decades ago, the chronicity of the symptoms of dysthymia were
believed to make it inappropriate to use an acute interpersonal focus for IPT; thus a now
abandoned Problem Area labeled ‘iatrogenic Role Transition’ was created. Rather than being
developed collaboratively, this Problem Area was imposed on the patient by the therapist,
and was conceptualized as a Role Transition from a depressed to less depressed state. This
imposition allowed the therapist to avoid using the now discarded interpersonal deficits or
sensitivities Problem Area, which was recognized even in early work with IPT to be a far less
productive area on which to focus. The equivocal evidence of efficacy using the iatrogenic
Role Transition Problem Area suggests that it was no better than the interpersonal deficits
area it was intended to replace.
    Initial research did not support the efficacy for IPT for dysthymic disorder.25 In a
randomized controlled trial comparing IPT, sertraline, and a brief supportive psychotherapy

                                                                                          267
Applications of Interpersonal Psychotherapy

control, sertraline alone or combined with IPT were equally efficacious, and both were
superior to IPT alone, which was in turn superior to brief supportive psychotherapy. In a
later trial, IPT was compared with brief supportive psychotherapy for dysthymic patients
with comorbid alcohol abuse. IPT was superior in treatment of mood symptoms and had a
modest impact on alcohol use.26
    Since the original description of IPT for dysthymia, the Problem Area of interpersonal
deficits/sensitivities has been eliminated; instead, it is understood in IPT that long-standing
fearful attachment is a far better way to conceptualize this pattern of interpersonal behavior.
There is now much greater emphasis on developing an acute problem focus in collaboration
with the patient rather than focusing on a chronic problem – there is nearly always some
acute crisis that leads a patient to finally seek out therapy even in the context of chronic
illness. That acute crisis – a Grief and Loss issue, an Interpersonal Dispute, or a Role
Transition – should be the focus of IPT.
    Rather than imposing an ‘iatrogenic’ Problem Area on patients with chronic
depression or dysthymia, therapists should listen well and help the patient determine
what acute problem led them to seek therapy at that particular moment. Though
dysthymia is chronic, there are nearly always specific events which influence patients
to seek help – an understanding consistent with the theoretical underpinnings of
IPT. Iatrogenically imposing anything on the patient runs completely counter to the
spirit of IPT, therefore the therapist’s task with dysthymic patients is to collaboratively
identify the acute stressor and focus on that acute Problem Area, recognizing that
treatment may be lengthier because of the patient’s paucity of interpersonal support and
attachment insecurities. Concluding Acute Treatment, rather than terminating it, and
the transition into Maintenance Treatment with IPT also play a critical role with these
patients.


IPT for Bipolar Disorder
While the mainstay of management of bipolar disorder is medication, psychological
therapies can assist bipolar patients to make appropriate modifications of lifestyle habits
to better manage their illnesses. Disturbances in circadian rhythms, such as altered sleep
habits, destabilize bipolar disorder.27 Using this as the basis for modification, Frank et al.
have integrated social rhythm therapy with IPT to create Interpersonal and Social Rhythm
Therapy (IPSRT) for bipolar disorder.28
    Rather than a modification, IPSRT is best considered a combination therapy. It is a
comprehensive psychosocial management approach to bipolar disorder, combining IPT
with psychoeducation and behavioral interventions to stabilize daily routines. The IPT
component of IPSRT assists patients to adapt to and cope with the multiple psychosocial
and relationship problems associated with bipolar disorder. There is a special emphasis in
the IPT component of IPSRT on the Problem Area of Grief and Loss to address the impact
of the illness on the healthy self. A randomized controlled trial of IPSRT demonstrated
onset of fewer affective episodes during a 2-year follow-up period, although the effect
was greater for depressive episodes.28 The large-scale Systematic Treatment Enhancement
Program for Bipolar Disorder (STEP-BD) compared cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT),
IPSRT and Family Focused Therapy in subjects with bipolar disorder who were on specific
standardized medication regimens. At 12-month follow-up, all three groups demonstrated
similar recovery rates and all were superior to the control arm (a brief psychoeducation
intervention).29

268
                                                                IPT for Non-affective Disorders

IPT for Non-affective Disorders
IPT for Eating Disorders
IPT was first utilized in a large clinical trial for bulimia nervosa by Fairburn and co-
workers.30,31 While CBT was superior to IPT at the end of Acute Treatment, IPT was found to
be equally beneficial at long-term follow-up,32 a finding since replicated.33 The IPT condition
used in this trial was extensively modified to remove any behavioral components, leading
many to conclude that a version of IPT that integrated the behavioral interventions commonly
used with eating disorders might have greater efficacy. This comprehensive approach has since
been described and appears to have great promise.34 Group IPT for eating disorders has been
described by Wilfley et al.35 Apart from demonstrating the benefits of IPT for this population,
this work provided a valuable template for the application of IPT in groups.36–38
     The efficacy of IPT for anorexia nervosa is less convincing. To date one randomized controlled
trial showed that IPT and CBT were inferior to treatment as usual.39 One critique of this
finding is the assertion that anorexia nervosa requires a comprehensive management approach
incorporating skilled medical, family, and individual psychological management. Therefore an
integrated approach to treatment is likely to be superior over stand-alone interventions.
     In our detailed discussion of the adaptations of IPT for post-traumatic stress disorder
(PTSD) below, it seems clear that there should be a paradigm shift in psychotherapy
development and research for many psychiatric disorders. Rather than using IPT, CBT, or
any other therapy as a ‘stand-alone’ treatment, integrated or sequential approaches which
utilize behavioral, interpersonal, dynamic, and mindfulness techniques and tactics should be
developed and tested. These integrated approaches are far more likely to be of benefit with all
patients, particularly those with eating disorders, PTSD, anxiety disorders, substance abuse
disorders, and personality disorders. Good surgeons use a variety of instruments with each
case as the need dictates, good psychotherapists should do the same.

IPT for Social Phobia
Lipsitz and colleagues adapted IPT for social phobia.40 Despite long-standing impairment,
nearly all patients with social phobia, like those with dysthymia, have an acute crisis that leads
them to seek treatment. It may be a relationship dispute or transition which might seem trivial
to some, but for these patients it carries great importance given their paucity of social contacts.
As with dysthymic patients, it is the task of the IPT therapist to listen well and to help the patient
identify the acute crisis, recognizing that therapy with these patients, most of whom have fearful
attachment styles, will require a longer course of Acute Treatment. Concluding Acute Treatment
rather than terminating it, and the transition into Maintenance Treatment are critical. A small-
scale open trial indicated some potential efficacy of IPT for social phobia,40 although a larger-
scale randomized controlled trial found that IPT was superior to placebo but inferior to CBT.41

IPT for Borderline Personality Disorder
IPT has been utilized with patients with borderline personality disorder (BPD).42–44
Modifications include providing treatment in two phases. In the first acute phase, the
patient receives 18 IPT sessions over 16 weeks. Goals are to establish a therapeutic
alliance, limit self-destructive behaviors, explain the IPT model, and provide initial
symptomatic relief. If the patient tolerates this first phase, a continuation phase of 16
sessions in as many weeks follows. Goals of the continuation phase treatment include

                                                                                                 269
Applications of Interpersonal Psychotherapy

developing more adaptive interpersonal skills, and maintaining a strong therapeutic
alliance as termination approaches. Patients with BPD thus can receive up to 34 IPT
sessions over 8 months.
     A trial including 35 patients with BDP and major depression compared fluoxetine plus
CBT to fluoxetine and IPT over 32 weeks.44 Apart from some minor differences in quality of
life and interpersonal functioning, there was no difference in outcome between the treatment
groups. A second study including 55 patients with BPD and major depressive disorder
compared fluoxetine and clinical management to fluoxetine plus IPT over 32 weeks. In this
study, remission rates did not differ significantly between subgroups. Combined therapy was
more effective in reducing anxiety and improving self-reported social functioning. Treating
borderline patients with IPT that is terminated does not appear to be more efficacious than good
clinical care. It is intuitively obvious that borderline patients are likely to react negatively to a forced
termination and that their long-standing problems are more likely to require longer treatment.
     The adaptation of IPT for BPD highlights some of the conceptual problems in the
earlier work with IPT. The theoretical basis for IPT emphasizes the need to focus on acute
interpersonal stressors, understanding that underlying attachment and personality issues
complicate treatment, but are not a focus of IPT because the duration of the time-limited
treatment is too short for substantial change in attachment to occur.
     In the original adaptation of IPT for BPD, an additional Problem Area called ‘self-image’ was
added.42 In contrast to the acute problem foci for which IPT has demonstrated efficacy, this ‘self-
image’ problem area was a long-standing problem; moreover, it was intrapsychically oriented rather
than interpersonally focused. As such, the self-image problem area, like the discarded interpersonal
sensitivities/deficits area, is not theoretically or practically consistent with IPT. An approach
in which borderline personality disorder and attachment insecurity were conceptualized as
complications of treatment which focused on an acute interpersonal problem – a Role Transition,
Interpersonal Dispute, or Grief and Loss issue – would be consistent with IPT and would be
expected to have an impact on mood and interpersonal functioning, though it would also
be expected to have much less impact on the patient’s underlying attachment style and personality.
     Another conceptual and practical problem with all of the adaptations of IPT for
patients with BPD was that the therapy was terminated. This presents enormous problems
generally and with IPT specifically. Generally speaking, terminating treatment under any
circumstances with patients with BPD causes iatrogenic distress. As noted throughout this
guide, termination of therapy shifts the focus from interpersonal crises outside of therapy to
a crisis within the therapeutic relationship. To terminate treatment with a borderline patient
precipitates a real abandonment crisis. The therapist is literally abandoning the patient –
there is no way to sugar-coat this fact. To terminate after a longer period of treatment (34
weeks in some cases) only intensifies the significance of the abandonment. Fuel is added to
the fire with borderline patients when the therapy is continued weekly and then abruptly
terminated. Discussion of termination does not mitigate their experience of termination as
a real abandonment, because it is an abandonment. There is no theoretical or practical reason
to terminate treatment, and every reason with insecurely attached patients to make a smooth
transition from the Conclusion of Acute Treatment to Maintenance Treatment.

IPT for Post-traumatic Stress Disorder
IPT has been applied to the treatment of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) by a number
of clinicians.45–50 The ways in which adaptations to IPT have been made are well illustrated
with PTSD. We describe these with PTSD as an example of the processes that can be used to
modify IPT for other affective and non-affective disorders.
270
                                                              IPT for Non-affective Disorders

Introduction to PTSD
The psychological and physiological effects of traumatic stress are neither uniform nor inevitable.
Complex biological, psychological, and social factors (both before and after the trauma)
determine its ultimate impact. The types of psychological traumatic stress are also variable.
    There is a growing body of evidence for the treatment for PTSD. Antidepressants,
particularly the serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), help to reduce the core symptoms of
PTSD and are recognized as mainstream treatment.51 Van Etten and Taylor52 analyzed 61
treatment trials for PTSD, including pharmacotherapy and psychotherapies such as Exposure
Therapy and Dynamic Psychotherapy. Overall, there was greater efficacy for Exposure
Therapy than for any other treatment. Other reviews of psychotherapeutic approaches53
have shown significant improvements in PTSD symptoms both post-treatment and at follow
up.54,55 Recent reviews support a combination of treatments including psychoeducation,
cognitive and behavioral techniques, and substantive interventions for comorbid mood,
substance use, and anxiety disorders.53,56,57
    Despite the evidence supporting psychotherapy, academicians have argued that ‘there is
no gold standard treatment program for PTSD, nor has any particular treatment approach
received universal acceptance among clinicians’.58 Moreover, there appears to be a general
consensus that individual treatment modalities are not effective in addressing the full range
of clinical problems, such as the interpersonal difficulties frequently observed in traumatized
individuals.58,59 While these observations strongly suggest that the interpersonal focus of
IPT is likely to address the interpersonal stressors faced by individuals with PTSD, they also
suggest that IPT is likely to be more effective as part of an integrated treatment that combines
interpersonal, behavioral, cognitive, and exposure-based approaches.

IPT for PTSD – conceptual issues
A number of authors have described phases of psychological response to traumatic events.
According to Horowitz,60 trauma survivors progress through phases of ‘outcry’, ‘denial’,
‘intrusion’, ‘working through’, and ‘completion.’ Herman61 has conceptualized treatment
interventions for PTSD in several phases which parallel the psyche’s processing of trauma.
She advocates for the creation of an environment of safety which facilitates a period of
‘remembrance and mourning’ and ultimately a process of ‘reconnection’. The latter emphasizes
the need for an interpersonal focus to trauma. Van der Kolk and others also advocate a phased
treatment program for PTSD.62 Their approach includes phases of stabilization, reconstruction
of trauma-disrupted cognitive schemas, reconnection, and enhanced interpersonal efficacy.
     Based on this work, a conceptual approach to the traumatized patient emphasizing a
hierarchy of needs akin to the theory of Maslow has been developed63 (Figure 19.1). Each
dimension implies a therapeutic intervention. Immediate needs such as safety and a stable
ecology are the first priority. After traumatic stress, particularly related to manmade disasters,
these two needs are the primary focus of intervention within traumatized communities.
     Following this, the traumatized patient seeks some sort of physiological homeostasis and
relief from psychological distress. Beyond this are questions of an existential nature such as the
meaning of traumatic events, notions of retributive and restorative justice, and a resolution or
sense of closure over an event. Many of the latter have significant interpersonal components.

Adapting IPT for PTSD
In light of this phased approach to PTSD and in recognition of the interpersonal aspects of
trauma, IPT has been adapted for PTSD by a number of investigators.45–49 All three of the IPT
Problem Areas are salient for this population.
                                                                                              271
Applications of Interpersonal Psychotherapy


                                               Security

                                               Ecology

                                             Homeostasis


                                               Distress


                                              Meaning

                                                Justice


                                              Resolution


Figure 19.1  Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) hierarchy

Interpersonal Disputes may exacerbate the course of PTSD or arise as a consequence
of it, particularly the hyperarousal and avoidant symptoms (Table 19.1). PTSD has a
detrimental effect on self-awareness, intimacy, sexuality, and interpersonal communication,
all of which are key elements for the maintenance of healthy interpersonal relationships
and the avoidance of conflict.64 It can also impact Role Transitions or ‘family life stages’
including courtship, marriage, childbirth and childrearing, and retirement.65 These various
developmental tasks and their associated changes in family and marital functioning are
frequently disrupted by avoidance or PTSD symptom intensification. The core issues
underlying these crises derive from an inability to develop trust, a sense of guilt, and feelings
of detachment or estrangement from others, all of which are associated with PTSD.

Table 19.1  Interpersonal Disputes arising from post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)

 Symptom cluster                 Examples of Interpersonal Disputes

 Intrusive symptoms              Problems around trauma-specific phobias
                                 Unable to share bed due to nightmares

 Avoidant symptoms               Avoiding important social engagement
                                 Poor communication style
                                 Inhibited problem solving style

 Hyperarousal symptoms           Irritability
                                 Aggressive outbursts or episodic dyscontrol
                                 Hostile interactions


One of the most difficult tasks facing the trauma survivor is the adjustment to a new internal
psychological state in the aftermath of trauma. Janoff-Bulman66 described it as a process of
adjusting to the ‘shattered assumptions’ of the world that the trauma survivor experiences.
Prior to a traumatic event, the world is predictable and safe, and the individual has confidence
in his capacity to participate in it. In the wake of trauma, these assumptions are ‘shattered’ and
the individual faces an internal and external world that is unpredictable and fragmented. This
abstract existential concept can be addressed as a Role Transition which focuses on a pre-
272
                                                              IPT for Non-affective Disorders

trauma and a post-trauma role. In the case of recently developed PTSD, the adjustment to a
potentially chronic illness process and its treatment may challenge a patient’s self-concept in
his ‘old (pre-trauma) role’ as well as necessitate a modification of his expectations of self and
future in the ‘new (post-trauma) role’, particularly when poor control of symptoms means that
return to work or to a previous level of social functioning may be unrealistic.
     This conceptualization of the reaction to trauma is consistent with the attachment model
undergirding IPT. The pre-trauma attachment (more secure) is shifted to a post-trauma
attachment style (more insecure) because the working model of others has shifted. The
trauma negatively impacts the internal model of trusting others and asking for help, and is a
tragic illustration that current or recent events can impact attachment.
     Grief and Loss is also a frequently used Problem Area when treating PTSD. Bereavement,
particularly if it is sudden or unexpected, is associated with PTSD in between 9–36 percent
of cases.67 Bereavement resulting from a loss due to a traumatic event may constitute an
acute crisis that may precipitate or exacerbate symptoms of PTSD. When PTSD symptoms
have been complicated by ‘survivor guilt’, the IPT techniques used with Grief and Loss help
patients identify with the concrete aspects of the loss, such as clarifying ways their attachment
needs may be met by others in their remaining social support networks. This approach de-
emphasizes in-depth discussion of the existential meaning of an individual’s survival and loss,
and instead focuses on helping the patient identify ways that his current attachment needs can
be met.
     It is well established that survivors of trauma, particularly combat veterans,
experience long-term problems in interpersonal relationships. PTSD adversely impacts
individuals’ attachment styles; pre-traumatic attachment may be altered by the traumatic
experience, leading to difficulties in current attachment and interpersonal functioning.64
While the old Problem Area of interpersonal sensitivity/deficits was once used as a way to
define this vulnerability, current work with IPT places it squarely in the realm of fearful
or dismissive attachment. As noted, trauma impacts attachment, greatly diminishing
the patient’s perceived sense of safety and security, and his ability to trust others and ask
for help when distressed. This fearful or dismissive style exacerbates the acute problems
that drive the patient to seek treatment. Thus the long-term disruption to interpersonal
functioning arising from trauma is conceptualized as the result of a maladaptive
attachment style; treatment is focused on acute crises in the context of this attachment
style.
     A trauma-based maladaptive attachment style is relevant to nearly all patients with
PTSD, and is directly discussed with all patients as sequelae of the trauma, framed
in terms of difficulties trusting others and making oneself vulnerable. Therapeutic
interventions emphasize the impact of PTSD symptoms upon interpersonal functioning
and attempt to define these processes as being as much a part of the disorder as
flashbacks or nightmares.

Group IPT for PTSD
While individual therapy is the most common approach to PTSD, group psychotherapy is a
valuable adjunct. Group psychotherapy is well suited to addressing the impact of PTSD on
an individual’s relationship with others, as the modality provides the opportunity for social
support, social reintegration, and interpersonal learning.68,69 The challenge for the therapist
working with groups is to create a ‘healing matrix’, where patients can risk exposure and
restore a sense of self-worth, feeling safe, and feeling connected to others.70 In IPT terms, the
group must be secure and have a high degree of inclusion.

                                                                                             273
Applications of Interpersonal Psychotherapy

Case example 19.1: James
James was a 56-year-old man who had recently retired from his liquor store business
after obtaining a war service pension. He had served in the Australian Navy in the
Vietnam War, and had volunteered to be a gunner in a US Army helicopter regiment.
James’s combat exposure had been heavy; his regiment had likely been responsible for the
deaths of dozens of Vietnamese combatants and civilians, as their role had largely been
offensive operations. James felt he was responsible for much of the carnage as he had oper-
ated one of his helicopter’s M60 machine guns. Despite this, James’s most distressing recol-
lections were of incidents where there was a threat to himself or his comrades. His father
had fought in the Second World War as an infantryman in the Pacific and had suffered with
severe anxiety throughout most of his adult life before dying of complications of alcoholism
in his forties. James had volunteered for combat ‘to do my duty like my father did’.
After his military service he became a prison officer. He remained in that role for 20
years, running a high-security prison block and dealing with the worst offenders. He was
involved in a number of violent incidents and suicides. James had taken early retire-
ment 5 years prior to seeking treatment and had bought a liquor store. The business had
struggled because of James’s worsening irritability and avoidant behavior. This had led to
escalating levels of alcohol consumption.
James had already completed a CBT program for PTSD. He had obtained some symp­
tomatic benefit from it, and was an active group participant. However, James had
required seven admissions to hospital in the 6 months following completion of the CBT
program. These had invariably been associated with conflicts with his wife or step-
daughter, all in the context of alcohol abuse. He had taken antidepressant medication,
but it had only been of modest benefit.
James lived with his wife, although his step-daughter frequently visited for long periods.
His wife had been treated for depression and his step-daughter had suffered from eating
disorder symptoms, episodes of deliberate self-harm and mood swings. His first marriage
had ended in estrangement and there had been domestic violence involved. He had one
son from that marriage, from whom he was completely estranged. He had been the step-
father of his step-daughter from age 8. Her sister had died in adolescence from a brain
tumor, which had heralded her eating disorder symptoms and her mother’s chronic
depression (Figure 19.2).

                                    Interpersonal Circle
                                             Janet
                                             (wife)
                                 Phoebe
                                 (step-daughter)




                                            Intimates


                   Jacob
                    (son)             Close supports
                                                           Extended supports


Figure 19.2  Interpersonal Circle – James

274
                                                                IPT for Non-affective Disorders

James was referred for group IPT based upon his previous experience in the CBT group,
but also because of the perceived role of the family conflict in his symptom exacerba-
tions. During the pre-group individual session he had presented as guarded, prickly, and
controlling. He frequently peppered his narrative with expletives, but had become tearful
and distressed when discussing his wife’s and step-daughter’s ‘problems’. As one ther­
apist had noted:

    James presents as having no redeeming features until he talks about his wife
    and step-daughter, and then his façade just crumbles and he is like a scared
    little kid.
James was diagnosed with PTSD, although much of his functional impairment seemed
associated with comorbid narcissistic personality traits, depressive symptoms, and the
effects of alcohol abuse. He was abstinent from alcohol at the start of treatment. During
the Interpersonal Formulation in the individual intake session (Figure 19.3), James noted
that the acute problem which had led him to therapy was an Interpersonal Dispute
involving his step-daughter.
James was on time for the first group session and chose a seat with his back against a
corner of the room. As other group members arrived he became visibly more vigilant
and agitated. When asked to introduce himself to the group he quickly snapped, ‘I have a
problem with my kid and I’m no bloody good in dealing with people.’
During the middle sessions of the group, James would occasionally respond to questions
and began to disclose more about his step-daughter. He said

    I could never be close to her because of all the kid molesters I had to deal
    with in the jails, and when her sister died, I just had nothing to say. I have
    seen death all around ... hell I even caused a lot of death, so I had nothing to
    say.



          Biological factors        Social factors                 Psychological factors
          56 years old              Fair support from partner      Distant father
          Male                      Not much social support        Trouble trusting others
          Family history of         War and combat veteran         Angry
           depression and           Estranged from son             Vigilant to danger
           anxiety
          Alcohol use
          Antidepressant
            medication



           Cultural factors
           Military
                                             James              Spiritual factors
           Had to ‘do his duty’
           Expected to be strong,                               Betrayed by God
            no feelings

                                 Acute Interpersonal Crisis
                Interpersonal Dispute (step-daughter and wife); Role Transition



                                            Distress
                                            (PTSD)

Figure 19.3  Interpersonal Formulation – James

                                                                                             275
Applications of Interpersonal Psychotherapy

Another group member confronted him, asking, ‘Mate, did you think you were a father to
her back then?’ to which James replied angrily, ‘About as much as mine was to me.’
The group therapist tried to elicit the specific details of interactions between James
and his step-daughter. This was difficult because of James’s reluctance to participate in
the group process. When invited to role play an interaction with his step-daughter, he
­responded, ‘I told you, I’m not doing any of that garbage. If you insist on it, I’m leaving
 right now.’ Rather than abandon the point entirely, the second group therapist asked
 James if he could remember what he actually said to his step-daughter, so as to recount
 an Interpersonal Incident. When he described this, it was apparent that his communica-
 tion was both vague and inflammatory. The therapist invited group members to offer
 suggestions for other styles of communication that may have been better. It was sug-
 gested by another member that James might want to set up a conversation with his step-
 daughter to practice less confrontational communication. The therapist called attention
 to James’s affect during the interaction within the group and highlighted that his distress
 seemed to indicate he cared for his step-daughter.
In the following session, James reported that he had a conversation with his step-
daughter and that they had been able to talk about events, and even about her sister’s
death. Three days later, though, they had another argument. In clarifying the argument,
it became apparent that James had lost control when his irritability and ‘short fuse’ esca-
lated. As he described and attempted to justify it: ‘It’s just like when they show all that
Afghanistan war stuff on TV, I just go off.’ Another group member asked, ‘Buddy, how
do you deal with the Afghanistan stuff?’ to which James replied, ‘I do the breathing and
distraction stuff earlier rather than later, so I can avoid a blowup.’ One of the therapists
suggested that perhaps a similar behavioral strategy could be applied to interactions
with his step-daughter.
In subsequent discussions, James’s disclosed his shame and sadness at ‘being such a bad
father’. The therapist suggested that he was now in the midst of a Role Transition with
his step-daughter, and that the ‘new role’ required the development of better communi-
cation skills, problem solving, and also attention to his emotional responses to her, which
were becoming warmer and more affectionate.
In later sessions, James’s lack of social supports arose as an issue. The therapist high-
lighted that attending the group sessions and disclosing information was an achieve-
ment and should serve as testimony to his ability to establish some social supports
outside of family and healthcare providers. James was referred for follow-up with his
individual therapist, who was familiar with IPT. At the conclusion of the group, James
was still having periodic conflicts within his family, but there had been no escalation in
aggression, substance use, or readmission to hospital.
James was an individual whose pre-trauma life experience combined with three decades
of interpersonal failure and considerable morbidity in his immediate support network.
He was difficult to engage with, and engendered a lot of negative responses in his treat-
ing clinicians and in the group members, as his interpersonal style was confrontational
and hostile, at times bordering on threatening. These could have been significant barriers
to empathic understanding of his experience and the formation of a workable thera­
peutic relationship to all but the most skilled therapist. Working with him in a group set-
ting, however, allowed some of this to be diffused, particularly as other group members
had experienced similar trauma and were therefore seen by James as people who could
legitimately understand him.
Using group IPT to intervene directly with the current interpersonal difficulties that were
meaningful to James and clearly relevant to symptom course enabled him to interact
more adaptively with his immediate attachment figures and to elicit responses that
helped him gratify his attachment needs. He had clearly sought interpersonal


276
                                                                                    Conclusion

inter­actions, either with his family members or professional caregivers. His pattern of
inter­action prior to IPT for PTSD had been to elicit unfavorable and unwanted responses
from them, which created a downward spiral of symptom intensification, substance
abuse, and worsening interpersonal interactions. Being a focal intervention, IPT for PTSD
enabled the therapists to quarantine problematic transference and countertransference
problems and provide him with a series of gratifying interpersonal interactions within the
group therapy setting, which could be generalized to relationships outside of therapy.
It is not clear whether James would have tolerated the same interventions in indi-
vidual therapy or whether an individual therapist would have become ‘bogged down’
in problematic countertransference. The cohesive group, focused upon Interpersonal
Problem Areas, maintained a working state and generated a momentum for change
that may not have been created in an individual therapeutic frame. As Wilfley et al.36
highlight, the group format in IPT provides an ‘interpersonal laboratory’ with numer-
ous opportunities for interpersonal interactions that may be therapeutic. James
likely benefited from empathic and practical responses from group members working
collaboratively on a focal area. Such interactions, explicitly highlighted by the group
therapist, seemed to provide stimulus for further change and a restitutive emotional
experience.

Evidence supporting IPT for PTSD
Several studies have evaluated the efficacy and effectiveness of IPT in PTSD; the majority
of these have used a group format. Krupnick et al.49 found group-based IPT for PTSD
effective in reducing symptoms of PTSD, depression, and some aspects of interpersonal
functioning in a sample of 48 low-income, predominantly minority women who had
sustained interpersonal trauma. Bleiberg and Markowitz47 provided IPT to 14 subjects
with PTSD in an open trial, and found that 12 of them no longer met the diagnostic
criteria for PTSD.
    Robertson and colleagues45,46 used group IPT for 13 patients with chronic PTSD.
Quantitative outcomes indicated no change in the severity of PTSD symptoms, but
substantial gains in social functioning, generalized well-being, and mood symptoms
did occur. Their qualitative analysis of participant exit interviews highlighted themes of
interpersonal connection and enhanced interpersonal efficacy emerging in the course of
therapy with IPT.
    Ray and Webster48 applied group IPT to nine military veterans using the approach
developed by Robertson et al. At 2- and 4-month follow-up, there were improvements in
PTSD and depressive symptoms with some qualitative data suggesting the participants
experienced improvements in anger management and interpersonal functioning. Meffert
and co-workers50 conducted a trial of IPT with 22 Sudanese refugees in Cairo, and found
reductions in PTSD and depressive symptoms in addition to anger and interpersonal violence.


Conclusion
IPT has been adapted to a wide variety of psychiatric disorders, including a spectrum of
affective disorders, eating disorders, and some anxiety disorders. In all of these adaptations,
IPT is distinguished because of its primary interpersonal focus and use of the IPT Problem
Areas. The application of IPT to PTSD is an example of the way that the interpersonal
aspects of a disorder or distress are identified and IPT is modified to address them. The
application of IPT with PTSD also illustrates its potential use in a sequential or integrated
psychotherapeutic approach.
                                                                                            277
Applications of Interpersonal Psychotherapy

    There are many disorders to which IPT can be applied. Without doubt, IPT should be of
benefit in improving mood and interpersonal functioning in a wide range of problems and
distress. Our hope is that new investigators will continue the development and investigation
of IPT for an even greater variety of problems.

References
 1. 	 Mufson L. Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Depressed Adolescents, 2nd edn. 2004, New
      York: Guilford Press.
 2.	 Mufson L, Moreau D and Weissman MM. The modification of interpersonal
      psychotherapy with depressed adolescents (IPT-A): phase I and phase II studies. Journal
      of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 1994, 33: 695–705.
 3.	 Rosselo J and Bernal G. The efficacy of cognitive-behavioral and interpersonal
      treatments for depression in Puerto Rican adolescents. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
      Psychology, 1999, 55: 379–384.
 4.	 Mufson L, et al. A randomized effectiveness trial of interpersonal psychotherapy for
      depressed adolescents. Archives of General Psychiatry, 2004, 61: 577–584.
 5.	 Rosselo J, Bernal G and Rivera-Medina C. Individual and group CBT and IPT for Puerto
      Rican adolescents with depressive symptoms. Cultural Diversity and Ethnic Minority
      Psychology, 2008, 14: 234–235.
 6.	 Tang TC, et al. Randomized study of school-based intensive interpersonal
      psychotherapy for depressed adolescents with suicidal risk and parasuicide behaviors.
      Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 2009, 63: 4.
 7.	 Dietz LJ, et al. Family-based interpersonal psychotherapy for depressed preadolescents:
      An open-treatment trial. Early Intervention in Psychiatry, 2008, 2: 154–161.
 8.	 Reynolds CF, et al. Treating depression to remission in older adults: a controlled
      evaluation of combined escitalopram with interpersonal psychotherapy versus
      escitalopram with depression care management. International Journal of Geriatric
      Psychiatry, 2010, 25: 1134–1141.
 9.	 Heisel MJ, et al. Adapting interpersonal psychotherapy for older adults at risk for suicide:
      preliminary findings. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 2009, 40: 156–164.
10.	 Miller MD. Using interpersonal therapy (IPT) with older adults today and tomorrow:
      a review of the literature and new developments. Current Psychiatry Reports, 2008, 10:
      16–22.
11.	 Reynolds CF, et al. Treatment of bereavement-related major depressive episodes in
      later life: a controlled study of acute and continuation treatment with nortriptyline and
      interpersonal psychotherapy. American Journal of Psychiatry, 1999, 156: 202–208.
12.	 Miler M and Reynolds CF. Expanding the usefulness of interpersonal psychotherapy
      (IPT) for depressed elders with comorbid cognitive impairment. International Journal of
      Geriatric Psychiatry, 2007, 22: 101–105.
13.	 Miller MD. Clinician’s Guide to Interpersonal Psychotherapy in Late Life: Helping Cognitively
      Impaired or Depressed Elders and their Caregivers. 2009, New York: Oxford Press.
14.	 Spinelli MG and Endicott J. Controlled clinical trial of interpersonal psychotherapy
      versus parenting education program for depressed pregnant women. American Journal of
      Psychiatry, 2003, 160: 555–562.

278
                                                                                 References

15.	 Spinelli MG and Weissman MM. The clinical application of interpersonal psychotherapy
     for depression during pregnancy. Primary Psychiatry, 1997, 4: 50–57.
16.	 Grote NK, et al. A randomized controlled trial of culturally relevant, brief interpersonal
     psychotherapy for perinatal depression. Psychiatric Services, 2009, 60: 313–321.
17.	 Bledsoe SE, et al. Feasibility of treating depression in pregnant, low-income adolescents
     using culturally relevant, brief interpersonal psychotherapy. Journal of Women’s Health,
     2010, 19: 1781.
18.	 O’Hara MW, et al. Efficacy of interpersonal psychotherapy for postpartum depression.
     Archives of General Psychiatry, 2000, 57: 1039–1045.
19.	 Stuart S and O’Hara MW. The use of interpersonal psychotherapy for perinatal mood
     and anxiety disorders, in Steiner M and Riecher-Rössler A (eds) Perinatal Depression:
     From Bench to Bedside. 2005, Basel: Karger, pp. 150–166.
20.	 Carter W, Grigoriadis S and Ross LE. Relationship distress and depression in postpartum
     women: literature review and introduction of a conjoint interpersonal psychotherapy
     intervention. Archives of Women’s Mental Health, 2010, 13: 279–284.
21.	 Grote NK, Swartz HA and Zuckoff A. Enhancing interpersonal psychotherapy for
     mothers and expectant mothers on low incomes: adaptations and additions. Journal of
     Contemporary Psychotherapy, 2008, 38: 23–33.
22.	 Reay R, et al. Group interpersonal psychotherapy for postnatal depression: a pilot study.
     Archives of Women’s Mental Health, 2006, 9: 31–39.
23.	 Mulcahy R, et al. A randomised control trial for the effectiveness of group interpersonal
     psychotherapy for postnatal depression. Archives of Women’s Mental Health, 2010, 13:
     125–139.
24.	 Markowitz J. Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Dysthymic Disorder. 1998, Washington DC:
     American Psychiatric Press.
25.	 Mason BJ, Markowitz JC and Klerman GL. Interpersonal psychotherapy for
     dysthymic disorder, in Klerman GL and Weissman MM (eds) New Applications of
     Interpersonal Psychotherapy. 1993, Washington DC: American Psychiatric Press, pp.
     225–264.
26.	 Markowitz J, et al. Pilot study of interpersonal psychotherapy versus supportive
     psychotherapy for dysthymic patients with secondary alcohol abuse of dependence.
     Journal of Nervous and Mental Disorders, 2008, 196: 468–474.
27.	 Ehlers C, Frank E and Kupfer DJ. Social zeitgebers and biological rhythms. Archives of
     General Psychiatry, 1988, 45: 948–952.
28.	 Frank E. Treating Bipolar Disorder: A Clinician’s Guide to Interpersonal and Social
     Rhythm Therapy. 2005, New York: Guilford Press.
29.	 Miklowitz D, et al. Psychosocial treatments for bipolar depression: a 1-year randomized
     trial from the systematic treatment enhancement program. Archives of General Psychiatry,
     2007, 64: 419–427.
30.	 Fairburn CG, et al. A prospective study of outcome in bulimia nervosa and the long-
     term effects of three psychological treatments. Archives of General Psychiatry, 1995, 52:
     304–312.
31.	 Fairburn CG, Jones R and Peveler RC. Three psychological treatments for bulimia
     nervosa: a comparative trial. Archives of General Psychiatry, 1991, 48: 463–469.

                                                                                          279
Applications of Interpersonal Psychotherapy

32.	 Fairburn CG, Jones R and Peveler RC. Psychotherapy and bulimia nervosa: the longer-
     term effects of interpersonal psychotherapy, behavioural psychotherapy, and cognitive
     behaviour therapy. Archives of General Psychiatry, 1993, 50: 419–428.
33.	 Agras WS, et al. A multicenter comparison of cognitive-behavioral therapy and
     interpersonal psychotherapy for bulimia nervosa. Archives of General Psychiatry, 2000,
     57: 459–466.
34.	 Arcelus J, et al. A case series evaluation of a modified version of interpersonal
     psychotherapy (IPT) for the treatment of bulimic eating disorders: a pilot study.
     European Eating Disorders Review, 2009, 17: 260–268.
35.	 Wilfley DE, et al. Adapting interpersonal psychotherapy to a group format (IPT-G) for
     binge eating disorder: toward a model for adapting empirically supported treatments.
     Psychotherapy Research, 1998, 8: 379–391.
36.	 Wilfley DE, et al. Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Group. 2000, New York: Basic
     Books.
37.	 Rieger E, et al. An eating disorder-specific model of interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT-
     ED): causal pathways and treatment implications. Clinical Psychology Review, 2010, 30:
     400–410.
38.	 Wilfley DE, et al. A randomized comparison of group cognitive-behavioral therapy and
     group interpersonal psychotherapy for the treatment of overweight individuals with
     binge-eating disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 2002, 59: 713–721.
39.	 McIntosh V, Jordan J and Carter F. Three psychotherapies for anorexia nervosa: a
     randomized controlled trial. American Journal of Psychiatry, 2005, 162: 741–747.
40.	 Lipsitz JD, et al. Open trial of interpersonal psychotherapy for the treatment of social
     phobia. American Journal of Psychiatry, 1999, 156: 1814–1816.
41.	 Stangier U, et al. Cognitive therapy versus interpersonal psychotherapy in social
     anxiety disorder: a randomized controlled trial. Archives of General Psychiatry, 2011, 68:
     692–700.
42.	 Angus L and Gillies L. Counseling the borderline client: an interpersonal approach.
     Canadian Journal of Counselling, 1994, 28: 69–83.
43.	 Markowitz J, Skodol A and Bleiberg K. Interpersonal psychotherapy for borderline
     personality disorder: possible mechanisms of change. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 2006,
     62: 431–444.
44.	 Bellino S, Zizza M and Rinaldi C. Combined therapy of major depression with
     concomitant borderline personality disorder: comparison of interpersonal
     psychotherapy and cognitive psychotherapy. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 2007, 52:
     718–725.
45.	 Robertson MD, Humphreys L and Ray R. Psychological treatments for post traumatic
     stress disorder: recommendations for the clinician. Journal of Psychiatric Practice, 2004,
     10: 106–118.
46.	 Robertson MD, et al. Group interpersonal psychotherapy for post traumatic stress
     disorder: clinical and theoretical aspects. International Journal of Group Psychotherapy,
     2004, 54: 145–175.
47.	 Bleiberg K and Markowitz J. A pilot study of interpersonal psychotherapy for
     posttraumatic stress disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 2005, 162: 181–183.


280
                                                                                   References

48.	 Ray R and Webster R. Group interpersonal psychotherapy for veterans with
     posttraumatic stress disorder: a pilot study. International Journal of Group Psychotherapy,
     2010, 60: 131–140.
49.	 Krupnick J, et al. Group interpersonal psychotherapy for low-income women with
     posttraumatic stress disorder. Psychotherapy Research, 2008, 18: 497–507.
50.	 Meffert SM, et al. A pliot randomized controlled trial of interpersonal psychotherapy for
     Sudanese refugees in Cairo, Egypt. Psychological Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice, and
     Policy, 2011, 5: 1–10.
51.	 Stein D, Ipser J and Seedat SCR. Pharmacotherapy for post traumatic stress disorder
     (PTSD). Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2006, 1.
52.	 Van Etten M and Taylor S. Comparative efficacy of treatments for posttraumatic stress
     disorder: a meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 1998, 5: 144–154.
53.	 Solomon S and Johnson D. Psychosocial treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder: a
     practice-friendly review of outcome research. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 2002, 58:
     947–959.
54.	 Bradley R, Greene J and Russ EA. A multidimensional meta-analysis of psychotherapy
     for PTSD. American Journal of Psychiatry, 2005, 162: 214–227.
55.	 Foa EB, Keane TM and Friedman MJ. Effective Treatments for PTSD. Practice Guidelines
     from the International Society for Traumatic Stress Studies, 2nd edn. 2008, New York:
     Guilford Press.
56.	 Basco M, et al. Cognitive-behavioral therapy for anxiety disorders: why and how it
     works. Bulletin of the Menninger Clinic, 2000, 64: 52–70.
57.	 Andrews G and Hunt C. Treatments that work in anxiety disorders. Medical Journal of
     Australia, 1998, 168: 628–634.
58.	 McFarlane A and Yehuda R. Clinical treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder:
     conceptual challenges raised by recent research. Australian and New Zealand Journal of
     Psychiatry, 2000, 34: 940–953.
59.	 Shalev A, Bonne O and Eth S. Treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder: a review.
     Psychosomatic Medicine, 1996, 58: 165–182.
60.	 Horowitz M. Stress Response Syndromes. 1976, New York: Aronson.
61.	 Herman J. Trauma and Recovery. 1992, New York: Basic Books.
62.	 van der Kolk B, McFarlane A and van der Hart O. A general approach to treatment
     of posttraumatic stress disorder, in van der Kolk B, McFarlane A and Weisath L (eds)
     Traumatic Stress. 1989, New York: Guildford Press.
63.	 Maslow A. A theory of human motivation. Psychological Review, 1943, 50: 370–396.
64.	 McFarlane A and Bookless C. The effect of PTSD on interpersonal relationships: issues
     for emergency service workers. Sexual and Relationship Therapy, 2001, 16: 261–267.
65.	 Scaturo D and Hayman P. The impact of combat trauma across the family life cycle:
     clinical considerations. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 1992, 5: 273–288.
66.	 Janoff-Bulman R. Shattered Assumptions: Towards a New Psychology of Trauma. 1992,
     New York: Free Press.
67.	 Zisook S and Shuchter S. PTSD following bereavement. Annals of Clinical Psychiatry,
     1998, 10: 157–163.


                                                                                           281
Applications of Interpersonal Psychotherapy

68.	 Allen S and Bloom S. Group and family treatment of post-traumatic stress disorder.
     Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 1994, 17: 425–437.
69.	 Kollar P, Marmar C and Kanas N. Psychodynamic group treatment of posttraumatic
     stress disorder in Vietnam veterans. International Journal of Group Psychotherapy, 1992,
     42: 225–246.
70.	 Klein R and Schermer V. Introduction and overview: creating a healing matrix, in Klein
     R and Schermer V (eds) Group Psychotherapy for Psychological Trauma. 2000, New York:
     Guilford Press.




282
                                                                     20
Research in Interpersonal
Psychotherapy
The highly significant research in Interpersonal Psychotherapy (IPT) includes the initial
studies in the 1970s by Klerman and Weissman,1–3 the National Institute of Mental Health
Treatment of Depression Collaborative Research Program (NIMH TDCRP),4–6 the
maintenance studies of Frank et al.,7–9 the international studies of IPT,10–12 and the recent
meta-analyses of IPT.13,14 A complete list of references can be found at the IPT institute at
www.iptinstitute.com.
     There is much that is not known about IPT. There are many elements which have yet
to be empirically demonstrated. The use of weekly sessions, for instance, follows clinical
tradition – there are no data supporting weekly over biweekly, monthly, or even twice-weekly
sessions. The use of hour-long appointments, as opposed to half-hour, 15-minute, or 2-hour
sessions, is not empirically derived – there are no data regarding the optimal duration of
sessions of any psychotherapy.
     While efficacy studies are based on the entire ‘treatment package’ of IPT, there are no data
regarding which parts of the package are essential. Many of the techniques and tactics used
in IPT (and other psychotherapies) are based primarily on clinical experience and historical
precedence. Deconstruction studies have not been conducted in IPT. The impact of assigning
homework (or not), of constructing a Biopsychosocial/Cultural/Spiritual Formulation (or
not), or of conducting an Interpersonal Inventory (or not), has not been studied.
     The impact of strict adherence to IPT has not been studied. Clinical experience suggests
that allowing therapists to use their clinical judgment leads to better outcome; empirical
evidence supports this as well.15–17,18 The requirement that therapists strictly adhere to a
manual prevents them from combining therapeutic approaches. For instance, a therapist may
believe that adding a behavioral activation technique to IPT will help a particular patient. A
discussion about cognitions may be of great benefit to some IPT patients. However, only a
therapist who is ‘allowed’ to do so rather than ‘required’ to follow a rigid protocol will be able
to use this kind of combined approach. There is little doubt that patients do in fact benefit
from a variety of techniques, and that a ‘mix and match approach’ is often taken in therapy.
While widespread in practice, this has not been tested empirically.
     In addition, there are no data regarding the impact of adherence to IPT as opposed to the
delivery of quality IPT. Adherence is not difficult to assess – a simple yes/no checklist can be
used. But adherence and quality are not the same. Conducting an Interpersonal Inventory
adherently, for example, is not the same as doing it well. Virtuoso IPT requires that the
therapist makes adaptations to individual patients. Adherence is a fine goal, but we should
aspire to conduct high-quality IPT.
     There are two responses to the lack of data about the specific elements of IPT. The first
is to insist that since the data are derived from a specific IPT protocol or manual, all of the
elements of that specific IPT protocol must be delivered precisely as defined or it won’t be
efficacious. There are no data supporting this. It might be a reasonable position to take if
all of the IPT protocols were consistent, but there is great variability. Some have used more

                                                                                             283
Research in Interpersonal Psychotherapy

than 20 sessions, others six. Some have used five Problem Areas, some three. Some provide
Maintenance Treatment, some do not. Some include homework, and some do not permit it.
    The better response is to base the clinical practice of IPT on a combination of the
empirical evidence, clinical experience, and clinical judgment. Adding a measure of common
sense is also wise. To suggest that empirical data alone should dictate treatment is both naïve
and unrealistic – there are simply too many aspects of IPT that have not been empirically
studied. Further, to insist that the practice of IPT be based solely on empirical data ignores
the vast wealth of information that has accumulated from clinical experience with IPT. While
the empirical literature supporting the efficacy of IPT should strongly influence treatment,
clinical experience and clinical judgment are equally important factors in determining how
IPT is delivered. Evidence-based practice should rest in part on practice-based evidence.

References
 1.	 Klerman GL, et al. Treatment of depression by drugs and psychotherapy. American
     Journal of Psychiatry, 1974, 131: 186–191.
 2.	 Weissman MM. The psychological treatment of depression. Evidence for the efficacy of
     psychotherapy alone, in comparison with, and in combination with pharmacotherapy.
     Archives of General Psychiatry, 1979, 36: 1261–1269.
 3.	 Weissman MM, et al. The efficacy of drugs and psychotherapy in the treatment of acute
     depressive episodes. American Journal of Psychiatry, 1979, 136(4B): 555–558.
 4.	 Elkin I, et al. NIMH Treatment of Depression Collaborative Treatment Program:
     background and research plan. Archives of General Psychiatry, 1985, 42: 305–316.
 5.	 Elkin I, et al. Conceptual and methodological issues in comparative studies of
     psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy, I. Active ingredients and mechanisms of change.
     American Journal of Psychiatry, 1988, 145: 909–917.
 6.	 Elkin I, et al. Conceptual and methodological issues in comparative studies of
     psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy, II. Nature and timing of treatment effects.
     American Journal of Psychiatry, 1988, 145(9): 1070–1076.
 7.	 Frank E, et al. Three-year outcomes for maintenance therapies in recurrent depression.
     Archives of General Psychiatry, 1990, 47(12): 1093–1099.
 8.	 Frank E and Spanier C. Interpersonal psychotherapy for depression: overview, clinical
     efficacy, and future directions. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 1995, 2:
     349–369.
 9.	 Frank E, et al. Randomized trial of weekly, twice-monthly, and monthly interpersonal
     psychotherapy as maintenance treatment for women with recurrent depression.
     American Journal of Psychiatry, 2007, 164: 761–767.
10.	 Bolton P, et al. Group interpersonal psychotherapy for depression in rural Uganda:
     a randomized controlled trial. Journal of the American Medical Association, 2003,
     289(23): 3117–3124.
11.	 Bass J, et al. Group interpersonal psychotherapy for depression in rural Uganda:
     6-month outcomes: randomised controlled trial. British Journal of Psychiatry, 2006,
     188(6): 567–573.
12.	 Verdeli H, et al. Group interpersonal psychotherapy for depressed youth in IDP camps
     in Northern Uganda: adaptation and training. Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Clinics
     of North America, 2008, 17: 605–624.
284
                                                                                   References

13.	 Cuijpers P, et al. Psychotherapy for depression in adults: a meta-analysis of comparative
     outcome studies. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 2008, 76(6): 909–922.
14.	 Cuijpers P, et al. Interpersonal psychotherapy for depression: a meta-analysis. American
     Journal of Psychiatry, 2011, 168(6): 581–592.
15.	 Barber J, Crits-Christoph P and Luborsky L. Effects of therapist adherence and
     competence on patient outcome in brief dynamic therapy. Journal of Consulting and
     Clinical Psychology, 1996, 64: 619–622.
16.	 Barber J, et al. The role of the alliance and techniques in predicting outcome of
     supportive-expressive dynamic therapy for cocaine dependence. Psychoanalytic
     Psychology, 2008, 25: 461–482.
17.	 Barber J, et al. The role of therapist adherence, therapist competence, and the alliance in
     predicting outcome of individual drug counseling: results from the NIDA collaborative
     cocaine treatment study. Psychotherapy Research, 2006, 16: 229–240.
18.	 Castonguay L, et al. Predicting the effect of cognitive therapy for depression: a study of
     unique and common factors. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 1996, 64:
     497–504.




                                                                                           285
                                                                    21
Integrated Case Example
Case Example 21.1: Allan                                                                   286
References                                                                                 305


This chapter is a synthesis of all of the components discussed throughout this book. The
case illustrates the flexible structure of Interpersonal Psychotherapy (IPT), the Interpersonal
Inventory, Interpersonal Formulation, Problem Areas and techniques.

Case Example 21.1: Allan
Part I: Clinical Assessment
Background
Allan was a 42-year-old married father of two teenage daughters. He worked as a proof
reader, a job he had held for 10 years. He had initially presented to his family physician
complaining of insomnia and abdominal pain. His family physician had diagnosed a major
depressive disorder and had instituted treatment with a serotonin selective reuptake inhibitor
(SSRI) antidepressant. After 3 weeks, Allan had not had much benefit from medication, and a
referral was made to a therapist.
Assessment/Initial sessions
Allan arrived half an hour early for his appointment. After he arrived, the therapist’s secretary
told him that the therapist was running 5–10 minutes behind schedule. This appeared to
irritate Allan, though he did not directly communicate his annoyance.
     Once the session began, Allan described having difficulty sleeping over the previous 3–6
months. He reported feeling irritable and frustrated, and had complaints of non-specific
abdominal pain and headaches. In her referral letter, Allan’s family physician reported
that Allan had been experiencing depressed mood for most of the day with a tendency
for his mood to lift through the afternoon. She noted both initial and terminal insomnia
characterized by early morning wakening. Allan confirmed this, and further described
having a decreased level of interest in his usual activities, and a reduced capacity to enjoy
things. Allan also reported that he had been experiencing difficulty with concentration which
had affected his job performance. He matter-of-factly divulged that he had intermittent
suicidal thoughts, and had contemplated overdosing on his medication and alcohol, though
he did not have any specific intent at the moment. The therapist inquired specifically about
psychotic symptoms, which were not present, and then further clarified Allan’s suicidal
ideation. Though Allan reported that he had thoughts at times that he might be better off
dead, he had no intent to do anything. Further, he stated that he would never commit suicide
because it would be devastating for his family.
     In addition to the antidepressant medication, Allan’s family doctor had prescribed a
benzodiazepine for sleep. Allan had doubled the dose on his own. He denied consuming

286
                                                                   Case Example 21.1: Allan

alcohol or other illicit substances, and denied that he had been obtaining prescriptions for
sedatives elsewhere.

Past psychiatric history
Allan denied previous consultation with any mental healthcare professionals. On closer
inquiry, however, he described several prolonged periods of dysphoria, as well as two
occasions in his early adolescence and young adulthood where he had significant depression
that lasted for months. He had not, however, sought any form of psychiatric treatment or
counseling.

Past medical history
Allan reported being in good health. His only medications were the antidepressant and the
benzodiazepine.

Family psychiatric history
Allan was an only child. His mother had been hospitalized throughout his childhood with
episodes of severe depression. He believed that the onset was after Allan’s birth. He had
been raised by a variety of caregivers throughout his childhood, and described that his
father became detached from him and his mother. Allan did not recall feeling particularly
affectionate or close to any of his caregivers, nor was he able to recall any meaningful
relationships with school teachers or peers. Speaking in the neutral voice he used nearly all
of the time, Allan reported that his mother had recently suffered another episode of severe
depression and had been hospitalized again:
    She tends to spend a long time in the hospital. I’m not sure she ever really gets
    better. I’ve never known her to be ‘normal’.
Allan was unaware of any other family members who had experienced psychological
problems.

Social and developmental history
Allan was carried to term in an uncomplicated pregnancy and delivery. There was no
evidence that his mother had been depressed antenatally. He was not aware of any delay in
reaching his developmental milestones. Allan described few meaningful attachments as a
child, and recalled that he was generally anxious and avoidant in his behavior. He reported
that he was isolated at school with few friends, and was described by his teachers as a ‘shy
but pleasant child’. There was no evidence of separation anxiety or somatizing symptoms as a
child. Allan completed 5 years of secondary education before leaving to join the civil service,
where he worked in a low-level administrative capacity for the next 10 years. Throughout his
employment in the civil service he had few social contacts, but he did get involved in solitary
physical activities such as going to the gym for exercise and running.
     Allan met his wife Pam at a church function during his early twenties. She had been on
a vacation from abroad, and after meeting they formed a relationship which he described
as ‘initially close, more of a friendship than lovers’. Pam migrated to live with Allan and
they were married after 2 years. Eliza was born after 12 months; Anna 3 years later. Allan
described being happy as a father, particularly with Eliza, to whom he felt close. He recalled
spending a lot of time with Eliza when she was younger, and he particularly enjoyed going
on long runs with her. He had been less close to Anna, but still felt that their relationship was



                                                                                             287
Integrated Case Example

good. He had grown closer to Eliza as his relationship with Pam had deteriorated over the
years.
     Eliza had begun to spend increasing amounts of time away from the family and seemed
to Allan to have been avoiding contact with him, particularly over the previous 6 months.
Allan stated that approximately 2 months before he had become aware of a relationship
Eliza was developing with an older woman, which he believed was sexual. He had no strong
feelings about the relationship itself, but was aware that as she was spending much less time
at home, he had felt more isolated. Allan summed up his social relationships by stating rather
blandly: ‘I feel completely alone – there’s nobody for me’.
Premorbid personality
Allan described a long-standing difficulty with intimate relationships. He reported that he
found strong emotional states such as anger and sadness intolerable. He described a pattern
of exploding in torrents of rage, only to become deeply ashamed at losing control. This
difficult cycle of rage and shame was greatly distressing to him. The therapist noted, however,
that when Allan described what he called ‘rage’ in detail, it was quite limited. In fact, the
therapist observed that what Allan labeled ‘rage’ would have been called nothing more than
simple anger by most people. It appeared that Allan was most concerned about losing control
of his emotions, and felt that any display of anger was a ‘rage’.
     The therapist came to the view that Allan had a tendency to rely on obsessional and
perfectionistic coping strategies, such as working longer hours, trying to atone for his
perceived failings by repetitively attending to tasks, and by overemphasizing order and goal
achievement. There seemed to be a tendency for him to view the world in an ‘all or nothing’
way, focusing primarily upon the negative aspects of life. The therapist felt there was evidence
that this was a stable pattern of personality functioning that had probably been present since
childhood.
Cultural and spiritual factors
Allan described his work environment as a ‘culture of silence’. It was expected that people
were productive; particularly among the men the expectation was to talk about the Hawkeyes
or the Roosters games and not much else. No one revealed much personal information, and
Allan felt that to do so would be perceived as a weakness by others. Allan described himself
as spiritual, but he did not attend church regularly. He described going with Pam on occasion
at holidays, but disliking the crowds of people and what he perceived to be the superficial
relationships there.
Mental state examination
Allan was a fit-looking, middle-aged man who was casually attired in jeans and a collared
shirt. He wore a neatly trimmed beard with glasses, and had short cropped hair. The
therapist had great difficulty establishing rapport with Allan, and found him to have little
or no warmth. He had difficulty maintaining eye contact. Allan’s affect was flat and he
described his mood as ‘quite depressed’. While there was no disorder of thought, there
appeared to be significant self-reproach and hopelessness in his thought content, though
it was not delusional in intensity. There were no perceptual disturbances evident. Allan
had fair insight into the severity of his problems – he acknowledged that some of his
vegetative symptoms were excessive and might be indicative of an illness, but he was very




288
                                                                  Case Example 21.1: Allan

hopeless, and felt that there was nothing he could do that would be of help, aside from
taking medication.
Diagnostic formulation
The therapist made the following Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
(DSM)-IV diagnoses (Table 21.1):

Table 21.1  GAF, Global Assessment of Functioning

 Axis I                 Major depressive disorder

                        Dysthymic disorder

 Axis II                Obsessive-compulsive personality traits

 Axis III               None

 Axis IV                Family and marital disputes

                        Illness of mother

                        Social isolation

 Axis V                 GAF = 55


Interpersonal Inventory
The psychiatric assessment, in large part based on the therapist’s perception that it would be
helpful to prioritize the therapeutic alliance rather than rush or impose a rigid agenda, was
done over the first two sessions. In session 3, the therapist invited Allan to work with him to
construct an Interpersonal Inventory. He realized that it was especially critical to give Allan
a sense of collaboration. He gave Allan brief instructions on how to write in the names of
people in his Interpersonal Circle, handed the paper to Allan, and sat back in his chair.
    Allan quickly wrote in Pam, Eliza, and Anna. Interestingly, he placed Eliza much closer
to the center of the circle than he did Pam. Pausing a bit, he then asked the therapist who else
should be added. The therapist responded:
    Whoever is in your social support network, especially if they have relevance to the
    problems you are having right now.
Allan pushed for more clarification, as if there were a right answer that the therapist
was withholding. Despite that, the therapist warmly encouraged Allan that it was his circle
to complete, that there were no right or wrong answers, and that he simply wanted to
have a visual sense of Allan’s social network so that he could understand Allan and his
distress better.
    Allan then wrote in his mother on the very outer edge of the paper. On the other side, he
wrote in his father in parentheses indicating he had died. The only other name he added was
a colleague at work, John, whom he placed in the outer circle. Before handing the paper back
to the therapist, he took one last look at it, and then drew a circle around Eliza and an arrow
pointing towards the outside of the circle. When asked to describe it, he said it represented
her leaving for another relationship (Figure 21.1).




                                                                                            289
Integrated Case Example

                                   Interpersonal Circle




                                          Eliza
                                                          Pam (wife)
                                       (daughter)                      John
                                                          Anna
                                                          (daughter)
                                           Intimates



                                      Close supports
                                                          Extended supports
                {Hugh (father)}                                   Joan (mother)
Figure 21.1 Interpersonal Circle – Allan

When the therapist asked more about his relationship with his wife, Allan replied:
    Pam doesn’t have much time for me anymore. She seems to have fallen out of
    love and I don’t think she wants to be with me. I don’t think I’m a particularly
    pleasant person to be with at the moment. Things just seem to be falling apart.
On further inquiry, it became apparent that Allan and Pam had been arguing a great deal, and
that their relationship had become ‘cold and stale’. When the therapist inquired further about
Allan’s relationship with his daughters, Allan reported that he had a ‘falling out’ with his older
daughter Eliza, and that Anna had become increasingly difficult at home, annoying both
Allan and his wife.
    When asking about Allan’s interests and activities outside of work, the therapist found
that there was very little evidence of any social support. Allan had little or no contact
with anybody outside of his immediate family, and he seemed quite socially isolated and
unsupported.
Attachment style
The Interpersonal Inventory provided a great deal of information about Allan’s attachment
style. It seemed clear that Allan’s social isolation was a significant factor in the genesis of his
mood symptoms and distress. Allan described his typical style of interacting as a tendency
to do things alone or to avoid people; the therapist concurred but also held the more
sophisticated view that Allan had a combination of fearful and dismissive attachment styles.
To evaluate this further, the therapist gathered some additional information:
Therapist: Allan, in addition to the family conflicts we’ve discussed, I wanted to talk more about
the general sense of isolation you are feeling.
Allan: Yes – it is a problem.
Therapist: You told me earlier that you tended to rely on Pam to ‘break the ice with people’.
Allan: That’s right.
Therapist: What makes it difficult, do you think?
Allan: Well, I’ve never really tried, I guess.
Therapist: Tell me more about that.

290
                                                                         Case Example 21.1: Allan

Allan: I’ve never had much luck in relationships. Not since I was a kid, and certainly not as an
adult.
Therapist: Perhaps we could look at a few examples of relationships in which you felt this has
been a problem, and see if there is a pattern.
Allan: You mean like dragging over old ground?
Therapist: Well, even though we are working on your current relationships, I think we can learn
about your current problems by paying some attention to what has happened in the more recent
past.
Following this exchange Allan and the therapist discussed a few examples of instances
in which Allan had tried and failed to initiate interpersonal contact. It appeared that the
common theme throughout all of these relationship failures had been Allan’s tendency to
place high expectations upon those around him, only to find that they did not follow up with
further contact. Allan described that if a particular social contact had not followed through
with a request or not met an expectation, then Allan would express disapproval. Typically,
Allan would not initiate further contact and ultimately the relationship would dissolve. The
therapist also asked Allan to tell a story as another way to assess his attachment style:
Therapist: It would be helpful for me to understand things even better if you could tell me a story
or two about your interactions with other people. What comes to mind?
Allan: [pausing for a bit] Nothing really. What do you mean by a story?
Therapist: What I’m looking for is an example. I’ve found that many times I can understand
people even better from the interactions they describe in stories. Perhaps there is one with Pam
that would be a good example.
Allan: [pausing again] I still can’t really think of anything. I mean, we’ve had our share of fights,
and a few good times, but I can’t think of any specific stories.
Therapist: Perhaps a holiday or family event might be an example.
Allan: [pausing yet again] Well, I guess this last Valentine’s Day would be a good example. We
both bought each other some cards, more out of obligation really. Then on the way home from
work I felt a bit guilty, so I stopped off to get her some flowers. It was late in the day, so most of the
nice ones were picked over. I ended up with daisies ... she didn’t get me anything at all, and then
we were mostly silent over dinner. I think for both of us it was disappointing, but more like it was
just the same. Nothing different, both of us at a distance. It’s kind of depressing just thinking about
it again.

Interpersonal Formulation
Just as he had done with the inventory, the therapist realized that the therapeutic alliance
could be further strengthened by engaging Allan in collaboratively developing the
formulation. After drawing the boxes, he again handed the paper and pencil over to Allan so
that he could write in the relevant elements. Together they developed a tentative formulation
(Figure 21.2), which included Allan’s family history and his limited social contacts as major
factors in his current distress. The psychological elements in particular were handled very
carefully by the therapist; his conceptualization was that Allan had an attachment style with
both dismissive and fearful elements, and that he also had substantial avoidant and obsessive
personality traits. For purposes of the formulation, however, they used the words Allan had
used to describe himself: ‘likes more individual activities, not very affectionate, and doesn’t
really like social activities’.


                                                                                                     291
Integrated Case Example

        Biological factors           Social factors                   Psychological factors
        42 years old                 Poor support from family and     Likes more individual
        Male                          friends                           activities
        History of depression        Only child                       Not very affectionate
        Family history of            Employed as a proof reader       Doesn’t really like social
          depression                                                    activities
        Antidepressant                                                Hard worker
          medication                                                  Detail oriented
        Insomnia                                                      Married 18 years
        Sedative for sleep
          (taking more than rx)
        Exercises regularly



                 Cultural factors                                     Spiritual factors
                 Work ethic                                           Spiritual, but does not
                 Stoicism valued                 Allan                 attend church

Figure 21.2 Initial Interpersonal Formulation – Allan


Therapeutic considerations
The therapist considered a number of treatment approaches to Allan’s problems. He was
mindful of the fearful and dismissive styles of attachment as evidenced by the account of
Allan’s early environment, his current interpersonal functioning, and his interactions during
the first session. Another consideration was the presence of significant personality traits, as
evidenced by Allan’s description of his long-term pattern of social relationships. The therapist
considered the following possible therapeutic interventions:
●● Cognitive behavioral therapy – CBT had merit for a number of reasons. The first was

   its focal and structured nature. While not engaging problematic aspects of attachment
   and psychodynamics, CBT would still be likely to help Allan address the dysfunctional
   nature of his cognitions and underlying schemas, particularly the obsessional aspects of his
   thoughts and behavior.
●● Psychodynamic psychotherapy – It was clear to the therapist that Allan had a life-long his-

   tory of ‘empathic failures’ by caregivers. Allan’s account of his childhood, particularly his rela-
   tionship with his chronically ill mother and distant father, his history of multiple caregivers,
   and his description of few if any nurturing relationships as a child, suggested that a long-term
   therapeutic relationship which was focused on the childhood antecedents to his problems
   and provided him with an experience of empathic understanding would be beneficial.
●● Family therapy – Allan’s account of his family functioning highlighted significant prob-

   lems in his relationships with his wife and daughters. There was certainly evidence that
   the family system was not functioning well, and treatment of the system would impact the
   family’s long-term functioning and its effect upon Allan’s depressive illness.
●● Interpersonal Psychotherapy – While there were clear biological and psychological

   reasons for Allan to have developed depression, perhaps the most compelling aspect of his
   presentation was the current relationship difficulties he was experiencing in his marriage
   and with his daughters in the context of his social isolation. These acute crises, which led
   Allan to seek treatment, could be understood as the trigger for depression which interacted
   with Allan’s biopsychosocial, cultural, and spiritual vulnerabilities. A treatment which
   was interpersonally focused would offer Allan a good chance of symptom relief, and IPT
   would be completely compatible with medication. Moreover, IPT was intuitively appealing
292
                                                                Case Example 21.1: Allan

   because it was directed towards Allan’s presenting complaints and his attributions for the
   development of his depression.
The therapist was also guided by the empirical literature. First, efficacy studies were clear
that IPT would be an evidence-supported treatment for Allan’s depression,1 as well as for
his dysthymia.2 Second, there was evidence from the National Institute of Mental Health
Treatment of Depression Collaborative Research Program (NIMH TDCRP) that IPT might
be better suited to patients with more obsessive traits, as opposed to treatment with CBT.3
There was also empirical evidence that combined treatment with both medication and IPT
would be of additional benefit to Allan.4
     The potential for a problematic therapeutic relationship, given Allan’s history of
relationship failures, suggested to the therapist that his approach with IPT would need to be
modified to accommodate Allan’s fearful attachment style. First, the therapist recognized that
he needed to spend more time to develop a therapeutic alliance with Allan, and would need
to take special care to listen well. Empathy would have to be used judiciously and carefully:
enough to build the alliance, but not too much, as there was a risk that Allan would see it as
excessive and reject it. Second, the pacing of IPT would need to be modified, as Allan would
likely need more time to develop a sense of trust in the therapist and to be able to disclose
his feelings more freely. This meant spending time simply getting to know Allan rather
than rushing to an agenda or specific therapeutic tasks. Finally, the therapist recognized
that he would need to work very carefully to convey to Allan that he was interested in truly
understanding him, and that he needed to be flexible so that Allan did not perceive that the
therapist was imposing an agenda upon him.
     At this point in the Interpersonal Formulation, after considering the various treatment
options, the therapist summarized:
   Allan, my sense is that the distress you’re experiencing really comes from a sense
   of isolation and a feeling that no one understands you well. As you described it,
   the tipping point – the crisis you are faced with – is a big change in your relation-
   ship with Eliza. Though things have not been going well for some time with your
   wife, it sounds to me that things were tolerable until the last several months. I
   think I can begin to understand how that has been difficult for you as you’ve
   sensed the change in your relationship with Eliza.
   There seem to be a number of factors that have interacted to produce this epi-
   sode of depression at this point in your life – you did a good job of listing them on
   the formulation we just finished. I’m particularly struck by the genetic factors: the
   history of your mother’s severe depression suggests that you’ve almost certainly
   inherited a vulnerability to depression.
   I think that there are a number of psychological vulnerabilities that have also led
   you to become depressed. While you’re clearly a hard working and detail-
   oriented man – indeed this has helped you achieve much in your work – I suspect
   these traits have also been an ‘Achilles heel’ for you in dealing with this crisis.
   While it has worked well for you in the past to deal with problems by working
   harder, things recently have come to a point where this strategy doesn’t seem to
   be working any more.
   Most compelling for me, however, is the context in which you’ve become de-
   pressed. You’ve described to me how your marriage with Pam has deteriorated to
   the point where you feel it’s failing. You’ve also told me that your relationship with
   Eliza has also changed, and this seems to have been a great loss for you as well.
                                                                                         293
Integrated Case Example

    Culturally you described a sense at work – your relationship with John, for
    instance – in which people simply don’t talk about personal issues or let other
    people know that they are struggling. I can understand why that would be
    a difficult place to get much support. And you mentioned that, though you
    have a sense of spirituality, there isn’t really a religious group or organization
    that you feel a part of. [Taking the paper and drawing lines from the various
    boxes] All of these factors seem to have come together right now as you’re
    in the midst of a big change in your relationship with Eliza, and it seems to be
    complicated by the chronic problems with Pam. It seems like the change with
    Eliza has tipped the scale, and now you’re depressed and distressed. What
    do you think about that as a start to describing why you’re having trouble
    right now?
Allan responded by saying, ‘I don’t like to admit it, but I have to agree that the biological part
must be playing a role. I had always thought that I could control that; that it wouldn’t get the
best of me. But you’re right, as I look at the paper we put together, it seems pretty clear that’s
what’s going on. I’m just disappointed that I can’t manage it on my own’.
    With a hopeful smile, the therapist continued:
    Based on our assessment then, I think that a diagnosis of major depression is war-
    ranted. You’ve done a good job of describing the distress you are experien­cing far
    beyond symptoms – especially the isolation, and I’d like to learn much more about
    that. All of it: the depression, distress, sense of isolation, seems dir­ectly connected
    to the changes in your relationships with Eliza and the problems with Pam.
    Given the biological elements, medication clearly has an important place in your
    treatment, and I strongly recommend continuing it. In addition, I believe that we
    can address many of your relationship issues using psychotherapy. Psycho-
    therapy, like medication, has many varieties. For example, some treatments might
    examine your thinking patterns, or perhaps the way in which your family is inter-
    acting. With the relationship elements playing such a strong role, however, I think
    that Interpersonal Psychotherapy, or IPT, will be the most helpful for you.
    IPT is a treatment that looks primarily at your current relationships. It’s been
    shown in numerous scientific studies to be helpful in the acute treatment of de-
    pression, and this seems to be because it helps individuals deal with their unique
    interpersonal problems. I believe that we can make the best use of it by focusing
    on your interpersonal relationships and helping you to make changes in them.
    What are your thoughts about this?
Allan responded to the therapist that he thought that perhaps there was some hope in
working with his relationships. While he was a bit skeptical about the value of talking with
someone about his problems, he agreed to start IPT.
     The therapist was careful to frame his summary of the Interpersonal Formulation in
the language that he and Allan had used to develop it. Since it was collaborative, there was
literally no danger that it would miss the target – Allan had contributed a great deal to it. The
alliance and engagement in treatment was enhanced by using Allan’s language: the therapist
consistently talked about his thoughts rather than his feelings, and asked Allan to respond in
the same way by asking about his thoughts about the summary as opposed to asking about his
feelings. The therapist also highlighted Allan’s strengths rather than framing the formulation
as a summary of his weaknesses, which Allan would likely take as criticism. Finally, the


294
                                                                    Case Example 21.1: Allan

therapist also framed the formulation as a hypothesis they had developed together, rather
than as a definitive interpretation, and carefully invited Allan’s feedback about it.
Developing foci for treatment
With a solid formulation in hand, the next task was to clarify with Allan the specific
interpersonal problems on which to focus treatment.
     Pam and Allan had met while she was visiting from New Zealand on a working holiday.
Overlooking the fact that she was a Kiwi, Allan had enjoyed spending time with Pam in the
early years, particularly since ‘she was better at social contact’. Allan described that Pam had
been solely responsible for organizing the couple’s social life, and that he would ‘go along
for the ride’ so long as Pam ‘was prepared to break the ice’. While Allan did not feel he was
excessively socially anxious, he felt more comfortable in this passive role.
     Allan reported that recently Pam had become increasingly ‘fed up with my behavior’. He
reported that Pam consistently ‘would not do what I requested, particularly around the house’,
and that he would often argue with her. Allan reported that their conversations frequently
became arguments, and that things were now at the point where nothing could really be
discussed. Allan told the therapist that Pam was now spending more time with her friends
and was increasing the number of hours she was at work. Over the last several years, Allan had
been working afternoon shifts and Pam working during the day. The only contact they now
had was for a few moments in the evening, after Allan had arrived home from work, when he
would usually find Pam already asleep. On weekends Pam continued to make arrangements
‘with the girls’, from which Allan was obviously excluded. Allan reported that their sexual
relationship had all but ceased, and that there was now little affection between the couple.
     The therapist asked for some specific Interpersonal Incidents in which the couple came
into conflict and Allan reported the following interaction.
Therapist: Tell me about the last time you and Pam argued.
Allan: Well... just the other night we had a bit of a fight.
Therapist (sitting back in an invitation to Allan to tell a story): Tell me more about
what happened.
Allan (neutrally and curtly): I arrived home from work, the trash had not been put out, and
there were dirty dishes in the sink.
Therapist: What happened then?
Allan (with mild indignance): I reminded her that I had specifically told her to take out the
trash and clean up the dishes.
Therapist: Tell me more: how did you ask her to do that?
Allan: What words exactly?
Therapist: Yes – I’d really like to understand better how the communication went.
Allan (feigning politeness): I said, ‘Pam, I have asked you before to put the garbage out. The
house is becoming a mess. You know that just drives me crazy.’
Therapist: And how did Pam respond?
Allan: She didn’t say anything.
Therapist: What was the emotional message you conveyed? Were you upset, angry, neutral?
Allan (with no emotion or affect): Well, mostly I was angry. My voice got pretty loud, and
then I felt guilty afterwards because I lost my temper. I need to do a better job of controlling my
emotions.

                                                                                              295
Integrated Case Example

It was not rocket science for the therapist to infer from this and several other Interpersonal
Incidents that there was very poor communication between Allan and Pam and there was a
need to specifically focus upon this within the treatment.
      Allan and Eliza had enjoyed a close relationship until approximately 9 months before,
when she decided to leave school in the fifth year of high school to go to work. This had
disappointed Allan, as he had wanted Eliza to complete her final exam at school and go
to college. Allan reported that his relationship with Eliza was, in most ways, closer than
that with Pam. He fondly recalled jogging and swimming with Eliza, and having a friendly
competition to ‘improve our personal bests’.
      The therapist noted that as Allan was discussing the loss of his relationship with Eliza, his
affect became more bland and restricted, despite the clearly significant loss he was describing.
When the therapist asked about Allan’s views of Eliza’s relationship with an older woman, he
responded that he had always imagined that Eliza would be at home, and that they would
continue to have the close relationship they had developed over the years. Intellectually, he
said, he realized that she was growing up and would eventually move on, but emotionally
he had chosen to deal with it by ignoring it. It was, according to Allan, ‘too difficult to think
about’.
      The following dialogue ensued.
Therapist: Allan, I can see that you have many reactions and feelings about the changes with
Eliza, and it sounds like you’ve tried to deal with them by pushing them to the side. What I’d like
to do is understand better what is happening in your relationship with Eliza right now, and how it
affects you and your depression. We’ve talked some about the three Problem Areas in IPT – how
would you characterize the problems you and Eliza are having now?
Allan: I certainly feel a loss, so I guess grief might fit. Can you tell me more about Role Transitions
again?
Therapist: Well, Role Transition looks at changes in relationships and how they affect each per-
son differently. Many people who have developed psychological symptoms in the context of a Role
Transition have had a Loss experience, and they often feel great sadness or anxiety about it. While
I can see that grief certainly reflects how you are feeling at the moment, Role Transition might also
fit. I think that either Grief or Role Transition would work, but I also think that it needs to be your
decision.
Allan: Well, I guess that I have to still be her dad, so perhaps looking at this as a Role Transition
would probably work best.
Therapist: Let’s add that to the formulation then – do you want to write it in?
Allan: Sure.
Allan and the therapist concluded by mutually agreeing to add the following foci to the
Interpersonal Formulation (Figure 21.3):
●● An Interpersonal Dispute with Pam

●● A Role Transition with Eliza.


The therapeutic agreement
At this point, Allan and the therapist had met for three sessions. They had completed
a thorough psychiatric evaluation, an Interpersonal Inventory, and an Interpersonal
Formulation. Allan, despite his less secure attachment style and limited social support,
appeared to be a reasonably good candidate for IPT, and had agreed to it.
    It was only at this point that they developed a formal Treatment Agreement to meet for
about 12 additional 50-minute sessions of IPT over the next several months. They agreed
296
                                                                       Case Example 21.1: Allan

       Biological factors           Social factors                     Psychological factors
       42 years old                 Poor support from family and       Likes more individual
       Male                          friends                             activities
       History of depression        Only child                         Not very affectionate
       Family history of            Employed as a proof reader         Doesn’t really like social
         depression                                                      activities
       Antidepressant                                                  Hard worker
         medication                                                    Detail oriented
       Insomnia                                                        Married 18 years
       Sedative for sleep
         (taking more than rx)
       Exercises regularly



                Cultural factors                                       Spiritual factors
                Work ethic                                             Spiritual, but does not
                Stoicism valued                 Allan                   attend church


                                    Acute Interpersonal Crisis
                                    Interpersonal Dispute (Pam)
                                   Role Transition (daughter Eliza)


                                            Distress
                                   (Major depressive disorder)

Figure 21.3 Interpersonal Formulation – Allan


to continue meeting weekly, with an explicit discussion of the possibility of meeting less
frequently as Allan improved. Allan agreed to be prompt and to give at least 24 hours’ notice
should he need to change appointments.

Part II: Middle Sessions
Interpersonal Dispute: Session 4
The middle sessions were focused on the dispute and transition issues. Allan elected to
start with the dispute with Pam, and the therapist began by using clarification to get more
information. The therapist had long ago learned from his supervisor the clinical pearl ‘when
in doubt, clarify’. In order to get more information, the therapist began by asking Allan to
help him visualize and better understand the dispute by working on a Conflict Graph. Taking
a piece of paper, the therapist drew two lines and began the interaction (Figure 21.4).
Therapist: Allan, it would be helpful to me if you could help me to visualize the conflict between
you and Pam. If you’d be willing to do it, I’d like you to plot your view of where the conflict is.
The x-axis simply represents the importance of the relationship between the two of you, and the
y-axis the severity of the conflict. I’m looking for a single point at the intersection of severity and
importance as you see it.
Allan: I can do that, but how come there are no numbers? I’m thinking that the severity is pretty
high – about an 8 or so.
Therapist: I’ve found that numbers, though they might seem to be helpful, actually hinder my
understanding of the problem. It’s kind of like rating pain: numbers don’t carry much meaning,
because what is an 8 for you might be a 10 for me, or a 2 might be a 5 for another person. I’ve
                                                                                                    297
Integrated Case Example

                                         Interpersonal Conflict Graph


                                         Allan



                   Severity of problem




                                           Importance of relationship

Figure 21.4 Conflict Graph – Allan


found it much more helpful to describe your experience using words – that way the other person
can really understand better.
Allan: OK, I guess I can do that. [Pausing to examine the graph for a bit] I guess I’d put it here:
pretty serious problem, but I’m not sure how invested I am in the relationship.
Therapist: Tell me more about that.
Allan: I was thoroughly committed, but now it just seems mundane – distant. I don’t want to
leave, and I don’t have any energy for another relationship or anything, but it just isn’t important
anymore. Our relationship feels like a relationship at my work – we both have things to get done,
we can talk about schedules, and going to the store, or fixing the toilet, or taking care of the car, but
it’s nothing more than that. I find myself bored a lot at home ... alone too I guess.
The therapist proceeded to ask Allan more about the relationship, using the graph as a way to
facilitate his verbal description of the relationship. After about 15 minutes, the therapist then
shifted.
Therapist: We’ve got a pretty good start on understanding where you are in the relationship –
where do you think Pam would mark your relationship on the graph?
Allan: I don’t know – I hadn’t really thought of her perspective ...
Therapist: It might be interesting to find out what she thinks ...
Allan: Maybe so ... [pausing nearly 30 seconds to think] I guess she’d put it somewhere about
here – pretty important, but I think she’s more invested in the relationship at the moment than I
am ... I really don’t know ...
Therapist: It would be interesting to find out what she thinks ... I wonder what she would say ...
[Figure 21.5].

Session 5
In session 5, the therapist developed several more Interpersonal Incidents to further
elaborate other examples of disagreements between Allan and Pam. The therapist was able to
highlight two factors which were related to the dispute. The first was that the way Allan was
298
                                                                       Case Example 21.1: Allan

                                        Interpersonal Conflict Graph



                                        Allan
                                                                         Pam



                  Severity of problem




                                          Importance of relationship

Figure 21.5 Conflict Graph – Allan and Pam

communicating his needs to Pam was not conveying his message adequately. Second, the
therapist felt that Allan’s expectations of Pam were not realistic.
    Allan’s generalization was that ‘Pam never listens to me’, and he described feeling angry,
disappointed, and frustrated. The therapist was able to introduce the possibility that Pam may
have also felt angry and frustrated by Allan’s requests, possibly because of the way the two of
them were communicating. Allan acknowledged that this might be the case, but was still of
the view that his expectations of Pam were not unreasonable, although he admitted that he
might need to look at alternative ways of discussing them with her.
    The session began with the therapist focusing on the interpersonal issues discussed the
week previously:
    Allan, last week we discussed your dispute with Pam in some detail. Can you tell
    me what has happened with her during the week?
Allan responded that there had been two or three further arguments along similar lines to
those already reported. The therapist asked Allan to provide more examples of some specific
communications. Allan gave numerous verbatim examples of his statements such as ‘you
never do what I ask, you don’t show me any respect’ and ‘Pam, I’ve told you a thousand times
to take the trash out on Monday nights’. Several specific incidents were discussed, each of
which was in essence a repetition of the initial incident that Allan reported.
    The therapist suggested to Allan that there might be some alternative ways of approaching
the subject with Pam, and that by utilizing role playing, there might be some opportunities to
work on modifying the problematic communication. The rest of the session was spent with
the therapist and Allan role playing and discussing an instance in which he was unhappy
with some aspects of Pam’s home care. The therapist and Allan started the role play with the
therapist playing Allan. In this reverse role play, the therapist attempted to model non-
confrontative ways of communicating with Pam, including statements such as, ‘Pam, how
about we talk over a cup of coffee about getting on top of this housework?’ or ‘Pam, what ways
do you see that we can make this house run more smoothly?’. Allan saw potential merit in
this approach, but continued to externalize the problem, though he did acknowledge that his
communication style could be improved.
                                                                                           299
Integrated Case Example

    The therapist also asked Allan what he was experiencing as he played Pam. After a brief
pause, he described that he felt a bit attacked, as if he would get criticized no matter what
he said. The therapist again speculated that it might be interesting to see how Pam would
describe things. When they switched, Allan managed to start with two fairly pleasant
comments, but quickly reverted to communicating in an accusatory and rather irritable way.
Rather than directly giving feedback to Allan about this communication style, the therapist
asked him to critique his own performance, again adapting his approach to Allan’s dismissive
and fearful style. If Allan had been more securely attached a more direct approach might have
been feasible, but the therapist was aware that he would need to be very careful not to give
Allan the perception that he was being critical. Allan recognized that he had quickly moved
into more irritable communication, but concluded by noting that it was hard to change old
habits.
Session 6
Session 6 began late, as the therapist ran over time with a previous patient and needed to take
an urgent phone call. When Allan entered the room he sat down and appeared quite angry.
He then stated:
    I can’t believe you are this disorganized! You finished 4 minutes early at the
    end of the last session and today you are running 15 minutes late. I bet you still
    charge me the same fee!
The therapist was quite taken aback by this exchange. He was initially at a loss as to how to
respond, and then finally stated:
    Allan I am sorry that you feel that I don’t value your time. I do my best to stick
    to my schedule, but sometimes my day gets out of control with phone calls and
    other emergencies. Despite that, I can certainly understand why you’re angry
    with me, and appreciate the fact that you let me know how you feel.
As the therapist was responding, Allan became visibly upset and tearful. This was startling
for the therapist, as this was the first time Allan had shown any real affect. After Allan had
regained his composure, the therapist attempted to link this affect with what Allan was
experiencing at the time by examining his process affect. Allan responded:
    I can’t believe that just happened. Everybody I ever deal with lets me down, and
    the relationship goes nowhere. You’re the only person who has been able to
    make any sense to me and now this is going to go bad as well.
The therapist tried to validate Allan’s concerns by reflecting his understanding of what Allan
had said, and then responded:
    Allan, I hear your concerns and your frustration. I wonder if what just happened
    here tells us something about what’s happening in your other relationships, par-
    ticularly with Pam. I haven’t been aware of your concerns about time pressure,
    although I know you have expectations about this. I’m wondering if this is the
    same pattern that leads to problems with Pam. If we can trace how this emerged
    with Pam, I think we can better understand your conflict with her.
The therapist considered a number of options in using the therapeutic relationship. One
possibility would have been to examine the ways Allan had communicated his expectations
to the therapist. He was mindful of how distressed Allan had become, and felt that it was
better not to deal with this directly, particularly given Allan’s insecure attachment style. The
therapist therefore moved to an exploration of the similarities in Allan’s relationship with

300
                                                                     Case Example 21.1: Allan

Pam. Allan, presumably motivated by his new affective experience, was able to finally link his
expectations with the dispute with Pam. The session ended, on time with the therapist stating:
    Allan, I think this has been one of the most productive sessions we have had so
    far. I appreciate how difficult it was for you to give me feedback about being late,
    but I think that taking that risk really helped me to understand you much better. I
    also appreciate the reminder to keep my schedule in order.

Session 7
Session 7 began on time with Allan apologizing for his previous behavior. The therapist
acknowledged the apology, and again reinforced the fact that Allan’s comments had been
helpful in understanding him better. For Allan, the experience of addressing his frustration
and resolving it with the therapist seemed to have reassured him that it was possible with
Pam. He reported to the therapist that he had discussed his expectations with Pam, following
his role playing rehearsal. Allan stated that he felt that the problem had improved, and that he
would like to concentrate on the problems with Eliza.
     They briefly reviewed both the Interpersonal Inventory and Formulation. The therapist
then directed the discussion to an exploration of the transition:
Therapist: It seems like you feel that you’ve lost something significant with Eliza’s growing up – is
that accurate?
Allan: It’s hard to describe really. She continues to change, and I guess I do as well, but we just
aren’t close like we used to be.
Therapist: Change leaves a lot of us vulnerable at times.
The therapist and Allan then discussed the particular difficulties he faced in dealing with
Eliza’s relationship with the ‘older woman’. Rather than being concerned about her sexuality,
Allan was concerned that Eliza was going to be exploited by this older woman and ‘get hurt’.
The therapist stated that he had talked with many patients about the difficulty parents have
dealing with the changes that occur as their children become adults, and that this was a
frequent source of distress. The therapist felt that his relationship with Allan had progressed
to a point where he could judiciously disclose some of his own life experiences, though just a
little bit.
Therapist: I think I can begin to understand your difficulty. I can remember when my kids were
growing up, it was always hard to strike a balance between giving them their freedom, their own
choices and knowing when to come in to bail them out. You never stop worrying though, do you?
Allan: You’ve got that right. I seem to be constantly worried about Eliza, though I can’t seem to
bring myself to tell her why.
The therapist then suggested a homework task for Allan: he could have a conversation with
Eliza about her relationship, but rather than focus on his concerns, he could ask her how her
relationship with the older woman had evolved, and where she saw things going, in a friendly
and interested way rather than as a concerned parent.
Session 8
Session 8 began with Allan reporting that the homework assignment, which he completed
the evening following the previous session, was very successful. He had finally talked with
Eliza about her relationship, and had also invited her partner over to visit as well. He stated:
    I guess my relationship is going to be this way. I still miss my little girl but she isn’t
    a little girl anymore. I guess I’m going to have to deal with her as a young woman.


                                                                                                301
Integrated Case Example

The therapist asked Allan how this impacted his relationship with Emma, his younger
daughter, to which Allan replied:
    She’s been responding to a lot of what is going on around her. I think as things
    have settled down with Pam and Eliza and me that she’s felt calmer and things
    have sorted themselves out.
With his distress diminished and progress in the Problem Areas, the therapist elected to
move to general social support. During the Interpersonal Inventory the therapist had
noted a consistent pattern in which Allan’s expectations of others were often unrealistic
and poorly communicated, leading to disappointments in his social relationships. Allan
appeared to be developing some understanding of this; however, the therapist was concerned
that introducing this as a problem might be perceived as criticism and undermine Allan’s
improving self-esteem. Rather than giving direct feedback to Allan about his social skills, the
therapist chose to focus on Allan’s general social support.
Therapist: As we discussed some time earlier, good social support is often a way to protect against
depression and psychological distress. Now that things are going better, what are some ways you
could get some additional support outside of your family?
The therapist used the technique of Problem Solving to help Allan generate potential ways to
increase his social support. Allan listed three possibilities:
●● Approaching a colleague for a drink after work

●● Joining a hiking club

●● Attending a church function.

Allan agreed to a homework assignment to consider which option looked best for him and to
make some preliminary inquiries.
Session 9
In session 9, Allan told the therapist that he had made some inquiries about hiking clubs
and had some contact details. He said that he had chosen to approach a colleague at work
with whom he felt some connection. The rest of the session was devoted to Allan rehearsing
potential communication strategies through role playing. A homework task was set for Allan
to approach the colleague and invite him out for a beer after work.
     They also discussed the Conclusion of Acute Therapy at length. The topic was actually
first broached by Allan, who felt that he was doing better, and that biweekly sessions would fit
his schedule better at this point. The therapist concurred, and they agreed to meet biweekly
for two sessions, then once a month later, and then move to Maintenance Treatment. Allan
stated that he was comfortable in spacing out the meetings, as he also felt that he was doing
well. He added, however, that he was not prepared to stop therapy at this point, and liked
knowing that he would still be able to see the therapist even though it would be a while before
the next appointment.
Session 10
Two weeks later session 10 began with Allan reporting that he had invited a colleague out,
and had an enjoyable drink after work. He said that this colleague had then invited Allan and
Pam to his place for a barbecue the following weekend. The therapist noted a considerable
improvement in Allan’s mood, although Allan reported some ongoing difficulties with
his sleep. Allan agreed that he was improving, noting that he felt less stressed about his
relationships and that his marriage was improving.


302
                                                                        Case Example 21.1: Allan

     The therapist then returned to the previous discussion and asked about the possibility
of joining a hiking club. The rest of the session was then devoted to Allan practicing his
communication meeting the members of the group who had been planning a hike in the
bush outside of the city that weekend.
Session 11
At session 11, Allan reported that he was continuing to do well. He had continued with
social contacts at work, and though they were limited, he felt that they were of benefit. Allan
expressed some surprise that he was able to initiate some of these, and felt pleased that he
had begun to develop some confidence in his social skills. His relationship with Pam had also
continued to improve, as had his relationship with Eliza. After a review of progress to date,
the following dialog ensued.
Therapist: Allan, we’re nearing the end of our Acute sessions. I have found this a good point
to tie things together in order to set the scene for Maintenance Treatment. There is a quote from
Winston Churchill I always like to use here: ‘this is not the beginning of the end, this is the end of
the beginning ...’
Allan: You didn’t do the accent that well, but I think I know what you mean.
Therapist: Allan, what are your thoughts about moving to maintenance and meeting less
frequently?
Allan: Oh, I think that I’ll do fine – I’m not really concerned. After all, we’ll still be meeting, and I
can contact you if I really need to, so it isn’t as if I’ll never see you again.
Therapist: I’m glad that we will have the chance to meet periodically too – I like to keep track of
the people I’ve worked with to make sure that they’re doing well. I’ve worked with a lot of patients,
though, who still felt that finishing up the weekly meetings was hard.
Allan: I suppose that it will be a bit hard for me – I do enjoy talking to you now – at least after
we got over the time when you were late. It seems a lot easier though, since we’ve already been
meeting less frequently – every other week and then last month I mean. I’ll probably will miss this
though – it’s been a good way to talk through some problems. And I never really thought that talk-
ing about things was all that helpful before.
Therapist: I want to let you know that I’ll also miss meeting with you regularly. I’ve really en-
joyed working with you, and it’s been great to see you make so much progress. I’m looking forward
to seeing how much more progress you make when we meet next month.
At this point, the therapist considered continuing this line of questioning about Allan’s
reactions to the impending conclusion. However, based on Allan’s responses, the therapist felt
that pressing the issue further would not be productive, particularly given Allan’s attachment
style. Further, to continue to press Allan for more reactions would move the therapy into
a discussion of the therapeutic relationship, which would be a move strongly against the
precedence set in the treatment. The therapist could see no particular point in doing this,
especially since Allan was doing well. Moreover, the therapist had intentionally structured the
therapy so that the conclusion would be less abrupt – both the spacing of the later sessions
and the specific contract for provision of maintenance treatment in the future were designed
to lessen the impact of the conclusion.
     The therapist therefore decided to return to the original Interpersonal Inventory and
Formulation and highlighted the progress that Allan had made in each of the Problem Areas.
The therapist reminded Allan that the Interpersonal Dispute had originally been quite severe,
but had improved as he had examined his communication and his expectations of Pam.

                                                                                                   303
Integrated Case Example

Allan reported that he and Pam had enjoyed a significant change in their relationship, and
that Pam had even asked to accompany Allan on one of his bushwalks.
    They then looked at the Role Transition with Eliza and noted that though Allan had
experienced a loss of the relationship with his young daughter, he had acquired a new
relationship with his adult daughter. The therapist praised Allan for his ability to adapt to the
circumstances and also his courage in inviting his daughter’s partner to the family home for
a meal. Allan reported that he felt quite happy with his progress in this area and was more
confident that Eliza would be able to come and ‘talk to me father to daughter, but as a woman
rather than my little girl’.
    The therapist also praised Allan for his ability to initiate new social contacts. The therapist
noted that Allan’s improving ability to socialize had led in part to his recovery. The therapist
gave Allan one final homework task for their concluding session, which was to develop a list
of problems which might arise in the future.
Session 12
The last Acute Treatment sessions occurred one month later, and began with Allan admitting
he was feeling a little sad about the conclusion. The therapist replied by stating that while the
change was difficult, they would continue clinical contact for Maintenance Treatment. Since
the clinical contact was continuing, the therapist encouraged Allan to contact him should
acute problems emerge.
     Allan then reported a number of potential future problems following the homework
task. One of those included the recurrence of his problematic communication with Pam. The
therapist and Allan then discussed how he might apply his new skills in this regard. When
discussing potential problems with Eliza, Allan felt that there could be further complications
in her relationship with her partner, but that continuing to treat her as an adult was the best
way to help her to deal with this.
     Allan and the therapist then went on to discuss the issue of Allan’s general social
supports. Allan was aware that his tendency to isolate himself could re-emerge, and stated
that he would try to pay attention to how he communicated his needs and expectations with
his friends and acquaintances. Near the end of the session, they formally agreed, as they
had discussed before, to meet again in 3 months and to do so for at least the next year as a
Maintenance Treatment. Both put the date of the next appointment in their calendars, and
the therapist reiterated that Allan should contact him should future problems arise.
     The therapist then concluded:
    Allan, when we first met I was very concerned about how much distress you
    were experiencing, and to be perfectly honest I was very worried about you
    and your safety. I was also concerned that psychological treatment may have
    been a problem because of your initial reluctance to talk to someone about your
    problems and your relationships in particular. Despite my concerns, you’ve done
    extremely well – I’ve been impressed not only with the way you’ve dealt with Pam
    and Eliza, but with the way you’ve been able to discuss things with me. This has
    been a very rewarding experience for me, particularly as you’ve worked so hard
    and have made so much progress.
Allan blushed and smiled. He stood, shook the therapist’s hand and moved to the door,
exactly 50 minutes after he had entered. ‘See you in 3 months,’ he said, as he left the office.




304
                                                                                 References

References
1.	 Cuijpers P, et al. Psychotherapy for depression in adults: a meta-analysis of comparative
    outcome studies. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 2008, 76(6): 909–922.
2.	 Browne G, et al. Sertraline and interpersonal psychotherapy, alone and combined, in the
    treatment of patients with dysthymic disorder in primary care: a 2 year comparison of
    effectiveness and cost. Journal of Affective Disorders, 2002, 68: 317–330.
3.	 Barber JP and Muenz LR. The role of avoidance and obsessiveness in matching patients
    to cognitive and interpersonal psychotherapy: empirical findings from the treatment
    for depression collaborative research program. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
    Psychology, 1996, 64: 951–958.
4.	 Thase ME, et al. Treatment of major depression with psychotherapy or psychotherapy-
    pharmacotherapy combinations. Archives of General Psychiatry, 1997, 54(11): 1009–
    1015.




                                                                                         305
                                    Appendix A
IPT Institute and Certified Training in
Interpersonal Psychotherapy
The IPT Institute is an international organization devoted to the certification of IPT
clinicians, supervisors, and trainers. The IPT Institute also sponsors training in IPT around
the world. More information about the IPT Institute and training opportunities can be found
on the web at www.IPTInstitute.com.
    The Mission of the IPT Institute is to:
●● Establish IPT training standards

●● Ensure that IPT is delivered with a high level of adherence and at high quality

●● Develop a cadre of highly trained and certified IPT clinicians, supervisors, and trainers

●● Conduct research regarding IPT training and adherence.

The IPT Institute was founded in 2009 to develop and promote clear standards for IPT
training and certification. The IPT Institute was also developed to coordinate efforts with the
International Society of Interpersonal Psychotherapy (ISIPT). Certification is not required
to practice IPT, but is available for interested clinicians. Listings of certified clinicians and
supervisors can be found on the IPT Institute website.

IPT Certification Requirements
Level A: Introductory Course in IPT
●●   Participation in an IPT Institute accredited training course lasting 2 days or more.

Level B: Clinical Training in IPT
Prerequisites
●● Completion of a Level A IPT course.
●● Familiarity with the IPT manuals.
●● Professional clinical training in mental health treatment.


IPT supervision
●● Supervision by a certified IPT Institute supervisor for two complete IPT cases.
●● Supervision must be provided in individual or group formats.
●● Supervision must be based on audio or videotaped recordings of sessions.

●● Supervision must be a minimum of 1 hour of supervision per 2 hours of therapy.

●● IPT treatment must meet clinical training standards for adherence and quality.

●● Submission of a satisfactory IPT portfolio including:

      ●  Case reports of two completed IPT cases

      ●  Supporting documents for the two cases including the IPT Formulation and Inter-

         personal Circle
      ●  Adherence and Quality Ratings (supervisor submitted).



306
                                                              IPT Certification Requirements

Level C: Clinical Certification in IPT
Prerequisites
●●   Completion of clinical training (level B) in IPT.
●●   Nomination by a certified IPT Institute supervisor.
IPT supervision
●● Supervision by a certified IPT Institute supervisor for two additional complete IPT cases.
●● Supervision must be provided in individual or group formats.
●● Supervision must be based on audio or videotaped recordings of sessions.

●● Supervision must be a minimum of 1 hour of supervision per 2 hours of therapy.
●● IPT treatment must meet clinical certification standards for adherence and quality.

●● Submission of a satisfactory IPT portfolio including:

      ●  Case reports of two completed level C IPT cases

      ●  Supporting documents for the two cases including the IPT Formulation and Inter-

         personal Circle
      ●  Adherence and quality ratings (supervisor submitted).



Level D: IPT Supervisor Certification
Prerequisites
●● Completion of IPT clinical certification (level C).
●● Nomination by a certified IPT Institute supervisor.
●● Evidence of continuing practice of IPT.


Training
●●   Completion of certified IPT supervisor training course.
●●   Must meet ongoing level D standards for IPT supervision.
Independent evaluation of supervision
●● An IPT supervision portfolio must be submitted for independent evaluation.
●● Supervision portfolios must include portfolio materials from an IPT supervisee and
   ­documented evaluations of supervision.
●● IPT supervision must meet standards for adherence and quality as judged by an

    ­independent IPT Institute supervisor.

Level E: IPT Trainer Certification
Prerequisites
●● Completion of IPT clinical certification (level C).
●● Nomination by a certified IPT Institute trainer.
●● Evidence of continuing practice of IPT.


Training and supervision
●● Completion of an IPT Institute certified IPT trainer workshop.
●● Satisfactory co-facilitation of an accredited introductory course in IPT.
●● Must meet ongoing level E standards for IPT training.




                                                                                          307
IPT Institute and Certified Training in Interpersonal Psychotherapy

Independent evaluation of supervision
●● An IPT training portfolio must be submitted for independent evaluation.
●● Training portfolios must include videotape of an IPT training course and documented
   course evaluations from participants.
●● IPT training must meet the institute standards for adherence and quality as judged by an

   independent IPT Institute trainer.
Clinicians interested in training opportunities in IPT or supervision in IPT can contact
the IPT Institute through the IPT Institute website at www.IPTInstitute.com or can contact
Dr Scott Stuart directly at scott-stuart@uiowa.edu.




308
                                     Appendix B
Interpersonal Inventory Form
                                   Interpersonal Inventory
                                    Circle of relationships




                                         Intimate
                                         supports



                                      Close supports

                                                              Extended supports

The Interpersonal Inventory form




                                                                                  309
                                 Appendix C
Interpersonal Formulation Form
      Biological factors             Social factors           Psychological factors
      Age                            Intimate relationships   Attachment
      Genetics                       Social support           Personality
      Gender                         Employment               Temperament
      Substance use                  Education                Defense mechanisms
      Medical illnesses              Healthcare system        Trauma history
      Medical treatments             Means of communication   Stigma
      Diet, exercise



  Cultural factors                                                 Spiritual factors
  Tradition                                                        Tradition
  Family                                Unique individual          Social support

                                 Acute Interpersonal Crisis
                                    Interpersonal Dispute
                                        Role Transition
                                        Grief and Loss



The Interpersonal Formulation form




310
                               Appendix D
International Society of
Interpersonal Psychotherapy (ISIPT)
The ISIPT is an academic organization of clinicians, researchers, and other individuals
interested in clinical work, teaching, and research in IPT.
    The mission of the ISIPT is to:
●● Disseminate IPT internationally

●● Promote training in IPT

●● Promote research in IPT

●● Provide a forum to further develop IPT.

The ISIPT was founded in 2000 by Michael Robertson and Scott Stuart. The first ISIPT
meeting was held at the American Psychiatric Association meeting in Chicago in May 2000,
and was attended by clinicians from the USA, Canada, Great Britain, Iceland, Scandinavia,
Australia, New Zealand, Germany, and Luxembourg. Since that time the organization
has grown to include members from six continents and over 40 countries. The ISIPT has
convened four International ISIPT meetings including 2005 in Pittsburgh, 2007 in Toronto,
2009 in New York, and 2011 in Amsterdam. The fifth international meeting will be held in
Iowa City, Iowa, USA, in June 2013.
    More information about the ISIPT can be found at the ISIPT website at www.
interpersonalpsychotherapy.org.




                                                                                      311
                                                                                                                                                       Second edition

        Classics in Psychotherapy                                                                                                    Classics in Psychotherapy




                                                                                                       Interpersonal Psychotherapy
        Interpersonal
        Psychotherapy                                                                                                                 Interpersonal
         a clinician’s guide                                                                                                         Psychotherapy
                                                                                                                                         a clinician’s guide
                                                                                                                                        Scott Stuart and Michael Robertson




                                                                                                     Stuart and Robertson
         This ground-breaking text has firmly established itself as a touchstone for all
         therapists using interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT).
         Key features and benefits:
         ■    A wealth of clinically-based descriptions and vignettes help bring the theory
              to life
         ■    Numerous case studies highlight the key issues in IPT
         ■    Reproducible diagrams and flowcharts for use by therapists and their patients
         ■    Comprehensive coverage of key theoretical issues and an up-to-date critical
              appraisal of IPT research
         For this, the second edition, there is extended coverage of the clinical
         adaptation of IPT to post-traumatic mental health and other new applications
                                                                                                     Second edition


         of IPT, more on depression and common problems encountered in IPT training
         and dissemination, as well as how to manage joint sessions and integrate
         techniques from other approaches and models.
         Interpersonal Psychotherapy: a clinician’s guide remains invaluable for all mental
         health workers including the clinical trainee seeking an introduction to IPT,
         instructors of psychiatry residents, psychology interns, graduate students, and
         social work students.

                                                                         I S B N 978-1-4441-3754-5




                                                                         9   781444 137545




137545_INTER_PSYO_V6.indd 1                                                                                                                                            03/08/2012 14:25
