                 Table of Contents
           The Heart of Jung and Shamanism
                Preface to Second Edition
               ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS




                  SERIES FOREWORD
                      Introduction
              PLAN AND ORGANIZATION
Part One: SHAMANISM | Chapter One: Overview of Classic
                  Shamanism
                     DEFINITIONS
                CLASSIC SHAMANISM
             METHODS OF RECRUITMENT
      SHAMANISM: COSMOLOGY AND RELIGION
  IMAGINAL COSMOLOGY: INVERTING MYTH AS MAP
                AND GUIDE
          MAGICAL TREE AND AXIS MUNDI
        HOW THE SHAMAN IMAGINES DISEASE
   IMAGINATION AS CAUSE AND CURE OF SICKNESS
CHEROKEE USE OF IMAGERY IN CONCEIVING ILLNESS
                 AND CURE
          SHAMANIC SPECIALIZATION
     ARE SHAMANS CRAZY? SHAMANISM AND
            PSYCHOPATHOLOGY
              INITIATORY ORDEALS
RELATIONS WITH SPIRITS AND SHAMANIC CONTROL
    FUNCTIONS AND TECHNIQUES OF ECSTASY
          MINOR SHAMANIC FUNCTION
          SHAMANIC PARAPHERNALIA
         NORTH AMERICAN SHAMANISM
    OBJECT INTRUSION AND SPIRIT INTRUSION
        SOUL LOSS: DIAGNOSIS AND CURE
OTHER ASPECTS OF NORTH AMERICAN SHAMANISM
       Chapter Two: Technician of the Sacred
         SHAMANISM AND THE SACRED
                     ANIMISM
 RUDOLF OTTO: THE SACRED IN ITS NON-RATIONAL
                  ASPECTS
                    MYSTERY
                  FASCINATION
TREMENDUM: THE REPELLING/HORRIFIC COMPONENT
      THE AMBIVALENT NATURE OF THE HOLY
            EXPRESSION OF THE NUMEN
    VAN DER LEEUW’S CONCEPT OF THE SACRED
              THE SACRED AS POWER
        SHAMANISM, HEALING, AND POWER
         THINGS, POWER, AND SHAMANISM
                TABOO AND POWER
    ELIADE: THE SACRED AS ARCHAIC ONTOLOGY
           NOSTALGIA FOR THE SACRED
             CELESTIAL ARCHETYPES
   THE PRESTIGE OF THE CENTER AND AXIS MUNDI
                   REPETITION
         THE SACRED AND RITUAL PROCESS
   SACRED SPACE AND RITUAL TRANSFORMATION
      TRANSFORMATIVE PROCESS AND RITUAL
               LEADERSHIP
Part Two: JUNG AND SHAMANISM | Chapter Three: Jung
                the Wounded Healer
    SOME SHAMANIC ELEMENTS OF JUNG’S LIFE
 JUNG’S CHILDHOOD: THE WOUNDING OF A HEALER
LATE CHILDHOOD AND YOUTH: THE WOUND DEEPENS
           YEARS OF APPRENTICESHIP
                 FATHER FREUD
          SEPARATION AND SOUL LOSS
       JUNG’S RITUAL ELDERS AND TRIBE
   THE DESCENT: JOURNEY AND SPIRIT GUIDES
              VISIONS OF THE DEAD
   THE ANIMA: RECOVERING SOUL AT MIDLIFE
DISCOVERING THE GOAL AND RETURNING WITH THE
                  BOON
             WAS JUNG A SHAMAN?
      Chapter Four: Jung’s Theory of the Soul
 COMPARISONS AND CONTRASTS WITH SHAMANISM
THE ANCESTRAL AND ARCHAIC LAYERS OF THE SOUL
                  ARCHETYPES
         ARCHETYPE AND NUMINOSITY
     THE NUMINA: SHAMANIC AND JUNGIAN
              PERSPECTIVES
  INDIVIDUATION AND THE RELIGIOUS OUTLOOK
     INDIVIDUATION AND TRIBAL SOCIETIES
 THE ARCHETYPAL SELF (THE INNER AXIS MUNDI)
  MANDALAS: IMAGES OF SELF AS AXIS MUNDI
 JUNG’S THEORY OF PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDER
        COMPLEXES: THE “LITTLE DEVILS”
 MAKING COMPLEXES CONSCIOUS VS. SHAMANIC
              EXORCISM
              FORMS OF COMPLEXES
 WHAT IS THE STATUS OF SPIRIT GUIDES IN SEEING
              SHAMANICALLY?
THE SELF-SELF CONNECTION IN SHAMANIC SEEING
  Chapter Five: Jung’s Interpretation of Shamanism
    SHAMANISM AS A PRECURSOR TO JUNG’S
        ANALYTICAL PSYCHOLOGY
      JUNG ON ALCHEMY AND SHAMANISM
         THE STONE AS SACRED OBJECT
THE ALCHEMICAL TREE AND THE MAGICAL TREE OF
 THE SHAMAN AS SYMBOL OF ARCHETYPAL SELF
  SHAMAN’S SELF AND THE SYMBOLISM OF THE
         INDIVIDUATION PROCESS
CELESTIAL BRIDE SYMBOLISM AND THE SHAMANIC
                  ANIMA
   THE SHAMAN AND ARCHAIC INDIVIDUATION
  SHAMANIC TRANSFORMATION AND THE HERO
              ARCHETYPE
        SHAMANIC INITIATION: TRANSFORMATION
                    SHAMAN: TRICKSTER
     SHAMAN AS SHAPE-SHIFTER/EPISTEMOLOGICAL
                   MEDIATOR
  SHAMAN AS WOUNDED HEALER AND SAVIOR (SOTER)
   JUNG ON SOUL LOSS, POSSESSION, AND EXORCISTIC
                       RITES
    RITUAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL TRANSFORMATION
     THE UNDERLYING ARCHETYPAL STRUCTURE OF
                  SHAMANISM
 Part Three: SOME IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS
 Chapter Six: Dissociation, Possession, and Soul Loss: Clinical
             and Theoretical Applications Today
      DISSOCIATIVE IDENTITY DISORDER (MULTIPLE
                   PERSONALITY)
            WHAT IS MULTIPLE PERSONALITY?
                 ORIGINS OF MULTIPLICITY
   THE THERAPY OF DISSOCIATIVE DISORDERS TODAY
  SHAMANIC RESOURCES FOR TREATING PATHOLOGIC
 DISSOCIATION TODAY I: COLIN ROSS, M.D., AND THE
        HYPNOTHERAPEUTIC ADAPTATIONS
   SHAMANIC RESOURCES FOR TREATING PATHOLOGIC
DISSOCIATION TODAY II: SANDRA INGERMAN’S CLASSIC
                SOUL RETRIEVAL
       SOUL LOSS AND DISSOCIATION IN JUNGIAN
                  PERSPECTIVE
       SOME PROBLEMS IN JUNG’S PERSPECTIVES
    NOXIOUS ALTERS, POSSESSION, AND EXORCISM
   POSSESSION AND RITUAL EXORCISM IN JUNGIAN
                 PERSPECTIVE
Chapter Seven: The Power of Ritual, Image, and Archetype to
    Bring About Profound Psychological and Spiritual
                    Transformation
       MASCULINE PUBERTY RITES AND RITUAL
               TRANSFORMATION
                 RITUAL AND THE BRAIN
   RITUAL TRANSFORMATION OF THE WORLD IMAGE
             (THE COGNITIVE MAP)
        RITUAL IMAGE AND BRAIN ASSYMETRY
     THE REPTILIAN BRAIN AND THE COLLECTIVE
            UNCONSCIOUS IN RITUAL
   JUNGIAN PERSPECTIVES: RECONCILING WITH THE
      TWO-MILLION-YEAR-OLD PERSON INSIDE
       THE MAGICIAN ARCHETYPE, RITUAL, AND
                NEUROBIOLOGY
         Chapter Eight: Implications for the Future
         TOWARD A POSTMODERN SHAMANISM
     THE LOSS OF THE SENSE OF THE SACRED
SHAMANIC DIAGNOSIS OF WESTERN CULTURE: LOSS
             OF THE SACRED
     THE FUNCTION OF MYTH AND RELIGION
NAVAJO USE OF MYTHIC HERO AND RITUAL HEALING
 COMPARISONS OF NAVAJO AND JUNGIAN METHODS
         OF WORKING WITH IMAGES
JUNG’S ANSWER TO THE LOSS OF THE SENSE OF THE
                  SACRED
                     Notes
CHAPTER ONE. OVERVIEW OF CLASSIC SHAMANISM
   CHAPTER TWO. TECHNICIAN OF THE SACRED
  CHAPTER THREE. JUNG THE WOUNDED HEALER
   CHAPTER FOUR. JUNG’S THEORY OF THE SOUL
    CHAPTER FIVE. JUNG’S INTERPRETATION OF
                SHAMANISM
CHAPTER SIX. DISSOCIATION, POSSESSION, AND SOUL
                     LOSS
CHAPTER SEVEN. THE POWER OF RITUAL, IMAGE, AND
                 ARCHETYPE
  CHAPTER EIGHT. IMPLICATIONS FOR THE FUTURE


              Selected Bibliography
                 The Heart of Jung and Shamanism
                       Preface to Second Edition

This book is the second in a series of three books that elaborate a common
thread. The first book was Psychotherapy and the Sacred, which tried to
open a theoretical and clinical space for the spiritual dimension in
psychotherapy. The third volume, now in process is entitled A Little
Psychology of the Heart. It develops a theoretical and very practical
framework that bridges the differences in the vocabularies of depth
psychology and the indigenous path-based healing system known as
shamanism. The second edition of this book provides opportunity to say a
little about Jung and Shamanism in Dialogue from the vantage point I now
have with the psychology of the heart. It is the opportunity to say what the
heart of this book is. The book is, viewed from a content perspective, a
study of the rich and complex interface of a range of experiences and
technical practices associated with the healing dimensions of shamanism
and the analytical psychology developed by C.G. Jung. But this is not its
core.

Neither shamanism nor analytical psychology are mere healing professions.
Their concerns spread out over many dimensions of life, including the way
of life itself. The common ground of this way of life is earth-honoring and
attuned to Nature, it is heart centered, and holds to the sacred value of the
inner being, call it soul, or simply the person inside, or what have you, and
not the symptoms and problems that come to the healer’s attention. This
fact is discussed at various places in the book but I feel a need for more
emphasis on the path of the shaman, the path of individuation, as the
context out of which a shamanic or Jungian approach to healing must be
understood today.

Neither shamanism nor analytical psychology can be gotten simply from
studying books. A book, or a class room course can give you the lay of the
land, but it cannot provide the living experience. So the question arises,
why another edition of a book on these topics? The answer that comes has
the same urgency it did when I penned the first draft fifteen years ago: to
help us in the Western health care professions, and particularly in the
psychotherapeutic professions, to keep open a space for the sacred being
which wants to come alive, develop, expand, creatively contribute and bring
its own calling and purpose into society. That being can come alive, become
whole, and live a healthful and satisfying life if it is aligned with its own
center, its own heart, from which the life forward energies arise, and if it is
solidly connected to body, and earth, society and Spirit.

In an era of managed care, insurance companies put great pressure on
psychotherapists to use empirically validated treatments [EVTs] for
resolving specific problems and symptoms. Psychology operating in this
way has surely lost its own soul, and its sense of soul, and is in need of its
recovery. That there is therapeutic value in such validated techniques is not
in question. That one must focus only on the troubling problems, symptoms
and diagnostic patterns to expedite therapy and save costs is put in question.
Such an orientation can easily influence the therapist to lose sight of the
person inside, that being who has those problems or symptoms. If that inner
person is not cared for, supported, helped to find their own fertile core of
aliveness and live from it, then its health is not addressed, and the
fundamental life issues that could result in solid psychological health are
missed.

Psychology, etymologically speaking, is the expression or study of the soul,
this inner being we are talking about. Yet the pressure today is increasing to
treat contents [symptoms, problems, diagnostic patterns], and the patient is
not any of those things, but the one who has them. To be soul-full and not
soul-lost, as it is often put in the shamanic vocabulary, that inner being
needs consideration, support, and space, to stir, breathe, come alive, move
into the world more deeply and solidly, and this requires a great deal of
genuine and loving care on the part of the therapist. In our healing efforts,
whether they be shamanic or depth psychological, finding the one in there
who is lost and helping restore it to life is a matter of helping that being find
its own core of aliveness, its own center of being, and begin sustaining and
nourishing its life by living from there, mind aligned with heart, and servant
of it.
The common ground of sacrality in shamanism and Jungian psychology is a
path of the heart that realizes that all life is sacred [not just human life] and
that each life form, including the human, has a center, a core of aliveness in
which the Sacred dwells. Black Elk, the Lakota Sioux medicine man put it
this way to Joseph Epes Brown: “Peace comes in within the souls of men
when they realize their relationship, their oneness with the universe and all
its powers, and when they realize that at the center of the universe dwells
Wakan Tanka, and that this center is really everywhere, it is within each of
us.”

In Jung’s psychology it is the archetypal Self, and its symbols which refer
to this deep center of the person, its potential wholeness and source of
development. To individuate, that is, to become a developed, distinct, and
whole individual you had to live from this deep center and font of your
being. This is Jung’ s equivalent for a path of the heart, in which the ego-
consciousness becomes subordinate to and servant of the Self. In
shamanism this same truth is often expressed as walking a path of the heart,
in which the mind finds its proper relationship as its servant, able to enact
and carry out its vision. Hence both are essentially psychologies of the
heart. The way advocated in both traditions also asserts the value of living
in humble, respectful, right relationship to the earth and the elements of
nature. The way Black Elk suggests can only be realized in humility before
even the tiniest creatures. Jung found nature alive and brought great
reverence to it, and, his path of individuation was a human expression of
what he saw going on everywhere in nature. In a letter to a friend he wrote
“everything living dreams of individuation.” Jung believed one could only
get right with oneself if one got right with nature. Often, when he felt out of
sorts he would retreat at Bollingen where he could once again find his “true
life”, by playfully absorbing himself digging canals at the water’s edge with
a stick, and entering into mystical participation with wind and waves, trees
and an open fire over which he cooked.

As the reader progresses through this book, and looks at many details of the
shamanic and Jungian perspectives and practices, the uses of ecstasy and
imagination, altered states of consciousness and efforts at soul recovery, at
ritual forms, and possible psychotherapeutic implications, he or she will do
well to keep in mind the real heart of it all, that we have but hinted at here.
It isn’t the techniques that are the essential thing, but the person inside, its
capacity to live from the heart in earth-honoring and Nature-attuning ways
that is the essential center of the Jung/shamanism interface.

C. Michael Smith, Ph.D.

Crows Nest Retreat
Dowagiac, Michigan
January, 2007
                       ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
A book such as this is indebted to many individuals, institutions, and
disciplines, too numerous to mention all here. There are certain individuals
who have played a special role in bringing this book to birth and I would
like to mention them here. Special thanks to Robert L. Moore, the Jung and
Spirituality series editor, who formerly as my teacher and doctoral advisor
inspired a number of the insights, including the methodology, employed in
this book. It was he who inspired the dialogic topic and encouraged me
through the process of writing it. I must also extend an enormous “thank
you” to my wife, Toni Smith, who read portions of the manuscript, gave
helpful advice, and endured my absence for long periods of time while I
was working on this project. It is she who is my most loyal source of
encouragement and inspiration. Then there are those friends who
contributed to this book in a variety of ways, either through numerous
unofficial dialogues and supportive encouragement, or through editorial
revisions: my Jungian analyst friends David J. Dalrymple, John R. Haule,
Tess Castleman, Thomas Kapacinskas, E. C. Whitmont and Sylvia Brinton
Perea, and my co-workers in practice Marc T. Milhander, Dennis Waite,
Krista Matthews, and my manuscript secretary Lee Ann Parm, who
resolved many technical difficulties for me. I wish to thank my students at
the Chicago Theological Seminary and University of Chicago Hospitals,
and wish also to thank Dani, Joe, Josh, Katie, Jason, and Eric for their
enthusiastic cooperation. I must finally thank the staff at Paulist Press for
their advice, patience, and help and express deepest gratitude to Bill Kelley,
who provided his cottage at Lake Chapin so that I might enjoy the solitude
necessary to produce such a work.

C. Michael Smith
Nub Lake
Summer, 1996
                          SERIES FOREWORD

        The Jung and Spirituality series provides a forum for the critical
interaction between Jungian psychology and living spiritual traditions. The
series serves two important goals.

        The first goal is: To enhance a creative exploration of the
contributions and criticisms that Jung’s psychology can offer to spirituality.
Jungian thought has far-reaching implications for the understanding and
practice of spirituality. Interest in these implications continues to expand in
both Christian and non-Christian religious communities. People are
increasingly aware of the depth and insight that a Jungian perspective adds
to the human experiences of the sacred. And yet, the use of Jungian
psychoanalysis clearly does not eliminate the need for careful
philosophical, theological, and ethical reflection or for maintaining one’s
centeredness in a spiritual tradition.

         The second goal is: To bring the creative insights and critical tools
of religious studies and practice to bear on Jungian thought. Many volumes
in the Jung and Spirituality series work to define the borders of the Jungian
and spiritual traditions, to bring the spiritual dimensions of Jung’s work into
relief, and to deepen those dimensions. We believe that an important
outcome of the Jung-Spirituality dialogue is greater cooperation of
psychology and spirituality. Such cooperation will move us ahead in the
formation of a postmodern spirituality, equal to the challenges of the
twenty-first century.

       Robert L. Moore
       Series Editor
                            INTRODUCTION

         This book attempts to present a cross-disciplinary dialogue between
ancient and contemporary forms of shamanism and the analytical
psychology of C.G.Jung, including post-Jungian theory and practice of
Jungian analysts. The reasons for such a dialogue are several. Books on
both shamanism and on Jungian psychology are currently receiving a
growing readership, suggesting an interest in the underlying spiritual issues
involved in psychopathology and various problems in human living. There
is also a growing interest in the value of spiritual resources in
psychotherapy and healing, and in living a healthful and balanced life. The
1990s have brought with them a renewed interest in living in ecological
integrity with the planetary environment, recognizing the vital balances
required to sustain life on the planet now and in the future. There are a
plethora of books on spirituality, the paranormal, near-death and out-of-
body experiences, aura reading, and various forms of spiritual and natural
healing. Many of these areas of focus seem new to many people living in
modern western society, but one who is familiar with the history of
religions on the planet knows that these phenomena are not something new,
but something known, experienced, and assumed in the great religions, and
in the earlier forms of religious experience that preceded them. In the
archaic past of human evolution, it was the shamans who first emerged on
the scene as mediators of the sacred for their people and for purposes of
survival and healing. The shamans developed the first technologies of the
sacred and learned how to use it for healing and healthful living. For those
of us living in the culture of modernity, the sacred has not been broadly
assumed to be a fundamental resource for healing of physical and mental
problems for a long time. Rather, most individuals have become
accustomed to seeking help from the secular and scientific health care
professionals. Many who profess a faith or who have developed a spiritual
practice in modern western society have not seen a connection between
their spiritual practice and their mental and emotional problems. Western
culture has kept spirituality and health problems in separate domains.
Perhaps this has been largely due to the kind of dichotomous assumptions
exemplified in Descartes’ philosophy, in which the mental and spiritual
domains are separate and unrelated to the natural and physical domains.
People living in western societies tend to think troubled individuals who
suffer from schizophrenia, bi-polar disorder, from addictions and
depression, are suffering from syndromes that are genetically inherited or
are caused solely by organic factors such as chemical imbalances. While not
rejecting the importance of physical factors in the origins of sickness, one
of the reasons for this book is to demonstrate another way of thinking of
them that respects their natural organic and psycho-spiritual basis. Both the
psychology of C.G. Jung and the view of traditional shamanism have
affirmed both components of sickness, even though they both give priority
to the psycho-spiritual pole of experience. Both systems of healing address
the bodily components of illness through the importance of ritual, dance,
movement, expressiveness, image, aromatic scent, and medicines although
they do not place their emphasis in equal degree. Both address the human
soul as a reality that interfaces with the body and so is partly dependent
upon it, and partly independent of it. Both Jung and shamanism view the
soul as being partly directed by organic and social influences, and partly
free to direct such processes. As technologies of healing, both disciplines
speak to the soul and body, and draw upon the sacred as the ultimate
therapeutic resource. For the shaman this resource is often directed through
power animals, spirit guides, and other familiars. In Jungian therapeutics,
this resource is typically understood in terms of the deep center of the
psyche, a numinous centering point of meaning and direction, and the
totality of psychological contents at the same time. For Jung, the real
therapy, as he conceived it, was the approach to the numinous. Jung
designated the deep and numinous center of the psyche the archetypal Self.
It may be viewed as the manifestation of the divine presence within the
psyche, or of the “image of God” within the psyche. It typically manifests
itself in a variety of forms and personifications, some of them bearing close
resemblance to the shaman’s spirit guides and familiars. One reason why
Jungian psychology is becoming so popular is that it offers a way of
understanding oneself and one’s problems in living that is as much spiritual
as it is psychological. Jungian psychology offers a way of self-
understanding that gives a place to the sacred (and the numinous) in
grounding and directing one’s life from a center of meaning and knowledge
greater than the individual’s ego can provide. Perhaps the emergence of
interest in shamanism within modern western culture has also arisen as an
alternative way to meet the same needs for meaning and for healing and
healthful living in a cosmos that is ultimately experienced as sacred and
friendly. If both Jungian psychology and shamanism are increasingly
appealing to more and more people living within modern western society,
then it may be worth taking a closer look at both disciplines to examine
more carefully what forms of self-understanding and healing they are
offering, and to see if they can be brought together in some intentional and
collaborative way that may increase the place of their insights and methods
in the diagnosis and treatment of modern western forms of illness. Perhaps
the most salient common feature of shamanism and Jungian psychology is
that they both offer a way of soulful living that takes its direction from
spirit, a transcendent dimension of wisdom and power. For Jungians this
transcendent dimension within the psyche, referred to as the archetypal
Self, may be conceived as including whatever the individual considers to be
ultimate reality, or as somehow being included in the divine life: a kind of
“Atman” presence. For shamanism, the transcendent source of wisdom and
power has typically manifested itself in some type of spirit guide or power
animal, although this may yet be a manifestation of whatever the shaman
considers as ultimate reality. Both Jung and shamanism offer considerable
possibilities for helping the modern western health care profession
understand how to draw upon the sacred for healing purposes. Both can be
transformed through a mutually respectful encounter between their
wisdoms, experiences, and technologies for healing. Perhaps we may
receive an expanded view of the possibilities in psychotherapy, and perhaps
shamanism may become more psychologically knowledgeable in a way that
expands its own therapeutic repertoire. Perhaps such an encounter can lead
to a spiritually more resourceful understanding of how to help individuals
experiencing serious problems in living in a way that may gain increasing
public legitimation. These are some of the questions, and hopes, that
motivate the following study.
                    PLAN AND ORGANIZATION

         In approaching our subject matter we shall be engaging in a method
of relating the two disciplines that can be considered a dialogue. In a true
dialogue (conversation) each partner must listen well to the other, paying
attention to what is articulated and unarticulated (but perhaps implied) in
the other’s position. This is followed by a critical response based upon
careful and sympathetic listening. We will be using such a method, in the
pages which follow, for bringing the two disciplines into cross-disciplinary
relationship with each other. Each fundamental aspect of shamanism will be
reviewed and will be compared and contrasted with corresponding and
differing fundamentals of Jungian psychology, and vice versa. Some
resulting implications and/or problems will be noted.
         The discussion is divided into three parts. In Part One, the basic
elements of classic shamanism are reviewed in some detail. In Chapter One
the operational definition of shamanism is given, followed by discussions of
fundamental elements of such shamanic phenomena as the call and
initiation, shamanic cosmology, and the importance of image and myth in
sickness and healing, shamanic paraphernalia, and use of percussion.
Chapter One also discusses the basic diagnostic and therapeutic conceptions
of shamanism, of soul loss and retrieval, and of extraction. North and South
American variants are distinguished from Eurasian variants. The question
of the mental health of the shaman is also reviewed. In Chapter Two,
“Technician of the Sacred”, the importance of the sacred and of ritual
structure and leadership in shamanic healing is explored. This discussion
reviews phenomenological understandings of the sacred as it manifests
itself across cultures, and insofar as it is employed in shamanic healing. The
work of Rudolf Otto, Gerhardus Van der Leeuw, and Mircea Eliade
provides a set of compatible frameworks for understanding the experience
of the sacred, and its healing power. The work of anthropologist Victor
Turner on ritual process, and of Jungian analyst and theorist Robert L.
Moore on ritual structure and leadership, helps us to understand the
transformative power of shamanic ritual and psychotherapeutic process.
This discussion is intended not only to inform us of the nature and power of
shamanic rituals, but also to make more apparent the possibilities of good
ritual process and leadership in psychotherapeutic treatment. It can also
serve as a lens through which the therapeutic process may be observed in a
cross-disciplinary way.
         Part Two, entitled “Jung and Shamanism”, explores the life and
work of C.G. Jung, and draws comparisons and contrasts with shamanism.
This discussion is kicked off by first examining the basis of Jung’s work in
his own life experience. Thus Chapter Three, “Jung the Wounded Healer,”
examines Jung’s life as it would that of a shaman. It explores some of the
fundamental shamanic elements in his life, giving attention to his early
childhood formation and to his midlife crisis, and offers a kind of shamanic
pattern of wounding, call, and initiation as parallels—but also giving
attention to the differences. Special attention is given to Jung’s break with
Sigmund Freud and the resulting loss of identity and breakdown in which
he made his nekyia, a descent into the unconscious, in which Jung
encountered the spirits, developed a relation with a spirit guide, and had
extraordinary visions, some of which were prophetic of his future life,
mission, and work. Jung described his midlife crisis as a condition of soul
loss and recovery. Out of his recovery he obtained a vision for his life’s
work, and a new sense of purpose which he committed himself to for the
benefit of himself, but also for his tribe (western culture).
         Chapter Four is entitled “Jung’s Theory of the Soul”. In this chapter
the fundamentals of Jung’s theory are discussed and the basic elements of
Jung’s mature psychology are given, followed by comparisons and contrasts
with shamanism. The layers of the collective unconscious, the role of the
archetypes, the importance of the numina and spirits in healing, and the
importance of image and symbol are brought into dialogue with the
corresponding elements in classic shamanism. The role of complexes, the
“little devils,” in illness and therapeutics is discussed and then compared
and contrasted with shamanism. The central role of the archetypal Self, the
sacred center of Jungian psychology, is identified as the basis for healthful
living, and the role it plays in illness and healing is explored. This is
compared with the role of the sacred in shamanic therapeutics. Chapter
Five, “Jung’s Interpretation of Shamanism,” reviews what Jung specifically
had to say about shamanism, as found in his collected works. Jung’ s view
of shamanism as an archaic individuation process is surrounded by parallels
from alchemy, in which Jung looks at certain shamanic phenomena such as
sacred stones, the world tree, and the celestial bride as manifestations of the
archetypal Self. Various aspects of shamanic psychology and functioning,
such as the shaman as trickster, shape-shifter, and epistemological mediator,
are explored. Jung’s own statements about soul loss, possession, and
exorcistic rites are compared and contrasted with the perspective of classic
shamanism. From Jung’s perspective, this chapter sums up the underlying
archetypal structure of shamanism and shamanic ritual process.
        Part Three, “Some Implications and Applications,” consists of three
chapters which explore several contemporary theoretical implications and
potential applications resulting from these discussions. Chapter Six,
“Dissociation, Possession, and Soul Loss,” gives extensive discussion of the
similarities of modern dissociation theory with shamanic theories of soul
loss. Tracing a history of dissociation and comparing and contrasting the
experiences of shamans and individuals suffering from multiple personality,
the author seeks to show one area where the dialogue between classic
shamanic resources and Jungian psychology and therapeutics can be most
beneficial. Two examples of the use of shamanic resources in dissociative
and other mental disorders today are given. One example reviews the
treatment methods of psychiatrist Colin A. Ross, M.D., who interfaces
hypnotherapeutic methods with shamanic metaphor in his treatment of
dissociative disorders. The second example explores the soul retrieval work
of Sandra Ingerman, a contemporary white urban shaman and former
psychotherapist. Ingerman also relates her understandings of soul loss to
psychological dissociation, and sees soul loss as widespread in modern
culture. Not only does she see shamanic soul retrieval as helpful in the
dissociative disorders, but sees it as effective in treating a wide variety of
disorders related to trauma, shock, accident, and injury. She includes
addictive disorders, co-dependency, and depression amongst the examples
of troubles which classic soul retrieval is effective with. Although
practicing purely as a shaman today, Ingerman is careful to acknowledge
the importance of counseling and psychotherapy in helping patients
integrate the retrieved souls and soul-parts. Both Ross and Ingerman have
provided examples of how the resources of shamanism may be useful in
treating various forms of mental disorder and psychopathology in
contemporary western society. The examination of their work is then
followed by Jungian reflection upon their work in an effort to understand
these hybrid forms of contemporary shamanism from the perspective of
Jungian and post-Jungian theory. The chapter ends with a discussion of a
problematic and intractable form of pathologic dissociation associated with
demonic possession and noxious alters. The insights of anthropologist
Felicitas Goodman and Jungian psychology are used to provide additional
understanding of how well-formed therapeutic ritual can be especially
effective in treating such serious and potentially life-threatening forms of
disorder, which are often refractory to the more conventional psychiatric
and psychotherapeutic methods.
         How well-formed therapeutic ritual can be so effective is the subject
matter of Chapter Seven. “The Power of Ritual, Image, and Archetype”
takes up this problem by drawing attention once again to the importance of
image as a potential cause or cure of illness, and correlates these
understandings with data from neurobiology and post-Jungian theory of
archetypal structures and processes. These discussions necessitate a
broadening into a multi-disciplinary discussion that includes perspectives
from medical anthropology, neuroanatomy, psychophysiology, cancer
research, and neuro-linguistic programming in an effort to further
understand the illness-causing and health-promoting powers of image and
ritual. Post-Jungian theorists and researchers such as Anthony Stevens,
Ernst Rossi, Douglas Gillette, and Robert L. Moore are examined for
additional insight into the relation between archetypes and brain structure,
with special attention to the implications of image and ritual in shamanic
healing and psychotherapy. The chapter is concluded with a review of the
work of Robert L. Moore and Douglas Gillette on the relation between the
shaman as ritual elder and the magus archetype.
         Chapter Eight, “Implications for the Future”, moves beyond the
focus on classic soul loss/retrieval and dissociation to a more fundamental
problem in western society: loss of the sacred from the assumptive world.
This chapter seeks to argue that soul retrieval in itself is insufficient and
incomplete when the underlying view of the world is profane and secular.
Shamanic soul retrieval is a psycho-spiritual form of healing that only
makes sense if the sacred is presupposed in the assumptive world of both
patient and healer. The importance of the assumptive world is explored
from a Jungian perspective, and the argument is advanced that retrieving the
sacred is necessary in western culture generally, and in the health care
culture of western society specifically. Retrieving the sacred is an important
part of retrieving the soul in post-modern western society.
 Part One: SHAMANISM | Chapter One: Overview of Classic
                    Shamanism
                              DEFINITIONS


        The term shamanism is commonly used to refer to a complex of
practices of a magico-religious character concerned primarily with what
may be called, in our modern western idiom, psychospiritual and
psychosomatic healing. The word shaman has been derived from the
Russian language through Siberian Tungisic s’aman; its precise and original
meaning is uncertain. But there are corresponding terms in other cultures,
for example the Yakut ojuna, the Mongolian buga (boga), the Turko-Tartar
kam, and Vedic sram. The latter Vedic term may give us a clue to its
meaning, sram = to heat oneself or practice austerities.1 Although its
ultimate root may turn out not to be Siberian, it refers to a complex of
related practices indigenous to Siberia and Central Asia, with cognate
words denoting specific magico-religious practices in which malignant
spirit powers are overcome with the aid of more powerful helping or
tutelary spirits.
        Whatever its etymological derivation, the word shaman has been
broadly used to denote a specific group of healers in diverse tribal cultures
and traditional societies who have been also previously referred to by
names such as medicine man, medicine woman, witch doctor, sorcerer,
magician, and, in some cases, seer, prophet, witch, and priest or priestess. It
was customary, until the major study of historian of religions Mircea Eliade
on shamanism,2 to confuse these various conceptions and practices with
shamanism. Eliade sought a more limited or restrictive definition by which
to distinguish shamanism from other forms of healing presupposing the
sacred. Since Eliade’s monumental work on shamanism, many scholars in
the fields of cultural anthropology and cultural psychology have adopted
Eliade’s more restricted, if complex, definition. Eliade’s first definition is
that shamanism = technique of ecstasy. This is to say that a distinguishing
feature of the shaman is that he or she practices by means of ecstasy or
trance. But Eliade is careful to point out that ecstasy is employed by other
healers, magicians, seers, mystics, and witches. The shamanic ecstasy is
distinguished further by a specific ecstatic method which belongs to the
shaman, and to the shaman alone. This is the trance state by which the
shaman’s soul is believed to leave his or her body and travel or ascend to
the upperworld or descend to the lowerworld. There it encounters spirits
(malignant and benign), souls of the dead (e.g., ghosts of human and animal
creatures), and lost souls which have wandered away or been stolen. There
the shaman encounters helping spirits as well. A further distinction is made,
however, between the shaman’s relation to the spirits, and those of other
individuals who may be possessed by them, or call upon them. Eliade notes
that in both the primitive and modern world there are individuals who
profess to have a relation to the spirits, to call upon them, to become a
medium, a channeler, whether they are possessed by them or control them.3
In defining the shaman’s relation to the helping spirits he notes that the
shaman differs from a possessed person in that he or she controls his or her
spirits, and in that the shaman is a human being who “is able to
communicate with the dead, demons, and nature spirits, without thereby
becoming their instrument.”4 With respect to healing also, the shaman
employs a unique ecstatic method, although there are other medicine men
and women and healers who employ the sacred for healing purposes. Thus,
not every ecstatic or every healer can be considered a shaman, although the
shaman may be considered a medicine man/woman or ecstatic.
         There are other anthropologists and psychologists who have taken a
broader definition of shamanism, referring more to the fact that the shaman
is a healer or ecstatic who enters into altered states of consciousness at will,
and this without Eliade’s distinguishing features of the descent or ascent to
the lower and upper worlds, or the commanding of spirits.5 This broader
definition permits the including of any ecstatic practitioners who enter
controlled altered states of consciousness, and may be more applicable to
the complex forms of shamanism found in many native North American
ritual healers or medicine men and women, particularly in the Southwest,
Plains, and Eastern and Southeastern Woodlands. One of the major
distinctions between Siberian and southern Asian forms of shamanism, and
North American shamanism, rides, to some extent, upon Eliade’s more
restricted definition. But it should be noted that certain North American
groups among the Eskimo, Northwest Coast Indians, and Ojibway fit very
precisely Eliade’s limited criteria.


                       CLASSIC SHAMANISM

        Given Eliade’s restricted definition, many scholars consider
shamanism to be preeminently a phenomenon of Siberia and Inner Asia.
There are other reasons for this attributed preeminence. Although
shamanism may be central or peripheral to various societies, throughout the
regions of northern and southern Asia the life of local societies has centered
upon shamanism. This does not mean that the shaman is the one and only
manipulator of the sacred for religious or healing purposes, nor does it
mean that he or she completely usurps these fields, for often other religious,
medical, herbal, and mystical functionaries exist alongside shamanism. In
many tribes, for example, a sacrificing priest (sometimes a priestess) co-
exists alongside the shaman. The Asian shaman may even be an officiary of
a religious or monastic tradition in some cultures (e.g., a Bon Po shaman).
Among the Buddhist lamaseries of Tibet, for example, are certain lamas
who are known also as shamanic healers. Sudhir Kakar, the psychoanalyst
and cultural psychologist, documents the case of a Buddhist monastic leader
(the Lama of Macleodgani) who is also a shaman known for his ability to
heal various mental disorders through shamanic methods. The idiom of this
healer is part shamanistic and part Buddhist; the methods of diagnosis and
treatment employing this mixed idiom are shamanic.6 At any rate, the
shaman remains a dominating figure, and it is he or she alone who,
throughout Asia, is master of ecstatic experience par excellence.


                   METHODS OF RECRUITMENT

       The chief methods of recruitment of shamans are two: 1) hereditary
transmission, and 2) spontaneous vocation (or call). There are also various
individuals who seek to become shamans by their own free will (questing),
or by the will of the clan (often when no other candidates are available).
These self-made shamans, in Asia at least, are generally considered to be
less powerful than those who have been called or who have inherited the
profession.7 However the shaman may be selected, he or she must receive
two types of instruction before he or she will be recognized or legitimated
as a shaman. The first type of instruction may be termed ecstatic, coming
primarily though dreams and trances. In addition to this there must be
instruction in traditional shamanic methods (ecstatic techniques, healing
methods and techniques, ritual formulas, chants, amulets, etc.,) of relevance
to the culture, the names and functions of the spirits, the genealogy and
mythology of the tribe, and the “secret language”. This two-fold instruction
by the spirits and the master shamans is considered an initiation, which may
be public or which may occur totally in the neophyte’s ecstatic experience.
Thus the absence of a public confirmatory initiation ritual does not imply
the absence of initiation, for “the latter can perfectly well occur in a
dream”.8 This latter type is found, for example, among the Rocky Mountain
tribes of North America, where shamanic power can be inherited, but then
the transmission “always takes place through an ecstatic experience”.9


          SHAMANISM: COSMOLOGY AND RELIGION

         Shamanism is not itself a religion, although it constitutes ail original
form of religious experience. It is more accurate to say that shamanism is a
set of techniques and an ideology which becomes attached to a religion (or
tribal mythology) and which has its own history and system of beliefs. As
such, shamanism must always be considered within the context of the
religion and the society which it serves. Shamanism is a very ancient and
archaic form of religious experience and a healing profession with elements
discernible the world over from Paleolithic times to the present. As
societies and cultures have evolved into more complex groupings or
civilizations adopting the cosmologies of the great religions (e.g.,
Buddhism, Islam, Christianity), shamanic elements are still discernible,
sometimes in strikingly complete form; at other times just fragments of
shamanic imagery, belief, or practice remain. However, in the more
restricted form of the shaman as one who enters an ecstatic trance in which
the soul leaves the body and journeys to the underworld or upperworld,
there are certain forms of cosmology (as well as religion and society) which
correspond to such belief and practice.
         The shamanic flight presupposes a sacred cosmology, often
objectified in tribal myths and beliefs which envision the sacred or ultimate
reality as structured in what might be called an archetypally ordered, three-
storied cosmology. This cosmology entails the concept of the earth, which
is our world and for the shaman a plane of non-ordinary reality. There is
also the upperworld (sky world) as the abode of helping spirits, angelic
beings, and the like, and the underworld below, with its ghosts, ancestral
and malignant spirits, and various mysterious places.10 The vocation of the
shaman as one who breaks through the various planes in consciousness
presupposes the ability to move between these realms at will, discovering
and reporting their structure and nature, and drawing upon their resources
for healing and restoring order for the people. Often these realms are
objectified in art, song, myth, or ideograms which illustrate these other
dimensions. The shaman’s vocation is to break through these planes for the
purpose of establishing effective communication between the three cosmic
zones. There are a variety of symbolic expressions used to indicate or
thematize the path, access, or channel of communication with the spirit
realms.


IMAGINAL COSMOLOGY: INVERTING MYTH AS MAP AND
                    GUIDE

        For most members of tribal society, there is belief in these
dimensions, but there is little personal experience of them, except in the
dramatic forms enacted in public ritual and ceremony. Belief in upper and
lower worlds may be literal, but something not explored in ecstasy. For the
average member of a traditional society, the mythic three-storied cosmology
serves as a “sacred canopy” (Peter Berger) to be believed in and lived in
accord with. It is the source of collective and social origins, of their ethical
foundations, and serves to guide lives through the life-cycle. However, for
the shaman, it is much more; it is a private and personal, rather than mere
public, experience. The shaman typically takes the mythic cosmology of his
or her culture and “inverts it” (Eliade ), that is, turns it into an inward
geography, using it as an itinerary and guide in his or her journeys to the
upper and lower regions of non-ordinary reality. There are two
psychologically related reasons for this:
         1) The shaman’s journey employs the imagination, and the use of
myth as inner map gives the shaman a way of imagining non-ordinary
reality, so that he or she may move about intentionally in it.
         2) In trance, the mind tends to be subject to distractions and
wanderings. By having an inner map, the shaman has a rich and complex
guide which helps him or her keep focused upon the task, and prevents
aimless mental wandering. The shaman’s use of ecstatic trance is always
controlled and intentional. This does not mean it is over-controlled or lacks
spontaneity. If the shaman enters a tunnel and travels down into the lower
world to find an illness-causing spirit, he or she does not know what sort of
spirit he or she will find, nor in what context.


               MAGICAL TREE AND AXIS MUNDI

         Eliade notes that some variation of an axis mundi, a central axis
which links the upper and lower worlds with our world, and supports it, is
often symbolized by a cosmic tree, a sacred mountain, or a ritual pillar.11
These representations are given ritual expression in shamanic rites
(especially in public shamanic initiation rites). For example, among the
Ojibway of northern Michigan and southern Canada, the Tcisaki diviner
shaman constructs a very small conjuring lodge out of three pine tree poles.
One tree with its branches is extended higher than the others, symbolizing
the cosmic axis, the path by which the manitou (sacred spirits) may enter
the conjurer’s lodge.12 Sometimes the world tree is mounted in public
initiatory rituals permitting the initiate to demonstrate shamanic prowess.
As an interior psychological aid (or tool), the shaman’s magical tree is
imaginally seen, being used in trance for climbing up to the hole in the sky,
where the shaman can pull himself or herself up into the sky world, or for
descending into the lower world through its roots.


            HOW THE SHAMAN IMAGINES DISEASE

         The shaman’s conception of the cause of illness is imagined in terms
of spirits and deities, which, existing in the upper and lower worlds, can
affect human beings on earth (our world) for good or ill. Shamanic
therapeutics begins with a two-fold process, that of imaging the cause, and
that of actively imaging the cure. That is, it begins with a diagnosis
(determining the nature and cause of the illness imaged as pathogenic spirit
or object), followed by a corresponding curative image (rectification,
restoration, or cure by a helping spirit). Typically the shaman will go into
ecstatic trance to determine whether or not the soul is impaired by intrusion
of pathogenic objects or spirits projected into the body by sorcerers (black
shaman), or by offended spirits. Once the cause has been determined, the
therapeutic method is imaged and employed. According to anthropologist
and shamanic scholar Michael Harner, there are two main or primary
methods of shamanic healing: 1) restoring something which is lacking in
the person who is ill, or 2) removing something that does not belong. The
latter therapeutic does not require the shamanic journey, and is usually
employed for a more localized illness. That is, it consists in working here in
the middleworld, typically using divination techniques and moving back
and forth from what Harner calls “ordinary” and “non ordinary reality” in
order to see the illness and remove it by specific methods.13 Typically the
shamanic efforts are focused on locating the foreign or pathogenic object in
the body of the afflicted, and then extracting it, usually by the technique of
sucking.
         The restoring method does typically involve the shamanic journey to
retrieve the lost soul. According to Harner the individual who has lost
his/her soul is at death’s door, comatose, or in a suicidal state of despair or
severe depression; that is, he or she has lost a vital principle or power. The
shaman then typically journeys into the other world to retrieve the lost soul
or power and restore it to the person.14 Henri F. Ellenberger, in a more
detailed effort, has listed five types of shamanic disease theory and their
corresponding therapeutics. They are as follows: 1) “disease object
intrusion”’ the therapy for which is “extraction of the disease”; 2) “loss of
soul”, the therapy for which is finding and restoring it; 3) “spirit intrusion”,
the therapy for which may be exorcism (depossession) if it be by a spirit
entity, mechanical extraction if it be an object, or transference of the foreign
spirit somewhere else; 4) “breach of taboo”, the therapy for which consists
typically of confessions and ritual propitiation; and 5) “sorcery”, which
requires a counter-magic therapeutic.15


     IMAGINATION AS CAUSE AND CURE OF SICKNESS

        Viewed in terms indigenous to shamanism, illness is most frequently
caused by invading spirits. Viewed in the language of psychology, spirits
are perceived inwardly as images. The image, according to Jeanne
Achterberg, may be viewed as both the cause and cure of sickness in
shamanism.16 This is true whether the sickness manifests itself physically
or psychologically and spiritually. The shaman, in trance, diagnoses by
entering an imaginal geography intensified vividly by ritual sonic and
rhythmic driving, often through percussion (drums, rattles, monotonous
chants, etc.). There, pathogenic spirits/objects are depicted, that is, imaged,
and therapeutic action taken by means of images. Anthropologist Janet
Siskind gives an example of the way Sharanahua shamans employ
therapeutics on the patient’s belief system by means of shamanically
constructed images related to tribal mythic figures and themes. Siskind
notes that Sharanahua patients typically report dreams that, interestingly
enough, overlap with the diagnostic/healing categories of the shaman’s
songs. The shaman evidently selects from among the patient’s reported
dreams those images that fit his or her classification. Typically only one or
two dream images are reported by the patient to the shaman. According to
Siskind’s analyses, most of the images or symbols in the patient’s dreams
echo the myths and stories of the culture. Siskind reports the case of
Tomuha, treated by the shaman Ndaishiwaka, the patient’s brother-in-law.
The case illustrates the Sharanahua shaman’s way of working with the
imagination, of the patient and himself, to effect a cure.

     Ndaishiwaka’s sister-in-law, Tomuha, was vomiting; her liver
     hurt, and she strongly wanted to die. Her father-in-law went to
     bring Ndaishiwaka (he was working away from the village at
     the time). The next morning he arrived at the village. He asked
     Tomuha what she had dreamed, and she described seeing a high
     bank of the river. In her dreams she climbed up and sat there
     alone. The shaman sang about a high bank of the river. Tomuha
     was slightly better the next day but still very ill, so he went to
     get ayahuasca, cooked it, and drank it that night. He saw the
     high bank and Tomuha sitting alone. A Culina is coming near
     her and he says, “You will die, Tomuha”, and throws a magical
     substance into her so that she vomits and cries out. “But I am
     there”, says the shaman, “and I am shaking my spear, and the
     Culina is frightened and runs away. And you will not die,
     Tomuha”. Then the shaman sang about dori, the magical
     substance. He saw Tomuha coming up the river, alone in a
     canoe. She was cured.17

        Suskind points out that Peruvian images underlie a piece of
Sharanahua belief, that strangers are dangerous. The Culina thus represents
the image of direct and pathogenic malice. The shaman speaks to and works
with the patient in the language of the imagination, evoked through the
curing song. We may conjecture, from a psychological standpoint, that by
acting upon pathogenic images produced by the patient, the shaman is able
to evoke a healing response at the neurophysiological and unconscious
psychological levels of experience. As we shall later see, one of the major
areas of convergence between shamanism and Jungian psychology has to do
with the value of images. Jung placed a great importance upon images
(“Image is psyche”). The therapeutics of the soul, for Jung, involves
listening to the psyche speak through images, and responding to the psyche
in terms of images.18
        Like the shaman, modern psychotherapists often work with imagery
to effect healing responses. The employment of imagery in psychotherapy
has been part of the history of depth psychology. There is great affinity
between the uses of imagery suggested in clinical hypnosis today, and that
employed by shamans traditionally. Another good example of the
importance of images in shamanic therapeutics can be observed in
traditional Southeastern Cherokee shamanism. The Cherokee shaman
traditionally employed a color imagery symbol system for what may be
psychologically understood as hypnotically altering the patient’s
experience. In order to gain a better sense of the interplay of cultural,
shamanic, and personal imagery in shamanism, we shall look at the
Cherokee system of imagery used in diagnosis and healing.


 CHEROKEE USE OF IMAGERY IN CONCEIVING ILLNESS
                   AND CURE

        Traditionally, for Southeastern Cherokee Indians, the most common
forms of illness were conceived as being caused by animal spirits retaliating
against humans for their disrespect. The depiction of the causes and
methods of curing illness in imaginal terms was systematic. For example, if
a hunter forgot to show respect by making appropriate prayers and petitions
to an animal whose life he took by asking its permission and explaining his
reasons, then the animal spirit of that species, for example, Bear, would
seek after him and afflict him with illness. The ritual formulae
(chants/songs) of the Cherokee shaman addressed these diseases and the
offended spirits believed to cause them in a language of images designed to
effectively attack the pathogenic images. The Southeastern Cherokee myth
which recounts the origins of sickness and cure illustrates the role which
images played in shamanic therapeutic conceptions.

      In the old days the members of the brute creation were gifted
      with speech, and dwelt in amity with the human race. The
      increase of humanity, however, crowded the animals into the
      forests and desert places of the earth, and upon the invention of
lethal weapons, man commenced the wholesale slaughter of the
beasts for the sake of their flesh and skins, and trod upon the
lesser animals with contempt. The animals, driven to despair,
resolved upon retributive measure. The first to meet were the
bears, headed by old White Bear, their chief. After several
speakers had denounced mankind for the bloodthirsty behavior,
war was unanimously decided upon, and the nature of human
weapons was discussed. It was discovered that the bow and
arrow were the principal human weapons, and it was resolved
to fashion a specimen to see if they could not turn man’s
weapons against himself. A piece of wood suitable for the
purpose was procured, and one of the bears sacrificed himself
to provide them with gut for the bowstring. After the bow was
completed it was discovered that the claws of the bears spoiled
their shooting. One of the bears, however, cut his claws, and
succeeded in hitting the mark. But the chief, the old White Bear,
interposed with the remark that the claws were necessary to
climb trees with, and that all would have to starve were they to
cut them off.
  The next council was held by the deer, under their chief, Little
Deer. They resolved to inflict rheumatism upon every hunter
who should slay one of them unless he asked a pardon in a
suitable manner. They gave notice of this decision to the nearest
settlement of Indians, and instructed them on how to make
propitiation when forced by necessity to kill one of the deer
folk. So when a deer is slain by the hunter, the Little Deer runs
to the spot, and bending over the blood stains, asks the spirit of
the deer if it has heard the prayer of the hunter for pardon. If the
reply be “yes”, all is well, and the Little Deer departs; but if the
answer is in the negative, he tracks the hunter until he is in his
cabin and strikes him with rheumatism, so that he becomes a
helpless cripple. Sometimes the hunters who have not learned
the proper formula for pardon attempt to turn aside the Little
Deer from his pursuit by building fire behind them in the trail.
  The fishes and reptiles then held a joint council, and arranged
to haunt those human beings who tormented them, with hideous
      dreams of serpents twining around them, and of eating fish
      which had become decayed.19
       Lastly, the birds and insects, with the smaller animals,
      gathered together for a similar purpose, the grubworm presiding
      over the meeting. Each in turn expressed an opinion, and the
      consensus was against mankind. They devised and named
      various diseases.
       When the plants, which were friendly to man, heard what had
      been arranged by the animals, they determined to frustrate their
      evil designs. Each tree, shrub, herb, down even to the grasses
      and mosses, agreed to furnish a remedy for some one of the
      diseases named. Thus did medicine come into being, and thus
      the plants came to furnish the antidote to counteract the evil
      wrought by the revengeful animals. When the shaman is in
      doubt as to what treatment to apply for the relief of a patient,
      the spirit of the plant suggests a fitting remedy.20

        The rationale for Cherokee shamanism rests upon this myth of the
origins of sickness and healing. The cause of illness is imaged in terms of
offended animal spirits, and cure is imaged in terms of sympathetic animal
and vegetation spirits. The symbolism of the colors and the four directions
added another component to the mythic imagery. For example, if one
offended an animal spirit, then the shaman will call upon the right
counteracting spirit from the four directions with their respective colors.
That is, a greater healing image is called upon to destroy a pathogenic
image. Cherokee therapeutics presupposes a kind of sympathetic magic,
which operated by association. A piece of rope, for example, could
symbolize a snake because of the similarities of shape and length. When it
comes to illness, the pathogenic color and animal spirit type then indicate
the type of therapeutic spirit and its color which must be called upon to
extract, obliterate, or counter the destructive spirit. In some cases all colors
and directions were used in rituals which look remarkably like modern
hypnosis in their suggestiveness and strategic thoroughness. For example,
to remove a rheumatism the shaman diagnoses its cause, in this case the
intrusion caused by Little Deer, an archetypal deer god; then the shaman
calls upon the agency of some powerful animal spirit which is the enemy of
the deer—this is usually the dog or wolf. Lewis describes one such ritual:

      The shaman thus invokes Red War Dog, who begs him to come
      to the assistance of the sick man (chants). This spirit is
      supposed to arrive and carry off with him a portion of the
      disease in his mouth. The Blue, Black, and White Dogs of the
      other lands [directions] situated at the remaining cardinal points
      are also successively invoked, and lastly, the White Terrapin of
      Wahala is prayed to remove what the dogs have left. He is
      supposed to do so and the shaman declares that a cure has been
      accomplished.21

  We could say that the shamanic conception of cause and cure of illness, as
illustrated in this Cherokee example, presupposes the notion of images as
being either potential slayers or healers. The importance of images in
shamanic healing, as in medical and psychotherapeutic healing today, can
hardly be underestimated. The tools of the medical profession also have an
image aspect. A pill, whatever its biochemical properties, is psychologically
experienced as an image of something that will heal, help, or bring relief.
Placebo studies have confirmed that something that looks like medicine can
be therapeutically effective, and patients who report that their medications
are working before they’ve had time to be medically effective suggest that
therapeutic images can have a dramatic beneficial effect upon mind, brain,
and body.22 As we continue with our discussion of other basic features of
shamanism, of shamanic tools, methods, and ritual, it is important to remain
mindful of the primacy of images in these other features.


                   SHAMANIC SPECIALIZATION

 In many tribal and traditional cultures there are distinctions and
classifications of shamans, according to their gifts and specialized
functions. There are what are called “white” (benevolent) shamans, and
“black” (malevolent) shamans, although the latter type are now more
commonly called sorcerers, and appear to be an aberration. There are
shamans who diagnose and treat illness, and there are those who are
specialized as diviners or conjurors, and weather controllers, and who do
not perform curing rituals. Often, however, the shaman encompasses all of
these roles and functions.
        Although the imagination plays an abundant role in shamanic
experience and practice, few shamans would want to say that they were
dealing with images. This would be a modern psychological way of
speaking. Certainly if spirits are viewed from a psychological disciplinary
angle they manifest themselves as images. The traditional shaman prefers to
speak of these manifestations in their own sacred/animistic idiom as spirits
and other numinous entities. Traditional shamans would also not accept an
understanding that they were merely projecting mental contents and images
of their own psyches, although there is often awareness of such projection.
Michael Harner asserts that shamans believe that the mind is used to pass
through itself into that which is not-mind, not personal psyche, into
something which is beyond the personal mind.23 The cosmos is viewed as
something far greater than the personal mind, something which can be
assessed through the mind, through images.



          ARE SHAMANS CRAZY? SHAMANISM AND
                  PSYCHOPATHOLOGY

         Anthropologists, psychoanalysts, and other scholars studying the
strange behavior of shamanism have debated whether or not the shaman is
psychopathological. Certainly illness is often associated with the shamanic
call and initiation. Until more recent years many scholars believed that the
shaman was always psychopathologically ill, perhaps suffering from
nervous disorders such as hysteria, epilepsy, or even from a psychosis.
According to Eliade the problem was wrongly formulated. First he argues
that it is not always true that shamans are, or always have to be,
neuropathics. Second, those among them who were ill became shamans
precisely because they were able to effect a cure of themselves. Finally,
Eliade claims, “To obtain the gift of shamanizing presupposes precisely the
solution of the psychic crisis brought on by the first symptoms of election
or call.”24 Most scholars sympathetic to Eliade’s views now agree that the
shaman, if he or she undergoes a psychic illness, is constitutionally stronger
than the neuropath precisely because he or she can heal himself/herself.
         Eliade does not deny the sometimes severe nature of the illness. He
even goes so far as to claim that the shamanic illness is often of crisis
proportions sometimes bordering on madness.25 However, since the youth
or initiant cannot become a shaman until after this crisis is resolved, it
clearly must play a role in his or her initiation:

      The shock provoked in the future shaman by the discovery that
      he has been chosen by the gods or spirits is by that very fact
      valuated as an “initiatory illness”. His sufferings are exactly
      like the tortures of initiation. Just as, in puberty rites or rites of
      entrance into a secret society, the novice is “killed” by
      semidivine beings, so the future shaman sees in dreams his own
      body dismembered by demons. The initiatory rituals peculiar to
      Siberian and Inner Asian shamanism include a symbolic ascent
      to Heaven up a tree or pole; in a dream or a series of waking
      dreams, the sick man chosen by the gods or spirits undertakes
      his celestial journey to the World Tree. The psychopathology of
      the shamanic vocation is not profane; it does not belong to
      ordinary symptomology. It has an initiatory structure and
      significance; in short, it reproduces a traditional mystical
      pattern.26

       Once healed of the initiatory psychopathology, the new shaman
displays a strong and healthy constitution, which cannot be called
psychopathological.27 This view has been somewhat confirmed by
psychological research. Psychoanalyst and research psychologist Bruce L.
Boyer, M.D., conducted a study of Apache and Mescalero shamans in 1962.
He conducted in-depth clinical interviews and administered the Rorschach
(inkblot) test to the socially confirmed shamans as well as to a number of
nonshamanic (ordinary) and pseudo-shamanic (not socially legitimated)
tribal members. Amongst the true shamans, Boyer did find some evidence
of hysteria, but not the more major forms of psychopathology (psychosis).
The fact that he found some hysteria did not mean that this condition was
pathological on Apache and Mescalero terms. It may be that such hysteria
responses were more symptomatic of the shamanic psycho-physical
constitution than of pathology. Boyer did observe some preoccupation with
sex, bodily reactions, and excitability, all important psycho-physical aspects
of shamanism. He concluded that shamans were “healthier than their
societal co-members.”28


                        INITIATORY ORDEALS

        As has already been suggested above, the shamanic initiatory
pattern involves an ordeal where there is a death and dismemberment, and
then a reconstitution or rebirth of the shaman. Siberian shamanic initiatory
ordeals are considered to be paradigmatic in their death/rebirth imagery.
Siberian shamans claim to die and lie dead (inanimate) for three to seven
days in their yurts (solitary spaces). During this period of death, demons or
ancestral spirits come and cut them up into pieces. Their bones are stripped
of their flesh and cleaned; their bodily fluids are thrown away and their eyes
ripped out of their sockets:

      According to a Yakut informant, the spirits carry the future
      shaman’s soul to the Underworld and shut him in a house for
      three years. Here he undergoes initiation; the spirits cut off his
      head (which they set to one side, for the novice must watch his
      own dismemberment with his own eyes) and hack his body to
      bits, which are later distributed among the spirits of various
      sicknesses. It is only on this condition that the future shaman
      will obtain the power of healing. His bones are then covered
      with new flesh, and in some cases he is given new blood.29

 The images of these initiatory experiences are remarkably similar
wherever they are found. In addition to this death/dismemberment
experience, the initiatory ordeal frequently includes journeying to the
upperworld or underworld and the acquisition of helping spirits, or power
animals, upon whom the shaman may call in the future for divination,
healing, and other activities. Through these initiatory ordeals the shaman-
elect transcends ordinary human constraints and limitations, gaining access
to, and knowledge of, the gods and spirits, often animal helping spirits, and
a language with which he or she may communicate with them.


  RELATIONS WITH SPIRITS AND SHAMANIC CONTROL

 Numerous individuals in traditional societies may claim to have helping or
guardian spirits. The shaman is only distinguished from these in that he or
she commands these spirits, and does so for specific purposes, usually to
restore individual, social, or climatic order and health, or for divination
purposes. The shaman, however, controls only a limited number of such
spirits, and these will be the ones with whom he or she maintains an active
and respectful relationship. Again, the shaman does not typically become
possessed by a spirit, but transforms himself or herself into the spirit via his
or her ecstatic technique. This aspect of control is essential in understanding
the shamanic task. The shaman, by contrast with ordinary members of his
society, is master of many psychological states/conditions, including
ecstasy and trance depth, imagery vivification, and dissociative capacities.
Even those South American shamans who use hallucinogenic substances
(sacred drugs) for the purpose of evoking ecstatic states, typically use low
enough doses so as to maintain control of their trance depth, and remain
intentionally focused on their healing, divinatory, or other shamanic task.
An exception to this is found in some ayahuasca rituals. Hallucinogenic
substances in high doses prevent the control of trance depth, and thus make
unpredictable the amount of intentional control the subject may have. One
can get lost in hallucinogen-induced trance states. Thus, it is essential to
underscore that the shaman remains intentional (purposive), and by
necessity controls his or her psychic states.
         FUNCTIONS AND TECHNIQUES OF ECSTASY

         Shamans typically enter into ecstatic trance for four reasons: 1) as
mediator for the community, taking an offering to the celestial deity; 2) to
seek, find, and restore the lost power or soul of a sick person that has been
stolen or wandered away; 3) to guide the souls of the dead (psychopomp);
and 4) to increase knowledge of the other worlds and their spirit beings.
The shaman may be able to divine the future, control weather, and do other
remarkable things, but he or she is indispensable in any situation which
concerns transformations and disorders of the human soul. The most
commonly associated function of the shaman is that of doctor or healer.
However, while he or she may be concerned with herbal or medical
treatments (e.g., surgery, setting a broken bone), or with rites of passage and
other ceremonies, they are not his or her primary concern. Other healers and
ritual leaders can and do perform those functions. According to Eliade, it is
the soul and its disorders which is the special province of the shaman:

      Everything that concerns the soul and its adventure, here on
      earth and in the beyond, is the exclusive province of the
      shamans. Through his own pre-initiatory and initiatory
      experiences, he knows the drama of the human soul, its
      instability, its precariousness; in addition, he knows the forces
      that threaten it and the regions to which it can be carried
      away….If shamanic cure involves ecstasy, it is precisely
      because illness is regarded as a corruption or alienation of the
      soul.30

         As a doctor of the soul, the shaman is, we might say, counterpart to
the psychoanalyst or psychotherapist, only working in a sacred idiom, and
with techniques of ecstasy, helping spirits, and well-formed shamanic
rituals complete with familial and/or community support as resources. Since
the soul can be affected malevolently or stolen away by malevolent spirits
(ghosts, ancestor spirits, demons, deities, animal spirits, or sorcerers), the
shaman must enter into ecstatic trance for the diagnosis and spiritual
resources to effect a cure (extract or exorcise malevolent influence, retrieve
lost soul).


                  MINOR SHAMANIC FUNCTION

        If healing is the primary shamanic function, there are minor ones we
should briefly mention. Divination and clairvoyance are often used in
conjunction with healing, but may also be used to control weather,
determine the whereabouts of a person, recover objects which have become
lost, and to perform ceremonial and other tasks related to the community
which the shaman serves. Shamans sometimes become involved in fakir-
like demonstrations, handle hot coals, cut themselves (and become
immediately healed), exercise psychokinesis, and the like. These
demonstrations may be for the purpose of practicing (exercising) of
shamanic methods and abilities, but may also be for the purpose of attaining
or maintaining community support and legitimation of the shaman’s
potency, at least when performed publicly.


                   SHAMANIC PARAPHERNALIA

 Shamanic paraphernalia often reveal an abundance of suggestive imagery
which speaks from and to the imagination of shaman, patient, and
community. Among the most important items of paraphernalia are costume,
drum, rattle, medicine bundle, and other equipment. Special costumes are
not a universal feature of shamanism; however, they appear frequently
enough to mention that they often are adorned with talismans and other
symbolic objects and designs which may reflect not only the shamanic
cosmology but also the power animals or tutelary spirits of the shaman.
Because of the importance of shamanic flight, bird symbolism is often a
prominent feature in shamanism, and birds, especially the Thunder Bird and
Eagle, are considered powerful helping spirits. Hence the shamanic costume
and other equipment will frequently enough be adorned with feathers. The
costume also often involves symbolism representing the shaman’s initiatory
experience, including skeleton symbolism and symbols of the helping
spirits of the shaman.
         The drum typically comes from the sacred tree which stands at the
central axis of the world and supports the three-storied cosmos. The drum,
especially helpful in inducing the shamanic trance, is often something of a
representation of the shamanic cosmology, often representing the world tree
by which the shaman mounts up or descends into the spirit world. Shamanic
masks serve to announce the incarnation of a spirit, rather than function as a
disguise. In short, the shamanic paraphernalia (costume, rattle, drum, mask,
etc.) can hardly be understood apart from shamanic cosmology and
initiation in general, nor apart from the specific meanings of the shaman
and his or her culture.
         The shaman’s paraphernalia and tools mark the shaman and his or
her therapeutic seance with a special importance, a sacred value, and, by
virtue of their colorful and provocative imagery, serve to heighten the sense
of drama and expectancy that something important and significant will
happen. This imagery, along with the other imagery employed in the
shamanic ritual, may serve to overload the ordinary conscious viewpoint
and provoke a sense of sacred time and space, a non-ordinary
consciousness, in which the healing work is to be done.


                 NORTH AMERICAN SHAMANISM

 According to Eliade, the North American shaman is more difficult to
distinguish from other ritual elders, priests, magicians, and medical
specialists who employ the sacred in their rituals and craft.31 Past
anthropological literature on North American shamanism has, for example,
considered every variety of healer, religious specialist, priest, and sorcerer a
shaman. This is in part due to the tendencies of nineteenth- and early
twentieth-century anthropologists to consider any type of primitive
religious specialist a shaman. But there are other reasons for a broader
conception of shamanism in North America than those limited criteria used
to define Siberian and Asian shamanism. Michael Abram, M.D., a
physician and Tsalagi (Cherokee) scholar on a reservation in North
Carolina, distinguishes between Cherokee priesthood and shamanism.32 He
claims that it was the “White Man” who “cut things up into separate
classes”, but for the Tsalagi people, a “shaman may also be a priest, or
sometimes be a priest, a chief, a clan elder, or other public officiary; there
are no clearcut distinctions”. One might suspect that this has been true of
many other North American tribes. In fact, scholars like Ake Hultkrantz and
Sam Gill have also drawn attention to this situation.33 Shamanism in North
America appears to be a very complex and diverse phenomenon. Gill
appears to take the broader view of shamanism with respect to North
America. He argues that the central element of North American shamanism
is spiritual power, “its nature, acquisition, accession, use, and loss”.34 The
North American spiritual concepts are often difficult for those who have
been shaped by modern Western culture to understand. Spiritual forms
show wide variance in North America. Among the Cherokee of the
Southeastern Woodlands, there were a multitude of spirits, human spirits,
animal spirits, inanimate and vegetable spirits, animal and human ghosts,
fairy-like creatures called “the little people,” and sorcerers (malicious spirit
beings disguised as humans who steal souls and “spoil the saliva”). All of
these possessed power and could become involved in human illness and
spirituality.35 Typically, throughout North America one will find spirit
forms identified with animals and other natural forms (rocks, plants, lakes
and streams, etc.) and other spirit forms with mythic forms and deities.
Ancestral souls and spirits of other living creatures (Bear, Wildcat, Eagle,
etc.) may become the shaman’s spirit helper or power animal.
         Access to spiritual powers, or shamanic selection methods, comes in
a variety of forms. There is inheritance, personal (vision) quest, election or
selection by a spirit power or by the clan or tribe, and through an
extraordinary affliction usually psychic in nature. Unlike South American
shamanism, quests of power usually do not require use of hallucinogens in
North America (Yak, Tarahumara, and Huichol shamanism of Mexico are
some exceptions), but more commonly involve use of fasting, sweat lodge,
isolation, and other non-pharmacological means (e.g., as among the
Iroquois, Cherokee, Sioux, Potowatami, Ojibway, and many others of the
Plains and Southwest and Northwest coasts).
         One of the confounding features in native North American cultures
is that, unlike the Siberian and Asian forms, anyone (not just the shaman)
can access spirit powers, go on vision quests, and seek for a guardian spirit
or power animal. Hence the shamanic quest for power and the quest for a
spirit guardian often seem indistinguishable.
         The shaman may only be distinguished by the power of his or her
helping spirits, and his or her mastery of ecstatic trances for healing and
visionary purposes. North American shamanic initiatory experiences may
be very brief or quite long. In contrast to the classic Siberian/Asian forms,
images of death, skeletization, rebirth, and magical flight may occur, but,
according to Gill, this is relatively rare, and they usually do not occur in
North American forms.36
         Acquisition of spirit power is typically accompanied by the
revelation of a power object by spirit helpers. The variety of power objects
is considerable. Feathers, sacred stones, bear claws, shells, beads, arrows,
and other charms and amulets are examples of some of the more common
power objects. Disease is felt to be a loss of power, whether that loss be
caused by spirit or pathogenic object intrusion, by sorcerers or offended
spirits, or by soul loss. Therapeutic response requires reinvesting the patient
with power, often in the form of application of power objects ritually
applied along with chant, songs, and sacred formulas (which also contain
healing power).
         According to Eliade, throughout North America the main forms of
disease are construed along the lines of a two-fold distinction: pathogenic
object intrusion, and soulloss.37 Hultkrantz distinguishes between object
and spirit intrusion in native North America.38 The North American shaman
may do other things, but healing is his chief function. Eliade notes that
while other healing specialists may be able to extract pathogenic objects,
the shaman is necessary to retrieve and restore a lost soul.39


         OBJECT INTRUSION AND SPIRIT INTRUSION

       An object or pathogenic spiritual being (of minor dimensions) may
cause physical or psychosomatic symptoms upon entering the patient’s
body. For example, there may be tissue swelling, soreness, itching, pains,
and other psychosomatic problems. Sometimes the distinction between the
object and intruding spirit is sharply drawn, while in other cases they are
synonymous. Cases of object intrusion have been well documented in North
America, whereas spirit intrusion is less frequent, or has been less
frequently documented (occurring in such areas as western Alaska, the
Northwest Coast, amongst the Central Algonquins, Southeast Indians, and
the Navajo of the Southwest).40 There is typically a spiritual agent
responsible for these intrusions, often a sorcerer. Object intrusion is most
often believed to be caused by malevolent intent by sorcerers; or when an
offended spirit has caused the disease, it is often the result of a taboo
violation. The intrusion diagnosis is not to be identified with possession,
which is a psychological concept. There are cases in Europe and Asia where
demon possession has been documented, with effects upon the psyche and
body which are often catastrophic and which require the offices of shaman
or ritual exorcist;41 but these are not a part of what we are terming North
American spirit or object intrusion. According to Gill, object intrusion also
sometimes appears to be a symbolic objectification of the illness.42 The
corresponding treatment is usually extraction by sucking techniques, in
which the healer, whether in trance or not, and whether in light or heavy
trance, directly places his or her mouth (or uses a tube, e.g., a piece of horn)
where the pathogenic object is diagnosed to be, and then sucks it from the
body. The pathogenic object may be displayed in some material form to
show the success of the treatment. It was once believed that this was a
charlatan trick, but recent researchers suggest that the demonstration of a
material object can have a placebo effect, which helps convince the patient
and the family or community that success is assured.43 Increased
expectancy enhances therapeutic responsiveness.


               SOUL LOSS: DIAGNOSIS AND CURE

 The other major form of disease theory is soul loss; it is largely
psychological, or psycho-spiritual in nature, and is based upon a variety of
complex theories of the soul. According to Hultkrantz, the soul, or one or
more souls (sometimes this is envisioned in North America as a power
animal or helping spirit), becomes lost, stolen, or wanders away, resulting in
a withering away. This belief presupposes a view of the person as typically
having a separable soul or vital principle, often known as the “free soul”,
that in states of psycho-physical weakness or unconsciousness and
comatose conditions distances itself from the body. Alternatively this
withering away may be caused by a sorcerer who wants to destroy the
person, or the soul may be enticed or snatched away by a ghost or spirit
being. Shocks and sudden injuries (i.e., trauma) can dislodge the soul,
causing it to leave the body and wander off. Hultkrantz argues that in order
to understand this Native American psychology one must understand that
there are typically two soul complexes in human beings:

      One covering the several souls or potencies that sustain
      individuals when they are in a lucid consciousness, the other
      consisting of just one soul that is the image of the person and is
      active when one sleeps or is entranced or unconscious—in other
      words, an extracorporeal soul, representing a person in his or
      her entirety. The first set of souls comprises the body souls that
      rule the heart movements, pulses, emotions, and will power of
      the waking individual, while the image soul is the so-called free
      soul, which can detach itself from the person and is then the
      carrier of the ego. There is an interchange of functions between
      the two soul concepts, which alternate in representing human
      beings.44

  Typically in a case of soul loss the soul leaves the body for the realm of
the dead. The person does not biologically die as long as some body souls
remain with the body.
        However, if the free soul crosses the boundary and moves into the
land of the dead (i.e., the condition becomes life threatening), the other
body souls will depart, breath will cease, heart beat will stop, and the
patient dies. It is typically paramount for the North American shaman to
retrieve the soul before the bodily souls depart, which means before the soul
reaches the land of the dead. Hultkrantz claims that it is only very rarely
that a shaman can rescue the free soul from the land of the dead, thus
restoring the patient’s life and preventing biological death.45 It is only
recently, with the publication of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders-Fourth Edition (DSM-IV),46 that the modern mental
health profession has given recognition of soul loss as a culturally
determined or shaped mental syndrome.
         The diagnosis for soul loss is made when the afflicted person suffers
from fever, or when there is a reduction in mental capacities (a reduction in
vitality or conscious lucidity), and the patient appears to be withering or
languishing away. In our modern Western psychiatric idiom we might
interpret the patient as being in a trance state, or a dissociative state, ranging
from various degrees of dissociation, derealization, or unconsciousness to a
comatose condition. We shall discuss the modern understanding more
extensively in Part Three. According to Hultkrantz, it is the patient’s state
of mind which principally determines the diagnosis, even though physical
ailments may sometimes be explained in the soul loss idiom.47 Cures for
soul loss may involve the shamanic seance in which the shaman, in trance,
dispatches his own free soul or power animal toward the land of the dead
(in which the patient’s free soul is moving) to retrieve the lost soul. The
shaman must interfere with the lost soul before it reaches the land of the
dead and bring it back, restoring it to the patient’s body. Occasionally, as we
have suggested, great shamans can enter the realm of the dead and convince
the lost soul to return, or can snatch it away from the realm of the dead.
Among the Coast Salish Indians it is believed that it is a guardian spirit or
guardian soul that has been captured by the ghosts of the dead and carried
to their land in the west. There are similar views among the Cherokee, who
traditionally believed the lonely souls of the dead sought to enchant and
entice souls of the living to come west into the realm of the dead beyond the
mountains, to keep them company. Souls and power appear to be identified
in such cases. Loss of soul is loss of vital power. Elsewhere the shaman
sends out his or her own guardian spirit or power animal to retrieve the lost
soul (or guardian or power spirit). Sometimes the soul is believed to stray,
but hang around the village. The shaman must sneak up on it and capture it,
carrying it back in his or her cupped hands and replacing it into the heart
area and fontanel at the top of the head (entrance and exit points for the
soul). Often there are dangers for the shamanic journey, such as dangerous
spirits or spirit animals (gnomes, teeth-showing creatures, monsters, etc.),
and temptations which may ensnare or destroy the shaman’s free soul.
Where shamanism has become weakened (diluted), soul loss may be cured
as if it were a case of intrusion. In some cases it may be that object or spirit
intrusion becomes responsible for the symptoms formerly attributed to soul
loss.48


   OTHER ASPECTS OF NORTH AMERICAN SHAMANISM

  There are some North American tribes that heal by medicine societies
rather than by individual shamanic performance. The Zuni Pueblo medicine
society, for example, is composed of previously afflicted persons who were
healed by that society. They are a society of wounded healers. The
cosmologies and healing techniques correspond often quite closely with
those of the shaman, including sucking rituals for intrusions, and cases of
soul loss and restoration have been reported, although it is not certain how
these soul recovery rituals were performed.
        Among North American shamans there are several other functions
which are important in addition to healing. These are primarily such
functions as weather control, divining, and clairvoyant practices, especially
those related to hunting, war, foretelling the future, and finding lost persons
or objects. These functions according to Gill are usually secondary to
healing but in cases of specialization, this would not be the case.49
Shamanic practices sometimes include the use of esoteric languages by
which the shaman communicates with the spirits (they are usually animal
languages, as the helping spirits are often animal spirits). In North
American tribal societies the shaman’s role fluctuates from being marginal
to being central to the life of the community.
               Chapter Two: Technician of the Sacred

                  SHAMANISM AND THE SACRED

        The shaman is a technician of the sacred. It is impossible to
understand the richness of shamanism without some understanding of the
importance of the sacred and of the shaman’s relations with the sacred. This
is so because the shaman’s calling is to a sacred vocation and because the
shaman is the ritual master of the sacred, being able to effectively locate,
guard, and utilize the creative but dangerous energies of the sacred for
therapeutic or other socially beneficial purposes. Any understanding of the
religious and spiritual components of shamanic practice requires an
understanding of the nature of the sacred, and of its importance to the
shaman’s way of life, therapeutic practice, and social function.
        In this chapter we shall review the concept of the sacred as it has
been illumined by three seminal scholars, Rudolf Otto, Gerhardus Vander
Leeuw, and Mircea Eliade. Our discussion will involve a review of those
aspects of the sacred most relevant to shamanic/animistic world view, but
will also involve discussion of the sacred in other cultural contexts,
including those of our familiar western civilization. That is, we shall follow
the historical/phenomenological method of Otto, Van der Leeuw, and Eliade
in order to clarify the phenomenology of the sacred by providing parallels
from our own western cultural experience. Our discussion of the sacred in
this chapter will set the stage for exploring the ritual role of the shaman, and
will provide various key concepts upon which to focus the dialogue
between Jungian psychology and shamanism in the remaining parts of the
book.


                                 ANIMISM
 Shamanic relations with the sacred rest upon a pre-theological and pre-
political spiritual vision and experience. Having probably arisen in the
Paleolithic-hunter period of cultural evolution, when small tribal groupings
had not given rise to priesthoods and credal dogma, shamanic authority
rested upon the sacred power and efficacy which shamans could command
for the benefit of their people. That is to say, the shamanic vision of reality
and the shamanic authority rest upon levels of experience rather than upon
priestly ordination or institutional hierarchy. Although shamanism is not a
religion, but a method of experience which can be called spiritual, it is often
associated with a primal form of religious experience called animism (from
the Latin anima, soul, suggesting nature ensouled, enspirited, or animated).
Animism is a view of the world as ensouled, or enspirited. Like the view of
many theoretical physicists today, nature is alive, everything is alive with
spirits. In the animistic world, there are ancestral spirits, plant and animal
spirits, benevolent and dangerous spirits, and numerous others. Proper
concourse with the spirits is necessary for harmonious and healthy living.
Violation of the spirits results in discord, chaos, and famine, or sickness.
The shamanic view of ultimate reality presupposes this type of animistic
vision of the world. Mysterious power and energy seem to be the ultimate
reality implicit in animism, in its rituals of worship, propitiation, atonement,
in its interdictions against taboo violations, and in its methods of restoring
health and order. This mysterious power and energy has been variously
called mana, orenda, wakan, and other names, and has been given a cross-
cultural designation by phenomenologists of religion as the sacred, or the
holy.


    RUDOLF OTTO: THE SACRED IN ITS NON-RATIONAL
                      ASPECTS

 Western conceptions of ultimate reality (i.e., of deity) have typically
emphasized attributes of God as moral law giver, as good will, and as spirit.
But, according to Rudolf Otto, these conceptions have typically ignored the
non-rational aspects of ultimate reality. Shamanism, indebted as it is to an
animistic conceptuality, has experienced the ultimate reality as mysterious,
fascinating, potentially dangerous, and powerful. Animism emphasizes the
non-rational aspects of the sacred. According to Rudolf Otto, the neglect of
the non-rational aspects has been the weakness of western
conceptualizations of ultimate reality.
        Otto, in his description of the sacred/holy, was more concerned to
describe the feeling reaction to something experienced as mysterious and
ineffable, something which, phenomenologically speaking, seems to appear
universally in religious experience. Otto coined the term numen (adjectival
form: numinous, from the Latin meaning god) to express the non-rational
feeling reaction to that universally appearing object of experience. The
numen is an irreducible concept. It refers to a universally appearing object,
a sui generis, which can not be reduced merely by the explanatory concepts
of sociology, psychology, anthropology, or of any other discipline. This
mystery is beyond the power of words to sufficiently describe. It can be
sensed by a faculty of feeling or intuition, but it still remains beyond the
range of words to adequately express. In terms of our own Western cultural
heritage, the Hebrew q‘adosh, the Greek hagios, the Latin sanctus, and the
German heilig evoke the sense of that ultimate reality which is beyond our
rational and linguistic capacities to grasp or describe. In Native American
shamanism, such terms as orenda and wakan have served the purpose of
denoting this ineffable reality. Typically such words are considered sacred,
and if they are said at all, must be said in a ritually prescribed or respectful
way. It is blasphemy to utter them in a profane manner.


                                 MYSTERY

        Otto also characterized the numen as being wholly other,
discontinuous with everything else in everyday experience. His analysis of
the holy into three contrasting aspects has been summed up under the Latin
phrase: mysterium tremendum et fascinans. As mysterium, the ineffable and
inexhaustible character of the holy is experienced as a power that strikes
one dumb, and mute. It is experienced more as a mood similar to that of
stupor, dumb astonishment, amazement, awe, and wonder. Certain
experiences which are strange, sublime, and overpowering, like confronting
the mighty waterfall at Niagara, evoke a sense of astonishment and
amazement. In experiencing the mysterious aspect of the holy we “come
upon something whose kind and character are incommensurable with our
own”.1


                             FASCINATION

        The holy is also described as fascinosum, that is, as having an
intoxicating and attracting component. The shamans, as have sages,
mystics, witches, and saints, possess a deep longing for the sacred, which
can be described as an ontological thirst. The shaman frequently begins as a
wounded youth who is irresistibly attracted (called) to the strange,
mysterious, and the powerful, in a way which his or her ordinary tribal
peers seem not to be. The fascinans aspect of the holy has an enticing and
alluring effect upon the imagination. It may become a great object of desire,
of obsession, or mystical and ascetical pursuit. As the source of religious
longing, it can bestow a feeling of beatitude beyond compare.
        Otto believed that the obsession with the fascinosum was the result
of either a magical identification of the self with the numen, in magical and
devotional transaction by means of conjuration, consecration, formula, and
exorcism, or by the shamanic procedure of “possession, indwelling, and
self-fulfillment in exaltation and ecstasy”.2 Otto believed that these modes
originated in animistic magic, but soon evolved into the pursuit of the
numen as an end in itself, in the higher religions. The culmination of
numinal pursuit is to be found in the worshipful encounter with what “eye
hath not seen, nor ear heard.”3 For the shaman, the purpose of the pursuit
was to access helping power, to learn about the sacred, and to chart its
mysterious geography. But beyond any practical function, it was a mystical
pursuit which called upon the shaman, with an allure and power which
evoked an obsession with it, and which could be refused or denied only at
risk or peril to the shaman’s soul.


 TREMENDUM: THE REPELLING/HORRIFIC COMPONENT
  The holy is not only mysterious, alluring, and enticing, it also has a
threatening and horrific component to the experience of it. This component
is evoked in the sense of over-powering might, majesty, and urgency,
reflected in the mood of Jacob: “How dreadful is this place/This is none
other than the house of Elohim”.4 It may be described as an uncanny feeling
which penetrates to the core of one’s being. It is evoked in the experience of
nothingness before the holy, of being nothing but dust and ashes. This
aspect is the source of ritual respect for the sacred, and the imperative to not
pollute it with profane impurity.


           THE AMBIVALENT NATURE OF THE HOLY

  The experience of the holy, as Otto delineates it, is an ambivalent
experience, since it consists of an attracting and alluring component, and a
dangerous and repelling component. The feeling of the numinous may come
suddenly, like a volcanic explosion, or gently and progressively like the
gentle waves of the sea. Additionally, one pole of the experience may occur
before the other, or both poles may occur simultaneously. The attracting and
intoxicating component culminates in the sense of rapture, the impulse
towards worship, and the desire to surrender to and indwell the numen. The
repelling or horrific component evokes a sense of unworthiness in the
presence of the holy. It results in feelings of moral or ontological guilt, and
evokes a sense of the need for atonement or expiation. It tends to result in
the impulse to set things right (e.g., ritual purification, propitiation,
salvation, or reconciliation). Not only has this bipolar experience of the
holy given rise to the religious need to worship, it has given rise to the
impulse to restore relations with the ultimate, to restore order, to atone for
sins and taboo violations, and thus has a teleological aspect. The dual aspect
is evident in all religious forms, from the animistic/shamanic form, to the
so-called civilized religions (Judaism, Christianity, Islam, Hinduism,
Buddhism). Shamanism has sought the causes of illness in taboo violations
which upset the ultimate spiritual order and the tribal order willed by the
gods, ancestors, and other symbols of the sacred.
                   EXPRESSION OF THE NUMEN

        Since the numinous is experienced as wholly other, expressing it is
problematic. Ordinary language and rational concepts fail to do it justice, as
it eludes them with its mystery. It can be evoked or aroused through the
symbolic use of language, but it requires a natural sense of the numinous to
be able to be conscious of it. Indirect means are typically used invoke or
evoke awareness of it, because it can not be taught or communicated
through tradition. The shaman may be taught much about practical healing
methods, techniques, rituals, and medicines by his or her shamanic peers
and elders, but the experience of the numen is of an exclusively personal
nature. The experience itself can only be invoked, incited, or aroused.
        Direct means of expression involve the use of language, but in a
way which stretches words to their breaking point, through symbolic
images, or through words which have no literal meaning at all (the Hindu
om, the Hebraic halleluiah, the Sioux wakan). Often sacred words must be
passed over in silence, or must be said or chanted in a special way. Direct
means only work if they rely on non-verbal means, such as an attitude of
reverence/respect, attunement of mood, respectful tones, etc. Indirect means
typically involve aesthetic and environmental conditions which arouse
numinal feeling. Any atmosphere which can evoke a sense of extraordinary
potency, beauty, awe, and elevation of mood or lofty aspiration, or perhaps
a sense of the sublime, may become an indirect means for evoking a feeling
of the numen. Places, events, or objects which seem strangely different,
unique, miraculous, or powerful seem to hold a greater potential for
numinal response. Otto draws attention to the ancient Stonehenge as having
a power and grace which was numinal. He believed it may have originally
been used to store up numen in a solid place by magical means.5 Natural
objects, for example, stones, bodies of water, mountains, the sun and moon,
all may arouse the feeling of the numen. Sacred art has typically been able
to arouse the numen, often through the use of impersonal and austere looks
(Byzantine Madonnas), blackness (black Madonnas), and destructive
personae (Kali Durga) because they suggest not only the alluring aspect but
the tremendum or horrific aspect of the holy. The use of negative space in
Oriental art, as well as in Gothic architecture, as well as the use of light and
shadow (Gothic vaults), also arouse similar responses. The shaman’s love
of darkness, of graveyards, of the nocturnal, may be understood as a need
for environmental contexts which are evocative of the ambivalent
experience of the sacred.


        VAN DER LEEUW’S CONCEPT OF THE SACRED

        Van der Leeuw’s descriptions and formulations of the sacred are
very close to Otto’s. Thus we want to mention mainly the areas where he
extends the concept beyond Otto. Van der Leeuw’s emphasis is upon the
ambivalent experience of the sacred as power and dread. Like Otto he
discerns an otherness in the object of religious experience: the first
affirmation we can make about the object of religion is that it is a highly
exceptional and extremely impressive other.6 Like Otto he also emphasizes
the affective experience of the holy, but characterizes it more as dread. In
dread, there is both an attracting and a repelling element. Thus, the
experience of the sacred is also an ambivalent experience. Positively, the
attracting element is experienced in feelings of reverence, awe, trust, and
love. Negatively, the repelling element is experienced as feelings of terror,
horror, and fear.


                       THE SACRED AS POWER

        The most important aspect of Van der Leeuw’s analysis, for our
consideration of shamanism, is his descriptions of the sacred in its aspect of
power. Van der Leeuw associates the primal experience of sacred power
with the Melanesian mana, with the Iroquois orenda, and the Sioux wakan.
For Van der Leeuw, natural phenomena associated with the power of life or
death were manifestations and effects of this power: sun, rain,
thunderstorms, rocks, stars, mountains, trees, streams, etc. Exceptional
qualities such as strength, fame, influence, majesty, intelligence, authority,
and the like were associated by primitive man with the sacred. Effectiveness
of shamanic healing is associated with the numinous power harnessed by
the shaman. Power and life force are also associated, so that the greater
one’s strength, vigor, or health, the greater the mana. Remembering that
mana is the Melanesian word for numinal or sacred power, Van der Leeuw
describes its significance for world creation, for the warrior, and for the
chieftain or king:

      Now mana actually has this significance; the warrior’s mana,
      for instance, is demonstrated by his continual success in
      combat, while repeated defeat shows that his mana has deserted
      him. Power…is authenticated…empirically: in all cases
      whenever anything unusual or great, effective or successful is
      manifested, people speak of mana…The creation of the earth is
      the effect of divine mana, but so is all capacity; the chiefs
      power, the happiness of the country, depend on mana.7


              SHAMANISM, HEALING, AND POWER

  The association of the sacred with power also is illustrated in relation to
evil (destructive or malevolent force). Evil force, in the primal world view,
is also powerful, but its effects are destructive. If the sacred = potency, evil
effects (illness, destruction, defeat )= accumulated impotence. Evil may
cause a diminution of life force, or may destroy it altogether by draining
away or destroying its potency. Hence the shamanic healer is one who has
access to great power, and who, through commanding his or her spirits, has
the power to restore power to the afflicted. In exorcism or extraction, for
example, this principle is discernible when a counterposing creative spirit is
invoked to drive out or extract an evil or destructive spirit. The potency of
the helping spirit must be greater than the potency of the evil or pathogenic
spirit (a principle, we might add, which is presupposed today in Alcoholics
Anonymous and other 12-step programs for addictions and compulsions).
               THINGS, POWER, AND SHAMANISM

  Shamanic amulets and talismans are believed to be saturated with power;
they are storehouses of numen. The shaman, for example, may give his or
her patient an amulet to restore power and/or keep the forces of danger and
chaos at bay. Van der Leeuw informs us that modernity has accustomed us
to look at things as “mere dead objects”. He notes that the poet is one who
knows better, as well as does the animistic mind: “On the contrary, the thing
is the bearer of a power; it can effect something, it has its own life which
reveals itself”; everything may be a power bearer.8 Souls, spirits, and ghosts
are sacred, and, by association, anything connected with them acquires an
indisputable potency, for example, a fetish, totem pole, a shamanic
talisman, the staff of a king or chief, and so on. Natural objects which
display unusual features or irregularities which distinguish them or set them
apart from the ordinary environment also lend themselves to being
identified as “power objects”.9 Tools and weapons also assume sacred
importance; they must be powerful to be effective. Among native North
Americans, the shaman’s sacred bundles assured the life and health of the
community. Their loss, theft, or desecration could mean disaster or
desolation for the community. One need only recall the effects of the loss of
the Grail in the Parsifal myths, or the loss of the Ark of the Covenant in
ancient Israel, to get a sense of the ambience of power and dread
surrounding such sacred objects. Additionally, any old thing handed down
by authority or tradition, by ancestors, chieftains, or kings, tended to be
viewed as sacred, that is, as saturated with power: old spears, a dagger, an
eagle feather, a scripture, stones, an imperial insignia. In distinction from
fetishes, amulets were reservoirs of power. They needed to be pocket-sized
or wearable around the neck. Effective in warding off evil and sickness
(impotence), they could acquire power from a holy person (shaman, witch,
saint, lama, or priest). Natural elements such as fire, water, stones, and trees
could be considered sacred, and are often employed in healing rituals.
Water and fire, for example, have often been associated with purification
rituals. The role of water in spiritual purification, healing, and exorcism has
been well documented, and Van der Leeuw gives a description of some of
the diverse uses of water powers:
      Purifications by water were effective in Ancient Egypt as well
      as for Roman Catholic piety: the holy water, freed from all
      damaging influences by exorcism, defends person or object
      sprinkled with it from all demonic sway, drives off spooks and
      sickness, protects entrance and egress, house and cattle. And
      finally in baptism, water expels the devil and pours in
      sanctifying grace.10


                         TABOO AND POWER

         Before we leave the discussion of Van der Leeuw’s conceptions of
the sacred, we must discuss the relations between the sacred and taboo,
since this is a very important relation in shamanic ideology and practice.
We mentioned earlier that one of the causes of illness in shamanic ideology
is taboo violation, often expressed in the form of offending the spirits;
sometimes it is an offense of tribal rules or law. Van der Leeuw tells us that
that which is sacred, and thus powerful, is also that which is taboo. In tribal
existence, daily life has been heavily circumscribed with taboo, that is to
say, with the fear of violating sacred potency. Insofar as certain objects,
times, places, persons, or things were charged with power, they were taboo.
Van der Leeuw compares power to an electrical charge. It may serve
creative purposes, but it is also dangerous. Contact with the sacred, because
it is potentially dangerous, is regulated with ritual and imperative (taboo),
lest destruction result from casual or unproscribed contact. “Tabu is thus a
sort of warning: Danger/High Voltage/Power has been stored up and we
must be on our guard” .11 Approaching the king (or chief), a foreigner, or
the opposite sex with proper greeting and due respect are necessary to
prevent the dangerous unleashing of destructive energies. Incest was often
punished by death, and quickly in the Central Celebs, for example. This was
done not in an act of moral outrage, but “merely as a means of limiting the
evil results of the outrage to the delinquents”.12 Taboo imposed by shamans
is typically for the purposes of limiting the effects of malevolent spirits, or
for the purposes of protecting an already weakened individual from contact
with other persons or spirits who may further weaken him or her. Shortly,
we shall discuss the danger aspect of the sacred under the needs for ritual
structure and maintenance of boundaries around sacred space by the
shaman. Discussing the sacred in terms of ambivalent attracting and
repelling aspects, and in terms of power, provides us with an understanding
of the non-rational or feeling side of religious experience presupposed by
shamanism. We now turn to Eliade for a discussion of the rational and non-
rational aspects of the sacred.


       ELIADE: THE SACRED AS ARCHAIC ONTOLOGY

         Eliade contrasts the sacred and the profane. Humans become aware
of the sacred because it manifests or shows itself as something wholly
different from the profane. Eliade proposed the term hierophany to
designate the act of manifestation of the sacred. He argues that all religions,
from the most primitive to the most highly developed, are constituted by
various manifestations of sacred realities, that is, by hierophanies. He gives
such examples as the most elementary manifestation of the sacred in a stone
or tree, to the most supreme Christian hierophany, the manifestation of God
in Jesus Christ. No matter what the religious tradition, whether it be archaic
or highly developed, in each case there is a confrontation with something of
a wholly different order, a reality that does not belong to our ordinary or
profane world, but which manifests itself in and through that world and its
objects. Any object, person, place, animal, human, or thing in the natural
world can become the locus of a manifestation of the sacred. All nature, in
fact, is capable of revealing itself as a cosmic sacrality, and the cosmos as a
whole may become itself a hierophany. To be sure, it is not the stone, tree,
human, or other profane object itself which is venerated, but the sacred
which manifests itself through it: “The sacred tree, the sacred stone are not
adored as stone or tree; they are worshiped precisely because they are
hierophanies, because they show something that is no longer stone or tree
but the sacred, the ganz andere”.13
                   NOSTALGIA FOR THE SACRED

  Eliade informs us that the persons of archaic or traditional societies tend to
live as much as possible in or close to the sacred. There is a nostalgic
longing for the sacred in religious consciousness, which is tantamount to an
ontological thirst for Being, for absolute reality, for the “absolutely real,
enduring, and effective”. Hence “the sacred is equivalent to a power, and,
in the last analysis, to reality. The sacred is saturated with being”.14
         Eliade, on the basis of a wide sampling historicaly and cross-
culturally, abstracted a typology of the sacred, insofar as it manifests itself
in certain patterns (archetypes) or universally recurring themes. He
articulates them into a three-fold structure: 1) repetition of a celestial
archetype; 2) reality as being conferred through participation in the
symbolism of the center; 3) rituals and significant profane gestures that
acquire meaning through repetition of the acts of the gods, ancestors, or
heroes.15 We shall briefly discuss these themes, since they are of relevance
to shamanic cosmology, symbolism, and practice.


                      CELESTIAL ARCHETYPES

  Eliade has drawn comparative data from archaic and ancient societies and
civilizations to substantiate his observations that traditional societies tend to
become patterned upon a celestial archetype. He refers to the Spanish
conquistadors and other Europeans to illustrate the notion that territories,
temples, and cities of traditional societies are patterned on a celestial
archetype. Drawing upon various civilizations, he cites the Star of the
Swallow, which the ancient Mesopotamians believed was the archetypal
model of the Euphrates river, and the star Anuit, the celestial model of the
Tigris. In India, Eliade points out, ancient and modern royal cities were
constructed upon the mythical model of a celestial city where, in the age of
old (in illo tempore), the universal sovereign dwelt. He illustrates how
sacred temples have also been modeled on the celestial archetype. For
example he cites Jahweh’s giving to Moses on Mount Sinai the form of the
temple to be built.16 Whether it be a city, temple, or territory, all are shown
to have an “extraterrestrial archetype, be it conceived as a plan, as a form,
or purely and simply as a double existing on a higher cosmic level”.17
         In elucidating the archetypal pattern, Eliade appears to be
articulating the deep rational structures of the sacred. But Eliade also
believes the sacred has an ordering effect upon traditional societies, not
only providing the ground plan for their cities, sacred architecture, and
space, but also for their social and ethical relations. This rationality of the
sacred runs through Eliade’s descriptions. The ordering power of the sacred
upon space inhabited by traditional and tribal societies is juxtaposed with
the common belief that not everything in the world is ordered. In fact, our
world is patterned upon a sacred archetype, but beyond the boundaries of
the city or village lies chaos, darkness, and the powers of evil and discord.
Desert regions and uninhabited territories constitute the realm of chaos,
where dragons and monsters are rampant. These forces of chaos are
terrifying, and are also to be found in uncharted regions on land and un-
navigated regions of the seas where the marine monster dwells. Insofar as
archaic and traditional societies may move about, explore, and conquer new
territories, ways of consecrating newly acquired space become necessary.
Ways of consecrating space are essential to making them safe and
inhabitable, and such has traditionally been the role of shaman and priest.
Thus Eliade says, in “Vedic India the erection of an altar dedicated to Agni
constituted the taking possession of a territory”.18 Eliade also cites the
Spanish and Portuguese erecting of a cross in the name of Jesus whenever
they took possession of continents and islands. This is equivalent to a new
birth or, in the Christian idiom, to a “baptizing” of the newly acquired
territory, remaking it into habitable space. It is important to note here that
the consecration rituals serve the purpose of keeping the forces of chaos at
bay, which is as much a function of the shaman during a healing ritual as it
is in the ritual acts of consecrating and taking possession of a territory. We
shall return to this point later. But suffice it to say that the shaman, in his or
her healing rituals, typically recites the cosmogonic myth and the myth of
the origins of healing, or the myth of the first shaman. These recitations
serve the function of returning to the time of the gods and ancestor
shamans, when reality and healing rites came fresh from the creator’s
hands, and thus re-establish order in a situation otherwise experienced as
chaotic and threatening. In this way the ancestor shamans, heroes, and tribal
deities become the paradigmatic models upon which the healing rites and
actions are patterned.


     THE PRESTIGE OF THE CENTER AND AXIS MUNDI

        Extending his efforts to demonstrate, the depth, rationality, and
ordering function of the sacred, Eliade argues that homo religiosus, the
person of traditional societies, seeks to live in an organized and intelligible
world ordered by the sacred. The key rational pattern discernible
universally in religious experience, especially in traditional societies, is
indicated by the “prestige of the center”. The importance of the symbolic
center overlaps with the ordering and creative function of the celestial
archetypes, which also reveal the sacred center from which life and
experience must take its orientation. Eliade gives an outline of architectonic
symbolism of the center as it appears universally in religious phenomena.
The sacred mountain where earth and heaven meet is said to be situated at
the center of the world. Eliade cites Mount Meru of India, Mount Sumeru of
the Ural-Altaic people, Mount Zinnalo in Laos, and the Christian Golgotha
as examples from the great religions and civilizations. We could add the
Harney Peak of the Sioux medicine man Black Elk to Eliade’s examples to
remind us that the mountain as a symbol of the center is extant in shamanic
cosmology.
        These instances of the symbolism of the center constitute examples
of the axis mundi, the central axis by which our world is brought into
communication with the upper and lower realms. In Christianity, the axis
mundi is the intersection between heaven and hell in relation to earth (the
analogue of middle world). In shamanism this axis mundi symbolism is
often exemplified in the cosmic tree, as well as in the healing ritual shrine,
which may also be a symbol of the axis mundi, the origin of the world, and
the origin of all healing powers. Thus, center = axis mundi = the meeting
point between the three cosmic zones = the creative origin of the world. The
center point is an opening, an access to the celestial world of the gods,
spirits, and the creative energies of the world. The underworld (understood
in Christian culture as the terrifying realm of hell) is the realm of the dead,
of ghosts and evil energies. At this point, Eliade’s phenomenology of the
sacred takes an inward turn, for it is the axis mundi, often symbolized as the
cosmic tree or pillar, which connects the lower and upper worlds for the
shaman, the ecstatic healer of traditional societies. The shaman, as we have
previously mentioned, makes journeys to the lower and upper regions in his
or her initiatory and ecstatic ordeals and tasks. The shaman mounts the
sacred tree in the celestial ascent to commune with the spirits in his or her
mystic flight. It is out of the center that the creative/healing energies of the
cosmos issue.
         The center, then, is the preeminent ontological zone of absolute
reality, the point of contact with that which gives orientation in our world,
and of access to that which is absolutely real, enduring, and effective. The
center, we should clarify, is not the sole province of the shaman. All
transformative religious experience requires contact with the energies of the
sacred. The religious person of traditional societies is possessed of an
ontological thirst, a profound nostalgia to be near the center. The center as
an inward experience, however, is not automatically or easily accessed.
Religious geniuses such as shaman, mystic, and guru may have learned how
to access it, but only after strenuous effort.

      The road leading to the center is a “difficult road” ... and this is
      verified at every level of reality: difficult convolutions of a
      temple (as at Borobudor); pilgrimage to sacred places (Mecca,
      Hardwar, Jerusalem); danger-ridden voyages of the heroic
      expeditions in search of the Golden Fleece, the Golden Apples,
      the Herb of Life, wandering in labyrinths; difficulties of the
      seeker for the road to the self, to the “center” of his being, and
      so on. The road is arduous, fraught with perils, because it is, in
      fact, a rite of passage from the profane to the sacred, from the
      ephemeral and the illusory to reality and eternity, from death to
      life, from man to divinity.19
        The symbolism of the center occupies a supremely important
position in shamanism: in terms of the shaman’s ecstatic experience, in
terms of shamanic cosmology, and in terms of shamanic healing rituals.


                              REPETITION

  We are arguing that the symbolism of the center, as Eliade elucidates it, is
equivalent to the sacred source of creation, order, and
healing/transformative energies. Implied throughout discussion of the
celestial archetype and the symbolism of the center is the theme of
paradigmatic repetition. This is the theme of repeating the sacred or
transcendent pattern or form laid down by the gods, ancestors, or heroes.
The city, the royal palace, and the temple repeat the primordial or
archetypal forms. In this way, ordinary, profane phenomena become
informed by a sacred ordering; hence the importance of consecration as a
way of imposing the divine archetypal form, bringing order out of chaos.
Additionally, the transformative healing and religious experiences repeat
the celestial archetype and the symbolism of the center. Beyond this, every
act of creation repeats the paradigmatic cosmogonic act of the gods, heroes,
and ancestors. The shaman, too, as we have mentioned, recites the myths of
the origins of healing and often the cosmogonic myth, for it is necessary to
become contemporary with the gods, in order to reconstitute the creative
healing energies. If illness and disease are conceived as the forces of chaos
and destruction, then it is the invocation and appropriation of the creative
and ordering energies which restores health, and brings healing. The
shaman plays a vital role in traditional societies, which are continually
threatened by the forces of chaos. It is the shaman as the representative and
mediator of the sacred power and order that provides assurance to the
community that the forces of chaos will be kept at bay, and that an access to
the sacred energies will be available to the community.
        Myths, for the religious person of traditional societies, also become
the paradigmatic forms upon which life becomes modeled. The repetition of
mythic forms provides assurance that things are done properly and in
harmony with the ultimate scheme of things. Without the repetition of these
transcendent and transhuman models, the person of traditional societies
does not consider himself to be truly man except insofar as he imitates the
gods, the culture heroes, or the mythical ancestors.20 To repeat these
archetypal patterns is to be truly human, for such repetition assures that
one’s life is real, enduring, and effective. We shall turn now to a discussion
of the relation of the sacred to the transformative ritual process in shamanic
and contemporary psychotherapy.


              THE SACRED AND RITUAL PROCESS

         In traditional shamanic healing there are several basic elements
which become integrated in the therapeutic ritual. These elements include
the mythology or cosmology of the patient’s community, a method of
diagnosing the illness in an idiom congruent with the mythological
cosmology, and certain methods of treatment. Each of the elements of
traditional therapeutics are related in a part-to-whole manner, so that each
makes sense only in relation to the others.21 The category which is central
to all of them is the sacred, and nowhere is the centrality of its role more
clearly discernible than in the ritual structure and process of traditional
shamanic psychotherapeutics. It is in the ritual structure, and in terms of the
sacred mediated within that structure, at the ordering myth is recited,
diagnosis is made, and the method of treatment determined and applied. In
traditional shamanic therapeutics, it is the sacred which is the healing and
transformative power. Human efforts are necessary to constitute and
maintain a ritual structure within which the sacred transformative energies
can be evoked. Eliade is most illuminating on the relation of the sacred to
space and transformation.


      SACRED SPACE AND RITUAL TRANSFORMATION

       We mentioned previously that Eliade documents the universal
importance of the “prestige of the center”, and that it is the axis mundi
which provides an orientation in time and space. Profane time and space,
we said, is homogeneous; there is no fixed point from which to gain an
orientation. There is no contact with that which is absolutely real, effective,
and enduring. But sacred time and space are heterogeneous, having
qualitative irruptions. To homo religiosus, certain places and times are
qualitatively other; that is, they are manifestations of the sacred. They put
one in touch with the meaning-giving center from which orientation is
drawn and healing/transformative energies are experienced.22
        It is this qualitative break in profane space which allows the world
to be constituted, which creates cosmos out of chaos, which provides an
orientation, and which allows the world to be regenerated. Drawing upon
massive data from ethnology and the history of religions, Eliade notes that
the manifestation of the sacred, a hierophany, permanently changes the
quality of that space, even if the dominant culture or religious tradition
constituted by it passes or is relativized. We can see an example in the
Dome of the Rock in Jerusalem, in which three different cultures and
religions have valorized (Judaic, Christian, Muslim) its space as sacred
during periods of historical ascendency in that region. Thus the
manifestation of the sacred (hierophany) is continually repeated irrespective
of historical changes. Eliade says:

      In this way the place becomes an inexhaustible source of power
      and sacredness and enables man, simply by entering it, to have
      a share in the power, to hold communion with the sacredness…
      But however diverse and variously elaborated these sacred
      spaces may be, they all present one trait in common: there is
      always a clearly marked space which makes it possible… to
      communicate with the sacred.23

        Sacred space cannot be generated by an act of the human will. It can
be provoked, invoked, and prepared for by questing, fasting, and by various
ritual means, but it is beyond the power of human beings to force its
manifestation. Human beings do, however, have important responsibilities
in the consecration and maintaining of the boundaries demarcating sacred
space, and this human function is of paramount importance. The boundaries
demarcating sacred space serve as notice that a qualitatively other space is
near, and that proper relations with the sacred require acknowledgment and
respect for these boundaries.
         Respect for the boundaries also serves as protection against the
“high voltage,” to use Van der Leeuw’s expression, of the sacred. Careless
contact with the sacred can be destructive without proper stewardship of its
boundaries. Hence the enclosure around the sacred space serves a function
of preserving profane persons from the danger of trespassing upon it
without due care and respect. The necessity of ritualized relations with the
sacred is derived from the fact that the sacred “is always dangerous to
anyone who comes into contact with it unprepared, without having gone
through the ‘gestures of approach’ that every religious act demands”.24
         According to Eliade it is one of the primary tasks of the shaman as a
technician of the sacred to locate and effectively use the powerful
deconstructive/reconstructive transformative energies of the sacred for
healing purposes. The primary function of the shaman was that of healing
disorders of a spiritual/psychopathological nature, that is, disorders of the
soul. Other forms of disorder may be appropriately attended to by other
types of healers who need not ritually provoke a strong and safe space for
powerful transformative energies. Herbalists, naturopathic physicians,
diviners, surgeons, and the like may be employed to diagnose physical
illness, treat it medicinally or surgically, or make referral to a shaman. But
disorders of the soul, in primitive societies, belong exclusively to the
shaman.
         The shaman as a technician of the sacred is the psychotherapist of
traditional and premodern cultures, who knows how to effectively locate,
utilize, and maintain sacred transformative space. Although Eliade indicates
that it is always a “clearly marked space” which makes it possible “to
communicate with the sacred”, he is reluctant to say that such spaces can be
found within modern western industrial culture, except in degraded or
laicized form.25


 TRANSFORMATIVE PROCESS AND RITUAL LEADERSHIP
        Robert L. Moore has drawn upon the work of Mircea Eliade and
Victor Turner in formulating a theory of ritual structure which contrasts
with Eliade on this notion of a qualitatively different space which cannot be
found in modernity except in laicized form. He finds sympathy with
Turner’s belief that even under the conditions of modern industrial culture
the human experience of space is anything but homogeneous.26 Moore
believes Turner’s work on space and transformation provides a significant
contribution to our understanding of the relationship between space and
transformational process. Moore notes that, in a way similar to Eliade,
Turner has devoted a considerable portion of his research to the task of
understanding the nature and meaning of heterogeneous forms of space
discernible in human experience.
        Turner’s work on ritual process was influenced by Van Gennep’s
pioneering monograph, The Rites of Passage, which distinguished
traditional rites of passages into three phases: separation, transition, and
incorporation.27 Separation was the ritual phase which drew a distinction
between profane space and time, and sacred space and time. A special
cultural realm is created, during this phase, which becomes the locus of the
intervening phase of transition. The second or middle phase was termed
margin or limen by Van Gennep. In this phase the ritual subjects pass
through a period of cultural and social ambiguity in which they are relieved
of their typical or previous social statuses, undergo ordeals, painful trials,
and dismemberments, and receive instruction from their ritual elders in
mythical lore relevant to their soon to be attained new status. The third, or
final phase, that of incorporation, returns the subjects to the ordinary space
and time, and reincorporates them, with their new status, into the social
structure.
        According to Moore, the great contribution of Turner to our
understanding of space and transformation concerns his extensive
elaboration of the middle or transitional phase of liminality. For Turner the
distinction between ceremony and ritual is drawn on the basis of the
presence of liminality. Turner views ceremony as indicative, but ritual as
transformative. Transformation, especially those forms respecting life
crises, occurs most completely in liminal seclusion. It is in the liminal phase
that the “cognitive schemata that give sense and order to everyday life no
longer apply, but are, as it were, suspended—in ritual symbolism perhaps
even shown as destroyed or dissolved. Gods and goddesses of destruction
are adored primarily because they personify an essential phase in an
irreversible transformative process”.28
        Similar to the danger of the sacred noted by Otto, Eliade, and Van
der Leeuw, Moore draws attention to Turner’s understanding that liminality
can be dangerous. But he adds that more than the destruction of a previous
“lfe world” is going on. Liminality is more of a space/time pod in which the
individual is ritually unbound from the binding power of social norms and
conventions, and is ritually rebound. In the liminal experience, new
meanings and symbols are often introduced, or new ways of embellishing
old modes of living, so as to renew interest in them, are portrayed. The
danger of the liminal phase. is conceded and respected by demarcating it
with ritual interdictions and taboos. Moore also draws attention to the
distinction Turner makes between liminal and liminoid, a distinction crucial
to Moore’s own theoretical developments of ritual prowess and leadership.
Liminal phenomena are more characteristic of tribal social crises which
naturally occur. Liminal phenomena are typically organized around symbols
which are culture-wide, and which have a common meaning for all
members of the group. Liminoid phenomena, by contrast, are more typical
of modern societies. Rather than being collective products, they are often
individual products, with meanings not shared normatively or universally
throughout the culture by all members of the society. These meanings are
marginal to dominant symbols and cultural institutions. Often associated
with leisure time, and with play, liminoid phenomena are more
idiosyncratic, and are typically generated by competing individuals or
groups. Theater, film, opera, ballet, art, poetry, and pilgrimage are
exemplifications of liminoid phenomena.
        Moore’s own contribution to understanding transformative ritual
process in religion and psychotherapy builds upon the insights of Turner,
but it begins with a critique. While giving credit to Turner for mapping the
distinctions between liminal and liminoid space, Moore argues that Turner
did not give enough attention to the relationship between boundary and
space in his reflections. Concern with the establishment and maintenance of
boundaries, for Moore, is essential to providing effective transformative
ritual leadership. Moore claims that the distinctions between liminal and
liminoid should not be based on distinctions between whether or not the
practices and symbols are culture-wide or not, but “on the basis of how the
boundaries that delimit the space are constituted and maintained.”29 Moore
holds that it is the permeability of the boundaries of the space involved, and
the “relative importance of the leadership of ritual elders or ‘technicians of
the sacred’ in making judgments as to the approximate utilization of the
space,” upon which the issue should become focused.30 Ritual leadership
becomes the key variable which, according to Moore, Turner failed to
isolate.
         Moore insists that liminal space requires ritual leadership, whereas
liminoid space does not: “A ritual leader may be present in liminoid space,
but must be present for liminal space to exist”.31 He says that the reason
liminality occurs at or near the center of tribal society is not simply because
the social processes are integrated and totalistic, but because of the
availability of knowledgeable ritual elders. Moore’s concept of the ritual
elder echoes Eliade’s shaman as technician of the sacred, but Moore
extends his concept to and beyond shamanism to contemporary
psychotherapists, ministers, film and theater directors, civil rights leaders,
and presumably to any figure who can help an individual or a group face
powerful conflicts, oppositions, and competing energies in a way which can
bring about relatively safe and creative transformation or resolution. The
ritual elder is primarily one who knows how transformative space is
“located, consecrated, and stewarded.”32 In the culture of modernity, Moore
contends, there is a lack of knowledgeable and competent ritual leadership
able to locate and effectively utilize such space for transformative purposes.
What has been left to fill the vacuum is a plethora of liminoid spaces not so
much constituted by boundaries as by being on the boundary. Liminal
space, by contrast, requires the constitution and stewarding of strong
boundaries capable of holding the intensity of the energies released in the
transformative deconstructive/reconstructive process. The availability of
such effectively transformative space requires the conscious intentionality
of its stewards in maintaining the boundaries. Whereas liminoid space does
not require such leadership, liminal transformative space does. A ritual
elder is not necessary on a pilgrimage, but is necessary in a transformative
life crisis or political crisis.
         Moore has been extending his theory into the domain of the ritually
transformative processes of psychotherapy and religion. He believes that
the time has come for us to recognize that psychotherapy, religious and
secular, provides a certain sector of our population with important ritual
leadership in times of crisis. Although he does not contend that all
psychotherapy is effective transformative ritual leadership, where it is
effective, such leadership is implied. Most forms of psychotherapy manifest
within their process ritualized submission, containment, and enactment:

      In order to facilitate a needed deconstruction of the old
      personality structure of the individual, the individual is offered
      an opportunity temporarily to surrender autonomy, to submit to
      a total process which has an autonomy of its own and which can
      enable the individual to maintain the needed orientation and
      structure during this time of deconstruction. Built into the
      therapeutic process is the creation of a relatively safe
      psychosocial space in which this deconstruction and surrender
      of autonomy can occur. It is in this ritually constructed
      therapeutic space that the enactment, both playful and painful,
      of innovative new behaviors and styles of thinking can be tested
      experimentally before returning to the world of structure and its
      merciless demands for adaptive effectiveness.33

         Moore emphasizes that, while there are many other ritual
dimensions of psychotherapy, the salient issue is that of containment, a term
underscoring the issue of boundary maintenance.34 Moore cites
psychoanalysts Robert Langs and William Goodheart, who have used the
analogous term therapeutic frame to suggest the strong boundaries which
need to be maintained in an effective therapeutic field. The securing of a
stable frame or boundary for therapeutic space has, Moore contends,
become more than an expression of professional ethics. Moore contends
that a stable frame has become the “sine qua non which must be present for
the facilitation of any truly transformative therapeutic space”.35 He argues
that maintenance of an effective therapeutic frame is essential for
containment. Without a strong enough frame the intensity and depth of the
transformative processes become truncated. In such a situation, therapist
and patient may collude in resisting truths which need to be faced, and the
transformative truth becomes dissipated or extinct.
         Moore’s thought on ritual leadership has implications far broader
than our topic of a dialogue between shamanism and Jungian psychology.
Nevertheless, it is of value to us in illuminating how the shaman exerts
ritual leadership through the constitution and stewardship of the boundaries
of sacred-transformative space. Moore’s use of the shaman as a
paradigmatic example of ritual mastery is instructive for contemporary
psychotherapy and other forms of leadership. His work on ritual leadership
will be taken up again when we examine the power of ritual in the
transformation of intractable psychological and spiritual disorders in Part
Three (Chapter 7).
 Part Two: JUNG AND SHAMANISM | Chapter Three: Jung
                 the Wounded Healer
        SOME SHAMANIC ELEMENTS OF JUNG’S LIFE

        It has often been observed that a writer’s works reflect, in some way,
the writer himself or herself. Perhaps we can extend this to say that an
original psychologist’s theories will be rooted to some extent in his or her
own life experience. On this assumption we will begin exploring a dialogue
between Jungian psychology and shamanism by looking first at the life and
experience of C.G. Jung to see what might be shamanic in it. We might
begin with such questions as: What is there about Jung’s life and work that
make it a good disciplinary dialogue partner with shamanism? Are there
elements in Jung’s life and work that are shamanic? If so, what are they?
Was Jung a shaman? There are in fact areas of Jung’s life that seem to run
parallel to the classic phenomena and experience of shamanism. In this
chapter we will limit our focus to some key elements in Jung’s life and
experience that can be said to be shamanic, or are closely parallel to it. We
shall save the exploration of similarities and differences in his work and
thought, and exploration of some implications for therapeutic practice, for
subsequent chapters. To sharpen our discussion, we shall review some basic
elements of classic shamanic experience, and then compare them with some
important aspects of Jung’s life and experience as he described them in his
autobiography, Memories, Dreams, Reflections (MDR).1 The period of
Jung’s life most fruitful to examine is the midlife crisis period beginning
shortly after his break with Freud. It is during this period that Jung
underwent a profound loss, which he himself considered equivalent to the
shamanic conception of soul loss (MDR, p. 191), and had to make an
original descent into his own unconscious to recover his soul. Jung’s
descent, exploration, and soul recovery constituted a self-healing of heroic
proportions, since it resulted not only in the personal benefit of self-healing,
but contributed an understanding of the self-healing tendencies of the
psyche to his tribe of western man.
         Up to now, we have claimed that the shaman is to be distinguished
from other ritual elders, and medicine men and women, and from herbalists,
bone setters, and other traditional healers who employ the sacred in their
healing practices. We have followed Eliade in arguing that the shaman’s
special province is disorders of the soul, the most common disorders being
soul loss, loss of a power animal, and sickness caused by spirit or power
intrusions (related to a loss of power or vitality). The future shaman, we
have said, is typically a wounded and dreamy youth, a loner whose
introverted tendencies and unusual interests may make him or her seem
strange to peers and community. The future shaman is called by the spirits,
often by way of a crackup or life crisis, or by way of a major physical or
psychological loss in which he or she is taught by the spirits, often under
the guidance of an elder shaman, to heal himself or herself by intentionally
and ritually undergoing the deep dismembering and transformative
processes of the psyche. In that transformative or death/rebirth experience,
the shaman learns what he or she fundamentally is, what his or her deepest
wounds are, and how to heal them or bind them up. It is as a result of these
discoveries, teachings, and healings that the shaman gains the wisdom,
vision, and power to see into the souls of other afflicted individuals, to
diagnose and treat them by the power of, and under the direction of, the
spirits.
         We should emphasize that the future shaman not only is singled out
by superior psychological and spiritual abilities and then taught shamanic
techniques for diagnosing and curing illness. Rather, the future shaman is
grounded in a spiritual path and practice that entails discovering a strong
center of orientation on which to found a strong sense of self. A hard-won
integrity and sense of personal power are rooted in courageous self-
examination and trust in, and knowledge of, the spirits. The preparatory and
initiatory processes are lengthy and test the mettle the future shaman is
made of. The path of the shaman emerges out of a difficult and time-
consuming process of acquiring self-knowledge. It is a path that involves
being firmly and deeply rooted in the spirit world, and in harmonious
relationship to nature. It is out of the shaman’s discovery of his or her
center, the deepest core of the self where the sacred dwells, and out of the
putting of himself or herself in intimate accord with it, that he or she is able
to move solidly out towards the world in generosity and compassion as a
healer and ritual elder. Without such a solid spiritual foundation, the shaman
is likely to be weak and careless at best, or become an ego-motivated
sorcerer using his or her talents for his or her own gain. Shamanism without
this kind of spiritual foundation is indeed a dangerous thing.
         It is from this fundamental understanding of shamanic experience
that we shall examine some of the aspects of Jung’s life that parallel the
classic shamanic experience, and note some of the differences we might
expect from a modern Western physician and psychologist.


   JUNG’S CHILDHOOD: THE WOUNDING OF A HEALER

 Like the childhood of many future shamans, Jung’s childhood was marked
by some oddities. He was a precocious and dreamy child, a loner who
preferred to be out in nature, talking to stones, digging canals in the mud,
and exploring his own imagination to being with friends. Jung’s
introversion was not simply a sign of his precocity or calling to be a great
healer, but was also a sign of early childhood woundedness. Some
explanation of his marked introversion can be understood in the light of his
early childhood circumstances. Jung was born on July 26, 1875, in Keswil
on Lake Constance, in the canton of Thurgau, in Switzerland. His father, a
classically educated orthodox Protestant, took a pastorate in Lauffen six
months later. In his autobiography, Jung describes his childhood as
relatively happy, contented, and secure. He remembered the “sense of
indescribable well being” of his early years. Yet, what he documents are
dreams, experiences, and resulting anxieties that reveal another side to his
early experience. Not all was as well as he preferred to remember it in his
old age.
         Jung remained an only child until nine years of age, when Gertrand,
his sister, was born. This lack of siblings allowed Jung plenty of time to
play alone, especially to explore his own imagination. There is not much
evidence of a bond with playmates during these years, and Jung no doubt
experienced more than a deep passion to be alone, but also a deep
loneliness that his absorption in imagination and play helped him to abide.
Jung describes a strong bond with his mother; he felt she had a hearty
animal warmth, was a wonderful cook, and was pleasant and
companionable. But he did not experience her as altogether reliable. He
experienced different sides of her. One side, which he came to call per
“personality No. 1,” was well adapted, conventional in thought and attitude,
and had a wonderful sense of humor. But she had another aspect, which he
came to call her “personality No. 2”. This No. 2 personality would now and
then suddenly put in an appearance. He experienced this personality as
unexpectedly powerful, uncanny, and frightening at times. This No. 2
personality fascinated Jung, but also frightened him. One may wonder what
aspects of her No. 2 psychology actually frightened Jung, and if these
aspects may have been reflective of deficits in her mothering skills. In
Jung’s first recalled dream, he goes down underground to a chamber where
a large phallus-shaped figure sits on a throne. Jung felt a certain anxiety in
its presence, and then he heard his mother’s voice shout: “That is the Man
Eater”, which intensified his anxiety into terror, and he awoke (MDR, pp.
25-26). Jung himself believed the earliest recalled dreams are of great
importance for an individual’s psychology. If this is true, it is interesting to
note that in this dream Jung’s mother is not perceived as a figure who
exhibits the maternal functions of calming and reassuring the little boy, but
one who generates more anxiety. Anthony Stevens has drawn attention to
some of the possible maternal difficulties Jung’s mother had. He suggests
that she was probably not adequately emotionally attuned to Jung in his
place of horror; she does not reassure him or comfort him. Her somewhat
feeble attempts to do so appear to generate more anxiety.2 For example,
once when Jung expressed anxiety to his mother over the drownings and
funeral burials of people around the Rhine Falls, she attempted to comfort
him with a song she sang every night: “Spread out Thy wings Lord Jesus
mild, and take to Thee thy chick, Thy child”. Little boy Jung experienced
these words as anything but reassuring. In fact, the implication was that
Jesus took you in death down into dark scary places underground. Jung
came to fear not only Jesus, but developed a peculiar phobia of Jesuits as
well, for they seemed connected to Jesus in some ominous way that Jung
could not adequately fathom. There apparently was no further attempt, by
Jung’s mother, to monitor how Jung was doing with this anxiety, and to
further attune her responsiveness to it. That Jung’s mother did continually
generate anxiety and was unreliably available in his early years becomes
more plausible as we learn that she had a nervous breakdown and had to be
hospitalized for several months, leaving Jung feeling abandoned, but in the
care of an aunt and family maid. Around the time of her breakdown, Jung
sensed forebodings in the air, and believed it had something to do with
difficulties in his parents’ marriage. His mother’s maternal difficulties were
no doubt rooted in her own psychological pain and perhaps in strained
marital relations. Anthony Stevens suggests that her breakdown was a
collapse into major depression (On Jung, p. 102). This occurred when Jung
was age three, around the time he experienced the Man Eater dream. His
mother’s withdrawal into the asylum forced a prolonged separation from
her that Jung no doubt experienced as further damaging to his sense of self.
While he became particularly attached to the maid, he also was deeply
affected by his mother’s absence and developed a case of nervous eczema.
Of the negative impact on his future experience of women and of love he
said: “From then on, I always felt mistrustful when the word ‘love’ was
spoken. The feeling I associated with ‘woman’ was for a long time that of
innate unreliability” (MDR, p. 23).
         Relating Jung’s sense of abandonment or detachment by his mother
to Bowlby’s studies of attachment and detachment phenomena, Stevens
suggests that Jung reacted by becoming self-absorbed and self-reliant to an
unusual extent. Such defensive reactions to abandonment/detachment can
result in an individual who becomes disconnected, remote, aloof from his
peers, who has difficulty in integrating socially, and who may seem odd to
his peers. By Jung’s own account, his childhood solitary activities were
fascinating, fun, and filled with exploration of the mysteries of the world of
the psyche. To point to their connection with Jung’s wound, and to draw
attention to their defensive function, however, is not to underestimate their
potentially constructive and even creative value. The future shaman
typically begins a wound, and it is through suffering this wound, becoming
conscious of it, facing it, and learning to tend and heal it that one becomes
truly initiated as a shaman. We may view Jung’s childhood wounds and
resulting fantasy life as at once a sign of his wounding, and as a sign of his
potential as a greater healer. These wounds probably provoked a strong
introverted tendency and an attending compensatory preoccupation with the
psyche at an early age. Such introversion and fascination with the psyche
has been noted as a characteristic of the future shaman.


 LATE CHILDHOOD AND YOUTH: THE WOUND DEEPENS

         Increasingly the young Jung explored the imaginal world, and found
it irresistibly entertaining. By age eleven, when Jung was sent to the
Gymnasium in Basel, his psychoneurotic constitution became suddenly
worse; he felt himself to be in a social world which was disturbingly
different from the familiar pastoral life with his country parson father.
Basel, the big city with its powerful personages, seemed to shrink Jung’s
capacity for idealization of his father and his father’s world. His classmates
were rich and well groomed, their fathers were powerful and “lived in big,
splendid houses, drove about in expensive carriages drawn by magnificent
horses, and talked a refined French and German” (MDR, p. 24). Jung did
not particularly like his polished, bourgeois classmates, and found his own
personality quite different from theirs. He no doubt felt insecure and
inadequate in this new environment.
         Typical of many extremely gifted and creative children in modern
Western civilization, Jung found school boring, and withdrew into fantasy:
“It [school] took up far too much time which I would rather have spent
drawing battles and playing with fire” (MDR, p. 27). Jung found himself
wanting to withdraw more and more into the fantastic part of himself, his
own “personality No. 2”. There was a growing division in himself similar to
what he experienced in his mother between inner and outer worlds. In his
twelfth year Jung suddenly developed another neurosis. He reported that he
was shoved down in the cathedral square and bumped his head, and almost
lost consciousness. He took the opportunity to manipulate his father and use
this injury as a possible way out of the dull activities of his school life. He
did manage to convince his father and the family physician that he was too
injured to return to school for awhile. During this time away from school
(more than six months) Jung claims that he steeped himself more and more
in solitude, withdrawing from ordinary waking pursuits into fantasy and
reverie:
      Above all, I was able to plunge into the world of the
      mysterious. To that realm belonged the trees, a pool, the
      swamp, stones, and animals, and my father’s library. But I was
      growing more and more away from the world, and had all the
      while faint pangs of conscience. I frittered away my time with
      loafing, collecting, reading, and playing. But I did not feel any
      happier for it; I had the obscure feeling that I was fleeing from
      myself. (MDR, pp. 30-31)

         We could view this “fleeing from myself”, from a shamanic
perspective, as sign of soul loss, or of an increasing departure of his soul
from the necessary responsibilities and obligations to the outer world. Jung,
later reflecting on this time of his life from his perspective as a
psychologist, saw himself as having become too unbalanced towards
introversion (and his No. 2 personality), and claims that he suddenly came
to his senses and made a decision to rebalance himself, moving again
towards the adaptiveness of his school and social life after he overheard his
father telling someone of his despair about Jung’s future. It was around this
point of his life when Jung began to realize that he himself had what he
considered to be two personalities: the No. 1, and the No. 2. Recognition of
this duality in himself, and in his mother, would later lend him an interest in
dissociative pathology and lay the foundations for his own psychology
based on dissociative and integrative processes. Jung applied this
conceptuality of personalities No. 1 and No. 2 to this turning point in his
youth. Personality No. 1 was considered his outwardly oriented and adapted
self, capable of making its way in the world. This personality later became
associated with Jung’s conception of the ego and the persona. Personality
No. 2 was considered by personality No. 1 to be darker, more mysterious, if
more intuitive, individualistic, and ancient. Jung reports that he had a
eureka experience, a sudden insight into his own duality one day:

      To my intense confusion, it occurred to me that I was actually
      two different persons. One of them was the school boy who
      could not grasp algebra and was far from sure of himself; the
      other was important, a high authority, a man not to be trifled
      with, as powerful and influential as this manufacturer. This
      “other” was an old man who lived in the eighteenth century,
      wore buckled shoes and a white wig and went driving in a fly
      with high, concave rear wheels between which the box was
      suspended on springs and leather straps. (MDR, p. 34)

      I always knew that I was two persons. One was the son of my
      parents, who went to school and was less intelligent, attentive,
      hardworking, decent, and cleaner than many other boys. The
      other was grown up—old, in fact—skeptical, mistrustful,
      remote from the world of men, but close to nature, the earth, the
      sun, the moon, the weather, all living creatures, and above all
      close to the night, to dreams, and to whatever “God” worked
      directly in him. (MDR, p. 44)

        While personality No. 1 could be considered the adaptive
functioning of the personality consisting of the ego, directed thinking, the
persona, and their socially and psychologically adaptive purposes;
personality No. 2 was viewed as a deeper self, an unfathomable depth of
experience which is associated with processes of symbolic imagination,
intuitive perception, and non-directed thinking and which invites solitary
reverie and play. Jung found personality No. 1 most demanding and tiring,
but the No. 2 personality he found a source of refreshing peace and solitude.
No. 2 also seems to have been exalted in a compensatory way, covering
over the inadequacies Jung felt from his No. 1.
        Jung came to realize that there was a danger in being overly
preoccupied or identified with personality No. 2. He considered Zarathustra
to be Nietzche’s No. 2 personality, and Faust to be Goethe’s. Nietzche made
the mistake, Jung believed, of identifying with No. 2, and of forsaking No.
1, which led to Nietzche’s psychotic disintegration. In terms of his own
psychological constitution, Jung appears to have been more fascinated with
No. 2, but he found it necessary to readjust himself in the direction of No. 1
when he felt himself too far off balance in the direction of No. 2. Based on
this intuition of the dual nature of his own personality, Jung eventually
came to the generalized belief that psychological health for all people
requires a balance between opposing forces.
         Jung believed that the division into No. 1 and No.2 was not what
today is considered a dissociative disorder, but normally occurring aspects
of the psychic totality. He also came to believe that it was a mistake to
consider oscillations between oppositional forces as pathological, for “on
the contrary, [the oppositions] are played out in every individual” (MDR, p.
45). As Jung prepared for his university education it became clearer to him
that personality No. 1 needed a good education and grounding in life, that
is, in the outer world. This realization probably influenced Jung to choose
the sciences, to satisfy the demands of No. 1, but it was, no doubt,
personality No. 2 that led him to select psychiatry for his post-doctoral
specialty. In this way both personalities got some input in shaping the
direction of his life course, although it would be at midlife before Jung’s
No. 2 personality would begin to more deeply stir and eventually consume
his attention. Jung’s deep woundings, stemming from his difficulties with
his mother, and adolescent difficulties with his father, were by no means
healed at this time. Their festering presence would resurface again at
midlife and demand that Jung take note and do something with them. But
for now, for the period in which he needed to prepare for adult life, he had
stumbled on the insight that he must put all of this preoccupation with
depths aside for awhile, and focus on the adaptive demands of personality
No. 1.
         Jung’s intuition of the need to compensate for imbalances or one-
sidedness in the direction of No. 2 could be considered an insight that
provided a temporary self-healing, or at least a containment for wounds that
must later be tended. That is to say, Jung’s early theory was shaped by his
experience of these contrasting opposites within the currents of his own
psyche. Although Jung, as we said, found a preference for No. 2, he tells of
a dream in which he realizes, just prior to beginning his university studies,
that No. 1 is important to his adaptation to the outer world, and to his ability
to confront the inner world.

      It was night in some unknown place, and I was making slow
      and painful headway against a mighty wind. Dense fog was
      flying along everywhere. I had my hands cupped around a tiny
      light which threatened to go out at any moment. Everything
      depended on my keeping this little light alive .... This dream
      was a great illumination for me. Now I knew that No. 1 was the
      bearer of the light, and that No. 2 followed him like a shadow.
      My task was to shield the light .... I recognized that my path led
      irrevocably outward, into the limitation and darkness of three-
      dimensionality. (MDR, pp. 93-94)

        Like the shaman who discovers that he must have one foot firmly
placed in “this ordinary world”, Jung concluded that the knowledge and
experience of the “other world” must be limited for a time, and always
supplemented by knowledge and practical competence in “this world”. The
shaman needs a firm and intentional grip in both worlds. For Jung, the need
to rebalance in the direction outward (this world) implied that it was time to
put limits on No. 2 and begin the academic development (public initiation
of his No. 1) which would give him the firm grounding in the outer world
which adult life required. This theme is still articulate when Jung later
formulates the task of the first half of life as that of “ego-adaptation” to
outer reality, whereby one achieves one’s place in the social and economic
order. It was the task of the second half of life, Jung came to believe, when
No. 2 would again be given its due, for No. 1 (the ego/persona complex) to
relinquish some of its dominance to make way for an expanded personality
structure created by its encounter with and integration of No. 2.
        There are many other inner and outer events in Jung’s childhood and
youth that could throw further light on his solitariness, his peculiarity, and
his woundedness. But we have said enough to clarify the origin and nature
of the childhood woundedness of Jung, the future wounded healer. All the
precocious fantasy experiences, the mystical experiences, and the
paranormal and uncanny experiences that Jung underwent provided rich
data for him to experience in his solitude. They increasingly confirmed for
him the objective reality of the psyche; and its importance. The fascination
with this material was never totally set aside, even when he entered the
university and medical school, but he discovered that getting a strong
foothold in the outer world was necessary before further exploration of the
inner world could safely be undertaken. These beliefs helped to clarify
Jung’s situation to himself, and helped him to bind himself while his ego
acquired the further developments necessary for adaptation in the outer
world.
                    YEARS OF APPRENTICESHIP

         We shall fast-forward now up to Jung’s University of Basel studies
and medical school training in which he was an outstanding student and
finished his studies in the shortest amount of time possible. His No. 2
personality interests, however, slowly crept back into his preoccupations, as
his chosen medical dissertation topic focused on the spiritistic seances of
his cousin Helene Preiswerk. The dissertation title, “On the Psychology of
So-Called Occult Phenomena,” designates Jung’s desire to explore No. 2
interests, but with the now highly educated, scientifically trained intellect of
his No. 1. Jung was still interested in the uncanny and the spirits, but now
wanted to examine them with a hard-earned scientific, or at least,
phenomenological, eye.
         The dissertation topic was not a mere regression to the interests of
his No. 2 personality, for Jung was clearly moving ahead with the program
of personality No. 1, and then, in 1900, on into his psychiatric residency at
the asylum at Burgholzli, under Eugen Bleuler (1857-1939), who was one
of the most outstanding psychiatrists of his day. Jung’s choice of psychiatry
as a specialty may have been rationalized as a mere professional or even
scientific choice, but it is not likely that Jung’s own psychological wounds,
and his own psychological giftedness, were not more determinative of this
choice. Nevertheless, Jung speaks of his early fascination with psychiatry as
if it were an apprenticeship in an area chosen by his own scientifically
inquiring mind: “The years at Burgholzli were my years of apprenticeship.
Dominating my interests and research was the burning question: ‘What
actually takes place inside the mentally ill?’ That was something which I
did not understand then, nor had any of my colleagues concerned
themselves with such problems” (MDR, p. 114).
         Jung was ambitious in his study, in his questioning and exploring
the inner world of his patients. He became Bleuler’s chief assistant and
withdrew into the asylum’s “monastic walls” and devoted every spare
minute to reading the entire fifty volumes of Allgemeine Zeitschrift für
Psychiatrie. Jung worked hard, long days focusing his scientific energies
upon the investigation of the inner life of the patients, because he “wanted
to understand how the human mind reacted to the sight of its own
destruction”. During the years at Burgholzli, Jung managed to find time to
meet, court, and marry Emma Rauchenbach, the daughter of a wealthy
industrialist. He claimed love at first sight. When he proposed the first time,
she turned him down, perhaps because of differences in socioeconomic
status, but this did not deter Jung. Jung was poor, and working in an
unglamorous profession, but he was brilliant and certainly had a promising
future. Emma eventually accepted the marriage proposal, and they were in
married in 1903; she moved into Jung’s flat at Burgholzli, and they soon
began making a family. Jung continued to pursue his knowledge of
psychopathology passionately. His hungry and creative mind was no doubt
propelled by the daimon of a wounded healer in the making. In his work
with the asylum’s insane patients, Jung felt that he was in the realm of lost
souls, and this is indeed how a shaman would view the world inhabited by
psychotic patients. In a shamanic view, psychotic states are an absorption, a
lostness in the non-ordinary reality of the other world, where the person is
lost to the social relationships and responsibilities of the ordinary reality of
the everyday world. Jung, like many powerful shamans, was highly
intuitive and had a knack for accessing the inner world of his patients. A
great compassion and sympathy for the tortured soul was no doubt a major
factor in his inquiry. He interviewed floridly psychotic patients and felt an
urge to piece together their biographies, their stories, so that he might see if
their bizarre and florid symptoms (delusions, hallucinations) could be
placed in a meaningful context. He found that this psychotic material was
not meaningless, but highly intelligible when placed in the context of the
person’s life story. This was a remarkable realization in his time, because
the psychiatry of his time was interested in little else than classification of
the various forms of insanity, all thought to be nothing more than symptoms
of organicity, of brain pathology:

Through my work with patients I realized that paranoid ideas and
hallucinations contain a germ of meaning. A personality, a life history, a
pattern of hopes and desires lie behind a psychosis .... It dawned on me then
for the first time that a general psychology of the personality lies concealed
within psychosis, and that even here we come upon the old human conflicts.
Although patients may appear dull, apathetic, or totally imbecilic, there is
more going on in their minds, and more that is meaningful, than there seems
to be. (MDR, p. 127)

         Jung came to believe that there was no fundamental difference
between the sane and insane at the deepest levels of the soul: “At bottom
we discover nothing new and unknown in the mentally ill; rather we
encounter the substratum of our own natures” (MDR, p. 127). By 1904 Jung
had begun laboratory experiments on psychopathology by means of the
newly devised word association experiment. In this experiment the subject
must respond as quickly to the series of stimulus words as possible. The
reaction time was noted, and inordinate delays were made salient for
psychological conjecture. Through this experimental procedure, Jung
stumbled onto the concept of “feeling toned complexes,” the autonomous
contents of the unconscious which interfere with the reaction time. He came
to believe that complexes were involved in psychopathology, and his
method of association experiment using the galvanometer was later adapted
to criminal investigation work, and became the basis of the lie detector test.
Because of this work, Jung subsequently won some early fame, and traveled
with Sigmund Freud to Clark University in the United States to receive an
Honorary Doctor of Laws degree in 1909, at age 34. Jung had already met
Freud in 1907, and had become interested in Freud’s new theories of
psychoanalysis after reading his book The Interpretation of Dreams.3 He
felt a special kinship with Freud because his theories introduced a
psychological approach into psychiatry. Freud’s approach was convergent
with Jung’s own, but Freud was 25 years Jung’s senior, had much more
experience than Jung, and had developed elegant theories. Jung was
naturally attracted to Freud because no one else seemed to speak so
knowledgeably and authoritatively to Jung’s intuitions in, and discoveries
about, the psyche. Another motivation for Jung’s taking an active effort to
establish contact with Freud, however, involved Jung’s own father complex,
and a need for a psychological ritual elder.
         In order to understand Jung’s attraction to Freud we need to
understand something about Jung’s disappointment with his own father.
Jung was not only wounded by his mother’s instability and intermittent
availability; he was also deeply wounded by his father’s lack of guidance of
him intellectually and spiritually. Jung’s mind was naturally open and
inquiring. Jung’s father’s mind was relatively rigid, orthodoxly Protestant,
and closed on great questions of life. Jung’s early experiences of god
images were bound up with sexuality and feces, a dream of a phallus
associated with Jesus as a man eater, and a vision of God sitting on his
throne ejecting a giant turd which falls and crushes a cathedral. The god
who had the impudence to show itself in such a manner seemed very
different from the orthodox God of Jung’s father. Jung had questions, but
his father seemed to have stopped questioning. Jung found his father’s mind
closed, his theology boring and unsatisfactory, and surmised that his father
himself suffered from a crisis of doubt, from which he never recovered.
When Jung prepared for his first communion, he had hopes of learning
something about God, but he was very disappointed to find his father knew
little. When Jung asked him about the Trinity, how one could be three
simultaneously, all his father could say is, “We’ll skip that, for I really
understand nothing about it myself” (MDR, p. 62). While this may have
been an honest answer, it also must have felt like a discount to Jung’s
inquiring mind, and it must have been a major disappointment to his
passionate No. 2 personality. Jung seemed to be seeking for what self-
psychologists call an ”idealizing selfobject” in his father, someone who
could guide and teach him, confirm his intellectual and spiritual gifts, and
acknowledge Jung’s future promise. Jung was amazed to find that his father,
a pastor and theologian of sorts, had so little of divine knowledge for him.
Jung decided that Christian theology was boring and the church
characterized more by an absence of God than a fullness of his presence.
Jung concluded that his father had nothing of interest to teach him, and he
became so disenchanted with Christianity that he decided that “a church is a
place I should not go” (MDR, p. 64).
         It appears that Jung had not really found an adequate idealizable
father figure in his university days, nor in Bleuler, although he was a
worthy mentor. By the time Jung had discovered the reality of the soul
(psyche) in the insane, he had recovered the passion and interest of his No.
2 personality along with the discipline and power of his No. 1 intellect.
Sigmund Freud must have seemed just the right salve for Jung’s wounding
around his father, for Freud was developing a science of the No. 2 domain.
Here, at last, there seemed to be a brilliant older man who had just the kind
of interests that Jung had, and who was more experienced and advanced in
understanding them. Jung was in need of a spiritual father, and Freud
seemed to be in need of a blessed son.


                            FATHER FREUD

         When Freud and Jung met in Vienna in 1907, they were so excited
and had so many ideas to exchange that their initial conversation ran
thirteen hours non-stop: a sign that the archetypal father and son couplet
had been activated. It seemed to be another situation of “love at first sight.”
Freud valued Jung tremendously, and came to view him as the most brilliant
of his students, and the probable future crown prince of psychoanalysis.
There was much mutual admiration exchanged, and a great deal of
collaboration. From the start, however, this relationship was unstable and
problems lay just under the thin surface of their friendship. Freud
immediately had an agenda for Jung, and Jung no doubt had his own
agenda. It is not likely that Jung wanted to remain a priest of anyone else’s
dogma, for his own ambitions, in accord with his own unusual gifts and the
drive towards individuation, would insure that Jung would not remain
Freud’s disciple.
         Freud’s agenda was to have a successor to lead psychoanalysis into
the future, a future that apparently involved no possibility of deviating from
Freudian doctrine, especially the sexual nature of the libido. Jung’s agenda
was informed in part by his need for an idealizable intellectual father figure,
for someone who could teach him, and for a partner in scientific inquiry,
who would work with him in a common cause and common interest. Jung
wanted to continue his investigations, add new knowledge to
psychoanalysis, even abandon theory when it no longer made sense of the
facts. And there was the proverbial rub. Freud’s theory of the sexual nature
of the libido was set in concrete; for Freud it was fact, not to be modified. A
higher or more fundamental level of understanding was not possible. Jung’s
reflections on his own experience, and upon that of his patients and of cases
he’d read about, suggested inadequacies in the Freudian libido theory. Jung
thought it ludicrous that the infant’s sucking at its mother’s breast could be
a sexual act. It was also possible, Jung thought, to view the satisfaction
displayed by an infant at its mother’s breast as a sign of the kind of
satisfaction anyone gets from eating. Jung felt Freud’s libido theory
confused the reproductive instinct with a normal hunger drive. Jung was
well aware that sexuality could be present at birth and develop into maturer
forms over time. But he felt the libido was more fundamental and psychic
in nature, than it was sexual. As psychic energy, it would migrate to
whatever zone (oral, anal, phallic, etc.) was seasonally relevant to the
child’s developmental or maturational schedule. At the phallic or genital
stage it would of course be characterized by sexual themes and interests.
Jung felt that Freud had overextended the concept of sexuality to describe
all developmental stages from birth to maturity. He lacked an adequate
understanding of the maturation and transformations of libido in adulthood,
at midlife, and in old age.
         Jung was convinced that it was good science to modify or abandon
theory if it wasn’t adequate to the facts, or if they could be better explained
by other theoretical constructs. Once he began publishing thoughts to this
end, the relationship with Freud began to unravel. But there were other
significant differences as well. Jung was increasingly interested in studying
religious and occult material, and by 1911 had begun psychoanalytically
investigating astrology, mythology, and other occult areas for their
psychological contents, with ambivalent blessings from Freud.
Paradoxically, Jung’s association with Freud seemed to consolidate his own
scholarly confidence, and was partially healing for him in this way.
However, it was the same confidence in the validity of his own ideas that
drove an irreparable wedge between himself and Freud.
         Jung’s personal problems with what he later called the anima, the
soul-image, the inner feminine, manifested themselves during his
partnership with Freud, and also no doubt served to caution Freud of Jung’s
seeming adolescent instabilities. There was no doubt that Jung loved his
wife, Emma, but he felt from early on in the marriage that she could not
satisfactorily contain him or adequately reflect aspects of his anima,
especially those aspects having to do with his feelings of maternal
abandonment, and the need for an admiration and soul-to-soul partnership
and merger. By the time Emma’s energies were invested in maternal
responsibilities, Jung found himself being irresistibly attracted to a number
of other women. Perhaps Emma’s maternal investments seemed to him
another abandonment, thus activating his old mother complex. Perhaps Jung
required more energies than Emma could give at this point in her life.
Perhaps Jung was naturally polygamous, as he liked to think of it. The fact
is that he was indeed involved in a series of brief amorous entanglements
with other women, at least two of which were his patients. He made no
secret of his sexual pursuit of extramarital relationships, and sought after
Freud’s advice and help when he got into a mess. His analysis of Sabina
Spielerein went astray and Freud had to take over. When Jung attempted to
become Emma’s analyst and trainer, he quickly made a mess of it, using the
analysis as a forum for attempting to manipulate Emma into feeling
comfortable with his promiscuous intentions. It didn’t work, and Emma
sought Freud’s advice, for Jung seemed blind to the jealousy, indignation,
and anxiety he was arousing in Emma by using his analysis with her as a
rationalization for his own motives.
         In 1910 a young woman by the name of Toni Wolff became Jung’s
patient. She was an intelligent and mysterious young woman who suffered a
breakdown upon the death of her father, a wealthy Zurich businessman.
There is no doubt that Jung was able quickly to help Toni. The death of her
father probably left considerable unfinished business with him; Jung, an
older man by at least fourteen years, no doubt provided her with a relatively
able substitute father figure, enabling her to regain her equilibrium, even if
her analysis with him was too brief to work through her father complex and
other issues. It may be too much to say that Jung had a corresponding need
for an admiring daughter figure; it is probably more accurate to say that he
was vulnerable and hungry for a woman to reflect aspects of himself
(anima) that were not mediated by Emma. What he seemed to need from
Toni was that she be his femme inspiratrice, and later a containing vessel
for him. The functions of admiration, adoration, comforting, and containing
have a maternal ring to them. It is probably the case that Jung’s femme
inspiratrice (Toni) was more accurately an embodiment of the maternal
functions which he languished for and lost to his mother’s illness, and
which he enjoyed briefly from his nursemaid. Those aspects of Jung’s
anima more in line with his maternal wounding, and with his additional
feelings of letdown and abandonment by his father and by Freud, were
apparently picked up or reflected by Toni.


                  SEPARATION AND SOUL LOSS

  Toni Wolff’s analysis was evidently brief, and no one is certain how long
it lasted or at what point the affair actually began. We do not know when or
how the affair became apparent to Emma. By 1911 Emma’s letters to Freud
revealed that she was very troubled, and later in the year, during the Weimar
Conference of the International Psychoanalytic Association, gossip of the
affair had begun to circulate.4 Jung apparently had no intentions of ending
his marriage to Emma and would have no talk of a divorce. What resulted
was a strange triangle in which both women played a different role and
shared differing aspects of the same man: Emma was the nominal wife and
true mother of Jung’s children. Toni appeared to be the true lover, femme
inspiratrice, collaborator, and nursemaid. Like the nursemaid (substitute
mother), she was emotionally close to Jung, while he probably experienced
Emma as emotionally distant. Toni apparently had an olive complexion and
dark hair like the nursemaid that cared for Jung during his mother’s long
absence. This triangular arrangement entailed significant strain on all
concerned, and this strain was probably a factor in Jung’s breakdown
following upon the break with Freud.
         The inevitable and devastating break with Freud came in 1912, and
it dramatically initiated Jung’s personal explorations into the unconscious.
The reader of MDR may be led to think that Jung explored the depths of his
own unconscious out of scientific or psychological curiosity or
commitment: “From the beginning I had conceived my voluntary
confrontation with the unconscious as a scientific experiment which I
myself was conducting and in whose outcome I was vitally interested”
(MDR, p. 179). But we only need to read the next line to get a hint that it
was more than a scientific experiment: “I might equally well say that it was
an experiment that was being conducted on me” (MDR, p. 179), and indeed
it was conducted on him. While it is true that Jung did confront the
unconscious in as objective and scientific a manner as he could, the descent
was not altogether voluntary. Immediately following upon the break with
Freud, Jung was ushered into a midlife crisis of monumental proportions.
Consider that he had lost another significant figure in his life, “Father
Freud”. His own fragmentation over this was further deepened by the
consequences on his social and public life: the necessary resignation from
the International Psychoanalytic Association, and from his teaching post at
the University of Zurich. All of his psychoanalytic friends and colleagues
withdrew from him. In short, Jung’s hard-won outer world collapsed. All
that he had built in the first half of his life, on the basis of his No. 1
personality, crumbled, and he was set adrift in a seething sea of doubt, lost
and directionless as to his own ideas and his life’s course: “After the break
with Freud, all my friends and acquaintances dropped away. My book was
declared rubbish; I was a mystic, and that settled the matter” (MDR, pp.
162-163). Jung’s own mature psychology and theory had not yet emerged in
a clear and distinct form. He had used Freud’s edifice for his own intellect
to react against, to begin defining his own position, in a parasitic, if
creative, manner. Suddenly, he no longer had a Freudian framework, nor did
he yet have a “Jungian” framework. Jung was no doubt deeply,
narcissistically wounded by the public loss, embarrassment, and lack of
appreciation for his solid work. The resulting feelings of rejection, loss of
appreciation, and lack of sense of his own mature framework ushered in a
period of profound disorientation; he was betwixt and between firm
structures.
         According to Stevens, in the weeks and months following the break
with Freud, Jung became seriously depressed and close to psychosis. The
insult to Jung’s self-esteem, his lostness with respect to his own psychology
and his future, released a powerful upsurge from the unconscious. From a
shamanic perspective, Jung was now suffering a form of soul loss, and his
life (his future, his work, and the well-being of his marriage and family)
was at stake. Shamanically speaking, soul loss has traditionally been
associated not only with a loss of will, such as we find in depression, or
with a loss of vital powers, such as we find in pathological dissociation, but
also with a loss of connection to community, to the social sphere. In soul
loss, one may be so lost in the “realm of imagination”, in altered states of
consciousness, that there is little relatedness to the outer world. In this
respect, Jung must have felt very “lost” indeed.
        During this liminal period Jung was so frequently absorbed in non-
ordinary reality (Castaneda) as to substantiate Stevens’ belief that he was
nearly psychotic. Jung temporarily and intermittently lost his foothold in the
realm of No. 1. He heard voices, had visions, dreamt of rivers of blood,
talked with spirits as he walked in his garden. He was so absorbed in the
altered states of consciousness associated with psychotic, mystic, and
shamanic realms that he had to remind himself that he was a doctor, a really
existing person with a family, patients, and responsibilities. In talking to
himself in this manner, he was seeking to regain and maintain the foothold
in both worlds, of No. 1 as well as the No. 2 he was so nearly irresistibly
immersed in.


              JUNG’S RITUAL ELDERS AND TRIBE

        During a shamanic initiatory crisis, the initiant has available ritual
elders, master shamans to whom he or she can go to guide and safely
contain the transformative process. The wounded healer learns to heal
himself or herself partly through the encounter with the spirits, and partly
under the necessary structuration and guidance of the ritual elders. Jung had
no ritual elder, no analyst to help him sort through and understand the
emerging material, and no professional therapeutic containing vessel was
available. Going to an asylum was not an option. There weren’t even any
helpful books on what he was experiencing to help guide him though the
process. The ritual responsibilities, perhaps by default, fell to Emma and
Toni. With their valuable help, he was able to respond to this upsurge from
the unconscious” with the intentionality and courage of a shaman, and the
desire for objectivity and understanding of a scientist. Perhaps it is too
simplistic to say that Emma provided much love and faith in Jung, and
domestic and financial security (material container), and Toni provided love
and possibly some esoteric knowledge that helped to psychologically
structure the process (psychological container) for Jung, but it is probably
not far off the mark.5 Recalling James Hillman’s conception of
“relationships as containers”, the idea that “the deeper the relationships go,
the more they can contain”, the matrix of relationships between Jung,
Emma, and Toni must have run very deep. This brings to mind the powerful
containing roles of the community when illness occurs in tribal life. The
shaman will often call together the patient’s extended family or clan, and
involve them in the preparations and procedures of the healing ritual.
Sometimes, the entire tribe is invited to participate. The weight of the
community, their love and concern, not only provides safety and security
for the healing ritual, it sends an important loving and supportive message
to the afflicted. In his midlife initiation Toni and Emma, and perhaps Jung’s
family, were his personal tribe, albeit a small but loving tribe or clan. Their
very real love for him and relatedness to him, in combination with his own
determination, somehow constellated a good enough ritual space/time pod.
It was only by such a vessel provided by these relationships that he could
safely make the nekyia into the water of the collective unconscious, and
undergo the necessary and heroic transformation that midlife was requiring
of him. It was in this makeshift ritual context that Jung underwent the most
profound experiences with non-ordinary reality, the collective unconscious;
and this ritual context made it possible for his encounter with numinous
spirits, visions, dreams, and voices to become a transformation of shamanic
proportions. Like the shaman and the archeytypal hero, Jung, as we shall
see, was able to return from his journey not only with benefits for his own
life but with a boon for his collective tribe (western society) as well.


        THE DESCENT: JOURNEY AND SPIRIT GUIDES

        For a while, Jung was uncertain how to approach his own emerging
unconscious material with a method that would be useful and reliable in
yielding insight into it. Recalling his doctoral thesis on his mediumistic
cousin, Helene Preiswerk, where he suggests that the doubling of
consciousness (as in dissociative states, mediumship, multiple personality)
is fundamentally “new character formations or attempts of a future
personality to break through”, Jung hit upon an insight into how to
approach his own unsconscious material. If he approached it with an
attitude that the events emerging in his dreams, fantasies, and visionary
material were suggestive of his future personality, a greater personality, then
the results of his encounter might be fruitful. This idea in itself became a
type of container, and inspired him to search further within himself. With
trust in the emerging material as purposeful, Jung began to experiment with
ways to intentionally enter varied altered states of consciousness, and to
even evoke the experiences with the numinous figures himself. On
December 12, 1913, Jung was sitting at his desk pondering his fears. On
that day he took a decisive step: “Then I let myself drop. Suddenly it was as
though the ground literally gave way beneath my feet, and I p1unged down
into the darkest depths” (MDR, p. 179).
         The language of “dropping down into dark depths” is reminiscent of
shamanic trance-journey language for a descent into the underworld. Jung,
seeking to avoid notions of hypnosis, or mystical trance, preferred to use his
own term, which he coined for the process, “active imagination”. In the
process of learning to do active imagination, Jung began by visualizing a
descent, a passage downward. He kept at it until he began to see that he was
arriving somewhere in an other world.

      In order to seize hold of the fantasies, I frequently imagined a
      steep descent. I even made several attempts to get to the very
      bottom. The first time I reached a depth, as it were, of about a
      thousand feet; the next time I found myself at the edge of a
      cosmic abyss. It was like a voyage to the moon, or a descent
      into empty space. First came the image of an empty crater, and I
      had the feeling that I was in the land of the dead. The
      atmosphere was that of the other world. (MDR, p. 181)

         Traditionally speaking, shamans have used some form of percussion
to facilitate trance states and enhance or vivify the imagination. Jung’s
method of active imagination apparently involved no percussion to facilitate
trance or intensify visualization; he apparently did not need it. He seemed to
have found through persistence and concentration that he could enter the
underworld through this method and make his own nekyia (journey) much
as Odysseus journeyed through the land of the dead. As such, Jung’s
journeys eventually yielded impressive results. On one occasion he
encountered a couple of spirit figures, an old man who called himself
Elijah, and young girl, called Salome. Jung was able to converse with them,
and listened to what they had to say. They claimed to have been together
from all eternity. Jung, kicking in his left brain, his psychological
understanding, interpreted Salome as an anima figure, and thought of Elijah
as a personification of the archetype of the old wise man, embodiments of
the eros and logos principles. In interpreting the spirit figures that appear in
psychological terms, Jung differentiates himself from the traditional shaman
who takes the phenomena just as they appear, as spirits. But Jung does not
seem to deny their objectivity or value by interpreting them
psychologically, although this respect for their objectivity only becomes
clear to him after his encounter with another spirit figure, Philemon.
         Jung tells us that Philemon emerged out of Elijah, as if Philemon is
a higher or more complete manifestation of the psychical entity. This
phenomenon is not new to shamans. In classical shamanic understandings,
spirits and spirit guides are thought to be very old spirit entities. A spirit
guide or power animal eventually may leave a shaman and be replaced by
another, or it may reappear when it shape-shifts or changes form. When a
shaman’s spirit guide or power animal changes form, this is often because
the shaman is ready for a fuller revelation of its reality. It first relates to the
shaman in a form he or she can understand. As the shaman matures, a
higher form is manifested. This in turn may even be superseded by higher
forms. In this way the shaman’s consciousness is gradually expanded.
Something similar may have been going on with the transformation from
Elijah to Philemon. While Philemon was later superseded by another figure,
Ka, Jung chose not to tell us much about it except for offering a few
Egyptian amplifications. Instead of telling us more about Ka, he decided to
focus on the importance of Philemon. This may be because Philemon
opened the initial door to a deeper understanding of the psyche for Jung.
         Philemon first appeared to Jung in a dream, in the image of an old
man with a long white beard, the horns of a bull, and the wings of a
kingfisher. He flew to Jung holding four keys in his hand. Jung considered
him an ancient Gnostic figure who revealed the objectivity of the psyche to
him. At first Jung did not understand this dream figure, so he carefully and
lovingly painted his image, which he placed in his secluded, pastoral
solitary retreat at Bollingen. During the days when Jung was painting this
picture he was thunderstruck to find a dead kingfisher, while walking in his
garden. Kingfishers are rare in the vicinity of Bollingen, and Jung never
saw one in the area again. This event he felt to be highly synchronistic, an
outer confirmation of the objective reality of the inner world. Jung was very
struck by the sense of importance to him that Philemon evoked, and he
became drawn to engage him in dialogue through active imagination. Jung
had a series of important conversations with Philemon, and would take
walks in his garden holding philosophical discussions with him. In his
discussion about Philemon, Jung reveals just how struck he was by his
objective inner reality, and by his message about the objectivity of the
psyche:

      Philemon and the other figures of my fantasies brought home to
      me the crucial insight that there are things in the psyche which I
      do not produce, but which produce themselves and have their
      own life. Philemon represented a force which was not myself.
      In my fantasies I had conversations with him, and he said things
      which I had not consciously thought. For I observed clearly that
      it was he who spoke, not I. He said I treated thoughts as if I
      generated them myself, but in his view thoughts were like
      animals in the forest, or people in a room, or birds in the air,
      and added, “If you see people in a room, you would not think
      that you made those people, or that you were responsible for
      them”. It was he who taught me psychic objectivity, the reality
      of the psyche. Through him the distinction was clarified
      between myself and the object of my thought. He confronted
      me in an objective manner, and I understood that there is
      something in me which can say things that I do not know and
      do not intend, things which can even be directed against me ....
      Psychologically, Philemon represented superior insight. He was
      a mysterious figure to me. At times he seemed quite real, as if
      he were a living personality. I went walking up and down the
      garden with him, and to me he was what the Indians call a guru.
      (MDR, p. 183)

         Jung’s need for a ritual elder to help him during this chaotic time of
his life seems to have been met by Philemon: “I could have wished for
nothing better than a real live guru, someone possessing superior
knowledge and ability, who would have disentangled for me the involuntary
creations of my imagination” (MDR, p. 184). Jung had not heard of the idea
of an inner guru until fifteen years later when talking with a friend of
Ghandi’s who said his own guru was Shankaracharya, the commentator on
the Vedas who died centuries before. In learning that it was possible for a
Hindu devotee to have a ghost guru, Jung felt even more confirmed in the
belief in Philemon’s objectivity as an inner guru (spirit guide). Philemon
came to be understood as an aspect of his higher Self, and after his
encounters with it and his confrontations with the anima, Jung realized that
all the visionary activity had to do with his own condition, his own actual
life, whatever else it might be about: “No matter how deeply absorbed or
how blown about I was, I always knew that everything I was experiencing
was ultimately directed at this life of mine” (MDR, p. 189). Over a period
of several years Jung gradually experienced the outlines of the inner
change.


                       VISIONS OF THE DEAD

        If Philemon was a kind of spirit guide or inner guru who opened
Jung up to the objectivity of the psyche, it was the visionary activity
subsequent upon his encounters with Philemon that yielded insights into
additional pieces of the framework of Jung’s mature psychology. Jung had
been thinking about, and struggling with, his own theory of the psyche. It
had not yet emerged in its clear and mature form, but through these
encounters with Elijah and Philemon, and the anima figures, it began to
gradually emerge into conscious formulation. By this time Jung already had
a theory of the collective unconscious, an awareness of the archetypes, and
a view of the psyche’s personifications as representations of a greater
personality. He also intuited the self-healing tendencies of the psyche and
knew that trusting it was important. But the hub of his psychology, the goal,
and its basic structures were still not crystal clear to him. Jung felt
compelled to express and formulate what might have been said by Philemon
on this subject. Out of his struggle with these questions, and the pressure of
trying to solve them, a period of strange and synchronistic phenomena,
followed by dramatic visionary activity, developed.
         “It began with a restlessness”, Jung claims, and he and his family
felt as if there were spirits in his house that wanted something of him, only
he did not know what they wanted. “Then it was as if my house began to be
haunted. My eldest daughter saw a white figure passing through the room”
(MDR, p. 190). Jung reports that a second daughter related that twice her
blanket had been snatched away. The same night his nine-year-old son had
an anxiety dream. Jung’s entire environment seemed to be highly charged;
he and his family experienced a type of mystical merger, a participation
mystique (Lévy-Bruhl). We won’t repeat the entire description of the
pressure building up in Jung’s household, but it was uncanny. Jung
describes the situation and what follows, reporting that the door bell began
to ring frantically, but no one was found to be there:

      The atmosphere was thick, believe me! Then I knew that
      something had to happen. The whole house was filled as if there
      were a crowd present, crammed full of spirits. They were
      packed deep right up to the door, and the air was so thick it was
      scarcely possible to breathe .... 1 was all a-quiver with the
      question: “For God’s sake, what in the world is this?” Then they
      cried out in chorus, “We have come back from Jerusalem where
      we found not what we sought”. That is the beginning of the
      Septem Sermones.
       Then it began to flow out of me, and in the course of three
      evenings the thing was written. As soon as I took up the pen,
      the whole ghostly assemblage evaporated. The room quieted
      and the atmosphere cleared. The haunting was over. (MDR, pp.
      190-191)

        No doubt Jung’s family was glad Jung had a creative breakthrough,
and what a breakthrough it was. The Septem Sermones ad Mortuos, while
given as the Gnostic “Seven Sermons of the Dead,” which Jung wrote down
in a Latin script, set out a number of the basic ideas of Jung’s mature
psychological theory, most notably the theory of polar oppositions and of
masculinity and femininity (intimations of the anima and animus theory),
and the relation of sexuality and spirit. It was as if out of Jung’s confusion
and tremendous desire for some clarity about his psychology, a eureka
experience had occurred, which finally reduced the tension in him, and in
his household, by giving him more details of his own psychology. A kind of
gestalt closure/satisfaction relieved the situation for everyone. The
psychological ideas which came forth were not worked out consciously,
however, but were given as a gift from beyond, it seems, through a process
that Jung is unclear about, but which appears to have been automatic
writing, perhaps a form of active imagination for him. Jung repeatedly had
revelatory dreams or visions of this sort, where he gained tremendous
psychological and spiritual insight. He tended to interpret such experiences
in psychological terms as information coming from the collective
unconscious or from the greater personality. In these psychological
interpretations, Jung takes care to remain respectful of their objectivity,
emphasizing at the very least that they do not come from his own ego-
consciousness.


        THE ANIMA: RECOVERING SOUL AT MIDLIFE

        Experiences such as the hauntings and visions around the Septem
Sermones give us an inkling of just how stressful it must been to be around
Jung at this time in his life, and more than inkling of how precarious his
own psychological condition was. Jung worked hard at trying to understand
the meaning of this material for his own life. Like the shaman who must
directly experience, know, and learn from the spirit revelations, Jung
adopted a creative attitude towards these unconscious contents. This
creative attitude of trying to understand every image and act with its
implications probably prevented the experiences from becoming
destructive. The shaman, too, must adopt such a constructive attitude in
becoming a self-healer. It is not likely, however, that Jung could have
“healed himself” without the help of women in his life, his family context,
his very human ritual elders. Stevens suggests that Toni Wolff was
especially helpful to Jung during periods when he felt he was losing his
sanity, and that this may be why Emma Jung was able to tolerate her
presence, even accept her into the family circle for a time. The relationship
of Toni to Jung’s experience of soul loss is worth considering. Around the
time of the Septem Sermones, Jung described having a fantasy that “my soul
had flown away from me” (MDR, p. 191), and Jung likened his own
situation and experience to the primitive experience of soul loss (MDR, p.
191).
         Midlife, that time when a person has climbed the ladder and realized
it is against the wrong wall, is a time of profound change, for women as
well as men. Since we are attempting to understand Jung’s experience, we
will make a few comments on the male midlife crisis, and relate it to anima
activity. For a man, midlife is a time of reevaluating and, often, of feeling
dissatisfied with one’s achievements, with the values and orientation by
which one has led one’s own life. Discontent and depression often attend
this condition as a man loses his bearings. He wants something more, needs
something more, but does not yet know what. At midlife the anima
typically becomes powerfully aroused. Those aspects of a man’s life that
have been unacknowledged or not made conscious and integrated often
become activated by a lover. Powerful romantic longings, sexual lusts,
desires for carefree playing, or a desire to throw off old stultifying
commitments arise. Additionally, old wounds resurface and clamor for
attention. This can be a most critical challenge to a man’s sense of identity
and continuity. It can be an opportunity for self-transformation or self-
destruction.
         Jung recalls a story. He was writing down a fantasy one day and
suddenly heard a voice from within call what he was doing art, rather than
psychology. Jung felt this as a seductive and tempting voice, and a
dangerous one, for he already had a life, a wife, and a career, and he
recognized that acting on such a voice could cost him his hard-won life
structure (e.g. his marriage, his livelihood, his career). It was too late, in any
event, to start over from scratch, and he felt his psychology was more
important to him than just doing art. He feared that if he listened to her he
would end up high and dry in some Bohemian garret. He was struck by the
feminine feel of this part of himself, and was “intrigued by the fact that a
woman should interfere with me from within” (MDR, p. 186). After some
conjecture that this voice might be from a bit of undeveloped feminine
personality that was developing within himself, he came upon the idea this
was his soul, in a primitive sense, and had a feminine quality. He quickly
became aware of a duality to the anima, that it had a positive aspect as well
as a negative aspect. It could be a femme inspiratrice or a femme fatale, for
example. It all depends on the man’s psychology and what he does with it.
         At midlife, if a man has been neglecting his anima, she may become
so charged that she arouses powerful compensatory urges. For example, if a
man has been one-sidedly goal-focused and overrational in building his
career, neglecting the more feeling, intuitive, playful, and sensual aspects of
his life and relationships, he may become seized by anima-generated
fantasies. These may become projected onto a special type of woman who
fascinates the man and becomes an object of obsession. Such a man may be
attracted to passionate embraces in a lustful relationship, or he may seek
femme fatales who ultimately will destroy him if he does not become
conscious and change his course of action. Through the passion, sensuality,
and carefree and non-rational spirit such a passionate relationship evokes,
the psyche is attempting to compensate for its neurotic onesidedness. If the
man is fortunate enough to become conscious of his onesidedness, and if he
realizes that the problems stem from within himself (neglect of his anima),
he may become able to consciously integrate these anima aspects (the non-
rational, playful, sensuous, intuitive, and wounded aspects) into his
personality organization. If all goes well, the anima then becomes a positive
force, a guide or pathway into his own depths.
         The concept of the anima is of major importance to Jung’s soul
theory, and it is important to note that Jung’s understanding of it emerged
out of his own midlife crisis. Jung did not learn of the anima by conjecture
or studying books; he learned about it through direct experience, the way
shamans best learn about the soul. There is a sense in which only in a
midlife crisis does a man come fully to encounter the anima and begin to
understand it. It can not be understood from book learning alone, for it must
be experienced. At midlife its power is tremendous indeed. Jung used the
term anima in a number of different but related aspects. It is the Latin word
for soul, and Jung described it variously as the “soul image” of a man, as
the “archetype of the inner feminine” in a man’s psychology, just as the
animus is the “inner masculine” in a woman’s psychology. As an archetype,
the anima is a “bridge” to the deeper depths of the psyche, to the archetypes
of the collective unconscious. As a bridge, it is a kind of psychopomp, or
guide into the collective unconscious.
         A man’s experience of the anima is colored by his early experience
of significant females, his mother, sisters, aunts, girlfriends, first love, and
later, other women. In the process of falling in love a man projects his
anima, his soul image, onto the woman. This projection makes her highly
attractive, numinous. Such attractions may insure the survival of the
species, but they also insure drama further on down the line. The woman is
compelling precisely because the anima projected onto her mediates the
man’s unconscious. Of course, if the man has been wounded by women
(e.g., his mother), this will be reflected in his anima. Midlife crises have a
way of rubbing a man’s nose in his wounds and vulnerabilities by way of
the anima.
         In the case of Emma Jung and Toni Wolff, Emma was encumbered
with focusing her maternal energies on the children and providing the home
and economic stability, and attendant feeling of safety that a nice setup
provides. Toni seemed to represent an inspiring muse, a woman who was
intelligent, wise, admiring, and comforting. But Toni was also young,
wounded, and probably in need of a father figure. For a middle-aged man
who felt wounded by his mother, to be admired by a young woman must
have seemed most attractive. Toni possessed another important quality as
already mentioned. Her dark hair and olive skin reminded Jung, apparently,
of the nursemaid that he had become attached to during the period when his
mother had been institutionalized. As a target for Jung’s anima projections,
the dual role of muse and nursemaid to Jung’s wounded psyche fell upon
Toni. It is possible that one aspect of the Elijah and Salome figures had
been to mirror the anima/animus relationship of Jung and Toni. The
motivations to cooperate with Jung’s demands upon her may have been
complemented by her own need for a wise father figure. In this view, those
aspects of her animus colored by her experience of her father were caught
by Jung. Without going into the thorny question of the professional ethics
of Jung making her his lover and confidante, we may suggest perhaps that
both individuals were wounded, and were able to help each other out in
some way, however incomplete Toni’s analysis with Jung must have been.
Certainly Jung could not have come upon the conception of the anima
without real relationship entanglements, and his entanglement with Toni
(and Emma). For Jung, this help seemed vital to the recovery from his soul
loss. Having lost his mother to depression, at a young and critical age, he
recently lost Freud’s admiration and love. These losses would be profound
since they were highly important figures in Jung’s life. While Freud was a
father figure, he was also a parent figure providing certain emotional
supplies that Jung needed, such as confirmation of his value, of his gifts,
and of his future. To lose Freud must have felt analogous to the magnitude
of the loss of his mother, thus evoking Jung’s mother complex and the
vulnerabilities associated with it. Toni Wolff, who greatly appreciated and
believed in Jung and his destiny, must have served a compensatory healing
function. She admired, confirmed, and contained him, and through his
relationship with Toni, Jung’s self-understanding increased as he became
aware of his anima, and gradually learned to withdraw it from her, thus
recovering his soul or his soul image. She provided a valuable reparative
function for him. Stevens speaks of the personally difficult but important
role she played in Jung’s own soul recovery:

      She carried the full burden of his anima projection, as well as
      his terrors and despair, until the personification of the anima in
      his fantasy life became sufficiently differentiated for him to be
      less in need of an outer woman to mediate his work with the
      unconscious .... Toni evidently advanced Jung’s individuation
      by enabling him to integrate the unlived feminine in himself
      and bring it to maturity. There is little doubt that the
      relationship was of equal importance to her.6

         Through understanding Jung’s concept of the anima in the context
of his midlife illness, we come to see how he arrived at an understanding of
soul recovery as a psychological process of reclaiming aspects of the
greater Self that have been dissociated or projected. From Jung’s relation to
Toni Wolff we can see how important it can be to have a human relationship
to mediate the process of reclamation and recovery. This has two
fundamental implications. First, like most shamans undergoing crisis and
initiation, Jung did not self-heal completely on his own. Although he did
tremendous work, mustering great courage and self-discipline to heal
himself, he still required his little tribe or clan to help him. The importance
of the weight of the family or community in healing is well established.
Second, like a shaman undergoing initiation, Jung also required a ritual
elder to provide structure, to provide the container. There were no
knowledgeable ritual elders available in his society to help him. He thus
allowed Toni and Emma to provide a human ritual container for his
initiation. Like the shaman relying on the spirits for guidance and healing,
Jung had to rely on Philemon and other figures as they revealed themselves
to him. It was through his confrontations, conversations, and reliance on the
insights gleaned from these numinous figures that Jung can be said to have
self-healed by virtue of their inner help.
         The necessity of human relationships, especially with ritual elders,
in a safe and secluded ritual space/time pod is fundamental to shamanic
initiation. The traditional shaman has played the role of such a human
mediator for the shaman-to-be in the past, as the modern urban shaman still
does. However, without psychological work and effort on the part of the
patient in welcoming home (Ingerman) and integrating the recovered soul
or aspects of the soul, the recovery will be in vain as the soul will become
lost again. Without the process of psychologically recognizing how the
recovered soul or soul parts fits within a person’s life context and
relationships, and within their own habits of living, it is also unlikely that
soul recovery in any lasting sense is possible.


  DISCOVERING THE GOAL AND RETURNING WITH THE
                     BOON

        Jung’s midlife crisis came to resolution around 1918-1919 when he
was drafted into the military. He acted as commandant in a prisoner of war
camp at Chateau d’Oex, and found time to continue his inner work. In the
mornings he would sketch a circle in his notebooks, a mandala (Sanskrit for
sacred circle), and within it he would draw what he felt to be his inner
situation at the time. This method appeared to be a type of active
imagination, and Jung discovered that through such drawings he could
observe his own psychic transformations from day to day. Gradually it
began to dawn on Jung that the mandala is really a mirror of the psyche in
its totality: “Only gradually did I discover what the mandala really is:
‘Formation, Transformation, Eternal Mind’s eternal recreation’. And that is
the self, the wholeness of the personality, which if all goes well is
harmonious, but which can not tolerate deceptions” (MDR, pp. 195-196).
         Jung had a strong awareness of the Self crystallizing at this time, but
he still was missing its fundamental importance for his life and his mature
psychological theory. This became resolved with a marvelous revelatory
dream. In the dream, Jung found himself in Liverpool. There was a central
square in the city around which were organized four quadrants. In the center
of this mandala-like dream image resided a round pool with a small island
in the middle of it. A magnificent magnolia tree stood in the center of it.
While the rest of the city was enshrouded in a fog, the tree blazed with a
numinous light. “Everything was extremely unpleasant, black and opaque-
just as I felt then. But I had a vision of unearthly beauty, and that was why I
was able to live at all. Liverpool is the ‘pool of life”’ (MDR, p. 198). Jung
said that the dream brought with it a sense of finality and that finally the
goal had been revealed. What was this goal? It was the center, the axis
mundi, represented by this magic tree. The magic tree is what the shamans
mount in their journeys to the upper world, or descend via roots to the
underworld. It is the axis mundi, at once a symbol for the center of the
world, a symbol for the center of the psyche, the center point of orientation.
From this dream Jung realized the telos (goal and purpose) of his life and of
his mature psychology: “One could not go beyond the center. The center is
the goal, and everything is directed toward that center. Through this dream I
understood that the self is the ... archetype of orientation and meaning.
Therein lies its healing function”. MDR, pp. 198-199).
         Jung had found the key to his own healing, to his own psychology
theory, and to others in his tribe of western society. The Self is the goal of
his personal quest and simultaneously the goal of his mature psychological
theory. In this insight we have Jung the shaman becoming healed, and
returning with the boon for his tribe: the individuation process is a path
towards self-realization. The understanding of the Self and its realization as
the goal of the life process, the individuation process, became the program
and mission for the second half of his life. From this point on, Jung had a
clear sense of his mission (purpose), and a valuable psychology to offer the
modern western world. He devoted the rest of his life to elaborating it for
his people. Looking back on this period of midlife crisis, Jung realized that
his mature psychology, his true life work, began then: “The years when I
was pursuing my inner images were the most important in my life—in them
everything essential was decided. It all began then; the later details are only
supplements and clarifications of the material that burst forth from the
unconscious, and at first swamped me. It was the prima materia for a
lifetime’s work” (MDR, p. 199).


                       WAS JUNG A SHAMAN?

         It is difficult to say that Jung was a shaman in the classical sense of
the term as suggested by Eliade, Harner, and others. There do appear to
have been strong shamanic elements in Jung’s life. If we can suspend, for a
while, the cultural differences between shamanic terminology and
conceptuality, and Jung’s psychological terminology, we perhaps may see
that Jung can in some sense be called a shaman.
         We have described the development of Jung’s life from early
childhood through his midlife period as the story of the making of a
wounded healer. The wounded healer is a fundamental aspect of the
shaman. It is through the tended wound that the shaman is able to see, to
empathize, and heal. Jung possessed empathic abilities in a high degree, and
his abilities increased immeasurably after the resolution of his midlife
crisis. Like the traditional shaman, Jung was a loner, an individual who
preferred solitude and absorption in the non-ordinary or imaginal
dimensions of what he later came to call the collective unconscious. Jung
does not specify that he had a power animal, but he is clear that he had a
spirit guide—more than one.
         Like the traditional shaman, Jung also had a fascination with the
soul—especially with its numinous contents—that remained with him all
his life. Our focus has been on early childhood and midlife, but if we
focused on the second half of his life, we would see that Jung continued his
interest in the uncanny, in synchronicity, in the parapsychological, and
underwent a near-death experience, where he left his body, had a life
review, and learned that he must return to earth because he still had work to
do. We would see that he continued to have visions, that he became very
interested in alchemy and astrology, and even had one of his assistants cast
horoscopes on his new clients, so he could get an astrological and
synchronistic perspective on his patient’s life. This practice is reminiscent
of the Tibetan Buddhist shamans and the Tibetan Bon Po shamans who
make astrological and oracle consultations for the same reason.
         Just as the classic shaman’s province is the soul and its disorders,
based on a very ancient theory and therapeutics of the soul, so Jung’s
psychology is a theory and therapeutics of soul, and one that developed,
like shamanism, out of his own confrontation with it, out of his own
initiation into it. Just as the shaman moves about intentionally in non-
ordinary reality, in the lowerworld, middleworld, and upperworld, Jung
navigated similar realms, perhaps the same realms, in what he called the
collective unconscious. Just as the traditional shaman has mapped this non-
ordinary and sacred geography for his or her people, so did Jung. Just like
the vision quester discovering his or her life’s purpose and then offering it
to the benefit of his or her tribe and piece of earth, so did Jung offer the
results of his nekyia to western culture. Such a journey is heroic, involving
a descent, an important discovery, and a return with it to benefit the people
and the earth.
         Unlike most traditional shamans, Jung did not use percussion to
enter trance, to enhance imaginal processes, but he employed a similar
method of descending downward, a “letting himself drop” and intentionally
encounter the spirit presences he met in the unconscious (active
imagination). Surely the personal and collective unconscious are modern
designations of the old non-ordinary reality, the three-storied imaginal
cosmology of the shamans. Jung had his spirit guides (Elijah, Salome,
Philemon, Ka) who lead him to discover himself, and discover the objective
transpersonal psychical dimensions that are beyond himself. He sometimes
referred to the entities he had conversations with as spirits, although he
remained cautious about using a spirit idiom before a modern scientific
readership. Like the traditional shaman, it was through his concourse with
such spirit presences that he learned much about the human soul, and thus
fashioned his own psychological theory and method of therapy. This is not
unlike the traditional shaman who is led by the spirit, or by the spirits, in
how he should live, work, or heal others.
         Jung was not a psychopomp in the traditional sense of escorting the
souls of the dead to their abode in the other world, the land of the dead, or a
realm of light. He had a profound insight into the psychological meaning of
death and its relation to the death and rebirth process, and believed he
underwent a psycho-spiritual death/rebirth process at midlife. This
death/rebirth was his initiation into the underworld at midlife. Jung also felt
his mental patients at the asylum of Burgholzli were lost souls, hanging out
in the land of the dead, an intuition that persons undergoing psychosis are
lost to the everyday world of ordinary reality and are lost in the imaginal
realm of non-ordinary reality (the collective unconscious). On occasion,
Jung was able to pull such persons out of this lost realm and back into
ordinary life. Certainly through his analytic and psychotherapy practice, he
was able to facilitate the recovery of souls, not through trance journeys, but
through analysis of dreams, of transference and counter-transference, and
through the power of a deep relationship with him.
         Shamanism has always had a close relationship to nature, to the
earth mother and the nature spirits. For Jung, nature was alive and sacred
(numinous). Jung had a profound love and respect for nature and solitude,
and knew that he needed to take periodic “vision quests” at his Bollingen
retreat. There, he felt at one with nature, and describes a mystical merger, as
if he were the splashing waves, the wind in the trees, the substance of the
stones and earth. Like the traditional shaman who heals himself or herself
through solitary retreat, by taking mini vision quests, at Bollingen Jung felt
he could touch his core, the Self, recharge and renew himself and his vision,
and heal from the strains of living. He felt that at Bollingen he was in the
midst of his true life. At Bollingen, Jung lived very simply. He chopped his
own wood, drew his own water, lighted kerosene lamps, cooked his own
meals. He meditated and engaged the spirits through active imagination and
analysis of his dreams. He only accepted visitors there when he flew a
special flag from the tower. Bollingen constituted Jung’s personal sacred
space, the locus for his highly disciplined psycho-spiritual practice, the
place of his renewal and vision questing.
         We have examined Jung’s early and middle life and found many
shamanic elements. Jung seemed to have stumbled on a shamanic way of
being, knowing, and healing, without the standard supports of traditional
shamanic culture, which shamans traditionally enjoyed. In the absence of
the traditional shamanic ritual elders and thought systems to serve as a
framework, Jung had to undergo his own original experience with the help
of Emma Jung and Toni Wolff. He underwent his own courageous
initiation, and had to arrive at his own methodology and his own language
of soul. Because of this original quality of his discovery, he developed some
new approaches and novel conceptions which are at once compatible with
shamanism and which may extend it beyond its traditional domain into the
world of post-modern Western culture. In the chapters that follow, we shall
bring Jung’s resultant ideas into dialogue with shamanism, and explore
some implications of the interface of a Jung-shamanism dialogue.
             Chapter Four: Jung’s Theory of the Soul

   COMPARISONS AND CONTRASTS WITH SHAMANISM

        The most salient common ground of the shamanic and Jungian
perspectives is the valuation of the soul. Jung often translated psyche by the
German word Seele, meaning soul, especially when he wanted to emphasize
the depth and plural nature of the psyche, emphasizing its multiplicity. The
shaman views the soul as a plurality of psychical energies which must exist
in some loose harmonious balance within the individual; Jung similarly
viewed the soul as a multiplicity-in-unity. When stressing its mystery,
variety, and impenetrability, he tends to use the word soul (Seele). When
stressing its integrity, ordering, archetypal patterning, and striving towards
wholeness, he tends to use the term psyche. Whatever the terminological
usage, psyche and soul are largely synonymous for Jung. There are many
parallels which can be drawn between the primitive view of the soul and
Jung’s view. As James Hillman has recurrently pointed out, there is a
certain animistic feel to the psychic contents and structures named by Jung.1
It is important to note that this animism tends to be self consciously
metaphoric in Jung. For example, his main psychological terms are not
affects, cognitions, volitions, and other such behavioral terms, although he
does use them at times, but highly suggestive, poetic, and animistic terms
which are often personifications of psychic energies and structures, such as
the shadow, the old wise man/woman, the anima/animus, the trickster, and
the like. The use of such evocative language is intended to bring the
imaginal realities of the psyche to life, to give them a numinal status and
importance of their own. Jung and the shaman both approach the psyche in
this imagistic way.
        Jung also conceived of the psyche in structural language, and at
times used the language of secular psychiatry, psychology, neurology, and
biology. However, in his later work, he came to prefer the more imagistic or
symbolic way of approaching and relating to the psyche. Regardless of the
language style, Jung’s writings always reflect an underlying view of the
psyche as mysterious, numinal, and of infinite value. Like the shamanic
view of the soul, Jung’s attitude towards the psyche gives his psychology a
spiritual or numinal aura, a religious feeling tone, if you will.
         The soul was so important to Jung that he wanted it to be understood
as something in itself, and not simply the epiphenomenon of biological
processes. In its broadest sense, Jung understood the psyche as a totality or
unity composed largely of conscious and unconscious aspects. The field of
conscious experience was understood as a relatively limited area of
psychical experience involving discrimination, awareness of contrasts, of
opposites, emerging from the more developmentally and phylogenetically
primitive and ancient layers of the unconscious. Following Freud, Jung
termed the center of the field of consciousness the ego (das Ich). His
understanding of the ego moves beyond the cognitive and perceptual and
discriminative identity and continuity of self. For Jung, however, the ego
was not the whole personality. While it was essential for daily living and
functioning, it was really only the tip of the psychic iceberg. Although the
ego has a tendency to want to direct the life of the individual, Jung believed
that it must relativize itself, subordinating itself to a deeper center of order
and meaning within the psyche. This deeper center Jung referred to as the
Self archetype, of which we shall say more later. The unfathomably deep
reservoir supporting consciousness, Jung sometimes referred to as the
unconscious. In this he followed Carus, Freud, and others who
conceptualized this underlying substrate to conscious experience as the
unconscious (das Unbewusst). Freud, as is well known, viewed the
unconscious as largely consisting of repressed, forgotten, or preconscious
memories, cognitions, affects, and instinctual energies. His view gave a
negative tone to the concept of the unconscious. Jung also acknowledged
this Freudian dimension of the unconscious, and termed it the “personal
unconscious”. Jung diverged from Freud’s view, however, by positing the
unconscious as creative and purposive in its strivings, and as having deeper,
more ancient, and more universal layers than the personal unconscious. He
called these deeper layers the collective unconscious, because they were
shared by human beings universally, historically, and cross-culturally.


 THE ANCESTRAL AND ARCHAIC LAYERS OF THE SOUL
         Jung’s understanding of a deeper collective dimension to the psyche
brought him close to the ancestral soul theory of primitive psychology and
shamanism. The belief that ancestral spirits play a significant part in the
daily life of the tribe, as well as in causing and curing illness, has been well
documented. In many cultures where shamanism is practiced, the shaman
enters his or her ecstatic trance state and apparently accesses these ancestral
dimensions, often having concourse with the helping or malevolent
ancestral spirits. Such a view presupposes that the psychic interior of the so-
called primitive is somehow open to, and in touch with, significant
influences from the past. Assuming the shaman is able to access such
ancestral layers, Jung’s mapping of the psyche can help illuminate the
experience of, and belief in, such layers. Jung’s first intuition of the multi-
layered structure of the psyche came to him in a dream around the time he
was trying to differentiate his views clearly from those of Freud. Such
extraordinary dreams and visions revealing the nature of psychical reality,
and serving as a map for the shaman, abound in the literature on
shamanism. The central dream image which awakened Jung and served as a
lifelong map and guide to psychical reality was that of a multi-layered
house:

      I was in a house I did not know, which had two stories. It was
      “my house.” I found myself in the upper story, where there was
      a kind of salon furnished with fine old pieces in rococo style.
      On the walls hung a number of precious old paintings. I
      wondered that this should be my house, and thought, “Not bad.”
      But then it occurred to me that I did not know what the lower
      floor looked like. Descending the stairs, I reached the ground
      floor. There everything was much older, and I realized that this
      part of the house must date from about the fifteenth or sixteenth
      century. The furnishings were medieval; the floors were of red
      brick. Everywhere it was rather dark. I went from one room to
      another, thinking, “Now I really must explore the whole house”.
      I came upon a heavy door, and opened it. Beyond it, I
      discovered a stone stairway that led down into the cellar.
      Descending again, I found myself in a beautifully vaulted room
      which looked exceedingly ancient. Examining the walls, I
      discovered layers of brick among the ordinary stone blocks, and
      chips of brick in the mortar. As soon as I saw this I knew that
      the walls dated from Roman times. My interest by now was
      intense. I looked more closely at the floor. It was of stone slabs
      and in one of these I discovered a ring. When I pulled it, the
      stone slab lifted, and again I saw a stairway of narrow stone
      steps leading down into the depths. These, too, I descended, and
      entered a low cave cut into the rock. Thick dust lay on the floor,
      and in the dust were scattered bones and broken pottery, like
      remains of a primitive culture. I discovered two human skulls,
      obviously very old and half disintegrated. Then I awoke.2

         As Jung pondered the dream imagery it struck him that the e was
much more complex and deep than Freud suspected. Interpreting the dream,
Jung said it suggested to him that there were further reaches beyond the
personal unconscious. The long uninhabited ground floor in medieval style,
the Roman cellar, and finally the prehistoric cave signified not only the past
in human biological and cultural evolution, but past stages of
consciousness. The dream pointed to the cultural and historical foundations
of human consciousness, a kind of Hegelian history of the successive layers
of consciousness. The dream postulated an impersonal foundation
underlying the human psyche. It seemed to constitute a structural diagram
of the psyche in imagistic/metaphoric terms. Jung says that it became a
guiding image which was confirmed over and again throughout his life as
he studied the psyche and its cultural and historical manifestations. It was
his first inkling of a collective a priori beneath the personal psyche. He
notes that he first understood the contents of the lower layers to be traces of
earlier modes of functioning, but later he recognized them as forms of
instinct which he came to call archetypes.3
         As Jung’s thoughts about the various layers of the psyche grew more
subtle and clarified, he proposed an alternative structural diagram of the
psyche as being layered from the most personal levels to the deeper pre-
human and transpersonal levels. According to Barbara Hannah,4 Jung once
used a large colored diagram during a lecture to illustrate the layers in the
unconscious. She reports that Jung colored the lowest level in crimson and
called it the “central fire”, apparently representing a cosmic source of
energy which gives off sparks which ascend upward through all the layers,
touching them with its luminous energy. The next to the lowest layer he
called the layer of animal ancestry, which he believed was present in every
human psyche, and above that was the layer of primeval ancestors. Above
this was a layer representing the psychical deposits and structures of a large
cultural group such as Europe or Asia, each with deep unconscious
connections to the other. These deep layers supply most of the archetypal
images which form the human patterns of behavior. Above these, the layers
are less collective, and more culture and individual specific. These layers
include the nation, above this the clan, above that the family, culminating in
the individual person. In any individual all these various layers have some
efficacy in structuring experience; most of them normally operate
unconsciously. In special altered states of consciousness induced by
psychosis and other forms of psychopathology, and in the creative and
mystical altered states of consciousness, the most archaic levels of the
psyche become activated in such a way that they give rise to archetypally
patterned imagery experienced in dreams, hallucinations, visions, artistic
products, and in the imagery of mystical or transcendental states. Such
imagery often has a very numinous feel, compels attention, entices the
imagination, and involves archaic or mythological forms. Jung in fact
believed that the collective unconscious was the source of the imagery
which rises to the surface in cultural myth and ritual, which informs and
structures religious and moral ideation, and which provides the ideological
ground of socio-cultural ordering.


                             ARCHETYPES

       Jung believed the collective unconscious was structured by
archetypes, the forms which pattern and direct instinctual energies into
purposive channels, leading to distinct psychological processes and
behaviors:
      We can also find in the unconscious qualities that are not
      individually acquired but are inherited, e.g., instincts as
      impulses to carry out actions from necessity, without conscious
      motivation. In this deeper stratum we also find ... archetypes ....
      The instincts and archetypes together form the “collective
      unconscious”. I call it collective because unlike the personal
      unconscious, it is not made up of individual and more or less
      unique contents but of those which are universal and of regular
      occurrence.5

         Jung considered the archetype to be an inherited part of the psyche,
initially developing through repeated experiences of prehuman and human
evolution. This conception of characteristics acquired through individual
experience and passed on to subsequent generations was originally
conceptualized by Jean-Baptiste de Lamarck (1744-1829). This view
apparently influenced Jung’s early formulation of the heritability of the
archetype. While de Lamarck’s view has been discredited, and has been
supplanted by Darwinian natural selection and Mendel’s laws of
inheritance, Jung’s conception of the heritability of the archetype can be
explained in terms of natural selection.6 The fear and fascination with
snakes, for example, appears to be a universal human reaction, which Jung
believed may be due to an archetypal pattern which formed through
countless aeons of human experience of fear and fascination with snakes, so
that the emotional reaction arises in each person’s initial encounter with a
snake. Alternatively, it could be that a mutation involving a fear of snakes
proved useful to the species. In the view of natural selection, genetic
mutations which enhanced survival meant that the mutants would reproduce
and supplant previous generations. Thus archetypes emerged, in this view,
in a seemingly random way, but proved useful for the survival of the
species. A genetic structure that insured the survival of an infant (e.g.,
attachment/bonding, the genetic programming for motherhood, i.e., the
mother archetype) would be passed on to succeeding generations and thus
become universally accessible to a mammalian species, helping to insure its
survival. There are also philosophical-theological views that explain
archetypes as Platonic forms, or as Whiteheadian “eternal objects”, which
exist as potentials in the mind of God, and which inform the world.7 In
Whitehead’s view, the eternal objects are the potential patterns and forms
that inform the world. God contemplates every creature in the cosmos in its
context, and offers it forms of possibility for becoming the most
harmonious and intense occasion of experience it can be. For Whitehead
this is true whether the creature be a simple subatomic particle, a complex
animal body, or the human psyche. In this view an archetype is a complex
eternal object, which has entered into the conceptual feelings of God, and
into the usually non-conscious conceptual feelings of the creatures of the
actual world. In the process of biological and psychological evolution
certain complex eternal objects have become selected because they enhance
not only survival, but harmonious and intense experience. However these
recurrent forms of experience are explained, Jung believed there to be a
seemingly endless variety of archetypes universally appearing across
cultures. Only certain archetypes are salient in Jung’s writings because they
are typically recognizable in familiar human behaviors, especially those
which configure around fundamental human experiences: crises and
challenges, such as birth, death, loss, motherhood and fatherhood,
creativity, healing, and psychological transformation. There are, for
example, certain recognizable mental states and behaviors which are clearly
characterizable as fatherly as opposed to motherly, or characterized as
creative rather than destructive. Among the common archetypal patterns
which dominate the psychic life and behavior of humans are those which
Jung termed the anima in men and the animus in women, the shadow, and
the persona. Other prominent archetypes in Jung’s understanding were
those of the hero, the trickster, the old wise man/woman, and the archetypal
Self. Each of these archetypal structures plays important roles in giving
meaningful shape and direction to the psychical energies of the libido. Jung
came increasingly to believe that the archetypes are not the instinctual
energies themselves, but the aim and form of the psychological states and
behaviors. An instinct may be conceived as the energetic force behind the
archetypal pattern, but the archetype is what gives the instinct its purposeful
direction, its telos.
         It is possible to note a certain affinity between an archetype and a
Platonic idea. Both the archetype and the Platonic idea can be experienced
as a form, an image; as something “seen” or intuited. However, Jung placed
the archetypes on an empirical and evolutionary basis as well. Platonic
forms or ideas were conceived as immutable, transcendent, a priori forms of
experience. By contrast, Jung conceived the archetypes as forms arising out
of evolutionary process, subject to change with time and evolution.8 Even
new archetypes could form, he believed, with sufficient evolutionary time.
Nevertheless, in his later years Jung’s theory of the archetype became
increasingly Platonic, that is, concerned with their formal and transpersonal
(transcendent) quality, but he never gave up the biological grounding of the
archetype.
         Jung’s theory of the archetype developed in several stages. In 1912
he coined the term primordial image as a result of noticing certain regularly
occurring psychological themes and images in the unconscious productions
of his patients. As he studied comparative religion, myth, and ritual, Jung
found regularly occurring motifs there as well. The similarities in motifs
between cultural myths and psychological productions (dreams, visions,
and hallucinations) were first documented at length in his book Symbols of
Transformation,9 a book that heralded his break with Freud. Shortly after
that publication, Jung began speaking of “nodal points” and “non-personal
dominants” which influence a person’s functioning by attracting psychical
energy. Eventually he began using the term archetype, and made a
distinction between the archetypal image which empirically manifested
itself, and the archetype per se, as an abstract form transcendent to
empirical manifestation, that is, as an “in-itself” (an sich).
         The archetype must be understood as neither a purely biological
phenomenon, nor as a purely mentalistic phenomenon. Jung sought to avoid
a dualism which placed one dimension in a dominant role. Rather he saw
the physical and psychical as polar aspects of the same underlying reality
(world), as aspects which find their manifestation in psychical life. Jung, it
seems, had a philosophical view of the psyche approximating panpsychism
in which psyche, at its deepest and most fundamental level, emerges out of
the material world. The more deeply one penetrates into the psyche and its
origins, the more physical and mental distinctions become blurred:
      The deeper “layers” of the psyche lose their individual
      uniqueness as they retreat farther and farther into darkness.
      “Lower down”, that is to say as they approach the autonomous
      functional systems, they become increasingly collective until
      they are universalized and extinguished in the body’s
      materiality, i.e., in chemical substances. The body’s carbon is
      simply carbon. Hence “at bottom” the psyche is simply
      “world”.10

        For Jung the archetype is a psychosomatic concept which involved
linkages between image and instinct, between psyche and soma. The
psychosomatic nature of archetypes was important for Jung in preventing a
mere reduction of imaginal and psychical contents to mere representations
of biological drives. Archetypes sometimes come into play seemingly
automatically, as in the maternal response to a newborn infant. However,
such activation of the maternal archetype is in part a response to external
demands and a deep and intelligent response to outer demands from the
numinous archetypal patterns lying dormant in the collective unconscious.
Certain other archetypes are best activated through ritual. For example,
various rites of passage are often employed in tribal societies to
evoke/activate, in masculine initiations, such archetypal patterns as the
archetypal hunter, the archetypal warrior. In female puberty rites the
culture-specific feminine archetypes have also been activated through an
analogous ritual process.11 The ritual transformation of a child into a mature
and responsible adult is the objective of puberty rites. Often considerable
ritual action is required to activate the adult archetypal patterns, and switch
off the childhood patterns, in a young man or woman. That ritual action is
required to turn off some powerful archetypal patterns can be observed in
the fate of many Vietnam veterans, who returned from brutal battle
circumstances without a national public ritual to help transform their
psychological organization from the warrior to the civilian pattern. The lack
of such a turnoff ritual made it difficult for many to re-enter their normal
daily roles as worker, spouse, and parent. Many suffered chaotically from
warrior-aggressive impulses which were inappropriate for civilian life, and
expressed them destructively after returning home. Thus, archetypal
patterns typically lay dormant, only potentially activated, awaiting inner or
outer signals for their activation or actualization. Some archetypal patterns
are activated and developed through ritual and educative processes, some
through responses to significant life events, some as the result of
psychotherapy, and some as the result of mental imbalance and breakdown.


                  ARCHETYPE AND NUMINOSITY

        Archetypes are considered numinal by Jung. They have the power to
arouse affect, to take possession of the will, to bedazzle consciousness, and
to blind one to other realities. Jung described the numinosum as

      a dynamic agency or effect not caused by an arbitrary act of
      will. On the contrary, it seizes and controls the human subject,
      who is always rather its victim than its creator. The numinosum
      —whatever its cause may be—is an experience of the subject
      independent of his will .... The numinosum is either a quality
      belonging to a visible object or the influence of an invisible
      presence that causes a peculiar alteration of consciousness.12

        Like the Platonic forms, the archetype exerts a numinal attraction
upon and within the psyche, providing structure and direction for psychical
energies (libido). The patterns of behavior exemplified, for example, in
mothering, fathering, in becoming a hunter, a food gatherer and preparer, a
warrior, a witch, a priestess, or a shaman, are felt as irresistibly alluring; or
as a compelling force. They may gradually emerge into consciousness and
behavior as the personality develops and matures, or they may burst
suddenly into consciousness with a power and violence in which the subject
is over-powered, seized, or possessed. Typically, in a healthy individual, the
attracting power of an archetype will be subtle, gentle, if also effective. The
so-called maternal instinct, for example, often dawns on a young woman as
an urge, perhaps a deep but quiet desire to bear children, and to mother
them. However, in cases of psychological crisis, or in cases of severe
pathology or mystical experience, the archetypes may burst upon the stage
in raw or near-pure form. In such cases their power, for good or ill, is
overwhelming. Their efficacy in seizing consciousness, or in possessing the
will, is compulsory. In cases of religious or mystical consciousness, the
effect may be desirous or threatening. This is true also in the province of
pathology.
         The numinosity of the archetype also has a religious quality to it,
compelling the attention and loyalty of ego-consciousness, and giving a
sense of meaning and purpose, even if it manifests itself in pathologically
truncated and fantastic form. Jung seemed to view the mythological gods as
archetypal images, that is, numinal representations of the presence and
power of certain archetypes, or archetypal configurations. Archetypes thus
become the driving structures behind religious images, behind god-images.
Zeus and Hera, for example, could be considered as archetypal images
(representations) of the king and queen archetypes, or of the central
archetype of the personality which Jung called the “Self” (capital “S” is
used to distinguish it from the ego-identity, which is referred to as self,
small “s”). Drawing conclusions from comparative study of religions, Jung
inferred that each culture has an array of religious images, all structured by
archetypes. It is as if the gods and goddesses of traditional societies have
particular cultural clothing and expression, exemplified in myth and ritual,
but are patterned upon underlying universal or archetypal forms. The
cultural masks and clothing account for the differences in emphasis.
Historian of dynamic psychiatry, Henri F. Ellenberger, argued that Jung was
indebted to the anthropologist and explorer Adolf Bastian for his
understanding of the distinction between the archetypal representation and
the underlying universal form (archetype per se). Bastian had noticed
numerous recurring patterns of myth and belief in various cultures, as he
traveled about the world in the late 19th century. He made a distinction
between the basic form and its culture-specific manifestation. The former
he called elementary ideas (elementare Gedanke), which correspond to
Jung’s term archetypes. The latter, cultural masks, he referred to as cultural
ideas (Volkesgedanke).


THE NUMINA: SHAMANIC AND JUNGIAN PERSPECTIVES
        It may be useful to pause and contrast, for a moment, Jung’s view of
the numina, from the traditional shamanic view. Shamanism and Jung
converge in the area of numina and animism. Like the shamanic belief in a
numinal world of invading spirits, ghosts, and demons, Jung also affirmed
the reality of certain powers, which could be characterized as spirits, ghosts,
demons, and the like; but he interpreted them in a psychological framework.
When Jung sometimes spoke of psychological phenomena in an animistic
way, he was apparently addressing the phenomenology of the numinous
mythico-symbolic clothing of various archetypal forms. As a psychological
theorist, Jung did not address the question of whether or not some spirits
might exist transcendent to the human psyche. He did address the
phenomena of spirits as a psychologist, viewing them as psychological
facts, as always appearing within the psyche. The key to understanding
Jung’s affirmation of spirit powers lies in his employment of the concept of
the numen. Jung occasionally characterized the numinal powers of the
psyche, in animistic terms, as

      certain dynamic factors that we conceive as “powers”: spirits,
      daemons, gods, laws, ideals, or whatever name man has given
      to such factors in his world as he has found powerful,
      dangerous, or helpful enough to be taken into careful
      consideration, or grand, beautiful, and meaningful enough to be
      devoutly worshiped and loved.13

        Jung borrowed the term numen from Rudolf Otto, whose book The
Idea of the Holy appeared in 1917.14 It is not known when Jung read the
book, but in 1934 Otto’s term numinous began appearing in Jung’s writings.
Otto had a catalyzing effect upon Jung’s understandings and theorizing. The
ground for Otto’s influence was prepared by Jung’s interest in the non-
rational aspects of symbol, myth, and dream imagery, and by the fact that
Jung found archetypal imagery to have the dual aspect of being fascinating
and attracting, and of being repelling and terrifying. Jung conjectured that
what the shaman believed to be benevolent or threatening spirits were
actually archetypes exercising their numinal effect through various
animistic forms of images, which symbolically represented them. From
Otto, Jung found a conception which could illuminate these ambiguous,
nonrational, and dual effects of images upon the psyche. Otto’s term also
suggests that there is a religious quality to the numinous, associated with
value and meaning. But Jung made a selective use of Otto’s concept.
Whereas Otto intended the term ultimately to refer to the transcendent God
of theology, Jung attempted to employ it in a non-metaphysical way,
withholding theological speculation. Jung ambiguously reshaped the
transcendent meaning of Otto’s term into an immanent (psychological)
framework. That is to say, Jung attempted to understand numinosity from
within the psyche, and believed numinosity, as any form of religious
experience, must always be a psychological experience, because it must
take place within a psyche. Unfortunately Jung did not address the
possibility of independently existing spirits, nor did he speculate on the
relationship between such spirits and the archetypal structures of the
shaman’s mind.
         If the archetypes have a numinous quality, for Jung, and if they give
rise to numinous imagery, the phenomenology of the numina (of their
empirical manifestation as ghosts, spirits, demons, etc.) is affirmed, but is
given a psychological interpretation. The traditional shaman could not, and
probably would not, offer a psychological (secular scientific) interpretation.
In the shamanic view, spirits are a sui generis reality; they simply are what
they are, and should not be reduced to other terms. According to
anthropologist Michael Harner, they (spirits, numina, etc.) are experienced
in a shamanic state of consciousness (SSC), and not in the ordinary state of
consciousness (OSC). In the shamanic state of consciousness the spirit
beings are real. To the ordinary state of consciousness spirits and other
numinous entities may look like illusions, or like mere psychological
apparitions. However, in the shamanic state of consciousness, they are
spiritual realities, having an objective ontological status outside any
presumed personal mental structures. According to Harner, the mental
structures of the imagination open a door into the alternative, non-ordinary
reality.15 By passing through this imaginal door of the mind, one may enter
into the realm of spirits, who also manifest themselves in terms of images.
The shaman’s mind is used, then, as a door to pass through into another
reality which exists independently of that personal mind. The soul perceives
the numina of the other reality by means of images. Thus, the traditional
shaman would claim that such spirit entities exist external to the individual
psyche, and occasionally invade or possess it. By contrast, Jung would
claim that the spirits (numina) are immanent within the psyche, and that
they only appear to be outside the psyche, but we can only say that they are
transcendent to ego-consciousness, and may be imagistic representations of
complexes and archetypal patterns.
        A Jungian perspective on the shamanic states of consciousness,
might claim that it is a right-brained mode of accessing the collective
unconscious, which Harner and Castaneda have referred to as the
nonordinary reality of the shaman. It is because archetypal contents may
seize, invade, or possess the ego, that they are experienced as ego-alien
powers. The ego is bedazzled by them because they are other than it,
appearing strange, mysterious, and sometimes threatening. But being other
does not mean exterior to the psyche, but outside the field of ego-
consciousness. Additionally, the Jungian understanding also views the
numina as manifest in images, and accessible by images. The psyche may
be said to perceive the realities of the other dimension (that is, the collective
unconscious) as images, and by means of images. For Jung, image is
psyche,16 regardless of the dimension from which it arises, or to which it
refers.


      INDIVIDUATION AND THE RELIGIOUS OUTLOOK

        Jung had a teleological view of the psyche, in which everything in it
had purposive intentionality aiming at wholeness and an unfolding
realization of potentiality which he called individuation. The unconscious
contents inherently strive toward outward expression and realization in the
actual world: “Everything in the unconscious seeks outward
manifestation”.17 The psyche as a whole strives toward an unfolding of the
personality into a distinct and individual unity in a developmental process.
This unfolding development is much like the transformation from the
proverbial acorn into the proverbial oak. That is, the originally enfolded
psychic implicate potential becomes unfolded into explicate psychological
fact. Jung called this unfolding development of the personality the
individuation process, because it is the “process by which a person becomes
an in-dividual, that is, a separate, indivisible unity or whole”.18 Jung uses
the term in a way synonymous with coming to selfhood and self-
realization.19 By self-realization, however, Jung does not mean ego
development. Ego development is a precondition to self-realization. Jung
refers to a self deeper than the ego, but including the ego, which he
sometimes simply termed the psyche, sometimes termed the Self, and at
other times termed soul. Individuation requires the aid of the ego in making
deep unconscious contents conscious, and is a precondition for the
uniqueness and differentiation of the personality which may begin with the
second half of life. But the promptings to individuate, to be true to the self,
come not from the ego, but from deep within the psyche itself, and appear
to be intrinsic to it.
         The individuation process, proper, is at once the unfolding
development of becoming differentiated and unique, and a process of
becoming an integrated whole. In becoming an individual, one
differentiates one’s psyche from the collective (i.e., the crowd) and affirms
the individual differences. Jung’s archetypal concept of the persona as a
social mask which a person wears for various roles he or she must play is
considered necessary for socially adaptive purposes. To fail to develop a
persona would leave the individual vulnerable if not disabled. It is
necessary to have a persona in order to have a recognizable place within the
social order. However, the persona is not the true self in its most authentic
sense: “One could say, with a little exaggeration, that the persona is that
which one in reality is not, but which oneself as well as others think one
is”.20 Individuation involves a process of methodically differentiating from
one’s persona so that one recognizes that it is not the deeper self, and that
this deeper self is distinct from social roles and expectations. It is also
important to become differentiated from the inner collective, that is, from
the contents of the collective unconscious. Archetypes, for example, can
possess and consume one. They care little for the individual. They are like
the Greek and Roman gods and goddesses who are jealous, and who may
compete for the person’s total allegiance. It is possible, for example, for a
woman to be so consumed by a need to mother that she has no identity
separate from that archetypal pattern. The archetype consumes the woman
in a compulsive way. Part of Jung’s understanding of individuation is its
characteristic freedom, the freedom to set limits upon the outer and inner
collective structures. It presupposes the freedom to give each relevant
archetypal energy its due, without destructive imbalance, and it presupposes
the freedom to differentiate oneself from the outer collective, or social
demands and influences. Such freedom presupposes a conscious relation to
the inner and outer worlds. Such consciousness strives for a balance
between competing and opposing forces. Wholeness is the aspect of
individuation which presupposes this delicate balancing act of holding the
oppositions in tension. It is strenuous conscious work. But it is work which
is deeply fulfilling and personally meaningful. The teleology of the
individuation process is directed towards differentiation and wholeness,
leading to a sense of meaning or fulfillment which has a spiritual character.
Echoing the Socrates of Plato, we might say that, when intentionally
undertaken, individuation is “care for the soul and what becomes of her”.
        For Jung, the individuation process is an archetypally structured or
patterned process of unfolding development. It is not irrational, although it
involves the integration of so-called nonrational (symbolic and affective)
contents. Jung did not spend as much energy writing about the
developmental processes of children as he did of adults, perhaps because
Freud and his followers had given much study to those processes already.
Jung’s concept of individuation did place greater emphasis upon adult
development, an area which Freud neglected. He divided the major
developmental steps into two complex sets of tasks. The task of the first
half of life is to develop the ego as an effective adaptive structure. The first
half of life, until about thirty-five or forty, Jung believed, was oriented
towards primarily the ego and persona which develop in this phase of life.
The psychological achievements of this first half of life involve separation
from the mother and father, relinquishing childhood and adolescent status,
and acquiring adult identity and capabilities. The task is to grow up and
takes one’s place in the social order, to acquire a financial means of
survival, to achieve a necessary measure of social status and skill, and
typically, to purchase one’s house and raise children. The tasks of the first
half of life typically burden the individual with the consumption of most of
his or her energies, and leave little time or energy for solitary pursuits, or
for greater differentiation from collective demands. The deeper self is
typically stifled. However, the first half of life has a positive and purposive
function: to set the stage for the tasks of the second half of life, providing
the necessary ego strength for greater exploration and development of the
deeper self.
         The tasks of the second half of life shift from preoccupation with the
external, collective dimension, to a conscious relationship with the inner
life, with intrapsychic processes. It also involves a shift from the personal
ego-centric guiding principles of life, to those principles which are more
objective, and other-centered. We might characterize the task as a shift from
an ego-centered attitude to an ego-transcending attitude. This is a way of
saying that the ego, being fully developed and actual, now has to be
relativised, giving allegiance to values which may be considered higher, or
deeper than those which have dominated it up to this point. Dependence
upon the ego must give way to a subordination to the deeper self, to a
relationship with the Self and its concern with meaning and spiritual values.
Subordination of the ego to the central archetype, this deeper self, may
result in commitment to higher social values (exemplified in such figures as
Ghandi, Mother Theresa, Martin Luther King), as well as to objective
values flowing in upon the psyche from that center itself.
         With the emergence of the second half of life, the individual may
find himself or herself dissatisfied with the collective values by which he or
she has been living. The values which previously guided the person’s
development may suddenly seem dry, inauthentic, and the person may feel
estranged from the authentic self, from life, or from spiritual concerns. Life
seems to lack something, and a hunger for zest and meaning arises. Such
persons, after enjoying the rewards of having arrived into adulthood, may
find themselves asking the question, “Is this all there is?” In the second half
of life the reality of death enters on the horizon and brings the question of
life’s meaning to the fore. The task is to find a way to affirm and accept
approaching death, so that one may more deeply affirm the life that remains
before one. Jung believed the refusal to honestly face death was a refusal to
accept life, especially life at its most meaningful level. What seems to be
involved is to ultimately gain a measure of self-acceptance, and a
willingness to live in accord with the promptings of the archetypal Self.
From the perspective of psychological structure, this means living in
conscious relation to the center of the personality, the archetypal Self.
Failure to face death, to accept life, and to live in accord with one’s deeper
self results, Jung believed, in a pathological condition. This pathological
condition could be considered a form of soul loss since lack of conscious
relation to the archetypal Self, and to the anima/animus, has the effect of
leaving the individual with a loss of something vital which parallels the
primitive phenomenon of soul loss. It is connection to the numinous
meaning-giving power of the archetypal Self which gives the process a
spiritual feel. The problem at midlife is to discover a religious or spiritual
outlook on life, by consciously submitting to the values and direction of the
archetypal Self. Jung considered the midlife problem a religious one, which
if not resolved would lead to a spiritual neurosis characterized by bitterness,
emptiness, and despair:

      Among all of my patients in the second half of life-that is to
      say, over thirty-five-there has not been one whose problem was
      not that of finding a religious outlook on life. None of them has
      been really healed who did not regain his religious outlook.21

        By “religious outlook”, Jung did not mean living by a particular
creed, nor by church membership. He meant a connection to the numinal
energies manifesting themselves in the soul, living in accord with the
promptings of the archetypal Self, which gives rise to authentic spiritual
experience and valuation, and which gives a sense of meaning, of fullness,
to an individuating life.


           INDIVIDUATION AND TRIBAL SOCIETIES

        In tribal societies in which shamanism has been traditionally
practiced, Jung believed that individuation has not been as highly valued as
participation in the collective life of the tribe. The emphasis upon the
collective, however, does not mean that personal or unique experiences are
not acquired in the process of individual development in these cultures.
Psychological development, although not called by that name, is a process
of maturation assisted by rites of passage which help transform pubescent
children into responsible and capable adults. Typically these rituals
facilitate psychological transformation through allowing the initiates
contact with numinal powers, objectified and encountered in the myths,
costume, and ordeals which the initiates experience or undergo. The major
rites of passage in tribal societies include those surrounding birth, puberty,
marriage, and death, and include initiations into special statuses (warrior,
kingship/queenship, or into a medicine society). The purpose of these rites
is to facilitate, through ritual procedures and community support, the
development or transformation of individuals within the society. Tribal
myth provides the ordering necessary for natural unfolding development
through the stages of the human life-cycle. Jung believed that modern
people, by contrast, had lost meaningful connection to the orienting myth of
their culture, and live in a culture where communal-participative ties are
weaker, and where independence from the collective is valued.
         Paradoxically, although tribal societies stress participation in the
collective, there is considerable value placed upon inner experience.
Historically, for example, in native North American tribes there has been an
emphasis upon personal interior experience through vision quests.
Meaningful contact with numinal entities, such as ancestral spirits, power
animals, and the like, are encouraged, and this personal religious experience
is highly valued because it is believed to serve the individual and social
good. Jung believed the shaman had more independence from the collective
norms of his or her community, and actually practiced an archaic form of
individuation. More will be said when we discuss Jung’s view on
shamanism. Suffice it to say here that shamanism involves ecstatic and
revelatory experiences which differentiate the shaman sharply from the
communities in which he or she serves. Some shamanic and medicine
societies consider the personal experiences to be secret. These unique
experiences are not totally for the individual benefit of the shaman. The
results of such secret ecstatic or mystical encounters are also contributed
back into the collective good, usually in the form of healing, myth making,
divination, or other ritual practice. This is a perspective close to the Jungian
understanding of individuation. Both views presuppose the heroic
archetypal pattern of detachment from the collective, discovery of the boon
(insight, healing power, knowledge, etc.), and return with the discovery to
the collective, where it contributes to the collective good.22 It would appear
that the main difference between the personal developmental process of
traditional (tribal) societies, and that required by the individuation process,
is a matter of accent. In tribal societies, the accent appears to be on the
collective participation. In the Jungian view of individuation, the accent is
on the differentiation from the collective.


     THE ARCHETYPAL SELF (THE INNER AXIS MUNDI)

         The individuation process, when analytically assisted or
intentionally entered upon, has the feel of a spiritual path. This is in part
due to the fact that it is not a linear progression, but a circumambulation
around a numinous nuclear center point, the central archetype, the
archetypal Self. The archetypal Self, as we have noted, is not the center of
the field of consciousness (i.e., it is not the ego), but is a deeper organizing
principle to which ego-consciousness must become related. Originally Jung
regarded the archetypal Self as comprising the totality of the conscious and
unconscious.23 Later he described it as the ordering, regulating,
harmonizing, and meaning-giving agency of the psyche.24 Jung also uses
the term in such a way as to include both the contents of the total
personality, and the ordering and structuring factor which contains the
contents, when he says that the “self is not only the center but also the
whole circumference”.25 The archetypal Self is at once the psyche’s
centering point, and its circumference; it is the origin of psychic
development and the goal of integration and wholeness. It is the psychic
totality of which all psychic contents are partial manifestations or
reflections. As the totality it is far greater than the ego can conceive or
integrate.
         As the goal of the individuation process, the archetypal Self evokes
images of the fullest potential and unity for the personality as a whole. As
the unifying principle, it has a position of authority in relation to psychic
life and individuation. In life, the archetypal Self makes a demand upon the
ego to be consciously recognized, integrated, and actualized. In its role of
prompting the personality to develop, differentiate, and integrate, it has
something of a spirit or god-like quality. Jung called this prompting
function of the archetypal Self the spiritus rector. It is this aspect of the Self
which brings the concept close to the primitive conception of the spirit
guides and power animals of shamans. Amplifying Jung’s conception,
Marie Louise von Franz has likened the spiritus rector aspects of the
archetypal Self to the ancient notions of great spirit, genius, or power
animal:

      Throughout the ages men have been intuitively aware of the
      existence of such an inner center. The Greeks called it man’s
      inner daimon, in Egypt it was expressed by the concept of the
      Ba soul and the Romans worshiped it as the “genius” native to
      each individual. In more primitive societies it was often thought
      of as a protective spirit embodied within an animal or fetish.26

        Von Franz goes on to mention the Naskapi Indians of Labrador.
Being simple hunters who live in isolated groups which make collective
custom, ritual, and belief impossible, they have relied on their spirit helpers
as inner voices to guide them daily in their economic, moral, and psychic
life. The Naskapi believes this inner voice to be his or her best friend, an
inner companion (mista‘peo) to be consulted and lived in accord with. From
a Jungian perspective, the helping spirits and power animals could also be
understood as the spiritus rector of the shaman. That such helping spirits
possess greater wisdom and knowledge, and that they serve as inner guide
and companion, distinguishes them from the contents of ego consciousness,
and gives them qualities in common with the archetypal Self in its
prompting and directing capacities.
        The archetypal Self is never experienced directly, per se, but always
by means of representations, that is, by images. Symbols of the Self often
possess extraordinary numinosity, giving them a sense of transcendent
priority, as if before a god-image. Jung believed the various images of God
around the world were projections of the archetypal Self. The symbols of
the Self which appear in dreams and active imagination also have a god-like
quality. Jung was unwilling to say, as a psychologist, that such god-images
might actually be referent to a divine or ultimate reality which prompts the
psyche towards wholeness, but the richness of his thought does not
foreclose such possibility. Jung did believe his discovery of the archetypal
Self, as it manifests itself in god-images, mandalas, and other central
numinous images found the world over, should be of special interest to
empirical theology. “Its relatively frequent occurrence seems to be a
noteworthy fact for any theologia naturalis”.27 When Jung spoke personally
and confessionally, he sometimes suggested that God had a direct effect
upon his own vocation, and destiny: “Nobody could rob me of the
conviction that it was enjoined upon me to do what God wanted.”28 An
examination of Jung’s personal letters and his autobiography (MDR)
supports the idea that Jung personally believed in a divine reality present
and manifest within the deep center of the person, the archetypal Self.


       MANDALAS: IMAGES OF SELF AS AXIS MUNDI

         The archetypal Self has the characteristics of an axis mundi, a center
of the psychological world of the individual. If the axis mundi be
understood as a center point of order and orientation for the collective life
of a tribe or community, then the archetypal Self may be considered an axis
mundi for the individual world. Just as every tribe, every village, every
church, has an image of the axis mundi, symbolizing a sacred center point
of orientation, so the psyche has the archetypal Self as the center from
which it takes its orientation.
         Jung believed he found in the mandala the special symbol of the
archetypal Self. The word comes from the Sanskrit word meaning “magic
circle”. It is usually a circular image which may be squared, or contain a
square within it. It may be divided into a quaternary structure, and be
further divided into regular subdivisions, all of which seem to radiate from
or move toward a center point. A major theme of mandalas is the
integration, balancing, or harmonizing of opposites. Mandalas have been
used as aids in meditation and healing in cultural contexts as diverse as
Tibetan Lamaism and Navaho medicine societies, where mandala-like sand
paintings are employed. The Islamic geomatrix and the Gothic rose window
and Christian crucifix are examples of mandalas used for religious
devotional purposes. Jung believed the mandala was a projection of the
archetypal Self, and may emerge not only in religious traditions, but in the
dreams and active imagination of individuals in analysis. Mandalas
represent potential for wholeness on both cosmic and personal levels. They
have been used by shamans and medicine societies for healing purposes,
and Jung noted that they tended to spontaneously emerge in his patients
who were undergoing crisis. Jung noted that spontaneous mandala images
appeared in some individuals who were fragmenting, and that these images
seem to have had a calming and integrative (cohesive) effect upon them.
        Shamans, and medicine men and women, have often had recourse to
mandalas, as aids in the healing process. The building of sacred shrines for
the healing seance, the drawing of magic circles within which the patient is
to lay and the shaman to perform, the construction of sand paintings upon
which the afflicted sit, and the employment of tribal myth as a means to re-
establish the order and keep chaos at bay, all suggest an attempt to evoke a
sense of a central orienting point, a zone of the “absolutely real, enduring,
and effective”; as Eliade would say. Mandalas apparently function as a way
of evoking or reconstituting an axis mundi (sacred center) and so provide a
sense of order and safety. Whether they be employed in shamanic ritual, or
emerge spontaneously from the unconscious of troubled modern
individuals, mandalas seem to impose order on psychic chaos, perhaps by
establishing a central focus (sacred presence) while providing a protective
enclosing circle (ritual boundaries).
        Individuals living in tribal or traditional societies, had recourse to
the axis mundi mediated through their myths, rituals, and sacred
architecture. Today, many modern individuals are unable to affirm the myth
of their Judeo-Christian culture. Few public center points of orientation are
trusted, and few satisfying religious institutional containers are available in
which to live a symbolic life. However, Jung believed that it was possible to
find meaning and inner security in living one’s own myth, in taking one’s
orientation from the inner center, the psychic axis mundi which he called
the Self. This, as we shall see, is also what he thought the shaman has
always been able to do. The shaman individuates by living from the heart.
     JUNG’S THEORY OF PSYCHOLOGICAL DISORDER

        Every theory of disorder presupposes some theory of order. In the
shamanic view, balance is the key word. To be healthy requires that one live
harmoniously, keep in balance. Disorder, in the shamanic view, is the result
of some imbalance, caused by the intrusion of some spirit or object which
upsets the balance, or of the loss of some vital part of the individual (e.g.,
soul loss). In the Jungian view, wholeness and integration are key terms
suggesting an order and balance which, when disrupted, results in
pathology. This brings the shamanic and Jungian views very close together.
Let us give a schematic diagram of the shamanic and Jungian views on
health and pathology:
        Shamanic View: Health = living in accord with the will of the
sacred.
                         Pathology = imbalance caused by violating the will
                         of the sacred.
      Jungian View: Health = result of wholeness, living in accord with
                         the promptings of the archetypal Self.
                         Pathology = imbalance (one-sidedness), caused by
                         violating the wholeness and integration demanded
                         by the archetypal Self.

        In Jung’s view, factors which contribute to mental disorders are
psychological imbalances between the archetypally patterned psychical
energies. He considered the personality to be composed of numerous polar
energies, archetypal patterns which come into conflict and tend to pull the
individual towards one pole or the other. The psychological task is to
consciously hold the opposing forces in some type of dynamic tension
promoting wholeness. Jung expresses this as a process of holding the
opposites in tension, and it is considered to be strenuous psychological
work, requiring conscious effort and courage. Inevitable imbalances occur
in the course of living, giving rise to disorder and various forms of
psychopathology. Psychopathology has a purposive or teleological function
since the psyche is attempting to call attention to the imbalances and correct
them through compensation: “But since everything strives for wholeness,
the inevitable one-sidedness of our conscious life is continually being
corrected and compensated by the universal human being within us, whose
goal is the ultimate integration of conscious and unconscious, or better, the
assimilation of the Ego to a wider personality.”29


               COMPLEXES: THE “LITTLE DEVILS”

        As we have mentioned elsewhere in this study, one of the most
common shamanic theories of psychological disorder is based upon the
belief that invading and possessing spirits can seize and possess the person,
or steal away the soul, giving rise to pathological imbalances requiring
shamanic restoration. Jung sometimes speaks in a similar manner, although
with psychological intent, of those “little devils,” which account for various
psychopathological manifestations, but which he psychologically
reinterprets as feeling toned complexes. The traditional shaman confronted
the problem of diagnosing and treating what we, from our Western medical
or psychological idiom, call mental disorders. The shaman has to draw
terms from his/her own cultural worldview in which the sacred is
presupposed, and those terms would of necessity be animistic or
demonological in idiom. The modern scientific worldview of the west,
which dominates the process of diagnosing and treating mental disorders in
industrialized or westernized societies today, constructs its conceptions and
terms out of a secular worldview. Jung’s worldview was heavily shaped by
the secular scientific tools of modernity. However, Jung had great respect
for the worldview of traditional peoples, and a great affinity for the nominal
which showed up in his rhetorical style. This blend of modern scientific and
numinal terminology in Jung’s writings may sometimes be confusing, for
Jung often tried to interpret religious or animistic perspectives in modern
psychiatric terms, and often interpreted psychological data and processes in
spiritual terms. This mixing of spiritistic and psychological idioms seems
especially apparent in his discussion of the complexes.
        For Jung, the ideal of health is psychological integration, and it is
complexes which account for the dissociative divisions manifest in
psychopathology. Complexes are Jung’s secular psychological
interpretation of the (shamanic) numinal spirits that cause psycho-spiritual
disorders, by invading and taking over the conscious organizing center
(will) of the personality:

      Complexes are autonomous groups of feeling toned
      associations that have a tendency to move by themselves, to
      live their own life apart from our intentions. We like to believe
      in our will power, in our energy in what we can do, but when it
      comes to the real showdown we find we can do it only to a
      certain extent because we are hampered by the “little devils”,
      the complexes.30

       Jung’s conception of the complex contributes to the traditional
theory of spirit and demonic possession, as well as its modern successor,
multiple personality (MPD, now dissociative identity disorder, or DID).
However, Jung, at least early in his career, wrote that belief in actual spirits
should be ruled out as superstitious, and replaced by the modern concept of
the psychological complex. Jung explains in what ways he considers
demonic possession to be a reality, if understood as possession by a
complex in personified form:

      I may say here that the superstition held by all races that
      hysterical insane persons are “possessed” by demons is right in
      conception. These patients have, in fact, autonomous
      complexes, which at times destroy self control. The superstition
      is therefore justified, inasmuch as it denotes “possession”,
      because the complexes behave quite independently of the Ego,
      and force upon it a quasi-foreign will.31

        Jung’s first piece of psychological scholarship, his medical
dissertation, was itself a study of complex-related dissociation phenomena,
which has traditionally been understood as possession, and in modern
psychiatric terms, as dissociative disorder. Jung’s dissertation, entitled “On
the Psychology and Pathology of So-called Occult Phenomena,”32 was
based upon a psychological case study of a young woman who performed
mediumistic feats in spiritistic seances. The young woman was Jung’s
cousin, Helene Preiswerk. With his supervisor’s (Eugen Bleuler)
encouragement, Jung attended the mediumistic seances regularly for some
time, and studied the phenomena of Helene’s possession states from a
psychological perspective. That is, Jung bracketed out any consideration of
the possessing spirits as actual occult spirits existing independently in time
and space from Helene’s psyche. Although Jung had not yet formulated the
term complex, his observations were actually prefigurations of the concept.
The seances gave Jung insight into a number of phenomena which would
later support Jung’s theory of the complex.
        Observing the many enactments of spirit possession by his cousin,
Jung categorized them into several classes. There were various masculine
figures, which Jung later interpreted as animus personifications, a female
personality who appeared more mature than Helene (a representation of
Helene’s archetypal Self), personifications of past lives, complete with
historical references, which Jung would later see as suggestive of historical
archetypes, the revelation of a psychological cosmology, and the
spontaneous appearance of a mandala imagery (image of archetypal Self, or
of wholeness). Jung came to understand these manifestations as dissociated
and/or projected aspects of Helene’s personality, and prefigurations of a
future and more mature self. Although Jung did not classify Helene as
suffering from multiple personality, one recent study of the case, reflecting
on the child abuse Helene experienced, has suggested that Helene probably
suffered a dissociative disorder, and possibly from multiple personality.33
Jung believed Helene’s spirit possession states could be explained in
psychological terms. He later articulated such possession states as the result
of the activity of feeling toned complexes which had become dissociated or
split-off from ego-consciousness, and became personified in the various
figures which spoke through her. Since they were experienced as dystonic
(separate from) the ego, she felt compelled to believe they were
independently existing spirits, rather than manifestations of her greater Self.
        Jung gained his first world-wide notoriety for his studies of word-
association experiments at the Burgholzli Hospital, under Eugen Rleuler, in
Zurich. These studies led Jung to establish his theory of the complex. The
research involved the construction of 100 neutral but emotionally charged
words, which were carefully mixed and presented to patients and to normal
control persons. Reactions to the stimulus words were carefully recorded in
terms of response times, response content, and perseverations, and any
other uncommon reactions were noted. The empirical data suggested that
unusually long response times (hesitations, confusions), failures to respond,
unexpected responses, seemingly unrelated responses, or other atypical
responses, indicated the presence of complexes outside the field of
conscious awareness, such as he had encountered with his cousin Helene.
Complexes became the foundation of Jung’s understandings of
psychopathology:

      Complexes are psychic fragments which have split off owing to
      traumatic influences or certain incompatible tendencies. As the
      association experiments prove, complexes interfere with the
      intentions of the will and disturb the conscious performance;
      they produce disturbances of memory and blockages in the flow
      of associations [q.v.]; they appear and disappear according to
      their own laws; they can temporarily obsess consciousness, or
      influence speech and action in an unconscious way. In a word,
      complexes behave like independent beings, a fact especially
      evident in abnormal states of mind. In the voices of the insane
      they even take on a personal Ego-character like that of spirits
      who manifest themselves through automatic writing and similar
      techniques.34

        At the Australasian Medical Congress in 1911, Jung presented the
results of his association researches, concluding that he had actually studied
the behavior of complexes accounting for a wide variety of
psychopathological symptoms, including demonic possession, dual
personality, psychotic hallucinations, fantasies of dementia praecox
(schizophrenia) patients, hysteria and related conversion symptoms, and
obsessions arising from catatonic impulses.35 In the same paper Jung draws
attention to Freud’s researches along the same lines, in studying slips of the
tongue (Freudian slips) as suggesting the presence of alternative and
unintegrated psychological viewpoints within the person which slip out
when ego-consciousness is weak, fatigued, or caught off guard. Jung argued
that hysterical symptoms are caused by “autonomously acting complexes”,
but that the hysteric’s complexes are continually subject to changes in
response to environmental fluctuations. He found the fantasy life of
schizophrenics also to be dominated by complexes, but the libidinal charge
of these complexes was so strong as to rigidly fix the attention of the
schizophrenic on them. Jung believed schizophrenic complexes to be more
rigid, or fixed, than those of the hysteric. He also noted that while the
schizophrenic personality may outwardly appear to be in a state of
deterioration, the inner fantasy life is exceptionally lively, dominated by
imagery and hallucinatory voices organized into symbolic patterns
revolving in theme around an archetypal core (pattern). The direction of
thought and libido, on the other hand, is turned away from external reality
and over-invested in inner reality. Such overinvestment was understood to
be a kind of possession by the complexes dominating the schizophrenic’s
psyche. Because the ego-personality is so fixed on the imagery dominated
by complexes, the progress of general personality development becomes
radically one-sided (radical introversion) and arrested.36 Adaptation to outer
reality (via normal extroversion) becomes maladaptively impoverished.
         Jung did not believe complexes were confined to pathological
individuals, however. Complexes develop in every personality, healthy and
unhealthy. It is a matter of how strong or autonomous such complexes may
be, and whether or not they seize and take over the ego. Jung believed that
complexes showed up in the dream material of ordinary as well as
pathological individuals. The complexes emerge as themes in ordinary
dream activity, and in ordinary behavior, giving substance and dramatic
character to the dream contents and fantasy life of the person.
         Every person has a number of complexes. A complex itself is not
harmful or resultant in significant self-defeating behavior. It is the
autonomous complexes, usually the result of childhood trauma, that create
profound difficulties in living. Complexes consist of a collection of ideas
and images organized around one or more archetypes at the complex core,
and having a certain feeling tone and energy charge. All of us, for example,
have a mother and father complex. They may not be harmful, but simply a
collection of ideas, memories, fantasies, and emotions which are
constellated around our own experiences of our parents, and which are
finally organized by the mother and father archetypes. What distinguishes a
pathological complex from a more or less ordinary one is the emotional
charge of the nuclear core of an autonomous complex. If inner and outer
events become sufficient to provoke the constellation of a complex in a
strong and discordant way, it may be said to be pathological, because it
remains unconscious, and tends to be autonomous in working against the
part-to-whole integrity of the psyche. An autonomous complex can usurp
the role of the ego, can even use the ego for its own purposes.
        Psychological disturbance may be potential or actual with a
complex, depending on whether or not the inner and outer events are
sufficient to activate it, or are insufficient, leaving it latent. Once activated,
the complex resists the executive functions and intentions of the ego. Jung
also considered the ego to be a complex, the ego-complex, since it also
consists in a collection of ideas and images with a feeling tone. It is the
center of the field of consciousness, and plays the role of being the
conscious executive of the personality. It is only one complex among at
least several, but it is of central importance in everyday living tasks. It can
be invaded, thwarted, used, and seized by other complexes. “Every one
knows that people have complexes,” Jung wrote, but “what is not so well
known…is that complexes can have us”.37 A sufficiently strong complex
can thwart the adaptive purposes of the ego and lead to serious
psychopathology in which the ego is seized and controlled by the complex’s
dictates.
        Jung’s therapeutic response to the pathological complex is the
process of making it conscious. This response is not as simple or as
simplistic as it sounds. Countless persons have found that intellectual
knowledge of their problems may be illuminating at first, but insufficient to
bring about resolution. Jung’s understanding of “making conscious” implies
more than intellectual knowledge. It requires a courageous effort, a strong
ego, and the capacity to accept suffering, which facing of complexes entails.
Only when the complex has been discharged, its emotional element
assimilated, or its energy transferred to another tension gradient can the
affective charge of the complex dissolve. Only then can the contents be
integrated in a relatively harmonious way which contributes positively to
the whole personality.
        As long as complexes remain unconscious they can grow and
become harmful to the integrity of the psyche. Remaining unconscious, the
archetypal core of the complex acts like a magnet, continuing to attract
images, ideas, affects, and other associations until it can become very
swollen and powerful. The complexes of psychotic individuals, such as
schizophrenics, tend to take on an archaic mythological character. Their
unconscious productions (hallucinations, dream images, fantasies, beliefs,
etc.) become less personally symbolic, and more universal or mythic. In
proportion as they distance themselves from ego-consciousness, their
numinosity increases, and this numinosity puts the subject in a state of will-
less submission to the complex. This is a kind of possession, since the
splinter psyche, or complex, has totally taken over the individual’s psyche
and life. In cases of psychosis and pathological dissociation, the complex
may take on the quality of a possessing spirit, demon, god, or ghost. It may
appear as one or more alternate personalities, or even as a soul stealing
parent, lover, or sorcerer.


     MAKING COMPLEXES CONSCIOUS VS. SHAMANIC
                   EXORCISM

         Jung’s approach to such possession is not exorcism or extraction, as
it might be for the traditional shaman dealing with possession or intrusion.
Jung’s underlying therapeutic purpose is not one of removal/extraction of a
pathogenic force, which is what exorcism implies, but of integration. The
structure and energy of the complex is a valuable part of the psychic whole.
It must not be removed, but restored to harmonious relations within the
totality. This requires the kind of consciousness which we just described. If
there is a congruent way to think of Jungian therapeutics as exorcistic, it
would be that of considering the process of becoming conscious as a
therapeutic method of casting out (casting off) the compulsive-autonomous
character of the complex. In the Jungian view, what needs to be removed is
not the complex itself, but its inordinate cathexis of energy, and its
destructive intrusiveness whereby it interferes with the personality’s
integrated functioning. In the Jungian view, the removal of inordinate
energy and intrusiveness could be said to be the goal. This requires
conscious work and effort on the part of the patient. In traditional shamanic
therapy, this type of conscious work is at a minimum, and the shaman may
rely upon the power of suggestion to abreact pent-up energy (affect) and
then reinstate repression and therefore relativise the functioning of the
complex in the overall psychological economy of the patient.
Psychoanalytic studies of shamanism have sometimes interpreted the
shaman, when exorcising destructive spirits, as actually sending them back
down into the unconscious via ritual means, and reinstating the repression
barrier. In a Jungian view, shamanic extraction could be understood as the
analogue of removing a pathologic complex from control or influence over
the ego. We might say the complex is extracted from the egoic field of
influence, so that the ego’s repressive powers are reconstituted. This seems
to be a fair psychological interpretation of shamanic exorcistic practice. I
have recently viewed videos brought back by an anthropologist from
Southeast Asia which show shamans performing exorcisms only after
exhausting their patient’s consciousness through the ordeals of the ritual. At
the moment of neurophysiological exhaustion, when the patient’s
consciousness is likely to be attenuated, the shaman commands the spirit to
leave, and it typically does leave.
         Voluminous reports of field studies by anthropologists indicate that
there will often be recurrences of possession, or new molesting spirits will
enter as the old one leaves. Some shamans give amulets and sacred charms
to help preserve the healing effects, and to prevent re-possession (relapse),
or prescribe periodic returns to the shamanic shrine for what amounts to
checkups. Such sacred objects are no doubt helpful, and the western
practitioner could benefit from the wisdom of shamanic experience with
regard to giving our patients such significant objects. In psychoanalytic
terms, the sacred objects, and check-up visits with the shaman, could be
understood in terms of providing the patient with transitional objects, and in
terms of providing the patient with object constancy. Both of these concepts
relate to the need for the patient to keep something of the healer’s presence
with them, as an aid in keeping the repression barrier instated. A Jungian
slant on this phenomena might suggest that the sacred amulets, charms, and
check-up visits actually serve to give the patient an image by which to
relate to the central integrative force of the psyche, the “doctor within,”
which Jung calls the archetypal Self. Being related to a greater center of
power and order provides the security that the forces of chaos will be kept
at bay, and help to inspire the confidence and courage that further
disintegration will not occur. At least in those cases of possession where the
subjects are, in Western psychological terms, hysterical or suffering from
multiple personality (constructed in the familiar demonological idiom of
their culture as demon or spirit possession), the interpretation of reinstating
the repression barrier, after allowing the patient to discharge (abreact) pent-
up affects attributed to the possessing entity, seems plausible.


                       FORMS OF COMPLEXES

        Complexes may manifest psychic or somatic aspects, or both. In
conversion hysteria, the complex is behind the physical symptom. In
perverted masturbatory fantasies, a complex is behind the perverted fantasy
and the masturbatory compulsion. One ordinary form of complex has such a
low energy charge that it seldom intrudes into consciousness, and does not
operate independently of consciousness. Another form is the unconscious
complex which is so swollen that it acts like a second ego-consciousness,
and comes into conflict with the executive ego. Persons with this type of
complex often feel caught between two competing value systems, truths, or
streams of will. When a complex splits off dramatically from the larger
organization of the psyche it becomes what Jung called autonomous,
accounting for the phenomena of possession, dual and multiple personality
(Janet), or dissociation into several partial personalities. Another form of
harmful complex consists of identification with the complex, as in a mother
or father complex. The values, opinions, dogmas, or wishes of the parent
are carried around unconsciously. It is as if the individual were the mere
instrument or mouthpiece of the parent. These individuals may not have the
slightest idea of what is going on. The projected form of complex attributes
the complex to an outward object or person, or to a spirit. Often these
projected complexes are colored by the shadow qualities which the
individual has not the courage to face. This form is observed in paranoia
and in homophobia, and it is also believed to be present in primitive
psychology, for example, in fetishism, totemism, and animism. A complex
may also be intellectually conscious, but remain harmful because the
individual is not wholeheartedly facing it, assimilating it emotionally, and
bringing it into alignment with the adaptive purposes of the ego.
        In the Jungian view, the inability or unwillingness to distinguish
conscious from unconscious contents is psychologically risky, for it may
prevent outward adaptation, thwart one’s larger purposes, and interfere with
human relationships and intimacy. The phenomenon which anthropologist
Lucien Levy-Bruhl (1857-1939)38 called participation mystique, which, he
observed, was characteristic of primitive psychology, is also characteristic
of the effects of autonomous complexes. Participation mystique is basically
the same as what object-relations psychoanalysts call projective
identification, in which inner and outer events are merged or confused. It is
basically an inability to distinguish inner from outer reality. It is found not
only in primitive psychology, but also in the thought processes of children,
and in modern neurotics. The stronger the tendency towards participation
mystique, the less the ego is able to discriminate and delimit the inner and
the outer. The result is increased vulnerability to inner or outer domination
and loss of freedom.
        Psychological health and maturity, for Jung, implies that the
different parts of the psyche are consciously acknowledged, recognized, and
brought into adequate (harmonious) relation to one another. Distinguishing
and delimiting the different parts of the self is essential to such harmonious
integration. It requires a strong ego, courage to become conscious and face
the disagreeable contents of a complex. The ego must have the courage and
strength to take negative elements into its own self-affirmation, if it is to
become richer, more flexible, and thus stronger.


    WHAT IS THE STATUS OF SPIRIT GUIDES IN SEEING
                  SHAMANICALLY?
         Jung’s view that feeling toned complexes are normal is a refutation
of the modern monolithic conceptions of the personality. In a way very
convergent with traditional shamanic views of the soul, the psyche, for
Jung, is a plurality, albeit within a greater unity, which he calls the Self.
Freud also viewed the psyche as a plurality; it contains a trinity of
intrapsychic systems: id, ego, and superego. But Jung’s view greatly
complexifies the psyche’s plurality, since the number of archetypes and
complexes may be beyond anyone’s ability to number. In a traditional
shamanic view, there may be vital souls, dream souls, free souls, and other
entities within a person, including the souls of ancestors and the spirits of
the clan, tribe, and sometimes of a sorcerer. Only in biological death have
all souls fled. In soul loss, typically only one soul, or perhaps several soul
parts have wandered off, been stolen, or become lost. When most of a
person’s vital souls or soul parts have departed he or she may become
comatose, psychotic, or die. It is as if more of the person is in non-ordinary
reality than in ordinary reality.
         A problem with Jung’s interpretations of shamanic phenomena is
that he tends to interpret spirits as manifestations of the unconscious, and
possessing spirits as complexes or archetypes, which we will examine
further in Chapters 5 and 6. Unpublished anecdotes from some of Jung’s
analysands are rumored to reveal that Jung did give personal
acknowledgment to the reality of such independent spirit entities, but our
discussion of Jung has had to rely on what he actually said (or published)
publicly. This might lead one to conclude that spirits are finally nothing but
psychological contents. For Jung the unconscious is very large, growing
beyond the personal unconscious of Freudian psychology, and including the
collective unconscious or objective psyche, which makes it largely an
unknown: an unfathomable mystery filled with numinous presences. When
Jung speaks of these numinous presences or spirits as a psychologist, he
tends to schematize them as complexes, apparently adjusting his discussion
to a relatively skeptical scientific audience. However, if we recall that
Jung’s midlife crisis was an initiation in which he encountered spirits, held
lengthy dialogues with them, received guidance and revelations concerning
his life’s work and his psychology, and spent a great deal of the rest of his
life fascinated with Gnosticism, alchemy, astrology, and synchronistic
phenomena, it is perhaps not too difficult to conceive that Jung’s private
interests in the spirit world may have exceeded what he felt that he could
express publicly. That Jung had great respect for the spirits that manifested
themselves in his own inner life, or in those of his patients, is beyond
question. Jung is remarkable for his great respect for the psyche and psychic
phenomena in modern western psychology.
         It is tempting to think about what real spirits might be like if we
modified the publicly published Jungian theory to account for them. Jung
claimed that there were limits to what psychology could know. All we can
ever know appears first to our psyche, and within psyche. We should keep
in mind that Jung’s conception of the objective psyche is equivalent to
Castaneda’s nonordinary reality, even if Jung endows it with archetypal
patterns. It is filled with numinal mystery, it is unfathomable, and it is the
locus of near-death experiences, out-of-body journeys, and shamanic
journeying. It is the locus of ancestral memory, of transpersonal guidance,
and of numinous healing power. By virtue of Jung’s belief in synchronistic
phenomena, including ESP, clairvoyance, clairaudience, precognition,
synchronization of inner and outer phenomena, and so on, Jung’s model of
the psyche may have little trouble making room for telepathy, out-of body
journeys, objectivity of spirit guides, and telepathic healing at a distance.
We are all “in” the collective unconscious, the objective psyche, and we are
all related. The “we” of this relatedness includes the spirit world, material
world, the plant, mineral, and animal kingdoms, the galaxies and star
systems, as well as other humans. For Jung, the psyche has subjective
(personal) as well as objective (transpersonal) dimensions. The collective
unconscious is the ultimate context in which all experience occurs. If spirits
manifest themselves, it is always in and to the psyche. If there be
independently existing spirit entities, their dealings with humans must pass
through archetypal structures. There is no getting around it: whatever
appears as a spirit must manifest itself to a human through structures of the
psyche and the central nervous system.
         When traditional or contemporary urban shamans speak of their
spirit guides (or power animals) it is often with great reverence and respect
for them. Their trust in these spirits, whatever their psychological or
ontological status, is essential to the efficacy of their healing work. It is the
spirit guide which diagnoses the patient’s illness and which instructs the
shaman on how best to engage in the healing work. The shaman, by virtue
of these spirit guides, is able to see shamanically into the patient’s body
(etheric aura or subtle body) and locate intrusions and extract (remove)
them. The shaman enters non-ordinary reality to find, by the help of the
spirit guide, the lost vital souls or soul parts. Reports of the efficacy of these
methods by shamans and their patients are voluminous. Increasingly there
are reports of shamans who can traverse thousands of miles in their
journeys to heal a patient in another locality geographically. While Jung
may have been reticent to speak in non-psychological terms about what
such guiding spirits really are, or how they can do such seemingly magical
things as heal at a distance, he had no trouble taking such reports seriously.
To go a step further than the official and public views of Jung, a slightly
extended Jungian view needn’t have many problems with the independent
reality of spirit guides or of their efficacy in healing, even at a great
distance. If the objective psyche is the locus of the world, or of all that
occurs, then its embracing unity is like a vessel that contains and inter-
relates all entities. Jung’s views on synchronistic activity regulated by the
archetypes, and especially by the archetypal Self, can easily account for
such synchronistic phenomena as telepathic diagnosis and healing at a
distance. Jung can say with psychological certainty that the shaman’s spirit
guides are experienced as ego-dystonic, as outside the agency of the
shaman’s ego-identity. According to Jungian analyst John R. Haule, the
experiencing of the spirit guide as independently existing, as beyond the
shaman’s ego, as ego-dystonic, enables the shaman to be freed from the
limited knowledge and experience of the ego-identity and its self-generating
monologues.39 The shaman thus becomes open to a knowledge, wisdom,
and healing power that far surpass that of the ego. Regardless of whether
one interprets the spirits as archetypes and complexes or as independently
existing spirits, Jung has wisely seen that they exist independent of the
human ego and its familiar ego-identity.
         Another problem arises from Jung’s tendency to interpret the
psyche’s spirit manifestations as he does the complexes and the archetypes,
as partial manifestations of the totality of the psyche, the Self. We shall see
the ways Jung does this in Chapter 5, where we examine Jung’s sparse
writings and views on shamanism in his Collected Works. For now we wish
to call attention to Jung’s interpretation of the shaman’s spirit guide (or
power animal) as a manifestation and representation of the archetypal Self,
the greater wholeness of the person. At first this may sound like another
psychological reduction, and it is as if Jung wished to say that all spirits
who manifest themselves in the psyche are manifestations of a person’s
archetypal Self. He does not say this, even if it seems implied. He does
suggest, as we shall see, that the shaman’s spirit helpers are manifestations
of the Self. Even if Jung did insist that the spirit guides are nothing but
manifestations of the archetypal Self, there is plenty of room in his
psychological theory to account for the factuality and importance of the
spirit guides as sui generis. We must remember the great respect and
seriousness with which he took his own spirit guides, especially Philemon.
We must again remember that Jung’s view of the psyche is very expansive,
much larger than the ego-personality and its personal unconscious. If the
cosmos of the shaman is vast enough to include journeys to various planes,
and concourse with spirits, Jung’s psyche is also vast and unfathomable,
consisting not only of the archetypes and spirit presences, but of ancestral
memories, of prehuman memory and, at bottom, the structure and memory
of the world and greater cosmos. Jung was not Cartesian in his view of
psyche and world; they are at bottom the same thing, viewed and
experienced in differing aspects. Jung also does not assume that we are
independent of one another, or that the outer and inner worlds are
fundamentally separate. We are all interrelated by virtue of being of and in
the collective unconscious. If we are all intrapsychically related, then
telepathy becomes an outmoded concept, and long-distance journeying to
heal a patient is not really long distance at all; it is a matter of tuning in to
the collective unconscious, and to the being which the shaman seeks to
heal. The collective unconscious, like non-ordinary reality, includes
everything, and, from a metaphysical perspective, has its locus in the
ultimate reality, call it God, Allah, Brahma, Wakan Tanka, Kitchimanitou,
or by whatever name you prefer. Jung, of course, tried to avoid public
metaphysical speculation, so this kind of metaphysical conclusion must be
inferred.
        Perhaps an illustration can help us understand how to conceptualize
Jung’s understanding of shamanic phenomena. Imagine that our psyches
overlap and interpenetrate one another like the circles of a Venn diagram,
and perhaps all our circles are encompassed by a greater circle, the divine
reality. Then it is possible for my spirit guide to enter your psyche, or more
accurately, it would tune in to your psyche through a shamanic altered state
of consciousness. The journey of the shaman would in effect be a tuning in
to your frequency, rather than a literal traversing of external space and time.
You might even access my spirit guide, and see it in an altered state of
consciousness. Even if my spirit guide is a manifestation of the archetypal
Self, it is none the less real. My trance journey with it is just as much a
shamanic journey, and its ability to see into your psyche and diagnose and
instruct me on how to help heal it is just as effective as it would be if it were
an independent spirit. According to John R. Haule, the value of the shaman
believing it is an independent spirit is that it makes its otherness to his ego
more apparent, and allows the greater knowledge, wisdom, and power of
the archetypal Self to be accessed for healing purposes. This keeps the
shaman’s ego from trying to run the show. In this view, the shaman’s power
is from his connection to the archetypal Self, mediated through the spirit
guide or power animal. The sorcerer, by contrast, is not individuated, and
lacks the direct access to the Self of the shaman. The sorcerer steals power
from others, from the outer collective. The shaman, by contrast, has great
authority because his or her power is accessed from within. Furthermore, if
God is accessed by coming into relation with the archetypal Self, then it is
ultimately divine wisdom that directs the shamanic journey and healing
process.40 This view, while not explicitly Jung’s, is consistent with his
understanding of spirit phenomena.


   THE SELF-SELF CONNECTION IN SHAMANIC SEEING

        In his book, Pilgrimage of the Heart, John R. Haule provides a
Jungian discussion of how shamans may access another psyche to see into it
and diagnose illness and perform healing functions. Haule explores the
similarities between shamans and lovers in their ability to see into one
another’s souls. The reader may wonder what a book on romantic love has
to do with shamanism. At first thought, they may seem to be as far apart as
roses and sage, but Haule reveals that they are in fact both paths of the soul
that correlate and correspond in interesting ways, while also diverging
substantially. Both shamanism and romantic love are passions of the soul,
both involve being caught up, inspired by daimones, being dismembered,
being initiated into various transformations of soul, to name just a few
similarities. Both also have treacherous ground to be traversed, and both
can plummet one into unfathomable abysses. Haule argues that romantic
love can be something more than a passing experience of youth; it can be an
opportunity for initiation into a path of soulful realization and living.
Because this work is also illuminating of the psychology of shamanism, we
want to draw attention to that aspect of this work here. Haule makes
comparisons between the psychological effect of the passion-producing
love potion (Tristan and Isolde) in bringing the lovers into a mystical
participation (participation mystique) and enabling them to see deeply into
each other’s soul.
          In the alchemy of romance a deep connection signaled by love’s
passionate energies activates deep archetypal structures of the Self/soul, and
it is this activation that makes it possible for lovers to see into each other’s
soul, in a way that others cannot. Such abilities to see into the soul are due
to the accessing of the archetypal Self of the other, in romantic experience.
Haule maintains a classic Jungian affirmation of the importance of the
archetypal Self. He thus describes an underlying model of the psyche with
two major levels, and three sub-levels:

PERSONAL PSYCHE: EGO CONSCIOUSNESS
                 PERSONAL UNCONSCIOUS
COLLECTIVE PSYCHE: Level 1) Mythic Images (mythopoetic
imagination)
                 Level 2) Self (archetypal Self, deep center)
                 Level 3) Instincts (inborn releasing mechanisms)

        When the lover drinks the love potion, or when the shaman enters
ecstatic trance, both become able to see into the soul of the other. Haule
claims that there are two ways of accessing the world: 1) Through ego-
consciousness, which includes directed thinking and feeling, and use of the
sense organs, and 2) through the Self level of the psyche. Our mental level
can be lowered by erotic involvement, bringing about a state of merger not
unlike the participation mystique described by anthropologist Lucien Levy-
Bruhl. An experience that involves the activation of an archetype brings
about a drop in the level of consciousness, giving access to other
individuals through the Self, which is the second sublevel of the collective
psyche (Level 2).
          Shamanism, the author argues, is found world wide and consists of
individuals who have a special talent for deliberately passing into ecstatic
trance in order to gain access to a very similar state of unity or mystical
participation with nature, nature spirits, and with their patients. By virtue of
calling, talent, and training, the shaman learns to gain access to the soul of
any individual, whereas lovers only gain access to each other’s souls.
          Haule makes some interesting observations about shamanism. He
notes that Eliade’s classic work on shamanism is restricted in focus
primarily to cases where the shamanic calling is limited to an elite who
have a special calling and talent. But Haule argues that shamanic powers
are more universally accessible, and cites the instance of the !Kung tribe
who believe that all individuals have shamanic power and abilities. This
would of course follow from Haule’s thesis that lovers and shamans are
able to see by virtue of their access to the Self level of the collective
psyche. He mentions the fact that in Castaneda’s eight books there is a
gradual reduction in the connotation of seeing as Castaneda matures and
learns what Don Juan Matus has been trying to teach him all along, that
seeing should be practiced as a daily event, and not given such a grandiose,
fanciful, and radiant content as Castaneda does for so long in his
apprenticeship.
          Haule describes the !Kung shaman’s journey in terms of this
Jungian model. The !Kung shaman actually enters a kind of dreamscape
and goes in search of his patient’s lost soul. We might add that if the
shaman’s spirit guide be a manifestation of the archetypal Self, or of God, it
still is a reality, a mode of access that allows the shaman to see into the
other’s psyche through a Self-Self relation. The journey is not a private
dream of personal significance for the shaman, for it has an objective
quality about it. It is a dream about the Self level of connectedness between
psyches of shaman and patient. The shaman obtains a true (effective)
insight into the psychological condition of the woman.42 The shaman’s
method is interpreted as 1) diagnostic seeing by way of a direct, imageless
intuition (Collective Level, Level 2), the level of Self. The shaman’s grasp
of the problem at this level is non-specific, because there is no image of it.
Hence the shaman must 2) rise to the mythopoetic imagination (not Haule’s
term) where a mythic image is given to the experience. In other words, the
shaman must access a level of psyche (Collective Level, Level 1) where
mythic images are given to deep but inarticulate psychical experiences, to
“where those deep, unarticulated interpersonal facts (the patient’s deceased
father is seen as having possession of the patient’s soul) can be represented
in a useful manner”.43 Haule has brought into bold contrast, through his
Jungian based analysis, a two-step process to shamanic seeing that is very
similar to the creative process. It calls to mind Silvano Arieti’s distinction
between the preliminary stage of the endocept wherein the artist feels an
intuition, an inspirational urge that is experienced or felt as quasi-physical
and, which may be uncomfortable until expressed, and the conceptual stage,
when an image or concept is given to the inarticulate endocept. Once given
such form, there is a release, a sense of eureka, and a satisfaction for the
artist. In addition to formulating a Jungian understanding of how shamanic
seeing is possible, Haule’s work helps us to see the creative dynamic in
shamanic seeing. The mind of the shaman creates a reality that is at once
subjective and objective, allowing the shaman to tune in to the psyche of
another person by passing through his or her own dreamscape into that of
another. The locus of both the shaman’s dreamscape and that of his or her
patient is the collective unconscious, the objective psyche, or, if you will,
non-ordinary reality.
       Chapter Five: Jung’s Interpretation of Shamanism

SHAMANISM AS A PRECURSOR TO JUNG’S ANALYTICAL
                 PSYCHOLOGY

         In the previous chapter we reviewed the basic principles of Jung’s
psychology, of the soul and its disorders, and compared and contrasted it
with shamanic views. One purpose was to provide a theoretical context for
examining more closely Jung’s own views of shamanism which we shall
offer here. Jung had some very definite views of shamanism, but these
views are anything but coherent and systematic. It is easier to explore the
shamanic implications of Jung’s theory than it is to develop a coherent
picture of Jung’ s understanding of shamanism based on his writings on the
subject. This is largely because more of his statements about shamanism
were offered as secondary amplifications or illustrations of other archetypes
and psychological processes, especially on mystical alchemy. Aside from
Jung’s own direct and personal shamanic type of experience, Jung
apparently read little about shamanism. Among the main documented
sources in his investigations of shamanism was Eliade’s classic study,
Shamanism: Archaic Techniques of Ecstasy. Many of Jung’s interpretations
of shamanism are based upon Eliade’s descriptions of the structure and
symbolism of shamanism. Other sources include the writings and theories
of Lucien Levy-Bruhl, and various sources in the history of dynamic
psychiatry. Additionally, Jung had encountered medicine men in his
expeditions to Africa and to the Taos Pueblo, but neither of the medicine
men is identified strictly as a shaman in Eliade’s restrictive definition.
Jung’s writings about shamanism are thus based on a narrow range of the
literature on shamanism, and probably on no direct experience with a
traditional shaman. His comments on shamanism are all too few, given the
magnitude of the Collected Works and the range of topics he gave
exhaustive discussion to. The reader will find no systematic and thorough
discussion of Jung’s view on the subject here. What we offer are a sampling
of a broad range of descriptions, interpretations, and correlations Jung made
between his own thought, alchemy, and shamanism. Some of the statements
appear to be contradictory, but we offer them here to show what Jung
actually thought about the subject as revealed in his public writings.
        In 1918 Jung’s first references to shamanism appeared in his
writings. He wrote an essay entitled “The ‘Role of the Unconscious,”1
where he described the historical forerunners of his analytical psychology.
He drew attention to the Romantic and Victorian revival of interest in the
ancient synchronistic phenomena, the non-rational, the occult, the spiritistic
seances, and in Mesmerism (hypnotism). Jung viewed these as immediate
precursors to the development of analytical psychology. Jung, however,
claimed that shamanism was the earliest forerunner of analytical
psychology. He argued that early hypnotism, Mesmer’s “animal
magnetism,” was not so much a rational scientific concept, as a revival of
the primitive-animistic concept of soul force and soul-stuff: “This is nothing
but a rediscovery of the primitive concept of soul force or soul-stuff,
awakened out of the unconscious by a reactivation of archaic forms of
thought.”2 Historian of dynamic psychiatry Henri F. Ellenberger
corroborates Jung’s view of Mesmer in considering him more like a shaman
drawing upon numinous healing power (animal magnetism), rather than
upon scientific methods, to treat his patients.
        Jung, while discussing the historical forerunners of analytical
psychology, implies that the archaic concepts employed in animism and
shamanism live on in the concerns of analytical psychology, and that
Mesmerism represents a kind of historic transition phase between the
archaic and modern conceptualizations of the same phenomena: soul force,
and the numinosity of unconscious contents. Jung argues that even as
animal magnetism became legitimated and renamed by modern psychiatry
as medical hypnosis and spread through the modern (Western) world of the
19th century, spiritualism, with its form of possession, mediumship (today’s
channeling), and table turning, spread throughout the popular culture of
Europe and America. Jung considered the fascination with spiritualism as a
revival of shamanistic forms of religion, and as attempts at a type of
individuation process. Much could be said of the New Age revival of
ancient forms of gnosis and cosmic consciousness in the 1990s wherein a
wide variety of synchronistic phenomena, channeling, near-death
experiences, and spiritual healing are becoming popular. New Agers often
feel they are discovering a new age of spiritual consciousness when, in fact,
they are re-discovering the non-ordinary reality that the archaic shamans
discovered in the Paleolithic era. Jung considered such modern fascination
with spirits and synchronism: “a rebirth of the shamanistic form of religion
practiced by our remote grandfathers”.3 Jung also considered Christian
Science to be a precursor of analytical psychology, and a “higher form of
shamanism”.4
         As we already mentioned, when Jung wrote of shamanism, it was
illustrative of some other point. That is, he drew upon shamanic parallels to
amplify other symbolic, mythic, or archetypal phenomena. So often did he
do this that there are enough various interpretations of shamanic
phenomena for us to present a loosely organized synopsis of Jung’s
reflections on it. Although these writings are scattered throughout a dozen
or so volumes of the Collected Works, the largest percentage of them are to
be found in the volume entitled Alchemical Studies (CW 13), of the
Collected Works. In fact, Jung draws more parallels between shamanism
and the symbolism and methods of alchemy, than with any other religious
or mythological form. The largest percentage of Jung’s interpretations of
shamanic methods and symbolisms is thus to be found as amplifications of
the methods and symbolism of alchemy. We shall begin by discussing these
views on shamanic and alchemical phenomena, and then move to other
categories by which Jung interpreted shamanic phenomena throughout his
Collected Works.


            JUNG ON ALCHEMY AND SHAMANISM

        In addition to shamanism, Jung also believed that alchemy, if
viewed through a symbolic-psychological lens, rather than through the lens
of scientific chemistry, could be understood as a precursor to the modern
psychology of the unconscious. Jung believed that alchemy was actually the
projection of symbolic processes arising from the unconscious, and the
imagery it produced, like that of shamanism, abounded in themes of ritual
transformation. However, the ritual transformation processes of alchemy
were believed by Jung to be disguised in terms of imagery of a chemical
basis, a schema organized into oppositions. With the various magico-
chemical operations performed upon these elements (divisio, solutio,
coagulatio, etc.) the alchemist attempted to turn base metals into gold. This
aim of turning base metals into gold, however, was more a mystical art than
a scientific art, and hence led to projection of unconscious contents onto the
elements, the opus, and the goal. Jung interpreted the gold, along with
sacred stones like the crystal and the lapis lazuli, to be a symbol of the Self,
and the chemico-transformation processes of alchemy to be a type of ritual
transformation akin to the transformation involved in the individuation
process.
        The alchemist, like the shaman, practiced a secret, sacred, and
esoteric art. Much ritual preparation and care went into the work (opus),
and ritual boundaries (alchemical vas) were carefully stewarded so that
nothing essential could escape or be contaminated. The alchemist often had
a female to assist him in his magical labor, much like the shaman’s celestial
wife; and the alchemist, like the shaman, practiced his secret art at the
margins of his society. Jung believed that medieval and renaissance
alchemy, like modern depth psychology, arose as an attempt to compensate
for the one-sidedness of Christianity. By drawing upon pagan themes, and
rich archetypal imagery, it contrasted with the overly dogmatic and sexless
expressions of Christianity, and its devaluation of the earthy and the
feminine. Jung also believed that alchemy dealt better with the problem of
the opposites (seeking a conjunctio rather than repression or dissociation),
and incorporated rather than repressed the dark, shadow side of reality. Like
shamanism, alchemy also placed a priority upon original experience, and
did not fear heretical opinion. The convergence of alchemical themes and
the similarities of alchemical symbolism is due more to the alchemists’
individual discoveries of archetypal symbolism and transformative
processes, and perhaps a comparing of findings amongst alchemists, than to
dissemination by dogma. In this way, alchemy is akin to shamanism, which
also has developed through individual experience of underlying archetypal
and transformative processes, and through a sharing of findings
(dissemination) amongst and between fellow shamans. A number of Jung’s
important statements about shamanism are made in amplification of various
alchemical symbols. We shall review the more salient alchemical-shamanic
comparisons made by Jung.


                 THE STONE AS SACRED OBJECT

        In the context of discussing the alchemical significance of the
philosopher’s stone, the lapis lazuli, the crystal, and gold as psychological
symbols of the archetypal Self, Jung reviews the significance of the
numinosity of crystals in North American shamanism and mythology. The
crystal, mounted in the head of the Cherokee dragon serpent Uktena, is
desired by shamans, and pieces of it are used in shamanic healing rituals.
Jung argues that crystals have a numinous status giving them paramount
importance as ministering spirits in shamanism:

      In shamanism, much importance is attached to Crystals, which
      play the part of ministering spirits. They come from the crystal
      throne of the Supreme Being, or from the vault of the sky. They
      show what is going on in the world and what is happening to
      the souls of the sick, and they also give man the power to fly.5

        The power of crystals to know what is going on, and what is wrong
with the sick, is characteristic of the powers of the archetypal Self, in its
capacity as regulator of all psychic processes, and as goad towards
integrations and healing. Additionally, Jung suggests that the attributes of
the stone are also those used symbolically to represent the archetypal Self.
These are the attributes of “incorruptibility, permanence, and divinity”.6
The symbolism of alchemy, like the symbolism of shamanism and that of
the unconscious of modern man, is polyvalent, consists of numerous and
overlapping meanings. Hence, Jung sometimes interprets the same symbols
differently, and sometimes interprets one symbol as meaning the same thing
as another symbol. Jung thus interprets the magical tree in a way similar to
the way he treated the alchemical tree, as having a variety of meanings,
depending upon the context and particular facet of functioning of the tree
under consideration.
  THE ALCHEMICAL TREE AND THE MAGICAL TREE OF
    THE SHAMAN AS SYMBOL OF ARCHETYPAL SELF

        The cosmic tree (world tree) is a symbolic motif common to
alchemy and shamanism. Jung’s understandings of the significance of the
alchemical tree were based, in part, upon Eliade’s understanding of the
shaman’s cosmic tree as an axis mundi, a center of the world which
connects the three cosmic zones of shamanic cosmology. The cosmic tree is
a kind of ritual passage way by which the shaman may mount up or ascend
into the upper world, or descend into the lower world.J ung claimed the
symbolism of ascent by means of a ladder, a stairway, or mountain, was
found in the dreams of many of his modern patients, and was patterned
upon the same archetype as the cosmic tree. Although Jung claimed that he
never saw a cosmic tree appear in one of his patient’s dreams, John Weir
Perry, a Jungian analyst and psychiatrist, has documented the appearance of
the cosmic tree motif in the hallucinatory images of various schizophrenic
patients. Perry argues that the emergence of this tree symbol heralds a
connection with the archetypal Self by the schizophrenic undergoing a
transformative psychotic process. Jung also likened the cosmic tree
symbolism with the central archetype. Since this type of axis mundi
symbolism is so central to shamanic cosmology, it became rather natural for
Jung to interpret it as a symbol of the Self, as a union of opposites, and as a
means of access to the collective unconscious (symbolized as upper world
and lower world).
        In a passage in which Jung borrows from Eliade, with reference to a
shaman’s inverted cosmic tree which has the image of a face carved on it,
Jung suggests that the tree is a symbol of the Self:

      “The inverted tree plays a great role among the East Siberian
      shamans…The roots signify hairs, and on the trunk, near the
      root a face has been carved, showing [that] the tree represents a
      man.” ...Presumably this is the shaman himself, or his higher
      personality. The shaman climbs the magic tree in order to find
      his true self in the Upperworld.7

        Jung goes on to elaborate the shaman’s need to climb the tree and
ascend or descend into the upper and lower worlds as an urge towards
mystical experience of the archetypal Self as a greater, more spiritual and
true self. This urge of the shaman towards mystical experience is interpreted
as the urge to individuate, to become a whole self, to live in connection with
the deeper and more authentic Self. Such experience seems to be mandatory
for the shaman, who cannot refuse its call without peril to himself or
herself, and perhaps without madness. It is essential to the constitution of
his or her personality: “Eliade says in his excellent study of shamanism that
the Eskimo feels the need for these ecstatic journeys because it is above all
during trance that he becomes truly himself; the mystical experience is
necessary to him as a constituent of his personality.”8


      SHAMAN’S SELF AND THE SYMBOLISM OF THE
              INDIVIDUATION PROCESS

        Jung links the ecstatic state in which the archetypal Self is
encountered by the shaman with the notion of possession by helping
guardian spirits, as aids or guides to an individuation process for the
shaman. The symbolism of shamanism, like that of alchemy, is interpreted
as projections of the individuation process. Again Jung relies upon Eliade
for the basis of his interpretation:

      The ecstasy is often accompanied by a state in which the
      shaman is possessed by his familiars or guardian spirits. By
      means of their possession he acquires his “‘mystical organs,’
      which in some sort constitute his true and complete spiritual
      personality”. This confirms the psychological inference that
      may be drawn from shamanic symbolism, namely that it is a
      projection of the individuation process. This inference we have
      also seen is true ofalchemy.9
   CELESTIAL BRIDE SYMBOLISM AND THE SHAMANIC
                      ANIMA

         Another aspect of the symbolism of the world tree is the feminine
aspect, its connection to the shaman’s celestial wife, its connection to earth
mother symbolism, which Jung interprets as due to the projection of the
anima. Eliade documents the motif of the shaman’s bond with the sacred,
that is, with the numen of the other world. Eliade argues that the celestial
wife serves as a spirit guide and instructor to the shaman, helping him
navigate the mysteries and dangers of the other world. The role of the
shaman’s celestial bride (wife) is echoed as an archetypal theme found the
world over in myth and literature, for example, as Dante’s Beatrice, lure and
guide to the other world, spirit guide on the path through the under world
(Inferno) and into the upper world (Paradise). It is echoed in the alchemist’s
female assistant helper, in Orpheus mythology, and in Tantra.
         Jung interprets the functioning of the celestial bride of the shaman
as an anima figure.10 He considered the anima to be an inner figure of
contrasexual feminine within the psyche of a man. It corresponded to the
animus in the woman, as the counterpart of the contrasexual masculine
within her psyche. Unfortunately, Jung did not reflect on the role of the
animus in the psychology of female shamans. Presumably it would operate
much as the anima does for the male shaman. But here we will stay with
what Jung did discuss. The anima, for Jung, is like a bridge to the deeper
Self, to the unconscious psyche. She is usually perceived in the form of
feminine images, and sometimes comes to represent the entirety of the soul
(anima = soul). We should recall that the anima, as Jung understood it, may
be beneficial, if related to and integrated in a positive manner, but it may
also be dangerous, have a negative aspect, if inappropriately related to,
neglected, or ignored. The anima is typically projected by men onto real
women in the outer world. In projection, the numinosity may attract
attention in the form of lovers, mysterious and alluring women, or as
ordinary wives and female friends. In myth and folklore, the anima has
been projected into concrete mythic personages such as Helen of Troy,
Athena, the Virgin Mary, Sophia, Dante’s Beatrice, Aphrodite, and
Psychopompoi (guides of the soul). The appropriate way of dealing with the
anima, for Jung, is to relate to her as an inner figure, as a guide to the
depths of the psyche. This is what Jung believes the shaman is able to
accomplish, even if it is understood in ecstatic projected form. The ascent
of the cosmic tree is an inward journey to the other world of the collective
unconscious, where the shaman meets his anima figure: “The climbing of
the magical Tree is the heavenly journey of the shaman, during which he
encounters his heavenly spouse. In Medieval Christianity the shamanic
anima was transformed into Lilith, who ... was Adam’s first wife.”11
        For Jung, the anima also represents the “not-I”, that is, the “non-
ego”. In the analytically assisted individuation process, the anima is
typically one of the first important figures from the collective unconscious
which must be brought into conscious relationship. Her importance is due
to the fact that she represents something of the totality of the psyche (soul).
Along with the psyche’s feminine aspect, the male personality’s experience
of the archetypal and personal mother, as well as his experience of females
in general, colors his experience of the anima. Hence the anima lies close to
personal experience, on the one hand, and collective or transpersonal
experience on the other, thus making her a bridge figure between ego and
collective unconscious. It is as a bridge figure that the anima is seen to be a
guide to the other world, that is, of the collective unconscious. Not only the
celestial wife but the cosmic tree itself are also understood by Jung as
feminine, and carry a projection of the maternal and psychopompous
aspects of the anima:

      Our material is fully in accord with the wide spread, primitive
      shamanistic conceptions of the tree and the heavenly bride, who
      is a typical anima projection. She is the ayami (familiar,
      protective spirit) of the shaman ancestors....The tree represents
      the life of the shaman’s heavenly bride, and has maternal
      significance.12


        THE SHAMAN AND ARCHAIC INDIVIDUATION
         For most individuals within the collective life of archaic and
traditional tribal societies, individuation was not as definite a possibility as
it is with modern individuals, since the collective aspect of life in a
participation mystique type of consciousness prevented the kind of
conscious differentiation possible to today’s individuals, living in modern
western societies. However, Jung believed the shaman was able to undergo
the individuation process on an archaic level, that was later possible in an
increasingly sophisticated way as human culture and religion evolved:

      The numinous experience of the individuation process is, on the
      archaic level, the prerogative of the shamans and medicine men;
      later of physician, prophet, priest, and finally, at the
      individualized states of philosophy and religion [of
      individuals].13


       SHAMANIC TRANSFORMATION AND THE HERO
                    ARCHETYPE

        Jung links the death/rebirth experience of shamans to the archetype
of the hero. His understanding of the ritual transformation process of
archaic shamanic individuation could not be understood without
understanding the role of the hero archetype and its relations to ritual
transformation. The hero journey, for Jung, is a process of moving from a
lesser to a greater consciousness, by means of a descent into the
unconscious. Jung considers the hero figure to be the finest of the symbols
of psychical energy (libido) because it is a transformation symbol:

      The finest of all symbols of the libido is the human figure of the
      hero...a figure who passes from joy to sorrow and from sorrow
      to joy, and like the sun, now stands high at the zenith and now
      is plunged into the darkest night, only to rise again a new
      splendor.14
         This passage of the hero from joy to sorrow to joy again is, for Jung,
the equivalent of a passage from the naive or pre-morbid ego structure, into
the suffering and dismemberment in the unconscious (ritual death), and a
return (ritual rebirth), but with a greater consciousness. Joseph Campbell,
the mythologist who was influenced by Jung, has characterized the hero
journey as consisting of three stages: 1) Separation, 2) Initiation, and 3)
Return (with the boon). Campbell claims that the hero mythic pattern
underlies the process of ritual transformation which the shaman must
undergo. The first stage represents a separation from normal ego-
consciousness, from the collective (society with its norms, conventions, and
everyday perspectives), whereby the shaman goes off alone into the woods
or the wilderness to enter the other world. There the second stage, involving
the dismemberment, the contemplation of the skeleton, and the
reconstruction of the shaman’s mystical body, is a period of learning and
discovery of the mysteries, sacred power, or insights. Stage three, the return
with the boon (the insight, increased consciousness, or healing power), is
the stage whereby the hero or shaman benefits his or her tribe or social
group with what he or she obtained on the journey. Campbell emphasizes
that this is the feature of the hero journey which differentiates it from mere
psychopathological regression. The hero pattern objectified in shamanic
experience is beneficial socially, and thus is creative.
         Jung links the death/rebirth archetype and the dismemberment the
shaman must undergo with the hero pattern:

      The dismemberment motif belongs in the wider context of
      rebirth symbolism. Consequently it plays an important part in
      the initiation experiences of shamans and medicine men [or
      medicine women] who are dismembered and put together
      again.15


         SHAMANIC INITIATION: TRANSFORMATION

       The shamanic initiatory ordeal of being dismembered and
reconstructed is interpreted as a psychological and spiritual transformation
(individuation). It is symbolic of the transformation of consciousness from a
primitive to a differentiated state characteristic of the path of
individuation.16 Jung also observes the similarity of dismemberment
symbolism to the alchemical symbolism of divisio-separatio-solutio.
Commenting on the shaman’s initiatory dismemberment Jung wrote:

      He is essentially unconscious and therefore in need of
      transformation and enlightenment. For this purpose his body
      must be taken apart and dissolved into its constituents, a
      process known in alchemy as divisio, separatio, and solutio, and
      in later treatises as discrimination and self-knowledge.17

        The transformative processes observed in the shaman’s
dismemberment and reconstitution are thus interpreted by Jung in terms of
an archetypal configuration involving death/rebirth, ritual transformation,
and the hero pattern. This archetypal configuration underlying shamanism
is discernible in mythology and religion the world over. Jung believed the
transformation symbolism of the Catholic Mass to be a kind of heir to a
progressive deepening of consciousness which began many millennia
before Christianity, but which probably had its origins in the initiatory
experiences of shamans:

      The shaman’s experience of sickness, of torture, death, and
      regeneration implies, at a higher level, the idea of being made
      whole through sacrifice; of being changed by transubstantiation
      and exalted to the pneumatic man-in a word, of apotheosis.18


                        SHAMAN: TRICKSTER

         If the shaman can be considered a kind of hero, there is a negative
side to the heroic pattern exemplified in the archetypal figure of the shaman
as a trickster figure. The typical antics of the trickster include the tendency
to accomplish things through trickiness, slyness, buffoonery, and pranks,
what others can only accomplish, if at all, with a concentrated and
methodical effort. Jung observed that the trickster holds a compensatory
relationship to ego-consciousness, and to rational order, often upsetting the
rational order.
        Jung catalogued the attributes of the trickster as a shapeshifting
figure, akin to the alchemical Mercurius, to parapsychological phenomena,
and to the tradition of the medieval carnival with periodic reversal of the
social-hierarchical, ecclesiastical, and political orderings. As a shadow
figure the trickster plays a compensatory role in relation to the dominant
attitude of consciousness or of society. In this form of the jester, for
example, King Lear’s fool can humble the king with his wisdom in the way
no other member of the society can, and he shows himself to be a wiser fool
than Lear. The trickster is often portrayed as a comical and ignorant figure,
who can sometimes get himself or herself into trouble by his or her
foolishness. In its highest expression the trickster serves the creative and
life-enhancing tendencies of self and society. In its lowest expression, the
trickster has a self-serving sociopathic aspect that entails tricking and
hustling for the sheer heck of it. Individuals in whom the trickster is
strongly activated can be socially useful if they are guided by social and
spiritual values. They may be sociopathic and socially destructive if guided
by narcissistic goals, or by no goals at all. For the great shamans, the value
commitment to society overrides selfish or narcissistic aims. Jung believed
the traditional shaman and medicine man to have some of both the
constructive and destructive characteristics of the trickster archetype. He
commented upon the danger of the negative characteristics:

      His [the trickster’s] universality is co-extensive with
      shamanism, to which, as we know, the whole phenomenology
      of spiritualism belongs. There is something of the trickster
      character in the character of the shaman and medicine man, for
      he too often plays malicious jokes on people, only to fall victim
      in his turn to the vengeance of those whom he has injured. For
      this reason his profession sometimes puts him in peril of his
      life.19
     SHAMAN AS SHAPE-SHIFTER/EPISTEMOLOGICAL
                    MEDIATOR

        Another duality in the trickster archetype is the simultaneous
appearance of wisdom and folly: the paradoxical image of the wise fool. On
the surface level, the trickster appears to be ignorant, immature, and full of
mischievous folly. On a deeper level, it can be a folly guided by the deeper
wisdom of the unconscious, of the archetypal Self. It is the trickster which
upsets the stale routine, the too certain rationality, the too familiar and rigid
boundaries of ordinary everyday consciousness, and mocks them. The
shaman, in his or her trickster function, plays a similar role with respect to
the personal and collective cultural boundaries and orderings of his or her
society. In the trickster aspect, the shaman serves as a mediator between the
non-ordinary reality of the sacred, and the ordinary reality of everyday life.
As a mediator the shaman is able to shift epistemological boundaries
through his or her illusive shape-shifting capacities, and place them
elsewhere, thus expanding the consciousness of his or her people. The
shaman is able to bring findings from the non-ordinary realm back to the
people and thus help by communicating it, as much as he or she can, in the
mythic and cultural idiom familiar to his or her people.20
        In this shape-shifting capacity the shaman is also able to share his or
her ecstatic-revelatory experiences, and show that ordinary reality is
somewhat constructed by arbitrary boundaries. On the other hand, the
shaman knows well that the arbitrary boundaries of everyday life are
important, and that no one can dwell only in the non-ordinary reality
without becoming lost. This is the lesson which Yaqui shaman Don Juan
teaches Carlos Castaneda, that the shaman must have one foot firmly
planted in both realities. Understood in psychological terms, the shaman
must have a firmly developed ego if he or she is to be able to tolerate and
survive the numinous and sometimes chaotic power of the collective
unconscious, and not get swallowed by it. Finally, if the shaman is to render
his or her ecstatic visions and powers into a socially useful form, he or she
must do so in terms which his or her people can understand, that is, in terms
of the mythology or cosmology of tribe. The shaman requires the shape-
shifting subtlety of the trickster in order to expand the consciousness of his
or her people within the terms of their ordinary linguistic and mythic
conceptual equipment.


  SHAMAN AS WOUNDED HEALER AND SAVIOR (SOTER)

          The shaman, as we have seen, insofar as he or she begins the
vocation with an illness from which he or she must cure himself or herself,
and insofar as he or she is dismembered in the other world, is a wounded
healer. The shaman’s giftedness at healing arises, in part, from the fact of
his or her own wound, and from his or her mastery in tending to the wound.
It is as if he or she heals out of the wound. The wounded healer motif,
according to Jung, is also a trickster characteristic. Of the trickster as soter,
Jung wrote: “His approximation to the ‘savior’ is an obvious
consequence…in confirmation of the mythological truth that the wounded
healer is the agent of healing, and the sufferer who takes away suffering”.21
          It is the qualities of the shaman as trickster, as shape-shifter, and as
wounded healer, which enable him or her to mediate the healing power of
the sacred to his or her people, to turn the meaningless into the meaningful,
and to turn the wound into the gift. Although every person may encounter
the trickster, the shaman has it constellated in a high degree, as essential to
his or her character and to his or her professional activities.


   JUNG ON SOUL LOSS, POSSESSION, AND EXORCISTIC
                       RITES

        Jung considered soul loss as a pathological deformation of the
personality. The primitive phenomenon of soul loss, diagnosed and treated
by shamans, is interpreted by Jung primarily in terms of a diminution of
personality, and in terms of possession by a complex. With respect to the
diminution of personality, Jung argued that it had the features of Pierre
Janet’s “abaissement du niveau mental”, in which ego-consciousness is
attenuated, and the psychical energy (libido) withdraws from the ego. Jung
described the condition phenomenologically:

      The peculiar condition covered by this term [“loss of soul”] is
      accounted for in the mind of the primitive by the supposition
      that the soul has gone off, just like a dog runs away from his
      master overnight. It is then the task of the medicine-man to
      fetch this fugitive back. Often the loss occurs suddenly and
      manifests itself in a general malaise.22

         Jung argues that this phenomenon is closely tied to the condition of
primitive consciousness, which he believed lacks the coherence and
firmness of the ego-consciousness of modern men and women. Jung argues
that the primitive does not have the control of his or her willpower that
modern individuals do, and so is vulnerable to emotional, instinctive, and
archetypal forces from the unconscious. Modern people, by contrast, are
viewed by Jung as having a much more rational and reality (external)
oriented ego-structure, making it safer and more dependable in being able
to resist the whims of the unconscious. Jung believed that the primitive had
to perform complicated exercises if he or she was to pull himself or herself
together for any activity that is conscious and intentional, not just emotional
and instructive.23
         Because of the unfirmness of the primitive’s ego-structure, Jung
believed the primitive was especially sensitive to upsurges, invasions, and
fantasies arising from the unconscious. Emotions and instincts were
amongst the powerful forces which could cause the primitive’s nascent ego-
structure to break down leading to psychological pandemonium, and a loss
of order:

      Primitives are notoriously subject to such phenomena as
      running amok, going berserk, possession, and the like. The
      recognition of the daemonic character of passion is an effective
      safeguard, for it once deprives the object of its strongest spell,
      relegating its source to the world of demons, i.e., the
      unconscious, whence the force of passion springs.24
        If psychopathology and chaos are sometimes the result of passion,
emotion, and instinctual upsurges of the primitive, the concerted efforts of
exorcism rituals are necessary for sending the erupted psychic energies back
down into the unconscious. Jung says of exorcistic rites that they are
“effective in causing the libido to flow back into the unconscious”.25 This
amounts, as we have already suggested, to a ritual re-instating of the
repression barrier, reconstituting a stronger ego for the primitive. Jung also
characterized loss of soul as a form of possession by a complex:

      Loss of soul amounts to a tearing loose of part of one’s nature,
      it is the disappearance and emancipation of a complex, which
      there upon becomes a tyrannical usurper of consciousness,
      oppressing the whole man. It throws him off course and drives
      him to actions whose blind one-sidedness inevitably leads to
      self destruction.26

        Again, it is the purpose of exorcistic rites, Jung believes, to restore
order by wresting the soul from its enchantment with the complex. This is
what the shamanic ritual of soul recovery, by means of trance and use of the
imagination, does for the victim. The shaman is able to navigate in the
waters of the collective unconscious, and by means of imagery derived
from it, and by his or her ritual structure and process, free the patient’s ego
from seizure by the complex. The bringing back of the soul amounts to a
recovery of psychical energy (libido), which was entrapped in the
unconscious complex, and which the primitive’s ego is normally invested
with. The restoring of this psychical libido from its enchantment
(possession) in the complex, and the similarity between soul loss, major
depression, and the hysterical anesthesias and dissociative disorders of
modern individuals did not escape Jung’s attention. He wrote as if
depression and hysteria were the primary modern psychiatric analogues to
primitive soul loss.

      Occasionally something similar can happen to civilized man,
      only he does not describe it as “soul loss” but as an
      “abaissement du niveau mental”, Janet’s apt term for this
      phenomenon. It is a slackening of the tensity of consciousness,
      which might be compared to a low barometric reading,
      presaging bad weather. The tonus has given way, and this is felt
      subjectively as listlessness, moroseness, and depression. One no
      longer has any wish or courage to face the tasks of the day. One
      feels like lead, because no part of one’s body seems willing to
      move, and this is due to the fact that one no longer has any
      disposable energy. This well known phenomenon corresponds
      to the primitive’s loss of soul. The listlessness and paralysis of
      will can go so far that the whole personality falls apart, so to
      speak, and consciousness loses its unity; the individual parts of
      the personality make themselves independent and thus escape
      the control of the conscious mind, as in the case of anesthetic
      areas or systematic amnesias. The latter are well known as
      hysterical “loss of function.”27

         In Jung’s discussions of soul loss and possession, and exorcistic
rites, he fails to articulate the relation between trauma or psychic shock and
soul loss. When he speaks of the primitive as having a less firm ego-
structure and as susceptible to invasion by unconscious contents or seizure
by a complex, he also confuses things by not connecting these phenomena
to their origins in trauma and shock. Whether so-called primitives have a
less firm ego-structure and are more susceptible to soul loss is a debatable
point. Many neoshamans and modern urban shamans report that soul loss is
widespread amongst modern men and women, living in industrialized
society, and much of it is reportedly attributable to trauma (e.g., sexual
abuse, rape, auto accident, surgery, war, etc.). We will discuss contemporary
forms of soul loss and its causes in Chapter Six, but we wish to draw
attention here to the inadequacy of Jung’s psychological understanding of
soul loss and of primitive mentality by today’s standards. Nevertheless,
Jung was the first major psychologist to take shamanism and soul loss
theory seriously, and find ways to correlate it with modern psychological
experience. He did call attention to the fact that modern men and women in
western society are desperately in search of soul, implying widespread soul
loss, but he did not articulate this well in the context of his discussions on
shamanism.


    RITUAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL TRANSFORMATION

         If primitive psychopathology may be considered a disorder of the
psyche (soul), shamanic psychotherapeutics may be considered a ritual re-
ordering of the soul, or a re-establishing of order within the psyche. For
Jung, ritual functions as a psychic container for transformative processes
when psychic integrity and balance is threatened by the unexpected power
of the numinosum of the unconscious. Jung believed that ritual served
psychological purposes by imposing a restrictive form upon instinctual or
archetypal energies.28 By imposing form upon instinctual and archetypal
energies, some restriction and control of these energies became possible.
The shaman has been the master, par excellence, of imposing ritual form
and order upon unruly and powerful psychic energies.
         Jung believed that ritual is so bound up with primitive societies that
it means their cultural and spiritual destruction when those societies lose
their ritual forms. This is one of the effects of Christian missionaries upon
primitive cultures, which, Jung claimed, leads to a “loss of soul for the
tribe”.29 Traditional ritual functioned to facilitate the important transitions
which members of primitive societies had to undergo, for example, the
transformation of a child into an adult, or the change of status obtained in
birth, death, marriage, and profession or secret society. Ritual also served to
reconcile oppositions.30 The exemplary type of ritual for Jung was the
initiation rite, especially those called puberty rites. At puberty, when a
young male displays increased size, strength, intellect, and sexual capability
(and thus poses a threat to social/cooperative purposes), he is typically
“stolen” by the male ritual elders of the tribe and taken off into the bush,
where he must undergo challenging and painful ordeals designed to
transform him into a responsible and contributing adult member of the tribe.
Under the ritual mastery of shamans, the youth must learn to suffer, to
endure difficult things, and learn the mythology and adult moral codes of
the tribe. He is taught how to be a contributing adult member through
training in hunting and warrior skills, and learns that he must serve the good
of the tribe. Jung believed these puberty rites serve to activate archetypes,
or archetypal configurations, within the psyche of the initiant. For males, in
order to be a good hunter and warrior, the archetypal hunter and warrior
must be ritually activated in the psychology of the adolescent initiant. The
archetypes are usually disguised as culture-heroes, gods, or ancestors,
whose paradigmatic acts serve as a model for the young men. This
activation of such powerful and numinous energies are organized in the
initiant’s psyche by the restrictive ritual forms, placed upon those energies
by archetypal patterns. The effect of the imposition of these forms upon the
psychical energies of the youth, is to effect a transformation of libido into a
higher form of consciousness, in this case, adult consciousness.31 All
shamanic ritual can likewise be understood as having a very similar
structure and function of providing a safe container in which to undergo
transformation through imposition of restrictive form, into more organized
and mature levels of consciousness. Ritual, as Jung understands it, effects a
transformation, a death of an old self and the birth of a new self, a
transformation from a lower to a higher level of consciousness.


     THE UNDERLYING ARCHETYPAL STRUCTURE OF
                   SHAMANISM

        For Jung, shamanic imagery is fundamentally a set of concrete
symbolic expressions of an underlying archetypal pattern which emerged
not only in Paleolithic times, but continues to emerge in myth and folklore,
in modern literature and art, and in the myriads of unconscious-imaginative
productions of modern men and women. We have seen, for example, from
the previous discussion of the cosmic tree symbolism, that the symbol has a
plurality of related possible meanings, depending upon the aspect and
context of the focus. The tree is a means of access, a ladder of
ascent/descent into the other world (of the collective unconscious), and it is
at once a symbol of the archetypal Self, a central point of orientations (axis
mundi) uniting the opposites (of lower and upper worlds), and of the
feminine in its maternal and psychopompous aspects (anima). It symbolized
these meanings for shamanism as it also does so for alchemy, and the
underlying archetypal form is discernible the world over in myth and
folklore, and in modern dreams and psychotic productions. What the
shaman discovered thousands of years ago was how to tap into an
underlying archetypal realm for psychological development, healing, and
mystical exploration. What was discovered by the shaman has been
rediscovered by other individuals in other times and places. In all
probability, there has also been much dissemination, as Eliade has argued.
 Part Three: SOME IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS

Introduction to Part Three: Dissociation/Soul Loss/and Retrieval

         We now turn to a consideration of areas of practical and theoretical
application in the dialogue between Jung and shamanism. We have
discussed the structure of shamanism in Part One, and discussed the
fundamental notions of Jung’s analytical psychology and compared and
contrasted them with classic shamanism in Part Two. In Part Three we turn
to a consideration of some major areas of practical and clinical interest. The
areas of considerable convergence of interests between Jung and
shamanism are the areas of psychopathology concerned with dissociation,
imagination, and ritual control of chaotic and anomalous psychic
functioning. Additionally the importance of the sacred and the numinous as
therapeutic resources provides another area of convergent interest which
shall be discussed.
         Dissociation, as we discussed in Part Two (Chapter 4), is
foundational to understanding Jungian psychology, especially its view of
psychopathology and its therapeutic goal of integration (wholeness).
Dissociation is also a bridge concept, albeit of psychological origins, for
understanding the shamanic concept of soul loss, and the shamanic methods
to retrieve lost souls and extract and exorcise pathogenic
invasions/intrusions. In Part One and in Part Two we discussed classic
shamanic ideas as they have been practiced since Paleolithic times (at least
20,000 years). In the discussion that follows we aim to show a couple of
ways in which a shamanic soul loss and soul retrieval can be understood
today, in modern western urbanized society. We shall take as our examples
the· shamanic practices adapted by two modern psychotherapists, one a
psychiatrist specializing in dissociative disorders (Colin Ross), the other a
mental health counselor turned white shaman (Sandra Ingerman). Their
adaptations of shamanic understandings and practices of soul loss and soul
retrieval to modern mental health problems will be reviewed. This will be
followed by some Jungian perspectives in response to their work. Next, we
will turn to a special problem that emerges in dissociative disorders which
resembles classic pathogenic spirit possession. We will discuss the topic of
possession because it provides an example of one type of intractable and
potentially dangerous disorder which is often amenable to the shamanic and
Jungian understandings and treatment methods. It thus provides another
bridge area of focus for shamanic and Jungian resources. In the final
chapter, we shall discuss Jungian and shamanic views of the importance of
the sacred as a resource in healing, and in daily living. It is here that
shamanism and Jungian psychology present us with the importance of the
spiritual dimension of sickness and health, and of living in general.
 Chapter Six: Dissociation, Possession, and Soul Loss: Clinical
             and Theoretical Applications Today

      DISSOCIATIVE IDENTITY DISORDER (MULTIPLE
                    PERSONALITY)

        We will begin our discussion of the relations between dissociation
and soul loss by discussing a most serious form in which these notions
manifest today: as dissociative identity disorder (DID). Until recently this
disorder was referred to as multiple personality disorder (MPD), and we
shall use the terms interchangeably throughout our discussion. MPD was,
until very recently, thought by clinicians to be a rare phenomenon. Movies
like Sybil and the Three Faces of Eve popularized the disorder and made it
something of an exotic interest for the public. Many scientifically biased
mental health professionals from all disciplines (psychiatry, psychology,
social work, pastoral counseling) were skeptical or disbelieving that such a
phenomenon existed. Part of the reason for the resistance rested upon a
Platonic/Cartesian assumption of the unity of the soul, that there can only
be one personality or personality organization in a given body. To modern
scientific ears the idea of multiple personalities smacked of magical
thinking, of the supernatural, of the old spirit and demon possession beliefs.
But at the beginnings of psychological research in the late nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries there was considerable interest in dissociative
phenomena by researchers such as Pierre Janet, Alfred Benet, C.G. Jung,
Morton Prince, and many others. But with the rise of behaviorism with its
focus on observable behavior, and the increasing popularity of Freudian
psychoanalytic understandings with its emphasis upon repression rather
than dissociation, research into dissociative disorders fell by the wayside.
With this loss of interest in dissociative disorders went a bridge to
understanding one of the most common of current and past forms of serious
mental disorder. It was only in the 1970s with researchers like Ernst
Hilgard1 doing laboratory studies of hypnotic and dissociative states that
clinical and research interest in the subject was rekindled, and this at a time
when many clinicians were noticing that some victims of childhood sexual
abuse, combat, stress, and rape were demonstrating chaotic behavior and
symptoms of pathologic dissociation.
         There is substantial evidence that pathological dissociation has been
around for many millennia, although previously it was culturally shaped
and labeled as spirit possession, demon possession, and the like. It is still
understood as possession in many premodern and developing societies
where the scientific-technological view of modernity has not redefined it. It
is likely that until very recently patients going to modern psychotherapists
were misdiagnosed as suffering from a variety of disorders, depending on
which alternate personality (alter) was in control while being observed by
the therapist. If the presenting alter was depressed, a diagnosis of
depression was likely. If the presenting alter was angry, or fluctuating
between neediness and anger, perhaps a diagnosis of borderline personality.
If the patient heard voices from his or her other alters, he or she might have
been diagnosed as schizophrenic and placed on a phenothiazine medication
to reduce symptoms. In short, this disorder has been widely misdiagnosed
by well-meaning mental health professionals.
         In recent years the growing attention that childhood sexual abuse
has received in the media, and by clinicians, has made it possible for more
of the public who were sexually abused to come forward and tell therapists.
If more victims (survivors) of such abuse are coming forward, and if
pathologic dissociation is one possible effect of such abuse, then it is
reasonable to assume that this makes it more likely that the disorder will
come to the attention of more therapists and researchers. Additionally, as
therapists and the public become more knowledgeable of this disorder, this
too will bring more people into therapy, and better informed therapists are
now recognizing what previously they would have missed. Typically,
fifteen to twenty percent of my own patients suffer from a dissociative
disorder and the closely related post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD ), and
most cases are related to sexual abuse.
         Treating multiple personality disorder is a fairly complicated
process which requires considerable knowledge and patience on the part of
the psychotherapist. There are profound levels of distrust that have to be
overcome. The complexity of the patient’s internal psychological
organization (or seeming lack of one) can be overwhelming to the therapist.
Cases of MPD range from simple to complex, from two or three alters, to
more than a hundred. One important complication is that one (and
sometimes more) alter(s) may be quite hostile, even dangerous, to self and
others, including the therapist (although this danger appears to be remote in
most cases). There may be alters of whom the patient (i.e., the host
personality) is aware, and there may be others that are hidden from him or
her. There may even be those who are lost, or who have run away for
protection to an inner place that is difficult to find and access. It is the
shaman’s knowledge of inner and intrapsychic worlds and ritual knowledge
of how to retrieve lost souls (in our culture lost alters, dissociated memories
and libido, etc.) and exorcise intruding molesting spirits (hostile alters,
personified pockets of rage/outrage about the trauma) that make
contributions from shamanism most promising in this area of pathologic
dissociation. Jung’s understandings of dissociation and integration of
archetypes and autonomous complexes, and of the integrating power of the
archetypal Self, also have much to contribute in understanding this modern
form of soul loss and retrieval.


               WHAT IS MULTIPLE PERSONALITY?

         Multiple personality has recently been renamed by the Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV) as dissociative
identity disorder (DID). The purpose of changing the name was to classify
it as a dissociative disorder and thus remove the stigma associated with
what, to many in modern Western society, often seems a strange idea of
having more than one personality in one body. It is hoped that this change
in terminology will promote less resistance to diagnosing and researching
the disorder. However, we will continue to use the term multiple personality
disorder (MPD) throughout our discussion since it is still the more familiar
term, and since it still conveys the reality of the imaginative personification
of fragmented parts of the person. This personification is easier to correlate
with the shamanic view of lost vital souls, and the Jungian conception of
complexes and possession.
        MPD is sub-classified as a dissociative disorder. Some dissociation
is normal. Anytime we drive a car while listening to the radio add aren’t
conscious of the road or of the executive functions involved in driving the
car, we have dissociated. This can come as a startling realization when we
realize we’ve driven the last twenty miles without being aware of it.
Perhaps we have had the experience of reading a book and tuning out the
voice of someone calling out to us. Anytime we enter an altered state of
consciousness, have prayed, or been hypnotized, we have experienced some
degree of dissociation which contrasts with our so-called normal waking
state of consciousness. However, a dissociative disorder involves
pathological dissociation in which there is “a disruption of the usually
integrative functions of consciousness, memory, identity, or perception of
the environment”.2 Pathologic dissociation, while it may have been helpful
in surviving a trauma, becomes a hindrance to effective living later in life.
        There are several types of dissociative disorder, all related to the
effects of trauma and stress as described by the DSM-IV. These include the
following: 1) Dissociative amnesia is the inability to recall important
personal information, usually of a traumatic or stressful nature. 2)
Dissociative fugue is characterized by sudden automatic travel away from
home and the assumption of a new identity. When the subject switches back
to the original identity, there is typically total amnesia of the fugue state. 3)
Depersonalization disorder involves a persistent feeling of being detached
from one’s body or mental process, but is accompanied by intact reality
testing. 4) dissociative identity disorder (multiple personality) is
characterized by the existence of two or more distinct identities or
personality states that recurrently assume control of the individual’s
behavior. This is frequently accompanied by the inability to recall important
personal information which is too extensive to be explained by normal
forgetfulness, and it may sometimes entail a lack of reality testing making it
look similar to schizophrenia or other psychoses.


                     ORIGINS OF MULTIPLICITY
         MPD can be caused by a variety of traumatic and stressful situations
including childhood abuse, rape, loss of a parent in childhood, combat
stress, and so on. However, for the sake of simplicity and convenience we
will focus on childhood sexual abuse as our main example of how
pathological dissociation begins. We shall keep in mind that whatever the
cause, the processes are essentially the same.
         It is a sad fact that many children are abused by parents, relatives,
and other caretakers. It is not likely that this is a new fact, but it is probably
a reality that has been too unpleasant for many of us to want to believe and
honestly face as an epidemic problem. So horrendous are the facts of child
abuse that we prefer to think humans are more civilized and moral than they
may be in fact. Children can be, and probably for a long time have been,
physically abused, sexually abused, ritually abused, emotionally neglected
and abandoned. Unfortunately, when children undergo such extreme
treatment they are not constitutionally able to tolerate it. They do not have
the developed adult cognitive capacities to evaluate the situation, to
understand what is happening, to know what their options are. Often, they
can’t even know if what happens to them is normal or justified by some
misbehavior of their own. They may thus think that they have caused or
deserve the abuse, and that they are therefore ugly and bad. They often try
to figure out how to stop the abuse, but they simply can’t. They are too
small, too powerless. Abused children are terrified, deeply sad, very lonely,
and feel there is no one who can come to their aid and help them fight to
survive.
         Some children seem to survive the abuse without any serious degree
of dissociation. Usually these children have figured out some way to numb
out by placing a protective wall or defensive barrier around themselves.
Their ways of coping often develop into other serious problems that later
show up in promiscuity, fear of sex, addictions and eating disorders,
depression, low self-esteem, inability to trust, and post-traumatic stress
symptoms. Other children, perhaps because of genetic and/or
neurobiological giftedness in combination with severe stress and pain, are
able to develop highly elaborated ways to avoid the pain and misery of their
abuse. They find ways to numb out, ignore, or forget (become amnesic) that
involves the separating of dissociated or split-off parts of themselves, which
become more or less personified into alternate personalities (alters).
Dissociation becomes a very effective way for them to survive by enabling
them to escape the pain mentally. Probably using neurobiological and
psychological processes related to self-hypnotic trance states, they are able
to wall off pain and anxiety from themselves, and even believe that they are
not actually experiencing their abuse. They often believe or imagine that the
abuse is really happening to someone else (i.e., to some other alter). While
the body is being abused, a little girl may dissociatively float up to the
ceiling and watch the abuse taking place to the little girl or boy down
below.
         Not all persons who dissociate to survive the trauma of abuse do it
in the same way. One child may create alternate selves to handle various
responses to the offense, for the purpose of functioning in a protected way.
These alters often have symbolic-like names which indicate the aspects
(i.e., functions, roles, purposes, etc.) of the total personality which they
perform in dissociation from the totality (personality as a whole). One alter
may house the feelings and thought reactions of helplessness (the helpless
one), another may house feelings of magical-playful-creative innocence
(magical thinker), another may house promiscuous parts of the self (the
whore/male slut), and still another may house puritanical responses (the
prude). Often there will be a figure who is characterized by anger if not
intense rage (the angry one, or the evil one). Therapists working with
multiples can find this part to be quite troublesome, and sometimes
dangerous. Often it constitutes a potentially serious threat to treatment
progress, and in a few cases it may even claim to be a demon or evil spirit.
Most experienced clinicians believe it is more important to understand this
part as holding the rage feelings which it was not safe for the child to vent.
It is therefore believed that it is important to gain rapport with this alter,
reframe its intentions away from being an evil one to being a potentially
helpful one who has understandable feelings, and who can use those angry
energies for the benefit of the entire personality system. In this way the
reframing gives the angry alter a constructive and purposeful outlet.
However, this is not always easy to achieve and there are documented cases
of severe intractable self-destructive possession, one where a psychiatrist
(Ralph B. Allison) specializing in MPD turned to ritual exorcism as a last
resort.3 More will later be said about complications of this angry alter in
relation to so-called demonic possession and ritual exorcism. For the
moment we want to clarify its distinctive nature.
         We have said that not all children suffering dissociative disorders
learned to dissociate in the same way. One girl was abused by her brother
and father. She learned to leave mentally and invite another older girl who
was bigger and wasn’t afraid to take over and receive the abuse. The
therapist learned that this personality was called Angretta, and that her job
was to protect her host, whom we shall call Susan. With the passage of time
that part of Susan’s self called Angretta became characterized by increasing
hostility towards men, and fear of sexuality. When Angretta would rudely
act out her rage towards any man who seemed attracted to Susan, she had
another alter, named Regretta, who functioned to clean up the social mess
and placate the man. Needless to say, Susan confused numerous men with
this strange inconsistency in her identity, and often they would withdraw
their interest in her. Susan often wondered why she could not find a
heterosexual mate, why she drove men away, and had little insight into the
fact that she was sending inconsistent messages simultaneously to these
men.
         Frequently persons suffering from pathologic dissociation create
entire inner families, with each alter having a certain role and perspective, a
part or fragment of the self. Often these dissociating children learn to
dissociate so well that they create numerous selves, and they learn to take
off, go inside, leave, or hide when under threat or stress. Dissociation does
work in helping the individual channel the pain into pathways that help him
or her survive. However, once pathologic dissociation is no longer
necessary because the person has grown up and is no longer in danger of
abuse, it may remain and create serious problems for the individual, as it
did for Susan. Although the pain is numbed or dissociated from conscious
awareness, it doesn’t just go away, unless it is consciously recalled,
understood, and effectively worked through. Among the problems that
untreated MPD involves are such phenomena as waking up and not
knowing how you got where you are, having long unexplained periods of
blanked-out memory (amnesia), having chaotic and disorganized living, and
being unable to plan and consistently achieve goals. One of the most
disturbing effects of pathologic dissociation is the fact that dissociations
may become a reflex response (like the blink reflex when something comes
toward your eye). When the individual was a child and was threatened with
abusive behavior he or she automatically learned to go away or switch to
another alter who would take the abuse. Let’s say an older brother
repeatedly raped his sister. He wore a certain aftershave that her sensory
memory system recorded. The scent of that aftershave meant danger when
she was a little girl. Now the stimulus of that aftershave may have
generalized to any man who uses that or a similar aftershave. It may even
have generalized to all aftershaves. Thus in adult life, whenever the
individual smells the aftershave, she has flashback memories of abuse, or
feels imminent danger and dissociates to another alter. The aftershave thus
serves as a trigger that provokes flashback memories and dissociative
defenses. This behavior is often interpreted by her family, friends, and co-
workers as peculiar. People come to view her as strange and avoid her. In
this way, pathologic dissociation continues to damage her life. One of the
tasks of therapy is to help the individual learn to avoid this automatic reflex
switching.


   THE THERAPY OF DISSOCIATIVE DISORDERS TODAY

        If MPD represents a fragmentation of the self, then healing would
imply a reintegration of these fragments or splinter psyches. Reintegration
of the parts into one whole self has indeed been held out as the goal of
MPD therapy. However, this notion is not without difficulties. First of all,
integration to an individual who has experienced traumatic abuse and
violence tends to sound like more violence and abuse, even death to the
various alters. It is not surprising, then, that so many MPD patients resist
and even protest against the therapist’s proposal of integration or fusion as
the treatment goal. Certainly some form of integrative functioning should
be the desired goal of therapy, but it should be recognized that this is not
always possible and that talk of integration can slow therapy. In my
experience integration should be discussed as a goal and then laid aside so
that the work of recovering traumatic memories and working through
affects and cognitive distortions brought about by the abuse can get under
way. Typically a great deal of integration takes place as this preliminary
work is in progress. Usually at a later stage of therapy, the idea of some
kind of model of integration is not so threatening to the patient. There are
numerous models of the treatment stages replete with various strategies.
The model I employ is a three-stage model similar to the one Colin Ross
describes.4 It involves four treatment goals: 1) Recover abuse memories. 2)
Come to terms with them cognitively and affectively. 3) Integrate into one
person. 4) Learn how to function and live effectively without pathological
dissociation. The stages of treatment are divided into three phases: a) an
initial phase, b) a middle phase, and c) a post-integration phase. We will
discuss these phases briefly so that the reader has a context for the shamanic
and Jungian discussions of dissociation, possession, soul retrieval, and
ritual which follow.
         The initial phase consists of making the diagnosis and sharing it
with the patient. This often involves considerable education of the patient
about the nature of the disorder, its effects, and the self-destructive costs of
continuing to operate in a pathologically dissociative way. Treatment goals
of some sort of integrative functioning are discussed, and more specialized
treatment goals are set. The treatment contract is negotiated and the limits
and therapeutic frame are set. The therapist begins to explore the internal
world of the patient, meet and identify as many alters as possible, and
determine their positive and negative value in the personality system as a
whole. This allows the therapist to make an initial map of the patient’s
internal world and prepares the ground work for the therapeutic challenges,
recovering of memories, and the abreactions which follow in the middle
phase.
         In the middle phase the actual recovery of abuse memories, whether
by clinical hypnosis or direct exploration, takes place (MPD patients are
often in a trance-like state anyway, so formal hypnosis is often not needed).
This work may entail further discovery and recovery of other alters, even a
different layer of alters which only becomes accessible through one alter
who knows of their existence. There may be alters who have run away or
been stolen and taken to another psychic realm where they are not easily
accessible. The therapist may employ various hypnotic techniques to try to
draw these missing parts back. The therapist works on cognitive distortions
of various alters, reframes negative intentions, and may spend considerable
time working with distrustful or enraged alters, challenging their pathologic
cognitive errors, reframing their intentions and behaviors. As a result of all
this middle phase work the therapist’s mapping of the system changes and
improves. Late in this phase there is extensive negotiation aimed at some
sort of integrative or cooperative personality organization. For those
patients who refuse the idea of integration, the therapist may shift to a
democratic metaphor, where various alters can hold internal counsels when
considering situations and which actions to take. In other cases an
integration ritual in which each part dissolves its separate identity and
brings its unique values and perspectives into one integrated person is
possible. Sometimes the integration takes place easily because so much
integration work silently took place during the middle phase work.
         The postintegration phase focuses on non-dissociative coping
strategies, that is, on ways of dealing with fear and stress that do not
employ the pathologic dissociation processes with which they are so
familiar. Other defenses are taught which include sublimation and
repression, but the accent is on non-defensive strategies which involve
higher-level cognitive processes, self-assertiveness training, and turning to
others for help when needed. In this phase the therapist watches for signs of
reversion to dissociation. Often this happens during periods of stress; the
dissociations are only partial, and frequently resolve after the stress is
removed or effectively mastered. This phase is probably the least
demanding, but it can last several years as the patient draws continuing
support from the therapist, and may need to experience the mirroring,
idealizing, and guiding functions of the therapist as an integrated individual
before those processes are transmuted into self-functions.
         Now that we have given an overview of pathologic dissociation we
will turn to a discussion of some resources from shamanism and Jungian
psychology for the treatment of this most disrupting disorder of the soul.
We shall focus on two major problems that arise in the treatment of
pathologic dissociation for which shamanism and Jungian psychology can
be especially helpful: soul loss, and possession. We shall discuss soul loss
and its therapy of retrieval first. Then we shall turn to pathologic possession
and its traditional cure through ritual exorcism. These discussions will
finally be followed by Jungian and post-Jungian understandings and clinical
resources.
  SHAMANIC RESOURCES FOR TREATING PATHOLOGIC
  DISSOCIATION TODAY I: COLIN ROSS, M.D., AND THE
         HYPNOTHERAPEUTIC ADAPTATIONS

         One of the most perplexing problems that can arise for the modern
clinician treating dissociative disorders has to do with how to access,
retrieve, and integrate those parts of the self which seem to have
disappeared, been dissociatively hidden for protective purposes, or which
have been reportedly stolen by other intrapsychic forces (alters). One
psychiatrist and researcher, Colin Ross, has found that shamanic methods of
journey and retrieval can be useful adjuncts to psychotherapy with such
patients. Noting that the shaman utilizes trance and image work for
purposes of retrieval, and that the shaman can take journeys to locate wild
game for the hunt, Ross has adapted these shamanic methods as trance-
work strategies for alter location and retrieval.5
         Shamans and persons suffering dissociative disorders have much in
common. Both know how to dissociate and utilize trance states, and both
have exceptionally enhanced imaginative powers. Shamans have been the
great masters of psychological dissociation, and they have been able to use
it for therapeutic purposes as well as for the benefit of the larger
community. This is one of the reasons Ross believes that therapists treating
dissociative disorders like MPD should consider the similarities and
differences between shamanism and MPD, and should study the methods
and techniques with an eye to clinical application.
         Because there are actually numerous areas of similarity and
difference between the experiences of shamans and MPD patients, it may be
useful to briefly review some of the dissociative features of shamanism, and
compare and contrast them with MPD. Such phenomena as trance states,
meaningful hallucinations, Hypnotic amnesia, symbolic dreams, ritual
dismemberment, possession by spirits, possession by ancestral souls,
neurological exhaustion following trance work, use of intoxicants (or
hallucinogens) to stimulate dissociation, out-of-body experiences, and
transformation of identity are common to the shaman and the person
suffering MPD.
         The shaman intentionally evokes dissociative states for the purpose
of exploration of non-ordinary reality, for the purposes of making diagnosis
and contacting healing potentials, and for the purpose of healing his or her
patient. By contrast, the person suffering from MPD is more victimized by
the incongruity and autonomy of dissociated states. The shaman as well as
the MPD patient may see visions and hear voices; for the MPD patient these
may be chaotic, meaningless, not understood. By contrast, for the shaman
they are highly structured and meaningful. The shaman deliberately induces
altered (dissociative) states in order to converse with helping spirits, make
diagnosis, procure treatment. Both shaman and MPD patient employ a kind
of auto-hypnosis or self-generated trance state. For the MPD patient, the
self-hypnotic strategies operate largely non-consciously, outside the
executive control of the ego. They are more the response to stimuli which
activate them. By contrast, the shaman intentionally enters trance by ritual
methods, and for intended and limited purposes. The shaman can control
trance and dissociative depth, and does so for intentional purposes. Like
MPD patients, the shaman can be observed talking as if he or she were
another person, animal, or other spirit entity. However, the purpose is not
defensive but consciously undertaken for a specific (often therapeutic)
reason. Just as MPD patients report anesthesia for physical and mental pain
caused by abuse or self-infliction, the shaman also is able to control pain
through dissociation. They can perform fakir-like feats, swallow fire, walk
on hot coal beds, withstand extreme temperatures, and undergo painful
initiatory ordeals.
         Shamans have also been specialists in interpreting dreams for
pathological and teleological import. Dreams are often employed in a
visionary way to help locate a lost soul, foretell the future, find game, and
learn about and find their way around in the underworld. Dreams were
considered sources of information about the real world. Shamans have
intentionally navigated in their own dreams (lucid dreaming), and have
interpreted their patient’s own dreams diagnostically. Dreams of MPD
patients frequently are revelatory. What they reveal may be symbolic, but is
often not far from literal in revealing forgotten connections, abuse
memories, and even diagnostic/prognostic information about the next stage
of treatment. In my own work with MPD patients, I have observed dream
motifs of the patient living in a house or castle with many rooms sealed off
by thick walls. As therapy proceeds, and as recurrent dreams appear, the
room themes reappear with thinner walls, even glass walls, or doorways,
which suggests that defensive amnesiac and dissociative barriers are
wearing away, and that communication between dissociated states (rooms)
is either beginning, or is imminent.
         Shamans typically have experienced a psychic dismemberment in
their initiatory rituals, where the shaman’s soul is torn apart, the bones
cleaned, and the subtle body flesh put back on the bones. For the shaman
this has been a visionary death/rebirth experience. The MPD patient has
also undergone psychic dismemberment, but has not experienced rebirth
and re-integration. Whereas the shaman intentionally undergoes psychic
dismemberment, the MPD patient has fragmented and dissociated in order
to defend against pain, and, in our culture, typically to survive childhood
sexual abuse, rape, or other traumatic ordeals.
         Possession by ancestral souls is also common to MPD and
shamanism. Important ancestors, typically ancestral shamans, would speak
through the mouth or body of the shaman for such purposes as providing
the society with prophetic guidance or advice. In 20.6 percent of American
and Canadian MPD cases, alternate personalities claiming to be dead
relatives appear.6 This is a much more common phenomenon in societies
where ancestral spirit possession is broadly assumed in the assumptive
world of the culture (e.g., Japan, Taiwan, Korea, Haiti, Nigeria, India, Sri
Lanka).7 MPD patients also manifest entities who claim to be helpful, some
of whom claim to be spirits, angels, or other helpers from a spiritual
dimension. These figures are often quite helpful to the therapist in
providing valuable information and guidance in the psychotherapy of the
MPD patient. Shamans also claim to have spirit helpers and to be on
familiar terms with at least one, while being able to intentionally summon
others. The shaman evokes these spirit helpers to help him diagnose, restore
power, heal, and prognose. The egos of the MPD patients are often unaware
of their spirit helpers, and, before treatment, have not utilized them with
conscious intentionality to help themselves.
         MPD patients and shamans also report out-of-body experiences, and
sometimes use intoxicants to stimulate trance/dissociative states. Whereas
the shaman uses intoxicants in limited levels so as to maintain control of the
trance for therapeutic purposes, the MPD patient may use drugs in an
uncontrolled manner for the purposes of defending against psychic pain.
Shamans, by virtue of their journeys to the upper and lower worlds of non-
ordinary reality, can be said to have out-of-body experiences. Again, these
experiences are intentional, and have to do with healing, or other shamanic
functions. Shamans, as we already mentioned, sometimes send their spirit
helpers out to search for a lost soul or for game. By contrast, those MPD
patients who have had out-of-body experiences initially had them in
childhood to defend against the pain of abuse or other trauma. This use of
dissociation is not unlike burn patients who have reported letting their
minds float to the ceiling of their hospital rooms while undergoing the
excruciating pain of debriding.8 Ross has given the example of a little girl
who would float up to the ceiling and count dots in the plaster or travel to
another location to play with friends or dolls while abuse was taking place.9
For MPD, once this capacity has been developed and habituated, it can
become detached from abuse situations and be employed in a variety of
contexts.
         Shamans and MPD patients become exhausted from their trance
work, which involves switching the psychological and neuro-physiological
processes associated with flashback memories and activation of various
alters. The shaman switches intentionally, and by choice; the MPD patient
may not switch by conscious or intentional choice. When the shaman is
possessed by a helping spirit, there is clearly a change in voice, expression,
and behavior. When an MPD patient is possessed by an alternate
personality, such changes are also visible. However, it is likely that the
shaman understands the necessity of switching on ritual cue. The switching
between alters in untreated MPD patients apparently is not ritually
structured, and so can be chaotic, prolonged, and subject to the whims of
inner and outer conditions. Both shamans and MPD patients exhibit
neurophysiological exhaustion after ritual or psychotherapy in which
trance/dissociation switching has occurred.
         From this discussion of the similarities and differences between
shamanism and MPD in the employment of dissociative states, it would
appear that the mind has a natural capacity to dissociate. It would also
appear that both shamans and persons suffering MPD utilize this capacity in
different ways. It can be intentionally used to defend against pain and
trauma. It can come autonomously into play in cases of MPD, and it can be
intentionally and ritually controlled, as in shamanic journeys, soul retrieval
methods, and dialogue with spirits. These capacities can be either
pathologically generated, or generated for therapeutic, creative healing, or
spiritual and communal purposes.
         Colin Ross believes that since shamans are masters of intentional
use of trance states and imagination for therapeutic purposes, and because
there appears to be some neuropsychological linkage between abuse,
dissociation, and the visual imagination, clinically adapted shamanic
methods can be quite powerful and therapeutically effective. He argues that
MPD patients have very intense modes of visual-thought, are very
hypnotically suggestible, and some multiples are highly visually elaborated.
A frightened alter may run off to hide in a faraway park, or into a safe room
in an internal house, unavailable for treatment. Shamans have been masters
at locating such remote intrapsychic places and in retrieving vital souls (i.e.,
alters, or parts of self), and Ross believes this fact demands attention from
psychotherapists and clinical researchers interested in the treatment of
MPD.
         For the sake of those patients who will respond to shamanic-style
techniques, Ross has created a shamanic-ritual-symbolic ambience in his
consulting room: “My office contains a number of amulets, medicine
bundles, and shamanic power objects that testify to my authority and
healing power and reveal to the patients that therapy is a prolonged spiritual
ritual.”10 Ross indicates that this shamanic ambience is not so obvious as to
be offensive to other patients who might not understand or appreciate it. “I
have magically transformed these possessions into objects consistent with
the cultural expectations of my patients. Non-shamanic people who enter
my office see only degrees on the wall, filing cabinets, professional books,
and a computer. I, however, know that therapy is a mysterious ritual.”11
         Ross believes that the therapeutic rituals should be derived from
whatever mythology or thought system the patient and therapist find
congruent. Shamanic or more secular scientific methods may be used,
depending upon the patient, but Ross believes that all therapeutic languages
are metaphoric, and it is speaking to the client in terms of a relevant
metaphor that can bring about therapeutic change. For example, in order to
evoke some secular and modern image of executive control for the
personality, Ross might suggest that the patient imagine an inner
boardroom, replete with conference tables, a chair for each alter, and remote
control video equipment for reviewing memories and monitoring other
alters; he may even install an imaginal intercom device so that alters who
are too scared to come to meetings can listen in on their proceedings.
Intercoms are also useful for tuning out alters whom the therapist wants to
exclude from the proceedings. The purpose of such a boardroom is not only
to establish intrapsychic order, but to create an internal ordering device for
processing and integrating the discrepant perspectives and demands of a
number of alters. Such boardrooms can have chairpersons to moderate the
proceedings.
         Intrapsychic conferences can be used for gaining an internal
consensus before an action is taken. This method may protect the whole
person from a complex or part of self that might act out autonomously and
in a way destructive to the whole person. For example, one young woman I
worked with kept getting herself into sexual situations which she enjoyed at
the moment (that is, her promiscuous alter wanted to indulge sexually), but
later regretted and condemned herself for. I was unable to see her more than
twice as she was preparing to go off to college. However, there was a
danger that she would continue behaving self-destructively in college if
some remedy for her impulsive acting out behaviors was not in place. After
some mutual exploration we agreed to have her learn a self-hypnotic
method, whereby she would set up a conference room with enough chairs
for each alter. A moderator was chosen and a democratic process for
dealing with important matters was agreed upon. No sexual action could be
taken unless there was first an inner conference to decide the matter. Each
alter was given a vote at such conferences. If the internal majority thought it
was a good thing (i.e., not self-destructive or dangerous), then this woman
could engage in the sexual activity. When I received a follow-up visit from
her at the end of her first semester, she said she was using the method and it
worked for her rather well. In this way, internal meetings can establish
some ritual control over psychological processes and may regulate
otherwise self-destructive/impulsive behaviors.
        In addition to such secular metaphors as boardrooms and intercom
devices, Ross also adapts shamanic methods to the intrapsychic processes
of the patient. He may call out alters the way a shaman may sing a sacred
song to call a spirit back from the land of the dead; or may make shamanic
expeditions into a patient’s dream world. But in contrast to classic
shamanism where the shaman takes the journey on behalf of the patient,
Ross may also have the patient taking journeys on behalf of himself/herself
to locate and retrieve alters:

      When I make shamanic expeditions into a patient’s
      dreamworld, through guided imagery techniques, I can enter
      landscapes reported from spontaneous nocturnal dreams. There
      I may meet an alter for a specific task.... Alternatively I may
      stand at the edge of the dreamworld awaiting an alter’s return
      from a journey. This provides a sense of control, safety, and
      protection. Another variation is to place a magical marker on an
      alter as a tracking and retrieval device.

      For instance, a child personality may run away into a dark place
      and not know how to get back. If a marker has been placed on
      her beforehand, the therapist can give a hypnotic suggestion
      that because of the marker his voice is bringing the child back
      to the therapy room.12

        Ross believes this type of therapeutic intervention is the cultural
equivalent of circumpolar shamans, who send out their spirit guides across
the landscape to locate game. It is perhaps because of the
hypnotic/dissociative/imaginative virtuosity of MPD patients that the
therapist or shaman can be so effective. These kinds of methods are most
important in treating MPD because they teach the patients how to use their
own hypnotic/ dissociative/imagistic resources for recovery and improved
functioning.


  SHAMANIC RESOURCES FOR TREATING PATHOLOGIC
DISSOCIATION TODAY II: SANDRA INGERMAN’S CLASSIC
                SOUL RETRIEVAL

        Another example of shamanic applications to modern western
psychological and spiritual problems comes from a psychotherapeutically
trained white shaman: Sandra Ingerman. Ingerman, a student of
anthropologist/white shaman Michael Harner, has developed a fairly classic
shamanic approach to soul loss which is adapted to a certain segment of
western culture. She goes beyond the approach of Colin Ross who adapts
shamanic methods to hypnotherapeutic techniques for working with MPD.
Rather, she claims to practice the classic model of shamanism as described
primarily by Michael Harner, and secondarily by Mircea Eliade. She sees
dissociation as a form of soul loss at the root of many forms of physical and
mental sickness, not simply dissociative disorders and MPD. Her approach
distinguishes between the shamanic ritual and psychotherapy sessions. One
is not a substitute for the other. After a soul retrieval, Ingerman believes
psychotherapy helps with much of the work of integrating the recovered
memories, affects, and energies.
        Ingerman believes that the shamanic view of soul loss speaks to the
widespread experience of soul loss in modern western society. Her work
moves beyond mere application to dissociative disorders to a whole variety
of disorders which she claims have their underlying cause in soul loss.
However, she does interpret soul loss as dissociation. In keeping with a
classic shamanic view, Ingerman argues that whenever a person is
traumatized or shocked, soul loss is a possibility. This viewpoint has
considerable clinical ramifications.
        If we take a brief survey of the clinical syndromes demanding the
interest and attention of modern mental health practitioners today, we find
an array of disorders as defined by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders (DSM-IV), the diagnostic and nosological system of the
mental health profession. It is in terms of this publicly and professionally
legitimized manual that the codes and conceptions for labeling and
diagnosing mental pathology in western society are derived. Clinicians are
finding themselves having to specialize or gain expertise in the syndromes
or disorders classified in this manual. Among the most common DSM-IV
legitimized disorders being treated are mood disorders (e.g., major
depression, dysthymia), addictions and eating disorders, identity disorders,
adjustment disorders, and especially the trauma disorders related to combat
and sexual abuse. Some of these disorders are produced by the pressures of
modernity, of living in a radically secular world devoid of the sense of the
sacred and failing to give support to a psyche fragmenting under the
demands and restrictions of an industrial, technological, and increasingly
multicultural society. But it is also likely that a traditional shaman would
have much to say to these disorders of modernity, and would no doubt
reinterpret them in terms of shamanic categories. Among these categories,
soul loss and possession would be the ones most likely to be employed.
        In a classic shamanic view, these various disorders, which are often
viewed as discrete if not occasionally overlapping, are really the result
primarily of an underlying loss of power or vital energy described as soul
loss. The shaman today might look at eating disorders, posttraumatic stress,
depression, codependency, borderline and narcissistic personality disorders,
and identity and anxiety disorders as surface symptoms of an underlying
loss of power and vitality, that is, as soul loss.
        In her pathbreaking book Soul Retrieval: Mending The Fragmented
    13
Self Ingerman claims that she is both a trained psychotherapist and a
shaman, and is able to understand her therapeutic practice from both these
frameworks. Looking at the difficulties confronted by modern clinicians
within our culture, Ingerman argues that soul loss is widespread in our
culture, and that it is the rule rather than the exception. Many people do not
feel whole, they fill themselves up with addictions, co-dependent and
abusive relationships, chronic sickness, and workaholism. Many who do not
feel whole desperately seek relief in a variety of secular therapies and
treatments, or in spiritualities, often going from one therapist or guru to
another in the hope of finding what they are lacking. Sometimes the therapy
becomes stalemated because the therapist isn’t working with the whole
person. Some part of the soul has wandered off or is lost.
         In Ingerman’s classic view of these syndromes resulting from soul
loss, parts of our soul may have traveled off to other realms (non-ordinary
reality) as a result of shock or trauma. These parts constitute vital power
and energy, and perhaps memories and potentials, even whole aspects of
psychic functioning. Without these lost soul parts we do not feel whole. We
are enfeebled, weak, depressed, anxious, or empty. We feel as if something
is missing. Ingerman claims that soul loss, psychologically understood, is
dissociation, particularly of the soul or soul parts that have wandered off as
a result of trauma or shock which often, but not necessarily, arose in
childhood.
         Possessing a viewpoint closely approximating current psychological
understandings of pathologic dissociation, she believes that this dissociation
has a purpose: to protect the rest of the organism and help it to survive
trauma or loss. In this view, once the soul parts are lost, gone, or
dissociated, people may suffer a variety of physical, psychological, and
spiritual symptoms as an effect of the resulting loss of power. Such power
loss can keep people from leading healthy, fulfilling, and creative lives.
Ingerman’s view of soul parts corresponds to the traditional notion of
having more than one soul. However, there are apparently some differences
between her view and many traditional shamanic understandings of the
soul. In fact, historian of religions Ake Hultkrantz has designated what he
calls two soul complexes amongst tribal peoples (especially traditional
Native Americans). One soul complex is made up of the vital or body souls
which rule the body and mind. These are potencies which sustain
individuals when they are in lucid consciousness. These souls or soul parts
rule the heart movements, pulses, emotions, and the will power of the
waking individual. The other soul complex is the free soul or image soul; it
is active especially during sleep. This free soul can wander in sleep and
dreaming. It can also be stolen or lost as the result of trauma, shock, or
sorcery. According to Hultkrantz the free soul can detach itself from the
person and become the carrier of the ego.14 It is typically the free soul
which may be snatched away (stolen) by a deceased relative or other spirit
entity, or by a sorcerer. Sudden shocks and sudden injuries (traumas) may
dislodge the free soul and cause it to jump out of the body or go astray,
usually wandering off or being drawn to the land of the dead.15 By contrast,
for Ingerman, soul parts may wander off to anywhere in the three-storied
cosmology of non-ordinary reality; rarely is it the land of the dead to which
she finds they have gone.
        Hultkrantz’s descriptions of the two different soul complexes is
acknowledged by Ingerman. She is familiar with his twofold distinction.
However, she speaks of the soul as a whole whose soul parts, because of
shock or trauma, may wander off or be stolen, resulting in various forms of
mental and physical illness as a result of the decrease in vital potency. In
her understanding, it is the free soul which does the journeying to retrieve
the lost soul. If the patient accompanies the shaman, it is the patient’s free
soul which does so. Again, it is the shaman’s free soul that, along with the
power animal, goes in search and recovery of the lost soul part. What
Hultkrantz calls the vital souls are for Ingerman the soul parts that become
dissociated because of shock, trauma, and other injury. It is the vital soul
parts that await retrieval by the free soul, and subsequent integration and
understanding. Her notion of soul loss as loss of vital parts of the soul or
psyche is a very valuable and useful theoretical hybrid integration of the
two soul complexes. Her notion of these soul parts as vital energies does
have much in common with the several soul potencies of which Hultkrantz
speaks. Ultimately, her view presupposes a concept of the unmolested,
untraumatized soul as a wholeness which becomes fragmented, and the
fragments as dissociated soul parts. This understanding apparently slightly
modifies traditional shamanic understandings while making a bridge
between shamanic theory and practices and modern psychological theories
and practices. This is a helpful step for Ingerman to take in bridging classic
shamanism with modern psychotherapy.
        This understanding of soul loss can be useful in working with
trauma-related disorders which are showing up in the consulting room with
such frequency today. For example, in the dissociative identity disorders,
formerly called multiple personality (MPD) and posttraumatic stress
disorder (PTSD) it is useful to consider the pathologically dissociated part
as located somewhere within the psychic or psychoid realm (or collective
unconscious) where it can be therapeutically accessed, retrieved, and later
reintegrated with the ego-structure and personality as a whole. In
Ingerman’s view the location of the lost soul part can be any of the worlds
or planes of consciousness in the realms of non-ordinary reality. She
employs a fairly classic shamanic method of ecstatic journey to diagnose,
locate, and retrieve these lost soul parts for her patients. Ingerman describes
her construction of ritual space:

      The first thing I do is light a candle in a darkened room; this act
      is how I request the presence of the spirit in the room. Next I
      get ready a blanket on the floor for my client and me to lie on
      together. I get out my crystal soul catcher in case I need it. I
      have found that sometimes in my journey I have trouble holding
      onto the soul parts. A crystal can actually act as a comfortable
      waiting room for the soul parts as I continue my journey. My
      crystal soul catcher acts as a vacuum cleaner to sweep up the
      splintered parts....Next I ask my client to lie down on the
      blanket, I explain that when I am ready to begin my work, I will
      lie next to him or her, touching shoulder, hip, and ankle.
      Before I begin my journey, I kneel next to my client. I whistle
      to call the helping spirits to me so we are all working in
      partnership, then I begin to rattle and sing my power song, a
      song that came to me years ago.16

        Ingerman then goes on to describe a fairly classic entry into the
shamanic state of consciousness (SSC) accompanied by the sonic driving of
the drum. She says that she either has an assistant drumming for her, or she
turns to modern technology and plays a drumming cassette tape. While the
client remains passive, he or she may accompany Sandra in some level of
trance state. It is Ingerman’s task, however, to locate and retrieve the lost
soul parts: “My responsibility is tracking the soul parts and returning them
to my client”. Ingerman typically asks her power animal for help in locating
the lost soul part(s), related to the patient’s problem. In contrast to the
approach of Colin Ross, Ingerman’s shamanic retrieval methods are not
employed just for the purpose of retrieving lost alters in patients with MPD.
This might be one type of patient she sees, but she also seeks those lost soul
parts which lie behind a broad range of symptoms including, but not limited
to, abuse, addiction, grief, depression, or trust problems.
         In doing a soul retrieval, Ingerman does not know beforehand how
she will receive information about the lost soul parts. Sometimes she will
see an image of the trauma scene, replete with details; at other times she
will just see the image of a certain aged child in non-ordinary reality. There
are also times her power animal will give her the information: “Go, get the
four year old”.17 She believes she can always ask for more information if
she needs it. Typically she finds the lost soul part, often imaged as a child
(since that is when the traumas most devastating to later development take
place), returns with it, and sits up. She then blows it into the chest (heart
center) and fontanel at the crown of the patient’s head, just as traditional
shamans have done for thousands of years, because they believe these are
natural entry and exit points for the vital souls.
         This is a very emotionally powerful experience for the patient.
According to Ingerman her patients typically report a feeling of being
energized, awake, more alive than they can ever remember being.
Interestingly, many of her patients are in psychotherapy with other
therapists. They may have become stuck because they were lacking the
power to face something, or to move forward in their healing or
development. After a soul retrieval, they frequently have the energy and
vitality to courageously and creatively move forward once again. A
psychotherapy process that was stagnant or stalemated becomes re-
energized.
         It is important to note that Ingerman believes that shamanic soul
retrieval is not a substitute for psychotherapy. Soul retrieval itself is not
sufficient; there is much work to be done in psychotherapy after the
retrieval. The retrieval may bring back lost energies and memories, but it is
the task of follow-up therapy, in her view, to do the real work of integration
and of learning how to live as a more whole and integrated person. If there
are other lost soul parts, the dissociative result of other traumas (as in, but
not limited to, multiple personalities), they must await some time and
follow-up therapeutic work and integration before another retrieval is
attempted.
        Ingerman’s work is far more complex and rich than we can suggest
here. She describes new adaptations of shamanic methods as well as a host
of classic approaches to soul loss. As a novel approach she reports, for
example, an underworld expedition to the “Cave of the Lost Children”
where hundreds of “lost children, sad, hurt, and lonely” are quartered. More
classically, she describes the heroic effort and vast experience it takes to
retrieve soul parts from the land of the dead. In an area reminiscent of
classic sorcery and spirit possession, she discusses the importance of being
able to negotiate the release of stolen soul parts from adult individuals who
depended too much on various persons when they were children (such as
needy parents who were overly dependent on their children). After the
needy adult dies, according to Ingerman, their souls still are attached to the
persons they needed. This view has much in common with Jung’s complex-
possessed individual. It can be a vitality draining experience, which can be
corrected with such negotiative retrieval methods. Ingerman’s approach to
stolen souls takes the cultural equivalents of sorcery and spirit possession
and transforms them with a psychologically sensitive understanding of how
one modern individual may negatively effect the health and vitality of
another. This is not pure classic shamanism, but a very creative and useful
adaptation to the problems of modern western people.
        While we have explained that Ingerman’s shamanic soul retrieval
method is employable with a broad range of disorders, it is nevertheless
Ingerman’s understanding of soul loss as a type of dissociation which gives
her work a relevance to the trauma disorders so closely related to sexual
abuse today. She not only brings in another model of how the spirituality
and methods of shamanism may help in the healing of dissociatiye
disorders; she provides a conceptual bridge between the disorders of
traditional societies who have employed shamans, and modern forms of
psychological and spiritual distress.


         SOUL LOSS AND DISSOCIATION IN JUNGIAN
                     PERSPECTIVE
         In Chapter Four we discussed Jung’s views of complexes and their
contribution to pathologic dissociation. Here we will apply the discussion of
Jung, and of other Jungian analysts, to the contemporary western
understandings of soul loss and dissociation as discussed by Ross and
Ingerman above. From their work we can see that our modern psyches are
not really so different from those of our archaic ancestors and our non-
modernized neighbors around the world. The modern soul, Jung believed,
was not really so modern as we like to think. The primitive’s and modern
person’s psychology is rooted in the same two-million-year-old archetypally
structured psyche that owes its biological and psychical origins to a much
more ancient prehuman ancestry. Like the primitive, the modern person
develops serious psychopathology when the psyche’s age-old archetypal
intent is frustrated or thwarted.
         We can not deny that there is a frequent malaise in the modern
psyche which corresponds with what classic shamanism has considered a
symptom of soul loss. We will recall that Jung believed that the
phenomenon that traditional peoples called soul loss could be
psychologically understood in terms of 1) a diminution of personality, and
2) possession by a complex (i.e., pathologic dissociation). These two
notions are interdependent in Jungian psychology.
         We will recall that Ingerman claims that the wide variety of
symptoms seen by many psychotherapists today are actually symptoms of
soul loss. We will also recall Ingerman’s argument that soul loss means loss
of vital parts of ourselves, that is, loss of vitalities, of power. Loss of parts
of ourselves correlates well with Jung’s notions of complexes, of
autonomous complexes which split off from their integrity with the psyche
and function independently of that integrity. Loss of vital souls, vital
energies, correlates well with Jung’s notion of psychic libido. When Jung
speaks, in the language formulated by his teacher Pierre Janet, of soul loss
as a kind of “abaissement du niveau mental”, he means that there is a loss
or slackening in ego-consciousness. Ego-consciousness is receding from its
peak and becomes attenuated as psychical energy withdraws from the
executive functioning of the ego. This happens when an autonomous
complex splits off (dissociates) and attracts so much energy and psychical
content unto itself that it becomes “swollen” and powerful. When the
complex begins to act on its own, irrespective of the intentions of the ego
and its executive agendas and programs, and from the archetypal Self in its
quest to regulate and balance the psyche, the natural wholeness is shattered.
         Jungian analysts, when they talk about the ego, ordinarily mean the
“I” that we think of ourselves as being. The ego is our image of ourselves,
what we believe ourselves to be. We identify our name with it. Typically
when we say, “I think this way…” or “I feel that way about…”, our ego is
speaking. While Jung believed the ego also to be a complex because it
attracted and organized a variety of conscious and unconscious processes,
the ego can be analyzed into its capacities for rational intellect, its ability to
will actions, to have its own feelings and desires, and to remember the past
and project future actions (planning).
         Consciousness researcher Ernst Hilgard, who confirmed through
laboratory studies that we in fact “do more than one thing at a time all the
time”,18 has suggested that the assumed unity of consciousness is an
illusion; that consciousness is always multifaceted and complex. From a
Jungian perspective, the unity of consciousness can be an illusion of the ego
who wants to be master in its own house.
         Jungian psychology has understood from its inception the
multiplicity within the pregiven unity of the psyche. Often I am neither the
one thinking nor the one feeling, willing, deciding, or acting. On the
contrary, often some autonomous complex is operating and temporarily
possessing the ego. When a complex possesses the ego, it forces it to
operate out of its (i.e., the complex’s) perspective. In this way the ego’s own
perspectives and its own goals are bypassed. The ego tends to be pretty
much unaware of the other complexes and is easily fooled into thinking that
it is master in the house.
         We should be clear that a Jungian view of consciousness does not
limit it to the ego, where the peak of consciousness is attained. The ego is
often unaware of the other complexes in the personal unconscious and of
the archetypal core in the collective unconscious; but the unconscious does
itself possess various levels of consciousness. The other complexes are only
unconscious, we could say, from the ego’s perspective. They in fact have a
great degree of awareness and intentionality, and are conscious of each
other and of the ego and its perspective.
        The autonomous complexes often constellate in response to their
awareness of the ego’s perspective. This becomes most obvious in the
dissociative disorders, and is most dramatically illustrated in MPD. In a
Jungian view, the alternate personalities in MPD are actually highly
elaborated, personified, and often emotionally and energetically charged
complexes, or aspects of complexes. In MPD a complex may be personified
in several alters. When activated (switched on), these personified,
autonomous complex manifestations behave in ways that usurp the
intentions and wishes of the ego.
        We have already mentioned that the dissociative disorders found in
our society are the result of trauma, often of overwhelming abuse
experienced in childhood. During such trauma, bits of the psyche split off
and dissociate in order to perform certain psychic functions that enable the
psychophysical organism of the child to survive. In a Jungian view, all of us
experience some degree of traumatic childhood disappointments, parental
failures of empathy, or outright abuse. Such traumas thwart and frustrate the
archetypal intent, the two-million-year-old hardwiring of the human psyche.
A certain degree of dissociation is normal, even desirable. An excessive
degree of dissociation is pathologic and thwarts the wholeness and integrity
of the person. In less severe forms it has been considered to be at neurotic
levels. Extreme forms of pathologic dissociation are involved in psychosis
and dissociative disorders. While we do not all develop dissociative identity
disorders, it is important to understand that we all have complexes, some of
which may become more or less autonomous and disrupt the psyche’s
natural strivings towards wholeness and integrity. In multiple personality
there is a greater degree of pathologic dissociation than in so-called normal
people. However, most of us are not so far from the experience of
pathologic multiplicity as we would like to think.
        In a Jungian view, we all have complexes. It is the autonomous
complexes that cause serious problems, which Ross and Ingerman treat with
shamanic methods. They are usually the result of traumatic childhood
experience. Such traumatically induced autonomous complexes tend to
cause a more serious degree of psychic disintegration than normal, with the
split-off parts becoming markedly alienated from the programs, energies,
and intentions of the ego, therefore reducing its power and vitality (power
loss). Likewise, these sharply split-off parts can resist the integrative efforts
of the archetypal Self, the deep organizing center of the total psyche.
        The split-off parts, having robbed the ego of some of its vital
energies, are not forever lost. They become shadow aspects of the ego,
awaiting conscious acknowledgment and often awaiting reintegration.
Reintegration is possible, and their retrieval is the goal of both Jungian
psychoanalysis and of shamanic healing. Jungian analyst Robert L. Moore
has written of the disintegrative effects of trauma, of the value of the parts
which become dissociated (lost), and of their reintegrative possibilities:

      During early traumas, our emerging Egos split off and repress
      aspects of the psyche that parents, siblings, or society found
      unacceptable. These split-off aspects could be thoughts,
      feelings, images, or associations. Often they are valuable and
      worth recall. They may carry hidden talents, intuitions, abilities,
      or accurate feelings that would make our personalities wiser
      and more complete if we could reintegrate them. Until
      reintegration can occur, our psyches are like pieces of a broken
      mirror, which hold in fragments what was once a complete
      reflection.19

        It is important to note here that soul retrieval can be done by
methods other than shamanic ones. Hypnosis, witchcraft, psychoanalysis,
and other healing disciplines all have methods for integrating split-off or
lost parts of the self.20 The important thing is that there be a potential for
retrieval and integration as well as a technology for bringing it about.
Jungians have long followed Jung in trusting in the psyche’s self-healing
capacities, and believing that the healer only assists the natural process
along. In a Jungian view, the shaman, by virtue of his or her use of trance,
dissociation, imagery, and other methods and ritual skills, is not only able to
access and retrieve lost parts of the self, but is able to access and mobilize
the healing energies of the doctor within us all, that is, the archetypal Self.
        In accessing the split-off parts, the shaman, in a Jungian view, can
be understood as employing a trance device similar to active imagination
for accessing at will the personal and collective unconscious of his/her
patient (depending on where the split-off energies are located). A special
advantage of the shaman is the map he or she has acquired through
numerous ecstatic journeys. This map of the inner world serves as a
navigational guide, a way of conceptualizing the various places to which
these soul parts can wander or be held captive (e.g., by the numinosity of an
archetype).
        The potential for Jungian psychology to illuminate pathologic
dissociation and soul loss today is considerable. Like Ingerman’s view, Jung
does have a model of the psyche as an original and undifferentiated
wholeness. Jung adds a developmental perspective to this wholeness. At
birth there is an unconscious and undifferentiated wholeness, which then
must become differentiated through the unfolding development of the
individuation process, and finally move towards a more differentiated and
mature wholeness. The wholeness is always there as a potential, and it can
always be fragmented through trauma. Like classic shamanism, Jung does
have an understanding of the loss of vitality which arises as a result of
shock or trauma and which correlates with the loss of power characteristic
of soul loss. He does have a psychological model for those parts of the
psyche which split off and become autonomous as a result of trauma. Like
Ingerman, he held that dissociation is at the root of many modern problems.
Unlike shamanism, Jungian analysis and psychotherapy (and numerous
other psychotherapies) have many methods for facilitating reintegration of
retrieved, formerly dissociated parts of the psyche (active imagination,
dream analysis, sand tray and dance techniques, and analysis of the
transference).


         SOME PROBLEMS IN JUNG’S PERSPECTIVES

        In addition to the strength of the correspondence between Jungian
and shamanic views, there are some areas of weakness in Jung’s actual
views on what he called the primitive experience of soul loss. He tended to
think soul loss was mainly a problem for primitives, although modern men
and women experienced something similar. Jung believed, as we discussed
in Chapter 4, that soul loss was closely tied to the condition of primitive
consciousness, which lacks the firmness and coherence of the
consciousness of modern people. Jung erroneously believed that modern
individuals had more control of their will than primitive peoples, and that
they were better at resisting the whims of the unconscious because they had
more ego strength. Today, with the large volume of people showing up with
dissociative disorders, many of whom were abused by family members who
couldn’t resist the whims of their unconscious, it seems Jung greatly
overestimated the strength of the modern ego.
         Another problem with Jung’s thought concerns his belief that in
multiple personality the alters are really personified autonomous
complexes. While this may be the case occasionally, it does not square with
much of the vast clinical data available today. In my own clinical
experience, and in the experience of experts on dissociative disorders today,
the multiplicity of alters are often organized into clusters. Each alter,
depending on its degree of dissociation and elaboration, may have a distinct
identity. Often the identity of an alter is rather stereotyped, however,
because it is really only a part, a specific function within the whole self-
system. In complicated MPD there may be many alters, with several or
more alters being organized into layers or clusters. There may, for example,
be a cluster of alters who are related like brothers and sisters. They may
share feelings of powerlessness in the face of sexual approach, and they
may all feel hopeless and helpless around older men (and are dominated by
a father complex). Another cluster of alters within the same person may be
characterized as having more power, even being aggressive and angry
towards women (and is dominated by a mother complex). If relatively
accurate, this view suggests that the lines of archetypal influence are to be
drawn between clusters of alters, and that one or more alters may be
dominated by a complex, or more than one complex. All this would
suggest, contra Jung, that alters should not automatically be identified as
complexes personified. It is more likely that they are bits of psyche,
imaginatively elaborated parts of the total self from which they have been
split off.21 Since they are imaginatively elaborated, they fall under the same
archetypal structures and influences as does all imagery, and all parts may
still be conceived as potentials for reintegration under the questing
influence of the archetypal Self for wholeness. The shaman and the modern
psychotherapist treating pathologic dissociation enhance the natural
archetypally patterned questing of this deep psychic center for healing
(integration/wholeness).


      NOXIOUS ALTERS, POSSESSION, AND EXORCISM

         So far, the shamanic applications we have discussed have been
related to soul loss as dissociation in MPD and in a variety of mental
disorders and complaints. In discussing Collin Ross’ and Sandra Ingerman’s
applications to the problem of locating and retrieving lost soul parts and
alters, we argued that shamanic soul retrieval had something to offer. But
there is another form of dissociative problem related to MPD that is worthy
of some consideration. It is the problem of a noxious and unruly alter who
refuses therapeutic assistance, and who is bent on destroying its host and
perhaps other persons as well. What techniques might be helpful in treating
an alter that is dangerous and that refuses help? According to anthropologist
and neuroscientist Felicitas Goodman, ritual exorcism deserves more
scientific attention than it has been getting by researchers and clinicians
interested in complicated dissociative disorders. She, along with
psychiatrist Dr. Ralph B. Allison, believes that some intractable forms of
dissociative disorder might be better treated with this ritual which has
ancient roots in shamanism.22
         In many traditional societies, historically and cross-culturally, a
form of soul sickness is understood as spirit possession, the anthropological
equivalent of possession by a complex in Jung’s understanding. Most forms
of destructive spirit possession involve some type of pathologic dissociation
in which an alternate personality or part-self is culturally constructed in a
demonistic or spiritistic idiom. Sudhir Kakar describes a variety of cases of
spirit possession amongst young women in India.23 Typically these cases
resemble dual personality (multiple personality when there is more than one
spirit). Often the possessing spirit is unruly, and vigorously protests against
family norms and sacred values. Psychologically understood, Kakar sees
the motive for such dissociation as being a culturally sanctioned form of
pathology which allows the Indian woman to vent her pent-up hostilities
towards a patriarchal world that offers her little hope of fulfillment.24 Since,
in the assumptive world of the patient, it is believed to be a spirit or demon
who takes over her behavior, the woman is not considered responsible for it.
She can thus air her frustration and express pent-up hostility against her
social world without censure, embarrassment, or punishment.
         Indian temple healers and shamans typically diagnose and label this
form of dissociation as some type of ancestral spirit or demon possession,
and employ ritual exorcism to drive out the unruly spirit in the name of the
local deity of the local shrine, temple, and healer. This type of possession is
widespread and well documented cross-culturally. It is perhaps the main
form of psychological illness treated by traditional healers around the
globe.25 In a conceptualization similar to shamanic spirit
intrusion/extraction, a great spirit is counter-posed against a pathogenic,
invading spirit. Typically these exorcisms follow a classic pattern: 1) There
is an ecstatic diagnosis of spirit possession. 2) The healer calls out the spirit
and asks its intentions. 3) There follows a period of protest and struggle as
the exorcism in the name of the local deity begins. 4) And finally, at the
moment of neurophysiological exhaustion, the healer commands the spirit
to leave (casts it out), and it often does. 5) The patient feels exhausted,
relieved, and calm. 6) Sacrifices and thanksgivings are made to the
triumphant deity. 7) The healer may prescribe sacred amulets or charms to
keep evil spirits away, and may request the patient come back frequently to
have them recharged with numinous power (because spirits can always
return).
         We have a phenomenon similar to this type of spirit possession in
modern western societies. In cases of severe MPD, where there is a noxious
alter who acts like and believes itself to be an evil spirit, a demon, or the
devil, a dangerous and life-threatening situation may arise. These cases are
fairly rare, but they can quickly exhaust the healing resources of the best
psychiatrists and clergy. Typically these alters will call themselves evil, and
will blaspheme against everything sacred, beloved, and moral. Such spirits
may exhibit unusual strength, become violent, even homicidal and suicidal.
There may be paranormal-type phenomena, and inexplicable knowledge of
foreign languages the victim is not supposed to know. It has dramatic
effects upon the body and psyche of its victim/host, and often states its
intention is to remain until it kills its host. Often there are epileptic-like
seizures after which there is less of the host’s identity remaining (and more
of the demon/intruder’s presence) after each seizure.
        When they arise in a modern context, these rare but problematic
cases of possession quickly exhaust the resources of the best scientifically
trained and seasoned psychotherapists, and sometimes the patient dies.
They are more severe than the average possession cases found in traditional
societies where the invading spirits are often of lesser power and status.
Those spirits are fairly easily subdued with standard exorcistic rites. But in
the cases of classic demonic possession, where the invading entity has great
power and seeks to destroy its host, special and lengthy exorcistic rites are
the only known therapeutic in the world that has been shown to be effective.
However, even ritual exorcism is not always able to stop the horrendous
destruction, especially if the disorder is in advanced stages.
        Examples of this life-threatening type of demonic possession can be
found in a variety of sources. The most readily popular example is to be
found in William Peter Blatty’s novel, The Exorcist. While parts of Blatty’ s
book are fictional, the phenomenology of classic demonic possession and
ritual exorcism are given there. This book was based on an actual
documented case of possession and exorcism of a young boy by some
Jesuits in St. Louis.26 A more scientific discussion of this phenomenon is
found in Felicitas Goodman’s book How About Demons?27 There she seeks
to identify the various types of creative and destructive possession states as
they are found across cultures.
        Goodman argues that many forms of possession are of a religious
nature, and are ecstatic and positive. An example of a positive type of
possession would be the possession by the Holy Spirit amongst charismatic
Christians, or of the shaman by his helping spirits. An example of the
negative type would be possession by an angry ancestral spirit, a Christian
demon, an Islamic jinn, or malevolent ghost. In the positive type of
possession the good spirit is ritually invoked on cue (i.e., switched on),
experienced, and then ritually dismissed on cue (i.e., switched off). The
religious ritual itself acts as an elaborate mechanism of regulation and
control whereby sacred and profane modes of consciousness are switched
on and off. The negative type of possession, by contrast, often lacks ritual
regulation and control. It is a condition which often spontaneously emerges,
or if intentionally triggered (as in cases of possession which emerged as a
result of occult activities), is not regulated and terminated at will. Lack of
ritual control of altered states of consciousness is characteristic of the
autonomous activities of noxious alters and malignant possessing entities.
         Both types of possession, Goodman argues, must have a
neurophysiological basis, and probably involve the development of good
and bad neurocognitive brain maps. In trying to distinguish demonic
possession from the typical angry alters in standard MPD, she turns to
psychiatrist Ralph B. Allison, a specialist in treating MPD.
         Goodman draws attention to Dr. Allison’s observations that what
distinguishes cases of an evil alter from the typical cases of MPD with
various angry, noxious alters (but not the evil or demonic alters who claim
they are a demon, a ghost, or the devil himself) is that such evil entities act
autonomously. Often their birth (origination) can not be pinpointed, they
have or serve no specific purpose for the personality, and they frequently
refer to themselves as spirits. In the several cases of this sort which Allison
treated, not all of the alters could be considered absolutely evil. In
distinction from those which are just bothersome, the case of Carrie,
Allison’s patient, stands in bold contrast. In her case,

      a truly furious possession took place suddenly and without
      warning, exhibiting some of the traits of demonic
      possession...the alter screamed obscenities, had superhuman
      strength, and was viciously aggressive. Before Allison could
      help, Carrie committed suicide. People suffering from demonic
      possession often report that the demon wants to kill them by
      forcing them into a suicidal act. In this instance, it happened.28

        Allison thought that if these alters pretended to be spirits, or actually
were, then it might not hurt to try ritual exorcism. Allison began inquiring
into the nature of demonic possession and ritual exorcism. He enlisted the
help of an exorcist to treat an injured man who suffered convulsive
neurological seizures after an accident. Neurophysiological tests did not
find enough evidence to explain the seizures in purely biological terms.
Allison placed the patient under hypnosis and a voice came out that
identified itself as the devil. It claimed to have entered the man years before
in Japan when he had rescued a Japanese occupant from a burning house.
An explosion had apparently blown him out of the house. Allison says that
he contracted the services of a priest to help him with the case. The priest
was able to access the devil by simply reciting his ritual formulas. The
priest told Allison that he did not really believe the spirit was the devil, as
known by Christian theology, but he felt the spirit was so stupid that he
actually thought he was the devil.29 According to Allison the priest carried
out the exorcism with remarkable success. Allison who reported that he
continued contact with the patient said the symptoms of the devil’s voice
and the seizures did not recur.
         According to Goodman, for cases such as this, the undoing of such a
negative and intractable pattern is extremely difficult. This is especially the
case if the alter is evil, or, in religious terms, is demonic. Goodman argues
that Western-style biomedical psychiatric treatment of multiple personality
per se is ineffective, and is completely incapable of dealing with evil alters
or demonic molesting entities.30 To her knowledge there are not many
psychiatrists treating multiple personality who would be willing to employ
exorcism, like Allison, to gain ritual control over the molesting entities.
Goodman claims that ritual exorcism should work regardless of whether the
unruly alters claimed themselves spirits or not. She does not speculate on
whether or not there actually are intelligent spiritual entities that exist, that
have ontological status independent of the psyche. She does believe it is
beyond the scope of science to confirm or deny such possibilities. However,
Goodman does believe that, regardless of the status or source of the
molesting entities, the empirical phenomenon of the more serious and life-
threatening types of possession is quite real and quite refractory to
treatment with modern Western psychotherapeutic methods. Ritual
exorcism has been the only effective method for dealing with this more
powerful form of destructive possession, even if it is not always effective.31


     POSSESSION AND RITUAL EXORCISM IN JUNGIAN
                    PERSPECTIVE
         There are two questions we shall briefly explore here. The first
question has to do with a possible Jungian explanation for demonic
possession, or so-called evil alters. The second question seeks to understand
how ritual exorcism can be more effective than standard biomedical and
psychological models of treatment.
         In response to the first question we can say that a Jungian
perspective would tend to conjecture that possession by a so-called evil
spirit is really a form of possession by an autonomous complex, or by an
alter that is highly elaborated and whose anger and outrage is so intense that
it has turned inward against the self-system. In typical cases of MPD, an
angry alter often attacks the host, or other alters within the host. Such an
alter often feels these other inner people were weak and permitted the
abuse, and therefore deserved it. We must keep in mind that such a
cognitively distorted view typically develops in a child who lacks the
maturity and cognitive capacity to adequately assess her/his situation, know
what the options are, and take appropriate action. Such an abused child will
not have the option of expressing the outrage because it is dangerous to do
so, and likewise may not be permitted to ask for help from other adults.
Thus the energies of the outrage must be held within. So intense are these
energies that a specific alter is often created to contain them. The
psychological function of a mean or angry alter, in the libidinal economy of
the MPD system, is to handle and deal with this massive rage. But even this
function may overwhelm the angry alter, and others have to be created to
help with the load. Sometimes the angry alter and/or its associates simply
can’t contain the anger well; the affective charge is too strong. It may then
get retroflexively turned upon the self and its other part-selves (alters). In
my own clinical practice I have known angry alters to attack, mame, and
ridicule other alters. This may be viewed as an exaggerated version of the
kind of self-critical monologue depressed persons use habitually to erode
their self-esteem.
         If the person possessing large amounts of dissociated anger and
outrage should grow up in a culture (or subculture) which has a
supernatural belief system that explains pathologic dissociation in terms of
ancestral spirit or demon possession, the stage is set for the cultural shaping
of this dissociated pocket of rage into a malevolent spirit, a demon, or the
devil himself. Regardless of its traumatic cause, whether it began with
abuse, taboo violation, toying with the occult, or what have you, once this
enormous psychic energy is shaped into an evil supernatural being, its
malevolent force becomes dangerous and life-threatening. It takes sides and
identifies with the archetypal shadow aspects of the culture’s respective
alternate reality, and begins to blaspheme everything sacred. Because of this
identification with archetypal evil, there is also an inflation that develops in
such a way that the patient’s ego is simply taken over by the evil intruder.
Being identified with evil, the individual can no longer appeal to the sacred
for help. It thus is dissociated from the healing and integrating energies of
the archetypal Self. Becoming a powerful autonomous complex or alter, it
continues to grow within the patient (host), attracting with the power of
great affective numinosity all the contents it can unto itself. In a Jungian
view, it is as if the complex or alter has become malignant, a psychic cancer
which devours the psychological identity and often the body of the victim
until there is nothing left but the intruder, and the patient then dies (due to
neurological exhaustion and bio-systemic failures).
         So strong can this evil influence become, and so intelligent, that it
becomes dangerously fascinating, and seductive to others. This is why the
exorcist is sometimes overcome by the demon; its evil and cunning are
fascinating, and its sheer display of libido is numinous and can act like
corrosive acid upon the ego-structure of the healer. Some of the libido of
the complex/alter must be released in order to switch it off. Other libidinal
elements must be subdued by the ego, by the development of an ego-
archetype axis, and the psychic contents of the complex must be
subordinated to the ordering/integrating energies of the archetypal Self. But
since it is operating in hostility and defiance, and with intelligence, it
automatically defeats any attempts at a talking cure. It is libido run amok.
This powerful nuclear level of energy is truly chaotic and wild and will only
submit to a ritual adequate to its intensity. In many traditional societies, the
greater the demon or the sickness, the greater and more powerful the ritual
and preparations for the ritual, to combat the evil spirit.32 In Catholic
exorcistic ritual, the positive energies of God the Father, God the Son, God
the Holy Spirit, and all the saints and all the prophets and the angels are
called upon to command and cast out the invading spirit in the name of
Christ. These formulae can be repeated ad infinitum, the length of the rite
corresponding to the power of the demon, for days, weeks, months, or even
years.
         Jung believed, as we discussed in Chapter 4, that it was the job of
ritual to impose a restrictive form upon chaotic instinctual libidinal energies
running amok. He believed that exorcistic ritual, in particular, was able to
reinstate the integrity of the ego and strengthen it by reinstating the
repression barrier and driving much of the unruly libido back into the
unconscious.33 The task of the healer, whether psychotherapist or shaman,
is to switch off the autonomous activity of the evil entity complex by
exhausting it and draining it of its affective charge. Then a subordination of
that part to the greater totality under the rule of the archetypal Self must
take place. In many traditional cultures this is done by the healer invoking
the local deity (carrier of the projection of the archetypal Self) as the
healing power that drives out the invading spirit and reinstates order. The
patient is then required to pay homage and continue to worship the deity in
some way, which may include becoming its devotee, or wearing sacred
amulets representing its healing energies (like the Catholic crucifix to
protect against evil influence).
         The shaman, understood from a psychological perspective, has been
the ritual master of imposing restrictive form upon chaotic instinctual and
archetypal energies. Exorcism, which has roots in shamanism, is the most
dramatic expression of this ritual mastery. How ritual can have the power to
accomplish this task is the subject of the next chapter.
Chapter Seven: The Power of Ritual, Image, and Archetype to
    Bring About Profound Psychological and Spiritual
                     Transformation

         In this chapter we are going to consider some of the components of
transformative ritual in an effort to better understand how ritual can be so
effective in bringing about profound change. In traditional societies the
shamans have been the ritual masters par excellence. Whenever there were
important life crises or transitions, the shaman was often called upon to
provide the proper ritual and the appropriate ritual leadership. In male rites
of passage, such as the puberty rituals, for example, young boys were
transformed into men through the ritual wisdom of the shamans and with
the help of the tribal elders. Puberty rites have long been effective in
transforming young boys and girls into mature men and women. Puberty
rites are able to switch off the puer archetype, the young boy psychology
with its irresponsibility and dependency upon the mother, and able to switch
on what Robert L. Moore calls the archetypes of the mature masculine, the
archetypes of king, warrior, magician, and lover.1
         In females, the archetypal corollary of the puer is the puella, the girl
psychology—also indicating dependency upon the maternal figure(s). We
shall not go into the puberty rites of females in the following discussion for
a number of reasons. There are numerous discussions of female puberty
rites in the anthropological literature, and these discussions often suggest
that these rituals are less intense and lengthy than male puberty rites.
Proposed reasons for these differences are often said to have to do with the
fact that a woman’s initiation into adulthood is easier since menstruation
and other bodily changes make her change of status more evident. Thus,
less lengthy and less dramatic ritual efforts are required to bring about the
needed transformation, or so the argument goes. This may simply be
patriarchal rhetoric. It seems likely that females require the switching off of
immature archetypal patterns and the turning on of mature ones just as
males do. It also seems obvious that females have archetypes of the mature
feminine correlating to the archetypes of the mature masculine.2 However,
because we intend to illustrate the transformative power of ritual, rather
than give a full dissertation on puberty rites, because of the need to limit the
length of our discussion, and because our subsequent discussion of the
relation of ritual action to archetypes and their locus in the brain
necessitates a discussion of Robert Moore’s and Douglas Gillette’s work on
ritual transformation and the archetypes of the mature masculine, we shall
limit our discussion of puberty rituals to the male form. We will thus
proceed to discuss the prowess of male initiation and puberty rites as a
demonstration of the transformative power of ritual in bringing about
dramatic change and psychic transformation in ordinary living and passage
through the life cycle. After discussing male puberty rites we will turn to an
examination of the imagination in its power to cause and cure sickness and
then to a discussion of the role of ritual in intensifying the vividness and
impact of therapeutic imagery upon body, brain, and psyche. These
multidisciplinary discussions will cut across psychological, anthropological,
and neurobiological domains.


          MASCULINE PUBERTY RITES AND RITUAL
                  TRANSFORMATION

        In tribal societies, when the young boys arrive at puberty they begin
undergoing massive physical and mental changes. There is rapid growth of
the central nervous system, increase in the size of muscles and bone, an
increase in cognitive capacity, and an increase in general physical and
mental power. All this growth means increased aggressive and sexual
instinctual demands and desires, and this new power is a potential threat to
the security and order of the tribe if it does not become adequately
disciplined, channeled, and transformed into the mature masculine. In
psychoanalytic terms, it is the job of puberty rites to install a super-ego, an
internal moral authority based upon the authority and will of the ancestors
or deities of the tribe.
        To accomplish this task, young boys at puberty are snatched away
from their mothers, for whom, as boys, they are now dead. Later they are
returned to the tribe and their mothers as men, with new names designating
their new status as full adult male members of the tribe, but only after the
ritual transformation has taken place. From their secure dependency upon
their mothers they are taken into the bush, or some remote place, for a
considerable period of time (often up to several months). They are forced
by the ritual elders to undergo an ordeal, a type of ritual torture in which
they may be tied to red-ant hills, have teeth knocked out, have their faces
permanently scarified, be circumcised, and so on. These markings not only
will serve as permanent symbols of their changed condition; they recall
them to humility in the face of what the tribe considers sacred and moral.
Without submission to the social values of the tribe or community, the kind
of social cooperation necessary for the survival of the people would be
undercut. Hence, the humility necessary for mature masculine participation
in tribal life is inculcated in a dramatic and forceful way.
         According to anthropologist Victor Turner, these initiation rituals
largely take place in a liminal space, what Robert L. Moore calls a “sacred
transformative space”.3 It lies betwixt and between the normal space/time
of tribal life. It is a time of heightened intensity in which familiar roles (of
childhood) are put away, and in which one is stripped of one’s previous
profane status and identifying personae. Gods and goddesses of destruction
are adored, reflecting the role of this ritual to deconstruct the former ego-
identifications so that mature masculine archetypal energies can be
switched on.
         The candidates for adulthood are taught the sacred stories and lore
of the tribe; what we call myth, religious ritual, and ethical action are
amongst the most important educational agendas of the rite. Ritual
performances may include the elders acting out elaborate dramas and
dances in which they in effect say to the initiates, “This is what your
ancestors did, and so shall you!” This is the cultural equivalent of being told
the biblical story of Yahweh giving the Ten Commandments to Moses on
Sinai. Taboos with respect to violence and other forms of aggression and
sexuality are given.
         Through dramatic enactment of sacred stories of the great ancestral
warriors and hunters, the young men are also taught to be courageous
warriors and hunters (activation of the archetypal warrior/hunter), learning
how to protect the tribe, serve the higher purpose of the tribe, and serve the
chief or king, and ultimately the will of the sacred gods and founding
ancestors as embodied in stories of the tribe. In these ways, the dramatic,
prolonged, and carefully structured ritual forces switch off the archetypes
which control what had been phase-appropriate dependency and
immaturity; and activate or switch on the now phase-appropriate archetypes
of the mature masculine, which serve the life of the community.
        Transformative ritual is necessary when there is a strong degree of
chaos or destructive power around. Puberty rites are necessary because the
young boys would not automatically decide to submit or sublimate their
aggressive and sexual instinctual energies; this is a work of culture (i.e., of
learning or conditioning) which ritual performs. According to Anthony
Stevens, any rite of passage helps the individual to make the psychosocial
transformations called for by the next step in the life cycle. The coercive
power of ritual is necessary because of a natural resistance to such change.
Stevens cites Whitmont’s law of psychic inertia, and compares it to
Newton’s law of inertia in physics. Newton’s law of inertia, it will be
recalled, holds that a body in motion or rest tends to remain in motion or
rest unless an outside force propels it to change. According to Jungian
analyst E. C. Whitmont, the psyche, being a part of nature, operates on a
psychic law of inertia. Psychic inertia is a tendency towards habit and
obsessive clinging: “Every pattern of adaptation, outer and inner, is
maintained in essentially the same unaltered form and anxiously defended
against change until an equally strong or stronger impulse is able to
displace it”.4 In itself this is not pathological, but is normal because it
serves the needs for constancy, security, familiarity, and permanence that
help to insure our survival as individuals and as a species. However, when it
is time to make a phase-appropriate developmental change or transition, the
psychic law of inertia may thwart the individuative needs. This happens, in
a Jungian view, because of the power of complexes to seize, possess, and
hold the ego in their grip. In puberty rites, the ritual seeks to pry the
candidates ego-structure away from identifications with the real mother
demanded by the internal mother complex. As the program of the initiation
archetype proceeds under adequate leadership, the numinous energy of the
mother archetype at the core of the mother complex is turned off, thus
reducing the ego’s investment with the external mother (i.e., the real
mother), and thus freeing the initiant to activate and assume other
archetypal programs. We shall turn, now, to a discussion of the relation of
image and ritual as efficaciously employed in shamanic ritual and related
therapeutics from neurobiological and Jungian psychological perspectives.


                      RITUAL AND THE BRAIN

         It is important to consider images and the imagination in relation to
ritual because images play such an important role in healing from Jungian
and shamanic perspectives. Religious and therapeutic ritual intensifies
images, making them more distinct and powerful, and thus making it easier
to see the spirits, or to image the disease. In ritual trance states, images are
seen for the purposes of diagnosis and treatment. Diagnosis and treatment is
often conceived of in terms of images. The shaman sees a pathogenic or
intruding spirit, and offers therapy with the counterposing creative spirit,
which he or she also sees in non-ordinary reality. Images are also important
in diagnosing and healing today. The image of the pill, whether it be a
placebo or effective medicinal agent, in effect, acts as an image upon the
psyche and the autoimmune system in mobilizing the body’s healing
energies.5 Like the shaman showing the extracted disease-causing object to
the patient, the dentist showing the patient his or her extracted and diseased
tooth (or the surgeon showing a patient the extracted tonsils) has some
impact upon the belief that proper action has taken place and that healing
will follow. Since belief is known to enhance therapeutic effect, the role of
these images should not be underestimated.
         According to psychophysiologist Jean Achterberg, images interact
with bodily tissues: “The imagination acts upon one’s own physical being.
Images communicate with tissues and organs, even cells, to effect a
change.”6 They affect the functioning of the central nervous system which,
in turn, affects the functioning of every aspect of bodily life. Echoing the
work of oncologist Dr. Carl O. Simonton and cancer therapist Stephanie
Matthews-Simonton, we can say that images are able to access pathways to
health or sickness. Research done by the Simontons has shown that massive
stress from which the individual believes there is no exit or forthcoming
relief sets the preconditions for many kinds of sickness, especially cancer.
The psychological component of this massive stress entails images of doom
which are accompanied by strong affectively toned cognitions of
hopelessness, helplessness, and futility.
        The Simontons have provided some preliminary mappings of the
neural pathways involved in sickness and healing. The impact of massive
stress-related negative images, according to the Simontons, is to influence
the regulatory neurophysiology of the autoimmune system. The limbic
system, known as the visceral brain, is affected, for example, by depression.
Since it plays an important role in the regulation of all activities important
to the organism’s preservation (e.g., fight/flight mechanism), and since it
registers the effects of depression/stress, this registration is believed to
upset the homeostatic regulatory mechanisms of the autoimmune system.
The hypothalamus is an important limbic structure concerned with the
mediation of such important functions as temperature control, water
metabolism, control of blood pressure, hunger, maintenance of balance
between sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions, and hormonal
secretions, and it plays a role in emotional reactions. Because of its effects
upon the pituitary gland, a very stressed or depressed individual can cause
themselves to produce hormonal imbalances which result in abnormal cell
growth, a precondition for cancer, and which can lead to irregular cells
becoming malignant. At just the time there is an increase in irregular cells,
there is a decrease in the autoimmune system’s ability to destroy those
irregular cells; hence, the conditions for a serious sickness are set. This is
the bad news. Massive stress, plus the belief (entailing negative images)
that there is no escape, can lead to depression and limbic system changes
which produce sickness.
        The good news is, according to the Simontons, that the same
pathways that create illness can also be used to heal it, or reduce its effects.
A reversal or remission of the sickness-causing processes can often be
effected by reversing the cognitive component (images) which developed as
a response to massive stress. This in turn utilizes the same pathways that
lead to illness. If the patient will turn negative images and beliefs into
positive ones, sickness can be stopped, slowed, and often healed. The
positive images have the same pathways to the limbic system. There they
can re-regulate the pituitary (slowing irregular cell growth), while
simultaneously affecting the autoimmune system (thus promoting
destruction of irregular cells). The Simontons have taught numerous cancer
patients to image their disease, and to image a greater healing force
destroying the disease. The patients are instructed to do this several times a
day, and to believe in the efficacy of this method. Many of the Simontons’
patients who employed this method actually recovered from cancer or sent
it into remission. The Simontons have published their impressive results in
their book, Getting Well Again.7 Their methods have great affinity with
shamanic methods in employing a greater counterposing image (or spirit) to
attack or remove a pathological one. According to Michael Harner, the
Simontons’ method could be enhanced by employing a classic shamanic
method along with having the patients visualize their illness and its cure.
The shaman would, on the patient’s behalf, shamanize and image the
removal or destruction of the disease. Having the support of another caring
human being work alongside the patient could enhance the therapeutic
benefit.8 In essence, what the shamanic and Simonton visualization
methods do is access and mobilize the natural “doctor within,” which is
why, according to Dr. Albert Schweitzer, all healers are effective when they
are effective.9 Image is truly slayer or healer.


RITUAL TRANSFORMATION OF THE WORLD IMAGE (THE
               COGNITIVE MAP)

        We have thus far argued that the shaman is the ritual master, par
excellence, who through trance and ritual enhances the power of the
imagination for diagnosis and healing. We have noted the highly
imaginative activity of persons suffering from soul loss and dissociative
disorders, and have noted some of the ways images can be causative or
curative of psychological, spiritual, and bodily sickness. There is another
type of image that should, be noted when considering the impact of
shamanic therapeutics and psychotherapy upon the sufferer: the World
Image. The World Image is capitalized for emphasis because it is a special
type of image. It is a very complex cognitive map of reality having
numerous facets, including collective elements such as cultural assumptions
and cosmological beliefs, plus the individual’s idiosyncratic non-conscious
assumptions and conscious beliefs based upon his or her experiences in
development and living.
         The World Image or Map may also be considered a heuristic device
for living. It is a very complex psychical construction. Being partly
conscious, and partly unconscious, it is made up of many smaller images,
beliefs, rules, likes, habits, and dislikes, and is based in neurological and
cultural constraints. Paul Watzlawick, who coined the term, offers a
definition of the World Image and attempts to clarify the complexity of this
image.

      We must think of a world image ... as the most comprehensive,
      most complex synthesis of the myriads of experiences,
      convictions, and influences, of their interpretations, of the
      resulting ascription of value and meaning to the objects of
      perception which an individual can muster....lt is not the world,
      but a mosaic of single images which may be interpreted in one
      way today and differently tomorrow; a pattern of patterns; an
      interpretation of interpretations; the result of incessant decisions
      about what may and what may not be included in these meta-
      interpretations which in themselves are consequences of past
      decisions.10

         Although our World Image may guide us, shape us, and orient us in
life, not all World Images are of equal value for healthy living. Our
cognitive maps serve as metaphors or models of reality. They are not the
reality itself; there is a difference between how we experience and interpret
the world, and how it is in itself (an sich). This is what Alfred Korzybski
meant with his famous dictum that “a map is not the territory it represents,
but if correct, it has a similar structure to the territory, which accounts for
its usefulness”.11 All cognitive maps are incomplete representations, but
some maps are too incomplete to permit health; they even generate or
support a pathologic process. When the shaman removes an illness-causing
spirit from his patient, something in the patient’s map changes, particularly
that portion of the map that deals with the belief of oneself as invaded by a
disease-causing object. When the shaman extracts or exorcises the invading
force, a shift in imagery and belief is effected which brings about relief in
the patient. As the philosopher Paul Ricoeur said, “Change the directive
image and you may change the person”.12 The shaman, who has a richer
World Image, a richer cognitive mapping of ordinary and non-ordinary
reality, is able to manipulate the cognitive constraints of his patient, and
even expand them. The shaman can also juxtapose pieces of tribal
mythology or conscious cultural belief in a way that brings about
therapeutic change. I recall the story of Sudhir Kakar of an old temple
healer in India who told the father of a daughter (who suffered from incest
anxiety) to marry her off quickly so that the “daughter-fucker” demon
wouldn’t attack her.13 Rather than directly address the collapsing barriers of
the incest taboo, the healer reframes the problem as one of potential demon
possession; that is, the father is given an explanation in an idiom he is
familiar with (but did not think of as an explanation for his daughter’s
anxieties and nightmares). This hermeneutic move adds a spiritual urgency
which motivates the father to take action to protect his daughter
(forestalling the possibility of abuse, and at the same time, reducing the
daughter’s anxiety and thus her disturbing nightmares).14 This would not be
recommended treatment in our own modern Western context, as few
therapists would ignore the daughter’s choices and needs in such a situation.
However, the case does reveal a tricksterish method of getting beyond the
patient’s cognitive constraints.
         In modern psychotherapy, regardless of the school, some sort of
change is sought. People come with some type of problem they want fixed,
some type of burden they want lifted, some type of pain they want relieved.
Cognitive therapists speak of “cognitive restructuring”, and Freudian
psychoanalysts speak of “remembering, repeating, working through”, and
becoming mature and adult. Humanistic therapies aim at some kind of
growth or self-realization. Jungians talk of pathology as a one-sidedness in
the ego’s perspective and of therapy as aiming at deep psychic
transformation (death/rebirth) in which the opposites are brought and held
together in tension (a kind of wholeness).
         The traditional shaman’s method is based upon his or her own
interior journeys into the non-ordinary reality. There the shaman encounters
a different perspective, one which is comparatively greater than that
permitted by typical social and individual constraints. Out of the experience
of the non-ordinary reality, the shaman creates a much richer map of reality
than the one provided by his or her society’s myth (cosmology). An analogy
can be drawn from Jungian psychology. The realm of non-ordinary reality
would correspond to the collective unconscious. Every culture’s mythology
and symbolism is patterned upon archetypes. The concrete imagery of each
society is like the particular clothing. The archetypes are different from the
clothing, and can be experienced and expressed in a multitude of ways. The
shaman’s journey into non-ordinary reality is like a descent into the
collective unconscious. There the shaman encounters universal structures
and processes which are not culture-specific, but which transcend the
culture’s clothing and its local social mapping. The shaman discovers the
arbitrariness of social and individual definitions (constraints of reality). The
shaman draws upon his or her own richer mapping (World Image) based
upon his or her experience of non-ordinary reality, for the purpose of
expanding the patient’s World Image. Regardless of what it is called or how
it is understood, regardless of whether it is wrought by a psychotherapist,
shaman, or other doctor of the soul, some kind of therapeutic change is
aimed at by challenging or influencing the World Image of the patient.
         The shaman, then, by virtue of his or her calling, initiation, training,
and frequent journeys and mappings of non-ordinary reality, creates,
revises, and maintains a richer model of reality than his/her patients. As an
expander of the patient’s World Image, the shaman is something of a
trickster-shape-shifter, able to juxtapose meanings, elude the defensive
definitions of reality rigidly adhered to by the patient, and influence the
patient’s underlying map of reality. I have written elsewhere of a Yoruban
shaman who treated a mentally ill young man, which illustrates the shaman
operating to expand the World Image.15

      The patient was reportedly suffering from a psychotic disorder
      according to my informant. The shamanic ritual involved the
      preparation of an elaborate shrine, and the bringing of his
      patient and family into the shrine. The shaman began by
      reciting the myth of the origins of the conflict of Good and Evil,
      and of the triumph of Good, thus setting the patient’s inner and
      interpersonal battle in a spiritually meaningful cosmological or
      mythic context. The shaman then reportedly induced trance in
      himself and the patient’s family, and commanded the family to
      become psychotic, that is, to begin acting “crazy”. The shaman
      obtained a diagnosis in trance from conversing with ancestral
      spirits. As the patient’s family members are imitatingly
      convulsing all around him (mimicking the patient’s bizarre
      gestures and behaviors), the shaman tells the patient his
      genealogy, and about his ancestors and how they had overcome
      evil and adversity. Each ancestor’s admirable qualities were
      recounted before informing the patient how they overcame
      certain adversities. This instruction also included explaining
      how the patient had become wounded when he was abandoned
      by his father, while very young. According to my informant, the
      patient came out of the “psychosis” when, watching his family
      in a crazy frenzy, and listening to the shaman’s instruction, he
      suddenly realizes he has been acting strangely different from
      everybody else.

         This “crazy” patient reportedly did not self-perceive his illness with
its context-specific (consensually considered) bizarre behavior and style of
thinking as unusual to his social group. It was, in the language of
psychoanalysis, ego-syntonic. The patient’s own internal mapping (World
Image) apparently did not permit him to see that certain features of his
psychological functioning and behavior were sick. The shaman challenges
this image by the combined use of elements which resemble family therapy
(participation of concerned family members), psychodrama (having the
family become “crazy”), and explanation of the origins of the patient’s
personal wounding (abandonment). All this was integrated in a narrative
rooted in an ancestral genealogy, and integrated with a sacred tribal myth of
the victory of good over evil. The theme that good can be victorious over
evil is used by the shaman in a way which says, at the level of the World
Image, that positive change or transformation is possible. The use of the
family to dramatically act out the patient’s craziness gave the patient a
visual, kinesthetic, and emotional reflection of what strange behavior must
be like. In seeing his family act radically different from the way they
normally do (that is, like him), the patient was able to render his own image
of his behavior into an ego-dystonic position, thus viewing it as strange
(i.e., sick). In Jungian terms, the ritual helps the patient to see his own
complex-driven and related behavior in bold dramatic contrast. The father
complex is consciously accessed and rendered ego-dystonic, and after being
consciously understood, is now an influence which the patient wants to
change. The shaman, through his recitations, persuaded the patient that his
condition (illustrated by his family) could be changed, for “his ancestors
were victorious”, as were the tribal divinities “at the beginning of time”
(inspiring hope). Thus the shaman integrates a variety of elements,
cosmological, cultural-ancestral, familial, and individual, into the ritual in a
way which overloaded the patient’s defenses of his own restrictive World
Image, and allowed it to be expanded. Only after the patient recognized he
had been acting crazy, according to my informant, was the patient able to
switch off his craziness and become normal.


           RITUAL IMAGE AND BRAIN ASSYMETRY

        The Yoruban shaman’s method is a classic example of the
therapeutic employment of imagery intensified by the use of ritual sonic
driving and explanatory narrative to challenge the patient’s World Image.
Through the ritual performance with its evocation of all sensory channels,
through use of incense, fire, sacred space, chanting, familial and social
participation, rhythm, and trance, the shaman acts dramatically upon the
patient’s imagination to forge a pathway into those cognitive and
neurobiological correlates which drive the chaotic behavior, and turns it off.
Conversely, by the same imaginal technology the shaman is able to access
and turn on the appropriate ordering structures.
        Psychological, spiritual, and neurological correlates are involved.
Let us consider the neurobiological correlates. We have already noted that
images interact and influence tissues and communicate with cells. We have
even mentioned that images access various neuropath ways in the brain
which can lead to the development of sickness as well as to its cure. In
ritual process, image acts upon image to bring about cognitive, affective,
and behavioral change. In thinking about what neurobiological processes
might be involved in this ritual action of image upon image to effect
psychological and somatic change, we might think in terms of brain
assymetry.
         Paul Watzlawick guesses that the World Image has its neurological
locus in the non-dominant hemisphere of the brain’s neocortex (normally
the right hemisphere). The dominant hemisphere appears to translate
perceptions and experiences into logical-digital-analytic and semantic
representations, some of which are partly conscious, some which aren’t.
The non-dominant hemisphere is quite different. It is specialized in holistic-
representing and communicates in terms of images, relationships, patterns,
structures and configurations. It operates in a more intuitive-holistic mode,
and seems to be more closely wired to the phylogenetically older sections
of the brain which have to do with instinct, ritual, emotion, and autonomic
functioning. The pars pro toto principle seems to characterize the
operations of the non-dominant hemisphere. That is, things can be
recognized or associated on the basis of parts in relation to the whole. All
sensory functions operate on the pars pro toto basis. A single chord or note
of a symphony can evoke recognition of the identity of the piece because it
relates that piece to the entire musical pattern. A scent can evoke recall of
an event which, once recalled, is perceived internally with all sensory
modes. Watzlawick notes that good caricature drawings are based upon the
pars pro toto principle, requiring the strictest economy of line to evoke
recognition of the personality suggested by the visual abbreviation. The
non-dominant hemisphere is more accessible through the employment of
visual, acoustic, olfactory, gustatory, rhythmic, tactile, and other stimuli
associated with movement.
         An insight into the power of ritual to effect dramatic psychological
changes follows from this understanding of the World Image as having its
probable locus in the non-dominant hemisphere. If the World Image has its
locus there, then ritual, with its strong use of visual, acoustic, aesthetic-
dramatic, symbolic, and olfactory-gustatory stimuli, aims to activate
pathways of access to, and influence on, the World Image by circumventing
the dominance of the dominant hemisphere, and to influence the gestalt
structures and processes by which the World Image is generated and
maintained (in the non-dominant hemisphere).
        If the non-dominant hemisphere speaks the language of figure,
symbol, gestalt, and image, if it speaks the language of dreams, fantasies,
myths, fairy tales, daydreams, active imaginings, and delusions and
hallucinations, why not seek to speak back to it and influence it on its own
terms? This is what shamanic ritual does. It speaks to the psyche, to the
World Image, to the non-dominant hemisphere in its own language, and is
able to circumvent the linguistic-analytic-rational totalitarianism of the
dominant hemisphere, which tends to ignore it. Ernst Rossi, a Jungian
analyst and hypnotherapist, has equated the non-dominant hemisphere with
the unconscious, the archetypal substrate. This is a position which we shall
partially disagree with, following Anthony Steven’s, Victor Turner’s,
Robert L. Moore’s, Douglas Gillette’s, and even Jung’s suggestions that the
collective unconscious has its roots in the phylogenetically older parts of
the brain.


       THE REPTILIAN BRAIN AND THE COLLECTIVE
               UNCONSCIOUS IN RITUAL

        The World Image, and the ritual which acts upon it, involve
neurological structures which are of a phylogenetically much older
evolution. While psychology has been preoccupied with the study of
psychological process involving the neocortex; biologists, ethologists, and
other non-psychological researchers have been accumulating evidence for
the importance of the phylogenetically much older portions of the brain, in
human behavior. The older structures are not defunct. They are well
integrated and interrelated with the higher cortical functions. The strongest
research in support of the importance of the influence of the older portions
of our neuroanatomy has come from Paul MacLean, former chief of the
Laboratory of Brain Evolution and Behavior at the National Institute of
Mental Health. MacLean describes the brain as having a triune structure,
being composed of three distinguishable but related systems which are each
active and influential in psychological functioning. These three systems
have been named to correspond with their evolutionary ascendancy; the
reptilian brain (also called the R-complex), mostly associated with the brain
stem; the paleo mammalian brain (associated mostly with the limbic
system); and the neo-mammalian brain (the cerebral cortex). The cerebral
hemispheres with their bilateral specializations, are of a phylogenetically
more recent development, associated with cognition, sophisticated
perceptual processes, as distinguished from affective and instinctual
behavior.
         Underlying the neocortex is the system of subcortical structures
known as the midbrain which includes the limbic system, hypothalamus,
and the hormone-regulating pituitary gland. As discussed above, the limbic
system mediates and records emotional experiences which impact the
hypothalamus and pituitary systems, which in turn regulate the capacity for
sickness and health throughout the organism. As homeostatic mechanisms,
the pituitary and hypothalamic systems maintain sensitive control of
hormone levels, and balance hunger’s satiation, sexual desire/gratification,
thirst/fluid retention, and sleep/wakefulness. At the state of evolution in
which this part of the brain developed, emotions had emerged and become
important, especially fear and anger, and the associated fight/flight
behavioral responses. There is some low-grade level of conscious
experience, most likely in the form of awareness of vague and intuitive
images, kinesthetic awareness, and other forms of preverbal language, and
no doubt is an important source of imagery, and of the affective tone
charging and surrounding imagery. It is apparently the role of the neocortex
to consciously elaborate and process this imagery and give linguistic
meaning and expression to it, if possible. Both hemispheres, not just the
non-dominant one, are involved in the elaboration of meaning and
expression.
         As we descend deeper into the neuro-archaeological layers we come
to the reptilian brain (R-complex), which includes a system of related
structures known as the brain stem, shared by all vertebrates. It contains
various nuclei and neuro-chemicals which control vital autonomic
processes, cardiovascular and respiratory systems, as well as the ascending
recticular activating system (ARAS) which is responsible for alertness and
the arousal and maintenance of consciousness. It plays an important role in
sleep/wake cycles. At the evolutionary stage in which the reptilian brain
emerged, emotions apparently had not emerged, nor had cognitive
awareness of past and future events. The behavioral functions and responses
rely primarily upon the basis of instinct and are apparently automatic. What
little psychic awareness there might have been was a slave to precedent, the
demands of the animal body, and its instinctive attunement to
environmental stimuli. Behavior associated with the R-complex includes
territoriality, dominance-threat-display rituals, mating rituals, aggression,
establishment of social hierarchies, and dominance behaviors.
         These various levels of the brain, while having their own system of
neuronal pathways and neurochemistry, interact and mutually influence the
other systems. There is much ritualistic behavior mediated by the R-
complex, and this fact probably suggests that rituals originate in the R-
complex and are further modified by the emotional factors added by the
limbic system, and by the cognitive activity of the neocortex. While the
neocortex, especially the dominant hemisphere, has the greatest freedom
from the lower instinctual and emotional centers, it does partially affect and
direct the lower systems, as well as being partially affected by them. As
Sagan has pointed out, this is observable in much political behavior. The
themes of social hierarchies, dominance, aggression, and territoriality do
characterize much political behavior. However, neither the R-complex nor
the mammalian substructures could construct the Bill of Rights of the
United States Constitution. Modern politics presupposes open
communication between the higher and lower brain systems.
         If the phylogenetically older brain, termed the “hot brain” by James
Olds, resembles the Freudian id, in its functioning in accord with the
pleasure principle, and in its impulsivity and demanding behavior, the
neocortex, or “cold brain,” is more rational and susceptible to social
conditioning, and could be said to function on the basis of the reality
principle. It appears to be responsible for mediating the passions of the hot
brain with those demands of the external environment. In this way the brain
seeks to achieve some type of balance between opposing systems. Insofar
as they are different, there are difficulties in evoking integration. According
to Jung, one of the functions of dreams, curative rituals, and psychotherapy
was to reconcile the more archaic parts of our organism with the most
recent, that is, to facilitate integration of oppositions and polarities.
JUNGIAN PERSPECTIVES: RECONCILING WITH THE TWO-
        MILLION-YEAR-OLD PERSON INSIDE

        Anthony Stevens, Jungian analyst and psychiatrist, has argued that
Jung’s clinical and psychological intuitions anticipated much of the recent
research into neuroanatomy and neurophysiology of the brain. In his book,
Archetypes: A Natural History of the Self, Stevens attempts to show the
neurobiological basis of Jung’s psychology. Of particular interest to our
discussion at this point is Stevens’ drawing of our attention to the way
Jung’s psychology is congruent with the findings of both the split-brain
research into the specializations of the hemispheres of the neocortex, and
also with MacLean’s convincing theories on the phylogenetically older
portions of the brain. Unlike Ernst Rossi, who has located the archetypes in
the right hemisphere, Stevens suggests that it is more likely to be the
phylogenetically older brain systems which are the probable loci of the
archetypes, although the process of archetypal experience in the non-
dominant hemisphere is likely.16 Stevens argues that this is more in keeping
with Jung’s view that if the archetypal systems could be given a biological
locus, they would have to be in these phylogenetically much older parts of
the brain.17 Stevens cautions, however, that it is not really possible to limit
the locus of an archetype to any one neurological site. Stevens is no doubt
aware of more recent neuropsychological research showing the way various
systems are interconnected with various neurobiological structures,
preventing the determination of the precise locus or seat of specific
perceptual processes in many cases. Theories on neuroanatomy currently
stress an inter-relational pattern of brain structures in processes which seem
simple. No doubt archetypal processes follow this pattern of
interconnection with various systems, and various levels of phylogeny.
According to Stevens:

      Inasmuch as one archetypal system can be differentiated from
      another, each must have a complex and widely ramifying
      neurological substrate involving millions of neurons in the brain
      stem and limbic system (the instinctive or biological pole) and
      both cerebral hemispheres (the psychic or spiritual pole). When
      one considers which of the two hemispheres is more
      appropriate to processing of archetypal components, one can
      agree with Rossi that it must be the right: Jung’s concepts of the
      collective unconscious and symbol are more closely associated
      with the use of imagery, gestalt and visuospacial characteristics
      or right hemispheric functioning.18

         The view of Henry and Stephens that the left (dominant) hemisphere
can inhibit communication from the right, and that both hemispheres can
inhibit communication from the limbic system, and thus suppress those
communicational processes which are essential to psychic and physical
health, sounds much like the defensive-dissociative functioning of the ego.
For Jung, the ego is essential to actualization of the Self. However, Jung
believed it tended to become estranged from the deeper unconscious and
bodily processes, and from the archetypal Self. The aim of Jungian analysis
is to bring the ego into relation with these deeper processes, that is, to
integrate deep archaic process with ego-structure. Jung believed that dreams
served to facilitate an integration between the ego and the unconscious, on
the psychological level. According to Stevens, this translates into
neurobiology as the integration of the limbic and older systems with the
processes of both hemispheres of the cerebral cortex. The theory that
dreams may represent information originating in the older parts of the brain,
and passing via the right hemisphere during the REM sleep stage, has been
suggested by researchers such as Galin and Henry and Stephens.19
Evidence for this view is suggested by Jouvet’s findings that low voltage-
high frequency EEG waves characteristic of the dream state of sleep
originate in the brain stem, and that they proceed upwards via neural
pathways which extend through the limbic system to the surface of the
neocortex. This view provides support for Jung’s and other depth
psychologists’ view that dreams come from the archaic depths of the
psyche.
         Jung argued that the psyche has a teleological thrust which quests
for integration and integrity, and that the psyche strives for the
reconciliation and integration of opposites. For Jung, psychological
wholeness means consciously striving to integrate all kinds of oppositions,
masculine and feminine, conscious and unconscious, mental and physical,
the phylogenetically older and more recent. The breaking up of the psyche’s
integrity, or the failure to achieve integration, characterizes Jung’s
understanding of psychopathology. While the goal of Jungian therapeutics
is integration of polar oppositions (integration as conjunction of opposites
rather than fusion), the psyche, whether it is in therapy or not, quests for
integration; for wholeness. The unconscious is continually prompting the
ego to become aware of irreconciled oppositions, and to embrace them. The
prompting, largely conceptualized as the promptings of the archetypal Self,
typically comes in non-verbal imagistic-symbolic forms, such as dreams,
fantasies, symptoms, and pathological behaviors. The deep psyche (or Self)
is constantly critiquing the ego by way of images, symbols, and symbolic
impulses, in an effort to get it to come into relation with the contents
represented or embodied in such imagery and symbolism. Jung’s own
method of therapy sought to listen and respond to the proverbial imagery
emerging from the unconscious. Understood on the neurobiological level,
Jung believed that the purpose of dreams was to promote integrations of
lower with higher neurophysiological processes. In terms of our discussion
of the triune brain, a Jungian view would argue that the purpose of
dreaming is to facilitate the reconciliation of reptilian and limbic processes
with those occurring in the cerebral hemispheres.
         The reptilian brain, which, we have noted, is typically a slave to
precedent, that is, to instinct, and which is engaged in cold-blooded
processes, in social-hierarchical dominance and in ritualized behaviors,
often emerges into dream and fantasy in the form of reptilian imagery. The
warm-blooded animals which appear in some shamanic imagery, as well as
in modern dreams, could likewise be interpreted as representations of
processes and energies deriving from the limbic system.20 Dreams put us in
touch with our phylogenic past, with our reptilian and mammalian ancestry.
Jung, believing his task was to put the two-million-year-old man inside us
in reconciliation with the ego, believed that psychopathology could be
characterized as arising from the loss of “contact with our instincts, with the
age old unforgotten wisdom stored up in us. And where do we make contact
with the age old unforgotten wisdom stored up in us? In our dreams.”21
        For Jung, the psyche was every bit as much a self-regulating system
as the body:

      Every process that goes too far immediately and inevitably calls
      forth compensations, and without these there would be neither a
      normal metabolism nor a normal psyche. In this sense we can
      take the theory of compensation as a basic law of psychic
      behavior.22

        Jung’s therapeutic methods of writing down dreams, journaling,
active imagination, and dramatic symbolic enactment in music, sculpture,
and painting, with respect to dream and other imagery emerging from the
unconscious, could be understood as an attempt to enhance the importance
or vividness of the images, and thus enhance their compensatory effect
upon consciousness. However, Jung believed the image had a beneficial
effect whether it was consciously understood or not, since images can alter
moods. In fact, most of what takes place in shamanic ritual is effective
without much of it being consciously understood. It is image acting upon
image, which in turn acts upon psyche and body through
neurophysiological processes. But Jung believed the participation of
consciousness to be important for persons undergoing an analytically
assisted individuation process. The analytic rituals involving dream
journaling, active imagination, and amplification by mythological parallel
were aimed at enhancement of integration with the content embodied in
such images, and they helped to facilitate, on the neurological level,
integration between cerebral hemispheres. Rossi’s view that ritual, prayer,
mantra, and mandala act similarly by promoting bilateral hemispheric
integrations, can be extended by Stevens’ view that bilateral hemispheric
integration also means integration with the phylogenetically older portions
of the brain. Recently, the work of Robert L. Moore, Jungian analyst and
psychologist of religion, and of mythologist Douglas Gillette has extended
the views of Jung and Stevens on the connections between the archetypal
energies accessed by the healer and their correlate neurobiological bases in
the brain. We turn now to a discussion of their work.
         THE MAGICIAN ARCHETYPE, RITUAL, AND
                   NEUROBIOLOGY

        If ritual has the power to activate and deactivate powerful archetypal
energies, switching them on and off, the capacity to effectively and safely
do this would seem to be rooted in special archetypal structures, and in the
correlate neurobiology of the brain. According to Moore and Gillette, the
ritual mastery and skill of the shamans presupposes the ability to access
such an archetypal structure, which enables the shaman or the
psychotherapist to be a healer. Moore and Gillette argue that there is no
archetype of the shaman, but, rather, a more fundamental archetype of the
mature masculine, and mature feminine, which they call the magician (or
magus).23 The shaman is the highest expression of this archetype.
        Before we say more about the magician archetype in relation to
ritual process and leadership, we shall first place the archetype in the
broader context of their theory. Moore and Gillette have been seminal
thinkers and major theorists in the so-called men’s movement of today, and
have been developing a systematic view of the mature masculine based
upon a Jungian view of archetypal structures. They claim there are four
archetypes of the mature masculine self: the king, warrior, magician, and
lover.24 Although we can’t go into the considerable complexities of their
analyses of these archetypes, we shall review their salient features.
        Each archetype of the mature masculine correlates with an archetype
of the mature feminine, and both sexes have both masculine and feminine
archetypes, in a Jungian view. We will be concerned here only with the
descriptions of the archetypes of the mature masculine because that is what
Moore and Gillette focus their analyses on, and because it will help simplify
a subject which is already too Byzantine. In Moore’s and Gillette’s view,
each archetype has a high and low expression. The highest expression of the
archetype is positive and creative; the lowest expression of the archetype is
one of the bipolar shadow expressions of the archetype, and tends to be
destructive. The archetypal king, in its highest expression, represents the
center of the personality, what Jung refers to as the archetypal Self. It is an
archetype of balance, order, and of fertility, nurturance, and guidance,
serving its subordinates and taking pride in their accomplishments. In its
lower shadow expression, it can be jealous, even murderous (Herod the
King, King Saul). The archetype of the warrior, in its highest expression, is
characterized by disciplined aggression, subservience to a higher principle,
is goal focused, and tends to vigorously defend boundaries of king,
kingdom, and people. In its lowest expression it can be wantonly
aggressive, even raping (Bosnia) and murderous (Lt. Calley at My Lai). The
archetype of the lover, in its highest expression, is emotionally warm,
passionate, aesthetic, deeply sensual, vital, and playful. It can be a
connoisseur. In its lowest expressions it becomes obsessive and addictive
(Don Juanish promiscuity, substance abuse), and/or impotent. The
archetypal magician is a knower and a master of technologies. In its highest
expressions, this archetype is socially creative and often healing, such as we
find in the activities of great ritual elders, the shamans, and also in
scientists, doctors, lawyers, and others who have specialized knowledge and
use it for the social good. In its lowest shadow expressions it can be self-
serving and manipulative, exploiting others with its power and knowledge,
and it can get others into a crazy mess (mad scientists, and the not-so-mad
nuclear physicists who begged their innocence when their ingenious
research was turned into a weapon of mass destruction). Taken together, the
four archetypes of the mature masculine interact with and regulate each
other, and although in the mature masculine personality, the warrior,
magician, and lover should be subordinate to the king, they are all part of
the integral wholeness of the personality.
         Moore’s and Gillette’s reflections on the neurobiological basis for
these archetypes is indebted to MacLean and Stevens. The archetypes of the
mature masculine for humans (as well as for all primates), while
augmenting the more basic instincts and prehuman archetypal patterns of
the reptilian brain (R-complex), are rooted in the limbic structures of the
paleo mammalian brain. In addition to the neurological structures of the
limbic system mentioned above in reference to MacLean and Stevens,
Moore draws attention to MacLean’s division of the limbic system into
three primary subsystems:
         1. the affiliative/attachment subsystem
         2. the autonomy/aggression subsystem
       3. the integration/inhibition subsystem25

        The affiliative/attachment subsystem, as its name suggests, is
responsible for general mammalian tendencies to form social units
characterized by affection, nurture, play, and psychosocial interdependence
and collaboration. It seems to arise, along with other species-specific
structures of affiliation, in the area of the cingulate gyrus. The
autonomy/aggression subsystem is concerned with exploration, fear,
frightening and defensive strategies, and self-preservation behavior. It
appears to be mediated by the amygdaloid complex, and there is evidence
that in primates, hierarchically ordering behaviors arise through the
mediation of the amygdala. Moore and Gillette speculate that the
autonomy/aggressive impulse enables humans to form cohesive selves
through adversity.26 The integration/inhibition subsystem is apparently
mediated by the septum and hippocampus that MacLean believes to be the
integrative center for the entire central nervous system. The hippocampus is
considered a gate mechanism and is apparently responsible for regulating,
modulating, prioritizing, and arranging data from other aspects of the
nervous system in an integrative way. Moore and Gillette discuss the
location of the archetypes, especially of the archetypes of the mature
masculine, within these three limbic subsystems distinguished by MacLean:

     It seems clear that what we call the Lover arises originally in
     the affiliative/attachment subsystem, and our Warrior arises in
     the autonomy/aggression subsystem. The Magician (which
     some other psychologies mistake for the Ego) arises in the
     integration/inhibition subsystem at its interface with neocortical
     structures. We’d locate the Ego within the neocortex proper.
     This maintains the Ego’s status as the apparent center of waking
     consciousness. Here it is separate from the Magician, but more
     closely related to this archetype than it is to the Lover or
     Warrior.
              The King manifests as the integrated, mature
     functioning of all neocortical and limbic subsystems. Though it
     seems to arise in the septal-hippocampal subsystem, it
      transcends this subsystem’s gate keeping functions. More than a
      regulator, the King embraces the Warrior, Magician, and Lover
      in an integrated, constitutive manner.27

        Moore and Gillette believe that these human archetypes arise in the
limbic system and are then elaborated and refined by the neocortex. In
respect to cerebral assymetry, both hemispheres are believed to be involved;
either the left brain’s rational, logical functions, or the right brain’s intuitive
holistic functions, or both, are involved. The rationally strategic and
emotionally detached modes of the warrior and magician suggest primary
mediation by the left brain, and secondary mediation by the right brain. The
aesthetic, visually oriented, sensuous, and intuitive modes of the lover
suggest primary mediation through the right brain, and secondary mediation
through the left brain. The king may draw upon both hemispheres equally.
        Moore and Gillette suggest that the frontal lobes may be involved in
giving humane form to the archetypes, since they are responsible for
mediating empathic and altruistic emotions and refined cognitive processes.
The ego, while more associated with the left brain processes, actually seems
to draw upon both hemispheres. It may experience the archetypes as
numinously other because their sources are neurologically located so much
deeper than the sources of ego-consciousness.
        We mentioned that Moore and Gillette claim that there is no
archetype of the shaman, but only an underlying archetype of the magician.
Now that we have placed that archetypal structure in the broader context of
Moore’s and Gillette’s work on the archetypes of the mature masculine, and
have discussed their views of the relation of these archetypes to brain
structure, we can turn to a discussion of the nature of shamanism and ritual
mastery in terms of their work. In Chapter 2 we mentioned Moore’s earlier
work on the ritual elder in conjunction with our discussion of anthropologist
Victor Turner’s views of ritual structure and process. We noted that Moore
found in Van Gennep and Turner an insightful mapping of the structure of
transformative ritual process involving three phases: separation, transition
(liminality), and incorporation. Moore credits Turner for the special
attention given to the importance of the middle phases of liminality, in
which previous cognitive and psychological structures are deconstructed
and reconstructed as they come into contact with the powerful trans
formative energies of the sacred.
         Turner’s theory serves as a foundation for Moore’s own thought
about ritual mastery. Following Eliade, Otto, and others, Moore has
underscored the potential danger of sacred energies, arguing that if they are
not carefully and safely accessed, they may destroy or dissolve ego-
structure, leading to chaos and serious pathology, rather than to creative
transformation. Moore also adds to Turner’s insights by drawing our
attention to the importance of how sacred-transformative space is
constituted, being demarcated by strong boundaries and properly stewarded.
Moore believes that only a knowledgeable ritual elder, who can effectively
constitute and maintain strong boundaries around sacred space, can help
facilitate deep structural change psychologically, socially, or spiritually.
Moore likens the importance of strong boundaries to the vas bene clausum,
the well-sealed vessel of alchemy, which is necessary to protect and insure
deep transformation.
         According to our discussion of Moore and Gillette, it is the
magician archetype which is accessed by the shaman, which makes his or
her ritual mastery possible. This archetype has a two-fold aspect: 1)
magician as “knower of deep and mysterious things”, and magician as
“master of technology”.28 As a “knower,” the person embodying the
magician archetype is an initiant and master of secret and hidden
knowledge of all kinds. Moore and Gillette do not limit this archetype to
shamans, medicine men and women, brujos, and other healers or ecstatics,
but, interestingly, include modern men and women who seek and possess
special valuable knowledge: scientists, medical doctors, engineers, lawyers,
and the like. The magician as an archetype is accessible to all. But it is the
shaman and other ritual masters which concern us here, for their accessing
of it is essential to the effectiveness of their craft. The second aspect, master
of technology, is salient in the shaman’s ritual knowledge and wisdom. It is
the knowledge of how things work combined with the skill to make them
work which characterizes the shaman as a master of ritual technology.
         Moore interprets the capacity to safely employ therapeutic ritual
process as involving what, in analytic parlance, is called an observing ego.
Without an observing ego, the dangerous energies of the sacred, and of the
numinosity of the psychic libido, can possess and melt away important ego-
structure. Neurobiologically, this can be understood as a deactivation or
switching off of higher neocortical centers as lower limbic and reptilian
centers take over. Moore laments that although we live in an age of
magicians, that is, of scientists, engineers, and other specialists, this
archetype is all too often not safely and appropriately accessed by
psychologists, psychotherapists, ministers, and others whose concern is for
the care and transformation of the human soul:

      Ours is, we believe, the age of the Magician, because it is a
      technological age. It is the age of the Magician at least in his
      materialistic concern with having power over nature. But in
      terms of the nonmaterialistic, psychological, or spiritual
      initiatory process, the Magician energy seems to be in short
      supply.29

        Moore believes the issue of the danger of sacred space has not
received enough attention by persons in the helping professions. The
libidinal and numinous energies of the psyche require strong protective
boundaries. If they are accessed without due ritual care, psychic chaos and
rebellion can result. Moore likens the sacred energies to a nuclear
generating power station. The energies must be carefully approached and
respected, if disastrous results are to be avoided. He draws attention to the
way encounter groups of the 1960s and 1970s sometimes activated
powerful energies which were not contained, leading to psychological
decompensation and destruction of the group. Again he illustrates the
danger of lack of containment in reference to the powerful energies which
are sometimes unleashed at rock concerts, leading to pandemonium, and
sometimes to violence. He also gives another amusing metaphor based upon
Walt Disney’s Fantasia, in which Mickey Mouse desires to take the easy
way out of his predicament of having to mop the workroom of his master,
the sorcerer. Without the knowledge and skill, Mickey performs an
incantation to get the mop and bucket to do the job for him. What happens
is the now familiar image of the mop and buckets getting out of hand,
multiplying, and creating pandemonium. After all, Mickey is just an
apprentice, not a master. When powerful energies are activated without
ritual knowledge and skill, Moore argues, the destructive unleashing of
energy is the result. The psychotherapist today who wishes to effect
profound psychological and spiritual transformation would do well to learn
from the ritual mastery of the shamans, who have always embodied the
magician archetype in their practice. Proper accessing of archetypal
energies to turn archetypes on or off requires firm ego-structure. This ego-
structure is a by-product of considerable knowledge, experience, and
discipline.
        The knowledgeable ritual elder is able to access and turn on the
magician archetype in its highest form, and thus activate a safe pathway
between the neocortical substrate of the ego and the limbic substructures of
the integration/inhibition subsystem. Although Moore and Gillette don’t say
so, we could add that the ritual process of the shaman facilitates a
controlled trance that safely structures the access to archetypes and their
related natural structures. The shaman does not only turn on the magician
within, he or she also accesses the compassionate energies of the lover, the
fierce focus and dedication of the warrior (who fights sickness-causing
enemies on the patient’s behalf), and the balance and integrative-ordering
skills of the king. The shaman thus accesses all the archetypes of the mature
masculine and the related neural structures in an intentional and disciplined
way. The shaman’s ecstatic trance allows him or her to turn on the needed
archetypal resources in his or her self, and to turn off or on the needed
archetypal and related neural resources in the patient.
        It may well be that powerful transformative rituals activate massive
amounts of neural tissues and neural pathways. In view of our discussion of
the relation between archetypes and ego-structure, and their neurobiological
correlates in the hemisphere of the neocortex and in the three limbic
subsystems, it appears that ritual acts do intensify imagery in a way that
activates these systems. Ritual, and the ritual intensification of imagery, can
be so evocative because it employs a variety of stimuli to all the sensory
pathways at once, thus overloading the trophotropic and argotrophic
systems of both hemispheres, and activating deep limbic substructures. The
visual pathways are activated by such things as fire, candlelight, costume,
sacred shrine architecture and symbolism. The kinesthetic pathways are
activated by dramatic enactment, dance, and rhythm. The auditory
pathways are activated by sacred music, chant, and the sonic driving of
drumming. The olfactory pathways are activated by the smells of smoke,
incense, and herbs, and the gustatory pathways by ritual meals, medicinal
substances, and the like. All this activation opens up powerful psychic and
emotional pathways. Additionally, emotional pathways are stimulated by
the caring presence of the shaman, by the loving presence of the extended
family and sometimes the whole tribe at the ritual. All this simultaneous
multisensory stimulation helps the shaman to intensify imaginal activity and
to forge into pathways that access deep archetypal structures and their
neurobiological correlates.
        Any well-formed ritual has a clearly marked beginning and ending,
and the shaman knows these clearly demarcated ritual boundaries serve as
ritual cues for turning on and off the necessary energies on ritual cue. In this
way order is brought out of chaos. All true ritual elders, whether shamans,
witches, temple healers, or psychotherapists, whether play-wrights, civil
rights leaders, or priests, know how to access and turn on and off the
necessary psychic and neurobiological systems for healing purposes.
             Chapter Eight: Implications for the Future

         We have compared and contrasted significant areas of similarity and
difference between shamanism and Jungian psychology throughout this
book. We have argued that both shamanism and Jungian psychologies are
theories of the soul, of its disorders, and its therapeutic treatment, and that
both may be considered spiritual psychologies, or psycho-spiritual systems
of healing. Both disciplines rest upon the direct immediate experience of
non-ordinary dimensions of reality, the collective unconscious for Jung, and
the non-ordinary three-storied cosmology of shamanism. The shamanic path
could be considered, as Jung suggested, an early or archaic individuation
process, and we have shown that Jungian psychology includes many
shamanic elements. In this chapter we would like to explore a few
implications of the Jung and shamanism dialogue for the developing of a
post-modern therapeutic practice now and in the future.
         We should be clear that it is impossible to practice shamanism in a
strict classical form, as we live in a pluralistic society of western culture. In
this pluralistic society its members do not share the same myth and belief
system (beyond the myth of science). The sacred is not so broadly
presupposed as to be included in the legitimized health care professions,
and most individuals when ill or in crisis still automatically turn to the
legitimized health care professionals, the physician, the psychiatrist or
psychologist, or other doctor, to help them, and such professionals tend to
use a strictly secular and scientific idiom to size up the problem (diagnosis)
and treat it. The spiritual and psycho-spiritual dimensions are typically
ignored in most legitimized forms of health care in the west. However, there
are an increasing number of alternative health care professionals emerging
whose viewpoints include the spiritual basis of health and illness, and there
is growing interest in spiritual practice amongst the growing New Age
movement. These developments have much in them of the traditional
assumptions, perspectives, and methods of traditional health care systems,
and the soul and spirit are often taken into account in their theory of health
and illness, and in their therapeutic techniques.
         If the increasing number of books and seminars on shamanism is
any indication, it seems that a revival of shamanism in western culture is
under way. There are an increasing number of western urban shamans,
luenced by Michael Harner and other teachers, who are practicing core
shamanism, and who have private practices in which they do soul retrievals
and extractions, and some also do psychopompery and are ordained in
animistic churches. These private practitioner shamans tend to work
alongside other alternative and legitimized health care professionals.
Additionally, there is a growing number of psychotherapists who are also
trained shamans, or who are interfacing shamanism and psychotherapy, and
there is a professional journal dedicated to this interface: The Shamanic
Applications Review.1 These are hybrid forms of shamanism; that is, classic
perspectives and techniques are interfaced in an integrative or
complementary way with modern secular-scientific perspectives and
methods. In this revival of shamanism there is much preoccupation with the
soul, with soul loss and retrieval. The problem is that soul recovery depends
for its long-term meaning and sustenance upon the sacred, and this is just
what is lacking in discussions of shamanism and psychotherapy today.
Without a retrieval of the sense of the sacred in western culture, efforts at
soul recovery will always be limited, lacking in the power of traditional
shamanic retrievals in which the entire society broadly presupposed the
sacred.


            TOWARD A POSTMODERN SHAMANISM

         To say that shamanism, as it has been traditionally practiced, cannot
be totally transferred into western culture, is not to say that it cannot be
practiced in modified form, or that it cannot contribute to the therapeutic
and spiritual disciplines of the west. Shamanism represents a vast array of
psychological and spiritual insights and healing methods, techniques and
rituals, which have evolved over thousands of years; perhaps over millions.
Shamanism has always had to adapt to new conditions, be they geographic,
political, social, climatic, or educative (learning new methods, sharing
efficacious techniques with peers from other tribes, etc.). Even though few
traditional shamans might want to affirm that they could learn something
from western scientific methods, it seems clear that shamanism must learn,
if it is to survive in developing societies, and that it must adapt and grow if
it is to make a legitimate contribution to encroaching western society in the
future. This adaptation has been one of the motivations behind the
production of this book. Achterberg recommends that shamans become
scientifically educated and articulate if they want to preserve their
contribution to health care in the future.
          The kind of contribution which shamanism can make could be
considered a postmodern contribution. By postmodern, I mean an approach
which is sympathetic to the good and effective aspects of modernity, its
valuable methods, findings, and technologies, while rejecting or
constructively criticizing what is deficient in modernity. By postmodern I
also mean a perspective which seeks to preserve past perspectives and
technologies which are valuable and effective, and which promote human
dignity and ecological integrity, while at the same time being willing to
benefit from the appropriate use of Western scientific, theological, and
psychological methods. In this way, what was of value in the premodern
world of traditional shamanism may be preserved and combined with what
is of value from modernity. In this way, a precritical naiveté may pass into a
post-critical naiveté (Ricoeur). Postmodern perspectives are developing in
the Western healing professions. For example, recall the Simontons’
methods to relieve anxiety, stress, and to cure cancer (or send it into
remission) using visualization methods which have been used traditionally
by shamans. Another example is the use of shamanic methods of
visualization, music, amulets, and rituals by psychotherapists treating
multiple personality disorder. Recall from earlier in Part Three that Colin
Ross, a psychiatrist, and one of the world’s foremost psychiatric specialists
in dissociative disorders, claims that because DID/MPD patients are
virtuosos at trance, and are continually in altered states, shamanic methods
can be very helpful in treating the disorder.2 Ross claims his office contains
amulets, medicine bundles, and shamanic power objects, which he employs
suggestively as resources in his work with MPD patients. Ross considers
the psychotherapy of MPD to be a kind of prolonged shamanic ritual. Yet
Ross also employs the latest scientific methods and conceptualities to
understand and work with this very complex and ancient disorder. Among
the modern western psychological and psychiatric methods which Ross also
uses are pharmacological means, cognitive therapy, psychoanalytic
methods. and hospitalization, informed by statistical studies into MPD, and
the latest psychiatric differential diagnostics. Ross believes that MPD is so
common (previously known as possession) and so complex, it requires a
variety of theoretical perspectives, and the best of premodern and modern
scientific methods and perspectives. Sandra Ingerman’s adaptation of
classic shamanism, as already discussed, could also be practiced alongside
of, or adjunctively with, psychotherapy, for a variety of mental disorders.
Psychotherapy can play a vital role in helping integrate the powerful effects
and implications of shamanic healing rituals, especially soul retrieval and
extraction. Psychotherapy can identify areas of soul loss and seek insight
and therapeutic leverage from shamanism.
         Since human life on the planet is increasingly encroaching upon and
absorbing traditional societies, it seems evident that human life on the
planet is moving towards a multi-cultural context which will yet be largely
urban and westernized. In such developing societies as Taiwan, shamanism
is becoming an urban shamanism, and is adapting to new social
circumstances dictated by modernization and cultural diversity. Shamans
practicing alongside western trained medical doctors often refer patients to
such doctors, when the disorders are beyond their professional scope, or
when their patients’ disorders require medical supplementation. It may be
that a postmodern urban shamanic profession can develop in American
culture if it is at least respectful of its own limits, and works collaboratively
as one healing profession in concert with others. Beyond collaboration there
is also the possibility of mutually challenging dialogue between shamanism
and other legitimized health care professions. Psychotherapy and
shamanism may lead to a more spiritual psychotherapy and to a more
psychologically sophisticated shamanism.


           THE LOSS OF THE SENSE OF THE SACRED

       We have mentioned that the major difference between the context in
which the traditional shaman practiced, and that of the modern
psychotherapist, has to do with the presupposition of the sacred as a sui
generis reality, broadly assumed in traditional societies. In the modern West
today, there has been a loss of the sacred from the assumptive world
generally, and from the healing arts specifically. Individuals may be
religious, may go to church or synagogue, or practice some other form of
institutional or non-institutional religion, but other areas of life are typically
encroached upon by the secular. In traditional and tribal societies, every
substantial aspect or function of life had a sacred basis. As Eliade has noted,
such substantial events in life were founded upon the paradigmatic acts of
the gods. Their sacredness guaranteed their significance, and proper social
ordering. Illness was viewed as a disruption of the proper ordering, and
required that the shaman restore relations with the sacred order, helping to
re-establish the proper order by placing the patient, the family, and the tribe
in accordance with the will of the sacred (gods and ancestors). In tribal
societies, hunting, love making, going to war, illness, and therapy all have a
sacred aspect. By contrast, today’s modern individual may be religious, but
when it comes to consulting a doctor or psychotherapist (or dentist for that
matter), there is no presupposition of the sacred. The healing professions
have become secularized. We do not expect our healers to attempt to restore
relations with God, the creator, or the earth. We do not expect our
psychotherapist to invoke, call upon, or mediate sacred in the therapy
session. Sudhir Kakar has noted that there are many scientists and health
professionals in the west who now lament the loss of the sacred from the
assumptive world of patient and healer:

      For the West, the home of modernism and now a state of mind
      rather than a geographical region, the connection of health with
      orders other than that of the body and mind no 1onger
      exists....With the irresistible march of scientific naturalism over
      the last one hundred years, the domain of the clinical has been
      finally and firmly usurped by the doctor, and the priest forced
      into exile. There are many in the West today who regret the
      disappearance of the Sacred from the healing sciences and its
      removal generally from the world of everyday life.3
         The situation of the loss of the sacred has been characterized by
various existentialist philosophers, in their own idiom. Nietzche’s heralding
of the death of God was prophetic of the loss of the sense of the sacred from
the assumptive world, and from life generally, in the west. Heidegger
described the withdrawal of Being from modern man as equivalent to a loss
of a sense of meaning, of mystery, and of dignity. He might as well have
called Being the sacred, for it possesses those numinous
(attracting/repelling, mysterious/ineffable) qualities we have attributed to
the sacred. Calculative thinking, economic thinking, the tendency to
quantify everything, goes hand in hand with a reductionistic materialistic
science, which finds nothing but physical, mechanical, or chemical causes.
The world seen only through the lenses of scientific-calculative thinking is
a thin, dry, hollow, surface world, devoid of mystery, depth, and meaning.
There is an existential nausea (Sartre) that comes with such a nihilistic view
of reality. Such a view is itself a symptom of deep spiritual, social, and
ecological pathology. Some face this nihilism nihilism with stoic courage,
others retreat into fundamentalistic and traditional forms of security, where
they may have some limited contact with the sacred, while still being
touched by the nihilism of the modern scientific worldview. Some seek a
genuine sense of the sacred to give their lives meaning and direction, but
cannot find it in the institutional religions of the west. Some turn to the
numinous resources of the East, some to occult interests; some are now
turning to shamanism, others the psychedelics, to rekindle a sense of
mystery and meaning characteristic of the sacred.


SHAMANIC DIAGNOSIS OF WESTERN CULTURE: LOSS OF
                 THE SACRED

        A shamanic view of western culture would diagnose the culture and
many, perhaps most, of its individual participants as suffering not simply
from a breach of relations with the sacred, but from a lack of any effective
relations with the sacred at all. This would be a new type of diagnostic
category for shamanism, but it is one from which western psychotherapists
could learn much. For in traditional societies, it is believed that the efforts
of the shaman, or other healer, are greatly aided by the continuing presence
and healing power of the sacred in their societies. The entire weight of the
community’s religion, objectified in its myths, history, and rituals, is
brought to bear upon the patient, his or her family, and perhaps the entire
community. This weight is sufficient to mobilize powerful psychic energies
in the patient. The patient believes and is assured that proper relations with
the sacred will be restored, that healing will occur, because he or she has the
gods, ancestors, or other sacred beings and emissaries present in the sacred
healing ritual. By contrast, today’s western patient is diagnosed and treated
often in isolation from the sacred, and from his or her family and the
community. The diagnosis is typically a secular one. If it is a mental
diagnosis, it sounds much like a disease one has, but one which is unrelated
to matters of religious or spiritual import. The loss of the sacred in western
society is also a loss of soul, a loss of the soul of the earth, of the cosmos, of
human society. Modern men and women are truly in search of soul, and a
retrieval of the sacred is essential to their finding or recovering soul.
        Jung was also aware of the problem of the loss of the sacred in the
west. In fact, his psychology is largely addressed to this problem. The
appeal of Jung to so many thoughtful persons today, one surmises, is
because his view of the psyche, and of therapy, presupposes the sacred
(numen). The appeal is also probably based on the feeling that Jung’s
analytical psychology is as much a spirituality as a psychology, as much a
religious path as a psychological process. Jung considered the real therapy
to be the experience of the numen, and the individuation process to be a
kind of myth to live by for those individuals who could not live the mythic
patterns provided by the traditional institutional religions of western
culture. The individuation process provides the individual with a sense of
deep and meaningful ordering at the base of things. This deep underlying
order which the psyche intrinsically quests for, and towards which it is
driven, is akin to the sacred orderings hungered for in traditional societies.
Within tribal society, myth reflects the implicit ordering of personal and
communal life. Jung’s view was that for many modern individuals, the
Christian myth could no longer be lived by the whole person. Rather than
turn to the East, Jung recommended turning to one’s own psyche, going
within to find a deep ordering mythic pattern to live by. Jung’s personal
myth seemed to be a heroic one, that is, one based upon the archetypal
pattern of the hero. As the hero detaches from his familiar community or
territory, goes into the unknown territory to make discoveries or find the
treasure, and then returns with the boon (with his findings, treasure, etc.), so
could Jung’s life be interpreted as heroic, since his psychological
discoveries seemed to involve this same process. The shaman’s way also
follows the same heroic pattern of separation, initiation into the sacred
mysteries, and return with the boon (healing power, etc.). There is a heroic
aspect to the individuation process as well, since it requires an ordered
process of leaving one’s normal state of ego-consciousness (separation), a
going into the unknown depths of the unconscious to discover something of
value (numen, self-knowledge, archetypal powers, etc.), and a return to
normal consciousness to ethically integrate and appropriate what one
discovered in one’s daily living.
         Jung believed that the Christian myth was based upon archetypal
patterns, the same as any other religion, myth, or aspect of life. However, he
felt there was a certain one-sidedness in the Christian myth which made it
increasingly difficult for individual to live it with their whole being. One-
sidedness, for Jung, is characteristic of neurosis, psychological imbalance,
and dissociation. Jung’s critique of Christianity can be considered a
psychological diagnostic in which Jung identifies the imbalances,
dissociations, and pathology of Christianity.
         Jung’s critique of Christianity included the view that spirit was
exalted over matter, that the masculine was exalted over the feminine, that
the problem of the opposites had not been adequately dealt with, and that
the exalted elements cast the inferior elements into the shadow realm,
associated with evil and the devil. While he believed that Catholicism, with
its rich tradition of symbol and ritual, could still mediate the sacred to its
devotees, he believed that Protestantism exalted the word (the literal), but
devalued and distrusted images, symbols, and rituals, thus creating an
overemphasis upon dogma, creed, and belief, and making it more difficult
for its adherents to have experience of the numinosum, or live the symbolic
life.
         Since Christianity was too one-sided, in Jung’s view, it had to
dissociate or split off parts of psychical reality not contained in its God-
image and dogma. Jung believed that alchemy dealt with both sides of the
polarities in a way which corrected the imbalances of Christianity. In
alchemy the spiritual and the material, the masculine and the feminine, were
each valued in a way which held the oppositions in some kind of tension
(balance).
        With Freud, Jung believed that Christianity tended to devalue the
sexual and sensual, to prohibit mature thinking, and to carry psychological
projections. Unlike Freud, however, Jung believed there was much more to
religion than projection of a benevolent father image to bolster an immature
existence over-burdened with the tasks of adult living. For Jung, religion
was a basic instinct, a psychological fact, and could not be fully explained
by, or reduced to, psychological explanations. It was not, in itself, a
necessarily neurotic phenomenon, although it could become one. For Jung,
religion was fundamentally “an attitude peculiar to a consciousness which
has been changed by experience of the numinosum.”4 This attitude was
based upon an instinct to experience the numinosum. As an instinct,
religion was as natural and powerful as the sexual or aggressive instincts.
Jung’s definition of religion is kept carefully separate from belief or
devotion to any creed, dogma, or external code.


           THE FUNCTION OF MYTH AND RELIGION

  Jung believed that the religion of the European (western) individual was
inadequate to his wholeness. He believed that much of European religion
was based upon intellectual assent to creed and dogma, and did not engage
the individual at the level of the heart, at the level of experience, and at the
level of the unconscious. Jung also believed that the religious instinct was
repressed by the modern culture of scientific rationality, dominated by ego-
consciousness. The result was that modern man suffers various forms of
distress and frustration, a sense of cosmic isolation and despair, attended by
feelings of meaninglessness. By contrast, religion has been the heart and
center of the culture of tribal societies. Out of the collective unconscious of
those societies arose religious symbols and rituals which forged a house of
meaning and being, within which the cosmos is viewed as reliably ordered
and significant, and within which human and ecological relations with one
another and with the earth and its creatures are established.
  Jung argued that the sacred mythology of primitive peoples springs from
the collective unconscious, as do dreams, folk art, and creative ideas. These
tribal myths, he believed, were patterned upon numinous archetypes, which
were themselves discernable beneath their veneer of cultural disguise
(particular mythological clothing). Myths ordered and gave meaning to life,
to individual and collective life in tribal societies. Such order and meaning
constitute the structural core of native religious experience, which touches
important areas of human life. Education in tribal societies is a kind of
training or preparation for responsible adult behavior, and typically has
been provided in the form of initiation rituals. One of the important
discoveries Jung made in his psychological expedition into Africa, among
the Elgonyi tribe, concerned the relation of archetype to myth, story, and
educatory aspects of puberty rites. Jung observed the older men (ritual
elders) instructing the young male initiants in the ethical and behavioral
norms of the society by means of story telling (myths). The form of this
instruction involved dramatically enacting stories about some tribal god or
ancestor, whose actions were to be emulated or avoided if unethical. Jung
said the underlying theme was to instruct the young men that “our ancestors
had done such and such, and so shall you too!”5 Jung’s observation that the
appropriate behavior was modeled upon archetypes is also supported by
Mircea Eliade’s observations that the acts of the tribal gods, ancestors, and
culture heroes in the primordial time, form the paradigmatic acts which
serve to guide younger generations in appropriate behavior, and thus
provide the foundations of social order. Eliade’s primordial time would
correspond to the timelessness of the collective unconscious from which the
paradigmatic archetypal forms spring. In this way, Jung believed the
foundation of culture, education, and social order was laid down by
numinous archetypal structures, which provided the mythic patterns
teaching tribal members how to behave. An implication is that these
patterns are not so much ex nihilo but are donated from the primordial
source of order in the collective unconscious, and discovered universally by
various cultures the world over.


  NAVAJO USE OF MYTHIC HERO AND RITUAL HEALING
        If myth embodies the order and meaning-giving substance of the
religious instinct, it is because it exemplifies and illustrates the foundations
of ethical behavior as rooted in something greater than ego-centric
consciousness. It comes from beyond consciousness. Jungian analyst
Donald Sandner has devoted considerable energy to the study of Navajo
mythology and healing rituals, drawing parallels with Jungian discoveries.
The eastern Navajo system of religion is intrinsically bound up with ritual
healing, aiming to bring individuals back into harmony with the tribal
tradition and cosmic order.6 The Navajo system of myth lies behind every
healing ritual chant. Each chant consists of a mythic story usually patterned
upon the cultural ancestor who had the same malady as the afflicted person.
For example, if the individual suffered from arthritic swelling and pain,
then the patient would recall the story of that particular hero or heroine
(usually a female) and actively identify with her triumphant struggle to
overcome that malady.7
        Navajo healing rituals typically involve placing the patient on a sand
painting, a type of mandala constructed of sand with symbols of the
requested hero/heroine (or other mythic figures) drawn upon it with brightly
dye-colored sand. The patient sits upon the sand painting while the
medicine man performs the sacred chants. Although the myth is not recited,
since the patient knows it already, the chant assists the patient in actively
evoking a religious altered state of consciousness (RASC) to facilitate the
process of inwardly identifying with the numinous healing energies of the
image. Sandner stresses that such healing rituals require the patient to do
more than believe in the efficacy of these sacred images to heal. The patient
must actively identify with these images, must actively concentrate upon
them, and must inwardly seek to appropriate their power.


 COMPARISONS OF NAVAJO AND JUNGIAN METHODS OF
             WORKING WITH IMAGES

 Sandner draws parallels between these Navajo healing rituals and Jungian
psychology. Just as the Navajo patient must actively focus on what is going
on, and must actively seek to appropriate the power of the images
objectified in the sand painting, so must the Jungian psychotherapy patient
(or analysand) actively participate and seek to appropriate the images and
symbols arising from the collective unconscious, in dreams and active
imagination. Sandner argues that the images and symbols must enter ego-
consciousness and must be actively appropriated in the life and behavior of
the patient. We might add that Jung did not employ sand paintings, although
he was well aware of the Navajo technique, but he did encourage the
spontaneous painting of the mandalas and other images arising from the
collective unconscious. He also encouraged his patients to evoke and
actively work with images in other ways reminiscent of primitive healing
rituals, especially in dance, drawing, and sculpture. His own tower at
Bollingen was rich with carvings in stone and wood, representing work
with his own images, and his attempts to take them seriously and give them
some permanent form. The images and symbols produced by the
unconscious are more than signs to be understood, interpreted, and then
done away with. Like the Navajo, Sandner argues, Jung believed that
images and symbols had a healing power in their own right. We can
conclude that since Jung believed the experience of the numen was the real
therapy, it is the numinosity of the image which donates its psychological-
spiritual value and healing power.


  JUNG’S ANSWER TO THE LOSS OF THE SENSE OF THE
                    SACRED

        Jung visited the Taos Pueblo medicine man Ochwiay Biano, on a
psychological expedition in New Mexico in 1925. The impact of that visit
gave Jung a tremendous insight into the religious needs of modern man.
Ochwiay Biano told Jung that he thought that white men are mad because
they think with their head and not with their heart. Jung was disturbingly
enlightened by this medicine man’s psychological and spiritual penetration
into the plight of western man. Biano characterized the white man as always
restless and looking for something because of his refusal to trust his own
heart. Translated in Jungian terms, Ochwiay Biano had an awareness of
modern man’s entrapment in the rational, intellectual, and inflated
tendencies of his ego. The Pueblo way of thinking with the heart, rather
than with the head, meant that they lived from a deeper center (the
unconscious), and not from the center of conscious rationality (ego). Jung
discovered that it was because the Pueblo lived by their mythology that they
were able to live out of the heart, and find their lives whole and meaningful.
This medicine man spoke to Jung with tremendous enthusiasm about his
people’s religion, and about the importance of the great Father Sun. He
believed that there could not be another God than this, since all life on the
planet required the sun’s energy and benevolence in order to grow, live, and
survive.

We are a people who live on the roof of the world; we are the sons of Father
Sun, and with our religion we daily help our father to go across the sky. We
do this not only for ourselves, but for the whole world. If we were to cease
practicing our religion, in ten years the sun would no longer rise. Then it
would be night forever.8

        Jung was greatly impressed by this religious philosophy, because it
afforded the Pueblo a fullness of meaning and dignity, a larger sense of
purpose, with a cosmological framework, than any religion or ideology
white man believed and lived. The Taos Pueblo, like members of tribal
societies everywhere, had an experience of life as meaningful because it
allowed them to relate to something larger and more meaningful than
themselves. In primitive societies the archetypal numinosity was still
mediated through their mythologies. By contrast, the European Judeo-
Christian myth had fallen into decay and was no longer livable by the whole
person. For most members of western society, it was no longer a way of
life, and the impoverished secular myth of science had taken over, leaving
modern persons with an inflated or ego-centric acquisitiveness, rather than a
way of relating to something bigger than themselves. It has always been the
role of religions to relate its devotees to something transindividual,
transpersonal, as the Taos Pueblo was able to care for the whole world by
practicing his or her religion. Jung did not believe it was possible for a new
religion to emerge which could order the life of modern man as Christianity
had done in the past. He believed such a religion might emerge in several
hundred years, but in the interim, it was incumbent upon modern man to
find a way to live a religious life, a symbolic life. Jung believed this was
possible. All that was necessary, he believed, was that each individual find a
myth to live by, or a way of life that was committed to something bigger
than oneself. Jung’s own answer to the problem of the loss of the sense of
the sacred, and to a loss of a religious way of life, was to persuade
individuals to turn inward to re-establish contact with the numinous
archetypal images, traditionally objectified in myth and religion. The same
source which gave rise to traditional religions still exists within modern
man, in the collective unconscious. Since modern man has become
disillusioned with a concept of God as up there or out there, that is, as
external to the self, the only solution is to turn inward, to the inner source of
order and meaning.
        One of the ways Jung’s psychology can contribute to a postmodern
shamanic function in western society is its effort to persuade individuals to
turn to our origins in the collective unconscious, and there to come into
living relation with the powers of the numen which can order our values,
our lives, and our behavior. The need to help estranged individuals in
western culture recover a sense of life as meaningful is a task of shamanic
proportions. Knowledgeable ritual elders who know how to evoke and
safely maintain relations with the sacred, and who know how to guide
individuals through the depths of the inner life, are urgently needed.
Shamanism can help us to identify the problem (loss of the sacred and loss
of the soul) and offer ways to think about solving it. By itself, however, it is
insufficient and requires adaptation to modern culture. The resources of
Jungian psychology offer a richer understanding, in western terms, of the
important factors, structures, and processes at work in shamanic healing.
This understanding can help us to transfer many insights and techniques
from shamanism into western psychotherapy and spiritual direction. Jung
helps us to understand how we may go about overcoming the loss of the
sense of the sacred, and reestablish a way of life that is meaningful and has
religious import in our time.
                                   Notes
  CHAPTER ONE. OVERVIEW OF CLASSIC SHAMANISM

       1 Cf.  Mircea Eliade, Shamanism: Archaic Techniques of Ecstasy
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, Bollingen Series LXXVI, 1964), p.
4; also cf. Joan Halifax, Shamanic Voices: A Survey of Visionary Narratives
(New York: E. P. Dutton Paperbacks; 1979), p. 3
        2 Eliade, Shamanism, pp. 3-13
        3 Ibid., p. 5
        4 Ibid., p. 7. Eliade argues that while shamans do sometimes become

accidentally possessed, this is not characteristic of their calling and trade.
Eliade evidently means that they may become possessed through taboo
violation or become a victim through sorcery just as other members of the
tribe may become possessed. When this happens, that shaman is afflicted
and requires the resources of another shaman. Cf. the conversation with
anthropologist Michael Harner on this point in Gary Doore, “The Ancient
Wisdom in Shamanic Cultures: An Interview with Michael Harner
Conducted by Gary Doore,” in Shirley Nicholson, editor, Shamanism: An
Expanded View of Reality (Wheaton, Ill.: Quest Books, 1987), p. 9
        5 Roger Walsh, M.D., Ph.D., The Spirit of Shamanism (Los Angeles:

Jeremy P. Tarcher, Inc., 1990), pp. 9-10
        6 Sudhir Kakar, Shamans, Mystics, and Doctors: A Psychological

Inquiry into India and Its Healing Traditions (Boston: Beacon Press, 1982),
pp. 106-116
        7 Mircea Eliade, “Shamanism: An Overview,” in The Encyclopedia

of Religion, vol. 13 (New York: Macmillan Publishing Co., 1987), p. 202
        8 Eliade, Shamanism, p. 13
        9 Ibid., p. 21
        10 For the shaman the middleworld is sometimes considered an

ordinary realm of the earth, at other times it is considered an ecstatic realm
of non-ordinary reality. This is especially true among the Polynesian
shamans.
       11 Eliade, Shamanism, pp. 259-287
       12 John A. Grimm, The Shaman: Patterns of Religious Healing

Among the Ojibway Indians (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press,
1987), pp. 78-82
       13 Cf. Doore, “Ancient Wisdom,” p. 9
       14 Ibid., p. 9
       15 Henri F. Ellenberger, The Discovery of the Unconscious: The

History and Evolution of Dynamic Psychiatry (New York: Harper & Row,
1970), p. 5
       16 Jeanne Achterberg, Imagery and Healing: Shamanism and

Modem Medicine (Boston: Shambala, 1985), pp. 4-10
       17 Janet Siskind, in Michael Harner, editor, Hallucinogens and

Shamanism (London: Oxford University Press, 1973), pp. 33-34
       18 C. G.Jung, The Collected Works of C. G. Jung, 2nd edition.

Translated by R.F.C. Hull (Princeton: Princeton University Press, Bollingen
Series XX, 1966), vol. 13, par. 75, hereafter called Jung, CW
       19 These snake and fish dreams seem to be of common occurrence

among the Cherokees, and the services of the shamans to banish them are in
constant demand.
       20 Cited in Lewis Spence, “Cherokees”, in Hastings Encyclopedia of

Religion and Ethics, vol. 3 (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1951), p.
505
       21 Ibid., p. 508
       22 Achterberg, Imagery and Healing, pp. 84-87 and 138-139
       23 See Doore, “Ancient Wisdom,” p. 4
       24 Eliade, “Shamanism: An Overview”, p. 203
       25 Ibid., p. 203
       26 Ibid., p. 203
       27 Ibid., p. 203
       28 Bruce L. Boyer, “Remarks on the Personality of Shamans: With

Special Reference to the Apache and Mescalero Indian Reservation,”
Psychoanalytic Study of Society, vol. 2, 1962, pp. 233-254
       29 Eliade, “Shamanism: An Overview,” p. 203 1962
       30 Eliade, Shamanism, p. 217
       31   Ibid., p. 298
         32 This information is based upon a conversation the author had with

Michael Abrams on the Cherokee reservation in March, 1991.
         33 Sam Gill, “North American Shamanism,” in The Encyclopedia of

Religion, vol. 13, pp. 216-219, and Ake Hultkrantz, “A Definition of
Shamanism,” Temenos 9, 1983, pp. 25-37; and Hultkrantz, “Health,
Religion, and Medicine in Native North American Traditions,” in Lawrence
E. Sullivan, ed., Healing and Restoring: Health and Medicine in the World’s
Religious Traditions (New York: Macmillan Publishing Co., 1989), pp.
327-358
         34 Gill, “North American Shamanism”, p. 216
         35 Spence, “Cherokees”, pp. 503-508
         36 Gill, “North American Shamanism”, p. 216. Because these

elements (shamanic flight, and skeletization, death/rebirth) frequently do
not occur, Hultkrantz considers most forms of North American shamanism
a pseudoshamanism. He notes that certain Eskimo and Northwest Coast
tribes exhibit the classic Asian pattern, but Hultkrantz also argues that a
distinguishing feature of North American shamanism is the “degree of
ecstatic trance depth”. He argues that those forms where the healer uses a
light trance should not be considered shamanism. Cf. Hultkrantz, “Health,
Religion, and Medicine,” p. 334. I prefer, with Gill, to not make a judgment
on the basis of the classic Asian form, but find Hultkrantz’s notion of trance
depth helpful in characterizing North American shamanism.
         37 Eliade, Shamanism, p. 298
         38 Hultkrantz, “Health, Religion, and Medicine”, pp. 341-342
         39 Eliade, Shamanism, p. 300
         40 Hultkrantz, “Health, Religion, and Medicine”, p. 341
         41 Cf. Felicitas D. Goodman, How About Demons? Possession and

Exorcism in the Modern World (Bloomington: Indiana University Press,
1988), pp. 79-126. Goodman documents various cases of demonic
possession in Asia, Africa, and Europe, in the past and recently, and shows
how such life-threatening states require shamanic or ritual exorcism. She
distinguishes these states from spirit possession, which is often religious
and beneficial, and from multiple and shamanic states. Goodman, who is a
medical anthropologist trained also in neuroscience, along with Ralph B.
Allison, a psychiatrist who specializes in multiple personality disorders
(MPD) and possession states, and others, makes an appeal for the recovery
of ritual exorcism for the treatment of intractable “evil” alters in MPD and
in demonic possession.
        42 Gill, “North American Shamanism,” p. 216
        43 Such a positive effect of seeing an image of the destroyed

pathogenic object has been demonstrated by the Simontons, for example, to
be therapeutically beneficial in the treatment of cancer patients. Cf. O. Carl
Simonton, M.D., and Stephanie Matthews-Simonton, with James Creighton,
Getting Well Again: A Step-By-Step, Self-Help Guide to Overcoming
Cancer of Patients and Their Families (Los Angeles: J. P. Tarcher, Inc.,
1978), p. 268
        44 Hultkrantz, “Health, Religion, and Medicine”, p. 342
        45 Hultkrantz, “Health, Religion, and Medicine”, p. 343
        46 Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders-Fourth

Edition (Washington, DC: The American Psychiatric Association), p. 848
        47 Hultkrantz, “Health, Religion, and Medicine”, p. 343
        48 Ibid., p. 346-347
        49 Gill, “North American Shamanism,” p. 217



       CHAPTER TWO. TECHNICIAN OF THE SACRED

       1  Rudolf Otto, The Idea of the Holy (London: Oxford University
Press, 1976), p. 28
        2 Ibid., p. 33
        3 Ibid., p. 34
        4 Genesis 28:17
        5 Otto, The Idea of the Holy, p. 67
        6 Gerhardus Van der Leeuw, Religion in Essence and Manifestation

(Princeton: Princeton University Press, Bollingen Series, 1986), p. 23
        7 Ibid., pp. 24-25
        8 Ibid., p. 37
        9 Ibid., p. 38
       10   Ibid., p. 60
         11 Ibid., p. 45
         12 Ibid., p. 46. Along these lines, a Cherokee shaman might place a

very sick person under taboo, not so much to protect others, but to protect
the patient, who is weak and vulnerable to having his soul stolen by “raven
mockers” (sorcerers).
         13 Mircea Eliade, The Sacred and the Profane: The Nature of

Religion (New York: Harcourt, Brace & World, Inc., 1959), p. 12
         14 Ibid., p. 12
         15 See Mircea Eliade, The Myth of the Eternal Return: Cosmos and

History, translated by Willard R. Trask (Princeton: Princeton University
Press, Bollingen Series no. 46, 1954), pp. 5-6: 1. Facts which show us that,
for archaic man, reality is a function of the imitation of a celestial
archetype. 2. Facts which show us how reality is conferred through
participation in the ‘symbolism of the Center’: cities, temples, houses
become real by the fact of being assimilated to the ‘center of the world.’ 3.
Finally, rituals and significant profane gestures which acquire the meaning
attributed to them, and materialize that meaning, only because they
deliberately repeat such and such acts posited ab origine by gods, heroes, or
ancestors.
         16 Exodus 25:9,40. Also Eliade, Myth, p. 7
         17 Ibid., p. 9
         18 1bid., pp. 10-11
         19 Ibid., p. 18
         20 Eliade, The Sacred and the Profane, pp. 99-100
         21 We may appeal to Peter Berger’s argument, mentioned previously

in this study, that the reasons for this integration lie in the need to keep the
forces of chaos at bay, and this is the task of sacred cosmology. Hence,
sacred psychotherapeutics becomes a form of “world” maintenance or
restoration.
         22 Eliade, The Sacred and the Profane, p. 20
         23 Mircea Eliade, Patterns in Comparative Religion (New York:

Sheed & Ward, 1958), p. 369
         24 Ibid., pp. 369-371
       25  Ibid., p. 369
        26 Robert L. Moore and Frank E. Reynolds, Anthropology and the

Study of Religion (Chicago: Center for the Scientific Study of Religion,
1984), p. 132
        27 Van Gennep; The Rites of Passage
        28 Moore and Reynolds, Anthropology, pp. 133-134
        29 Ibid., p. 136
        30 Ibid., p. 136
        31 Ibid., p. 136
        32 Ibid., p. 136
        33 Ibid., p. 137
        34 C. G. Jung used the terms container and alchemical vessel to

suggest the strong boundaries needed for deep psychological
transformation; cf. Jung, CW 10, pars. 253, 255
        35 Moore and Reynolds, Anthropology, p. 139



      CHAPTER THREE. JUNG THE WOUNDED HEALER

       1  C. G. Jung, Memories, Dreams, Reflections. Aniela Jaffé , editor
(New York: Pantheon Books, 1973). Hereafter we shall refer to this
autobiographical writing as MDR.
        2 Anthony Stevens, On Jung: A New Authoritative Introduction to

Jung’s Life and Thought (London: Penguin Books, 1990) pp. 102-103. All
subsequent references to Stevens in this chapter will be to this book,
indicated as On Jung, throughout the text.
        3 Sigmund Freud, The Interpretation of Dreams, in The Standard

Edition of the Collected Works of Sigmund Freud (London: The Hogarth
Press, 1900).
        4 Stevens, On Jung, pp. 160-161
        5 Stevens suggests that Toni reminded Jung of the maid that took

care of Jung when his mother was hospitalized. If this is true, it probably
meant that Jung felt a certain cohesion of personality in response to Toni’s
loving care of him. See On Jung, pp. 171-174, for Stevens’ discussion of
Toni’s psychological importance to Jung during this time of crisis.
        6 Stevens, On Jung, p. 172



      CHAPTER FOUR. JUNG’S THEORY OF THE SOUL

       1  James Hillman, Re-Visioning Psychology (New York: Harper
Colophon Books, 1975), p. 20, and pp. 30-38
        2 MDR, pp. 158-159
        3 MDR, pp. 161
        4 Barbara Hannah, Jung: His Life and Work (New York: G. P.

Putnam & Sons, 1976) pp. 16-17. Hannah was a close friend and analysand
of Jung. She studied under Jung, attending his lecture in Zurich, and later
shared a home with Jung’s right-hand assistant, Marie Louise von Franz.
        5 Jung, CW, p. 133
        6 See Stevens, On Jung, pp. 36-37, for a discussion of the

applicability of natural selection to the archetypal theory.
        7 St. Augustine and St. Thomas Aquinas believed that the forms

existed as thoughts in the mind of God, hence their numinous quality as
reflections of the divine life. Paul Tillich likewise equated the essences as
forms created in the divine life “above” existence, and he believed Jung’s
archetypes to be among those essential structures. For my extended
discussion of archetypes and eternal objects in the thought of C. G. Jung
and Alfred North Whitehead, see my Psychotherapy and the Sacred:
Religious Experience and Religious Resources in Psychotherapy (Chicago:
Center for the Scientific Study of Religion Press, 1995).
        8 Jolande Jacobi, Complex, Archetype, Symbol in the Psychology of

C. G. Jung (Princeton: Bollingen Series, 1959), p. 49. Jacobi quotes Jung
on this point and cites the German article “Uber den Archetypus” (1936), p.
264. She notes that this passage is not found in Jung, CW.
        9 Jung, CW 5, p. 268
        10 Jung, CW 9i, p. 173
       11  We do not mean to minimize the importance of female puberty
rites. The girl must be transformed into a woman. Traditionally, and cross-
culturally, female archetypal patterns have been determined largely by
patriarchal power structures, leaving fewer archetypal patterns accessible to
females. Feminist critics today have much to say about puberty rites which
switch on archetypal patterns of mother and wife and which limit female
transformation to roles desired by men. It should be mentioned, however,
that females do have access, today at least, to many of the archetypal
patterns once designated as masculine. There is both current and historical
precedent for believing that women can access the archetypes of warrior,
hunter, trickster, and other archetypes once considered masculine. Our
discussion here, however, follows Jung and Eliade and other
anthropologists and psychologists whose focus on masculine gender for
their examples is now believed to be unfair and outdated.
        12 Jung; CW 11, par. 6
        13 Jung; CW 17, p 8
        14 Otto, The Idea of the Holy
        15 Doore, “Ancient Wisdom,” p. 4
        16 Jung, CW 13, par. 75; CW 8, par. 618
        17 MDR, p. 3
        18 Jung, CW 9i, p 275
        19 Jung, CW 7, par. 266
        20 Jung, CW 9i, pp. 122ff
        21 Jung, CW, ii, par. 509
        22 The terminology used to describe the hero pattern is borrowed

from Joseph Campbell, who, influenced by Jung in his studies into
comparative mythology, speaks of the archetypal hero journey as consisting
of the three stages of separation, initiation, and return (with the boon). Cf.
Joseph Campbell, Myths to Live By (New York: Bantam Books, 1970), p.
209
        23 Jung, CW 11, par. 391
        24 Cf. Jung’s discussion of the archetypal Self as “source of order”,

Jung, CW 10, par. 805; as “organizer of personality,” Jung, CW 10, par.
694; as “regulator”, Jung, CW 13, par. 18; and as source of meaning, Jung,
CW 10, par. 488-588
        25 Jung, CW 12, par. 44
        26 C. G. Jung, ed., Man and His Symbols (London: Aldus Books,

1964), p. 161
        27 Jung, CW 11, par. 59
        28 MDR, pp. 48, 57
        29 Jung, CW 8, p. 557
        30 Jung, CW 18, p. 73
        31 Jung, CW 2, pp. 601-602
        32 Jung, CW 2, pp. 1-92
        33 C. Jess Groesbeck, M.D., “Multiple Personality Disorder and C.

G. Jung”, an audio cassette tape.
        34 Jung, CW 8, p. 121
        35 Jung, CW 2, pp. 601-602
        36 Jung, CW 2, p. 602, par. 354
        37 C. G. Jung, editor, Man and His Symbols (Garden City, New

York: Doubleday & Company, Inc., 1964), p. 161
        38 Lucien Lévy-Bruhl, How Natives Think, Lilian A. Clare, trans.

(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1985), pp. 69-104
        39 John R. Haule, Ph.D., Jungian Analyst (Zurich), made this

observation to me during an ongoing correspondence concerning
shamanism, Jungian psychology, and the New Age spirit phenomena. A
number of the insights in this discussion about the reality of spirits
crystalized through these conversations. Mr. Haule is an innovator in the
interfacing of shamanic and Jungian theory and experience. His
forthcoming book Downloading Wisdom: Spirit, Dream, and
Transcendence in the New Age contains many illuminating and clarifying
discussions on shamanic and related spirit phenomena. It is highly
recommended. Also his book Pilgrimage of the Heart: The Path of
Romantic Love (Boston: Shambala Books, 1992) is valuable in discussing
the relation between psyches, the Self-Self relation in accounting for
shamanic seeing, a la Castaneda. Citing the way lovers can see into each
other’s souls and citing the existence of shamanic societies like that which
exists amongst the !Kung tribe, Haule argues that the ability to tune into
another person’s psyche telepathically and see is a universal psychological
potential, which can be developed.
         40 Jung is anything but clear and consistent in talking of God’s

reality, sometimes sounding like he’s talking about a god-image, or an
archetype, and at other times an objective, although subjectively
experienced, divine reality. He has suggested that the locus of God, or a
divine reality, would be archetypal Self, both in its all-embracing totality of
the psyche, and in its guiding and directing functions as spiritus rector.
         41 See Haule, Pilgrimage, pp. 50-61
         42 Ibid., p. 54
         43 Ibid., p. 55



           CHAPTER FIVE. JUNG’S INTERPRETATION OF
                         SHAMANISM

       1  Jung, CW 10, pars. 21-22
        2 Jung, CW par. 2
        3 Jung, CW 10, par. 2
        4 Jung, CW 10, par. 22
        5 Jung, CW 13, par. 132. Jung points out that this corresponds to

Eliade ‘s observation in Shamanism, p. 52
        6 Jung, CW 13, par. 126
        7 Jung, CW 13, 340
        8 Jung, CW 13, par. 462; of Eliade; Shamanism, p. 293
        9 Jung, CW 13, par. 462
        10 Jung, CW 9i, par. 115, footnote 38
        11 Jung, CW 13, par. 399
        12 Jung, CW 13, par. 460
        13 Jung, CW 11, par. 448
        14 Jung, CW 5, par. 251
       15  Jung, CW 11, par. 346, footnote. The brackets in this quote are
mine, to emphasize that Jung’s use of “medicine men” would include
medicine women if rephrased today.
        16 Jung, CW 11, par. 411
        17 Jung, CW 11, par. 411
        18 Jung, CW 11, par. 448
        19 Jung, CW 9i, par. 457
        20 I wish to acknowledge my indebtedness, for this understanding of

the shaman as epistemological mediator, to anthropologist Mary Schmidt;
see her essay “Crazy Wisdom: The Shaman as Mediator of Realities”, in
Nichols, Shamanism, pp. 62-75
        21 Jung, CW 9i, par. 457
        22 Jung, CW 9i, par. 213
        23 Jung, CW 9i, par. 213
        24 Jung, CW 6, par. 384
        25 Jung, CW 6, par. 384
        26 Jung, CW par. 384
        27 Jung, CW 9i, par. 213
        28 Jung, CW 14, par. 602
        29 Jung, CW 16, pars. 214-215
        30 Jung, CW 14, par. 603
        31 Jung, CW 16, pars. 215-215



 CHAPTER SIX. DISSOCIATION, POSSESSION, AND SOUL
                      LOSS

       1 Ernst Hilgard, Divided Consciousness: Multiple Controls in
Human Thought and Action (New York: Wiley & Sons, 1977).
       2 Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders-Fourth

Edition, p. 477
       3 Ralph B. Allison, Minds in Many Pieces (New York: Rawsom &

Wade, 1980).
       4  Colin Ross, Multiple Personality Disorder: Diagnosis, Clinical
Features, and Treatment (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1989), pp. 204-
246
        5 Ibid., pp. 268-273
        6 Ibid., p. 111
        7 Cf. Kakar, Shamans, Mystics, and Doctors. Kakar describes

throughout the section on shamans how ancestral spirits are the most
prominent possessing entities in Indian subcultures. He also argues that
dissociation is the most widespread psychotherapeutic technique in the
world, especially for dealing with possession disorders (p. 105)
        8 Achterberg, Imagery in Healing, pp. 108-111
        9 Ross, Multiple Personality Disorder, p. 16
        10 Ibid., p. 259
        11 Ibid., p. 269
        12 Ibid., p. 272
        13 Sandra Ingerman, Soul Retrieval: Mending the Fragmented Self

(San Francisco, Harper San Francisco, 1991), p. 221
        14 Hultkrantz, “Health, Religion, and Medicine,” p. 342
        15 Ibid., p. 342-343
        16 Ingerman, Soul Retrieval, pp. 68-69
        17 Ibid., p. 71
        18 Hilgard, Divided Consciousness, p. 1
        19 Robert L. Moore and Douglas Gillette, The Magician Within:

Accessing the Shaman in the Male Psyche (New York: William Morrow and
Co., 1993), p. 34
        20 There are even spontaneous retrievals, according to Ingerman.
        21 I am indebted to Geoffry Satin over for his interpretation of the

relation between clusters of alters and archetypes, given in a discussion at
the C. G. Jung Insititute of Chicago, February 19, 20, 1994. Tapes of this
workshop on neural network theory and dissociation in Jungian perspective
are available through the Insititute.
        22 Goodman, How About Demons? pp. 79-86
        23 Kakar, Shamans, Mystics, and Doctors, pp. 22-52
        24 Feminist critics might observe that for such a woman her illness is
more a sane response to an insane world than it is an actual sickness as
defined by a patriarchal diagnostic system. Be that as it may, the woman’s
suffering is real, and her culture, like all cultures, gives rise to a therapeutic
remedy for the illness caused by the contradictions engendered by the
culture itself. Our point in this example is to show how a demonological
idiom is employed within a culture or subculture to shape the
symptomatology—in this case, to culturally shape dissociated contents into
a demon.
        25 Kakar, Shamans, Mystics, and Doctors, p. 105-106
        26 Thomas B. Allen, Possessed: The True Story of an Exorcism

(New York, Doubleday, 1993), p. 259
        27 Goodman, How About Demons? pp. 107-122
        28 Ibid., p. 85
        29 Cited ibid., pp. 85-86. For a fuller discussion of Allison’s

approach, see Ralph B. Allison, Minds in Many Pieces, (New York: Rawson
Wade, 1980) and “The Possession Syndrome: Myth, Magic, and
Multiplicity,” paper presented to the Second Pacific Conference of
Psychiatry, Manila, Philippines, 12-15 May, 1989
        30 Goodman, How About Demons? p. 84



        31 Goodman herself has written a couple of books documenting and
reflecting upon these more serious cases. Felicitas Goodman, The Exorcism
of Anneliese Michel (New York: Doubleday, 1981), discusses the relatively
recent case of Anneliese Michel, the young German university student who
died during a Catholic ritual exorcism. She discusses several cases of
possession in How About Demons? and gives a detailed account of the
successful exorcism of Anna Maria of Uz in the 17th century by the shaman
Jacob Durr.
        32 Kakar, Obeysekere, Kleinman
        33 Jung, CW 6, par. 384
 CHAPTER SEVEN. THE POWER OF RITUAL, IMAGE, AND
                  ARCHETYPE

       1   Robert Moore, Douglas Gillette, King, Warrior, Magician, and
Lover: Rediscovering the Archetypes of the Mature Masculine, (New York:
HarperCollins, 1990).
         2 See Robert L. Moore and Douglas Gillette, The King Within:

Accessing the King in the Male Psyche (New York: William Morrow & Co.,
Inc., 1992), p. 25. Moore and Gillette propose that females can access the
archetypes of the mature feminine (queen, warrior, lover, and magician).
However, there is no extensive treatment of how these archetypes function
in female maturity. Certainly there are classical mythologic images of
woman as ruler and principle of order: queen (Hera), warrior (Athena),
magician (Persephone as psychopomp), and lover (Aphrodite/Venus). When
Moore and Gillette note that puberty rites are part of tribal cultures with
their “limitations” and “drawbacks”, it appears that they are cognizant of
patriarchal assumptions in defining what the ideals and norms of mature
masculine and feminine behaviors are (p. 25). In spite of these “limitations”
and “drawbacks”, Moore and Gillette believe that puberty rituals did
provide a means of transformation for girls into mature women and boys
into mature men, as defined by the gender-specific norms and ideals of the
local culture. For a balanced contemporary resource by gender-sensitive
psychologists, analysts, and anthropologists on initiation rites for males and
females, see Louise Madhi, Steven Foster, and Meredith Little, eds., Betwixt
and Between: Patterns of Initiation (Lasalle, Ill.: Open Court Publishing
Co., 1986), pp. 201-284
         3 See Robert L. Moore’s discussion of Victor Turner’s work on

transformative ritual, and his own discussion of liminality and sacred space-
time, in Robert L. Moore and Frank E. Reynolds, eds., Anthropology and
the Study of Religion (Chicago: Center for the Scientific Study of Religion
Press, 1984), pp. 126-142
         4 Cited in Anthony Stevens, Archetypes: A Natural History of the

Self (New York: Quill, 1982), p. 262
         5 Achterberg, Imagery in Healing, p. 5
       6  1bid., p. 5
        7 Simonton, Matthews-Simonton, and Creighton, Getting Well Again
        8 Michael Harner, editor, The Way of the Shaman (New York:

Bantam Books, 1982), pp. 137-138
        9 Simonton, Matthews-Simonton, and Creighton, Getting Well

Again, p. 268
        10 Paul Watzlawick, The Language of Change: Elements of

Therapeutic Communication (New York: Basic Books, 1978), p. 43
        11 Cited ibid., p. 43

        12 Paul Ricoeur, History and Truth (Evanston: Northwestern
University Press, 1966), p. 127
        13 Kakar, Shamans, Mystics, and Doctors, pp. 20-24
        14 We can not take the time to comment upon the culturally

determined problem of the father marrying off the daughter, possibly
without even consulting her wishes. In Western society today, most
psychotherapists would consider this also an abusive and patriarchal move,
where the daughter is penalized instead of the perpetrator (potential
perpetrator in this case). However, in this cultural context, the healer’s
intervention would be considered legitimate and helpful. Only a careful
follow-up study could determine if it was helpful or further damaging.
        15 C. Michael Smith, Psychotherapy and the Sacred: Religious

Experience and Religious Resources in Psychotherapy (Chicago: Center for
the Scientific Study of Religion Press, 1995). The events of this shamanic
therapy were reported to me by Prince Forolungsha Ogundele, of the
Yoruba Tribe, Nigeria, in an interview at the University of Chicago, 1988.
Ogundele reported that his grandfather was the shaman. Ogundele said the
patient was psychotic by Western standards, rather than possessed.
Ogundele has been trained in Western psychology and sociology.
        16 Stevens, Archetypes, p. 262
        17 Ibid., p. 266
        18 Ibid., p. 266
        19 J. P. Henry and P. M. Stephens, Stress, Health, and the Social

Environment: A Sociobiological Approach to Medicine (New York:
Springer-Verlag, 1977), p. 111
       20  Stevens, Archetypes, p. 269
        21 Cited ibid., p. 270
        22 Jung, CW 16, par. 330
        23 Again, we should note that Moore and Gillette are careful to

emphasize that females also have and can access the archetypes of the
masculine, especially through the Jungian animus, as men can access the
archetypes of the feminine through the Jungian anima. Anima and animus
are the contrasexual archetypal structures, both of which reside in men and
women. This is the basis for Moore and Gillette’s belief that women access
the king, although the queen will be primary for most women, and men
access the queen, although the king will be primary for most men. Women
therefore also can access the magician and all the other archetypes. In fact,
according to Eliade, the feminine is powerful to the shaman, and women are
often considered more powerful shamans. This is purportedly why male
shamans sometimes wear dresses. This suggests that women can access the
magician archetype in its highest expression.
        24 Moore and Gillette: King, Warrior, Magician, Lover, pp. xv-xix
        25 Moore and Gillette, The King Within, p. 269
        26 Moore and Gillette, King, Warrior, Magician, Lover, p. 270
        27 Ibid., p. 271
        28 Ibid., p. 98
        29 Ibid., p. 102



    CHAPTER EIGHT. IMPLICATIONS FOR THE FUTURE

       1  The Shamanic Applications Review is a journal which interfaces
shamanism and psychotherapy, and also shamanism and other modem
health care disciplines, and also seeks to interface findings and insights
from neuroscience, clinical hypnosis, dissociation theory, theology, and
philosophy. For further information: SAR, P.O. Box 0314, Niles, MI 49120
        2 Colin A. Ross, M.D., Multiple Personality Disorder: Diagnosis,

Clinical Features, and Treatment (New York: Wiley & Sons, 1989), pp.
268-269. Ross is one of the world’s foremost psychiatric
specialists/researchers in multiple personality disorders. He states that he
has a number of shamanic amulets, medicine bundles, and shamanic power
objects in his office, and that treatment of MPD often becomes a prolonged
spiritual ritual. He argues that because MPD patients are continuously in
altered states, their thought patterns are magical, suggestible, and can be
influenced by shamanic-type interventions and suggestions.
        3 Kakar, Shamans, Mystics, and Doctors, p. 5
        4 Jung, CW 11, par. 9
        5 This is a quote from a conversation recorded on the film/video The

Wisdom of the Dream: C. G. Jung, a Steven Segallier Film, vol. 2 (Segallier
Films, 1989)
        6 Ibid., conversation with Jungian analyst Donald Sandner, on the

Navajo system of myth and healing.
        7 Ibid.
        8 MDR, p. 252
                         Selected Bibliography

Achterberg, Jeanne, Imagery in Healing: Shamanism and Modem Medicine
     (Boston: Shambala Publications, Inc., 1985).

Berger, Peter L., The Sacred Canopy: Elements of a Sociological Theory of
     Religion (New York: Doubleday & Co., 1969).

Berger, Peter L. and Luckmann, Thomas, The Social Construction of
     Reality: A Treatise in the Sociology of Knowledge (New York: Anchor
     Books, 1967).

Bergin, Allen E. and Jansen, J.P., “Religiosity of Psychotherapists: A
     National Survey,” Psychotherapy, Vol. 27, No. 1, 1990, pp. 3-7.

Bergin, Allen E., “Values and Religious Issues in Psychotherapy and
     Mental Health,” American Psychologist, Vol. 46, No. 4, pp. 394-403.

Boisen, Anton, The Exploration of the Inner World: A Study of Mental
     Health Disorder and Religious Experience (Philadelphia: University
     of Pennsylvania Press, 1936).

Brennan, Barbara Ann, Hands of Light: A Guide to Healing Through the
     Human Energy Field (New York: Bantam Books, 1988).

Brown, Daniel and Fass, Margot L., Creative Mastery in Hypnosis: A
    Festschrift for Erika Fromm (Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
    Associates, Inc., 1990).

Brown, Daniel P. and Fromm, Erika, Hypnotherapy and Hypnoanalysis
    (London: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers, 1986).

Campbell, Joseph, “Schizophrenia: The Inward journey”, in Consciousness:
    Brain States of Awareness and Mysticism, Daniel Goleman and
      Richard J. Davidson, editors (New York: Harper & Row, 1979).

Castaneda, Carlos, Tales of Power (New York: Rocket Books, 1974).

Csordas, Thomas, “Medical and Sacred Realities: Between Comparative
     Religion and Psychiatry,” Journal of Culture, Medicine, and
     Psychiatry, Vol. 9, 1985.

DeKorne, Jim, Psychedelic Shamanism: The Cultivation, Preparation and
    Shamanic Use of Psychotropic Plants (Port Townsend, WA:
    Loompanics Unlimited, 1994).

Doore, Gary, editor, What Survives? Contemporary Explorations of Life
     After Death (New York: G. P. Putnam & Sons, 1990).

Durkhcim, Emile, The Elementary Forms of Religious Life, Joseph Ward
     Swain, translator (New York: Free Press, 1915).

Drury, Nevill, The Elements of Shamanism (Dorset: Element Books, Ltd.,
     1989).

Eigen, Michael, The Psychotic Core (London: Jason Aronson, 1986).

Eliade, Mircea, Le Sacré et le Profane (Paris: Editions Gallimard, 1965).

_______ The Myth of the Eternal Return; or, Cosmos and History (Princeton:
      Princeton University Press, Bollingen Series XLVI, 1959).

_______Images and Symbols: Studies in Religious Symbolism (New York:
      Sheed & Ward, 1969).

_______Patterns in Comparative Religion (New York: Sheed & Ward,
      1958).
_______Shamanism: Archaic Techniques of Ecstasy (Princeton: Princeton
      University Press, Bollingen Series LXXVI, 1964).

Ellenberger, Henri F., The Discovery of the Unconscious: The History and
      Evolution of Dynamic Psychiatry (New York: Harper & Row, 1970).

Foucault, Michel, Madness and Civilization: A History of Insanity in the
     Age of Reason (New York: Random House, 1965).

Frank, Jerome, Persuasion and Healing (New York: Schocken Books,
     1969).

Freud, Sigmund, The Major Works of Sigmund Freud, Vol. 54, Great Books
     Series (Chicago: Encyclopedia Brittanica, Inc., 1947).

Geertz, Clifford, The Interpretation of Cultures (New York: Harper
     Torchbooks, 1973).

Goodman, Felicitas D., Ecstasy, Ritual, and Alternate Reality: Religion in a
    Pluralistic World (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1988).

_______How About Demons? Possession and Exorcism in the Modern
      World (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1986).

Grant, Brian, Schizophrenia: A Source of Social Insight (Philadelphia:
     Westminster Press, 1975).

Griffin, David Ray, editor, God and Religion in the Postmodern World:
      Essays in Postmodern Theology (New York: State University of New
      York Press, 1989).

Griffin, David Ray, editor, Archetypal Process: Self and Divine in
      Whitehead, Jung, and Hillman (Evanston, IL: Northwestern
      University Press, 1989).
Grof, Stanislav, Beyond the Brain: Birth, Death, and Transcendence in
      Psychotherapy (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1985).

Grof, Stanislav and Grof, Christina, editors, Spiritual Emergency: When
      Personal Transformation Becomes a Crisis (New York: G. P. Putnam
      and Sons, 1989).

Hannah, Barbara, Jung: His Life and Work (New York: G. P. Putnam &
     Sons, 1976).

Harner, Michael, editor, Hallucinogens and Shamanism (London: Oxford
     University Press, 1973).

_______ The Way of the Shaman (New York: Bantam Books, 1982).
Haule, John R., Pilgrimage of the Heart: The Path of Romantic Love
     (Boston: Shambala Books, 1992).

Hick, John, God Has Many Names (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1982).

Hillman, James, Re-Visioning Psychology (New York: Harper Colophon
     Books, 1975).

Hughes-Calero, Heather, Shaman of Tibet: Milarepa—from Anger to
    Enlightenment (Sedona, AZ: Higher Consciousness Books, 1987).

Ingerman, Sandra, Soul Retrieval: Mending the Fragmented Self (San
     Francisco: Harper San Francisco, 1991).

_______Welcome Home: Life After Healing, Following Your Soul’s Journey
      Home (San Francisco: Harper San Francisco, 1993).

Jaffé, Aniela, The Myth of Meaning: Jung and the Expansion of
       Consciousness (New York: Penguin Books, 1975).
James, William, The Varieties of Religious Experience (New York: Bantam
     Books, 1950).

Jung, C. G., Memories, Dreams, Reflections, revised edition, Aniela Jaffé,
      editor (New York: Pantheon Books, 1962).

_______ Symbols of Transformation: An Analysis of the Prelude to a Case of
      Schizophrenia, Vol. 5, Collected Works, 2nd edition; Sir Herbert
      Read, Michael Fordham, Gerhard Adler, editors; William McGuire,
      executive editor; R. F. C. Hull, translator (Princeton: Princeton
      University Press, Bollingen series 20, 1967).

_______ Two Essays on Analytical Psychology, Vol. 7, Collected Works, 2nd
      edition (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1972).

_______The Structure and Dynamics of the Psyche, Vol. 8, Collected Works,
      2nd edition (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1969).

_______The Archetypes of the Collective Unconscious, Vol. 9i, Collected
      Works, 2nd edition (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1968).

_______Aion: Researches into the Phenomenology of the Self, Vol. 9ii,
      Collected Works, 2nd edition (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
      1968).

_______Psychology and Religion: East and West, Vol. 11, Collected Works,
      2nd edition (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1968).

_______ The Practice of Psychotherapy: Essays on the Psychology of the
      Transference and Other Subjects, Vol. 16, Collected Works, 2nd
      edition (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1966).

_______ The Symbolic Life, Vol. 16, Collected Works, 2nd edition (Princeton:
      Princeton University Press, 1976).
_______Briefe, Aniela Jaffé and Gerhard Adler, editors, 3 Vols. (Olten,
      Switzerland: Walter-Verlag, 1971).

_______The Inner World: A Psycho-Analytic Study of Childhood and
      Society in India, 2nd edition (Dehli: Oxford University Press, 1981).

_______ Intimate Relations: Exploring Indian Sexuality (Chicago: University
      of Chicago Press, 1990).

Kalwait, Holger, Shamans, Healers, and Medicine Men (Boston: Shambala,
     1992).

Keller, Catherine, From a Broken Web: Separation, Sexism, and Self
      (Boston: Beacon Press, 1986).

King, Noel Q., African Cosmos: An Introduction to Religion in Africa
      (Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Publishing Co., 1986).

King, Serge Kahili, Urban Shaman, A Handbook for Personal and
      Planetary Transformation Based on the Hawaiian Way of the
      Adventurer (New York: Fireside, 1990).

Kleinman, Arthur and Good, Byron, Culture and Depression: Studies in
     Anthropology and Cross-Cultural Psychiatry of Affect Disorder
     (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1985).

_______ Patients and Healers in the Context of Culture: An Exploration of
      the Borderland Between Anthropology, Medicine, and Psychiatry
      (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1980).

Kohut, Heinz, Self Psychology and the Humanities: Reflection on a New
     Psychoanalytic Approach (New York: W. W. Norton & Co., 1985).

Kubler-Ross, Elizabeth, On Life After Death (Berkeley: Celestial Arts,
     1995).
Lacan, Jacques, Ecrits: A Selection, Alan Sheridan, translator (New York:
     W. W. Norton & Co., 1977).

Laing, R.D., The Voice of Experience (New York: Pantheon Books, 1982).

Levi-Strauss, Claude, Structural Anthropology (New York: Harper
     Torchbooks, 1983).

Lévy-Bruhl, Lucien, How Natives Think, Lilian Clare, translator (Princeton:
     Princeton University Press, 1985).

Marino, Adrian, L‘Hermeneutic de Mircea Eliade (Paris: Gallimard, 1981).

Meland, Bernard, Faith and Culture (London: George Allen and Unwin
     Ltd., 1955).

_______   The Realities of Faith (London: Oxford University Press, 1962).

Moore, Robert L., “Ritual Process, Initiation, and Contemporary Religion”,
    in Murray Stein and Robert L. Moore, editors, Jung’s Challenge to
    Contemporary Religion (Wilmette, IL: Chiron Publications, 1987).

_______ King, Warrior, Magician, and Lover: Rediscovering the Archetypes
      of the Mature Masculine (New York: HarperCollins, 1990).

Moore, Robert L. and Gillette, Douglas, The King Within: Accessing the
    King in the Male Psyche (New York: William Morrow and Co.,
    1992).

_______ The Magician Within: Accessing the Shaman in the Male Psyche
      (New York: William Morrow and Co., 1993).

Moore, Robert L. and Reynolds, Frank E., Anthropology and the Study of
    Religion (Chicago: Center for the Scientific Study of Religion, 1984).
Moore, Thomas, The Care of the Soul: A Guide for Cultivating Depth and
    Sacredness in Everyday Life (New York: Harper Collins Publishers,
    1992).

Nicholson, Shirley, editor, Shamanism: An Expanded View of Reality
     (Wheaton, IL: Theosophical Publishing House, 1987).

Noble, Kathleen, “Psychological Health and the Experience of
     Transcendence”, The Counseling Psychologist, Vol. 15, No. 4,
     October 1987.

Obeyesekere, Gannath, Medusa’s Hair: An Essay on Personal Symbols and
     Religious Experience (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981).

Perry, John Weir, “Psychosis as a Visionary State,” in Ian F. Baker, editor,
      Methods of Treatment in Analytical Psychology (Verlag: Adolf Bonz
      Publishers, 1980).

_______The Far Side of Madness (Englewood, NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc.,
      1974).

_______ The Self in Psychotic Process: Its Symbolization in Schizophrenia
      (Dallas: Spring Publications, 1953).

Putnam, Frank W., Diagnosis and Treatment of Multiple Personality
     Disorder (New York: The Guilford Press, 1989).

Ricoeur, Paul, The Symbolism of Evil, Emerson Buchanan, translator (New
     York: Harper & Row, 1967).

Ring, Kenneth, Heading Toward Omega: In Search of the Meaning of the
      Near Death Experience (New York: William Morrow, 1985).
Ross, Colin A., Multiple Personality Disorder: Diagnosis, Clinical
      Features, and Treatment (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1989).

Russel, Robbins Hope, The Encyclopedia of Witchcraft and Demonology
     (New York: Crown Publishers, 1959).

Otto, Rudolf, The Idea of the Holy (London: Oxford University Press,
      1976).

Samuels, Andrew, Shorter, Bani, and Plaut, Fred, A Critical Dictionary of
    jungian Analysis (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1985 ).

Sanchez, Victor, The Teaching of Don Carlos: Practical Applications of the
     Works of Carlos Castaneda (Santa Fe, NM: Bear & Co., 1995).

Sandner, Donald F. and Beebem, John, “Psychopathology and Analysis,” in
     Murray Stein, editor, Jungian Analysis (Boulder: Shambala
     Publications, Inc., 1982).

Schultz, Duane, A History of Modern Psychology, 3rd edition (New York:
     Academic Press, 1981).

Schroeder, W. Widick, Cognitive Structures and Religious Research: Essays
     in Sociology and Theology (East Lansing: Michigan State University
     Press, 1970).

Smith, C. Michael, Psychotherapy and the Sacred: Religious Experience
     and Religious Resources in Psychotherapy (Chicago: Center for the
     Scientific Study of Religion Press, 1995).

Snyder, Solomon H., Drugs and the Brain (New York: Scientific American
     Library, 1986).

Spiegelberg, Herbert, Phenomenology in Psychology and Psychiatry
     (Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 1972).
Star Hawk Lake, Tela, Hawk Woman Dancing with the Moon: The Last
      Female Shaman (New York: M. Evans & Company, Inc.).

Stein, Murray, Jung’s Treatment of Christianity: The Psychotherapy of a
      Religious Tradition (Wilmette, IL: Chiron Publications, 1985).

Stevens, Anthony, Archetypes: A Natural History of the Self (New York:
     Quill, 1982).

_______   On Jung (London: Penguin Group, 1990).

_______The Two Million Year Old Self (College Station, TX: Texas A & M
      University Press, 1993).

Stigler, James, Shweder, Richard A., and Herdt, Gilbert, editors, Cultural
      Psychology: Essays on Comparative Human Development
      (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990).

Sullivan, Lawrence E., editor, Healing and Restoring: Health and Medicine
      in the World’s Religious Traditions (New York: Macmillan Publishing
      Co., 1990).

Tillich, Paul, The Dynamics of Faith (New York: Harper Torchbooks,
       1957).

_______ The Meaning of Health, Perry Lefevre, editor (Chicago: Exploration
      Press, 1984).

Turner, Victor, On the Edge of the Bush: Anthropology as Experience
     (Tuscan: University of Arizona Press, 1985 ).

_______The Ritual Process: Structure and Anti-Structure (Ithaca, NY:
      Cornell University Press, 1969).
Van der Leeuw, Gerhardus, Religion in Essence and Manifestation
     (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1986).

Van Gennep, Arnold, Les Rites de Passage (Paris: E. Nourry, 1908).

Villoldo, Alberto and Jendressen, Erik, Dance of the Four Winds: Secrets of
      the Inca Medicine Wheel (Rochester, VT: Destiny Books, 1990).

_______Island of the Sun: Mastering the Inca Medicine Wheel (Rochester,
      VT: Destiny Books, 1990).

Waya, Ai Guhdi, Soul Recovery and Extraction (Cottonwood, AZ: Blue
     Turtle Publishing Co., 1996).

Wheelwright, Joseph B., The Analytic Process: Aims, Analysis, Training
    (New York: G. P. Putnam & Sons, 1971).

Whitehead, Alfred North, Adventure of Ideas (New York: The Free Press,
     1961).

_______Process and Reality: Corrected Edition, David Ray Griffin and
      Donald W. Sherburne, editors (New York: The Free Press, 1978).

_______   Religion in the Making (New York: MacMillan Co., 1925).

_______   Science and the Modern World (New York: The Free Press, 1953).

_______ Symbolism: Its Meaning and Effect (New York: Fordham University
      Press, 1965).

Winnicott, D. W., Human Nature (New York: Schocken Books, 1988).

_______   Playing and Reality (London: Rutledge & Kegan Paul, 1986).
_______Psychoanalytic Explorations, Clare Winnicott, Ray Shepherd, and
      Madeline Davis, editors (Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
      1989).

Winquist, Charles E., Homecoming: Interpretation, Transformation, and
    Individuation (Chicago: Scholars Press, 1978).

Wolf, Fred Alan, The Eagle’s Quest: A Physicist Finds Scientific Truth at
      the Heart of the Shamanic World (New York: Simon and Schuster,
      1991).
