 LIFE FORCE:
SENSED ENERGY
      IN

BREATHWORK,
PSYCHEDELIA
     AND

 CHAOS MAGIC
Life Force ©2017 David Lee
Print copy ISBN 978-0-9954904-3-7
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including
photocopying, recording or by any information retrieval system without the
prior written permission of the copyright owner, except for brief quotations
in a review.

Editing, typesetting, and design: Nikki Wyrd

First published in March, 2017 by The Universe Machine, Norwich.
Contents
Foreword
Introduction: Sensed Energy and Embodied Wisdom

Part I: The Many Ways of the Breath
           Chapter I-1: Breath for Inner Healing
           Chapter I-2: Peaceful Pranayamas
           Chapter I-3: Breaths of Power: Three Intense Pranayamas
           Chapter I-4: A Very Shallow, Slow Breath
Interlude: ‘Energy Healing’ and the Role of the Observer Self

Part II: The Breathwork Journey
           Chapter II-1: Embodied Wisdom, Flow and Guidance
           Chapter II-2: Reboot: The Death of Breath
           Chapter II-3: The Inner Alchemy of Art

Part III: Working With Sensed Energy
           Chapter III-1: Healing with Sensed Energy
           Chapter III-2: Group energy work

Part IV: Sensed Energy, Sex and Transmutation
           Chapter IV-1: Sensed Energy Currents and Centres
           Chapter IV-2: Energy Alchemy: The Dragon –Eagle Transmutation
           Chapter IV-3: The Alchemy of Sexual Desire

Part V: That’s All Very Well in Practice, But…
           Chapter V-1: Sensed Energy Up Close
           Chapter V-2: Remote Magic and Information
           Chapter V-3: Realm of the Damned: Energetic ‘Impossibilities’

Conclusions
           Appendix A: Chaos Magic—the Main Ideas and Where They Came From
           Appendix B: Resources for Connected Breathwork
           Appendix C: Some Connected Breathwork Exercises
           Appendix D: Origins and Schools of Connected Breathwork
           Appendix E: Physiology and Safety in Connected Breathwork
Bibliography and Recommended Reading
Foreword
This is a book about subtle energy for those who can’t bring themselves to
‘believe in’ subtle energy. It is a book of ideas and practices, many of which
come from traditions which are usually called vitalist, for sceptics of vitalism.
It is an exploration and a celebration of that set of feelings which are
undeniably, irrefutably real to consciousness, and appear to stem from ‘subtle
energies’, and the schemes of belief which work best for experiencing,
cultivating and manipulating these subtle sensations. It is about learning new
languages, the languages of breath and energy-sensing.
   When I use the term ‘energy’, the quote marks can be considered to be
there on most occasions. When I write ‘energy’ in a magical context, I
invariably mean ‘sensed energy’. I do not ‘believe in’ vitalism as an
overarching philosophy, nor is Energy Magic the only belief framework or
paradigm I employ in my work on myself and my world. For me, it is a
question of how useful an idea is. This is the true core of the Chaos Magic
attitude, which is the philosophical underpinning to this book.
   To me, the essence of the application of the ‘energy’ approach or ‘energy
magic paradigm’ is that it puts to best use a primary datum: the undeniable
sense of energy flowing in a healthy system.
The first four Parts of this book are practical. The fifth is concerned with
theory. This makes it the most exciting and the least useful, which is why it
goes at the end. The book’s Parts work as follows:
     Part I is about the immense variety of breathing techniques, introducing
     nine of them and understanding the core polarity between arousal and
     relaxation of sensed energy which is central to most breathwork.
     Part II is about the spiritual and emotional journey of one kind of
     breathwork, Connected Breathwork, the technique in which I am most
     experienced. Amongst other topics, it deals with: the idea of embodied
     wisdom and the experience of guidance arising from it, and the issue of
     ‘spiritual crisis’ and its relationship to the core polarity of breathwork.
     Part III is about working with sensed energy outside the individual
     body. It covers the use of sensed energy in healing and group energy-
     magic workings such as the Chaotron and the Breath of Light Circle.
     Part IV is about the internal transmutation of sensed energy. It discusses
     the cultivation of sensed energy with internal exercises, and the alchemy
     of sexual desire.
     Part V supplies some theoretical background, and a systematic, sceptical
     evaluation of weird events which are usually attributed to the action of
     subtle energy. These include physical theories to describe the
     transmission of ‘energy’ close up, the more challenging theoretical
     considerations around transmission over greater distance, and events
     which just seem downright impossible, such as the levitation event I
     witnessed as a young magician.
The book lays a foundation of experiential reporting, summing up reports
from my clients, from students and from magical groups I have worked with,
and my own experiences, both spontaneous and deliberate. These
summarized results are supplemented with more detailed case-study-type
notes; breathwork and energy-cultivation produce such individually-variable
effects that a case-study element helps to gain some idea of the breadth of
effects that we have to consider. Detailed subjective reports form a vital part
of any discourse that aims to bring the power of the breathwork experience to
a wider audience; this is not surprising—after all, our subjective world
contains the reasons we engage in breathwork in the first place. So I start
with practice, and return to it again and again. The book is structured with
some reference to my historical journey, starting with youthful psychedelic
experiences, and developing via Connected Breathwork and group energy
magic experiments in Chaos Magic groups.
   The ‘energies’ discussed herein may be familiar to you from traditional
systems of magic and combat, or you may have practised connected
breathwork (Rebirthing Breathwork, Vivation, Holotropic Breathwork), one
of the most powerful kinds of technique for the arousal of these energies.
You may have taken breathing technique and applied them to the healing of
other people—maybe learning some modern healing modality such as
Quantum Touch Healing. You may have experimented with body energy
flows during sex and ‘tantric’ practices, and learned how to redirect energy,
and experience the shifts in consciousness this produces. My intention in this
volume is to bring together this bewildering array of practices, objectives and
ideas and make some sense out of them.
   No book has attempted this before. To map such disparate sets of data
requires a big, inclusive frame of reference which permits many ideas,
ranging from clinical practice to spiritual traditions. My approach is sceptical
without dismissing non-ordinary experiences; it is somewhat scientific in its
approach but I believe it enshrines the true spirit of broad and deep scientific
enquiry. This philosophy is Chaoist, multiple models are examined to
account for the experiences herein, so as to provide a menu from which we
can select the most appropriate and effective model for the situation we find
ourselves in. Every narrative carries with it its own universe of belief, and my
aim here is to present evidence and possibilities in just such a spirit.
   Because the book draws on a number of schemes and concepts, including
the worlds of Connected Breathwork and pranayama, qigong and Taoist
alchemy, physical sciences, the work of Wilhelm Reich, Northern European
magical tradition and Chaos Magic, some of the less well-documented areas
have Appendices.
Introduction:
Sensed Energy and Embodied Wisdom
                                                                  …the sage is
                                                                 For the belly,
                                                               Not for the eye.
                             Therefore he discards the one and takes the other.
                                                 - Lao-Tse, Tao Teh Ching (1)
Toxic Dualism
When you sit down and close your eyes, how many kinds of things are
happening? No doubt the things you perceive will include thoughts, feelings,
the current of your breath, the beating of your heart... Sit for longer, and
you’ll become aware of a complex of tiny postural tensions and adjustments.
How many broad categories would you divide those sensations into? There is
probably a part of you that says: These experiences come from just two
categories—mind or body.
   Even if you are sophisticated at noting your inner experience, you may still
remember a time when you thought of yourself as consisting of only these
two categories, thought of yourself as a mind in a body, a ghost-in-a-
machine. Because that is what our culture tells us.
   This dualism had its most explicit form with Descartes’ cogito, ergo sum,
but goes back a lot further, right back to what is usually thought of as the start
of Western Philosophy—the thoughts of Plato (2).
   This mind/body split has proven to be relentlessly toxic. For a start, it has
condemned us to living in a dead, mechanical world, and provided humans
with an excuse to treat animals as if they did not feel pain. This thinking is
right at the root of the maniacal ecocide currently being perpetrated in the
name of ‘growth’.
   Then there's the disembodiment effect. Because ‘spirit’, which has become
equivalent to ‘mind’, is inherently superior to ‘flesh’, we are habitually
estranged from living participation in the vast fields of information that pour
from below our necks.
   From childhood, we are taught to think in abstract symbols—words and
numbers. Some of us become proficient at this skill, maybe to the extent of
becoming convinced that verbal, symbolic thought is the only significant
mode of human consciousness.
  Generally, other mental capabilities are not formally educated; kinaesthetic
awareness may develop with some kinds of sport, emotional intelligence is
mainly left to flourish—or not—on its own. Nowhere in mainstream
education is training offered in being totally aware of your experience and
inner processes.
  It is hard to think of ourselves outside of the crude, lumpen categories of
mind and body. It took a relatively extreme experience for me to ‘break open
my head’, and start to locate myself in the richer field of consciousness that
surrounds and underlies symbolic thought.
The first time I took LSD, it was a present from my friend for my 18th
birthday. We swallowed our pink tablets in the Sheffield Cathedral forecourt,
then we went and sat in a café in nearby Chapel Walk.
   I didn’t know what to expect. Naturally, I had some vague anticipations—I
had read about cosmic experiences in Leary’s Politics of Ecstasy, and I’d
listened to the Grateful Dead’s Anthem of the Sun album, with its glorious
climaxes, which seemed to represent a breaking-out of consciousness into
something new. What I actually got was, unsurprisingly, something quite
different. The tablet was not a strong one, and little of the famous
disorientation occurred. We sat on stools at the counter of the café, sipping
our coffee, waiting for things to get interesting.
   I suddenly noticed the music—the café radio was playing something that
made me feel as if my flesh was melting, my bones turning to soft tissue… I
felt the curve of my spine almost as an arc of energy… I let my body adjust
itself, allowing this new-found fluidity to expand and relax. All of a sudden, I
was in my body in a way I had never been before. In. My. Body. My body—
which no longer meant what it had always meant—not a unit of flesh seen
from the outside, but a living web of energy-like sensations.
   The music flowed through the space of me, I was permeated with sound
and feeling. Suddenly it occurred to me that the music was very far from
what I normally thought of as good music—it was some kind of Reginald
Dixon-style electric organ, like something from the end of the pier in a 1950s
seaside holiday. I burst out laughing.
   The music kept playing. I kept laughing. It felt good. Then I looked at my
friend and the same thought seemed to occur to both of us: Are we creating a
stir? That idea was funnier still. Shortly after that, we decided it was better if
we left the café and went for a walk.
    The feeling grew on me; I really had never been entirely ‘in my body’
before. I had lived my 18 years in my head—at least the consciously-owned
part of me, my provisional selfhood, had always thought that to be the case. I
was a thinker, who delighted in ideas, pondered problems, came up with
theories. I paid lip service to the idea of ‘having a body’, but my inner world
was all concepts and arguments. Except in states of high emotion, all I could
detect of my own inner process was a ceaseless internal monologue. I knew
the basic pains, desires and pleasures of being in a body, but even in the
course of sex I had never until that day felt so vividly that I was located in my
physical form. Now, I was in a world of rich inner sensation, sensing my
flesh like I’d never sensed it before, living in a many-dimensioned flow of
perceptions.
   This intensity did not last long, but it came to underlie my thoughts, raising
new questions about my identity. Eventually, this line of thinking led me to
ask: What is it to be ‘in’ ‘flesh’, ‘in’ ‘a body’?
   What is my ‘body’? It is me, seen from the outside. I don’t experience
‘having a body’ as a primary experience; I experience a range of sensations
and say ‘those ones are from the body’. Aaron Daniels writes of Jacques
Lacan’s crucial insight about how we mistake the image of our bodies for our
selves (3):
   Imagine a nice large mirror up to which you can hold a baby. Before the
   infant passes this develop​mental milestone, you can sneak a sticker onto
   the child’s face (for some reason, this is usually a banana sticker) and the
   giggling little imp will point at the ‘silly baby’ in the mirror. However,
   after passing through this phase, the infant will now point at his or her
   own face - seeing the sticker on an image it now identifies as ‘myself’. The
   baby takes in (i.e., ‘introjects’ or perhaps ‘invokes’) this limited mirror-
   representation as a self-image. For the rest of our lives, we will carry this
   mirror image ‘within’ us and, more often than not, only see it as ‘who I
   am’. Lacan says that this ‘here, this is me!’ internal model is the first great
   lie upon which we build all the other contrivances that twist our lives into
   neurotic pretzels.
  So our idea of ‘my body’ is an idea of a thing, like a chair or a piece of
bread. Our inward sense of ourselves is subsequently overwritten, obscured
by this thing-like false identity.
  This overlaying of primal sensation, this cutting up of the primal being into
two parts, is no accident, but part of a cultural programme. Once we divide
our experience into body and spirit, an order of precedence arises—spirit is
more important than body.
   The experience of being alive has been fragmented by the above-
mentioned toxic dualism. To put it bluntly, people have been royally ripped
off for millennia by various religions and philosophies about what it is to be
human.
   This thesis is not new—Raoul Vaneigem traces a history of bodily denial
and the Mediaeval resistance to it in The Movement of the Free Spirit (4).
More recently, Morris Berman wrote (5) of the way in which, once we are
split in two, virtually all attitudes within the culture, whether they be
conservative or radical, uphold the extreme value of ‘ascent experiences’—
any experience of ‘higher conscious​ness’ that takes us away from the body.
   What then if there were other ways than the crude, toxic mind/body dyad
of slicing up the primal giant of our experience? Perhaps a way that would
enhance our feeling of security and belonging in the world, by way of
honouring the primacy of experience, the way we feel from one moment to
the next? Nikki Wyrd suggests we abandon the primacy of ‘higher’ in her
blog piece ‘Dionysus’ Doorway’ (6):
   […] I suggest that the iconography of ‘higher’ levels of consciousness, of
   the ideal realms beyond our mundane reality, is unhelpful. Rather, we
   could use linguistic approaches emphasising the physical ground of our
   existence as those worthy of most awe, exposure to direct lived embodied
   awareness as the basis of our spiritual awakenings. Shifting our attention
   downwards, to the felt foundation, could resolve the vertiginous sickness of
   the last two millennia spent trying to find the Real in the cosmic distance.
   The ‘other dimensions’ beloved of so many entheogenic gurus may turn
   out to be the real world, whilst our normal awareness describes for us a
   practically useful fiction, a steady state narrative within which we see and
   move.
  To get back to basics, all we can know is what we experience directly. That
experience is ours to divide up as we see fit.
A Better Model
We need a scheme of sensed awareness, a model that empowers us, enables
us to centre on what is actually happening. A good model will help us
become familiar with the ‘languages’ of our inner world, and learn to trust
our intuitive sense of whether something is benign or harmful. Such a scheme
may even protect us to some extent from the toxic stream of propaganda we
swim in.
   Ancient models of human experience have many more categories than
Descartes' crude dualism.
   Within a number of these soul schemes, there are also schemes of sensed
awareness, often based on threefold patterns. So why not divide up the giant
of inner sensation into three zones of experience?
   Let us take Taoist alchemy as a classic example. In qigong, jing is the
densest kind of feeling, qi is intermediate, and shen is the subtlest, the
experience of consciousness itself. We might refer to these flavours of
experience as three fields of perception, three divisions of all our inner
sensations. In modern Western interpretation of traditional energy models,
these categories are usually called ‘energies’. This is misleading, because it
gives the impression of a naïve vitalism, which is a modern Western
projection, a dualistic category imposition, where no such duality may exist
in the original. Vitalism as such is not what I am interested in exploring.
   Let us dispense with the idea of ‘energies’ and instead think about the three
principles of traditional ‘energy’ systems as non-dualistic divisions in our
total experience, three fields of inner sensation, leaving behind the absolute
and rigid Cartesian boundary between thought and body.
It’s Not Just the Taoists
Our own culture has traces in its roots of a three-fields model. From Northern
European, pre-Christian literature we have the Old Norse term önd. This
appears in the Spae-Woman’s Prophecy (Völuspá), a poem from the great
13th century Icelandic compilation of traditional Norse lore known as the
Elder or Poetic Edda (7). In this poem, we read of the ensoulment of two
trees to form the first two human beings by the three gods who are aspects of
Odin, the Allfather.
   Three qualities (or sets of qualities) are given to the proto-humans. In the
source mentioned above, they are translated as ‘breath of life’, ‘wit’ and a
third principle which is in itself threefold, consisting of ‘manner’, ‘life hue’
and ‘good looks’.
   Here we have three principles—firstly, conscious mind, secondly ‘life-
breath’ and thirdly something denser, closer to the flesh itself; the translations
of the third principle cluster around a set of concepts that suggest healthy,
ruddy faces, and an overall idea of physical vitality.
   One of these third-category words is ‘movement’; I am reminded of
Gurdjieff’s system of three vital centres—the intellectual, the emotional and
the movement centres. The latter is the densest, most physical of these. So
one facet of the third principle is what we feel as the power to move us, the
passion that drives us (8).
   These three principles can be used as the basis for a scheme of sensed-
energy cultivation built from the Northern European magical tradition.
   The translator of the above text (James Chisholm) has rendered the
intellectual principle óð as ‘wod’. What he has done here is to adopt an old
English cognate of óð, which fits much more smoothly into modern English
speech. I would like to extend this idea of developing an English-style
vocabulary for discussion of these primal categories by adopting the
suggestion of Paul Mansveld (9) that the Old English word ‘ǽþm’ be adapted
to modern English spelling as ‘athm’, and adopted as a modern English
equivalent to önd. The densest principle can be counted as a single basic idea
because all three attributes are given by the same one of the three deities, and
I would suggest a modern English version of the Anglo-Saxon word
ástyrung, ‘motion’; this is astyr, pronounced with the stress on the first
syllable, but with a wave in the direction of the modern English word ‘astir’.
Three Zones of Experience
Let us look more closely at what we experience in each of these three
categories.
Wod (the Northern equivalent of the Taoists’ shen) is of course the
subjective experience of conscious awareness. Within this scheme, wod is
relatively obvious—there is no need to explicate it further, except to remind
ourselves that it is much more than mundane thought.
   These three kinds of sensation, wod, athm and astyr, run at different
speeds, and wod is the fastest kind, ‘fast as thought’. It is the easiest of the
principles to influence, its nature being fluid and sensitive to change.
Athm (Taoist qi) stretches, expands and contracts. Athm is sensed in the
rhythm of the breath, the primary pulsation of life from contracting to
expanding, the desire to stretch, to reach out, or to curl up. In this pulsation
there is a simple duality between parasympathetic and sympathetic sides of
the autonomic nervous system.
   Sensing athm includes sensing the flows of the autonomic nervous system,
between its tense, held-in sympathetic side and its relaxed and expansive
parasympathetic one. In qigong, it is said that the flow of qi is reduced when
the muscles are tensed; this is a condition in which the sympathetic nervous
system is dominant and inner sensation is reduced. Full immersion in the
tensions of the sympathetic-NS state is antithetical to full awareness of the
movement of athm.
   Athm is easy to direct—in qigong we are told ‘qi flows where attention
goes’. This parallelism works both ways—the mind can make the qi go where
it wants, as it does in qigong, and also the way we pay attention to any
sensation can be viewed as an outflowing of athm to that experience. The
experience of athm is the sensing of the body’s life, when at rest or when in
calmly controlled movement.
   Athm is intermediate in subtlety and speed of movement between wod and
astyr. Consider the sensation of a flush of excitement passing through you;
would it be fair to say it moves at a few millimetres per second? Research on
external correlates of these sensations has been done since the 1930s;
Wilhelm Reich measured skin potentials before and during emotional or
sexual arousal, showing that they change. Despite the rejection that often
greets Reich’s work, this research is not fringe stuff—skin potentials have
been measured many times, though not until Reich did the researcher
correlate the skin measurements to the subjective state of the subject. This
kind of research has been continued into the present day by scientists
studying measurable physical phenomena that correspond to the sensed flows
of qi in the skin surface or deep organs.
Astyr, the densest power, hardest to direct by conscious will, contains the
experience of that which moves us—passion, as the complement and spur of
action. It is that which is aroused by anything that touches our deepest
emotional and atavistic springs, and once aroused, carries immense
momentum, which is why it is difficult to direct.
Astyr is not the ‘poor relation’ of the other two principles, nor is athm, nor
wod; with this triplicity we have the core idea for a scheme of self-knowledge
which is not based on a loaded dualism. It is more holistic, realistic and
healthier than the duality we have inherited.
  What is more, if we adopt such a scheme, we uphold the primacy of our
experience, which enables us to resist mainstream societal programming.
This can only result in greater empowerment.
   This kind of model does not require any kind of vitalism, which is a
product of dualistic thinking. However, if thinking of these three principles as
‘energies’ helps you to occupy the reality of your inner world better than
thinking in terms of physics, psychology or whatever, then you should go
ahead and do so. As far as our work on ourselves is concerned, we need not
worry too much about what science has to say about our inner experience. If
you need to switch between thinking about ‘subtle energies’ and thinking in
terms of modern physics, then where is the problem with that, if such
thinking enables your growth?
   For our models of internal work, there is one central question: how well do
they work? Ways of cultivating sensed energy tend to centre on athm, and the
technology of breath. This is Part I.
References
(1) See for instance, http://www.centertao.org/tao-te-ching/dc-
lau/chapter-12-commentary/
(2) For a discussion of Plato’s influence on the mind-body split see Nikki
Wyrd’s excellent blogpost Dionysus’ Doorway,
https://theblogofbaphomet.com/2016/05/08/dionysus-doorway/
(3) Aaron Daniels, Imaginal Reality vol. 1.
http://www.amazon.com/Imaginal-Reality-Volume-Aaron-
Daniels/dp/1904658490
(4) Raoul Vaneigem, The Movement of the Free Spirit,
https://www.amazon.co.uk/Movement-Free-Spirit-Raoul-
Vaneigem/dp/094229971X
(5) Morris Berman, Coming To Our Senses, 1989
(6) Dionysus’ Doorway,
https://theblogofbaphomet.com/2016/05/08/dionysus-doorway/
(7) The James Chisholm translation of the Edda is free online at, for instance,
http://www.heathengods.com/library/poetic_edda/ChisholmEdda.pdf
(8) I am indebted to Ingrid Fischer for discussions on these meanings; she
came up with ‘passion’ for astyr.
(9) Paul Mansveld, personal communication.
    Part I:
The Many Ways
      of

  the Breath
I spent a couple of years in my late teens doing acid rather frequently,
melting down my sense of self in the hope of recasting it in a better form,
seeking weird and exceptional experiences. In the course of this molten,
formative time I started locating what I sometimes thought of as the bank of
switches that control consciousness.
   One of the first switches I located was breath, and it happened in the chaos
of an acid trip. My girlfriend and I were walking back to her place, along an
old road out of the city which passes by an old graveyard. The atmosphere of
the burial-ground seemed oppressive at that moment, as if it was weighing
me down physically, a weight that bent my body down, shrank me so that I
was all huddled up. It occurred to me that I was avoiding dwelling on
thoughts of death in my still-molten state, locking my body’s musculature to
keep the thoughts down.
   Once I knew what was happening, once I’d located what I was doing in the
way my body felt, I knew I could change it. All that was required was that I
push it all away; I flung my arms wide, almost clouting my companion and
breathed deeply. Instantly, the feeling of oppression ceased.
   The images of death flew away into the night. There was just me, my
friend and the night again.
Breathing is the only automatic vital bodily function that we can adjust
directly through an act of will. You can change your heart rate indirectly by
making yourself fearful or calm; you can change your blood sugar level
through exercise. Neither of these examples represents anything like as
simple, direct and intimate as the control we have over our breathing patterns.
Breathing is therefore a function which is intermediate between thought and
automatic bodily process. Since long before recorded history some men and
women have mastered the various ways we can breathe and transmitted their
findings in the form of traditions.
   I use the term 'breathwork' as a useful catch-all for any technique which
consciously alters the way we breathe. This includes traditional practices
such as yogic pranayama and the special breathing of qigong, and also
modern or rediscovered modes of breathwork. Spelt 'Breathwork', I am
referring specifically to the various schools of Connected Breathwork—
Holotropic Breathwork, Rebirthing Breathwork and their descendants.
   Part I lays out all the techniques of breathwork I have had persistent
experience of. The purpose of this section is to introduce these nine styles of
breathwork, and tease out their main features in order to compare them. The
deeper I looked into the claims and warnings issued by teachers of the
various kinds of breathwork, the more disparity I found between what they
claim. What you have here is a distillation of thousands of hours spent
breathing consciously, plus many dozens more in which my clients, friends,
students and fellow magicians reported their experiences of healing, magic
and higher consciousness.
   The following four chapters make considerable use of personal reports.
These originate with myself, with breathwork clients, with students at
breathwork retreats and with students at the courses I ran at Arcanorium
College (http://www. arcanoriumcollege.com/), particularly ‘Breath, Gnosis
and Energy’ in 2012. (The reports are anonymized—you know who you are!)
   The first chapter is on Connected Breathwork, the breathwork technique I
am qualified to instruct. The next two chapters cover seven styles of
breathing from the Hindu tradition of pranayama and two from Taoist
practice. The fourth chapter explores the modern practice of Buteyko
breathing.
The Varieties of Breathwork
Different kinds of breathwork can be used to calm or excite the body, to
focus the mind or to enable various states. The advice given represents an
enormous range of techniques, but there are a few simple patterns which
appear again and again. For example, the usual breathing advice for calming
yourself down goes along these lines:

       1. Breathe from deeper down in the belly, rather than from up in the
          chest;
       2. Breathe slowly and evenly;
       3. Lengthen the exhalation—even to the extent of taking twice as
          long to exhale as to inhale;
       4. Allow a pause after the exhale, for as long as it takes for the
          desire to breathe in again to happen naturally;
       5. Take all breaths through the nose.

In contrast to this, Connected Breathwork involves breathing without pausing
or holding, often a little faster and deeper than feels natural, and not
bothering about the length of exhalation versus the length to inhalation.
Furthermore, it often involves breathing through the mouth.
   It’s pretty clear that these are different techniques, for different purposes.
What is more puzzling is that quite often the advice given for one type of
breathwork excludes other styles, sometimes with warnings of dire
consequences if you breathe in the excluded fashion.
   Consequently, people who learn basic breath control for relaxation are
often astonished when they encounter Connected Breathwork, because they
have probably been told that it is a bad idea to breathe continuously, or fast,
and have almost certainly been told not to breathe through the mouth.
Anyone who has studied spiritual teacher George Gurdjieff will have come
across his advice to avoid breathwork altogether unless you have an expert
teacher, saying it will only cause health problems if you get it wrong.
   What are we to make of these apparently conflicting admonitions? Are
they simply the warnings given by ‘fans’ of one style of breathwork?
   I don’t think that is the case; I think these conflicts conceal a deeper truth:
that various styles of breathwork are designed to produce a range of different
effects. One set of effects is employed to calm yourself down and overcome
the health-eroding results of chronic stress. It is quite another thing to practise
styles of breathwork which overturn everyday consciousness in order to
achieve extraordinary states which are used for deep self-transformation,
healing and other magical goals.
   So that we know what we are talking about, the next section comprises a
set of simple instructions for ten (nine of which are unique—there is one
overlap in techniques) different styles of breathwork. The order they are in
reflects to some extent my depth of experience of these techniques: I have
over twenty years’ experience of Connected breathwork, both as a client and
as a professional coach. I have been practicing pranayama for thirty years, but
not with such intensive focus as I have with Connected Breathwork. Buteyko
breathing I only discovered in recent years, I took the practice up for three
months in order to experience it. So you will find much more detail in the
first section, on Connected Breathwork, and I hope this gives some idea of
the richness of at least this technique, and suggest that the other techniques,
in the supporting context of a scheme of meditation, a training system or a
healing process, might offer similar richness of experience.
   Each practice is summarized at the end of its section, in order to provide
the data I shall use to compare and discuss their effects at the end of Part I.
To achieve this, I needed to create a framework for comparing these widely-
differing conscious uses of the breath. Each set of breathwork reports is
summarized in a text box at the end of each section. The two ideas here are 1)
to isolate a few main technical features of each breath to enable comparison
between them and 2) to express the breath pattern in a one-shot overview, the
‘waveform’ sketches.
Please Note: You will find in Part I instructions for various kinds of
breathwork. However, it is not an instruction manual. As I hope the accounts
show, each of the breathwork techniques I discuss below, taken singly and
applied in daily life, will take a minimum of a few months to get even the
first flavour of the nature of the technique.
   If a particular technique interests you and you want to take it further,
consult the references and bibliography, do some reading round the subject
(preferably beyond Wikipedia) and if you still want to practice it, find a
coach or teacher.
   I myself offer professionally-trained coaching in Connected Breathwork.
Chapter I-1:
Breath for Inner Healing
The Power of Connected Breathwork
Connected Breathwork finally caught up with me at a few days of magical
workshops at a mediaeval castle in Burgenland, Austria. Ramsey Dukes
introduced the breathing technique known as Rebirthing or Vivation (they are
very similar—see below). He told us that it was a technique for entering into
the moment, of letting go of the drive which pushes us to try to change our
lives. Instead, this breathing technique would put us somewhere which was
right at the heart of the moment, in our bodies, in real time, in bliss. After the
talk, we all lay down on mats on the floor and breathed as instructed. Within
minutes, my fingers began to tingle. In a few more minutes I began to feel
like I was awash with energy. I gave myself up to the buzzing sensation
which filled me. Some more minutes after that, I was overwhelmed with a
flood of emotion. Sensations of loss and sadness, then anger. At first, this felt
uncomfortable, even threatening. As the session progressed, my attitude to
the emotions shifted: all sense of threat disappeared and I began to experience
the feelings as pure sensation, as waves of energy coursing through me.
   At the end of the session, I found myself bewildered and impressed by the
power of this technique: how could such a fantastic shift in awareness happen
just through breathing??? And I knew, as I sat and thought about what I’d just
experienced, that I had released a whole slew of held-in anger, not by acting
it out, but simply by letting go, by being there in full awareness, witnessing
some wiser part of me process and release that pent-up feeling.
   All ‘brands’ of Connected Breathwork share a common basis: you breathe
without pause or hold; the inhale is connected to the exhale, hence
‘connected’ breathing. Often, the breathing is somewhat faster and fuller than
usual, but not for the whole of the session. When such breathing patterns are
practised for emotional resolution and ecstatic consciousness they are
referred to as Connected Breathwork.
   The best-known brands or schools of this kind of breathwork are
Rebirthing Breathwork, Vivation and Holotropic Breathwork. These schools
have given rise to quite a few other schools. (For a survey of these schools
see Appendix: Schools of Connected Breathwork).
   Connected breathing can also be used for the raising of internal energy for
physical healing (see Part III).
   Connected breathing produces within minutes a tingling in the hands and
feet and a sense of energy surging round the body. This feeling of energy is
the sensing of what is called in Chinese qi. In the Indian healing tradition of
Ayurveda and the breathing yogas of pranayama it is called prana. In the old
Norse tale, The Spae of the Volva it is called önd. ‘Önd’ and ‘prana’ also
mean ‘breath’; the science of pranayama addresses both energy and
breathing. Why not coin a term for this same idea of energy? In modern
English, a suitable word would be athm.
   In the traditional models, this kind of sensed energy is considered as
intermediate in quality between the sense of being embodied in flesh and that
of the mercurial swiftness of thought. Its conscious direction and projection
are the bases of subtle martial arts and energy healing procedures. In
Connected Breathwork sessions such as Rebirthing or Holotropic breathwork,
the energy-sensations stay within the body. Unlike with the energy healing
modes, this high level of energy is not projected outwards, and neither is it
directed internally in any way; you just let it go where it wishes. You simply
witness as it circulates the body and focuses itself into definite sensations and
emotions. Signals such as discomfort, tensions and emotions are the way the
energy focuses itself on something that needs drawing to your attention,
something that needs resolving. Again, once we notice the energy focusing
we do not steer it, we merely witness it, while it does what it needs to, in the
high-energy space of a breathwork session.
   When we witness the energy doing what it needs to, right to where its
cycle is complete, we are witnessing what is called by Breathworkers
‘integration’. Patterns which are uncomfortable or unpleasant when you first
become aware of them become sources of ecstasy. We say we ‘integrate the
sensation into ecstasy’. This experience is the core of the ‘healing journey’ of
Connected Breathwork and is covered in Part II. Layers of unresolved pain
and tension arise, and the high level of sensed energy helps them to integrate.
This frees up a good deal of blocked energy, and makes you feel better.
   Connected Breathwork has worked for me like no other ‘therapy’ or
   technique of meditation I have ever encountered. This incredibly simple
   practise has enabled me to get through the aftermath of a very painful
   divorce and instilled a degree of confidence in me I didn’t know I had!
   Breathwork has brought me a level of calm assurance in everyday matters
   that I’d previously lacked. After the very first session the levels of anxiety
  and depression I was experiencing were dramatically reduced.
  Subsequently, breathwork has transformed my approach to life so
  noticeably that friends, family and colleagues have all commented on how
  much more relaxed and ‘together’ I seem to be these days. (1)
   This extraordinary internal journey is not the only use connected breathing
can be put to. As mentioned above, the energy can be directed to internal
sites for self-healing or projected externally to heal or attack. There is also a
longer-term perspective on the breathwork journey: in the course of
breathwork, we become aware of a sense of inner guidance. That dimension
of the breathwork journey is explored in Part II.
Breathwork, emotion and sensed energy
As children, we learn that it is sometimes inappropriate to express an emotion
or a reaction to physical pain, so we learn how to suppress feelings on a short
term basis by locking or holding breath. This lock becomes habitual, even
addictive—in the sense of a habitual escape from immediate, moment-to-
moment sensation. Connecting the breath, relearning how to breathe
continuously, gives us a skill set for navigating the rapids of intense emotion,
which in turn tends to generate an (often amazing) new range of flexibility in
dealing with intense emotional states.
Connected Breathwork untangles pain and discomfort from the past that still
troubles us. It does this without recourse to personal history or analysis. This
is an extraordinary effect, from something that seems as ordinary as
breathing. So our discussion begins with some ideas as to how this happens.
    When we breathe in a connected fashion, without holding or locking, we
start to feel flooded with energy. This increased level of energy often causes
old feelings to surface. It’s as if the energy is a current of electricity running
through us, and where it reaches part of our system where there is resistance,
it lights it up like a light bulb going on. As a result, we notice something we
would normally avoid or actively suppress. Suppression is learned early in
life to continue functioning after painful, unresolved emotion and is achieved
through tensing up and breathing more shallowly. Distraction is the other
main way we avoid the resurgence of old pain; we pick up something to eat
or drink or smoke, or we read a book, watch TV, engage in online trivia.
    This re-stimulation of old pain is called in Rebirthing Breathwork
‘activation’. In a Connected breathwork session we do not suppress the
feeling, we keep up our connected breathing. Neither do we avoid it; we pay
full attention to the sensations in our body, particularly the strongest ones,
which in this case are unpleasant. This focus on uncomfortable material does
not come naturally; it takes a sustained effort of will to continue to pay full
attention to such feelings. This is why ‘breathwork’ contains the four-letter
word ‘work’.
   However, the high level of energy we feel not only causes the activation
but enables its relatively rapid integration into a bliss state. By being
conscious of our breathing and body sensations, we can modulate the flow of
breath: a higher volume of air inhaled will produce stronger sensations, a
lesser volume will calm things down. By doing this, we hover in the space
between the suppression of this unresolved material and its uncontrolled,
painful activation, which is not useful because it simply gets us to re-run the
original trauma.
   Re-running traumas again and again is not an effective healing procedure
—the trauma may even end up being more suppressed. All we are aiming for
is to hold uncomfortable or painful sensations in awareness for long enough
for them to be resolved. The resolution is automatic—we do not have to
direct it consciously at all, but what is required is that hovering, observing
self there to witness this process.
   The presence of that uninvolved witness works a kind of magic (discussed
below, in Interlude: ‘Energy Healing’ and the Role of the Observer Self,
p127) on the body’s natural ability to integrate past pain. It is worth
mentioning at this point that the process of integration is not unique to
Connected Breathwork—we do it all the time. It is considerably speeded up
by doing Connected Breathwork, and the breathwork enables material that
has been long-buried to surface and be integrated.
   The attitude we have towards uncomfortable sensations in Connected
Breathwork is one of near-detachment—although we are observing in full
detail all the features of the uncomfortable sensation, we cultivate equanimity
towards it. It does not matter that it feels unpleasant—it cannot harm us. We
let it happen, controlling the intensity with which we feel it by the volume of
our breathing—breathe deep, you feel it more; breathe more shallowly, you
feel it less.
   This attitude facilitates an experience of the uncomfortable sensation as
energy, as a pattern in the energy that is surging through us. This pattern not
something we are going to run from, nor is it something we wish to expel
from our body; it is simply a pattern which has been suppressed and therefore
not been integrated into the rest of our awareness.
   This attitude of equanimity or neutrality towards uncomfortable sensations
is the core of the conscious aspects of a Connected Breathwork session. The
integration of uncomfortable or unpleasant feelings into ecstasy is not as
strange as it may first seem; once the emotion or sensation is experienced as a
pattern in your energy, it naturally becomes part of an experience of energy
flows in your heightened state, which is in itself blissful. The pain dissolves
into ecstasy through the alchemy of the observing self.
Part of the mechanism of integration is to feel troubling emotions as
consisting of two components: the physical sensations of an emotion and the
things we believe about it. The physical sensations can, in the enhanced
energy state of connected breathing, be experienced as patterns in that
energy. Your thoughts about what the sensations mean can be changed—a
procedure that an NLP practitioner would call ‘reframing’.
   To take an example, consider the emotion of fear. Its physical side consists
of the flight-fight reaction of raised heart rate, faster breathing and sudden
alertness. The immediate cause of these symptoms is the release of the
hormone adrenalin from the adrenal cortex near the kidneys. Its mental set is
generally a desire to run away, a sharp, troubled urgency. Now consider the
emotion of excitement or exhilaration. Its physical sensations are of
‘butterflies in the stomach’, of a beating heart. Its immediate cause is also the
release of adrenalin. However, its mental set is one of impatient anticipation
or delicious involvement, rather than running away. These two emotions can
arrive as a mixture—those who enjoy rollercoaster rides or frightening films
bear witness to this. The closeness of these two emotions to each other also
allows fear to be transmuted into exhilaration in the course of a Connected
Breathwork session. Because we can stand back from the original emotion of
fear and examine it as a set of sensations, the way is open to reframe those
sensations as exhilaration. The parts or elements of our experience have been
taken apart and reassembled in an alchemical transmutation, the base metal of
an unpleasant emotion transmuted into the gold of ecstasy.
    The key to this transmutation is the stance of witnessing, observing
without trying to change anything. The observing perspective is a common
and useful experience; we watch ourselves whenever we introspect, whenever
we think about our own behaviour in comparison to that of other people,
whenever we try to change ourselves. We become especially aware of this
observing capacity in Connected Breathwork as we watch the currents and
patterns of energy within us, as we become engrossed in the details of each
change that arises in those currents, without judging or comparing, without
wanting to be anywhere else, without wanting to be anywhere and anytime
other than here and now.
Connected Breathwork: The Technique
I am going to describe the Connected Breathwork technique in some detail,
so that those who have not had the experience will still be able to appreciate
the comparisons of different techniques that follows at the end of Part I.
   Connected Breathwork is practiced in order to resolve feeling-patterns
which are stuck in past modes, and to enable bliss states. Phil Laut and Jim
Leonard described Vivation—their form of it—as ‘the science of enjoying
the whole of your life', and 'a meditation on just how good the worst of your
feelings can feel' (2).
   Connected Breathwork will enable you put aside the internal monologue
and put yourself in present time, in your body, in feelings. Because you have
to be in immediate sensation to experience ecstasy, and because you have, do
not try to exert any control over the content of the experience; the only
material you have to work with—the only kind of experience you have—is
the flow of sensations, whatever they are.
   Some of these feelings and sensations will initially seem uncomfortable,
unpleasant or even threatening—but one of the things you will learn in this
breathwork is that you can view any sensation you feel from profoundly new
perspectives. Sensations that seemed to be in the way of your achieving
ecstasy in the present will be reframed as: interesting; awe-inspiring; full of
energy; full of power; beautiful... and, eventually, perfect for this moment.
   Because of this reframing of intense sensations, the process of learning
Connected Breathwork is inevitably a healing journey. You will re-
experience blocked or suppressed emotions, at first as physical sensations,
then as energy patterns. As you progressively reframe an unpleasant
sensation—feeling it again and again until you start to perceive it as
interesting, then positive in some way—a permanent change occurs in the
way you relate to that sensation. You may experience this change quite
abruptly, as a kind of 'click'; the sensation has integrated. Integration, in this
context, means that a sensation that was once unpleasant will never bother
you again; it hasn't gone away, but your attitude to it has changed forever.
   This change is permanent because it happens at the level of feeling. It is
not necessary to understand where the sensation originally came from, which
era of your life, which childhood experience: Connected Breathwork is not a
cognitive technique based on personal history but one based on sensation and
emotion. The sensations may represent unfinished business from earlier
today, last week, or thirty years ago, and it doesn't matter. All the sensations
you experience in a breathwork session arise as if they want urgently to
communicate themselves to you, and you work with whatever presents itself
to your attention. You make no attempt to control which sensations you are
experiencing.
To do Connected Breathwork, you have to learn to do a number of things at
the same time. Breathwork teachers divide up these functions in various
ways; I shall keep it simple and talk about three levels of the experience—
Body, Breath and Mind—and what they will be doing.
1. Body: Complete Relaxation
For your first few sessions at least, you will need to be in a place where no-
one will disturb you. Environmental sound is no problem—even people
talking nearby is not a problem. The point is, you will need to be in a
situation where you do not have to respond to anything that happens.
    Try not to move, fidget or scratch. Stillness is the ideal condition for
focussing on your sensations. If you want to move, or laugh, or cry out, try it
—but it will tend to distract you from the process of integration: you need to
feel the sensations rather than act on them.
   When you do not have to respond to anything that happens, and you are
still, then there are then no distractions in the process: everything that
happens is part of your session. This frees up your attention to focus on the
strongest sensation.
   Relax all of your body, all of your muscles, and keep on relaxing. Muscles
will tense up as thoughts and feelings sweep through you; this is fine, but as
soon as you notice a tension, relax it.
   You will go through this cycle many times in a session. Keep coming back
to relaxing your face and jaw area in particular. Just let any tension drain out
with the outbreath.
2. Breath: Connected Breathing
Small children and animals tend to breathe continuously, without locking or
stopping the breath. Most humans get the habit of interrupted breathing, with
lots of locks and stops. This originates in childhood: when the infant is
subjected to pain or fright, he or she locks the breath to reduce sensation.
This starts happening before the individual can talk, so this habit is formed at
a pre-verbal stage of development. Connected Breathwork breaks this cycle
of numbing-down and opens up the body-mind system to a greater awareness
of energy, via unrestricted breathing.
   Before getting into further details of how to do connecting breathing, it has
to be said that the following instructions come from my own breathwork
practice. I was trained in Rebirthing, then took my professional qualification
in its immediate descendent, Vivation. These two styles are very similar;
Holotropic Breathwork is somewhat different. (For details of the distinctions
between different styles and schools of Connected Breathwork, see Appendix
4).
   There are the three special features to the breathwork you will be doing,
whichever of the three breaths (see below) you are using. These are:

         1. Connect all breaths: In connected breathing, you breathe without
            pause or lock; the inhale and exhale are connected so that there
            are no pauses in the breathing. As soon as an inbreath is
            complete, you begin an outbreath. As soon as an outbreath is
            complete, begin the inbreath.
         2. Relax the outbreath: The exhale is relaxed and not controlled at
            all. Remember to relax the exhale: the main difference between
            hyperventilation and connected breathing is that the former has a
            tense outbreath, and is not supportable for very long.
         3. Breathe through the mouth: Mouth breathing is generally better,
            for two reasons: firstly, all our habits of breath are linked to
            breathing through the nose, our usual, natural way of breathing.
            So, if we want to break those breathing habits and make new
            ones, it is good to start with this rather 'unnatural' kind of breath;
            the fact that we have to make this extra effort means we can link
            our mouth-breathing to our Connected Breathwork so we
            progress faster. The second reason is that the only time we
            generally indulge in mouth-breathing is in states associated with
             exercise or strong feelings; it is an emotional, physical kind of
             breathing, and so releases more feeling if used in breathwork.

  Towards the end of a session, you might want to experiment with
connected breathing through your nose. The effects are subtly different, and
milder, so it is easier to get distracted by thoughts. It is best not to alternate
nose and mouth—if the inhale is through the nose, then so is the exhale.
Same for the mouth.
The Three Breaths
There are two main things you can vary about your breathing—the speed you
breathe at and the volume of air you take in. The effects that these two
variables have on your perception are as follows:
         -     If the volume of the inhale is increased, then the sensations of
         energy patterns in the body become more intense. The emotional
         level will probably go up.
         -    If the speed of the inhale is increased, then the sensations in the
         body feel less weird and overwhelming. You feel a sense of
         detachment, a little bit of control.
   Combining these two variables gives us four basic breathing patterns, of
which we use three. The Three Breaths used in Connected Breathwork are:
  FAST & FULL: this breath is deep, intense and passionate. It holds you in
  your body and tends to keep you awake. It makes sensations very intense
  and overwhelms the internal monologue. It makes integration easier
  because you are experiencing sensations so intensely and directly. It is
  impossible to be bored when you are doing fast and full connected
  breathing!
  FAST & SHALLOW: this is a very shallow, fairly fast type of breath. This
  breath keeps you awake and fully conscious of sensation but from a slight
  remove. It is sometimes taught to women in labour, when it is necessary to
  stop pushing.
  It makes it easy to focus, and makes the intensity of sensation easier to
  handle. However, this is not a repressive breath; the mechanism of
  repression is linked to stopping breathing, and this breath keeps sensation
  immediate and enables integration to continue.
  FULL & SLOW: This is a very deep, slow, sighing sort of breath. You
  will not want to use this breath if the sensations are unpleasant—it tends to
   intensify whatever you are feeling. It also intensifies awareness of energy
   patterns & enables you to focus on them in an ecstatic way. This is the
   breathing that you do when you want to be in your body experiencing
   something pleasant—you might think of it as ‘bliss breathing'.
   Slow & shallow breathing is not used in Connected Breathwork because it
   tends to cause sleep.
These three breaths create a cycle which you will go round again and again in
a session.
   The first two, Fast and Full, and Fast and Shallow form what I think of as a
natural volume control for feelings and sensations.
The Volume Control
If it seems appropriate, I sometimes coach clients to start a session with a few
minutes of Fast and Full breathing. Starting off with such intense breathing
gives the client a chance to impress themselves with how fast they can get
into an extraordinary state of consciousness, and sense energy flows.
   It also means that person is likely to experience intense feelings (emotional
states and physical sensations), and some of these may be unpleasant.
Persisting in Fast and Full breathing at this stage will probably result in a
feeling of overwhelm.
   If it wasn't for the 'volume control', this would be frightening—but if you
go into Fast and Shallow breathing as soon as you feel overwhelmed or
threatened by sensation, you will be able to continue experiencing the
sensation without any fear. With the volume control there is no need for fear
of the sensations, no need to get lost in the feelings. The volume control
allows you to feel something just as intensely or just as gently as you want. It
is the only physical adjustment you make in Connected Breathwork, one of
the two ways in which you can change anything, the other being reframing,
see below.
   The use of these two breaths is one of the most useful breathwork lessons
you can learn. The ability to stay in intense immediate sensation without
panicking and cutting it off will cause integration, which will be experienced
as ecstasy.
   At that stage, when some sensation or other has integrated and you go into
bliss, you will want to use the third breath—Slow and Full, the sighing,
ecstatic breath.
   After a while, flooded with relief of tension and with pleasure signals, you
will probably start to go to sleep. Integrating the sensations that occur on the
edge of sleep is fascinating and deeply healing, but you need to be conscious
to do it! Every Connected Breathwork coach is familiar with the sight of a
client going through intense emotion into bliss, then starting to snore a few
minutes later. The job of the coach at this stage (or before it gets that far) is to
remind the client to breathe a little Faster and Fuller again for a while. This
will start the next cycle of integration.
   Incidentally, you can use this effect to get to sleep: see Appendix:
Breathwork Practices.

    3. Mind: Paying Attention Now
What is your mind doing during the breathwork? The meditational core of
this technique is awareness of the present moment, in detail. As soon as you
relax and connect your breathing, you will notice a whole range of shifting
sensations in the body. Pay attention to the fine detail in these sensations.
Focus on the strongest sensation at any moment; this will change, moving
from one part of you to another. Let your attention always follow the
strongest sensation. Focus on the feelings that come to your attention in your
body. Explore every detail of what feelings feel like.
   In the event of 'going unconscious’—i.e. sleepiness, sense of anaesthesia,
or anything that makes you unaware of patterns in your body—switch to the
Full & Fast breathing pattern.
    As you focus on a strong sensation whilst doing fast and full breathing, it
may get uncomfortable. What is happening is simply that a part of you that
you haven't paid attention to for a long time has surfaced, and is demanding
your attention. You do not need to know what the origin of this sensation is,
or anything about it. All you need to do is to pay attention to it.
   If the sensation is too overwhelming, you can go into faster and shallower
breathing, to distance yourself from the intensity of it. After a while in Fast
and Shallow, you will notice that the sense of overwhelm is reduced, and you
can go back into deeper breathing, allowing yourself a closer experience of
that sensation.
   Again, if it gets too much, you can pull back into Fast and Shallow.
   I sometimes think of this use of the ‘volume control’ as like surfing around
the edge of a whirlpool, which represents the intense sensation. How close
you are to it, how 'deep' into the 'whirlpool' you are at any given moment is
up to you—you have complete control of the depth of sensation via the depth
and speed of your breathing, via your volume control.
  When you pay attention to this sensation, this part of you, this bit of
unfinished business in your mind-body system, you are giving it your
unconditional love—and that changes it. It will shift, maybe through mildly
uncomfortable, to interesting, to a wonderful pattern of energy. At this point,
you have integrated it, and your relationship with it has changed forever. It
will no longer be threatening, but instead will be a new source of bliss.
The paying of intense attention is a form of self-love. This giving of self-love
is at the core of the Connected Breathwork process of healing. We do
integration naturally anyway—otherwise we'd be a complete mess of
unresolved tensions—and this process of fascination, of loving attention,
speeds it up enormously.
    Your attention is on the intensest sensation you feel, whether it's a great,
big important emotion or something seemingly trivial, like an itching in your
scalp, a numbness in your left thumb, a desire to laugh, an urge to curl up—
or something weird like the sense that your right eye is full of pink gas—you
focus on whatever is happening now. Your way of looking at it should be
non-judgmental; you cannot but accept this sensation if you are to feel in
present time. This is where reframing comes in. (This is a term from NLP that
just means: is the glass half full, or is it half empty?).
    A frame we employ a lot is wanting to be somewhere else, doing
something else. Connected Breathwork is a holiday from all that, real quality
time with yourself. When you experience immediate sensation, your habitual
frame will often be: 'I don't want to feel like this, I want to feel some other
way'. This makes it impossible to go into ecstasy—because you cannot be in
present time without accepting present sensation. So, in order to achieve
ecstasy, you have to frame each sensation in a way that causes you to accept
it, so it can integrate into ecstasy.
    Eventually, what happens is that the sensation—which may initially have
been frightening, overwhelming or emotionally painful—becomes
interesting. Keeping yourself in your body by sufficiently deep breathing
allows you to experience this unnamed sensation as a pattern of energy, a
complex and wonderful array of energies, maybe dramatic and potent. Once
you have developed that level of interest in the sensation, the way is open to
reframe it again as bliss.
    There are no distractions in this process, everything is relevant, all
sensation. If a plane flies over, or a car goes past, or you can hear music or
conversation from the next room, this is fine too. You need not respond to it,
do anything about it. Just feel what it feels like in your body to hear those
sounds... it all integrates into the energy pattern that is uniquely you, now.
Feel the energy of the breath coming in through that energy pattern… breathe
the rich energy of breath through that pattern...

Personal Accounts: Connected Breathwork
1. Recapitulation of birth: a warm water session
Two of the main schools of Connected Breathwork link the breathwork
experience directly to perinatal processes—processes that happen before or
just after birth. Leonard Orr saw breathwork as a way of recapitulating the
trauma of birth—doing it again and getting it right, as it were. Stanislav and
Christina Grof, who developed Holotropic Breathwork, also report consistent
patterns of perinatal events during their breathwork sessions, out of which
they built an entire scheme of core birth trauma patterns.
   The connection is deep: from when we take our first breath, we are subject
to shocks and pains that we will suppress by locking breath, long before we
learn to speak. Breathwork is one of the two royal roads to pre-verbal
consciousness (the other being psychedelic therapy), to the healing of those
traumas that no verbal technique can reach, because these memories are not
coded in words or symbols.
   Therefore, even if you practice a Connected Breathwork technique like
Vivation which de-emphasizes the birth trauma connection, you may well
experience 'rebirth', and the taking of your 'first breath' all over again.
   Such experiences are supported in some breathwork groups by
visualization work in which you imagine yourself being born, and being
greeted by your parents. You hear them saying all the things you want them
to say about you, the new arrival.
   Other stimuli can be used at the beginning of a session to bring up
emotions. Groups of experienced breathworkers sometimes choose to work
directly with traumatic memories at the beginning of a session.
   Our group used a hot tub and snorkels. We each experimented until we
found a way of floating which required no effort. I found the best technique
seems to be to float face downwards, breathing through the snorkel, legs and
arms dangling downwards.
  Doing connected breathing whilst wearing a mask and snorkel took some
getting used to, but eventually it all became automatic, and that meant I was
able to relax completely, to just let go. It helped that each of us did our
session with someone watching over us while we floated.
  And float I did, floated off into something extraordinary. Here are some
extracts from my notes that day:
   I was limitless, my body had no boundaries. When my eyes were closed, I
   was immersed in a soft, unstructured light. The images I drifted through
   were no mere dream-fragments such as we all get on the edge of sleep, but
   seemed more like entire dreams, playing out in full consciousness. A full
   consciousness that was experiencing time very differently from usual, that
   was lost in some ecstasy outside of normal sequence.
   No, it is not easy to express what happened. In short, it was the most
oceanic experience I’d ever had. When I got out of the tub it was a slow re-
entry into ‘normal’ life. I stood by the tub, moving slowly, not wanting to
disrupt completely the bliss I was emerging from. On the wall was a small
mirror. I looked at my face; it was different; it was longer than usual. All the
tension had drained out of my muscles; all of it, not just some. This was my
own face, but washed clean of the usual strains of daily life.
2. Fear of death: the lukewarm tub
Fear of dying is a human given, at least for some moments in every life. For
some, such as Philip Larkin in ‘Aubade’, it is pervasive (3):
   This is a special way of being afraid
   No trick dispels. Religion used to try,
   That vast, moth-eaten musical brocade
   Created to pretend we never die
   In the process of healing, this issue will at some stage be encountered, as
fear, or as a vivid need to find purpose and meaning in life, or as a spur to
higher consciousness. In the energy-conscious space of Connected
Breathwork our emotions around the thought of dying can be experienced as
energy patterns. The thoughts that hold these patterns in place can then be
changed, resulting in different energy patterns and a different attitude to
dying.
   Some breathwork teachers—notably Leonard Orr—have challenged the
notion that we have to die at all. For years Orr claimed that breathwork can
bring about physical immortality, and apparently his recent writings still do.
Some people in the world of Connected Breathwork have done a bit of hand-
waving about the 'symbolic' nature of immortalist claims, but in an interview
Orr states:
   Physical immortality can be defined as endless existence; specifically, the
   endless existence of your physical body in perpetual health and
   youthfulness. (4)
His co-worker Sondra Ray has a similar (5) position (misspelling of Sondra’s
name is in original):
  Pola: So do you feel you will live forever, or just longer than most?
  Sandra: I believe that whatever I say is what I will get, and I have the
  choice, so what I am choosing is, to live as long as I want in the physical
  body, and that maybe hundreds of years, and then maybe I will ascend.
  Which means I will go to another dimension and be turned into light.
   Fortunately, most breathwork books these days tend not to make this kind
of claim; it does the movement no good at all to be associated with cranky
ideas (6).
   There is an ethical issue for the coach here too: it is very dubious to present
an unsubstantiated possibility as fact, particularly to someone who, perhaps
already vulnerable, may take on that belief without question. The client may
be trying to please the coach or may lack the self-confidence that would
allow them to reject the belief as wrong for them, so for the coach to impose
such a belief is very close to the aggressive anti-reason of cultic conversion
techniques.
   I experimented with physical immortalism as a belief for a year, but now it
strikes me as an avoidance of deeper integration of the death process itself. In
poetry of compelling simplicity, the Old Norse classic Hávamál of the Elder
Edda urges us to adjust to the reality of dying and frame life’s efforts as a
heroic struggle to live a life which inspires others:
   Cattle die, kinsmen die,
   and you yourself shall die.
   But fair fame never dies
   for the one who wins it. (7)
  In order to sustain belief in physical immortality, the believer must step a
long way outside the mainstream of belief. Not a bad thing, you might say. I
agree; we cannot live life as a magical adventure if we restrict ourselves to
belief in the dried-up wretchedness of materialist scientism. However, when
we turn too far away from the overwhelming evidence around us, which
indicates that, in all probability we are going to die at some stage, it is a good
idea to take careful account of the effects such a belief has on what else we
believe.
   There is a kind of overspill effect that ripples out from so drastic a shift in
thinking. The result may be a degradation of the ability to distinguish
metaphor from actuality, turning the believer into the kind of space cadet who
is all too familiar in New Age circles. The physical immortalist has bent so
far backwards to avoid believing he will die that it gives him a very strange
and, to my mind, rather silly, view of the world. Leonard Orr writes of his
immortal hero Babaji:
   I have lots of friends all over the planet who Babaji appears to on a daily
   basis. They can just look and direct their attention and there he is sitting in
   the middle of a tree, or whatever. They can just talk with him. […] He’s
   more often than not appeared to me as bums on the street or little old
   ladies on bicycles. (8)
   Here, Orr is blurring the lines between visions of an archetypal teacher,
and his personal flight from mortality. Such histrionics of belief do not strike
me as illuminated; anyone who is that obsessed with avoiding death is
probably very far from completely awakened.
   However, our beliefs about dying are certainly culturally conditioned, and
it is a very good thing to examine and undo mainstream beliefs, where they
stand in the way of greater awareness.
   Focusing on things that suggest death and dying whilst doing breathwork
can allow us to reconsider our feelings about death. Some breathworkers
favour working in a tub of lukewarm water to bring up fears of death and
integrate them.
   The trainer in my professional training course, Hilary Newman, announced
this particular weekend of training as death-themed, and involving ‘cold
water Vivation’. I must say I wasn’t much looking forward to sitting in a cold
hot tub, but it wasn’t quite like that: it was actually warm, but not quite warm
enough to be completely comfortable.
   I floated. I breathed. Nothing much happened, nothing dramatic, nothing
out of the ordinary. I did not achieve that unbounded, oceanic state. In fact, it
was just like being thrown back onto my own resources. And I think that is
where my experiment with believing in physical immortality ended up: as an
idea I took on board for a few months, then rejected as neither useful nor
noble.
3. Breathwork, money and social games
Obviously, money has powerful emotional dimen​sions. Some breathworkers,
in particular Phil Laut, have specialized in using breathwork to evoke and
reframe the psychological blocks that contribute to financial problems. Chief
amongst these are issues of self-esteem, and issues of security.
   If, at some level of your internal monologue, there is a voice saying, 'I
don't deserve to be well off, I don't deserve to have more money’, and so
forth, then you will tend to sabotage your own prosperity. So, work on your
self-esteem is needed.
   Generally, people feel pretty insecure when they're not carrying some form
of money. Some people may feel insecure however much money they have—
which may then become a real problem, a kind of addiction to money. This
requires work on feelings around personal, physical security.
   In 1994 I attended Phil Laut’s workshop ‘Money Is My Friend’. Laut
spoke about the basic idea of stating to yourself ‘money is my friend’. We
discussed our feelings about money. We did a breathwork session, to
integrate those feelings, to gain new perspectives on what we felt our
limitations were. Then we set up a game. We each took out some of our
money and walked round the room giving money to and receiving money
from each other. There was no indication given at the start whether we would
get this money back; each of us chose a sum to give away, not knowing
whether we would end up with more cash or less. In other words, the game is
a test of faith from the beginning.
   The game brought up plenty of emotions. We let them arise, then we went
into another breathwork session, to integrate new layers of feeling.
4. Intimacy: Eyegaze Breathwork
This was an extraordinary experiment, and was another proof of the power
and depth of the ESCs generated by Connected Breathwork. It was the
weekend in my Vivation Professional training when we focused on intimate
relationships. The idea of eyegaze breathwork is that you can use it to
integrate feelings around asking for what you want, receiving pleasure, and
loving yourself, as well as any specifics that are to do with your relationship
with the other person.
   Members of the group had by then developed a degree of trust; it is easy to
imagine some people finding this sudden intimacy that was to follow
shocking and uncomfortable.
   We paired up and sat facing each other. Our eyes were closed. We start
connected breathing. We let this run for some time—maybe ten minutes—
until there was a definite sense of internal energy streaming. At that point,
each of us opened our eyes.
   The energy flowing between us was exhilarating, and indeed shocking in
its intensity. I was strongly attracted to the woman I was paired with, and it
felt not only that she sensed this but also felt the same way. At some point I
remember the thought boiling up in me: I want to touch you. My eyegaze
partner visibly jumped.
   It doesn’t take a great leap of imagination to apply this effect to sex. Those
who practise magical sex will see how the ESC can contribute enormously to
the power of ritual lovemaking. For instance, you could start a Connected
Breathwork session sitting facing your lover, with your eyes closed. When
you feel the energy streaming, open them. Continue connected breathing as
long as you want to—or can remember to!
5. Reports from Students and Clients on Connected Breathwork (CBW)
The following reports are from students on my Arcanorium courses (9)
‘Energy Magic’, which ran in 2011, and ‘Breath, Gnosis and Energy’ from
2012. So it is worth bearing in mind that these individuals were coming at
their experiences from a perspective of magic.
   I tend to find this breath particularly soothing […] The sustainability of
   this breathing over long periods of time makes for interesting trance
   states, more so if one is adept at "adjusting the volume." […] This is the
   kind of breathing I use in my day to day, deep, no-intention meditations as
   well. Done gently, there is no tingling or overwhelming intensity. Probably
   the most emotionally satisfying of the breaths as well.
                                         ***
   I find that CBW produces a very strong ESC (magical gnosis), strong
   feelings of energy and tingling, feelings of ecstasy and euphoria.
                                         ***
   It occurs to me that emotions are very much body things as well as
  conscious things. You can parse them into 'sensations' and 'interpretations
  of sensations'; the former are what we are focusing on, the latter are
  things we can change, the changing of which then leads to integration.
The following reports are from my clients. Some of the reports take the form
of dialogues between the client and me.
6. Dialogues with clients
  There were mild sensations of involuntary motion in the left eyelid and
  behind the left eye.
  I also began to have a sensation of tingling and tension below the navel, in
  front of the intestines. There was also tingling in one specific part of my
  genitals.
  I began to have a mild high-pitched ringing in my ears. Actually, my ears
  popped twice during the session.
  I had to pause several times to swallow during the practice.
  <me> That's something totally personal - I have no idea what it means.
  Most sensations you encounter in CBW are of that kind, individual,
  personal things.
  My shoulders and parts of my arms and ring + little fingers started
  tingling pretty quickly. This made a certain kind of sense to me because
  I've had chronic issues with RSI and these areas will tend to "fall asleep"
  fairly easily. There was also tingling through the cheeks and around the
  mouth, and especially in my teeth.
  <me> That sounds good - I encourage clients to breathe intensely enough
  to get tingling in the hands and feet, and sometimes in the face. Keep
  focusing on it! As long as it’s the dominant sensation, it is exactly where
  you need to be!
  A few minutes in, I noticed that my mouth involuntarily made an "o"
  shape. Try as I might to relax the muscles, they remained in that shape.
  <me> Sounds like mild tetany, a muscle spasm caused by
  hyperventilation. More evidence that you are probably doing it too
  intensely for comfort, but tetany is not a bad thing in itself. I find that most
clients who get tetany usually end up blissful after the session.
This was my first attempt at breath-work. These are the things that I
noticed:
I must be a tense person. As I worked into relaxing my body, which really
seemed impossible, I noticed that I needed to change my body position
periodically because the joints felt like they needed more length and/or
width between them. I felt like I was a bunched up mess and I probably am
most of the time.
I felt myself rebelling against the breathwork. I experienced the need to
swallow at inappropriate times and I sometimes felt the sensation of
voluntarily wanting to hold my breath. I felt as if the breathing was too
much work.
<me> You could try to treat the feeling of resistance as an actual
sensation to work with.
I never would have considered resistance as a sensation. I went with that
train of thought in mind during this last experiment and I found that I
settled in much better.
At one point I detected the hint of emotions surfacing, but I pushed the
thoughts that were causing the feelings away immediately. I must do this
habitually because I was not aware of what I was doing until afterwards. It
was automatic.
<me> okay, next time try to let the emotions happen, if you feel you can.
Just let yourself open up a tiny bit to that emotion, and see how it goes.
You can always draw back by moving into shallower breathing; having
any experience of being able to close in or hold emotions at a distance like
that will give you a sense of having choices around those feelings.
                                      ***
[…] and of course awareness of physical pain came into the picture again
and I used the panting for a few cycles but then I changed my approach.
While this was going on I decided to explore the pain instead of trying to
ignore it (which is what I usually do). I started to enjoy it-- weird. Is THIS
integration?
  <me> YES! Exactly.
                                        ***
  Breathwork is so good for helping me face the world. It’s like being
  ‘opened to the sky’, as I put it yesterday, opened up to a universe of
  distress, which is then much less distressing than I originally thought. This
  is good, good, good!
  I emptied myself out, changing the focus of my eyes, going quickly into that
  state of just being, just feeling - which happens in breathwork, but not
  usually this fast and vividly. I got into real ecstasy: there was the
  identification with the breath current, and then there was an inner bliss, an
  inner space that was formless, opaque - I could only see this side of it - but
  it was bursting with life and ecstasy, ecstasy came from simply being in
  contact with it. It had the emotions of a sense of renewal. At last I feel the
  life, the joy again!
7. Weird Scenes Inside the Bodymind: Various Connected Breathwork
experiences:
  I find it interesting how each session is different. This time, as I settled in, I
  detected a numbed sense of discomfort around my right eye. While it
  seemed numbed, I could still detect a sense of fluidity - maybe fluid within
  the sinus cavity or blood? Is it possible to detect such a thing?
  Some emotion did rise up almost spontaneously without any antecedent
  thoughts. It was anger and sorrow just briefly and I felt a strong crinkling
  sensation at the top of my nose then discomfort radiated across my right
  cheekbone to the ear, then down my neck into my right shoulder. This
  movement reminds me of a slow moving waterslide. I think my emotions
  are tied to what is happening in my body. I have heard this theory before
  but I have never experienced anything close before.
  I tried to focus in on the emotions and when I did this, they became barely
  there. It was as if I was focusing on the memory of the emotions. The
  numbed pain eventually radiated down to the top of my right hip and at
  this point I experienced a slow throbbing. This was followed by a pretty
  intense spasm in the left glute and then all discomfort disappeared. All
  memory of negative emotion disappeared. There were no intense thoughts,
  no images - just me noticing something and nothing at the same time. I
  don’t know how to name what I experienced. Admittedly, I became little
  scared by what I was experiencing and decided that it was enough. Maybe
  I will get to that place again and go longer the next time. Thinking about
  the fear in hindsight, I should have tried to pant though it but... wow I am
  still trying to digest that whole experience. It was bizarre!
  I let go into the writhing, the messy twisted postures, the silent screams,
  the ecstatic stretches and eventually the great squeeze, where I gave birth
  to myself.
  I feel the dizziness as a graininess of the feeling of thoughts in my head… I
  squirm into it, squeeze and squirm in there… as if I’m squeezing back into
  shape something that had gone limp and shapeless… or stirring something
  thick and tarry until it becomes translucent again… keep coming back to
  the feeling of dizziness, following it until I can squeeze it again…
  I felt the familiar cold white sheet of fire in the left side of my head... I fell
  through silvery blades and angles to a moment of silence, then it happened
  again.
  Fantastic - the shape of hands pulling around my energy, inches out from
  the skin… then a flow of power, wholeness, through me! I was shaken by
  the ecstasy of it.
Stopping breathing
This is one of my own early breathwork experiences:
  I breathed very deeply, almost convulsively. Eventually, it was like I had
  enough oxygen in my body and I stopped breathing. My sense of being in a
  body, my body image, disappeared completely… I was in a black space, no
  feelings other than a vague warmth. The next thing I knew was Paul’s (my
  first Rebirthing coach) voice bringing me back from that blackness
  beneath thought. Then I went back into it. Afterwards, my sense of
  personal perspective was completely gone, I was totally spaced out. Paul
  told me that when he spoke, I had not breathed for a whole minute, and he
  saw my lips go blue.
Trauma memory
  A sense of something hot touching the instep of my left foot. I have the
  distinct but utterly unprovable feeling that this is the memory of something
  that occurred to me when I was in children’s home as a baby. It feels like a
  lighted cigarette was touched to that instep. The words how can anyone do
  that to a child? recurred through the session.

In the box that follows and all such boxes, I shall refer to the holding in of
the breath between inhale and exhale as a ‘hold’, and the pausing of the
breath between exhale and the next inhale as ‘pause’.
Summary of Breathwork Style: Connected Breathwork
  Philosophical/magical contexts:
  Connected Breathwork practice is most often framed as a healing
  journey.
  Recommended regularity of practice:
  When you first practise Connected Breathwork, it can be useful to have
  as many as one or two or even more sessions per week. Once you have
  dealt with the immediate layers of blocked energy, the need for sessions
  decreases. Later, it may be that you need another intensive series of
  sessions, and then perhaps an occasional top-up much later. (For further
  discussion on the frequency of different breathwork prac​tices, see the
  Conclusion of Part I).
  Physiological correlates:
  CBW produces a range of physiological effects in the course of a
  session, largely related to what emotions you are experien​cing at the
  time.
  The Breath Itself:
  Is breath predominantly in chest, abdomen or both (‘complete’)? Both,
  either. This is not an issue in Connected Breathwork.
  Inbreath and outbreath: Can be large or small. Relative length of
  outbreath and inbreath completely unimportant.
  Outbreath should be relaxed, to avoid hyperventilation.
  Hold? None. This is important.
  Pause? None.
  Is it claimed to raise CO2 or O2? It tends to flush out CO2 and raise O2
  levels.


  Form can be represented as:
You can imagine the cycle of the breath to be like a ‘sine wave’,
touching the ‘bottom’ of the exhale and the ‘top’ of the inhale only
momentarily, with no pause or hold.
References
(1) Personal communication from my client SS, used with permission.
(2) From an old audio tape ‘The Skill of Happiness’ by Jim Leonard. His
webpage is http://vivation.com/inspiration/articles/vivation-the-skill-of-
happiness/
(3) https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-
poets/poems/detail/48422
(4) Interview with Leonard Orr at
http://www.som.org/3library/interviews/orr2.htm
(5) http://www.polachurchill.com/interview.pdf
(6) For a light-hearted fictive romp through immortalist ideas, including a
satirical portrait of an obsessive immortalist, I cannot recommend this novel
highly enough: Jitterbug Perfume, by Tom Robbins,
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jitterbug_Perfume
(7) The James Chisholm translation of the Edda is free online at, for instance,
http://www.heathengods.com/library/poetic_edda/ChisholmEdda.pdf
(8) http://som.org/books/leonard-orr-on-physical-immortality/
(9) Arcanorium is Peter Carroll’s online college. I don’t know whether any
traces of these courses remain in the current website:
http://www.arcanoriumcollege.com/
Chapter I-2: Peaceful Pranayamas
Breaths for Relaxation and Daily Health
Most people who start practising some kind of breathwork start with yoga,
and the majority are just trying to relax better. Google ‘yoga breathing’ and
the first link will probably be concerned with relaxation. I introduce below a
very basic and popular breath and three refinements. Unlike in the above
section on Connected Breathwork, I give only basic instructions for each of
these styles—you can easily find more practical details via online texts and
videos.
   You will notice that one of the main features of all the breathing patterns
we discuss in this part of the book is that you are using more lung capacity
than you habitually use. This is an almost-universal piece of advice, found
everywhere in traditional breathing practices except for a few obscure and
extreme techniques for advanced practitioners. It is also the rule in most
modern, medically-sanctioned ones. There is just one exception to this rule—
Buteyko breathing, in which the client is taught to restrict and reduce the
depth of their breathing. This is massively at odds with all other advice on
breathing, to the extent that I devote an entire chapter to it at the end of Part I,
and attempt to understand how, if at all, this practice fits in with all other
styles of breathwork.
   Below is a technique which adds to the experience of pranayama.
The Energy Shiver I: Flared Nostril Breathing
If you’ve ever done any qigong, martial arts or Connected Breathwork—or
even done intense and prolonged exercise—you may have tried flaring your
nostrils while inhaling. If you have done this and paid attention, you will
probably have noticed a sensation rather like shivering, but just the sensed-
energy part of shivering, not the feeling of cold. Typically, the Energy Shiver
consists of a tingling that travels over the back of the head, neck and
shoulder, and maybe the face too.
   Try this now. Check how there is an ‘energy-shiver’ when you flare your
nostrils, and not if you don’t.
   It can help to get the flare if you imagine smelling a rose—this will open
you up in a very receptive way. Andre van Lysebeth in her book Pranayama:
The Yoga of Breathing (1) claims that we absorb prana in the upper part of
our nasal passages, so that flaring the nostrils increases the flow to this area.
This is also the region of the nose where the smell receptors are located, so
smelling good smells can help boot up this sensitivity; Van Lysebeth suggests
we imagine the smell of a rose.
  I’ll discuss this effect further in Parts III and V; for now, I suggest you try
any or all of the exercises in this chapter with and without flaring your
nostrils, and check whether you can tell the difference. Whatever you believe
about prana, it definitely adds to the experience.
Basic Pranayama
By this, I mean the kind of pranayama you’ll be familiar with if you’ve only
ever read one set of instructions for yogic breathing. It is the form that is
common to most basic instruction manuals for yoga and also for magical
training.
   In this technique, the breath is treated as having four phases—inhale, hold,
exhale, pause. The basic objective is to make the breath cycle long, slow,
deep and efficient. Here is a good example of a very general basic pranayama
instruction:
   Stay as motionless as possible and begin to deliberately make the
   breathing slower and deeper. The aim is to use the entire capacity of the
   lungs but without any undue muscular effort or strain. The lungs may be
   held empty or full between exhalation and inhalation to lengthen the cycle.
   (2)
   Sometimes the instructions are quite specific about the time scales you
should be aiming for, such as: Inhale through nose to the count of four. Hold
for a count of seven. Exhale to a count of eight.
   Implicit or explicit in most instructions for basic pranayama is what is
usually called the Yoga Complete Breath or long, deep breathing. This is a
form of preliminary pranayama training which trains us to utilize much more
of the capacity of the lungs. This breath utilizes all three sets of muscles we
use for breathing. The following instructions are condensed from Science of
Breath by Ramacharaka (3).
   Stand or sit erect. Through the nostrils, steadily, first fill the lower part of
   the lungs, using the diaphragm, pushing abdomen out gently.
  Then the middle part of the lungs, pushing out the lower ribs, breastbone
  and chest.
  Then the higher part, protruding the upper chest, including the upper six
  or seven pairs of ribs.
  In the final movement, the lower part of the abdomen is slightly drawn in,
  which movement gives the lungs a support and also helps to fill the highest
  part of lungs. At the end of the inhalation, it is well to occasionally slightly
  elevate the shoulders, thus raising the collar bone and allowing the air to
  pass freely into the small upper lobe of the right lung.
  (This is not three separate movements, but continuous, the entire chest
  cavity from the lowered diaphragm to the highest part being expanded
  with a uniform movement. Practice will overcome tendency to divide the
  inhalation into three movements. With practice, complete inhalation can
  be achieved in a couple of seconds.)
  Retain the breath for a few seconds.
  Exhale quite slowly, holding the chest in a firm position, and drawing the
  abdomen in a little and lifting it upwards slowly as air leaves the lungs.
  When air entirely exhaled, relax chest and abdomen.
  It will be helpful if you practice this breath before a large mirror, placing
  the hands lightly over the abdomen to feel movements
Ramacharaka claims that this breath will give resistance to ‘consumption,
colds and bronchitis’. He writes that colds can be prevented by practicing a
little vigorous complete breathing when you feel you have been exposed or
chilled and that most colds can be cured by complete breathing and partial
fasting for a day. He claims that it cleanses the blood, massages the liver,
stomach and other abdominal organs. He also claims that it can restore lost
sexual potency. I’ll come back to the conflicting healing claims of various
schools of breathwork at the end of Part I, but there are some well-attested
health benefits from more complete breath patterns (see below).
    The basic pattern of this breathing is derived in part at least from the
ancient text of Patanjali’s Yoga Sutras. However, very little precise technical
instruction is actually given in the original sutras—most of the detail is in the
commentaries. Practically all there is in the main text is the following:
    Once this [firm, comfortable posture] is accomplished, breath regulation,
    which is the separation of the flow of inhalation and exhalation, is
  attained.
  It has internal, external and restrictive operations, which are regulated
  according to the place, time and accounting, being prolonged or hardly
  noticed. (4)
   You can see how this is the bare bones; of course in Patanjali’s day, around
400–500 BCE, the norm for the seeker would be to find an expert teacher of
pranayama, not to get it out of a book. So refinements have been added to this
basic pattern time and time again.
   Modern medicine, in one of its enlightened areas, has taken on board the
ancient lesson of relaxing breathing and supplied modern, scientific
explanations for how it works. A good source for both a scientific treatment
of relaxation breathing and actual detailed advice about how to do it,
complete with an audio CD that helps the beginner to pace their breathing, is
The Healing Power of the Breath, by Richard P. Brown and Patricia L.
Gerbarg (5). Brown and Gerbarg are mental health professionals who have
extensive experience of using breathwork in crisis situations, so their writing
comes from a position of genuine, practical knowledge.
   Here, they introduce the autonomic nervous system and how breathing
affects it:
   The healing, calming part of the nervous system is the parasympathetic
   nervous system. The level of activity of this system can be measured using
   the natural fluctuations in heart rate that are linked to breathing; these
   fluctuations are used to calculate heart rate variability, or HRV. Changing
   the rate and pattern of breathing alters HRV, reflecting shifts in nervous
   system activity. […] You can do a simple test of this on yourself. Sit
   comfortably and place two fingers on your pulse, either on the side of your
   neck or on your wrist, whichever is easier. Now breathe closely and
   deeply. Continue the slow deep breathing as you count your pulse. Count
   the number of beats when you breathe in, and compare it with the number
   of beats when you breathe out. What did you notice? If you found that your
   heart beats faster when you breathe in than when you breathe out, you are
   correct. You have discovered that every breath you take affects your heart
   rate. […] breathing slowly increases HRV.
  They go on to point out that increased HRV is a good thing—it
demonstrates that the nervous system is responding to changes in what is
happening. It is flexible, not locked into a pattern, one heart rate fits all,
which is clearly not a good state to be in.
   People with anxiety disorders, depression, post-traumatic stress, attention
deficit disorder, excess aggression, cardiovascular disease and irritable bowel
syndrome have reduced HRV and dysfunctions in their stress response
systems.
   It is not hard to see how people get locked into dysfunctional breathing
patterns. One of the consequences of breathing being the only vital function
we can change at will, in an instant, is that it is intimately bound up with our
fight/flight reflex. The moment we believe we are threatened, the sympathetic
side of the autonomic nervous system comes into play and causes the
diaphragm, our main breathing muscle, to contract and pull in air rapidly and
forcefully, often through the mouth.
   This is an important survival adaptation which has no doubt helped you
and your ancestors to avoid dying many times. It is a gene-cluster that has
paid its way in terms of survival. It is fine to quicken the breath and raise the
pulse, but this is meant to be a temporary state of affairs which dies down a
few minutes after the danger has passed. To get locked into that kind of
breath pattern cannot be good for you—the sympathetic nervous system
response is meant for special, dangerous occasions, not as your daily
baseline. So we need ways in which to break up any dysfunctional,
conditioned breathing patterns we have acquired.
   Brown and Gerbarg write that Zen monks in deep meditation show a
breath rate of six breaths per minute (bpm), and they claim that the ‘sweetest
spot’ in the breathing rate is five bpm, or slightly slower for very tall people.
So modern science and traditional experience is showing us that the relaxing
effects of the peaceful pranayamas have a sound neurological basis: slower,
deeper breathing causes the parasympathetic side of the autonomic nervous
system to predominate.
   Hold on to that thought, for when we look into the claimed exception to
this rule in the end chapter of this section, concerning Buteyko breathing.
Personal Accounts: Basic Pranayama with slow, full breathing
  Using the CD from The Healing Power of the Breath, quite hard to
  breathe at 6 breaths per minute. And it needs to be fewer to get full benefit
  of Coherent Breathing. Got easier after a couple of minutes. Switched to 5
  BPM.
Another go, 5min, using 5bpm: Difficult at first, felt like too much breath-
energy in my head. Then this settled down. Head feels ‘full’ of energy at
end.
Easy now to get into that calm, slow breath. Gets easier the more I do it. 5
minutes has a noticeable effect.
5 bpm: On top of massive stress state, felt like my teeth were going to
splinter last time the phone rang. Amazing, completely got rid of it in
about 3 minutes.
Good. I found myself looking forward to this exercise, it is no longer a
chore.
Just calming, with a little sense of energy in head.
Summary of breathwork style: Basic Pranayama
  Philosophical/magical contexts:
  Most commonly: Hatha Yoga. In the West, Hatha Yoga has come to
  mean ‘yoga of the body’, practised for health and fitness. In Tantra,
  however, Hatha Yoga is considered to exist on a much higher level, as a
  basis of the transformation of consciousness.
  Also: Basic magical training; for a good example of this context, see
  Liber MMM, the IOT’s introductory training programme
  (http://www.chaosmatrix.org/library/chaos/texts/libermmm.pdf ).
  Recommended regularity of practice:
  Daily, in most contexts.
  Physiological correlates: Modern pranayama teachers will usually point
  out that basic pranayama breathing is actually more efficient at getting
  oxygen into the system, especially when the Full Breath is used.
  The parasympathetic side of the autonomic nervous system promotes
  relaxation, immune system functioning, healing and recharging of your
  ‘life-batteries’. This is stimulated by slow, full breathing. It has been
  claimed (see The Healing Power of the Breath) that there is a particular
  pace of breathing—six bpm—that form a parasympathetic ‘sweet spot’.
  The Breath Itself:
  Is breath predominantly in chest, abdomen or both (‘complete’)? Both,
  complete.
  Inbreath and Outbreath: Lengthen both of them as much as possible.
  Neither is usually forced.
  Hold? Yes.
  Pause? Yes.
  Form: The overall shape of basic pranayama can be imagined as a
  slightly sloping ‘square wave’, where the flat parts at the top and bottom
  represent the hold and the pause respectively.
Ujjayi Breath
This is a slightly more intense style of pranayama. It is often combined with
yoga asanas (postures), particularly in Ashtanga Yoga. Ujjayi is usually
translated as ‘victorious’, and this breath is said to be good for overcoming
stress and frustration. Its function is keep the prana circulating through the
body rather than being projected outwards into the world. It is said to be
similar to the breathing of a newborn baby before its prana starts to flow out
towards the attractions of the world.
   Ujjayi is often called ‘ocean breath’ or, in modern schools, ‘Darth Vader
breath’, because of the sound produced by the air moving past the glottis
when the throat is constricted. Some practitioners make it sound louder,
almost like a foghorn, though Sivananda (6) writes that ‘The sound produced
during inhalation should be of a mild and uniform pitch’.
   Sivananda’s instructions combine this technique with alternate nostril
breathing (see below). Most instructors do not; expanding the basic form with
Sivananda’s more detailed instructions, we get:

       1. Close the mouth. Inhale slowly through both the nostrils in a
          smooth, uniform manner till the breath fills the space from the
          throat to the heart. Expand the chest when you inhale.
       2. Retain the breath as long as you can do it comfortably and then
          exhale slowly through the nose while constricting the throat
          muscles. To get the hang of this, try exhaling the sound ‘haaaah’
          with your mouth open. Then try to make the same sound with the
          mouth closed.
       3. When you have got to the stage where you find the exhale sound
          easy, try it for the inhale, gently constricting the throat as you
          breathe in.
       4. The inhale and exhale are of equal length, and should feel easy,
          not strained. There is only a short hold of comfortable length and
          only a short pause if any.

   The reason for making this sound is so that you can hear how your breath
is doing, so you can monitor your breath from one moment to the next and
make sure that it remains slow and controlled. In other words, this is a breath
for increasing awareness of breath as a moment-to-moment experience,
which becomes a way of monitoring the flows of prana within the body.
Sivananda adds that:
   This Kumbhaka may be practised even when walking or standing. Instead
   of exhaling through the left nostril, you can exhale slowly through both
   nostrils.
   Ujjayi is a form of ‘Resistance Breathing’. This is defined by Richard P.
Brown and Patricia L. Gerbarg (5) as ‘any kind of breathing which creates
resistance to the flow of air’. Resistance breathing is recommended because
the vibration it produces is similar to the purr of a cat, which acts on the cat’s
nervous system to calm it down.
   Recent research on cat purring has shown it to be a self-healing
mechanism:
   Cats often purr while under duress, such as during a visit to the
   veterinarian or when recovering from injury. […] Cats purr during both
   inhalation and exhalation with a consistent pattern and frequency between
   25 and 150 Hertz. Various investigators have shown that sound
   frequencies in this range can improve bone density and promote healing.
   (7)
  Thus the soft sound produced in ujjayi breathing may well be a trigger for
healing.
   There are some good training videos for ujjayi breath online. It is
worthwhile looking at two or three because there are lots of variations in this
style of pranayama.

Claimed benefits of Ujjayi Pranayama
This is considered to be a balancing and calming breath which increases
oxygenation and builds internal body heat. Ujjayi breathing is sometimes
used continuously throughout Ashtanga yoga sessions, to encourage a free-
flowing of prana. It also helps practitioners to stay present and aware of
posture and energy state, so it generates a kind of meditative state. In any
event, purring like a cat is not a bad thing to aim for.
Personal Accounts: Ujjayi (Victorious) Breath
  Preliminary few cycles: Strange at first to make a sound while breathing!
  After the initial oddness, there comes a sense of one-pointed focus, more
  so than with basic pranayama - the sound requires a certain amount of
concentration. The sound also gives the chattering mind something to do,
keeping it busy.
                                      ***
There’s some energy focused in the head, a pleasant, easy energy feeling.
The overall feeling is a kind of steadiness.
                                      ***
Thirty-five breaths in five minutes: Definite buzzing all over - something is
happening with the prana. But not the same as the buzzing of
overbreathing.
                                      ***
I am actually aware of prana, as a floating sensation, like the 5th Circuit
experience of the 8 Circuits. Definitely enhanced energy flows, sent prana
to my injured foot.
                                      ***
Started practising a with a small hold; this feels comfortable, feels good to
have a pause before exhaling. A certain peaceful clarity.
                                      ***
This time, I was frustrated (problem with a friend), so I was able to test the
claim that it overcomes frustration: Yes, at the end of the session (five
minutes) it no longer mattered, and I felt fine. This is definitely a centring
breath, good for dealing with difficult emotions. In fact, I think it helped
stave off the beginning of a bout of depression.
                                      ***
This is a great precursor for sitting contemplation.
Whoo! Nice sense that things are being balanced in my body-energy
feelings! It resembles a cat’s purring, insofar as it sounds on both inhale
and exhale. Leaves head feeling full of light, soft energy.
Summary of breath pattern: Ujjayi Breath
  Philosophical/magical contexts: Becoming conscious of and entraining
  sensed energy. Often paired with (Ashtanga) yoga postures.
  Recommended regularity of practice: Same frequency as yoga
  practice, usually daily.
  Physiological correlates:
  Is it claimed to raise CO2 or O2? Increases oxygenation.
  The Breath Itself:
  Is breath predominantly in chest, abdomen or both (‘complete’)? Chest.
  Inbreath and Outbreath: Equal length. Not forced.
  Hold? Yes/ No. Comfortable.
  Pause? No, or small.
  Form: Somewhere between sine- and square-wave.
Alternate Nostril Pranayama (Nadi Shodhana)
This is a refinement of basic pranayama often recommended in Ayurvedic
medical texts. It is sufficiently common that some texts simply label it
‘pranayama’. It is claimed to calm an overstimulated mind, ease insomnia
and cool the body of excessive heat. Modern practitioners have also claimed
that it helps the information flow between the right and left cerebral
hemispheres, enhancing creativity.
Sivananda writes:
   firm in the posture and having preserved perfect self-control, the Yogi
   should, in order to clear away the impurities of the Sushumna, […] having
   inhaled the air through the left nostril, should retain it as long as he can
   and should exhale through the right.
  Then drawing it again through the right and having retained it, he should
  exhale it through the left, in the order, that he should draw it through the
  same nostril, by which he exhaled it before and had retained it. To those
  who practise it according to these rules, through the right and left nostrils,
  the Nadis become purified within three months. (6)
This is how it is usually described:

        1. Place your right thumb over your right nostril and your ring finger
           above your left nostril. Inhale to a count of four.
        2. Then close your left nostril at the same time you release the right,
           and exhale through your right nostril to a count of eight.
        3. Then inhale through your right nostril to a count of four, release
           your left nostril and close your right. Exhale through your left
           nostril to a count of eight.

   The effects claimed for alternate nostril breathing relate to the Ayurvedic
science of ida and pingala, the two channels which move subtle energy
around the body. They are a subtle equivalent to the two sides of the
autonomic nervous system, the relaxing parasympathetic nerves and the
fight-flight directed sympathetic system.
   Note how the pattern of this breath—open a nostril, breathe out, breathe in,
close nostril—puts the exhalation at the start of the cycle. My natural way of
thinking about the breath cycle is that it starts with the inhale, and I think
most people would think that way. But this emphasis on the exhale as the first
part of the cycle fits with the idea found in some pranayama teachings that
the exhale is the more important part of the cycle to focus on.
   This emphasis brings the breather’s attention to the parasympathetic side
of the autonomic nervous system; as noted above, the exhale produces a
slower pace of breathing. It has been found that a long, complete exhale
stimulates the parasympathetic system, which results in relaxation.
   Nadi shodhana is of course a form of resistance breathing, as mentioned
above. However, unlike ujjayi breathing, it does not involve making any
sound. Therefore, its effects might be quite different. The personal
investigations in the accounts below established this breath pattern as
calming and centring.
Personal Accounts: Alternate nostril pranayama
  Makes arm ache! [This is someone who was sitting upright on a straight-
  backed chair. Good position for meditation, but not for a breathing
  technique where you have to keep your hand near your face!] I noticed
  that the breath current through the left nostril was strong at first, then
  became harder to pass the air - clearly, it had closed down, like they are
  said to.
                                        ***
  A calming feeling, definitely.
                                        ***
  I noticed the right nostril closing up a bit this time. I can feel the difference
  in resistance in each nostril. Centring, like being in the centre of my body.
Summary of breath pattern: Alternate Nostril Pranayama
  Philosophical/magical contexts: Healing and balancing. Cleansing of
  ‘energy channels’, which can be taken at face value, and also as
  equivalent to working through the feelings that arise when old memories
  surface in the course of sensing intense energy.
  Recommended regularity of practice: Same frequency as yoga
  practice, usually daily.
  Physiological correlates:
  Is it claimed to raise CO2 or O2? No.
  The Breath Itself:
  Is breath predominantly in chest, abdomen or both (‘complete’)? Both.
  Inbreath and Outbreath: Outbreath is twice the length of the inbreath.
  Not forced.
  Hold? Yes.
  Pause? None, or small.
  Form: More or less square-wave.
Tui-Na: Taoist Breath Patterns
In Taoist subtle alchemy, there are many breath practices. Many of these are
outside the scope of this book, because they are exercises in which other
factors—usually movement—predominate.
   The generic term for breathwork in qigong is Tui-na. Some forms of the
Tui-na breathing which is practiced in conjunction with qigong exercises are
similar to either basic pranayama or to Ujjayi breath. The instructions given
for qigong breathing are usually simple and minimal, and often combined
with movement.
Some schools of Tui-Na recognize four basic styles of breathing:

       1. Natural Breathing, which is what it sounds like. The advantage of
          it is that is effortless. The downside is that is considered too
          shallow.
       2. Complementary Breathing: this is simply the development of
          deep, abdominal breathing, in which the abdomen pushes
          outwards as the breath is inhaled. Just as with Yoga Complete
          Breath, this expands lung capacity, massages the abdominal
          organs, thereby helping digestion, and assists blood circulation.
       3. Stopping the Breathing: this is just a development of the hold or
          pause at the end of the inhale or exhale. It is recommended for
          focusing the mind on the breath.
       4. Reverse Cycle Breathing: this is the opposite in form to
          Complementary Breathing. The abdomen is drawn inwards as the
          breath is inhaled, and pushed outwards on the exhale.

   (Those familiar with Pilates may have come across something very similar
to this technique.)
In addition to these breaths, there are other breathing techniques which are
only used with particular illnesses.
   It is easy to see from the above that the basic, relaxing form of breathwork
in the Taoist tradition, Complementary Breathing, is identical in nature to
those of the Hindu pranayama schools. My own investigative practice
concentrated on investigating Reverse Cycle Breathing.
Against Nature: The Reverse Cycle
When we learn just about any basic breathing technique for meditation and
inner work, we learn to breathe from the abdomen. This is a more efficient
breath than breathing from the chest which a lot of adults tend to get stuck in.
When I began to do basic sitting meditation in my mid-20s, one of my
teachers got me into doing abdominal breathing. Before that I didn’t even
know that I had been stuck in chest breathing. Quite rapidly, abdominal
breathing became my normal mode.
   In abdominal breathing, we contract the diaphragm muscle, the inverted
bowl-shaped sheet of muscle that separates the chest cavity from the
abdominal cavity. This makes the diaphragm push downwards, which
expands the belly outwards. This creates a pressure drop in the lungs which
draws air in. When we exhale, the diaphragm relaxes back to its bowl shape,
pushing air out of the lungs and drawing the belly back in.
   In reverse breathing, breath is taken in using the abdomen, but the
abdomen is not allowed to expand outwards with the inhale, indeed, it is
contracted a little. Exhaling, the belly is allowed to relax and push outwards.
The basic cycle is:

        1. On the inhale, draw in the lower abdomen and raise the perineum.
           The upper rib cage does not move. This is accompanied by the qi
           entrainment of the Small Circulation or Microcosmic Orbit: Let
           the qi flow from just below the navel down the centre line of the
           body, through the perineum, up the spine to the crown, or in some
           versions all the way over the head to the tip of the nose.
        2. On the exhale, let the lower abdomen move outward and let the
           perineum lower back into place. Let the qi flow from the nose
           down centreline of the front of the body, back to just below the
           navel.
        3. At the conclusion of your session, store the qi in the lower Dan
           tian, the energy centre just below the navel.

One of my qigong contacts tells me that:
  Taoist reverse cycle breathing, used in conjunction with the Microcosmic
  Orbit is the foundation practice of Taoist inner alchemy as I was taught.
  (8)
  The normal abdominal style of breathing is universal in meditational
practice—except in Taoism! The same qigong exercises can be done either
with normal abdominal breathing, or with reverse breathing; Dr. Yang (9)
tells us that it does not matter, and that some meditators switch between the
two methods of breathing.
   Other writers make larger claims for it. A commonly-repeated claim is that
Reverse Cycle Breathing is the same in form as the ‘breathing’ of qi a foetus
does in the womb. Another claim is that Reverse Cycle is useful when we
need a sudden boost of energy.
   The latter idea may come from the martial uses of Reverse Breathing.
Qigong has always had a strong association with martial practice, and it is
said that Reverse Breathing ‘compresses’ qi, making it more useful for
fighting.
   My contact ponders whether the reason for the peculiarity of Reverse
Breathing is simply to set it apart from normal breathing. This sounds
believable to me—after all, in Connected Breathwork, we breathe through the
mouth, for various reasons, one of which is that it sets that style of breathing
apart from our decades-conditioned ‘normal’ breathing, thereby making it
special. This fits in with what other Taoist commentators say about it—that it
makes you more aware of the subtler physical and energetic movements
occurring in the body, that it is about becoming more intensely aware.
   However, there is more to it than that. Investigating for myself, I
discovered that this breath pattern induces some very useful energy flows.
Because the effects are related more to inner alchemy than calming yourself
down, I have included my reports in Part IV, where we investigate shifts in
internal sensed energy.
   There is no summary box or waveform for basic Tui-Na because the
properties of the breath overlap completely with the breaths mentioned
above.
The Yoga Cleansing Breath
This is a specific exercise designed to ventilate and cleanse the lungs. It is
therefore useful to end cycles of other breathing exercises with this breath. It
is a kind of resistance breath.
   It is quite an intense breath, more so than the other breaths in this chapter,
but it does not have the rather extreme effects of the three breaths in the next
chapter. It is said to stimulates the cells of the respiratory system and tone it
up, and to refresh you when you’re tired. I’ve included it in the Peaceful
Pranayama chapter because I have not read any reports of it producing
extreme or ‘difficult to handle’ shifts in consciousness.
Here is the sequence:

        1. Inhale a Complete Breath. This is where you ‘fill and empty the
           jug from the bottom to the top’: you start off the breath by
           relaxing the abdominal muscles, so your belly sticks out slightly.
           Then allow the breath to rise into your chest, which expands.
           Finally, let the breath into the very top of the lungs, by feeling
           that tiny tilt in the collarbone, that final sip of air. This whole
           sequence should be practised until it is smooth and continuous.
        2. Retain the breath for a few seconds.
        3. Pucker up the lips as if to whistle (but do not swell out the
           cheeks). Exhale a little air through the opening, with considerable
           vigour. Stop for a moment, retaining the air, and then exhale a
           little more. Repeat until all the air is exhaled. (10)

This exercise should be practised until it can be performed naturally and
easily, and used to finish other exercises.
Personal Accounts: Yoga Cleansing Breath
  Good cool down breath, helped to regulate some of the energy from the
  other breaths.
                                       ***
  The name sums this one up nicely. It clears the mind almost like a
  banishing ritual, returns presence of mind to one coming out of trance,
  and seems to re-open mind-body channels that might be clouded or
  energetically obstructed. I never felt the need to do more than 3 of these
breaths in a row.
Summary of breath pattern: Yogi Cleansing Breath
  Philosophical/magical contexts: Toning, refreshing, ending other breath
  cycles.
  Recommended regularity of practice: same frequency as yoga
  practice, usually daily.
  Physiological correlates:
  Is it claimed to raise CO2 or O2? Since it claims to refresh when tired, it
  is a breath which increases oxygen levels and decreases carbon dioxide.
  The Breath Itself:
  Is breath predominantly in chest, abdomen or both (‘complete’)? Both,
  complete.
  Inbreath and Outbreath: Equal length. Not forced.
  Hold? Yes.
  Pause? No, or small.
  Form:
References
(1) Andre Van Lysebeth, Pranayama: The Yoga of Breathing, p54 in the
edition here: https://www.waterstones.com/book/pranayama/andre-van-
lysebeth/9780955241239
(2) From Liber Null & Psychonaut: An Introduction to Chaos Magic by Peter
J. Carroll.
(3) http://www.arfalpha.com/ScienceOfBreath/ScienceOfBreath.pdf
(4) http://www.sacred-texts.com/hin/yogasutr.htm
(5) https://www.amazon.co.uk/Healing-Power-Breath-Techniques-
Concentration/dp/1590309022
(6) I make no apologies for Sivananda’s fulsome claims; it’s technique we’re
talking about here. http://www.yoga-age.com/asanas/prana.html
(7) https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/why-do-cats-purr/
(8) Paul Mansveld, personal communication.
(9) Dr. Yang, Jwing-Ming, https://www.amazon.co.uk/d/cka/Qigong-
Health-amp-Martial-Arts-Exercises-Meditation/1886969574
(10) http://www.arfalpha.com/ScienceOfBreath/ScienceOfBreath.pdf
Chapter I-3: Breaths of Power:
Three Intense Pranayamas
  Felt energized, a bit too much energy, a little dizziness…
                                           - Student, Arcanorium course, 2010
Pranayama is not just for relaxation. The three techniques we shall be looking
at in this chapter are all rather forceful and have quite extreme effects. We are
going to peek into the world of intense pranayama and see how different it is
from the gentle forms.
   Bearing in mind appropriate health and safety considerations (see
Appendix: Health and Safety issues) you are encouraged to try some of these
practices in order to experience the range of effects that breathwork can offer.
I know a few magicians who use them daily, to produce extraordinary states,
but in all cases they have worked up to this over some time. I have a few
months’ daily experience of each of these breaths, but I would not claim to
have mastered any of them completely.
These breaths may be of the type Gurdjieff warned against practising unless
you have the right sort of teacher. They are undoubtedly powerful, and it is
possible they could produce states where energy feeds into tensions,
producing effects which are both physiologically unpleasant and emotionally
disturbing. The latter kind of disturbance is discussed under ‘Spiritual Crisis’
in the Introduction to Part II.

Agni-Prasana or Breath of Fire
Perhaps the most stimulating breathing style of all is Agni-Prasana, or Breath
of Fire. This is most often used in the practice of Kundalini yoga. It is
believed to relieve fatigue by restoring vitality and energy to the nervous
system.

To do the breath of fire:

        1. Sit comfortably upright but relaxed. Inhale through the nose about
           halfway, in a relaxed fashion, letting your lungs inflate on their
           own.
       2. Let the breath out easily, feeling your abdomen pulling back
          towards your spine.
       3. Then do a full inhalation, feeling your abdomen extend outwards.
       4. Exhale forcefully through your nose several times, feeling your
          abdomen pulling back towards your spine, as if you are pumping
          a bellows. The exhale will sound like a long sniff—you will find
          that blowing your nose before you start is a good idea.
       5. Do a round of nine of these cycles, then take three deep relaxed
          breaths, then another nine cycles (another round).
       6. Add more rounds only as you feel comfortable.

   This is a very powerful breath, so do not try to push your limits but stay
where you are comfortable and not dizzy. Breath of fire is usually practiced
from thirty seconds, working up to three minutes.
   Breath of Fire and Shining Skull are used interchangeably by some
teachers, and there was some need to clarify the instructions for the
Arcanorium course (1):
   For the Breath of Fire instructions, the rounds of 9 inhales/exhales are all
   half-breaths, right? That's the way I understand you.
  (My yoga teacher teaches Breath of Fire with quarter breaths and we go
  on until she says stop. Also, she seems to use the terms "Shining Skull" and
  "Breath of Fire" interchangeably. Any comments on either of these? Just
  curious.)
  <me> 'Half' is pretty arbitrary - certainly use an incomplete breath, not a
  full lungful.
  Shining Skull and Breath of Fire are very similar. Part of the practise of
  them for me was to distinguish between them. All writers I've read on this
  make emphatic distinction between them - let's hope we can too!
  The way I read it, Breath of Fire can be done with equal lengths of inhale
  and exhale. The snorting/sniffing sound is slower than the sound for
  Kapalbhati [Shining Skull].
  Kapalbhati definitely emphasizes forceful, shorter exhale. That's what
  everyone seems to write, but yes, it's hard to see the difference even on the
  online demonstration.
  It does seem that the Kapalbhati inhale is more relaxed, and the exhale is
  a little shorter, whereas Breath of Fire is more kind of symmetrical,
  pulsing the diaphragm regularly.
   Another point is that some teachers recommend that, as soon as the lungs
are empty from the first exhale, arch the back to inhale. With the next exhale,
let the chest collapse forward. Some writers recommend this practice for
stimulating the lowest three chakras, or energy centres in kundalini yoga.
There is a brief mention of this below, and how it improved the Breath of
Fire experience for one student.
Personal Accounts: Breath of Fire
  I rather liked breath of fire and how easily it leads to a trance state. I
  found it much easier to do than the shining skull breathing [See below -
  Kapalbhati], which made me tired and felt laborious. Breath of fire is
  great for achieving gnosis, but in my own practice I almost never use one
  type of breath exclusively, even within the scope of one single ritual.
  Like the Shining Skull and Bellows Breath, I liked how Breath of Fire
  facilitates easy access to seething [see notes on shaking, at the end of Part
  IV], which I often use in my own practice.
                                        ***
  Breath of Fire: produces a ‘tight’ feeling in head.
  Sometimes that develops into dizziness, sometimes a tingling in hands.
  Have also felt spiky feelings in the heart from this breath
  However, when I tried out different intensities of breathing, I found it
  could be soothing and gentle - depends how intensely I breathe.
  Often gives a feeling that the abdominal organs are getting a good
  massage.
                                        ***
  Breath of Fire: Light head, tendency toward dizziness, tingling in the
  hands and head, uncomfortable feelings.
                                        ***
  Built up to fast and full Breath of Fire, hands tingling, dizzy after 4
  minutes. Let it calm down a bit then did it again. If I do it intensely enough
  to just about feel it in abdominal muscles, then I get a lot of dizziness.
                                        ***
First thing in the day: Fast and full Breath of Fire, lying down, got a bit
dizzy.
                                       ***
Doing it like in [online instructions], arching spine with inbreath, 6-7
minutes of this before any dizziness - the arching seems to push the energy
into the body, not head - there's a little 'energy-shiver' at the end of the
inbreath. The dizziness soon died away - I think this is another dimension
to this excellent practice I've just got my head round!
                                       ***
Arching my back enough to get an ‘energy shiver’, then there seems to be
less dizziness.
Summary of breath pattern: Breath of Fire
  Philosophical/magical contexts: Yoga practice for raising kundalini. I
  do not have a deep experimental grasp of kundalini yoga, so I cannot
  comment in detail about what this implies.
  Recommended regularity of practice: Integrated with other practice,
  build up from very short sessions to longer ones, carefully.
  Physiological correlates:
  Is it claimed to raise CO2 or O2? No.
  The Breath Itself:
  Is breath predominantly in chest, abdomen or both (‘complete’)? Chiefly
  abdominal.
  Inbreath and Outbreath: Inbreath is much longer than outbreath.
  Outbreath is somewhat forced.
  Hold? No.
  Pause? None, or small.
  Form: A spiky shape with a steeper exhale slope:
Kapalbhati or ‘shining skull’ pranayama
Perhaps the least extreme of these styles is Kapalbhati (also spelled
Kapalabhati), which is Sanskrit for ‘shining skull’. As the name suggests, this
breath is for stimulating and cleansing the organs of the head.
Sivananda writes (2):
   The term ‘Kapalabhati’ means an exercise that makes the skull shine. This
   Kriya cleanses the skull. So this is taken as one of the Shat-Karmas (six
   cleansing processes in Hatha Yoga).
   Kapalbhati is highly energizing abdominal breathing exercise consisting
basically of a natural-length inhalation and a fast exhalation. The exhalation
takes only one quarter of the time of the inhalation. This fast exhalation
follows directly after the inhalation, with no hold stage.
The breath is done as follows:

       1. Sit in a comfortable posture with a straight back. Inhale deeply
          through both nostrils, pushing out the abdomen.
       2. Exhale through the nose by pulling the abdomen in, a fast
          contraction of the abdominal muscles. This exhale comes from
          the diaphragm.
       3. Inhale again, so that the inhalation does not involve any effort.
          Just relax your abdomen and the lungs will automatically expand
          and fill up.
       4. A good start is to do just fifteen cycles of breath. Then inhale and
          exhale deeply. This is one round of Kapalbhati. Three such
          rounds are the recommended starting practice.

   Between the rounds, do a gentle, normal kind of breathing. As you get
more experienced and learn to tune in to whether more of the same breath is
good for you, you can either add more breaths to the round or more rounds to
the total cycle of repetitions.
Personal Accounts: Kapalbhati pranayama:
  KPB x 15: Generates a refined, ‘purifying fire’ feeling in head. With a
  slight edge of tightness.
                                    ***
KPB x 15: I have a cold, and it cleared some mucus out! Again: that
refined, ‘purifying fire’ feeling in head. With a slight edge of tightness.
And again, faster still; some dizziness.
                                       ***
KPB x15: Fine. Slight edge of head-tightness. Again - feels really nice in
my belly muscles, that pulling in, quite sexual. Feels okay, so again -
lovely 'hidden' 'ache' in head, hard to describe. Its edges are a tightness,
so this is the limiting state. Gives a ‘buzzing in the face’ too.
                                       ***
Again - a swoony feel! Good! Then a head-tightness, which is like a wave
from some drug. That's enough, I think.
                                       ***
Buildup, KPB x 15: good, like soft stuff in my head. Again: more thoughts
flood in - this wakes the brain up!
Very slight feeling of possible excess in some direction. Bright energy in
front of head - hence Shining Forehead!
And again: slightly fiercer light.
                                       ***
Shining Skull: Similar to Breath of Fire, pressure towards the forehead
area, light head, less dizziness than BOF, energising, definitely feels better
than BOF, probably due to deeper breathing,
                                       ***
What happened was that I did Kapalbhati then I decided to do Connected
Breathwork. Utterly fantastic, really is one of the best moments of feeling
for years, something I've missed for years.
                                       ***
Shining Skull, Kapalbhati - Shining Skull was, to me, like a more advanced
Breath of Fire - similar, but more difficult to do, and requiring much more
practice to make it applicable. Because of this it was more difficult to
enjoy, but worked well when used alongside Breath of Fire when I felt I
needed a short break from it.
                                       ***
Once I'd been working with it for a while, the feelings in my head started
to get softer. And a definite increase in enthusiasm and clarity.
                                       ***
Kapalbhati was the most effective and strongest for me in terms of effects
and 'clean' perception afterwards.
Summary of breath pattern: Kapalbhati Pranayama
  Philosophical/magical contexts: In Hatha Yoga, cleansing of the energy
  channels (nadis), to allow the kundalini to rise.
  Recommended regularity of practice: Small bouts, regularly, stopping
  if any untoward symptoms occur.
  Physiological correlates:
  Is it claimed to raise CO2 or O2? No.
  The Breath Itself:
  Is breath predominantly in chest, abdomen or both (‘complete’)?
  Abdominal.
  Inbreath and Outbreath: Inbreath is four times the length of the
  outbreath. Inhale is vigorous but not forced. Exhale is forced.
  Hold? No.
  Pause? No.
  Form: Abrupt in shape, something like this:
Bellows Breath, Bhastrika Pranayama
All these highly stimulating breaths should be explored carefully and
thoughtfully—more is not necessarily better. It is claimed to calm ‘the mind,
and stimulates the body, increasing oxygen and decreasing carbon dioxide in
the blood. It is excellent to do before meditation’. (3)
   Bhastrika, or Bellows Breath is a popular stimulating breath. It uses the
‘Yogi Complete Breath’ (all three sets of breathing muscles) and is claimed
to increase one's lung capacity. Bhastrika consists of a distinctly forced, rapid
kind of deep breathing. The name covers a variety of exercises, each with
their own refinements of this basic pattern. Both inbreath and outbreath are
forced, but the emphasis is placed upon the forceful expulsion of air.
Sivananda writes (2):
   In Sanskrit Bhastrika means ‘bellows’. Rapid succession of forcible
   expulsion is a characteristic feature of Bhastrika. Just as a blacksmith
   blows his bellows rapidly, so also you should move your breath rapidly.
  Sit on Padmasana [Lotus]. Keep the body, neck and head erect. Close the
  mouth. Next, inhale and exhale quickly ten times like the bellows of the
  blacksmith. Constantly dilate and contract. When you practise this
  Pranayama a hissing sound is produced. The practitioner should start with
  rapid expulsions of breath following one another in rapid succession.
  When the required number of expulsions, say ten for a round, is finished,
  the final expulsion is followed by a deepest possible inhalation. The breath
  is suspended as long as it could be done with comfort. Then deepest
  possible exhalation is done very slowly. The end of this deep exhalation
  completes one round of Bhastrika.
  Rest a while after one round is over by taking a few normal breaths. This
  will give you relief and make you fit for starting the second round. Do
  three rounds daily in the morning. You can do another three rounds in the
  evening also. Busy people who find it difficult to do three rounds of
  Bhastrika can do one round at least. This also will keep them quite fit.
  Bhastrika is a powerful exercise. A combination of Kapalabhati and Ujjayi
  makes up Bhastrika. Practise Kapalabhati and Ujjayi to start with. Then
  you will find it very easy to do Bhastrika.
In its basic form, it is very simple:

        1. Sit upright but relaxed.
        2. Now simply inhale and exhale quickly and deeply. Like a
           bellows, you should draw air in and out quite firmly but without
           undue strain.
        3. A series of such expulsions, each following the other in quick
           succession with neither hold nor pause phases is called a round.
           There is a serious warning attached to this highly stimulating
           breath pattern, because excessive use of Bhastrika is said to cause
           injuries to lung tissues. A beginner should limit the round to about
           five complete breath cycles. Eventually, the number may be
           increased to ten, or even more. If you do not have an expert
           teacher, you should progress by how the process feels; basically,
           if you feel uncomfortable or dizzy you should stop and review
           your practice.
        4. Finish or follow a round by the deepest possible inhalation and
           exhalation. A series of normal breaths should occur before
           undertaking a second round.

This is also one of the few styles of pranayama where you can breathe
through the mouth, or through both mouth and nose. One variation is to use a
full pause after each round. This makes a lot of sense in terms of relaxing the
body and breathing system.
   A further variation is to keep the tongue in the 'yoga position', touching
against the roof of the mouth. This is said to enable the circulation of male
and female internal energies, as with breaths in which energy is consciously
circulated. See my notes on this posture in the discussions on energy
circulation in Part III. With this breath, I have found it makes a difference to
how the energy feels—it feels a lot less ‘rough’ when the tongue is in place.
Personal Accounts: Bhastrika Pranayama
  I struggled with the bhastrika - the way I have done this before is with
  alternate-nostril breathing, which I think someone else mentioned.
  Fundamentally, bhastrika feels pretty much the same to me as kapalbhati,
  just not as strong - I didn't end up dizzy also.
                                        ***
Bellows breath, Bhastrika - This one seemed too much for any extended
period of time. It's more like something I would do briefly to intensify an
already developed session of a different breath. I did feel a tight sensation
in the head with this one more than once. This breath also produced
tingling sensations from my acromioclavicular joint down to my wrists.
                                     ***
Felt energized, a bit too much energy, a little dizziness,
                                     ***
Not bearing down, pulling breath in hard, expelling with sneeze sound.
Cycles of 4, with build-up and cool-down breaths. Some dizziness after 2
cycles. But this is much less dizzying than KPB [Kapalbhati]. Heart rate
raised.
                                     ***
Started off just doing mindfulness, which I've been doing on and off all
day, then did 3 cycles of buildup - big Bhastrika, then segued into ujjayi.
No real dizziness, but on last cycle did get that 'wild' feeling, overbreath-
overload.
I am getting the hang of segueing into and out of the Bhastrika. And I'm
getting the bellows- feeling in my abdomen and diaphragm.
                                     ***
What's the difference between this and KPB? The latter feels more violent,
though it has gentle inbreath, whereas Bhastrika has forced in- and
outbreaths.
It's definitely the force of the outbreath not the inbreath that determines
how dizzying the breath is, but how is it that the Bhastrika outbreath is
gentler than the KPB one? Doesn't feel like it is.
                                       ***
After 1st cycle, on edge of a headache. 2nd - ‘chasing’ massive energy as I
segued into ujjayi. Which I allowed to go on a good long time. 3rd - near-
dizzy. 4th - calibrated to ‘uhh’ sound on online piece about Bhastrika -
although noisier, the ‘official’ one is gentler! - because it’s more in the
nose and less in the belly.
                                       ***
1st cycle quite shallow, but trying to get that ‘official’ sound. Getting it,
but it sounds like I’m deliberately making more noise than need be on the
breath. 2nd - can really feel it in abdomen, but no dizziness. 3rd - a certain
fullness in head, a touch of tingling in hands.
                                      ***
1st - enormous difficulty getting that 'ouf' sound. Slight rushing feeling,
tinnitus seems louder. Rushing continued well into ujjayi wind-down. 2nd -
big dizziness, sharp ache in side of diaphragm. Then mindfulness, CBW
[Connected Breathwork]. Then a 3rd - rather unpleasant, dizzy. CBW.
                                      ***
Late in the day. Bhastrika. 1 cycle, then a break, then loosened up with
some Connected Breathwork, then another Bhastrika.
Forced myself to keep tongue against roof of mouth for this cycle: it does
seem to feel better, more ‘complete’ somehow.
3rd cycle - this is very similar to the Fast & Shallow breath in Connected
Breathwork, only difference is this is through the nose - and maybe aiming
for speed, unlike Fast & Shallow. But it is basically the same breath.
Keeping the tongue there does seem to produce a sense of completion of a
circuit, and a more centred feeling.
4th - I’ve built up to a buzz, but no dizziness or head-tightness.
                                      ***
Connected Breathwork, Bhastrika: 1st cycle - just energizing. 2nd - really
pleasant. Remembered to put tongue against roof of mouth.
3rd - pleasurable ache through some of my limbs and joints.
4th - pleasant.
Why is it so much easier now, Bhastrika?
Because I’m breathing shallower, I think is the main thing.
                                     ***
Bhastrika, 1st and 2nd: Tongue position really does seem to help - the
rushing is gentler, more in balance.
3rd: felt clumsier, a flash of headache.
                                     ***
1st - much easier sat up than lying down - it’s the way the belly moves, too
floppy lying down, can’t get the speed of movement of belly. And I get hot -
  I was pretty warm beforehand.
  2nd - more heat. And alertness.
  3rd - hot now! Enough.
                                        ***
  I did breath of fire daily for a few months. My experiences included bliss,
  'clearing of my head', waking me up. When I pushed it harder, I felt heat
  and eventually dizziness and discomfort.
  Moving into Kapalbhati, which is similar, got some pretty intense
  sensations in the head, like fine-grained light pushing through every cell.
                                       ***
  Bhastrika is another fairly intense breath, but I think gentler than Breath
  of Fire/Kapalbhati.
At the end of the first few sessions, people often ask: What’s the difference
between Bhastrika and Kapalbhati?
   The consensus among current teachers is that Kapalbhati is actually quite
similar to Bhastrika, but in Bhastrika, the puraka (inhale) and rechaka
(exhale) are performed with equal force. In Kapalbhati however, only the
exhale is forceful.
   There are some instructional films on YouTube for these three
pranayamas. It is worth watching more than one for each, and thinking about
the differences between them.
Summary of breath pattern: Bhastrika Pranayama
  Philosophical/magical contexts: To calm the mind for meditation.
  Recommended regularity of practice: Sparingly, carefully.
  Physiological correlates:
  Is it claimed to raise CO2 or O2? Yes: increasing oxygen and decreasing
  carbon dioxide in the blood; see (20).
  The Breath Itself:
  Is breath predominantly in chest, abdomen or both (‘complete’)?
  Predominantly abdomen.
  Inbreath and Outbreath: In some versions, outbreath is twice the length
  of the inbreath. Not forced, but decidedly vigorous.
  Hold? Yes.
  Pause? None, or small.
  Form: Square-wave, with two phases—rapid inhale and exhale, long
  inhale, hold and exhale.
References
(1) Arcanorium is Peter Carroll’s online college. It has reduced in size since
2012, and I don’t know whether any traces of these courses remain in the
current website: http://www.arcanoriumcollege.com/
(2) I make no apologies for Sivananda’s fulsome claims; it’s technique we’re
talking about here. http://www.yoga-age.com/asanas/prana.html
(3) https://sites.google.com/site/psychospiritualtools/Home/other-
practices/breath-of-fire
Chapter I-4: A Very Shallow, Slow Breath:
Buteyko Breathing
My interest in this specialized breathing technique started when an ex-
Connected Breathwork client of mine wrote to me about the ‘unprecedented
positive effects’ he was having from Buteyko breathing. He adds that he had
been in ‘quite a poor state of health for the past 8 years or so’. His enthusiasm
for Buteyko breathing was so great that he said he would ‘wholeheartedly
recommend’ it to ‘anyone with any chronic health problems’.
   Buteyko breathing is specifically aimed at alleviating asthma (although
other claims are made for it—see below). Since this recommendation had
come from a previous client, I wondered whether I should be recommending
the Buteyko technique to some of my clients. In recent years, I have coached
four clients who had asthma (to my knowledge). Should I recommend to such
people that they take up Buteyko?
   As I read further into the world of Buteyko practice, I began to realize that,
in some significant respects, it was almost the opposite kind of breathwork to
the one I coach, Connected Breathwork. In the latter, and in all of the styles
of pranayama we discussed above, it is taken as centrally important that the
more lung capacity we use the better. All of those styles, to some degree,
contribute to an ease in drawing large, deep breaths, whereas Buteyko
breathing is designed to teach the practitioner how to breathe more shallowly,
with more pauses, and to extend this breathing style into almost every
moment of waking and sleeping life.
As with modern medical understanding of the ‘peaceful pranayamas’ above,
Buteyko bases its claims to effectiveness on shifting the balance of the
autonomic nervous system over to the relaxed, parasympathetic side. Dorisse
Neal (1) writes:
   It is in this place, the sumptuous pause before the next in-breath, that our
   bodies relax into parasympathetic dominance, where our body regulatory
   systems are able to do their unimpeded and ongoing work of nurturing
   healthy biological terrain. Digestion is functioning optimally, the immune
   system is revitalizing itself, the nervous system is calm yet vigilant, oxygen
   and carbon dioxide are doing their delicate dance of respiration, and our
   diaphragm, the largest and most important respiratory muscle, is at ease.
   The respiratory system is said to be 85% responsible for pH balance in the
  blood, and a healthy pH is what determines homeostatic balance, or
  healthy biological terrain.
   In the Peaceful Pranayamas chapter I mentioned how a number of medical
conditions are underpinned by habits of dysfunctional, stress-promoting
breathing patterns. Too often, we carry our survival instincts’ response to
danger, that stressed approach to stimuli, into our everyday lives. This is
accepted in mainstream medicine.
   However, sudden, deeper breathing can also be switched on by pleasurable
stimuli—being surprised by an exciting offer or a generous gift might cause
you to suck in a great gasp of breath. The old expression ‘giddy with delight’
captures this reaction precisely. Some people get habituated to this state of
excitement, drama and incipient danger. Buteyko practitioners go much
further than that and claim that most people are habituated in this way, not
just obvious ‘drama queens’. Some Buteyko practitioners say that the vast
majority of us are locked into sympathetic nervous system responses, fight-
flight reactions, most of the time. It is claimed that this reaction is held in
place by fast, high-volume breathing in the upper chest.
   Interestingly, some Rebirthing (Connected) Breathwork coaches encourage
their clients to breathe high up in the chest, in order to reactivate suppressed
emotional memories, so that they can be integrated and healed. It seems that
the crying response is located in that part of the lungs, and the suppression of
crying will be encoded in muscle memory in the upper part of the chest. So
the basic ideas here are very similar, even though the techniques
recommended could not be more different.
The effects of rapid, deep breathing are far-ranging. If you breathe high
volumes of air, rapidly, more carbon dioxide gets flushed out of the lungs. In
normal, shallow, everyday breathing most of the lung volume is not
exchanged—the same air sits in there for longer than one breath. This slow-
to-change volume of air is known as the Functional Reserve Capacity or
FRC, and is defined as the amount of air remaining in the lungs after a
normal exhalation. The FRC is of course rich in carbon dioxide, the waste gas
of respiration. This means that the blood in contact with the parts of the lungs
where the FRC is, will take up carbon dioxide from the lung, making the
blood more acidic. This acidity plays a surprisingly large role in maintaining
all sorts of functions of the blood at their normal levels.
   Therefore, if you flush the residual FRC carbon dioxide out of the lungs,
this means there is less carbon dioxide in the blood (condition known as
hypocapnia). This in turn makes the blood less acidic (raises its pH). This is
known as alkalosis, and it triggers a series of changes in the metabolism.
   The lack of a pause in Connected breathing causes quite a rapid flushing
out of the residual carbon dioxide in the lungs. This is the physiological basis
of the ESC, the Extraordinary State of Consciousness which we employ in
Connected Breathwork.
One of the most important of the above-mentioned metabolic changes is the
seemingly-bizarre Bohr effect, in which the oxygen in your blood is more
tightly-bound to the carrier-molecule haemoglobin, so it cannot be released
into the nerves and muscles so easily. So, even though you have flooded your
system with oxygen, it is not as available as usual, to your brain, for instance.
This is considered very important in Buteyko theory, more of which below.
   Dr. Konstantin Buteyko, a Ukrainian doctor working in Moscow in the
1950's, named habituation to over-breathing chronic hyperventilation
syndrome or CHVS. In the course of studying breathing patterns and trying to
alleviate his own massive hypertension, he developed a system of breathing
which he claimed is a remedy for CHVS.
   Dr. Buteyko writes (2):
   Oxygen starvation in combination with over-ventilation produces a false
   feeling of air deficit, excites the respiratory centre, enhances breathing
   intensity and adds to the progress in disease development. CO2 deficiency
   in the nerve cells excites all the structures of the nervous system thus
   making the process of breathing still more intensive.
   Buteyko maintained that some 90% of the population of the Western world
is chronically over-breathing and opposed what he saw as propaganda about
the health benefits of continuous deep breathing. However, Buteyko’s
theoretical explanation of the problem is very odd.
   No-one disputes the existence of the above-mentioned Bohr effect, the
tighter binding of oxygen to the haemoglobin molecule, but Buteyko goes on
to make much more of this effect, claiming that the lower rate of release of
oxygen to the tissues will cause damage to the tissues.
   This sounds wrong; surely the whole evolutionary point of the Bohr effect
is a self-adjustment mechanism, whereby the tissues don’t get flooded with
oxygen just because there is more in the blood, but instead the haemoglobin
holds onto it. In other words, it is hard to accept that chronic, mild
overbreathing can cause any damage at all. This is substantiated in part of a
lengthy post by a medic, Joseph Albietz:
   … even if the Bohr effect remained in play, it is a minor determinant of
   oxygen delivery, easily compensated for by numerous other mechanisms,
   and insufficient to independently cause hypoxic injury or dysfunction.
   What is more, the physiology just does not hold up. Buteyko practitioners
claim that more than 300 disease symptoms are caused by CHVS. Albietz
criticizes Buteyko theory further: (3)
   If Buteyko is correct, and chronic hyperventilation is the cause of all (or
   any) of the diseases listed on their site, then one would expect to see a high
   pH, low CO2, low bicarbonate, low phosphorus, low magnesium, and
   signs of anaerobic metabolism such as a low mixed venous O2 saturation
   or elevated serum lactate level.
  These are extremely common labs that physicians (especially ICU
  physicians such as myself) are intimately familiar with. According to
  Buteyko, this lab pattern should be a nearly universal feature of all
  disorders cured by BBT. Guess how many actually routinely display
  anything remotely resembling it.
  None.
He concludes:
  Now the lack of physiologic plausibility does not in and of itself mean that
  Buteyko method is ineffective. What it does mean is that the physiologic
  explanation for its mechanism is likely dramatically wrong, and that the
  primary proponents of the technique have not only failed to recognize this
  fact, but have ignored elementary flaws in their hypothesis apparent in
  both theory and practice.
  BBT is now accepted in some therapeutic communities, but not in the
mainstream. The biggest study done on it to date, usually just called the
‘Brisbane Trials’, is riddled with experimental problems and errors. In
conclusion, BBT seems to work very well for some asthmatics, but there is
considerable doubt about its broader applicability.
  There is also some cause for concern about the behaviour of some Buteyko
practitioners. My contact mentioned a group he had worked with who would
‘occasionally drop arcane Buteyko lore suggesting that when one reached a
certain point one would have something resembling a nervous breakdown
that would render one temporarily dysfunctional whilst the nervous system
reorganized itself’. That sounds like a cult to me, that promotion of a state
where you become helpless, after which there is only one possible
explanation for your helplessness—the one the group provide. (This recurrent
notion of ‘breakdown’ in the course of spiritual development is discussed in
the introduction to Part II, under Spiritual Crisis.)
   However, because I knew one person who had great results from BBT, I
decided to investigate for myself, to practice it for three months and see
whether I could detect anything it was doing to my system.
   Manuals of self-help Buteyko practice are available. Basic practice can
begin with what could be called breath mindfulness. Here is a piece by
Dorisse Neale (1):
   For most healthy individuals, often the primary change needed for
   reactivation of healthy O2 and CO2 exchange in the body is to get into the
   habit of taking brief moments throughout the day to hush a busy mind in
   the midst of activity and to offer our cells small sprigs of tranquillity to
   keep us inspired. It is in these moments that we can begin to notice if we
   are over-breathing, and from there reclaim our breath. We begin by
   developing skills of self-observation and focusing on the breath.
  …Notice and become aware of the point at which the exhale ends and the
  pause begins. Allow a moment of respite in this place of the "no breath"
  before your next inhale returns, and begin to cultivate this pause.
   A more concerted attempt to adjust breathing is given in Patrick
McKeown’s Close Your Mouth: Buteyko Breathing Clinic Self-Help Manual
(4). The method I employed was closely based on McKeown’s and goes as
follows:

       1. Adopt an upright, comfortable seated posture.
       2. Check your pulse.
       3. Breathe entirely with the abdomen. If you do not know how to do
          this, place one hand on your chest and one on your abdomen.
          Breathe in. You should find that your belly moves out and your
          chest stays put. If the opposite happens, you are breathing in your
          upper chest.
       4. Check your control pause as follows: with a stopwatch, check
            how long you can go after a breath cycle, before inhaling again.
            Close your nose with your fingers to make sure no air leaks in.
       5.   Feel the movement of air in and out of your body, particularly
            through the nostrils. You must be aware of the flow of air in your
            body or you cannot get any further.
       6.   Let your shoulders fall nice and easy. This will reduce the volume
            of your chest and make shallower breathing easier.
       7.   Take short breaths, but don’t push the change. Do it easily. Focus
            on feeling less air pass your nostrils.
       8.   Do this for five minutes.
       9.   Check your control pause again.

Repeat the cycle of reduced breathing followed by checking control pause
four times.
Personal Accounts: Buteyko Breathing
  I think I got the Buteyko buzz, the buzz of the pause: like wrapping myself
  around a cosy, warm feeling centred in the windpipe.
  My pulse rate went down quite a bit - I am getting into the flow of this.
   Over the three-month period, my control pause increased from six seconds
to twenty-four seconds. My pulse rate stabilized so that I was tolerating
shallower breathing. Apparently, this meant I was doing BBT correctly. The
experience of enjoying the vacuity of the pause was mildly interesting.
However, I didn’t feel any benefit either to my health or my consciousness
from it, and was not motivated to continue beyond the three months.
   Buteyko breathing is best framed as a specialist technique that works for
some asthma sufferers, by unknown physiological means. However, it is
clearly related to the ‘preserving’ pole of breathwork techniques (see next
chapter)—in fact, it can be seen as an exaggerated form of preserving breath.
Summary of breath pattern: Buteyko Breathing
  Philosophical/magical contexts: Treatment of numerous diseases, but
  especially asthma.
  Recommended regularity of practice: 24/7!
  Physiological correlates:
  Is it claimed to raise CO2 or O2? It is claimed to lower O2 intake but
  stabilize blood O2 levels.
  The Breath Itself:
  Is breath predominantly in chest, abdomen or both (‘complete’)?
  Abdomen.
  Inbreath and Outbreath: Outbreath is twice the length of the inbreath.
  Not forced
  Hold? Yes.
  Pause? As much as can be stood.
  Form: Very shallow square-wave with long pause.
References
(1) Dorisse Neale, http://www.breathwork.be/articles/breathwork/999-
radiant-spatiality-and-breath-buteyko-breathwork-by-dorisse-neal
(2) Translation of Small Buteyko Manual, Voskresensk, 1994, quoted by
Dorisse Neale as above.
(3) https://sciencebasedmedicine.org/buteyko-breathing-technique-
nothing-to-hyperventilate-about/
(4) Close Your Mouth, by Patrick McKeown, Buteyko Books 2004.
Part I Conclusion: A Core Polarity of Breathwork
The nine styles of breathwork plus a couple of variations reported on and
discussed above span a wide range of what you can do to vary the breath.
Some of the variables employed are obvious—how deep and how fast are the
inbreath and outbreath? Is any forcefulness employed in either breath? Does
the breath use the chest or the abdominal muscles? Is there just one single
cycle or are there a variety of styles within one overall technique (as in
CBW)?
   Then there are subtler variables: is the overall rhythm smooth or bumpy,
even percussive? The little wave-form pictures are an attempt to give more of
an overall impression of the breath pattern, in order to compare them in a
more intuitive way.
   Over and above all these considerations there loom the biggest of all—the
intentions of the breathwork and the expectations of the practitioner. Some
breath patterns—such as increased abdominal breathing, or the special
exercises of Buteyko, as designed to be practised every day, with the
intention of replacing one’s basic breathing patterns. Others are meant to be
practised only occasionally, to achieve special states, such as the intense
pranayamas reported above and Connected Breathwork. As I shall show, this
distinction is central to how we view the usefulness of a particular practice.
   The visual list of reminders (below) is a relatively crude scheme of
classification, which can only be expected to bring out the most obvious
overall patterns in the techniques and what they achieve. The styles of breath
are ordered in what seems to me to be the most obvious overall trend—
whether they are excitatory or relaxing.
Towards comfort, or towards transformation?
Beyond the obvious excitation-relaxation axis, the important distinction is
how frequently you are meant to practice a given technique. The latter
variable underpins the former; the two together reveal the true, deep polarity
in breathwork technology.
   One pole of this spectrum I shall refer to as the ‘preserver’ styles. These
are comforting, balancing styles of breathwork. Their intention is to relax into
everyday life, to preserve the good in our daily experience. They are used for
prevention of illness more than healing; they work to overcome the
dominance of the sympathetic side of the autonomic nervous system, saving
us from the degenerative effects of long-term stress. They calm the emotions,
enabling us to sit in contemplation. These are techniques we are advised to
use frequently, even every day, well-worn tools in our toolbox of techniques.
They may or may not be practiced in connection with a scheme of spiritual or
magical development. Used on their own, they have slow, undramatic,
cumulative effects on consciousness, a general stabilizing effect. (This is not
necessarily true if they are used in conjunction with sitting
contemplation/meditation; the latter eventually produces destabilizing effects
as discussed below).
   The ‘basic pranayamas’ discussed above fall at this end of the spectrum.
Any inner change they catalyse will be gradual. At the extreme end of this
pole is Buteyko breathing. Its practitioners seem anxious to avoid any breath-
mediated stimulation whatsoever, any arousal of the autonomic function.
   Some find this kind of development unsatisfactory, either because it is too
slow, or because the practitioner finds that he or she is using unchallenging
techniques to comfort themselves, to keep themselves within their comforting
illusions. Some unchallenging techniques of breathwork can be used to avoid
or suppress one’s darker feelings. This leads to an impoverishment of
experience, and requires continual output of energy to suppress unwanted
feelings that arise in the course of the day.
   If this is our experience, we call in the exceptional, extraordinary
destabilizing states of consciousness that are necessary for personal
transformation. These lie at the pole of the spectrum I call ‘disrupter’ styles.
   When these techniques are employed, or when ‘preserver’ styles are used
in conjunction with prolonged sitting contemplation, the individual will
eventually be confronted with uncomfortable emotional material, which will
have to be integrated into consciousness so that one is not overwhelmed by it.
   These incursions of dark material may be thought of in terms of the
Jungian concept of the Shadow, the sum total of all which we deny we are,
and all which we project outwards onto other people, needing to imagine that
what befalls us is their doing rather than anything we can influence. They can
also be thought of as the basic existential realities from which we withdraw in
fear. Aaron Daniels (1) writes:
    an existential perspective defines life by the inescapable limitations of the
    human condition. This philosophy holds that regardless of whatever meta​-
    physical, spiritual, or religious speculations we may engage in, life
    remains rather indeterminate, changeable, and inscrutable. Existentialists
    also hold that most humans intuitively defend against acknowledging and
  living in accord with such limitations as death, isolation, and the
  meaninglessness of the world unto itself. Thus, ignoring life’s givens, we
  miss most of how life actually happens. We fore​close the majority of life’s
  ‘Big Questions’ with unsatisfactory and temporary answers based in the
  very ways we usually ask and answer questions.
   When we become aware of how stuck we are, how addicted to the
comforts of a particular narrative we have talked ourselves into, that is when
we can reach for the ‘disrupter’ techniques of breathwork.
   Each end of this polarity has its function in someone who is striving to
overcome their illusions and become more conscious. The more extreme
styles may be labelled ‘not for daily use’, but all of these breathwork
techniques have their place in navigating between the polar extremes of
experience.
   The breathing styles that feel the most ‘unnatural’ are the most disruptive.
Anything that works ‘against nature’, against the emotional and physical
comfort zones we construct, has the flavour of limitation and death, brings us
closer to the scary, Shadow-haunted fringes of human life. Yoga Cleansing
Breath may be seen as the least disruptive of the ‘disrupter’ techniques, or as
the most excitatory of the ‘preserver’ ones. The three ‘Powerful Pranayamas’
all come with ‘do not use all the time’ warnings.
   This is the basic spectrum of breathing techniques, running from
Disrupting to Preserving:
                                 Bhastrika
                                Kapalbhati
                               Breath of Fire
                                   CBW
                                    YCB
                                   Ujjayi
                             ‘Basic Pranayama’
                                  Buteyko
Connected Breathwork has some natural affinities with the highly stimulating
pranayamas: it can involve fast, high-volume breathing, which leads to an
extraordinary state of consciousness characterized by high energy and
sometimes high emotion. It can lead to sudden, intense upsurges of
uncomfortable feelings, and equally spectacular internal resolutions
(‘integration’, in the jargon of that practice). Of all the more extreme
techniques, it is probably the most balanced. Even with CBW though, some
people are precipitated into crises that take them a long time to emerge from
—see the discussion on Spiritual Emergencies in Part II.
   This brings into focus one more stand-out variable: As the Arcanorium
student quoted above wrote, ‘It's definitely the force of the outbreath not the
inbreath that determines how dizzying the breath is’. This effect is recognized
in Connected Breathwork, and most Vivation and Rebirthing coaches will
watch the client for signs of forced outbreath. When you are breathing fast
and full and you also push the exhale out hard, that pattern is very similar to
hyperventilation, and may be accompanied by panic or cramping (tetany).
   Some pranayama practitioners call the forcefulness the ‘length’ of the
breath—as in how far away from the nostrils can the exhale be felt? André
van Lysebeth in her book Pranayama: the yoga of breathing (2) suggests
moving your hand away from your nostrils until you no longer feel the
exhale, then measuring the distance. She writes:
   In order to obtain a maximum state of concentration, yoga recommends
   that we should become aware of our breath and gradually reduce its
   length.
   This advice is of course for the Preserving end of the spectrum of life. Van
Lysebeth quotes another yogi who claims that this reduction of breath length
increases vitality, presumably because we are preserving ourselves from
excessive effort and overstimulation.
   The spectrum of effects relates directly to the use of these breathing styles.
The final column shows this—as we move away from Disrupting and
towards Preserving, we see a greater frequency of recommended use. This in
turn reflects the way we frame the process we are going through when we do
these techniques—are we looking to maintain things, or are we looking for
something that will disrupt our normal lives and bring profound healing? This
consideration is where Part II starts.
References
       (1) Aaron Daniels - Imaginal Reality, 2011. Reviewed on my blog,
       http://chaotopia-dave.blogspot.co.uk/2013/02/review-of-
       imaginal-reality-by-aaron-b.html
       (2) Andre Van Lysebeth, Pranayama: The Yoga of Breathing
       https://www.waterstones.com/book/pranayama/andre-van-
       lysebeth/9780955241239
Waveforms
Connected BreathWork:




Basic Pranayama/Reverse Cycle Breathing:




Ujjayi:




Breath of Fire:




Kapalbhati:




Bhastrika:
Buteyko:
KEY POINT PART I
Breathwork comes in many varieties, but they fall on a spectrum between two
poles of techniques that are for health and everyday well-being—the
'preserving' styles and the techniques that are for producing exceptional and
possibly unsettling states of consciousness for healing, magic and so on—the
'disturbing' techniques.
Interlude: ‘Energy Healing’ and the Role of the
Observer Self
The effects related in Parts I and II are real: real healing, real personal
transformation. None of these transformations present any challenge to
physical science, intelligently applied. In Part III I am going to lay out a good
deal of evidence for the effectiveness of physical healing, the results of
working in an Energy Magic belief system, but I want to pause here and take
stock of one very important element of what I have presented so far.
   Whilst not all of the experiences mentioned so far had sensed energy as a
main feature, they all had something else—the observer position or ‘Observer
Self’, the awareness of that unique point of view. Might that fact contribute to
the healing?
   In Part I, I described the observer position as exerting an alchemical effect,
converting pain into ecstasy. It seems that the mechanism of integration, as
understood in Connected Breathwork involves bringing the observer position
to bear on pain or shadow material.
   The part of you that perceives without judging, that observes but cannot
act, is cultivated by Connected Breathwork and sitting meditation. Practicing
these disciplines, you will find yourself becoming more aware of the self-
behind-the-self, just watching. It has names in many traditions and practices.
Meditators often call it the 'observing self' or 'choiceless witness'. Austin
Osman Spare glyphed it as the Kia, the 'atmospheric I' that sits behind the
eyes, that hovers like a vulture above the feast of life and death. We find it
too in the Yggdrasil myth—the Hawk sitting between the eyes of the Eagle
atop the tree of life. That Hawk is the ever-present Witness. The gaze of the
Hawk is dispassionate, accepting. Its state is not dependent on whether the
action-part is creating pleasure or pain, joy or fear, anger or enthusiasm, love
or hate.
   This observer self is looking from a certain distance—the distance simply
of being able to observe, because it is separate from that which it observes.
This slight objectification of sensation consists, for instance, in the sense of
having a sensation or thought rather than being in the tunnel of it. The
observing faculty opens your mind to the sky, pulls you out of the tunnel-
vision frame.
   It is very present when integration and healing occur; is it best to think of it
doing so directly, without any intermediate level operating, or can we think
of athm as the intermediary between the wod-area represented by the
observer and the movement of more obscure energies that are needed for the
healing to occur?
   Athm is easy to direct—in qigong we are told ‘qi flows where attention
goes’. This parallelism works both ways: not only does the mind make the
athm go where it wants, as it does in all sensed-energy-cultivation disciplines,
but also the way we pay attention to any sensation can be viewed as an
outflowing of athm to that experience. In Taoist alchemy it is said that pain is
a signal that forces us to pay attention to part of us that needs healing, so the
energy of qi can flow to it. In this model, the observer position is what is
needed to stimulate the athm to flow to the afflicted area.
   I introduce this idea at this stage in the book because from now on we are
going to be talking much more directly about the experience of energy and
how it moves. So it is worth bearing in mind this intimate association of
energy and the observer position.
  Part II:
    The
Breathwork
  Journey
Introduction: Spiritual Crisis and the Core Polarity
This is part of an exchange with a Connected Breathwork client, who was
having doubts about the suitability of further Breathwork for her progress:
  I'd be very interested to know if you have experience with spiritual
  emergence/kundalini symptoms? I want release from some blockages still
  present, although some people warn against breathwork for being too
  powerful when there is already that intensity there... Although was also
  highly recommended it from others for what I have going on: shaking,
  spasms, involuntary sounds... Any thoughts?
  <me> People seem to mean different things by kundalini experiences, but I
  think I know what you mean, the involuntary movements and so on. Back
  in my youth, when I took LSD, I experienced involuntary movements and
  even a strange kind of movement-meditation that came to me
  spontaneously and helped to sort out what felt like blocked flows.
  Breathwork is the only other technique I've discovered that reliably opens
  up those deep levels that some people call the soul, the deep mind that is
  very hard to touch by any conscious processing, any scheme of thought,
  however sophisticated. (And of course breathwork is much less
  uncontrollable - and exhaustingly long-lasting - than an LSD session.)
  I've had such experiences a small number of times in my years of
  breathwork too. The last full-on occasion was a couple of years ago when
  I attended Grof's holotropic weekend in Brighton in 2005. I had some kind
  of energy locked into the angle of my jaw, and the 'focused energy release',
  which is part of the HB-coach's supporting techniques, really worked for
  me, hurling me out of tension and into a visionary space.
  Stan Grof's breathwork seems to focus on a full-on, almost confrontational
  approach to blocks; you're encouraged to hyperventilate and, if you feel
  like it, physically act out tensions in a large group environment with loud,
  rhythmic music. This is not a criticism - I have immense respect for Grof's
  ideas and practice, and this style suits some people.
  In contrast, the Rebirthing/Vivation approach, which is my main
  background and in which I'm qualified, has a gentler but more frequent
  approach, generally single sessions, quite frequent until the client has the
  basic skill to do it on his or her own. In other words, a lot of people find
  the R/V approach more flexible when it comes to their own rhythm, their
  own step-style of deep/transpersonal development. And of course that's the
  ultimate arbiter - the part of you, the particular 'soul', that decides how
  fast your liberation can proceed over any given day, week or year.
  So, I wouldn't not recommend breathwork for someone who is opening up
  like you are: It sounds like you've found some useful approaches, and that
  things are moving fast for you.
  Your own 'holotropic mind', the part of you that steers your development,
  will advise you to slow down or speed up your work. Also, a breathwork
  session is only rarely a traumatic or painful set of sensations to ride out,
  but often partakes of an integration of material that is already stirred up
  and in motion.
  In other words, you may be approaching the release and relief phase…
   Where Part I ended, with the spectrum of breathwork styles, is the starting
point for this part, where we are looking at the journeys that doing intensive
breathwork can take you on. A common framework for these processes can
be called the Crisis/Breakthrough model. The client quoted above had
chanced upon, or stumbled into, a stage of her inner journey where things had
overwhelmed her, and she was seeking a way through that stage.
   In fact, it would be fair to say that people in that position are first and
foremost seeking some assurance that it is just a stage they are going though,
and that other people had been through something recognizably similar and
that they’d come through it.
   And not only come through it, but come through it transformed ins some
positive way, knowing they’d undergone profound inner growth.
   As noted in Chapter I-5, other forms of breathwork may also lead into the
kind of crisis my client was concerned about; I sometimes wonder whether
Gurdjieff’s warnings against practising breathing techniques without a proper
teacher might relate to the ‘pranayamas of power’ (see Chapter I-3). These
intensely excitatory techniques may produce states where energy feeds into
tensions, producing effects which are both physically unpleasant and
emotionally disturbing.
It is the emotionally disturbing part of the experience that is usually what
challenges the practitioner the most. Connected Breathwork is predominantly
an excitatory technique—it can induce a kind of semi-controlled overload of
emotion and energy, with the intention of going through the feelings, giving
them a chance to integrate rather than suppressing or avoiding them. It’s not a
peaceful style of meditation; as Vivation co-founder Jim Leonard puts it, it’s
about ‘how great the worst of your emotions can feel’. (1)
   In the world of Holotropic Breathwork the term ‘spiritual emergency’ is
used to denote this kind of crisis. In his 1989 book (2), Grof ‘argues that
many episodes of transformational crisis have been misdiagnosed as mental
illness, and explains how to use such a crisis for spiritual development’. In
this model, it is acknowledged that spiritual growth may take us through
regions of terror and lostness, and that some people may remain lost in these
unpleasant and frightening states for years.
   This model also gives hope—the pain that we experience, if we continue to
try and stay conscious, will eventually transmute the lead of our ordinary
misery into the gold of higher consciousness and belonging in the world,
maybe for the first time. However, all too often what happens is that we start
out on a journey of self-transformation, and the pain that arises is so great we
cannot bring ourselves to continue. However we symbolize this process, one
thing is certain—we are meant to complete each cycle of it once we begin.
We are not meant to get stuck in the Apophis or dissolution phase, but stay
conscious and work our way through the horrifying or frightening images and
feelings that arise. To do otherwise, to get stuck, is the core of what it means
to be in a ‘spiritual emergency’.
   This kind of crisis can be triggered by all sorts of practices. Recently there
has been a backlash against the growing tendency to provide (often very)
basic training in ‘mindfulness meditation’ as an adjunct to Cognitive
Behavioural Therapy (CBT) for depressed people. BBC journalist Jolyon
Jenkins writes (3):
    Tim Lomas, a London psychologist, recently published an academic paper
    about men who had been doing part-time meditation for non-clinical
    reasons. While most of them benefited from it, a quarter of them had
    encountered what Lomas calls “substantial difficulties”, including
    “challenging experiences of the self” and a “frightening dissolution of
    identity”. For some, mindfulness “made them aware of their distress but
    unable to deal with it, so that they found that meditation was “not only
    unhelpful but counterproductive”.
  Lomas is no enemy of meditation. Indeed, he told me that these
  experiences were “not necessarily good or bad”, and that one man who
  apparently felt “close to psychosis” after meditation not only came
  through it but found it “one of the most transformative experiences of his
  life”.
   The deeper reason why we are prone to such distressing states at all is that
the identities we use in our daily lives are built to shield us from the
unavoidable boundaries of all human life. These include the temporal
limitation of death, and the knowledge that the universe does not provide us
with ready-made meaning, but that we have to make it ourselves. For an in-
depth treatment of this existentialist approach, see Aaron Daniels’s Imaginal
Reality (4). Of such an approach, Daniels writes:
   regardless of whatever meta​physical, spiritual, or religious speculations
   we may engage in, life remains rather indeterminate, changeable, and
   inscrutable. Existentialists also hold that most humans intuitively defend
   against acknowledging and living in accord with such limitations as death,
   isolation, and the meaninglessness of the world unto itself. Thus, ignoring
   life’s givens, we miss most of how life actually happens. We fore​close the
   majority of life’s ‘Big Questions’ with unsatisfactory and temporary
   answers based in the very ways we usually ask and answer questions.
   So, we live within well-defended citadels of cobbled-together meaning,
defending ourselves against most of what the world throws at us—not just the
bad stuff, but practically everything, because it is not part of the illusions that
bind our reality together. To use a Jungian term, this incursion of Otherness is
the Shadow, the unacknowledged and suppressed parts of ourselves. These
whispers from the edges of our lives, whether they arrive via Connected
Breathwork, via the kinds of breathwork that are supposed to stimulate
kundalini, such as Bhastrika, or via psychedelic medicines, are disruptive.
They remind us of the Voids, the inescapable limits of life which we spend so
much time and effort distracting ourselves from. As the result of such a
confrontation with our existential edges, the practitioner may retreat into
something akin to a ‘normal’ life (whatever he or she thinks that means!),
deny involvement with ESCs, deny the importance of their Void-facing
experiences. Such a withdrawal may continue the whole of the person’s life,
or the person may find a new way to engage with spiritual development
which gives them the strength to continue.
   Encounters with the Voids are not of course cerebral, abstract things. All
the pains impacted into our nervous systems from childhood trauma are also
there, beyond the limits of acknowledged selfhood too. We have all met
people who have tried to get off the speeding train of their own spiritual
development and come unstuck, falling into addictions or other self-
destructive patterns. Back in my youth, some of them were called ‘acid
casualties’.
My most terrifying early encounter with the Voids was via LSD and provides
an example of the IAO-type process mentioned below.
   As a teenage LSD enthusiast, I came from a sceptical, science-educated
background. My youthful, high-dose psychedelic experimentation only lasted
for two years, and after that phase of my life, I took a break from anything
magical and went back to studying science, before taking up a thorough and
disciplined investigation of magic. When I took up regular magical practice,
it was Chaos Magic. It was the only magical current I felt able to engage with
at the beginning of my magical career, because, more than any other
approach to magic, it respects the fact that in our culture we are starting off
from a sceptical approach to miraculous occurrences, and an even more
radical scepticism about metaphysical models of how such things might
happen.
   From the above, you can imagine that I have never expected anything
much by way of help from the higher realms in my own pursuit of greater
awareness and awakening. So it was, to say the least, completely unexpected
when, in the midst of having a hard time with my moment-to-moment
experience (what some call cosmic horror), an extremely powerful presence
dropped, as it were, through the roof of my mind and rescued me.
I and a few friends had hitch-hiked from Sheffield to a free concert in
London’s Hyde Park, where Pink Floyd were premiering Atom Heart
Mother. We already had some acid, and we were out to find some more,
which in such a situation was not difficult. I took a yellow capsule. When it
started to come up, I knew something was wrong: the trees looked all warped
and sick, and flattened-out, like a badly-painted backdrop. At that point,
something in me made an important decision, to more than triple the dose by
taking two more tablets, of the new, and supposedly stronger blue pentagon
variety we had bought. I would say now that my basic mind-set was to
surrender to emptiness, to let my selfhood dissolve. I had some idea what that
concept entailed, having allowed myself to dissolve a few months earlier, but
with no conscious awareness of what was going on, so I knew a lot less than I
thought about the self and how it works.
   All the reality bled out of everything, and it all looked distant and abstract.
The trees turned into gigantic dark plastic numerals leaning against each
other. Part of my mind was excitedly saying, ‘Oh wow!!! I’m having a real
hallucination!!!’, and the rest of me was terrified. I looked around at my
friends, who seemed to be engaged with their own worlds: no help there. The
paranoid thought even occurred to me that my having a bad trip would be an
embarrassment to them. So I knelt and looked down, to the ground, parting
the fluxing fire of the grass to gaze at the earth, hoping it would provide a
grounding effect. No help here either: the soil was a stream of numbers,
streaming endlessly where the black earth should be. I looked up at the sky,
and the same thing was happening—instead of blue space and white clouds, a
rage of numbers and symbols, like unfinished equations, streaming into
nothingness at the edges.
   I now understand that symbolism. It’s an indication that I was blocking a
message, blocking and refusing a coherence that some deeper part of me
knew was possible, but which terrified my mundane mind—which sensed
that the opening-up would involve a lot of pain.
   At this point, I tried the impossible: to make myself surrender, to give in to
the dissolution that was happening.
   The attempt made it feel worse, and the more I tried to give in, the more
frenzied the hallucinations got. It was a hell of half-finished thoughts rotating
at terrible frictionless speed, an inner scream of panic. I was lost, in an
eternity of spiritual terror.
   Then it came, like a ton of bricks smashing through the mangled sky: a
voice was speaking in my head. It was saying, ‘You cannot allow this to
continue’. The tone was commanding, totally certain, and that was all it said.
Instantaneously, I obeyed, I made the terror stop, by an act of will, just like
that. The world held its breath, and cautiously, I looked around. I saw my
friends, and now I wanted to hug them all. The middle of my chest was
erupting with pulsating, golden light, and I felt as wonderful then as I had felt
terrified a few moments before. For the first time in my life, I was in total
bliss. The sexy golden light spilled through me and filled me to the brim with
love and laughter. That afternoon, I conversed telepathically with people,
walked effortlessly through some dangerous situations, gave and received
love. I felt like I understood everything about what it means to be alive and
human. I most certainly knew what it meant to feel a living, sensuous part of
everything, and the proof was that everything worked out perfectly that
enchanted day.
   Twenty-five years later, I realized what it was that had pulled me out of a
nosedive that day. It was my own future (from my teenage frame of
reference) self, the magical self I had built over the years. And that was what
I called at the time my Holy Guardian Angel, whose Knowledge and
Conversation I achieved at Avebury, completing the circle of being rescued,
then constructing that very intervention under the guidance of the part of me
that lives outside of time, the Angel.
I hope the sense of renewal comes over in that account. A psychedelic was
the first catalyst I found for such a renewal, such a deep refreshing of my
feeling of being in the world. The only other catalyst of anything like that
power I have ever found was Connected Breathwork.
   Renewal is vitally important. Our selves, our citadels of emotional
comfort, become stuffy places, and need airing out from time to time. Both as
individuals and as a culture we need to rediscover what lies beyond the limits
of the self, to look beyond the primal will to survive, to really appreciate that
there is something out there. We need reminding that the world outside of us
is neither dead nor human-hearted.
   The core of this renewal begins with a loosening of the boundaries of the
self. This enables us to experience, to behold that which is outside of
ourselves—the 'Other'. When we let go of the shards of will that revolve in
the exhausted mind and open up to that unconditioned world, we leave
behind the frustration and sadness of our compromises. We find that our
perceptions of the world are washed clean by this confrontation, and the
doors of our perception opened to the infinity and eternity of each passing
moment.
   This opening-up is difficult and demands extraordinary effort, which does
not end. And you do not choose the contents of your future experience. When
you lie down for a breathwork session, you are not supposed to have a
particular experience. You may have an ecstatic session. It may be
uneventful. It doesn't matter, whatever you experience is exactly what you are
'supposed' to experience—the point of the session is to be able to face
everything about your moment to moment experience full in the face, as it
were.
Stuck in Discomfort: A Holotropic Breathwork session with Stanislav
Grof, 2005
  That was the intensest breathwork session I’ve ever had. It was
  comparable to a full-blown psychedelic experience. Lots of very dark
  emotions - fear of the process, hatred of the world, despair at my life, rage
  at other people. Bits of birth memory, smells like vomit and blood. Anger
  at the mother who abandoned me, then compassion for her. An image of
  the ‘aliens’ known as the Greys - they appear as symbols of abusive
  medical procedures around the birth process. They have the cold alienness
  of ketamine, visions arising from anaesthesia. They are the spirits of
  technological healing and experimentation. And also surveillance.
  After a lot of this, I got bored, realising that I can evoke any of these ugly
  emotions at will. I started to feel completely stuck, that the session was
  now pointless. J came over and did energy release work, starting with
  chest and abdomen - the self-pity was in my chest, the anger in my belly -
  and the breathing began to connect between them, to become more
  complete. She spotted that I was doing something with my jaw - that weird
  Eustachian click I’ve been doing since early childhood - and she pushed
  against my chin.
  This left me feeling more peaceful.
  D asked me how I was doing and I decided to have one more go. D spoke
  to Grof, who came over and asked where the energy was. I said in the left
  angle of the jaw. He shoved his finger in there, behind my ear, and I
  resisted by moving my jaw. A cone of blue light shot down my vision. I
  made a lot of weird sounds. It hurt, and still feels sore. At the end, there
  was a brief flash of a tunnel of darkness, a chute like described by people
  in near-death experiences. It had a valence of annihilation and terror.
  I know there’s more to do on this, but this is all I can do today... I feel it is
  time to stop.
Magical Formulas of Transformation
The point of these ideas is to recognize the wholeness of the process of which
the crisis is only one part. There is a clear outline to this process, a dialectical
formula of transformation. The first stage is our naïve state at the beginning
of the process, our naïve sense of who and what we are. The second is the
shock of entering a crisis and being dissolved or melted, and the third is a
recrystallization of identity around a new and better centre.
   For some esotericists, the Gnostic magical formula I-A-O encapsulates this
process. ‘I’ is Isis, nature, the naïve state we start in; ‘A’ is Apophis, the
serpent of destruction, corresponding to the disruption of your identity by
pain and ‘O’ is Osiris, the Risen God, the state that comes when the pain is
integrated into full consciousness.
   Another traditional magical formula that relates to this process is the old
Germanic one, Hagala Wih Hailagaz. This cycle starts with the disruption
phase and gives a bit more detail to the process. The Hagala is the hailstone
that falls from the sky, the sudden destruction or terror that throws us into
fear and confusion. Wih represents sacredness; here, the chaos of Hagala is
being offered up to a higher context; we recognize what is happening and
honour it. Hailagaz is related etymologically to both ‘healing’ and
‘wholeness’, showing us the renewal and revitalization that follows the
disruption stages.
   It is important to understand this cycle before embarking on deep
transformational work, whether that involves breathwork or other techniques.
In Part III we are less concerned with psychic transformation—the discussion
centres around using sensed energy to accomplish physical healing.
References
(1) From an old audio tape ‘The Skill of Happiness’ by Jim Leonard. His
webpage is http://vivation.com/inspiration/articles/vivation-the-skill-of-
happiness/
(2) http://www.amazon.co.uk/Spiritual-Emergency-Personal-
Transformation-Consciousness/dp/0874775388
(3)
http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/articles/2nB1psRz3JFQpzDh6J2Z6xl/is-
mindfulness-meditation-dangerous
(4) Aaron Daniels - Imaginal Reality, 2011. Reviewed on my blog,
http://chaotopia-dave.blogspot.co.uk/2013/02/review-of-imaginal-reality-
by-aaron-b.html
Chapter II-1: Embodied Wisdom, Flow and
Guidance
                                   ... how lucky lovers are (whose selves abide
                                           under whatever shall discovered be)
                                  whose ignorant each breathing dares to hide
                            more than most fabulous wisdom fears to see... (1)

  ‘How many times do I have to go through this, go past this same point?’
  This complaint runs round and round in my head, because I feel trapped.
  Like in a nightmare of uncontrolled repetition, but all it consists of is just
  mundane sensations, again and again and again and again… I tell myself
  to accept it… it fragments into mirror-shards of bodily sensation… and it
  still feels exasperating.
  …But somehow now I don’t resent it as much… In fact, I notice that it is
  interesting, sufficiently weird to hold my attention. Then, as I cultivate this
  fascination, the feelings become fascinating, I see how they are full of
  energy, full of power… As I absorb my attention in this surging, massive
  sensation, I suddenly notice that I am no longer making any effort to
  continue this fast, full breathing. My chest and my belly move, my breath
  opens and closes… At first, it felt so uncomfortable to breathe in this new
  way… It felt forced, excessive. I kept it going by a massive effort of will. At
  the end of that session, I promised myself I would be asking Hilary [my
  coach]: Does this get any easier?
  At that point, suddenly it all went loose, is the only way I can describe it…
  No sharp edges any more, no tensions that lasted for more than the split-
  second it took me to notice that they existed… It was completely different;
  instead of pushing the breath, suddenly, I was being led by it, as torrents
  of energy sluiced through me, and the breath was like a steering wheel, but
  without my conscious control, without any hand on it…
When I was new to Connected Breathwork, I heard my breathwork coach talk
about an experience she’d had and which apparently other breathworkers had
too. The words she used were ‘It breathed me’. That made no sense at all,
until that experience above, a diary entry from one of my earliest breathwork
sessions. This is not at all an uncommon experience among practitioners of
CBW. Breathworkers speak of a stage in a breathwork session when it is no
longer an effort to keep up the unusual breathing pattern and it becomes
spontaneous. People sometimes say ‘the universe breathed into me and out of
me’. All effort is gone; the practitioner is in a state similar to what
psychologist Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi calls ‘flow’, a condition in which you
are completely involved in an activity for its own sake. The ego falls away.
Time flies. Every action, movement, and thought follows inevitably from the
previous one, like playing... Your whole being is involved, and you're using
your skills to the utmost. (2)
   In this particular flow-condition, the sense of ‘it breathes me’, we are not
guiding the experience. 'Something' steers the movement of the breathing
apparatus, responding to changes in sensation from moment to moment. It
feels like being held, being suspended, while something else guides you in
terms of your muscular movements from one moment to the next.
   The resultant feeling, like flow states tend to be, is basically ecstatic: you
are in full, rich involvement with your experience.
   It is fair to say that the core of the breathwork experience often involves a
sense of spontaneous, wordless inner guidance, a kind of embodied wisdom.
The experience of ‘it breathes me’ amounts to direct experience of a complex
and sensitive function within the body which is normally ‘unconscious’ or
‘automatic’, but is now being experienced in full consciousness.
   The idea of trusting input from some source which is not consciously
available is not an easy step from conventional thinking. Quite apart from our
resistance to opening up, which is often uncomfortable or painful, there is a
vast gulf of philosophy and ideology which keeps us away from a positive
attitude to the body.
   One way forward is the idea of embodied cognition, a concept which has
been getting some traction in the world of mainstream psychology; see for
instance Wilson and Golonka (3), and their analysis of the extraordinarily
precise feat of movement which enable us to catch a flying ball. Considering
the various theories to account for how a fielder in baseball can catch a ball,
they first reject the theory that the fielder computes from the ball’s initial
position where it will land:
   The computational strategy suggests that the outfielder will run in a
   straight line to the predicted landing site. This is because the fielder
   computes the future landing site based on input variables that the fielder
   detects before setting off. […] Outfielders do not typically run in straight
   lines, ruling the computational strategy out.
   Instead they suggest that the fielder is responding moment-to-moment to
the observed trajectory of the ball:
   [These solutions] have numerous advantages over the computational
   solution. First, instead of relying on an initial estimate of the ball’s
   motion, which could be in error, they allow the fielder to continuously
   couple themselves to the ball. This coupling provides fielders with
   numerous opportunities for error detection and correction. Second, the
   strategies provide a continuous stream of information about how well the
   fielder is doing. If the ball still seems to be accelerating, or if its trajectory
   is still curved, this tells the fielder both that there is an error and what to
   do to fix the error. If the fielder is running flat out and is still unable to
   correct the errors, this specifies an uncatchable ball, and the fielder
   should switch to intercepting the ball on the bounce instead.
   We get a glimpse here of one of our hidden fields of non-symbolic
intelligence, and can appreciate how intelligent it is. This intelligence, sensed
as guidance, has been modelled in various ways, both in traditional soul-
schemes and in modern psychotherapy.
Models of Guidance
Traditional models of the mind or souls affirm that we are not one, single
consciousness, but a dynamic, shifting network of conscious and unconscious
influences. Our source of guidance is in the shadows, beyond the edges of the
pool of light representing our conscious awareness. It is what we might call a
‘known unknown’. In traditional systems it is of course a property of one or
more of our souls.
   These souls do not have to be transmundane principles, like the extra and
more obscure ghost in the machine of Christian soul-lore but on the contrary,
are parts of our everyday being which we just cannot access consciously or
grasp with analytical thought alone. A related esoteric notion is that of the
Holy Guardian Angel of the modern ‘Western Esoteric Tradition’.
   Some schools of psychotherapy use the idea of something deep trying to
communicate with the surface mind. Jungian-influenced therapist Arnold
Mindell uses bodywork and dream work with his clients and writes of the
‘dreambody’ (4). From within the world of Connected Breathwork another
model emerged: famous breathwork teacher Stanislav Grof’s ‘holotropic
mind’ (5).
   In Grof’s model, the feeling of guidance that comes in a breathwork
session originates in the 'holotropic mind'. Holotropic means ‘seeking
wholeness’. This mind-function (‘soul’) draws you into one subtly-different
way of breathing or moving rather than some other, orchestrating each entry
and exit from each stage of the experience and thereby sculpting an adventure
in transpersonal consciousness, a journey towards healing and wholeness. It
also 'knows' your own rhythm, your own step-style of deep or transpersonal
development and decides how fast your liberation can proceed over any given
day, week or year.
   What can we say about this 'holotropic mind'? I suggested above the word
'soul', and I mean it not in the sense of Christian dogma but in an old, popular
sense: that we know we are more than just the conscious data-processing
revealed by the internal monologue. We know we have a 'deep mind' that is
very hard to touch by any conscious processing, any scheme of thought,
however sophisticated, and which communicates with us in ways other than
speech.
   It was Grof who named this 'soul' in the modern age; let us try to clarify
this idea of souls and line it up against modern scientific knowledge.
   It has been said that the human nervous system is rather like a car that took
many generations to build, and was built in layers, all of which are still
present. The chassis is one evolutionary level, the body another, the engine
another, the control systems yet another, all built one on top of another. All
the ancient layers uncovered by neurology are still with us—the parts we
share with reptiles, the parts we share with other mammals, the parts we share
with other apes, and the parts that are uniquely human.
   The traditional soul-systems gives us a means of approaching these non-
verbal souls, dealing with the subjective experience of functional layers of
human neurology, personifying them as conscious or semi-conscious entities
we can engage in dialogue with. As any NLP practitioner can tell you,
personification is an extremely powerful way of negotiating between our
component selves, based as it is on our most focused and detailed kind of
perception—the way we relate to other people (see in particular the works of
Ramsey Dukes (6), and Phil Farber (7)).
   When we 'talk' to a soul in its own language—which may be symbols,
dream-images or bodily sensations—we get useful information back.
   In breathwork, the subtle impulses from the 'holotropic soul', that nudge
you towards moving in one direction of consciousness rather than another,
come through as bodily sensations rather than visual or auditory symbols.
The deep processes of breathwork open us directly into dialogue with the
'holotropic soul', via a sense that one way of breathing or moving just feels
'right' or 'better' than some other. Somehow, wisdom arises through the rich
continuum of physical sensation and guides us towards wholeness.
   And there's more still; this holotropic soul seeks wholeness, completion;
my conscious self seeks towards the Other, that which I am not, and which I
cannot understand fully at this stage. At some stage, I will find that I now
understand the aspect of it that was a mystery yesterday; however, the quest
is not over—I move on to a deeper aspect of the same mystery. This process
is endless, and the quest forms the core of a meaningful life, of always
seeking towards the mystery.
   Grof’s approach calls for the client to trust his holotropic mind. No doubt,
this is initiated by the trust the client invests in the psychotherapeutic
situation, but of course if the therapy is to work, this trust is transferred to the
source of inner guidance.
   Some breathwork coaches make quite specific interpretations of particular
bodily messages. Joy Manné writes (8): ‘Tetany is the lock on memory
activation’
   Tetany, as mentioned in Part I, is cramping caused by overbreathing. The
client has been breathing more intensely than usual, maybe consciously
desiring to break through a feeling of limitation, but instead they just get
cramps in the hands, painful enough to put them off any deeper breathing. So
instead of more emotionally-difficult memories surfacing, the tetany stops in
its tracks any further opening-up. The breather has been disallowed from
exploring in that particular direction, on this occasion, because some part of
them judges it too emotionally painful. Manné’s statement above suggest a
whole way of viewing the ‘messages’ ‘from’ ‘the body’ as remarkably
detailed, implying a considerable and far-sighted intelligence at work in
deciding our pace of development.
At the core of the healing experience lies our link with such a deep, verbally-
silent part of us. In the course of your first few breathwork sessions, there's
often a sense that you're beginning to give permission for your deeper mind,
your holotropic soul, to communicate more with you. Once started, such a
dialogue gets deeper; it gets easier to communicate between the conscious
self and the soul that guides. A neurologist might tell us that more
connections are being forged between the two sides of the cerebral cortex,
more 'wiring' occurring across the corpus callosum. Whatever the physical
mechanism, the dialogue gets richer, and a cooperation grows between the
conscious self and the mysterious holotropic soul. The greater aim of
breathwork is, in a sense, to strengthen this link.
   Embodied wisdom is recognized as a central component of the more
advanced traditional systems of soul-lore. In the Old Norse tales and myths
(the Eddas and sagas) we find mentions of a soul that may be identified with
the source of this wisdom—the fylgia, for which the English traditional word
is Fetch (I use a capital to distinguish this use of the word from the usual ‘Go
get, Spot’ usage). Writer on Old Norse mysteries Ristandi describes some of
its functions as follows:
    Although closely connected to the individual, the Fetch possesses
    autonomous existence... It is a source and repository of transpersonal
    information. It can guide and advise. (9)
   The urgings of the Fetch, if we are lucky (or unlucky—traditions tend to
acknowledge the difficulty of a life where we are forever being pushed
towards greater inner development) enough to notice them, come through the
least conscious part of us—the accidental motions of the body. Ristandi
writes:
   Learn to observe the most infinitesimal of movements in yourself and
   others: blinks, eye movements, flaring of nostrils. If you practice this
   assiduously, you may find yourself establishing a personal “alphabet of
   the body…
  … Pay particular attention to sensations of pressure or immobility
  (complete or partial), since […] research suggests that these sensations
  are intimately related to the presence of the Fetch.
   The story of Thorsteinn in Flateyjarbok (10) shows a boy whose
‘accidental’ stumble reveals his fylgia to one of the people in the room:
   …when the boy entered the hall, he came in with a great rush, as children
   usually do. He slipped on the floor of the hall, and when Geitir saw this, he
   burst out laughing. The boy went up to Geitir and said: ‘Why did it seem
  funny to you when I fell just now?’ Geitir answered: ‘Because in truth I
  could see what you did not’. ‘What was that?’ asked Thorsteinn. ‘I will tell
  you. When you came into the hall, a white bear cub followed you and ran
  along the floor in front of you. Now when he saw me he stood still; but you
  were going rather fast and you fell over him - and it is my belief that you
  are not the son of Krumr and Thorgunna, but must be of greater family’.
   Without a doubt we have here a model of moment-to-moment guidance via
signals from the body—which of course are usually unconscious, usually not
acknowledged as aspects of our intelligence. If we want to live at the deepest
and richest levels we are capable of, we have to let go of the idea of
intelligence as something that can be entirely compassed by conscious
rational processing.
   Arnold Mindell’s approach (see (4)) is to treat the symptoms that arise in
illness, and the symbols that arise in dreams, as part of a greater whole, as
different channels of expression for different phases of an individuation
process. The messenger from whom these communications are coming is
conceived as a kind of multi-dimensional set of links between different
‘channels’ of our being. Messages can come through verbal/ audio channels
as words, through Kinaesthetic/Proprioceptive channels as feelings, as is the
case in Connected Breathwork, or through images in dream of waking
reverie. The therapist works directly with whatever presents itself, however
apparently trivial or bizarre.
Personal Experiences of a ‘Channel’: The Inner DJ
It’s a long time since I first noticed a soundtrack underlying more or less
every conscious moment. I must have thousands of songs in my head, from
decades of avid listening, and increasingly it occurred to me to wonder what
caused a particular song to pop up at this moment. I woke up one morning
with 'This Old Man, he played one...’, playing in my head. I don't believe I'm
entering my dotage; no, this is about my relationship with my Inner Disc
Jockey.
   Later in the day, I started writing a record of this experience, and I
understood: my Inner DJ was simply drawing attention to himself, saying:
Here I am, playing one for you!
   I gather I'm not the only person who has a DJ in his head. But what dictates
the choice of tracks?
    Generally it seems to be about the words, run them through your head until
a line or phrase stands out. Brian Wilson’s album ‘Smile’ contains a repeated
refrain involving the rolling of a rock. This came back again and again till I
got it: the myth of Sisyphus, who rolls the same rock up the same hill every
day, only to watch it roll back down again. This is a metaphor for the nature
of repetitive work, agricultural or industrial. And for me it was about
adjusting my attitude to the necessity of work. I was reminded of Camus in
The Myth of Sisyphus enjoining us to ‘imagine Sisyphus happy’.
    So what do I think the Inner DJ is about? Well, sometimes he plays what
I've just been listening to or thinking about. Sometimes it's hard to understand
why he's selected that old track. Sometimes he selects a track you used to
like, but have grown fed up with. Or even some bit of dross from the charts.
    Sometimes, like with dreams, the song appears to have no meaning at all.
Much of the time, the Inner DJ seems to be an automaton, certainly not
always under the direction of the Fetch, not always delivering messages
drenched in meaning. But I have found that any track my IDJ plays
persistently, it always has a meaning, although it may take months to decode
it, especially if it relates to truths about myself I am unwilling to face.
    I mention the Inner DJ as an example of the ‘channels’ through which our
holotropic function seeks to goad us into evolving, overcoming our
limitations. Where does this guidance take us? To greater awareness, we
hope. However, the initial movement is often towards an ecstasy promised in
the very name of the practice pranayama, one (respectable) translation of
which is ‘the death of breath’.
References
(1) From ‘love’s function is to fabricate unknownness’ by e e cummings.
http://plagiarist.com/poetry/9238/
(2) Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, http://www.pursuit-of-
happiness.org/history-of-happiness/mihaly-csikszentmihalyi/
(3) Wilson and Golonka, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23408669
(4) Arnold Mindell, Working with the Dreaming Body, R and KP, 1985.
(5) Stanislav and Christina Grof, various books. See for instance
http://www.stanislavgrof.com/books-and-media/
(6) Ramsey Dukes Little Book of Demons; The Positive Advantages of the
Personification of Life's Problems, http://www.amazon.co.uk/Little-Book-
Demons-Advantages-Personification/dp/1904658091
(7) Phil Farber, http://www.meta-magick.com/
(8) Joy Manné, Conscious Breathing. http://www.amazon.co.uk/Conscious-
Breathing-Joy-Manne/dp/1556435320
(9) The Fetch: Ristandi's in-depth study of the practical use of embodied
wisdom to work with the Fetch can be found as a free download at:
https://www.scribd.com/document/49967333/fetch
(10) In the Flateyjarbok, see for instance http://www.sacred-
texts.com/neu/nda/nda07.htm
Chapter II-2: Reboot: The Death of Breath
The big promise that some Connected Breathwork teachers made to me when
I was first studying the technique was that I would experience a ‘First
Breath’, a complete reboot of my emotional nature from a particularly deep
breathing experience.
  The idea is, in the words of the website First Breath (1):
   when a person undertakes a committed period of breathwork with a
   practitioner it is likely that at some point they will access deeply
   suppressed memories of their birth experience and their first breath. […]
   Clearing the birth trauma means getting in touch with deeply suppressed
   memories from birth and allowing yourself to acknowledge them in the
   present moment. It has become a significant aspect of the rebirthing
   movement due to the immense physical and psychological benefits people
   have experienced through releasing this deeply held experience.
  This is very similar to Austin Spare’s Death Posture. Spare claims that
with this technique:
  the Ego is swept up as a leaf in a fierce gale… that which is always about
  to happen becomes its truth…. Know the death posture and its reality in
  annihilation of law… The death posture in the reduction of all conception
  (sin) to the "Neither-Neither"… (2)
   Allowing for Spare’s extreme obscurity, he seems to be saying that the
Death Posture wipes clean our attachments and ideas of what we are,
allowing us to be renewed—that renewal being a condition he refers to as the
‘New Sexuality’, something untainted by conditioning. The technique is
closely related to the experience of the First Breath, but in Spare’s version it
is approached with athletic enthusiasm rather than with gentle and lengthy
persistence:
   Standing on tip-toe, with the arms rigid, bound behind by the hands,
   clasped and straining the utmost, the neck stretched- breathing deeply and
   spasmodically, till giddy and sensation comes in gusts, gives exhaustion
   and capacity for the former. (3)
   To cut to the core technique, you breathe deeply and then restrict the
breathing, to provoke a kind of collapse (don’t try this on the balcony, kids!)
If the blackout phase is deep enough, it results in a great feeling of
refreshment, of all life’s little problems being left behind and the mind wiped
clean.
   I suspect that this kind of technique, of overbreathing followed by breath
restriction, is known to many people from childhood. I have a memory, the
context of which is faint, but the core experience vivid, of practicing
something similar at an early age, somewhere between five and seven years
of age. I was standing in the street where I lived with two friends. We took it
in turns to breathe very deep and fast—classic overbreathing—for long
enough to feel something, then one of the other kids would come up behind
and clasp us round the upper abdomen, pulling in tight and hard, resulting in
a swoon.
   It seemed like as soon as I’d gone under, I was back again—but with the
memory of having flown over our house to the street on the other side, then
back again.
   Another connection is the ‘shaman squat’, employed by magicians in
various cultures. Try squatting and breathing deep, then wrapping your arms
around your knees and closing your breath down as far as possible—this is a
slightly less extreme version of the childhood technique, and takes a good
deal longer to achieve interesting effects.
   In my experience, the feeling of refreshment from the ‘first breath’
experience is superior to that generated by the Spare-style Death Posture.
However, this might well be due to gaining success at the former before the
latter. These are not the only two sources for such a drastic reboot of
consciousness and it is no surprise that we find this process embedded in
myth.
   Every creation myth has a primordial death embedded in it. Consciousness
has arisen, and now it learns that it is going to die, that its death is already
written, scripted in the flesh it inhabits. In the Norse story of beginnings, told
in the poem V ǫ luspá (4), the first being to come to life is Ymir, and he is the
first to die, killed by his kinsman Odin, so that his parts could be used to
make a more coherent universe. Ymir is the undifferentiated, the pre-
conscious, and he has to make way for the new law, that of conscious being.
   The Hindu god Yama was the first conscious being ever to die, and so
knows all the secrets of death and cessation. He and his sister Yami are the
original human twins, a myth-form which recurs across various Indo-
European myth cycles, not to mention those of other traditions. One of
Yama's titles is Antaka, 'he who ends life’.
   The Sanskrit word yama means death, and also self-control, so with the
compound word pranayama, we are referring to the control of breath and of
life-force, and also to the ‘death of breath’. The experience of the breath-
reboot is amazing; the breath dwindles and disappears, then re-starts. The
power of Yama, to end life, is used to dissolve the stuck sense of self, to
break through the hard shell of frustrated will, as a prelude to renewal of the
life-force. The feeling of rebirth when the breath stops and starts, when there
is finally a rest-point in the breath, followed by the breath spontaneously
starting again, has to be experienced to be believed. All the stuff, all the
mental processing, that was in the way of ecstatic consciousness just
evaporates, and the new breath that then starts is drenched in ecstatic renewal.
There is a real sense that the self has been melted down and recast, made
whole and complete.
My record here is from an extraordinary breathwork session:
 At the end of breath, where it is the same as thought, there lies the
 emptiness that has the potential of encounter with alien Other.
  I steer my attention moment to moment by fine-tuning the exact instant and
  fierceness/softness of breath to maximize a vivid sense of conscious-now.
  What tells me I am steering in the best direction, is a spectrum of
  pleasure/discomfort, and sometimes of 'more real/less real'.
  I am steering along a swerving track of sensation, holding fast to the most
  'real' sensation at any given moment.
  I follow the stretch of a thought in any direction, follow it until the breath
  dies, ceases to be, and is reborn perfectly in that rightness.
  I follow it down to strangulation, to the rock-bottom of kumbakham, to the
  Death of Breath.
  I pick up every dropped stitch of tension along the way of each single
  breath.
  I uproot all the falsity from each breath, all the second-best, ad hoc, it'll-
  do-ness of each breath.
  All that is sacrificed to the Death of Breath.
  As breath dies, it reunites with consciousness.
  Let the breath remain dead until another breath HAS to be taken. At some
  point, the following breath fuses, becomes coextensive with, thought.
  The feeling of this pure, renewed breath is like a gesture which I fill with
  my entire aliveness. […] The continuity of consciousness is now
  inescapable, a recognition of the undying awareness that runs underneath
  the surface of the experience of the death of breath.
   The incredible feeling of rebirth on taking that new, first breath seems to
be at the root of the cult of immortalism that ran through Rebirthing and
Vivation Breathwork communities in the 1980s and ’90s (but which is
fortunately receding); the feeling of renewal is so strong, that it is not hard to
believe that one could live forever in the same body (or other bodies), if one
only kept refreshing one’s deepest energies in this way. So pranayama has
also the meaning of ‘breath of immortality’.
   Returning to the role of restricted breathing and rebirth, we are reminded
of the hanged god, Odin. In Havamal (5) we read:
   I know that I hung on a wind-tossed tree
   Nights all-nine
   Wounded by a spear, given to Odin, myself to myself
   On that same tree of which no man knows
   From what root it rises
   They gave me no bread, nor drinking horn
   I looked down
   I took up the runes, roaring I took them
   And fell back again
   Here the god has called upon all that he is not, the Otherness of the
mysterious universe, to give him the keys to consciousness, the runes.
Although piercing with a spear is mentioned, the sequence starts by referring
to hanging, and one of Odin's many titles is Hangatyr, the ‘hanged god’, not
the ‘pierced god'. Clearly, the 'hanging' part of the experience is highly
significant. By strangulation, the god cuts off his breath to the point where he
stops breathing, where he reaches the edge of death. He has sacrificed himself
to himself, confronting his death directly, and been filled with the wisdom of
the Other. He surges back from the brink of death, bearing the runes.
Another interpretation of death-of-breath is the pausing of the breath with the
lungs empty. This is also known as kumbakham, and is of course a close
relative to the breath-reboot of First Breath. Some yoga texts recommend the
extension of this pause, to relish its emptiness:
   In the empty space
  which separates two instants of awareness,
  radiant spatiality is revealed. (6)
  Other texts claim it as the holiest of states, in which all limitation is
overcome:
  For that precise moment at which the prana has ceased to move […] there
  arises a kumbhaka which is effortless: the wise regard that as an
  important state.
  When there is effortless suspension of breath, it is the supreme state. This
  is the self; it is pure infinite consciousness. He who reaches this does not
  grieve. (7)
  Even at the strange end of breathwork, where everything is topsy-turvy, in
Buteyko, we come across the same goal, seeking that same ecstasy:
  Most of us know the feeling of deep, delicious fulfilment when we are able
  to fully rest at the end of a complete breath. Our body is settled and calm,
  yet alert and responsive. We have come full circle, with a gentle quiet
  pause at the end of each exhale. We are home.
  For those who do not know this place, it would be wise to begin an
  exploration. (8)
   Buteyko’s objection to fuller breathing was incomprehensible at first to
me, as someone who has valued Connected Breathwork for years. But it is
not surprising—high-volume breathing does lead to Extraordinary States of
Consciousness (ESCs), and may lead to a feeling of being overwhelmed, of
drowning in chaotic sensation.
   We are uncomfortable in raw, chaotic, unstructured sensation, unless we
are in ecstasy. Ecstasy enables us to deal with the ubiquitous closeness of our
own death; Buteyko was concerned with banishing such fears: ‘the more
deeply you breathe, the closer you are to death.’ (9)
   The death-rebirth aspect of breathwork is never going to appeal to
everyone. That’s why the spectrum of preserving-through-disrupting contains
the peaceful pranayamas, and, ploughing its own lone furrow, Buteyko
breathing, representing total flight from emotional transformation.
   Ultimately, those who pursue breathwork persistently and deeply will write
their own instructions, that work only for them. Beyond the realms of rules
and guidelines, lies the realms of art.
References
(1) http://www.first-breath.co.uk/
(2) Austin Spare, The Book of Pleasure (Self-Love). Available online in
various editions.
(3) Ibid.
(4) In the Poetic Edda. The excellent James Chisholm translation of the Edda
is free online at, for instance,
http://www.heathengods.com/library/poetic_edda/ChisholmEdda.pdf
(5) Also in the Poetic Edda.
(6) Vijñânabhairava Tantra, circa 2000 BCE.
(7) From Yoga Vasistha, ancient text of unknown authorship available, for
example, here: http://yogi.lv/files/yoga_vasistha.pdf
(8) https://www.breathwork.eu/articles/breathwork/999-radiant-
spatiality-and-breath-buteyko-breathwork-by-dorisse-neal
(9) https://thebreathingman.wordpress.com/article/buteyko-quotes-
202i29i90v7sn-50/
Chapter II-3: The Inner Alchemy of Art
One idea, one insight can generate thousands of words of text. The previous
afternoon, I’d invoked Alwiss, the All-Wise dwarf and spent hours listening
to a recording of Wagner’s Die Walküre. I did an hour of Connected
Breathwork. I plunged into some issues about my life and my work, as often
happens with breathwork.
   After the opera is over, it is the middle of the night. Everywhere is quiet,
but my mind feels charged with energy, thoughts tumbling one over the
other. I close my eyes. One Eye, that of the All-Wise, stares back at me, out
of another space and time. I open the laptop and start to type.
   About four hours later, I have five thousand words of an essay on the
psychedelic gnosis in the modern world. I go to bed in the dawn light, fully
expecting much of what I wrote in that creative frenzy to be rubbish.
Astonishingly, the next day I look again, and much it is usable. Some of it
even got used.
   The Mead of Poetic Inspiration is no idle or fanciful metaphor. The role of
the poet often overlaps with that of the magician in traditional societies. This
is hardly surprising; after all, we are talking about a man or woman who has
thousands of lines of poetry by heart and can compose extempore ballads and
praise poems in traditional metre whilst barely breaking a sweat. The skalds
of the Norse world, the filidh of Irish poesy, these people were a spiritual and
cultural elite, the memory and intelligence of their culture. They were
expected to compose in a state of ecstasy, and their words were supposed to
induce extraordinary states in the listener, or even cause major changes.
   The process of composition does not occur in a vacuum. The poet may
wrestle with difficult circumstances, and in the process of creation, he both
transforms those painful events and also enriches what he is creating, because
he is drawing the words from his own depths of feeling.
   Those depths may be found in deliberate introspection and contemplation.
In inner work, dark and difficult material can arise, memories that you would
rather remained forgotten. But that memory is likely to have been tapping at
the door of your consciousness for some time, maybe since your childhood,
needing the succour of your attention.
   This is very much the case when we do Connected Breathwork; we focus
on such unpleasant sensations and work with them until the click of
integration happens and the energy flows into ecstasy. Someone who is
engaged in artistic creation may find that the energy that was held in, frozen
in position, becomes fluid and pours itself into his work. And of course it
brings with it the flavour of insight, of new ideas emerging from a stalled or
halted creative process.
   There is an exchange, or feedback between our inner states and what we
create, no matter what the content of those states. If we are dealing with
difficult or painful feelings, then even to express what we are feeling in
words can be immensely helpful to our dealing with it. Writing or talking
about your unpleasant feelings, thinking about them until the feeling is
expressed clearly, and you feel you have the full measure of it is like the
traditional idea of gaining power over a demon by giving it a name. Once you
have power over it, and can let it go, into your past, and get on with your life.
   When you have a had a good experience, something exceptional or
praiseworthy, and you write about it with carefully-weighed words, you are
placing that experience in a special, enhanced kind of memory. You add
something to your store of personal myth.
   When you write about something magical that happened, like I did with the
tales I’ve told in this book, you define and limit the magic of the remembered
moment, but you create something which is likely to stay in memory, be
remembered much more clearly than some random occurrence. This is
another addition to personal myth—of a very special kind. Further, if what
you have created is good to read, if it a good piece of art, then it will hold
some of that magic forever.
   In all of these cases, you have transformed your perception of whatever
feeling you started with. You have transformed the raw energy of unresolved
feelings and made it mean something, wrestled it into shape as an idea that
lives on in your mind. With something that expresses power and beauty you
have gone beyond mere commentary and into art.
Erryn R. Laurie writes about this kind of process in her commentaries on The
Cauldron of Poesy (1), in which she recommends meditation using the idea
of the three cauldrons:
   Being able to state what you perceive in poetic form is an important part
   of the process of working with the cauldrons and transforming their
   contents. […] Poetry provides a context for information and power, and a
   matrix within which to work. It ritualizes the information and becomes the
   ritual through which power flows.
   In the process of transforming and overcoming himself, the artist discovers
a radical, paradoxical freedom, the dimension of art which is pure play. In
that dimension, nothing is true except what is discovered in the process of the
alchemy, nothing is necessary except what emerges with intuitive certainty as
the creation proceeds. The artist works within the formal rules of his
discipline, but within those constraints he is free to make something new
happen in the world.
An Artist’s Connected Breathwork Journey
The above applies as much to visual arts as it does to writing. The notes and
images on the following pages show a process of artistic inspiration emerging
from a struggle with intense feelings. Geoff Sumner was a participant on my
Arcanorium courses. Whilst working with Connected Breathwork, he
obtained from his inner visions a series of ideas for a work in progress. The
eventual artwork itself (not shown) is a remarkable piece of magical
landscape art; the construction of a magical environment in his own back
yard.




                                           01 August 2011 (39 min)
   A truly wonderful Connected Breathwork meditation this afternoon before
     I proceed downstairs to begin some 9Ds and then outside to my stone
                                       work…
   Sensations in hands, feet, s. plexus, right knee (dull pain). A visual image
   (is this a sensation?) of a sort of doughnut or something inside. It is a bit
     like a recessed cubby or something, a hole in the wall if you will. Also
                                  triangles again.
I had one very powerful ecstatic state towards the end, which I did sighing
   breath in [See Part II, slow, deep breathing]. It felt really pleasant and
  ‘whole’. I came out with a feeling of blood to my extremities (hands and
        feet) and healed (from the stress of stonework on the body?)
                                         In which a triangle formed from my
energized hands to my :[ehwaz]: centre (collar-bone level of my lower neck),
 and so I believe this was more or less symmetrical, perhaps longer if you’d
    include the crown of my head (but I’m not sure it did). Then a point
  somewhere 5-6 [”] above (directly above) my solar plexus formed and it
                                  caused …
                                        … a sort of imaginary pyramid to form.
                              This is hard to draw!
 I went through a coughing period and a period of loud noise that turned into
 pain that that finally eased into sighs. It really took it out of me! At the end I
felt something painful, almost ----- being released or pulled out from my chest
                                      area…
           I also had some healing sensation in the heart! If this […]
                 […] sunlight then it




                                The moon can only be seen by
                 reflected sunlight.

It struck me somehow that the mound platform becomes
              moon-like during moon-work.
                            40 min Breathwork meditation

This warm and healing sensation that appears in
        my light-elf centre is very […]
                  Too, I received some great images from it
               on my project.
 Plus some ideas about water management
              (from the roof)
which may be useful, even part of the creation.
Reference
(1) Erynn Rowan Laurie’s The Cauldron of Poesy develops a working
method from the poem’s descriptions of the vessels and their qualities. It is a
free book available online.
A lengthier and more academic treatment of the poem can be read in P.L.
Henry’s The Caldron of Poesy, Studia Celtica, 14/15 (1979/1980).
KEY POINT PART II
‘Spiritual crises’ may arise through any kind of practice that changes
profoundly your experience of yourself, including some kinds of breathwork.
Practising breathwork may open us up to changes, through which we are
steered by forms of guidance that are communicated through the body and
feeling.
The resolution of problems glimpsed in breathwork may occur through art.
  Part III:
  Working
    With
Sensed Energy
This is the point in the book where we have to start thinking of ‘subtle
energy’ as real—at least while we are doing the exercises and interpreting the
results! Here is the story of another teenage acid trip and the beliefs that I
used to understand it.
   My first unambiguous encounter with ‘subtle energy’ was far from subtle.
My friend and I were engaging in a very slow game of Go. His cat was
stalking peacefully about at the other end of the room. Then something
moved me to point at the cat, with a lazy, flicking gesture. This stuff, like
light but all bent and twisted like lightning, came out of the tip of my index
finger and arced across the room, hitting the cat. It looked exactly like the
stuff that came out of the hands of sorcerers in Doctor Strange comic, those
kinked, glowing arcs of energy exchanged between battling wizards.
   It would just have been a drug hallucination but for the effect it had on the
cat. It jumped two feet in the air and leaped out of the window. I was
concerned for it (I’ve always loved cats) and went over to look out; it was
tearing off across the yard. Later I discovered it was fine. The movement I
had made was slow and easy, nowhere near abrupt enough to startle even a
more nervous cat.
   I’ve come a long way in my interpretations of that trip. At the time, I did
not slip into interpreting it via some naïve belief in energy magic; it did not
change my dominant, scientific-scientistic worldview. Instead, I filed it under
‘unexplained, and suggestive of something weird going on somewhere’, a
category of memories I didn’t unpack and examine until I’d overcome my
naïve, single-perspective belief in scientific materialism.
   In other words, not until I’d grown into the Chaos Magic perspective, the
multi-model approach where it is okay to have more than one model, to
interpret the world in multiple ways. (In fact, that it is seriously dangerous to
your mental health to do otherwise.)
   Those Doctor Strange panels were depictions of energy magic. Energy
magic is one of the great belief systems or ‘paradigms’ of magic, one of the
basic ways of thinking about so-called magical effects. Within that idea of
magic, wizards seek to project or block energy to heal or harm, to rearrange
energy internally for health and strength, to use energy to carry
enchantments.
   There are very few kinds of magical model as broad and general as the
energy magic model. Some people call such wide-ranging belief schemes
‘paradigms’. Frater UD (Ralph Tegtmeier), suggested (1) a total of five
paradigms into which any set of magical ideas can be classified. These five
are actually four, with the fifth as an overview which can utilize any of them.
The four are:
   The Spirit Paradigm, in which all magic is done by independent, non-
human agencies with which we negotiate. A strong example of a full-time
spirit paradigm approach might be a Voudon or Santeria practitioner, who
makes regular offerings to various spirits, some of which carry out their
intentions, and some of which might advise the person on a daily basis.
   The Psychological Paradigm starts from the assumption that magic is
pretty much ‘all in the mind’. This is the dominant paradigm in serious
modern magical writing, and usually involves a favoured status for
materialist scientism. In the Psychological model, the only entities that help
you to do our magic consist of instructions which somehow shape our world.
   How that shaping gets done is essentially an extension to the paradigm.
Furthermore, what the mind consists of and how much of it is inside our
skulls is an issue which makes this paradigm rather leaky—it tends to
approach or even overlap other paradigms. For instance, if we take the view
that our awareness consists of the interplay between elements in a network,
we are close to the following magical model, Information.
   The Information Paradigm may be the newest, or the oldest, from some
standpoints. Tegtmeier writes of ‘information matrices’, by which he
presumably means nets of information extending between entities. Or, to
consider another possible edge to the paradigm, entities actually consist of
nets of information, including the practitioner.
   The Energy Magic Paradigm (EMP) is well-represented in traditional
systems, as outlined above. In a full-blown Energy paradigm, magic is
considered to happen by means of ‘energies’ travelling from one place to
another. Modern versions of Energy magic tend to be rich in analogies to
physics and engineering—rays, forces, barriers and energy itself. This
analogical structure is limiting—as are the concepts in all the paradigms, but
on the other hand, energy-work traditions are astonishingly rich in effective
techniques, such as those we’re discussing in this book.
The limitations of all of the above ‘paradigms’ is what makes it important for
the modern magician to avail themselves of all four models, switching to a
model to utilize its strengths and shifting to another to avoid its weaknesses
and utilize the strengths of a different way of seeing the world. This is what
the fifth paradigm, the metamodel, consists of.
   For a flavour of this metamodel, imagine how a helper spirit, or what a
chaos magician might term a ‘servitor’, would appear in each. To a full-time
Spirit magician, everything has a spirit, and you talk and negotiate with them.
The servitor is another entity in a world teeming with various kinds of
sentience. To someone who takes the Psychological model as foremost, a
servitor is basically a set of instructions inhabiting your nervous system, very
similar to the idea of a Strategy in NLP. To the Energy magician, a servitor is
a self-sustaining net of energy with an inbuilt purpose. To our
Cybermagician, the servitor is a net of information among other nets of
information. To be able to switch between these viewpoints at will is the
essence of Chaos Magic (for a brief introduction to the history of Chaos
Magic ideas, see Appendix 1).
In Part III we will look at energy sensed between or outside bodies. Healing
magic is the main theme in this part, both the hands on-or-near styles of
energy healing and the powerful energies of group work. The sensing and
transmutation of internal energy is covered in Part IV.
For an immediate experience of sensed energy, let us return to the delicious
world of the Energy Shiver.
The Energy Shiver II
One exercise that is great for raising energy, especially when working
outdoors in the cold, is Energy-Shaking. Combined with Flared Nostrils, this
produces lots of energy-sensations, starting around the head and neck and
upper torso and eventually extending all over the body. Here is one version of
this practice.
  Stand with your body loose and easy. Start to make your hands shake, not
  violently but so that you can feel the muscles quivering.
  Extend the shaking to the lower arms.
  Then the upper arms.
  Start to make your knees tremble, just a little. No need to move your feet,
  just standing still is fine.
  Let the shake extend up to your buttocks. Feel the flesh of your muscles
  wobble and shake.
  While doing all this, try to flare your nostrils all the time.
  Let the shaking take over your whole body, except for your head and neck,
  which should be relaxed and upright.
  Now let the shaking get more intense, until you feel like it is going out of
  control.
  Take great gasps of breath.
  Now let the shaking die down a bit. Keep the deep breathing with flared
  nostrils going.
   You can always do another cycle, increasing the extent of your shaking
again until… well, it certainly gets more interesting when you do it for a long
time!

Practice Note
The exercises described in Part III may be practiced by relative beginners to
energy work. It is best to find a teacher, learn as much as you can then find
another source of teaching before you convince yourself of the ultimate
nature of your first teacher's work.
Reference
   (1) http://www.chaosmatrix.org/library/chaos/texts/model.html
Chapter III-1: Healing with Sensed Energy
My experience of healing magic outstrips most of my other areas of magical
endeavour—it's something I can relate a lot of successes in. This is partly
because as we get older our loved ones get sicker, so there's plenty of
demand, but it's partly because, amongst all the goals of practical magic,
healing magic is one of the easiest to succeed at. It's very much a case of
cooperating with the momentum of the universe—your body wants to heal
and is very good at doing so. That's why disciplines like Reiki, even though
marketed at people with a New Age level of magical understanding are still
successful, unlike the New Age techniques of most other magical areas,
which tend to be diluted beyond all usefulness if not outright rubbish.
   My interest in healing magic was not present from the beginning, but was
stimulated by early magical experiences. When I first started practising
magic, way back when, one of my co-workers was a man who was often ill. I
think he probably had ME. He used to insist I did hands-near healing on him
from time to time, despite the fact that I had no prior experience of such, and
therefore no reason to believe I could do it. I was a year or so into doing
regular magical practice (approximately the Liber MMM training, (1)) and the
idea that I could heal someone had never occurred to me. It seemed like
something that would require special training, or maybe something done by
delicate sensitives with porcelain skin, their closed eyelids fluttering. But my
friend insisted, so I had a go. He sat; I stood behind him, and tried to feel for
energy… and he seemed to benefit from it.
   My records of what I actually did are sketchy, and at that stage I didn’t
pursue healing as a main magical avenue. In fact, when I started working
healing magic a few years later, it was with spells and sigils rather than with
energy techniques. My exploration of energy healing did not start until after
I’d qualified as a coach of Connected Breathwork.
   As mentioned above, Connected Breathwork leads rapidly to a shift in
your attention, featuring a much stronger awareness of physical sensations
and energy flows in the body. The breather becomes sensitive to energy, but
does not consciously move it around; in Connected Breathwork practices
such as Rebirthing, Vivation and Holotropic breathwork, the breather does
not exert any will to direct the flow of sensations, Instead, the direction the
sessions takes is left entirely to subconscious processes.
Not long after my breathwork professional training in 1993, I noticed
something about doing breathwork in groups. I went to a residential weekend,
and had the most ecstatic state I have ever achieved, before or since, purely
from Connected Breathwork. As I emerged from the lengthy and highly
emotional breathwork session, I opened my eyes and looked out through the
open French windows into a rough patch of grass and weeds drenched in
sunlight. I lost my boundaries in bliss, what people sometimes call a full-
blown nature-mysticism event.
   Thinking about this afterwards, it was clear that the intensity and depth of
the experience had a lot to do with the fact that it took place in a group of
about ten people, most of whom were in a similar ESC (Extraordinary State
of Consciousness) at the time. I started to think of this as the Group Effect.
One interpretation of this Group Effect is that the energy raised in connected
breathing can reach outside of the body and affect other people. This seemed
like a reasonable belief to go with as long as it was useful, and it has proven
itself to be very useful indeed.
In the late 1990s, some magical co-workers started to work with a magical
group structure they called a Chaotron. At around the same time, I learned of
the breathwork group work of George Pennington, called the Breath of Light
Circle. As you can see, my journey with energy magic started with group
experiences, but I shall write about them more fully below, in their own
chapter.
   In the early 2000s, I volunteered at a South London collective called Green
Angels who, amongst other events, hosted healing evenings. I ran
introductory Connected Breathwork sessions for groups of twelve to fifteen
people at some of these evenings, and was astonished at the intensity of the
experiences people were having. This was particularly marked when we
consider that these sessions were typically only about twenty minutes long,
unlike the conventional Vivation session, which is an hour. However, people
reported that they were sensing energy and seeing auras, as well as the usual
effects of connected breathing. Once more, the Group Effect was happening.
   What is this effect? Starting from what people were experiencing, was it
that they were developing their awareness of the ‘twilight senses’, the areas
of sensory input we normally screen out? Is there an element in whatever
happened of ‘group permission’, of people unconsciously exchanging subtle
signals which indicate it is okay to experience the world differently, kind of a
conspiracy to see the world anew? This is what we would say if we were
firmly in the Psychological Paradigm. Viewed from the point of view of the
Energy Paradigm, people were opening up and sensing energy that was
flowing outside them. I shall refrain from further discussion of what is ‘really
going on’ with ‘energy’ effects until Part V.
   The experiences did cluster around the sensing of energy outside the body,
so that is what I decided to investigate, systematically. I started
experimenting with different breath patterns and energy healing modes. I read
around, to find out what breath patterns other people were getting successes
with. I restricted my interest, initially, to techniques that seemed only to
involve energy transmission, not other forms of magical effect. For instance,
I did not study Reiki at that stage, because the higher levels of that discipline
employ a mixture of energy work and symbol work, and I was not sure how
that would impact on the basic, non-symbolic work. My experiences with
Reiki are discussed in Part V under ‘Egregores’.
   I discovered that the type of breathing I had come to think of as connected
breathing was the most effective. Breathing through the mouth instead of the
nose, breathing without pausing or holding, relaxing as much as possible—
this was the pattern that worked. I would do this breath pattern until it felt
like I was entraining energy, rising up my torso on the inbreath, going down
the front of my body and into my hands as I breathed out. Slowing down the
outbreath helped increase the sense of entrainment of the energy through my
body. Not long after this, I discovered a book called Quantum-Touch: The
Power to Heal, (2) by Richard Gordon. I had discovered what is basically the
same as Gordon’s technique—breathing through the mouth, relaxing, and
making the outbreath at least twice as long as the inbreath.
The Energy Healing Breath
This breath pattern is what I now think of as the Energy Healing Breath
(EHB). By 2009 I felt confident enough in my results to deliver a public
workshop on energy magic. After a warm-up where we moved about and
played with the sensations of the energy, I called for volunteers who had
pain, right there and then. Three brave people stepped forward, and we broke
into three groups to transfer healing energy into their sick parts.
   F had had a sprained wrist for nine months, P had suffered a pain in her
shoulder for six weeks now, and H had chronic sinusitis. F and H got
immediate relief from the energy work—F was feeling much less pain and H
said she felt ‘much better’. The next day, P’s shoulder was also improved. I
followed up all three recipients of healing for a week, and the healing
persisted.
   I also led a group work on me, for my chronic shoulder pain. Immediately
after the session, I reported: ‘Wow, great, I feel so much better!’
   Two other public workshops had similar high levels of success; it was an
enormous relief to find that the first wasn’t a fluke! I continued to work with
this technique with friends and in experimental magical groups.
   Here is a record of one successful session, that illustrates how such work
feels from the point of view of the healer.
   L, 17/8/2010: Asked her where it hurts. At present, nowhere, but main
   problems are in muscles round the shoulder blades, and sides of neck.
  I gave some thought about how to seat her and me for prolonged comfort,
  and the necessary relaxation. She sat on chair, I sat on the settee, then
  moved to kneeling on floor behind her.
  I did breaths in a 2-in and 6-out rhythm, focusing on the feel of energy in
  my body at first, that 'weightless' kind of sensation. Then I focused on the
  energy in my hands. The feeling there was intermittent at first, then
  stronger.
  I started around her right shoulder blade. A few minutes into this, I asked
  her what she felt. ‘It feels good’.
  I moved on from there, because there was no pain. I opened up to the
  feelings of where the energy seemed to ‘want’ to go; the left shoulder
  blade seemed to want more energy. This is when I started to feel the
  buzzing vibration, a real sense of the energy vibrating inside my hands.
  I worked on her neck for a while.
  The session totalled around fifteen minutes. L said it felt good. I finished
  off by working on her heart-centre area, with my hands near her back and
  her solar plexus. This part of her seemed to want lots, which fitted in to
  what she told me about her life…
  As for me, it took me a few minutes to get into the rhythm, then I focused
  on keeping myself as relaxed as possible.
  A thought for future sessions: pay even more attention at the start to long-
  term positioning. It is so important to stay relaxed, and posture is of
  course a big key to this.
   By now, my co-workers and I had a good grasp of the basic technique,
sufficient for me to go onto the next stage and run a course on Energy Magic
at Arcanorium College of Magic (3).
The Arcanorium College Energy Magic course
The course started with instructions on Connected breathing, so that students
could get familiar with the ESC generated by that process. Then followed
instructions to practice slight variations on the CBW breath pattern to find
out what worked best for each person for sensing and projecting energy.
   The following were the basic instructions for working with the Energy
Healing Breath:

         1. Do continuous, connected breathing, through the mouth, to a
            rhythm of 2:6 or 2:8. Experiment with the length of inhale and
            exhale. Continue this for 10 minutes at a time, maybe twice a
            day. Stop the exercise and breathe gently and slowly if you get
            uncomfortable. Sensations like dizziness may arise—these are
            harmless but may be disturbing.
         2. Breathe from your abdomen for the best results—if you're not
            sure where you're breathing from, place one hand on your belly
            and one on your chest—only the belly hand should move if
            you're breathing abdominally.
         3. You can also try breathing through the nose. This will probably
            result in a much weaker experience, but it works well for some
            people, so it is worth a try.
         4. When you have a good rhythm established, introduce this
            visualization: the energy flowing up from the earth into your feet
            on the inhale, up your body to your head, changing direction
            with the beginning of the exhale to flow down your arms to your
            hands.
         5. Try these exercises in a variety of physical postures standing,
            sitting, lying, to get used to the process in different situations. If
            moved to, dance around while you’re raising the energy!
         6. Record and report your results.
   Once people reported that they were sensing energy, the next exercise was
that the student find a willing person who has pain, discomfort or sickness,
and do their best to heal them.
   The important addition to the above instructions for the basic breathing
technique was to pay special attention to sensing changes in the quality and
quantity of energy the student perceived moving through their hands, and
also the patterns of energy flow they experience in the 'patient'.
   This sensitivity is central to effective healing. In pursuit of this, it is good
to talk to the 'patient', encouraging them tell the healer how things feel. This
enables the healer to respond to changes in what the recipient feels.
In the course of the healing session, it can be useful from time to time, to
‘power up’ your energy flow by using a more intense style of breathing.
Agni-prasana (Breath of Fire) or Bhastrika pranayama (Bellows Breath) are
good, but it is best not to over-use them, or you can get dizzy; see Chapter I-
3, Breaths of Power.
   My experience of the process of working the healing is that I start by
visualizing the energy flow up my legs and down my arms, but the
visualization becomes intermittent once I start working on someone. In fact,
once the visualization is established it kind of runs by itself—there is a
change from feeling I am visualizing the energy to a sense that I am
entraining it.
   At that stage, the important thing is to continue to sense the energy. I do
pay some attention to my breathing, but this gets interrupted by paying
attention to the feeling of the client’s energy. The energy flows change,
sometimes slower and sometimes faster, and sometimes these changes can
bring me information about what is happening with the healing. For example,
I sometimes feel heat in my hands, and a sense that the energy is building up
there. Then that may release, as if there had been a blockage between me and
the client, or in the client, and it breaks and the energy moves. Another
change is in the way my hands 'want to move'—sometimes there's a strong
urge to move my hands to another place on the client. This is a good point at
which to ask the client how he/she feels, what sensations they're getting and
whether those sensations are moving around. Sometimes the client reports
pain in one place, but after some time, it moves to another place. This is
typical with problems that have a postural element to them.
   Occasionally I catch myself drifting out of the ESC into ordinary thinking.
This usually results from being tired and a bit unfocused. Sometimes, though,
it can be the result of a change in the client's energy flows which I have not
yet consciously noticed.
   I find that it is vitally important to keep the posture fairly fluid, and allow
myself to move. When I work on someone else, I find that the energy will
demand that I move from time to time. This student writes of the sensations
involved healing someone else:
   S: Healing session with my wife. 10 minutes long. She complained of
   having back pain so I offered her a healing session which she willingly
   accepted. She was lying on the floor and I sat beside her in a kneeling
   position.
  Using a 2-6 breathing cycle I quickly felt the energy running, esp. in my
  hands which I put on her back. Almost immediately my hands and the area
  on her back felt warm and she fell in tears, overwhelmed by the
  experience. She explained it as "a total body experience" and said she had
  a vision of all the muscles in her back.
  I moved my hands around a bit trying to cover the cold areas (noticing that
  the top of her back was already warm so I didn't work on that part) but she
  asked me to focus on the area where she was in pain, which I did.
  After a while my legs started to hurt so I rose, but it didn't take long before
  I got quite tired in my body and felt it was time to end the session.
  My wife was very relaxed and wanted to stay in her position forever (she
  was now lying in the yogic 'child’s pose' position, on her knees).
  The next day:
  She still has some back pain but not the way it was yesterday. This
  morning she told me she had pain in her right hip towards the buttock, an
  area which is often numb, and now it was as if it had been 'activated'.
  She also told me another detail from yesterday: My hands felt larger than
  they really are, as if growing while touching her back.
One of the things that came out of my experiments and those of the
Arcanorium students was that doing EHB healing feels good. It’s good to let
the energy flow through you, out to the recipient. It is not draining—or it
should not be! One student did get great results, with healing his family, but
mentioned that he felt 'beat up'. Problems like that may be caused by a lack of
energy. It is therefore very important when you work this energy healing to
hold onto the idea that you are 'channelling' the energy, so you just let it flow
through you to the other person, leaving you without unbalancing your
system. Maybe it is not possible to sustain this all the time, but I think we can
approach that happy condition by learning from our less happy results.
One student’s report exemplifies the most useful attitude for this work:
  I have now started feeling more and more that when I do the practice I tap
  into an infinite source of energy, and just need to open myself up to it and
  channel the energy up the legs to the head and then out the hands. It feels
  like there is a pressure gradient, so as soon as open up my body, the
  energy automatically flows in the entrained direction. The more I open
  myself up to the infinite energy source, the more energy flows through me.
  Though I hesitate to use the word infinite, this is how it feels when I'm
  doing the practice, or at least effectively infinite: if an ant tried to drink the
  ocean it would probably regard it an infinite even though it is actually
  finite. I don't know if such an energy source actually exists, or what we are
  actually doing when we channel "energy", but regardless, the practice
  seems more effective if I believe that I am tapping into such an energy
  source.
This attitude is an enabling belief. The writer on yoga Sivananda (4) says:
  Those who practise Pranayama, can impart their Prana in healing morbid
  diseases. They can also recharge themselves with Prana in no time by
  practising Kumbhaka. Never think that you will be depleted of your Prana
  by distributing it to others. The more you give, the more it will flow to you
  from the cosmic source (Hiranyagarbha). That is the law of nature. Do not
  become a niggard.
   In my own experience, the important thing in energy healing is to feel that
I am 'getting myself out of the way'. Then, the energy flows smoothly and my
own system is continually replenished. The other vitally important point is
not to stop doing the high-energy breathing. Generally, when people
complain they feel drained after a healing session, it is because they forgot to
keep the EHB pattern up and fell into shallow, low-energy breathing. In that
state, their energy was very easily lost.
   Another thing that came out of the course is that students tried different
methods of working energy healing on their own problems. P in particular
reported doing some self-healing work on a (minor) head wound, which, the
day after his energy work, his wife could no longer even locate.
   When I want to do energy healing work on myself, I direct the energy
internally, so that it comes up through my feet, then goes straight to the part
that needs healing. But I also use my hands, if I can get at that part of my
body while remaining relaxed. It does seem important that the hands and
arms are fairly relaxed, to get the energy flowing freely. The reasoning
behind using my hands on myself is that there seems to be some energy flow
through my hands, even when I'm visualizing it going to some other part of
my body.
   Something I've found effective with self-healing is to immerse myself in
the feeling of the discomfort or pain, keep bringing my attention back to it,
which may amount to a conscious decision to pour energy into it.
   This is the energetic basis of using Connected Breathwork for pain
management, such as is offered by specialist breathwork coaches. Some
energy practitioners say that pain actually functions to get us to lead athm to
where it’s needed, so that pain not only tells us there is something wrong, so
we can avoid hurting that part of us anymore, but brings our attention to
where the athm needs to flow. To paraphrase what they say in qigong, athm
flows where attention goes.
One variation in energy healing which was covered on the Arcanorium
course was the use of sound when working with the energy. This combination
has two purposes: to enhance the energy flow for the healer, and to carry a
magical intention into the patient.
  On the healer’s side, humming in particular can be very conducive to
sensing energy. Sivananda (4) writes on building up the energy via the
Bhramari Kumbhaka technique:
  Inhale rapidly through both nostrils making sound of Bhramara, the bee,
  and exhale rapidly through both nostrils, making the humming sound. You
  can carry the process till the body is bathed in perspiration. In the end
  inhale through both nostrils, retain the breath as long as you can do it
  comfortably and then exhale slowly through both nostrils. The joy which
  the practitioner gets in making the Kumbhaka is unlimited and
  indescribable. In the beginning, heat of the body is increased as the
  circulation of blood is quickened. In the end the body-heat is decreased by
  perspiration. By success in this Bhramari Kumbhaka the Yogic student
  gets success in Samadhi.
   If you are working with energy via breath, it is well worth trying the bee-
buzzing sound.
   Regarding transmission of magical intentions, we experimented on the
course with using runes and other vocal formulae to encode the healing
intention. An example is the use of the Elder Futhark runes laguz and uruz,
for life-force and general robustness, combined into the chant ‘luuu’.
Traditional runic formulae can also be used, such as the beautiful galdor
(rune-song) luwatuwa.
   The first time I ever did a healing using runes, it was on my girlfriend, who
had lower back pain. I used the ‘luuu’ galdor and she gained rapid relief. I
asked her how it felt, and she, who was trained in Reiki, said it was very
much like the latter.
   As effective as sound-healing is, it is not directly concerned with athm.
Sound instead becomes the message, carrying the healing intention via the
‘carrier wave’ of the athm, so there are two things happening here, and the
reception of the athm may well be the less effective of the two. So these
effects are outside the scope of the book.
   The next chapter deals with what happens when people consciously
combine energies.
References
(1) ‘Liber MMM’ is part of Peter J. Carroll’s Liber Null.
(2) Richard Gordon - Quantum-Touch: The Power to Heal, 2006.
(3) Peter Carroll’s online college. I don’t know whether any traces of these
courses remain in the current website: http://www.arcanoriumcollege.com/
(4) http://www.yoga-age.com/asanas/prana.html
Chapter III-2: Group energy work
It was my experiences of group energy effects, alluded to briefly in the last
chapter, that triggered my fascination with energy work. This led on to
experiments with breath-patterns, the ‘Group Energy Effect’, and its big
sisters, George Pennington’s Breath of Light Circle and the Chaotron. There
is some support in traditional practice for the group effect; apparently some
esoteric martial arts instructors say that the qi is higher when you’re working
in a group.
   The Breath of Light was the first group energy work I heard of which
produced ‘miraculous’ healing. A lengthy and fascinating article about it used
to be available online, but it has been taken down in recent years. In a
nutshell, the Breath of Light involves ten or more people lying on the floor in
a circle, feet to the centre, holding hands to facilitate energy flow, and
breathing intensely for long periods, up to a few hours. The breath pattern
used is more like the super-energizing overbreathing typical of Holotropic
sessions than the gentler Rebirthing breathing. (For descriptions of these
breath patterns, see Part I).
   Pennington tells the story of the discovery of the Breath of Light. It
happened when one of the participants at a weekend healing retreat had
waited too long for her dialysis procedure, and had gone into a very scary
kidney crisis. People in the group were inspired to form this new
arrangement, did so and the sufferer was restored to health for at least long
enough to get to her next dialysis without mishap.
   At around the same time, I worked with magicians who were
experimenting with how energy could be used in groups. In the late 1990s,
one such group gained some very interesting effects by structuring energy
flows through themselves and each other, and came up with the term
'Chaotron', for the energy-magic of specially-positioned people in a group.
   The original Chaotron was a circular form, like the Breath of Light Circle.
Once I’d experienced both, these circular forms start appearing all over the
place. The simplest form of them must be the witches’ Cone of Power. This
is a circular, or more accurately, domed form which is generated by dancing
in a circle, often whilst holding hands, with the participants, one hopes, in a
state of Gnostic exaltation. Such a structure, a group of people in a high-
energy ESC, will be running plenty of athm through the collective space,
generating a spinning vortex of life-force.
Another visualization of group circle-power is in a painting by Pablo
Ameringo, the Peruvian visionary artist, called ‘Los Archontes Volares’ (1).
In it, four people are sitting in a circle drinking ayahuasca. Two of them are
men, two are women, two face into the centre, two face outwards. Around
them is a torus, a doughnut shaped structure, made of fine filigrees of light
such as are typical of DMT hallucinations. In the centre of the circle are
descending a group of incredible quasi-human entities, as if the vortex is
drawing them in from cosmic space. I have since learned that some groups
within the Santo Daime church employ geometrical arrangements of human
energies for directed healing.
   My experiences of the Chaotron actually preceded those of the Breath of
Light, but I am going to present the material on the Breath of Light Circle
before the Chaotron work, because the former is simpler, with fewer
variations.
Breath of Light circles
At a public series of seminars and workshops in summer 2004, I presented a
Breath of Light Circle to around thirty people.
George Pennington (2) writes:
  One of the insights usually triggered by individual breathing sessions is an
  increasing awareness of the low level of energy we use in daily life. The
  sessions gradually increase the tolerance for higher levels of energy and
  make them available for everyday use.
  A Breath of Light session is a different kind of approach. Here we generate
  the energy not for ourselves but for the whole circle. Instead of increasing
  the individual level of energy a surplus of energy is generated and
  circulated freely around the circle. Not the "having" is important here, but
  the flow. Being part of such a circle is an unforgettable experience. Words
  cannot describe it adequately.
    I would certainly agree, especially on this occasion, when such a large
group lent the occasion an extraordinary intensity. Everyone who spoke about
it, spoke of an ecstatic experience, and two participants said that they thought
they were going to start levitating at some points.
    We stripped the method down to something with far fewer detailed
prescriptions than Pennington recommends. What we ended up with, I would
like to stress, is no longer George Pennington’s Breath of Light Circle; the
latter was a starting point for this simplified method. The steps are:
       1. Everyone forms a circle, lying down. They spend some time
          getting comfortable. The relatively large number of people
          required (at least ten) is due to the sheer geometry of the human
          bodies involved: if there are only five of you, you will find that
          you cannot reach each others’ hands if your feet are in the centre.
          If the group place their heads in the centre the occasional
          coughing and spluttering that happens with intense breathwork
          makes the centre of the circle an unpleasant and unhygienic place
          to be.
       2. All hold hands, with ‘yin-yang palms’—i.e. you lay your hands so
          both thumbs are to the left. The left hand becomes passive (yin),
          the right hand active (yang). This gives a definite direction for the
          energy to flow in, anticlockwise around the circle. Make a firm
          agreement not to let go of your neighbours’ hands at any time
          before the end of the session. This is important—see below.
       3. Everyone starts to breathe in a connected fashion, with no pausing
          or holding. See Part I for a full description of Connected
          Breathing.
       4. The host (who is usually part of the circle, but was not in this
          instance) brings everyone’s breath into rhythm with simple
          instructions.
       5. Everyone breathes slightly faster than feels normal. They keep
          that breath up until everyone feels some kind of ESC starting.
       6. The pace can be maintained or increased, depending on how
          everyone feels. It is best if the host is in the circle, because then
          there is at least one experienced person to lead the pacing of the
          breath, initially. After a while, the circle will often find its own
          momentum, its own natural pace of breathing, which can be
          maintained for some time.
       7. When the time comes, and it should be quite apparent, the host
          gets the pace to slow down. Stay in this nice, relaxed slowed
          down state for a while.
       8. Breathing returns to normal, shallow nose breathing. Hands are
          still joined.
       9. Host checks if everyone is okay about releasing hands, when this
          feels right.
      10. Release hands.
      11. Take plenty of time to come out of your ESC. Do not, for
          instance, drive a car for at least an hour.

   Anyone who has had the kind of really intense Connected Breathwork
session which included some overbreathing, may well have experienced the
cramping (tetany) of the hands that can occur with hyperoxygenation and
hypocapnia (reduced carbon dioxide levels leading to changes in nerve
function). Because the Breath of Light breathing patterns often drift near to
overbreathing, you would expect people to get a lot of cramping. But it
almost never happens.
   This is one of the strongest direct pieces of evidence that we are dealing
with a real energy here, that what we raise with breathing can be transferred
to other people via touch. This is of course why it is so important for
everyone in the circle to maintain hand contact until everyone feels that the
energy has settled down.
   Pennington writes:
   One of the observable effects of this circular energy flow is that the usual
   symptoms of hyperventilation (cramps of the hands and around the mouth)
   hardly ever occur - and if they do they subside very quickly. The energy is
   there, available and circulating, but does not choke the individual system
   by overloading it excessively. (In individual breathing sessions these
   cramps are an expected phenomenon, which passes as the system gets
   accustomed to higher oxygen/energy levels.)
  Another piece of anecdotal evidence for the genuine energetic
connectedness of the people in the circle is that is remarkably easy to tell if
something is happening to other people in the circle. Intense emotion or
physical sensation, energy blockages and so on can be felt from the other side
of the circle. Here are some accounts of Breath of Light Circles and similar
group-energy forms.
   2005, with [a Chaos Magic group]: Eleven people present. First trial of
   this method of doing connected breathwork: lying down, feet in the centre,
   hands linked yin palm-yang palm. Did a talk-in on Connected Breathwork
   in general, then some practice, questions, then a few minutes in the Circle,
   then about 35-40 minutes, as it turned out. The time flew. We ended by
  sitting up, continuing to link hands. I asked if anyone needed any more
  time in the circuit, and M said yes, five minutes. We let go our contact
  slowly - amazing sense of energy, saw the chi ball between my hands with
  actual ‘strings’ of sticky light.
  Conducted a brief verbal survey immediately afterwards:
  i) did anyone slip into ‘normal’ breathing (interrupted, shallow, lots of
  thoughts, through nose)? - about 5;
  ii) did anyone feel sleepy? - about 5. [I myself felt very far from sleepy,
  unusually for me in breathwork];
  iii) did anyone get cramp (tetany)? - only 1, and it passed easily;
  iv) did anyone notice a change in energy/awareness when we broke hand
  contact? - 7 did;
  v) did anyone have an emotionally/physically intense challenging
  experience? - 1 only;
  My impressions:
  i) after the first half there was a definite sense of energy flowing to the
  parts of me that need healing - liver, and heart and lungs. I had a buzzing
  sensation in my chest right up to the end;
  ii) I pushed myself pretty hard, and there was much less sense of
  overwhelm to the sensations than with separate Breathwork;
  iii) The state I was in at the end I could have stayed in much longer.
   It's astonishing how detailed one's awareness of the other people is, even
when you can't see them and aren't directly touching them. As the energy
flows build up, participants experience some consciousness of the entire
circle of people—for instance, it is vividly obvious not only when someone in
the circle breaks hand-contact but also where the break is. In another Breath
of Light session, I knew immediately when one woman on the opposite side
of the circle had broken hand-contact. So it's not too hard for the host or
facilitator to know what's going on, when to drive things a bit faster and when
to wind it all down.
In 2005, I ran some short, practical courses in Connected Breathwork at a
London college of Further Education. On the final sessions of the course, I
introduced a modified form of the Breath of Light Circle, for the smaller
group we had.
   Saturday 07/05/05: Connected Breathwork class 4. Introductory talk about
   Pennington’s Breath of Light. Decided to seat J in the middle, because she
   has a broken arm.
  Seven of us sat around her, seated on chairs, facing inwards, holding
  hands. Agreed not to break hand contact until we were all happy with that.
  Joined hands with thumbs to the left. The idea was, to circulate the energy
  anticlockwise left to right.
  Ten minutes to build up the energy. Then ten minutes restful, easy rhythm.
  Repeat this, then twenty minutes of intense breathing, then a ten-minute
  slowdown. Rest before breaking hand contact.
  Reports:
  J says she got 'stuck to the ground', and felt some healing, coming through
  her feet.
  No-one got tetany - though C said she'd thought she might - even though
  people were really pushing the breath.
  S found that the energy went out of his left side, as did C. This is another
  piece of evidence suggesting the Breath of Light may be over-structured,
  and worth experimenting with in different versions. In Chaotron energy
  circulation, it doesn’t always matter.
  People including M reported feeling the energy moving outside the circle.
  S had a healing friend turn up to her left, and said we sent healing to
  someone else.
  Most people reported bliss.
  I got a beautiful serene bliss as we stopped pushing and relaxed into it. My
  attention was floating like a point of light in an expanding torus of light.
  This, for me, was the strongest feeling I’ve yet had off doing Breath of
  Light. In fact, this session has brought the best results I’ve had from any
  kind of Connected Breathwork since a particular event two years ago.
                                        ***
  Saturday 14/05/05: This time, people wanted to experience what it is like
  with our heads in the centre. So we lay down and joined hands.
  Overall, the session felt less intense than last week’s, while we were
  actually doing it, but as soon as we separated, there was a massive surge
  of energy.
  Discussing our experiences of energy in the Breath of Light ircle, it’s clear
  now that the Breath of Light can be changed out of all recognition and you
  still get very worthwhile effects. For instance, it does not need people to
  face inwards, for people to lie down, and maybe it doesn’t even need
  people to touch. This takes me back to my earliest experiences of the
  ‘group energy effect’, such as seeing light around people and around the
  room, such as the increase in intensity even when there are more people
  doing breathwork in the same room.
   This is the jumping-off point for the Chaotron, which was originally in a
single, complex form, but a range of other useful forms were discovered.
Chaotrons
An Austrian Chaos Magic group developed and first presented the Chaotron
in 1998. The original form of it was a relatively complex arrangement,
involving more than twenty people in precise positions. The smaller pieces it
was put together from included a training session beforehand, as follows.

       1. Participants practice the energy circulation: Firstly, people get into
          pairs. Each faces the other and you coordinate your breathing,
          deep and strong.
       2. As you do this, sense the energy flowing between you... let it
          flow. As soon as you become aware of this, you can see it. It
          flows from your head across to your partner’s head, and then
          returns through your feet, then rising up through you and flowing
          out of your head again. The energy flows in both directions at the
          same time, projected from your head and your partner's head,
          received by both your feet.
       3. This is not a 'visualization' in the normal sense of 'driving' an
          image into existence; the authors of the original presentation say:
          'We found out that the lines the energy flows along are there all
          the time, we just feed them with energy.’
   The originating group experimented with different forms of the basic idea
of collectively-directed energy, culminating in a much-simplified version of
the Chaotron.
   This works as follows: After practicing the energy circulation in pairs,
participants stand in a circle. The energy lines are now seen to flow to all the
persons in the Chaotron following the same breathing pattern and energy
circulation as above, not only those on the opposite side. The effect is a kind
of web connecting all participants.
   This space is then used for magical enchantment.
   Breath is used to power the Chaotron up in the first place. The breath-style
we used in most cases was Connected Breathing or something very similar.
When the energy was flowing well, sometimes it felt like a good idea to boost
it—in which case fast cycles of EHB or similar breathing are used.
Once the general principle of the Chaotron had been established, it
blossomed into a whole range of collective human-energy geometries. One
that we tried out as a result of immediate need, was a six-fold symmetrical
structure. I relate this tale in my book Bright From the Well, because the
healing was so impressive. Our friend had got burned in an accident, and was
taken to hospital. Her right arm was treated for first and second degree burns,
and the doctor had said that she won’t be able to do without a dressing for
two weeks.
   Back at the meeting we decided to devise a Chaotron structure to beam
healing energy to our friend as efficiently as possible. Over the course of that
day, at least three people had impressions of the same basic structure—a
looping, s-shaped curl. We assemble a Chaotron involving six groups of three
people, each group using that particular geometry to generate energy and
pump it into the centre, where our ‘patient’ was. In 24 hours she was able to
remove the bandages, and a day later the burns had healed without trace—
seven times the predicted rate of healing.
References
(1) http://www.ayahuaska.eoldal.hu/fenykepek/ayahuasca-ihlette-
muveszet/-don-pablo-amaringo/los-archontes-volares.jpg.-.html
(2) Unfortunately George Pennington’s lengthy description of the Breath of
Light is no longer available, as far as I can find.
KEY POINT PART III
An energy magic/energy cultivation (Qigong) approach to healing produces
reliable results, often bordering on the miraculous. This is especially the case
with group energy work such as Breath of Light circle and Chaotrons.
Energy magic produces reliable results in healing, and is certainly the best
way of using the primary data of embodied consciousness. In the hands of
experts, and sometimes the hands of the naïve believer, it can lead to
extraordinary effects.
   Part IV:
Sensed Energy,
     Sex
     and
Transmutation
In Part IV we dive into the immense world within—the feelings of desire, of
flowing energy, of ecstatic transformation. To get the best out of this
exploration, we are taking the idea of magical energy a little more literally.
   There are three basic kinds of inner energy work considered in Part IV: the
circulation of energy, the reversal of normal energy patterns, and the making
of the Inner Mead. These esoteric skills all contribute to the transmutation of
sexual energy.
Sex and Imagination
Before we get into the details of imaginal technologies for transmuting sexual
desire, let us first ask what we are transmuting here, because sex isn’t a
simple given. It does different things according to what we believe about it.
There is no irreducible, pristine version of the sex act and all that surrounds
it; like everything else in human life, sex is dragooned into the provision of
significance in some way or another. Everything is soaked in culture,
everything in human life is forced to have meaning.
    Sex exists in a storm of meanings. Each one of us is already and always
telling ourselves stories, working our imaginations about sex, so that it
becomes what it us for each of us. We may be making these narratives
consciously or, more likely, without conscious control.
One possible view of sex is as fuel, the source of energy for some obsession
or other. The way we think about sex energizes particular ideas for us;
whatever we think, when we have sex, we power up beliefs, we affirm some
world or other that we live in. Sex is quite literally the embodiment, the
incarnation, of an idea—either a conscious one, or one you have not made
conscious, not acknowledged and that is therefore controlling your behaviour
from hidden places.
Consider the following list of eight attitudes to sex, which includes a few
common ones and some that are less common, and is not meant to be even a
stab at completeness:

       1. Relief; to find respite from the pressure of desiring: If we dig
          back through a couple of generations’ worth of sexual
          unhappiness, we find grim expressions such as ‘to get one’s ashes
          hauled’. Here we see sex considered as a cleaning job, involving a
          basic attitude of contempt for the process of obtaining relief. That
             contempt in turn reflects resentment at being controlled by desire.
             Gratification at this level is both impersonal and desperate.
        2.   Manipulation: ‘If I have sex with [them]/promise to have sex with
             [them], then there’s money/power in it for me.’ This type of
             pattern is too widespread to merit further comment.
        3.   Co-dependent bonding: Feeling insecure in their sexual
             relationship, people often use sex to affirm their bondedness to
             the other person. You may say ‘I love you’, but you are basically
             using sex to strengthen your comfort zone.
        4.   Pleasure: The desire to have fun, to spend some time having sex
             just for its own sake. This kind of sex is also impersonal; it does
             not matter a great deal who you’re doing it with, as long as they
             fulfil a few basic criteria. This kind of sex can slide into
             consumerism, into wanting more and more impersonal sex.
        5.   The romantic ideal: The lover places his or her beloved on a
             pedestal, coming fairly close to the belief that he or she is making
             love to a deity.
        6.   Love and ecstasy: Making love because you really want to and
             have nothing but love for the other person in mind.
        7.   Consciousness: Knowing that the feeling of sex can be transmuted
             into something that increases your awareness and freedom.
        8.   Inner adventure: Enjoying sex for anything it might become.

   None of these attitudes and expectations are new, they have all been
around for many centuries. It is probable that the only value element added
by modern thought is the idea of sexual freedom predicated on informed
consent and effective contraception. This is the basis of the civilized end of
modern sexual culture.
   However, it is obvious that the above list has a value system built into it:
point one is the least conscious sexual behaviour and points four onwards are
the most. If we are going to take seriously the idea that our sexuality can be
integrated into magical or ‘spiritual’ practice, it is worth looking at what
Perennialist systems of thought say about sex, and how, if at all, such
knowledge can be made use of in the modern world.
Perennialism is the idea that all ancient cultures contain traces of a Perennial
Philosophy, at the core of which is an ideal of Awakening or Enlightenment.
Aldous Huxley’s 1945 essay (1) is a good introduction to the concept. In such
cultures, ‘Awakening’ forms the centre of the cultural mandala, the fixed
point around which everything else revolves and which everything ultimately
gets referred back to. Multiple roles for sex are acknowledged, but they are
usually rigidly delimited. Let us try to get a glimpse of how sex might be
framed according to a traditional, three- or four-part division of society, such
as still exists to some degree in India and which is visible throughout the
history of the West.
   The producer-trader caste, corresponding to Vaishyas in Hinduism and the
bourgeoisie in industrial society, are focused on production. Sex is for
reproduction, to provide more bodies to work in the family business, to
support the parents when they are old. It is also something to consume;
having more sexual partners is a sign you are doing well in a materialistic
sense. Of course, the hypocritical morality of merchant-caste sexuality means
that such pleasures have to remain secret, indulged in the privacy of one’s
thoughts and memories.
   Families in the warrior caste, corresponding to the Hindu Kshatriyas,
employ competitive breeding to avoid their genes becoming cannon fodder.
This is a Darwinian attitude to children—produce plenty, the smarter and
tougher ones will survive. Think the Lannister family in Game of Thrones.
Sex is divorced from intimacy in most cases—sexual contact in war is
degraded to rape. Some established warrior elites also formed homosexual
warrior brotherhoods. This is hardly surprising, seeing how the men of this
caste spend most of the time in each other’s company. Also, in a warrior-
ethos society, men and women are raised to be so different as to have nothing
in common except sex and reproduction. Julius Caesar exemplified just such
a value system; he was known as ‘every woman’s husband and every man’s
wife’, and a famous dictum of his was: ‘Women for childbearing, boys for
pleasure, men for true love.’
   The sage caste, Brahmins in the Hindu world, have strong rules about sex,
and some interesting ways of allowing exceptions to those rules. Patanjali
lists amongst the stages of yogic development which lead to enlightenment:
    Non-violence, realism, non-stealing, sexual non-expressiveness which
    results in the perception of spirituality (Brahman) and non-possessiveness,
    are the moral restraints. (2)
  Most commentators interpret ‘sexual non-expressiveness’ as complete
celibacy, often referred to as Bramacharya. This then forms the cornerstone
of yogas that are based on renunciation of worldly pursuits.
   More advanced historical layers of traditional sexual-spiritual lore generate
schemes that are more balanced and complete, viewing sexual desire as the
fuel for self-transformation. Such traditions as Tantric sexual yoga and Taoist
alchemy are yogas of transmutation, harnessing sexual energy in the cause of
Awakening.
   The fourth or invisible caste is the underclass, the Shudras in Hinduism.
This layer of traditional societies often included musicians, entertainers (what
an illuminating contrast to how we worship entertainers now!) and the people
who would these days be called sex workers. This tells us that the hedonic
technologies, the knowledge of how to make life more enjoyable through art,
music and sex, are preserved and nurtured by certain elements of the
underclass.
   In some traditional societies, there were some interesting links between
sexual roles in different castes. The famous Chakrapuja Tantric rite, with its
‘five elements’, may in some cases have involved high-caste Tantric adepts
having sacred sex with prostitutes, sex of an ‘illicit’ kind being taken as one
of the five tattvas or elements of the rite.
Nowadays, we live in the fragments of Tradition, and we have inherited a
strange mixture of fragments of these traditional sex roles. Refracted through
Roman Christianity, we see the most twisted, toxic version of the sage-caste’s
take on sex. The Roman Christian programme for sex is basically an
institutionalization of sexual-emotional pathology in the service of political
power. It works like this: you teach people to hate the flesh. In a few
generations, most people’s connection with their own organic integrity, their
ability to feel ‘in’ their bodies, to feel that they own their own bodily
perceptions, is shattered. People become strangers to their bodies.
   In the Roman Christian ideology, any input from the flesh is rejected as
evil. The resulting damaged individuals are torn from their roots in the
intelligence of the flesh. Such people are doubly dispossessed—denied
political power, they also no longer feel that they even own their own bodies.
This of course makes them much easier to control, just the ticket for the
decaying empire Saul-Paul designed Christianity for in the first place.
One extraordinary sexual practice did arise in the Christian era: in the
mediaeval troubadour cult of Courtly Love we see a powerful transmutation
of sex—via abstinence—into an ideal. The knight would be celibate,
dedicated to his lady back home when he went to war. The bond was
intensely erotic, as is shown by the references in chivalric poetry to the
knight’s wearing on his person some clothing of his lady.
   In Wolfram von Eschenbach’s Parzival, we read of Gamuret, Parzival’s
father:
   And a small white silken garment, a shift that the queen did wear, That had
   touched her naked body who now was his wife so fair,
   This should be his corslet's cover (3)
   This is clearly sexual alchemy, an attempt to transmute intense desire. This
transmutation feeds an invocation of the Goddess in the form of the Beloved,
with whom one’s relationship is pure and perfect love. The lover places the
beloved high above him/herself, and uses the energy of transmuted desire to
feed this ideal.
   At its most exalted, this process is close to the Tantric idea of seeing in the
beloved the form of the God or Goddess, thereby raising your consciousness
to the contemplation of deity.
   The cult of courtly love is the historical underpinning of the idea of
romantic love, which was assimilated into bourgeois society by the 19th
century and is now one of the options on our modern sexual menu, generally
in a toned-down and less ambitious form suitable for modern life.
In the modern age we have inherited a tiered menu of socio-sexual attitudes.
Modernist thinking has questioned moral codes on a basis of humanist
rationality, but most people’s sexual lives still orbit around sexual
consumerism, emotional insecurity, romantic love or a blend of these.
   One modernistic attempt to break through people’s sexual unhappiness and
complacency came from Wilhelm Reich (see for instance his Function of the
Orgasm (4)), and the so-called sexual revolution of the mid-20th century was
underpinned by his philosophy of sexual liberation leading to social change.
The way he related sexuality to social class makes for an illuminating view of
both.
   People with healthy sex lives, in Reich’s definition, experience a build-up
of sexual tension followed by a complete release in orgasm. His ideal of
‘orgastic potency’, of total release of the orgasm, he saw as being very rare,
but least poorly represented in the working class people he saw in his clinical
practice. They were more likely to be ‘orgastically potent’, to have ‘adult
genitality’, a confident access to bodily bliss. So he identified members of the
lowest social class as having the healthiest sexual lives.
   Reich’s analysis of the merchant-class, the bourgeoisie, revealed sexual
energies that were blocked by inhibition. Such people may not be ostensibly
preoccupied with sex, but at some level they were dissatisfied and
emotionally dysfunctional. They may also regard sex as something to be
consumed.
   Reich also identified another kind of sexual dysfunction, one which led to
cruelty and violence. His book The Mass Psychology of Fascism treats the
latter political movement as an aspect of the ‘emotional plague’. By this,
Reich meant the mass incidence of sexual repression. He saw the
maintenance of fascism as the propaganda of a warrior elite acting upon a
population crippled by ‘emotional plague’. (5)
   Reich’s early work was done at a time when three powerful political
principles were struggling for world domination—Capitalism, the ideology of
business (the merchant caste), Communism, the ideology of property-less
workers and peasants and the under-caste, and Fascism, with its warrior caste
values of militarism and internal social repression. The two dysfunctional
sexual conditions mentioned can be seen to correspond to the two dominant
castes of Merchant and Soldier; Reich believed that by releasing the sexual
potential of all classes, along the lines of the ‘orgastic potency’ of the
working class, a new and better society could be built, a new kind of
socialism.
The cultural layer or ‘Aeon’ of Reich’s analysis is of course Modernist,
corresponding to 4th Aeon in Peter Carroll’s Aeonics (6), and Orange Meme
in the Spiral Dynamics (7) culture model. That is why Reich’s model
resonates well with dialectical materialism; the latter is possibly the
materialist 4th Aeon’s ideology par excellence, and strongly influenced
Reich’s political stance. His view of human potentialities did not include
Awakening, and so there would be no point in trying to transmute sexual
energy—in such a worldview as Reich’s, there would simply not be anything
better to transmute it into. In his scheme, sex is released, and this letting-go
of sexual energy gets sex out of the way, as it were; it fulfils its function so
that the person can get on with the rest of their life, with the afterglow of a
great orgasm. To put it another way, Reich’s idea of sexual energy is
profoundly anti-invocation.
   Stepping back outside of a Modernist frame of reference and looking at the
eight uses of sex outlined above, it’s clear that they can be seen as
representing different ‘levels of consciousness’ or ways of grasping the
world. At the lowest end, mere sexual automatism, no consciousness at all. In
the middle, we see the ceaseless juggling of emotional states and social
imperatives that most of us are engaged in much of the time. At the top, we
see the quest for Awakening, for total liberation from conditioned thought
and behaviour.
Practice Note
The exercises in Part IV are of a different kind to those in the previous
section. Again, you will progress better if you find a teacher who is suitable
for you. However, such teachers are few and far between and as you might
expect, there are a fair number of frauds and dubious characters in the world
of sexual energy work.
   The more important point though is that if you practice internal energy
work and sexual alchemy diligently it will transform you. The experiences
you have may open you to the existential Ground Zero of your life, the Voids
which surround our fragile castles of selfhood. This view of magic places it
right where it belongs—both at the centre of human experience, the daily,
hourly spells of making we cast upon ourselves to keep up our illusions, cast
by way of telling stories about who we are and what the stuff we experience
means, and at the ragged, scary periphery of our identities, just the areas of
experience we often flee from in our story-making.
   But it is precisely in these places, soaked in confusion, doubt, uncertainty
and mortal terror that magic resides. Our Fetches, the magical beast-gods in
our family genetics, drive us to exceed, to dream, to stalk power in the
wildwoods of the Void-places.
   The experiences and techniques described here were certainly
transformative for me. Some experiences take years to integrate and fully
metabolize into the psyche. Treat such extreme Gnostic states with the
respect they are due.
References
(1) http://silkworth.net/pdf/the_perennial_philosophy.pdf
(2) Patanjali Yoga Sutras, verse 30. Find free versions online.
(3) Parzival (vol. 1 of 2), A Knightly Epic, Wolfram von Eschenback,
Translator: Jessie L. Weston. Available from gutenberg.org
(4) https://www.amazon.co.uk/FUNCTION-ORGASM-Wilhelm-
Reich/dp/0374502048
(5) See in particular Reich’s The Mass Psychology of Fascism and Listen,
Little Man!
(6) Peter Carroll’s Aeonic model is described in his book Liber Kaos.
(7) Something which starts off from very different assumptions but ends up
with an identical analysis to Carroll’s, at least for the first four Aeonic layers,
is the modification of Spiral Dynamics created by Integralist philosopher Ken
Wilber in numerous of his many books, for example, A Theory of Everything.
Chapter IV-1: Sensed Energy Currents and Centres
The two kinds of technique discussed in this chapter are circulation of
energy, which can be considered a rehearsal for control of sexual energy, and
the movement of energy between vital centres in the body, which enables the
circulating energy to be directed to specific areas of your experience. Both of
these skills will strengthen the energy flows within you and enable more
powerful transmutations of energy into extraordinary states of consciousness.
Choosing circulation patterns
Meditation on the three vessels and the circulation of energy between them
will inevitably start with athm, the easiest energy to move by will. This
produces a kind of flexing of the energies, so that they feel more fluid and
easier to direct. When you have demonstrated to yourself that you have
control over the flow of athm between the vessels, you will better be able to
entrain the denser energies of astyr which are available in enormous measure
during sex.
   Over the course of my magical life, I’ve tried a number of schemes for the
internal circulation of energy. The first model I came across, right at the start
of my magical career, was Israel Regardie’s Middle Pillar exercise (1), in
which you establish energy-centres in the form of the Sephiroth of the
Qabalistic Tree of Life, then circulate energy in rhythm with the breath. On
the inbreath, the energy is drawn upwards, from the feet up the back to the
top of the head, and on the outbreath the energy is steered down the front of
the body to the basal centre. In a final stage of the exercise, the energy is
drawn upwards through all the centres in the centre line of the body.
In qigong, this would be called a forward circulation; in that scheme, it is said
that we have a flow of energy around the whole body, which has been in
place since we were in the womb. The object of forward circulation is to re-
establish this primal flow of energy, thereby renewing the body. It is
practised in rhythm with the breath, in the same direction as the Middle Pillar
circulation, up the midline of the back of the torso on the inhale (in qigong,
this is known as the Governor Channel) and down the midline of the front of
the torso (the Functional or Conception Channel) on the exhale. Doing this
exercise until you can circulate the energy round the whole circuit without
feeling that there is any blockage is called the Small Circulation. It is one of
the foundational stages of qigong training.
My cultivation of this circulation was initially erratic, but over a few years
amounted to a completion of the circuit, so that the energy could flow easily.
In qigong, the natural extension of the Small Circulation is the Grand
Circulation, where you learn to extend qi into the legs and arms.
    One culmination of the Grand Circulation is control of the extension of qi
outside the body, via the energy centres in the palms of the hands.
    This is much the same progress of training as is discussed in Richard
Gordon’s Quantum-Touch Healing book (2). One wonders whether Gordon’s
approach, which is relatively laid-back compared to the more rigorous
prescriptions of qigong training in, for instance, Dr. Yang’s books (3), gives
rise to an incompletely-trained person, a sort of rough-and-ready user of the
same basic power that a qigong adept would wield.
    However, from the point of view of effectiveness in energy healing, I see
little evidence of this in the case of myself and of those who have undergone
only brief training in Energy Healing Breath (see Part II). A few weeks of
working with the EHB cycle and learning to entrain energy seems quite
adequate for getting good healing results.
    I am not saying that the results could not be better—that is always the
case! But what is important is to isolate and cultivate the factors that lead to
whatever kind of success we are seeking, whilst allowing that the tradition
may also contain accretions from lineages which may have used the exercises
for different purposes, with different expectations.
    For instance, all the qigong instruction manuals emphasize that all qi
circulation work should be done with the tip of the tongue touching the roof
of the mouth. This forms a link, like an electrical switch, between the
Governor and Conception Channels, which are not otherwise in contact at
their upper ends.
    Now why would it work like this? Surely, if we are dealing with some
electrical aspect of athm (see discussion in Part V about different meanings of
concepts like ‘qi’), the inner surface of the mouth would be as conductive as
the tongue? Sure, the distance for the charge to travel is longer, but not by
very much. It is hard to imagine how it would make any difference where the
tongue is in regard to bioelectrical flows in the mouth. Could the purpose of
this instruction be to increase awareness of the energy flows at a place where
they might be difficult to stay aware of, where one might lose the thread of
the circulation?
   In the circulation exercises detailed below, it is strongly suggested that you
try them both with and without the tongue posture.
Regarding energy centres, in the Middle Pillar scheme, we use five—one
around the feet, one at the crown of the head and the other three in the torso.
Derived from some Tantric scheme, the chakra model made famous by
various New Age gurus posits seven centres, five ranged up the spine, one in
the brow area and one above the head. Other models specify eight, or nine
centres; clearly, there is no absolutely correct version of esoteric anatomy,
and we are free to choose whichever scheme suits what we are trying to
achieve.
   For our purposes, the transmutation of sexual energy, the most useful
scheme utilizes just three centres; one in the lower belly, one in the solar
plexus and one in the head.

The Triple Gift and the Vessels of the Mead
To recapitulate the core Germanic myth about the three principles of
conscious life:
  They had neither breath nor wit nor life hue
  nor manner nor good looks. Odin gave them
  the breath of life, Hoenir gave them wod,
  Lothur gave them life and good looks. (4)
   The three principles are wod, athm and astyr, and it is clear that there is a
natural order in which they operate: wod, as the conscious principle, gives us
control of athm, and via athm, of astyr. Astyr is the densest kind of principle,
wod the most rarefied, and athm, meaning both the breath and the sense of
energy it entrains, connects them.
   These three principles fall naturally into a scheme of power-centres,
distributed vertically in the midline of the body. Wod is the place of the brow
centre, which makes sense—wod must surely be associated with the brain.
Athm corresponds to the central wheel, the solar plexus, and the centre in the
lower belly is the home of the densest astyr energy.
   These energy centres or vessels of the life-force naturally suggest the
mythic tale of Odin’s gaining of the Mead of Inspiration, which is brewed in
three vessels.
Back in the beginning, the Aesir, the gods of Asgard, of whom Odin is the
leader, go to war with another tribe of gods—the Vanir. Truce is eventually
called, and all the gods spit into a cauldron. From this blend of the wisdom of
the two tribes of gods, the Aesir make a man called Kvasir, who proves to be
the wisest of all beings. Kvasir wanders the world teaching until captured and
killed by two dwarves. They pour his blood into three pots, add honey and set
the pots to ferment into mead. Anyone who drinks of this mead becomes a
poet or wise person. The two dwarves continue in their murderous career,
killing a giant whose son Suttung gains from them the mead in compensation
for the death of his father. Suttung wants all the mead for himself, and for
safe keeping, deposits the three vessels deep in a mountain, in the charge of
his daughter Gunnlodh.
   After many adventures, it is here that Odin comes. He asks for some of the
mead as payment for work he does for Suttung’s brother, but to no avail. So
Odin bores a narrow passage into the mountain, shapeshifts into the form of a
snake and slips in. He deals with the giantess Gunnlodh by declaring love and
seducing her. In the throes of love for the god, she allows him a draft of the
mead, but he drinks all three vessels, shifts into the shape of an eagle, and
flies back to Asgard, with Suttung in eagle-form in hot pursuit. Odin barely
makes it back to Asgard ahead of his pursuer, and spits the mead out into
containers provided by the other Aesir, also spilling a splash out in the world,
where it becomes the ‘poet’s share’, the source of inspiration for human
poets.
This is a story involving a magical fluid which brings inspiration. Rudolf
Simek (5) glosses the word Odhroerir (the name of the Mead and of one of
the vessels) as ‘one that stimulates to ecstasy’. This magical fluid is contained
in three vessels, named Odhroerir, Son and Bodhn. Simek’s gloss for Son is
‘reconciliation’ or ‘atonement’. Others have translated it as ‘blood’. For
Bodhn, he gives ‘vessel’.
   This tale is telling us that a shift in consciousness (the stirring of the wod)
proceeds from a fluid, which is contained in three vessels. The name of the
fluid is the same as that of the first vessel, Odhroerir; we can see that this is
the highest of the three vessels. Its principle, wod (Old Norse odhr) is the
principle in humanity that is nearest to being immortal; in the myth of the end
of the cycle, the Ragnarok, very few beings survive, and one of them is the
god Hoenir, the god who, in the ensoulment of humans, gives the principle of
wod (6).
   The name of the second vessel suggests emotion and human interaction.
This would naturally form the name of the vessel in the place of the heart.
Athm is natural to this position, especially since this is where our breathing
starts from.
   The third vessel is just that, the Vessel, therefore the primal fuel which is
used to generate the energies of the higher vessels. It is the place where the
densest energies of astyr reside, before becoming transmuted into athm and
wod.
   It is also worth noting that, in the tale of the Mead of Inspiration, Odin
shapeshifts into a snake—a reptilian form resonant with the Dragon, then into
an eagle, and gains the Mead through sex.
   To recapitulate the core scheme of the energies: astyr originates in the
Bodhn vessel in the lower abdomen. It rises to Son, the central vessel near the
heart, and is transmuted into athm. This then empowers the activity of the
highest vessel, the Odhroerir, where it produces an expansion of
consciousness.
   This esoteric anatomy gives us a basis for the energy-work exercises which
follow.
Circulation between the Vessels
Circulation enables us to become more conscious of athm by entraining it.
This starts off as a kind of visualization—it will feel at first as if you are
trying to make something happen. However, if you persist, especially with
the breath, you should get an increasing sense that you are merely paying
close attention to something that is already happening. You have entrained
energy, that was already flowing, into a particular pattern.
   By doing this, you become more conscious of the circulation of athm. You
may start to notice it at other times—for instance, any time you breathe
deeply whilst moving, or when you are cold and shake yourself to warm up,
or when you feel suddenly excited.
   A very good starting point for any basic circulation is of the same kind as
the Middle Pillar circulation mentioned above. The entrainment is practised
in rhythm with the breath, up the midline of the back of the torso and over the
head on the inhale and down the midline of the face and the front of the torso
on the exhale.
   Regular practice of such a circulation will have as a minimum the
following three objectives:

        1. to increase the strength and harmony of energy sensations;
        2. to increase the depth and clarity of thought;
        3. to clear channels for and rehearse the circulation of the densest
           energies in sexual alchemy. Circulation of the energy of
           excitement helps to inhibit ejaculation whilst keeping the level of
           excitement high.

  Here is an example of such a circulation, employing the three Mead
Vessels:
Vessels of the Inner Mead
Stage 1 Practice
Sit upright, comfortably, spine near-straight (but definitely not rigid). Any
position that enables this is fine. With practice, you can do this exercise lying
down, which can be useful if attempting work on the edge of sleep, but at
first you are liable to go to trigger the postural commands for going to sleep if
you try that.
   Inhale and entrain the athm up your back. What colour is it? Violet and
blue are typical.
   Let your attention shift so that you move the athm over the top of your
head. At the end of your inhale, focus on your brow area.
   The pace here should be comfortable and slow. If you have just been
physically active or busy and are breathing fast, let yourself slow down.
   At the brow, hold your breath briefly. Then exhale, entraining the athm
down the front of your body, to end the exhale when it curls under your groin
and reaches the base of your spine.
   Repeat a few times, not too many at first until you know your way round
the inner sensations. If you are working within the Northern Mysteries, nine
times would be appropriate. Work up to a full session of fifteen to twenty
minutes.
   When you have established this circulation and know thoroughly the
sensations that happen when you do it, move on to the next stage.
Stage 2 Practice
Before the beginning of the inhale, pause and focus on the base of your spine.
Resting on that area and extending into your lower belly is the Bodhn vessel.
What colour is it? Probably a dark one—this is the realm of astyr, which
works in darkness and obscurity.
    Now, as you inhale and draw the energy up, allow yourself to pause a little
when the athm reaches the region of your heart. Focus on this area. This is
the Son vessel, and you will probably sense it as red, the colour of the blood
it is associated with.
    At the end of your inhale, pause and focus on your brow centre. Behind
your brow is the Odhroerir centre. The visual you see here may be a bright
yellow or white, or the emptiness of space.
    When this part of the practice is established, add the final stage:
Stage 3 Practice
In this part, you raise the energy up the midline of the body, filling each
centre in turn on the inhale.
  On the exhale, entrain the energy so that it sprays out from the crown of
your head and flows down over you like a fountain. As the energy flows over
you, feel it repairing and strengthening any weak areas, restoring balance.
  Repeat this circulation three times.
  Bask in the radiance of your energy body.
  With all these circulations, try them both with your tongue touching the
roof of your mouth and without. Note any differences.
A different form of this kind of exercise, and a further discussion of the
functions of the three vessels, can be found in Stephen McNallen’s book A
Method of Transcendence in the Germanic Tradition (7). McNallen also
integrates the wisdom of an Irish strain of energy work. The Celtic esoteric
tradition was even more damaged by Christianity than the Germanic, but an
extraordinary magico-poetic document does survive, in what was later known
as the Cauldron of Poesy (8). This anonymous seventh century poem details
three vessels in the body, the descriptions of which correspond so closely to
the scheme outlined above that they may as well be the same. The Cauldron
hints at spiritual exercises which utilize these three vessels. The McNallen
book is strongly recommended for those who wish to work with a Germano-
Celtic scheme of energy-work.
Reversing the Cycle
Whenever there is a ‘forward’ way of doing something such as an energy
circulation, it will be associated with good health and serene living. In that
case, you can bet that plenty of people have investigated what happens when
you do it back to front. In this section, I discuss two such reverse-patterns—a
reverse circulation and Taoist Reverse Breathing.
The Reverse Circulation
The effects of circulating massive amounts of intense energy—athm-astyr—
around the system can lead to imbalances, if any of the body’s energy
systems are already out of balance. For instance, if one is recovering from
illness, the extra blast of intense energy running through the recovering
organs can feel uncomfortable, and is unlikely to do the organ much good.
Therefore, there has to be a method for ‘cooling down’ this ‘hot’ flow. This
method is what in qigong is called the Wind Path.
   The purpose of the Wind Path is to cool down overheated major energy
channels. Dr. Yang, Jwing-Ming (9) writes:
    If the Qi flow in your Fire path is too Yang because of excitement, injury,
    sickness, or even eating poor food, your whole body will become too Yang
    when this Qi is distributed through the twelve Qi channels. This Yang Qi
    will damage your organs, and make your mind excited and scattered. The
    Wind Path can regulate the Qi circulating in your Fire Path, and
    rebalance the Qi in your body.
   Another writer, Koujiryuu (10) gives instructions for a full, reverse-
direction Small Circulation—up the front and down the back of the midline.
He warns against ‘exclusive’ use of the technique, and says that it should not
be done more than ten times in one session. Dr. Yang also mentions the
reservations of practitioners about this practice, but does not say whether he
agrees or not—the jury is out, as far as Yang is concerned. Referring to the
classics, Yang comments:
   There are very few documents which discuss this path. However, some
   discuss a portion of the complete cycle, usually from the Lower Dan tian
   up to the Middle Dan tian, and many Qigong practitioners have trained it.
   (11)
   The reasons Yang gives for doing Wind Path are rather more detailed than
those of Koujiryuu. What they amount to is a slowing-down of the energy
circulation in the two main (front and rear midline) vessels, and the raising up
of ‘Prebirth Qi (Essence Qi or Water Qi)’ which is generated in the lower dan
tian (lower vessel—similar to Bodhn) from our primal essence (jing), and
which is independent of the qi generated from food and air. This then cools
down the contaminated qi from food and air which is generated in the middle
dan tian at the solar plexus (similar to Son) before it starts to circulate.
The portion of the circulation Yang writes about—from lower belly to solar
plexus—I became familiar with through a partner’s clairvoyance, many years
ago. My partner—I shall call her K—had almost no ‘book-learning’ when it
came to energy magic, but a good deal of ‘second sight’ and a talent for
spotting exactly the right thing to do, energetically-speaking.
   At the time we were together, I was young, and did not generally bother to
prevent myself ejaculating. I once happened to mention that I felt tired after
sex, and K gazed at me, doing some skrying of my aura, and announced that I
needed to ‘pull energy upwards’.
She proceeded to show me how to do this.

       1. Sitting upright, inhale, while keeping both chest and belly still.
       2. Inhale some more, whilst pulling the lower abdomen in quite hard
          and feeling the energy move from the lower belly up the front of
          the belly, to the solar plexus area.
       3. Relax and let go.

   The effect was highly invigorating, but I am not sure what to attribute this
effect to. The energy felt brighter, sharper, more ‘metallic’ in nature, which
links to the first personal report of Reverse Breathing below. Indeed, the
breath pattern K showed me is similar to Taoist Reverse Cycle Breathing.
Tui-Na Reverse Cycle Breathing
   Reverse Cycle Breathing is part of the qigong foundational training, I am
told (12) and it is considered to be a breath which compresses energy. This
compressed athm can be used to back up a punch or to heal internally.
   To refresh our memories from Part I:
   In reverse breathing, breath is taken in using the abdomen, but the
abdomen is not allowed to expand outwards with the inhale, indeed, it is
contracted a little. Exhaling, the belly is allowed to relax and push outwards.
The basic cycle is:
       1. On the inhale, draw in the lower abdomen and raise the perineum.
          The upper rib cage does not move. This is accompanied by the qi
          entrainment of the Small Circulation or Microcosmic Orbit: Let
          the qi flow from just below the navel down the centre line of the
          body, through the perineum, up the spine to the crown, or in some
          versions all the way over the head to the tip of the nose.
       2. On the exhale, let the lower abdomen move outward and let the
          perineum lower back into place. Let the qi flow from the nose
          down centreline of the front of the body, back to just below the
          navel.
       3. At the conclusion of your session, store the qi in the lower dan
          tian, the energy centre just below the navel.

   The following are some notes from my daily practice, split into two
different sequences, corresponding to two sets of more than one year apart.
First sequence
  Done this just enough cycles to know how to do it. Still getting the
  abdominal muscle movements right.
  Did 5 minutes, the longest yet: Felt the energy come through my head at
  the end of the inbreath, lighting up my skull bones!
  Wow, powerful. I am getting the hang of lifting up the perineal floor
  without a lot of tension. This enables a smoother flow of energy round the
  first part, through the perineum and up the back.
  Now I am just getting the hang of the relaxed outbreath. This involves
  relaxing the perineum, but not too suddenly - I want to stay aware of the
  energy.
  The effect: a sharpening of the brain, I think: my eyesight seems clearer!
  This effect persists for hours after the exercise.
  5 min: Tried keeping my chest still, so that all inhalation is via the
  abdomen. This increases the sense of ‘compression’ of the energy.
  Sat quiet, with normal breath for a minute afterwards: there is a raw,
  intense energy feeling in my head.
  5mins: There is a burning rhythm in my head, like everything is being
  consumed. Exceptional sudden clarity. Images of flames, sound of
  crackling.
  Pulse is strong and slightly faster.
  This time, I am making more of an effort to keep my diaphragm still.
  Result: Less feeling of pressure in head, more a feeling of dense energy
  being distilled upwards.
  Managed to relax my diaphragm; the quality of the energy is gentler and
  clearer.
  Yes, relaxing and keeping diaphragm still seems to be the key.
   The fiery, high-energy effects may be partly the result of this kind of
breathing—qigong writers class the style as Yang—but could also result from
lack of control of some aspects of the breath, leading to the kind of effects
you get from Breath of Fire or Kapalbhati (see Part I). Eventually, I got the
hang of it and avoided these effects, but at that time I didn’t find anything
uniquely useful about the breath and was not motivated to continue practice
of it.
                                        ***
The following year, I did a series of experiments with breathing techniques
with the intention of ameliorating the advancing pain of my hip arthritis and
chronic tension in my neck. I started from the work I recorded above, but I
varied the sequence slightly until I found the variation that worked for me.
This time, I did get interesting results.
The sequence I ended up using was as follows:

       1. On the inhale, draw in the lower abdomen and raise the perineum.
          This is easier than it sounds, once you get the feel the feel of
          pulling in and up, constricting the whole of the abdominal space.
          The upper rib cage does not move.
       2. It is vitally important to pay close attention to the energy feelings
          throughout the cycle.
       3. This inhalation produces a feeling of compression in the energy, a
          little like filling up a balloon and feeling the tension of holding
          the air in it.
       4. Exhale while letting the abdomen go out and the perineum fall,
          nice and easy, no pushing.
       5. Energetically, this is the hard bit. If you don’t employ the most
          careful concentration on the energy, it will just leak out rapidly,
          like letting go of the balloon, and you will get no effects at all.
          This is probably where I was going wrong on the first sequence.
       6. If you pay close attention to the feel of the energy at the precise
          moment you let go of your belly and perineal tension, you can
          direct it to wherever you want in your body.

   This is where it gets interesting—either you can follow the instructions
given above and let it settle into the lower dan tian (Bodhn) or you can use it
for self-healing. The effects can be quite dramatic—this is a very powerful
breath, which compresses energy and delivers it to where it is needed, once
you get the hang of directing it.
The reports below are all examples of using Reverse Breathing in this way.
Second sequence
  Sitting upright, I cannot turn my neck to the side without considerable pain
  and stiffness. I focus on the pain and turn my head carefully to the left as I
  breathe in, using Reverse Breathing. It feels like I've sucked in all this
  energy but everything's frozen, paused. Then I breathe out, and this is the
  hard bit. After a few tries I get it - keeping my focus carefully on my neck
  as I let my abdominal muscles relax outwards and exhale.
  The hard bit is keeping full awareness of the area I wish the energy to go
  to all the way through the first part of the exhale, because it’s quite a
  sudden rush - there it is, and either I got it or I didn’t.
  This time I got it. Amazing flood of energy to my neck. I turn it, and it is
  much easier, much less stiff.
  That was just one single breath. A full session produced relief which was
  still noticeable the next day.
                                       ***
  Walking, the hip pain starts. I stand still, tune out my environment and
  practise Reverse Breathing, directing the energy into my hip joints.
  Dramatic improvement, which lasts a few minutes.
  Repeating the sequence repeats the improvement.
   Reading these two sets of accounts, it is clear that I was working two
different patterns, without realising it. Which just goes to show how easy it is
to get these patterns wrong, or confuse yourself. Only consistent practice over
months, followed by assimilation and reflection, then further experiment,
gives us any chance of finding out what is really going on. In this case, the
Reverse Breathing, I am confident that my second set of experiments got me
onto the correct version, which delivered the energy changes promised. The
first amounted to some kind of mixup between the Reverse Breathing
sequence and one of the Powerful Pranayamas.
References
(1) See, for instance, Israel Regardie’s The Middle Pillar: The Balance
Between Mind and Magic, 1998.
(2) Richard Gordon - Quantum-Touch: The Power to Heal, 2006.
(3) For instance https://www.amazon.co.uk/d/cka/Qigong-Health-amp-
Martial-Arts-Exercises-Meditation/1886969574
(4) In the Poetic Edda. See James Chisholm translation of the Edda,
http://www.heathengods.com/library/poetic_edda/ChisholmEdda.pdf
(5) Rudolf Simek - Dictionary of Northern Mythology, D.S. Brewer, 1993.
(6) Kevin J. Wanner - Cunning Intelligence in Norse Myth. Fascinating study
of the limits of sovereignty in Odin’s kingship. Originally part of a book, but
now available online.
(7) Stephen A. McNallen - ‘A Method of Transcendence in the Germanic
Tradition’. Do a search for his blog and this book will be found there as a free
edition.
(8) Erynn Rowan Laurie’s The Cauldron of Poesy develops a working
method from the poem’s descriptions of the vessels and their qualities. It is a
free book available online.
(9) https://www.amazon.co.uk/d/cka/Qigong-Health-amp-Martial-Arts-
Exercises-Meditation/1886969574
(10) http://forums.vsociety.net/index.php?topic=20963.0
(11) Dr Yang, Jwing-Ming, The Root of Chinese Qigong.
(12) With particular thanks to Paul Mansveld for fruitful discussion of qigong
matters.
Chapter IV-2: Energy Alchemy:
The Dragon–Eagle Transmutation
The principle of the transmutation of energy can be applied in another way—
that of making an internal version of the Mead of Inspiration. The Mead was
originally made from the union of two great principles—the intelligence of
the two tribes of gods, the Aesir and the Vanir. In a kind of sensed-energy
inner analogy with the Mead process, we can mix two great principles—
which we experience as inner energies—and combine them into an inner
Mead.
   All pairs of principles have features in common; let’s start with male and
female.

Lord and Lady—the Inner Male and Female Principles
The Germanic languages preserve a division of sex archetypes that resonates
closely with the Indian branch of the Indo-European mysteries, and give rise
to quite a different picture than, for instance, the division preserved in the
Mediterranean cultures. In Tantra, the power of life and magic is Shakti,
which is a female principle. In gendered Germanic languages, the words for
sun are female and for moon, male—e.g. die Sonne, der Mond in German.
This depicts a reality in which all the power and energy that makes life
possible comes from the female side, represented as the solar force, the sun
which is the herald of life in the Northern lands, not the scorching killer of
the Egyptian desert. The sun-wheel, or swastika, is therefore a female sign,
the whirling energy of the manifest world, and the point at the centre is the
still point of consciousness around which the energies of creation spin. In
Tantra, this is identified with Shiva.
This division of sexes is also echoed in the Anglo-Saxon roots of the words
Lady and Lord: the lady is the hlaefdige, which breaks down into ‘loaf-
kneader’, the Lord is hlaford or hlāfweard, ‘loaf-ward’. Here, the homely
domestic image is of the Lady doing the primary processing of the life-force,
the ‘bread’, and the Lord is warding or keeping the premises in which this
occurs. In other words, the female force is that of life-energy, the male force
that of a task which wards or watches that energy.
Any association of this cosmic gender-patterning with mundane gender-roles
is the kind of thing that a mind constricted by a painful degree of literalism,
such as we find at the rigid, unimaginative end of Traditionalist thinking, will
jump to as an easy source of support for conservative gender politics. Such
thinking is irrelevant to this discussion. These are abstract principles, only
remotely connected by analogy to the lives of females and males of our
species.
Internally, we experience the power-Shakti-Solar force as desire, organic
necessity. The Lunar, ‘masculine’ quality is the cool machinery of the
conscious mind, limiting and still. This quality gives a central, focusing stead
to the surging life-energy and thereby enables both principles to become fully
conscious. These two powers combine in inner work to form a third principle,
just as, in the Mead story, the two principles of the Vanir’s earthy wisdom
and the celestial consciousness of the Aesir are wedded to form a third
mighty power—the Mead of Inspiration.
   This leads us to a method of working with the Mead myth. By combining
the Lord and Lady energies inwardly, we can generate an Inner Mead.
   The combined energies—or rather, modes of awareness, because they stem
from different regions of our experience, are not to be understood so much as
male and female principles in a sexual sense, but as two primary aspects of
all our possible fields of awareness—visceral power and observer
consciousness. The transformed energies of this preparation are based in
saliva, again echoing the myth via the Kvasir episode.
Objectives
What aims might we have in doing this kind of work?
Intense ESC or magical gnosis:
   These exercises can be used as to explore intense and powerful states of
consciousness, or as a prelude to actual magical work.
Rehearsal for Sexual Alchemy:
   This work can be seen as a rehearsal for transmuting the immense energies
of an intense, conscious sex act. Some familiarity with the feel of different
kinds and phases of energy is enormously helpful, as is practice in the use of
breath together with conscious will to steer the energies where you want
them.
Creation of an Energy Elixir:
   The Inner Mead, formed as spittle, is swallowed. What you are swallowing
is packed with energy, is a packet of magical force. You can programme an
intent into the Elixir, so that when you swallow it, that energy gets directed to
some part of you or your experience or elsewhere, into a spell.
Creation of a Healing Elixir:
  This working is easy to adapt to a work of self-healing. The Mead, when
swallowed, brings the energy to whatever part of you needs it.
Creation of a Sexual Elixir:
  The energies of sex can be used to carry a magical intention, as in Sexual
Sorcery above, but can also be condensed into the sexual fluids. Both lovers
can hold the intention while circulating the energy then, when orgasm occurs,
with ejaculation, the energy floods into the sexual fluids. These can then be
consumed—see Chapter IV-3.
Invocation:
  You can circulate the inner energy whilst performing an inner invocation.
Two of the co-workers in the Arcanorium course reports below mention this
use of it.
General well-being:
   All students and co-workers reported very positive states arising from this
work. You can do it just to feel good! See the final comment by P below.
In order to perform such a working, we need to consider what dynamic
principles in the psyche we can use to invoke primal power and
consciousness.
   The model chosen here is based on Norse mythology, in particular the
stories of the cosmic tree, Yggdrasil, gleaned from the Eddas, the great 13th
century Icelandic tales. The tree is the human body, sensed from within, its
powers and centres of consciousness arranged up a central, vertical axis. This
model does of course have a good deal in common with the chakras models
of Indian lore, and I shall be using it in a similar way—as a framework on
which to build sensed-energy exercises.

The Tree and the Dynamic Forces of the Energy-Body
The myth of the tree Yggdrasil is explicated in Bright From the Well (1), but
to recap briefly: In Grímnismál of the Elder Edda, we read:
  An eagle sitteth on Yggdrasil's limbs,
  whose keen eyes widely ken;
  'twixt his eyes a fallow falcon is perched,
  hight Vethrfolnir, and watcheth. (2)
   The eagle is the self in its empowered, magical form. The falcon or hawk is
the animal self of both major goddesses, Freya and Frigg, referring to their
visionary powers. The hawk that sits between the eagle’s eyes can be seen as
the observing self. Both the eagle and the hawk are features of wod, both are
nourished by Odhroerir.
   The eagle and the hawk sit upon the Tree, which is the energy-body.
Around the roots of our being coils the dragon, Nidhogg. The dragon is the
force of life and death, coiled half-asleep at the base of the spine. It is the
Norse equivalent of the serpent-goddess Kundalini in Hindu Tantra. The
dragon is the giver of life, and it also deals in death. The dragon-force is the
source of the feeling of being alive and in a body. It corresponds to the
feeling of astyr, in its stead in the Bodhn vessel. Life and death are always
close together for the dragon, which is why closeness to death makes us feel
intensely alive. It is the dynamic aspect of the raw, untransformed energy of
astyr.
   On and around the central trunk of the tree live two other kinds of being.
Four harts nibble at the tree, depleting its energy. This central area of the tree
is associated with the central Son vessel. The energy of athm, transmuted
from astyr, is centred here, but is subject to continual depletion by the
attrition of everyday life.
   The squirrel Ratatosk is the conscious mind’s internal monologue,
endlessly running up and down, endlessly worried by the intimations of chaos
and death arising from the realm of the dragon.
   These beings, particularly the dragon, the eagle and the hawk, form the
basis of workings which raise the dragon-force, transforming it into the
magical power of the Eagle. This transformation is equivalent to the raising
of kundalini in Tantric yoga.
   The key to this transmutation is conscious awareness, and this is supplied
by the hawk. The starry-eyed falcon is called Vedhrfölnir, and is the
observing self which, as any meditator will tell you, is a deeper layer of
selfhood than anything we commonly identify with. The name Vedhrfölnir
has been translated as ‘storm-bleached’; we can imagine a vanishing
perspective point at the core of the mind, a place that is empty of qualities, a
self that can only witness, and cannot help but do so.
   This transcendent viewpoint is the mechanism by which the dragon is
raised to full consciousness. The dragon, raised in ecstasy, now achieves its
fully-awakened form as the Eagle-Giant Hraesvelg, the sensation of the life-
force raging through us while fully conscious.
   Hraesvelg means ‘corpse-gulper’, referring to the way that awareness of
the body as mere flesh is swallowed up in the ecstasy of the risen Dragon-
Eagle force. Nidhogg drinks the blood of the dead and eats corpses—this
symbolism hints at how close are the concepts of Nidhogg, the coiled dragon,
and Hraesvelg, the arisen form of the eagle.
   This dynamic tension of opposites—the transcendent and the life-
embracing—generates a circuit of higher and lower consciousness in which
they both exceed their normal limits. This is the magical super-consciousness
that the magician seeks to develop.

Development of the Dragon-Eagle Work
The working method given below is one of the simplest forms and consists
essentially of four stages.
   The first stage is simply to remind yourself of the ever-present nature of
the observer principle. This can be done by any exercise which requires the
exercise of the observer faculty.
   This stage can be as brief as a pathworking which prompts you to identify
with more than one of your selves, or as lengthy as a full Connected
Breathwork session. This is called the Work of the Hawk.
   The second stage involves any technique which raises the power of the
Dragon. This will generally be the longest part of the working, and can take
many forms. The form given below involves overbreathing and shaking.
   Sex is an excellent source of this energy, and any conscious (as distinct
from automatic) sex act can readily be framed as a performance of this
working. Dancing can be used and, for those who get on with it, spinning.
   Clearly, we are talking energetic pursuits rather than sitting meditation.
   The third stage is when we feel the aroused Dragon energy to be
sufficiently intense to begin to transmute it. This is where some practice in
circulation is very useful, as is the discipline of sensing energy in different
parts of yourself so that you can take care not to overload some part of you,
for instance your head, but keep the energy circulating, giving it a chance to
balance itself naturally.
   At some stage, the Eagle will announce itself by inner sensations.
   These may include light-headedness, euphoria, a feeling of flows of power,
time dilation and various kinds of increased awareness.
   The fourth stage is the making of the Inner Mead. Saliva is gathered in the
mouth and imbued with magical energy before being swallowed.
   In this way, you are drinking a sacred draught, sending transmuted and
transforming energies to whatever part of your experience you wish to
influence.

Ritual Instructions
The Work of the Hawk: The Observer
Use any method which makes you aware of your Observer faculty.
   One way is to cultivate awareness of a point in the head, typically a few
inches back from the brow, from which you will watch the movements of the
energies in you.
The Work of the Dragon
This is the evocation phase, in which you are working with physical and
emotional energy. Stand and shake, let the power get loose, shake and shiver.
    If you are working out of doors, let the cold come inside you and let
yourself shiver with the power of it. Stamp your feet, feel the solidity of the
earth as power, rising through you. Feel the life-in-death of the dragon-seed
or dragon-egg in your belly, feel the wetness and heat of your flesh. This
phase of the working could consist of dancing to music with a driving
rhythm.
    Feel the Dragon force through your sexuality, through your fear, through
your love, your greed, your anger, everything and anything that gets you
worked up. This part of the working can be framed as a way of using difficult
emotional states, transforming them into something useful.
    Circulate the force round and round your body.
    All that matters is intensity. When you feel a desire to move, go along with
it. To shake, to crawl, to form your body into the way it wants to go, follow
only the dictates of the pleasure-energy in you, your guide to the life-death
force of the Dragon.
Raising the Dragon Eagle
This is an invocation stage. When the time feels right, let the energy of the
Dragon rise up within you. Circulate the power around the body. Split your
attention so that you are simultaneously aware of the bright, wind-bleached
realm in the head, and the surging power of the body-energy.
   Feel the dual principles of Hawk and Dragon simultaneously, feel them
creating a third being. Feel the power of the risen Dragon meeting the gaze of
the Hawk. Feel the Eagle forming.
   As the ecstasy of the Eagle surges through you, become aware of the inner
surfaces of your mouth. Feel the energy flowing through those surfaces. You
may wish to touch your tongue to the roof of your mouth, to close the gap in
your circulation.
The Making of the Inner Mead
  Feel the streams of force blending as they flow through your mouth. Rub
  your tongue on the inner surfaces of your mouth. Let saliva form. Hold it
  in your mouth.
  Feel the energy of athm flowing through the saliva. Make the Mead in
  your mouth.
  Let the energy of it build up, build up, build up, until it feels like the Mead
  is saturated with energy.
  Then swallow it.
  Feel the power coursing through you, going to whatever part of your
  experience you directed it to.
   Since 2007 I have experimented with various forms of this working. The
first time I worked with it in an open group was at the Shamania Festival in
August 2007. This was a Psytrance dance event, not a magical meeting
(despite the name—but the presenter was keen on presenting some magical
elements to the dance fans) so I simplified the working some more. The
Hawk section was done by talking everyone through a twenty-minute
Connected Breathwork session, to induce awareness of inner states, to
cultivate the observer position and to raise some energy. The Dragon part was
done with stamping and shaking, suggesting to participants that they invoke
intense emotion. Because the participants were inexperienced in energy work,
the Inner Mead was replaced with the passing round of a sacramental wine.
   It was instructive to see how far this kind of working can be stripped down
and still work. The Shamania group—about fifteen people—certainly seemed
to get a lot out of it at the time.
   In 2008 I designed a longer and more complex version of the working,
involving the use of galdor (rune-song) to invoke the Hawk, Dragon and
Eagle. This is the version published in Bright From the Well. I worked this
version both with a group of Chaos Magicians and with a group of Northern
Mysteries practitioners, all experienced in magic. What I learned from these
workings was that for the Hawk part, the invocation of the observing faculty,
it is not necessary to spend twenty minutes doing connected breathwork
(unless of course you want to, as part of the overall raising of consciousness).
Any technique that makes you aware of the observing faculty can be used.
For example, contemplating the different parts of the self and identifying with
each in turn can be used for the Hawk consciousness. In fact, there is really
no need to worry about the Hawk perspective, especially if you are
experienced in meditation.
   In 2012 I coordinated a research group, working with the following version
of the Dragon-Eagle material in the form of a course at Arcanorium College.
The reports from that group were highly inventive, and show that the working
can be worked up into all kinds of interesting magics. Highlights from those
reports are given below.
The Dragon-Eagle course at Arcanorium College
The context of these reports is that we were using the energies of the Dragon-
Eagle work for a fairly open-ended transformation of consciousness, for
inspiration, and for magical power.

  J: I find the mead created to be a very healing and empowering energy, it
  is however/seems a more refined energy which is more difficult to
  feel/sense than the Dragon. Dragon energy is easier to feel than Hawk, the
  combined energy is harder than both. I need to try invoking a deity into it.
  I find use of the galdors very good links to the energies and states.
  I am finding it difficult however to hold both points of view of energy and
  unite them - i.e. moving the dragon and focussing on the hawk. It reminds
  me of a Druidic meditation technique I heard of, translated as 'forked
  attention'… I guess more I do it easier it will become.
  The process reminds me too of various yoga texts I have read which speak
  of making the amrita (nectar) in Hindu traditions, created around the
  throat chakra via kundalini (dragon). It also reminds me of wiccan blade
and chalice (blade as the hawk - chalice as the eagle) - I wonder if two
partners could do this in the tantric sense - their combined energy as the
deity … or an older, Proto-Indo-European sky deity uniting with earth
mother deity… It reminds me too of an old Victorian occult text on energy
- AUB (dragon), AUD (hawk) creating AUR (OR) energy when combined -
two opposing energies meeting to create the third.
I’ve noticed that once the mead is created and swallowed I have an intense
energy sensation in throat/solar plexus area, as if I'd swallowed strong
alcohol, which makes me think this is why they used the symbolism of
mead because of the similarity.
I'd imagine that sigils drawn in saliva (symbolic mead) will be magically
potent.
… and how about invocation with this technique? Besides invoking say a
healing force into the mead, I've found before swallowing the saliva-mead
delivering an invocation to a favourite god form results in a very quick
manifestation of said god form. One favourite of mine led to me
automatically assuming said god form … and a rapid shift into that
awareness. By conventional methods I'd need much more time and focus to
do this.
                                      ***
O: I'm using the Dragon Eagle working in conjunction with Kite's
Oracular class as part of my daily observances. My familiarity with the
Microcosmic Orbit meditation [of qigong] makes the Hawk portion come
naturally. My proficiency with Seething [this refers to prolonged shaking,
a technique used to raise athm] has the Dragon part coming quite easily
too - though often a bit too easily or too intensely, and I have to watch I
don't crash into something or shake myself into a headache.
The combination of the two tends to bring on the Inner Mead quite quickly,
so I typically stay with this until the Inner Mead is made thrice. It's during
this phase I pull out the Oracular bits for Kite's class.
The similarities between this body alchemy and the inner alchemy of the
qigong I've practiced are many, and I recently had a Craniosacral worker
comment on the intense store of Qi in my lower Tan Tien, which is now a
product of the Dragon Eagle Working as well as all that old Qi Gong.
                                    ***
Z: Session was as follows:
Sang ULS(e)HAI - 36 times. Noting the 'seats' of dragon and eagle in
respective positions.
10 minutes resting in Hawk position watching thoughts or not watching
thoughts. Just watching, looking.
Some mental sinking had occurred by the end. Began shaking, laughter at
nothing bubbled up from wherever a few times. Felt I liberated quite a bit
of stagnant energy by the end (about 10 minutes)
Placed attention at base of spine for in breath. Recited Ihwaz, visualized
dragon moving up. At peak visualized hawk moving down to sound of
sowilo. These images only came after about 5 minutes and made it seem
like a game of 'tag' between these two forces, chasing each other tails like
Ouroboros. Some bliss and some emotions were released during this too.
10 minutes total.
By the end of this some spittle had formed in the mouth. Sang ULSEHAI
into this internally for a while then swallowed it.
Felt both simultaneously relaxed and energized by this practice.
                                     ***
P: […] This felt very powerful, the transcendent ever watchful Hawk, and
the raw visceral Dragon combining to create a being with the best of both
worlds, exhilarating! […] As the risen Dragon Eagle I circulated the
energy for a while to create the inner Mead. I then swallowed the mead
and stored the energy just below the navel, (the lower energy centre of the
Taoist system).
I have performed the ritual another two times since I last posted. Both
sessions went well, improving each time as I become more familiar with
the ritual, especially the invocations. I feel that the circulation of energy
whilst holding an invocation is an excellent way to strengthen the
invocation. For me one of the keys to successfully holding an invocation is
doing something as the invoked entity, and the energy circulation fits this
purpose well. I plan to practice energy circulation with other invoked
beings. I suspect that an invocation of Odin in particular as the master of
önd will work well with this method.
It seems to me from my practice so far that the invocation of the dragon
and hawk can both be seen as existing on a continuum. What I mean by
this is that when one invokes the hawk for example, the "purest" form of
the hawk is the observing self, devoid of any characteristics other than
observation. We can also work with a form of the hawk that has more
characteristics, such as imagining ourselves as the hawk with our feathers,
talons and such, even invoking Odin in hawk form. I know the hawk is
more associated with Freya than Odin, but an Aesiric rather than Vanic
hawk suits our purposes here, and Odin has been known to borrow Freya's
hawk form. I suspect that variation like this will add depth and detail to
the ritual on an individual level.
… I think a variation with Odin and Freya as the two invoked Gods as
representatives of the Aesir and Vanir to form Kvasir would work
particularly well.
With regard to the work of the hawk, I think that for me the hawk definitely
represents the ideal transcendent observer, and in many systems this is the
state that is aimed for to train in as a more or less permanent state of
awareness. I suspect that this desire is related to either the tendency of
some systems to regard the physical world as illusion or suffering, and the
body as evil or less perfect than the spiritual. I much prefer the path of the
dragon eagle, where the flesh is equal to the spirit, and the two paths are
combined to produce something greater than either. The dragon eagle to
me represents the ideal magical state to aim for, one that I never quite
attain as that would imply and end point to an ongoing quest.
Today I thought I would try something new. I regularly practice a qi
energy-ball-moving meditation which involves expanding and contracting
qi energy-balls three times in front of the three energy centres of the body
whilst circulating energy in the microcosmic orbit. Today I incorporated
the Dragon Eagle working into this practice. I first invoked the Hawk […]
then as the Hawk I circulated the energy and expanded and contracted the
energy balls. I then invoked the Dragon […] and circulated the energy and
expanded and contracted the energy balls. I then invoked both the Hawk
and the Dragon […] and then combined them. I mixed the two together for
a while, circulating the energy until I felt that the new being the Dragon-
Eagle had been created. As the risen Dragon-Eagle I then circulated the
energy and expanded and contracted the energy balls. At the conclusion of
the practice I collected and stored the energy/mead at the lower abdomen
energy centre.
A few things I noted were firstly that the Dragon seemed very interested in
the energy ball sequence, probably as it was something new and
interesting that it had not felt before. Also, as the Dragon Eagle I felt
enormous, really gigantic, the first time I have really felt this giant aspect
during the ritual. I also felt very strongly the presence of the newly created
being, and the name Kvasir kept on coming into my mind.
All in all, a very successful working, and I am looking forward to
performing it again.
I think that a variation on the Dragon Eagle routine will work amazingly
well for combining multiple Runic energies together to create bindrunes. I
would do this by vibrating the Rune galdor and then circulating the Runic
energy for as long as necessary to invoke the Rune strongly. I would then
invoke another Rune the same way and mix the two together by circulating
their energies together around the body. If my previous experience with
the DE working is any guide, the repeated mixing of the energies will
result in a spontaneous creation of the bindrune energy. This energy could
then be further circulated or used in the energy ball technique to increase
its strength and then directed inward or outward as needed.
Another way this routine could be adapted is for psychological self-
healing. One could do this by invoking the Hawk, and then invoking a
particular state that one finds distressing in the place of the Dragon. The
mixing, combining and circulation of the energies of these two states
should result in a third state which provides a new perspective on the
originally distressing state.
One can use the method of mixing of two invoked energies to create a third
to combine any qualities that one desires. I love the idea of combining two
  things together to create something that has the qualities of both, and then
  something extra as the whole is greater than the sum of the parts. Some of
  the ideas I had of invocations to combine would be Odin and Freya, Odin
  and Frigg to create Balder, Odin (he gets around) and Gridhr to create
  Vidhar, Jedi and Sith (Star Wars Nerd alert), strength and gentleness, etc.
  etc.
  For me the appeal of Dragon-Eagle working is that it addresses
  transcendentalism and illumination whilst being firmly rooted here in
  Midgard... or Hel if you like. The strength of the working is that it is
  simple in theory but far-reaching in practice. So much so that I feel a brief
  course could never do it justice. So maybe a limitation as well.
  As I mentioned in a previous post, I've spent some time anchoring hawk
  and dragon consciousness as separate workings and associating with
  galdr. Vipassana-style mindfulness meditation for minimum 20 minutes
  seems to work for the Hawk. The Dragon, however, can be a bit more fun.
  16-18 hour fasts prior seem to wake up some animal hunger combined
  with sexual excitation, forceful breathwork and occasionally rage are
  probably my quickest routes. […] In any case, there needs to come a point
  where aroused libido (dragon consciousness) can be objectified and used
  as fuel […] I'm viewing it as an ongoing work that generates greater joy,
  freedom and spontaneity
The Dragon-Eagle transmutation is the basis of one of the more written-about
sexual magic techniques—the formation of elixirs from sexual fluids. This
kind of technique is discussed in the next chapter.
References
(1) http://www.chaotopia.com/publications/
(2) From Grímnismál of the Poetic Edda, verse 32, translated by Lee M.
Hollander, 1962.
Chapter IV-3: The Alchemy of Sexual Desire
Once in my youth I had the great good fortune to stumble into a massive
learning experience about sexual energy. This occasion involved LSD.
   …More than ever before, I feel like my flesh is molten, like a fluid
   suspended in a net of energy. It seems that this is a more ‘real’ way to
   perceive my being in the flesh than the idea of a body; I am not a body, I
   am the sense of energy, flowing, rippling, moving up and down as I lie and
   breathe. I don’t settle easy with this at first, it is something of a tightrope
   walk, like this stage of acid often is. But tonight I am lucky - I am in good
   company and we are able to enjoy each other.
  We are lying side by side. In a low voice, somewhat surprised, she
  complains that her belly is cramping. She is asking me to help; she
  indicates where the cramping is. I place my hand a couple of inches above
  that area. I see the muscles of her lower abdomen rippling in waves.
  I do not know what to look for, or what I might be supposed to feel, but I
  am witnessing something I have never seen before, this spontaneous
  pulsing in someone’s flesh. It’s not an electric charge, it’s not something
  projecting from the surface of her body, but something deep in her flesh
  that is working of its own accord.
  I do not know what to expect, or what I can do. I am nineteen years old,
  naïve about esoteric energies, and drenched in acid. The nearest I’ve ever
  been to energy magic is reading Doctor Strange comics. I want to help; I
  watch the surface of her belly. Maybe the locked-in rhythm of the cramped
  muscles can be dispersed somehow…?
  Then suddenly I know what to do: I suspect that imagination alone will
  cause the flesh-waves to move differently. My hand slightly above her skin,
  I just stroke the waves upwards, stroke them up her belly, up her chest… I
  see the rippling break up and shift… Then I stroke the waves up towards
  her head…
  As my fingers brush her brow, she gasps, ‘Eagles, I see eagles…’ The
  rippling has stopped. The muscular spasms have transmuted into vision
  and thought…
Practising Sexual Alchemy
What is sexual alchemy? Seen through the lens of the three-fields energy
model outlined in the Part IV Introduction, it is the use of will to change the
way the densest kind of energy flows. In terms of the effects on our
consciousness, sexual alchemy is the use of the will to ride on the dragon of
lust, feeing ourselves from its dominance whilst thoroughly enjoying it.
   Taoist sexual alchemy is based on the conversion of jing into qi, making
that energy available for other functions, such as healing yourself, energizing
and revitalizing the brain. In order to have plenty of energy to work with,
some of this work is done in a state of sexual arousal.
   What goals might we have?
Better sex:
Control of sexual energy means you can have sex for longer, for a start. It is
also possible to make it feel deeper and richer.
   There are of course many ways to adapt and refine sexual acts, to get more
depth or sweetness or power. I leave most of the details to your imagination,
dear reader, but here are a couple of things worth trying: breath linkage and
energy entrainment. Synchronize your breathing with your partner’s, and
imagine the flows of energy rising up your back, mixing with your partner’s,
falling down your frontline. Or the other way; variations on energy
circulation are discussed in Chapter IV-1.
   You can also breathe in each other’s outbreaths; this can have a
delightfully dizzying effect.
   Doing this kind of thing, the least you will experience is a deepening of
contact and focus between you and your lover. Or you can turn into deities.
Invocation:
The deepening of intimacy, this deeply personal thing, shades paradoxically
into the sheer impersonality of sex, when it gets cosmic, when God/dess and
God/dess are the only beings present.
   You have to be high to be able to do this. The high comes from suspended
eroticism, doing it until your mind, to use an old term, is blown, your
mundane individuality sacrificed on the altar of Love and replaced by
someone who both is and is not you. Your lover sees you as God/dess; you
see your lover likewise.
   This is the aim of Invocation. You can work with whatever mythological
deities exemplify best for you the archetypal qualities of male and female.
   This kind of work fits in well with ejaculatory sex, where you produce a
fluid elixir to consume.
More frequent sex:
This is mainly a male issue; in our youth, an ejaculation may exhaust our
sexual energy for minutes or hours; it may be days as we get older. So control
of ejaculation can be very useful.
Sexual sorcery:
This is where we use the energies, the feeling of intensity and the shifts in
consciousness during sex to do magical spells.
   What kinds of spells you find acceptable here is a big question of personal
taste. I myself am not fond of using sex for most forms of magic; it seems
like using something immensely complex for rather basic work, like using a
tablet computer to dig the garden. If that thought does not bother you, I
would still advise caution in deciding what areas of magic you are willing to
have linked to your sexuality. For instance, cursing would be absolutely out
of the question for me.
   For me, the magical areas that resonate well with sex are:
Telepathy experiments:
It’s worth trying this both when your lover is present and when they are not.
In the latter case, agree a time, pleasure yourselves and then check what your
experiences were like. You might want to hold particular images in your
mind and see if you can transmit and receive them.
   This kind of thing shades into:
Dream programming:
Images or themes intended to enter your dreams so that you and your lover
can dream together can be invoked while you are having sex.
   When your lover is far away, this kind of magic can make remote sex even
more fun. You can agree on a time to pleasure yourselves, making remote
contact through your imagination. Alternatively, you can engage in magical
phone sex, feeding images to each other down the airwaves. (Hands-free sets
have more uses than just driving). As soon as possible before sleep is best, so
that you can fall into dream while the images are still being processed in your
mind.
Scrying:
Prolonged arousal and exhaustion can both be used for scrying.
   As with most sexual sorcery, you might want to be careful about the kind
of issues you are scrying around. Politics and war don’t mix well with sex, at
least not for me.
   It can be good to play with scrying purely with images—so that one of you
invokes the situation you wish to investigate, and the other acts as scryer,
paying attention in a pre-agreed time span to any images that arise. This kind
of work is fairly traditional, working as a pair, one magician and one
clairvoyant, like John Dee and his scryers (though there is no evidence that
he used sex to get them into a magical state!) One of the good things about
this technique is that at least one of the partners in the sex act does not have
to know anything about the divination issue, and the images that arise can
then be interpreted later, without their meanings overlaying your sexual
contact.
Visionary states:
Gazing into the eyes of your beloved whilst in sexual ecstasy has to be one of
the best things life offers. It can also be intensely inspiring; images, sounds,
words arise in ecstasy. These can be spoken or turned into sound or
memorized for later creative work.
   There is a potential for adding psychedelic sacraments to the mix for this
kind of work, but this is potentially hazardous. Many people find that high-
dose psychedelics do not mix at all well with sex, unless you are a very
experienced psychonaut and also have a close and loving bond with your
partner, so that you really care for each other.
Inner energy healing:
The great floods of energy available during sex can be used to target sick
areas of the body. This is something that requires care, or you can overload
sick organs. See my notes in Chapter IV-1 on cooling down energy flows.
   This work shades into the work of the Mead, in Chapter IV-2. You can
incarnate the intention into either an Inner Mead, or into mixed sexual fluids,
which are then consumed.
And finally:
Opening up to any inner, magical potentials of sex you might have missed.
To Come or Not To Come: Suspending sexual release
Traditional health and energy teachings tend to recommend sexual abstinence
or, in their more sophisticated texts, retention of semen for men, and
exercises designed to reduce menstrual flow in women. The loss of semen or
blood is seen as disastrous for one’s health, for energy work and for spiritual
progress.
   The reason for this recommendation is that the production of semen and
blood are seen as a function of Original Jing, the complement of raw,
unprocessed vitality-essence we gain at conception, and which is steadily
depleted by the stresses, strains and follies of everyday life until we are left
with none and we die.
   It is hard to know what to make of that idea in the face of medical-
scientific thinking. If we compiled a database of people over 100 years old,
their sexual history and their genetics, we might just be able to test it.
It is worth considering Wilhelm Reich’s teachings on orgasm, because they
are, at least on the surface, quite opposite to traditional notions of
withholding of ejaculation.
   I came of sexual age in the 1960s, amidst the so-called Sexual Revolution.
Widespread, reliable contraception had finally detached the sex act from the
raw biology of reproduction. Young people were becoming much freer with
their explorations of sex; long before I ever had sex with anyone else, I, in
common with nearly all my contemporaries, embraced the zeitgeist—the
ideal of sexual freedom, in a spirit of hopeful anticipation.
   I was in my mid 20s before I realized that I could control ejaculation. Once
some degree of control of sexual automatism was gained, the whole sexual
landscape looked a lot more interesting. No longer was there just arousal and
release, but other possibilities too, if only the massive lengthening of the pre-
orgasmic pleasure phase.
   This learning of how to inhibit orgasm was at odds with what my friends
and I were reading at the time—Wilhelm Reich’s The Function of the
Orgasm (1). Reich wrote that the problems of the world such as militarism
and authoritarianism were the results of people’s sexuality getting blocked,
dammed up behind muscular walls of ‘character armour’. He claimed that,
when people became ‘orgastically potent’—i.e. when they were able to
experience what Reich saw as the most complete kind of orgasm—they
would cease to be violent and authoritarian, and society would be
transformed. This is what interested my generation about Reich.
   Reading Reich, we were digging back into the foundations of the Sexual
Revolution, a phrase coined by Reich, something he hoped would arise and
dissolve the bonds of misplaced sexual energy and lead to a better world.
Reich was the original ‘hippie’, the erratic visionary who had looked forward
to an era we were now living in. He wrote (2):
   Psychic health depends upon orgastic potency, i.e. upon the degree to
   which one can surrender to and experience the climax of excitation in the
   natural sexual act. […] Psychic illnesses are the result of a disturbance in
   the natural ability to love. In the case of orgastic impotence, from which
   the overwhelming majority of people suffer, damming-up of biological
   energy occurs and becomes the source of irrational actions.
  He is clearly correct when he says that religion has warped our sexual self-
image, in order to better control us. Christianity in particular is guilty of this
nasty bit of bio-social engineering, and Reich was not the first to notice it.
English poet William Blake had seen it two centuries before when he wrote:
  As the catterpiller chooses the fairest leaves to lay her eggs on, so the
  priest lays his curse on the fairest joys. (3)
   However, it is less certain that the removal of sexual hang-ups can generate
the profound socio-political transformation Reich envisioned. For a start,
Reich’s idea of ‘orgastic potency’ is one of those ideal conditions, something
of an absolute.
   Reich was telling us not to control orgasm, but to cultivate an entirely
‘natural’ series of rhythmic pulsations that would result in the best kind of
orgasm, which discharged completely all the sexual tension that had been
building up. This may appear to be a clear definition, but we have all had
orgasms which seem to liberate us by way of a profound feeling of being
emptied out. I imagine that is what Reich is referring to as ‘orgastic potency’,
but that does not mean that every orgasm we have thereafter will be equally
deep. Reich’s own clinical records do not include follow-ups of patients who
had supposedly been successfully treated.
   Therefore, no-one can honestly claim that they know what percentage of
the population are ‘orgastically potent’. At best, the idea is a partial truth, and
of limited usefulness.
A more useful concept of Reich's is ‘genitality’, or what he calls ‘adult
sexuality’. This is about being able to pay full attention to genital sensation,
not being distracted by thought. Reich’s patients suffered from a ‘deadening
automatism’ in their sexual lives. When they orgasmed, the climax occurred
wreathed in fantasies which had nothing to do with genital sensations. So the
sensations were not actually enjoyed; all that happened was a dismal relief
based purely on the level of excitation dropping into dullness (see above, Sex
and Imagination—this is the least conscious kind of sex).
   This complete immersion in the moment of sexual sensation is definitely
worth aiming for. The enjoyment of the moment becomes the pure and
perfect goal, and the lovers are in a state of ‘flow’ in which they both do
precisely what feels best from one moment to the next.
   Once someone has realized this potential for him or herself then it is
possible to withhold orgasm for as long as they like, not ejaculating at all if
they wish. Whatever your opinions on the medical dimensions of the loss of
‘vital fluids’, it is worth practising the withholding of ejaculation, purely to
be able to enjoy sex more often as we get older.
   One useful practice is to only allow oneself to ejaculate rarely, practising
internal orgasm (see below) the rest of the time.
   This kind of practice suggests a cycle, of buildup over a few days of non-
ejaculatory sex followed by ejaculatory release, a cycle with two distinct
phases:
Buildup:
The few days of not ejaculating create a buildup of lust, of astyr. Each time
you have sex during this time, the energy is likely to be greater, building up a
tension. You may notice that this tension produces a kind of ‘flavour’ to your
day, a sort of emotional/energetic baseline which is characteristic of those
days.
   It can be helpful to think of this ‘flavour’, this ‘energetic baseline’ as the
result of the raised levels of astyr-athm kind of ‘lighting up’ and picking out
certain features of your emotional-energetic makeup and amplifying them.
For example, if you withhold ejaculation with your lover, it may happen that
you build up to a state of really being in love, a divine day-to-day erotic
obsession that keeps you both intensely sexually alive.
Release:
This is then followed by ejaculation. The ‘energetic flavour’ you have been
building up over the last few days is raised to its ultimate height then
exploded into orgasm. In a sense, you are ‘reifying’, making energetically
real, the obsessional energetic baseline you have established; you have
charged up and released an obsession.
   When you orgasm, you will have left behind the obsession you had. This
sequence does of course have the same profile as the ideal Austin Spare
sigilisation method—charge up the sigil then forget it.
   I think sex tends to be magical like this most of the time—we simply do
not normally train ourselves to notice it. What we are doing is reifying some
obsession or other—be it romantic love, personal power, or any of the other
uses for sex discussed in the Part IV Introduction, Sex and Imagination.
   This means that we can hijack the automatism of this system and
deliberately, consciously reify whatever obsession we want to. This makes a
reasonably good definition of sexual magic: Taking ownership of your
sexuality and obsessions.
   For instance, if we wish to gain vitality, we could circulate energy every
day with that in mind, have sex as often as we can or wish to, while focussing
on the feeling of death-defying bliss that a sexual energy high should
produce. When you eventually ejaculate, you will be raising that idea of
vitality to its highest pitch, and the elixir you consume will be full of that
condensed energy.
   The sadness many people feel after sex (I am not referring to the sadness
of discovering that you are in bed with the wrong person) may be the result of
the loss of a sexual tension that distracted us from life’s existential edges.
That delicious tension kept us focused on living and desiring, and its sudden
absence can remind us of death; hence the expression le petit mort. In that
respect, sexual release leads us closer to life’s unavoidable ragged edges, the
voids which surround our selfhood. Once you have let go of sexual desire,
you can no longer use that desire as a basis for identity, not until you get
horny again.
   This connection between sex and death underlies Wilhelm Reich’s view on
life’s difficulties:
   Pleasure and joy of life are inconceivable without struggle, painful
   experiences and unpleasurable self-confrontations. Psychic health is
   characterized […] by being fully alive in all situations in life.
  … As Nietzsche put it, he who would ‘exult to high heaven’ must be
  prepared to ‘grieve unto death’. (4)
   He is saying: We are finally grown up when we can let go into orgasm,
into exhalation, into release, when we can let go, knowing that death will get
us in the end, but that we are intensely alive right now.
Circulation and Internal Orgasm
Doing circulation exercises prepares us for the circulation of with the denser,
sexual energy of astyr. When we are sexually aroused, it is plentiful, but it is
harder to move around than athm. Simply using the mind to steer it is not
always enough, which is why we need to train ourselves by circulating athm.
Gathering together the magical techniques mentioned above, we have:
      -      Circulating energy to prolong the sex. As you exhale, you can
      allow the energy to settle in the region of the genitals, in order to
      ‘recycle’ the energy as sex. You can also allow it to come to rest in the
      lower energy vessel, the Bodhn, where it is available for other uses;
      - Circulating energy while holding in mind your magical intention;
      -     Deepening contact and intensity with your lover, culminating in
      invocation;
      -     Consecrating sex to a magical intent or to a deity, circulating the
      energy internally and creating an Inner Mead (without ejaculating);
      this Mead can be consumed by kissing and sharing saliva;
      -     Consecrating sex to a magical intent or to a deity, circulating the
      energy internally and orgasming. Then consuming the elixir of mixed
      sexual fluids to incarnate the deity or intention in your flesh;
      - For men, controlling ejaculation to have more frequent sex.
Circulation of the energy of excitement up the back on the inhale and down
the front on the exhale helps to inhibit ejaculation whilst keeping the level of
excitement high. The circulation can even be made to go so fast you have to
detach it from the breath and allow it to go at its own speed.
   Initially, the sensations arise from the circulation—there is a rush of
energy and pleasure up the back, and then down the front. Eventually, this
excitement reaches such a pitch that it is possible to have an internal orgasm.
This is a rush of energy identical to that of a ‘normal’ orgasm but without any
loss of seminal fluid.
   This orgasmic cycle can be experienced again and again, and it can leave
in its wake a surprisingly rich sense of satisfaction.
   Sexual alchemy is a cornerstone of personal flexibility, freedom and self-
awareness. It is the Centaur, the WoMan Beast. It is the Dragon-Eagle whose
wings drive the pulse of change through all the worlds. It is the Baphomet
androgyne/gynander in paradoxical splendour. It is the Valkyrie and the
living corpse of her Warrior, teleported out of history and into eternity.
Need any more be said about sensed energy? Only in play; any attempt to fit
the energies we’ve been discussing into consensus scientific reality is
probably doomed.
   But it will be fun to try, and that’s what Part V is about.
References
(1) https://www.amazon.co.uk/FUNCTION-ORGASM-Wilhelm-
Reich/dp/0374502048
(2) Ibid.
(3) Songs of Innocence and Experience.
(4) The Function of the Orgasm.
KEY POINT PART IV
Sexual desire and its associated inner sensations can be transmuted using
energy circulation and inner alchemy techniques.
These transmutations enable, for example:
       - greater and more frequent sexual pleasure;
       - enhanced intimacy which can be expanded into invocation;
       - dreamwork and various kinds of visionary magical work;
      -    healing.
            Part V:
That’s All Very Well in Practice,
             But…
‘…how would it work in theory?’ The name of this part is of course taken
from an old reprimand for the kind of theoretician who would argue with the
results because they don’t fit his model of how things are. Science demands
that theories be changed when evidence comes along that doesn’t fit them.
This is of course a pain, requiring people who have been coasting along with
a nice reputation to re-think the theories that got them that rep in the first
place.
   Some books start with a theory chapter. This is useful for books in which
you’re establishing epistemology, setting up your criteria for evaluating what
follows. So we can say that if the book is about practical matters, the theory
is there to supply additional meaning to techniques.
   In this book, my approach is that the meaning of each technique is what
can be achieved by using it—an ESC, some emotional resolution, some
healing or whatever. So I put the section on theory right at the end.
   One of my main reasons for my taking up magic in the first place was to
experience miraculous, improbable things. They say you should be careful
what you enchant for, and this is definitely true of miracles. Once you have
witnessed something impossible, your mind will not let you alone until you
have fitted into some worldview or other.
   So how do we deal with it when impossible stuff happens? How do we
frame experiences that refuse to slot into our usual models for the world?
   First of all, it’s important to decide how magical the event actually is. For
this, I use my Scale of Weirdness.
A Scale of Weirdness
What makes a result magical? I would say: the degree of apparent
improbability of the result. In other words, the weirder an event is (allowing
for context), the more magical. In my decades of magical work, I have
witnessed and experienced many apparently ‘miraculous’ events. Those that
seem to be down to magical work I have categorized into five levels, making
up a qualitative scale for the degree of improbability of an event intruding
into reality—a scale for the degree of weirdness of an event. A full account of
the model and the anecdotes which support it are in Bright From the Well.
Level 1: I call this Body Alchemy. These effects are apparently caused by the
action of will entirely within the skin, or involving recordable, non-occult
communication between skin-bounded humans.
  This is what psychologists might call a holistic-psychological effect. There
is actually nothing here to challenge materialistic scientism. The will acts via
some subconscious instruction to change gene expression, switching on or off
one gene or another. This type of causality includes firewalking, wart-
charming, most forms of healing and the so-called placebo effect, which is, of
course, healing magic.
   One practice that is often held up as an example of extreme body-alchemy
is walking on red-hot coals. Firewalking is however relatively easy to do. In
the so-called Circle of Chaos group in the 1980s six of us achieved ESCs by
spinning in a circle for a while before stepping into the eight-foot long,
vividly-glowing fire pit. No-one got burned. (1)
   Now it is true that the grass we were spinning on was cold and moist, but I
think there was also a body-alchemical effect: water emitted from the soles of
the feet as sweat in an unusually continuous way, providing some protection.
I turned up at the end of a similar experiment performed by a New Age
seminarist in Austria under similar conditions, that resulted in most of the
group getting burned feet, coals lodged between toes and so forth. I provided
lavender oil as treatment.
   The genuinely extreme end of Body Alchemy comprises things such as
setting fire to things by gazing at them; the demonstration of the power of
some energy adepts to beam measurable microwave radiation from the palms
of their hands means that this is not as challenging to science as it first
appears.
   Visions (i.e. virtual encounters with other realities), have a similar or lower
level of weirdness, unless they contain checkable data that couldn't have been
arrived at any other way; that raises the weirdness to Level 3 or 4.
   Despite the impressiveness of some of the effects, it could be said that
Level 1/Body Alchemy isn't really magic at all, because science can, with an
increasingly small stretch, explain it. For example, the finding that immune
system cells communicate with central nervous system sites was one of the
discoveries that narrowed the gap and enabled more materialistic scientists to
take the plunge of believing in psychosomatic healing.
Level 2 events show effects which are not confined to the skin. I label this
level of abilities Transpersonal, meaning that instructions and other
information appear to be transferred between two or more people’s nervous
systems without the usual means. The magics of this level include telepathy,
the unconscious transmission of information in situations such as one
person’s psychic state being picked up by another, and any magical result
where information seems to have been transferred by unknown means.
With Level 3 we seem to be looking at something which not only suggests
communication between nervous systems, but some kind of coordination of
effects between more than two nervous systems. One of the most vivid
examples of this kind of magic was when a friend of mine obtained the phone
number of a friend who was long out of touch, from the numbers in a tarot
spread.
   One of the definitions of magic I like is the engineering of synchronicities.
I’d label this level as Strong Transpersonal and also as Synchronistic. With
such results, it seems as if the world is a matrix, or an operating system, or a
field of interconnected consciousnesses.
Some experiences take us even beyond this, where the non-human world
itself seems to be affected directly by our magic. Level 4 consists of strong
Synchronistic events, effects that seem to be only partially dependent on a
human brain receiving the information put out there. Once, to test a new
magical working, I and three others appeared to interfere with the sound on
the BBC Nine O’clock News.
   This is what is popularly thought-of as being magic, in the Harry Potter
sense: events with no apparent physical connection bend the rules of
probability; effects occur as if will acts directly on the physical universe,
without the intermediary of a human receiver-transmitter. Specific abilities at
this level include remote viewing, as well as any improbable, 'inexplicable'
result in consensus reality that appears to be a result of your magical action.
   Finally, for Level 5, we have events that seem to demonstrate direct effects
on matter, like forces applied to objects. Effects at this level include psycho-
kinesis—objects flying across the room, people levitating—and the random
leakage of this sort of energy that leads to poltergeist activity. In Bright From
the Well I called this level ‘Strong Etheric’, using an old-fashioned term for
what appear to be energy miracles. I would now change that term, to the level
of The Damned, Charles Fort’s name for the evidence that science just cannot
digest.
This scale forms the basis of the following three chapters’ enquiries into
sensed energy experiences.
  So far, we have been concerned with the practice of the cultivation and
magic of sensed-energy. In Part V we will look at how to interpret our
sensed-energy experiences within the world of physical science.
Below is a brief historical introduction to Energy Magic thinking. After that,
we will consider energy experiences that are increasingly challenging for
science to interpret, starting with the least challenging.
Naming the Mystery: Traditional descriptions of magical energy
In the great esoteric traditions, we see an intimate connection between life-
force and breath, to the extent of finding words for breath which also double
as words for life energy or spirit. In Greek, we have pneuma, in Chinese qi or
chi, in Sanskrit prana, in Hebrew ruach, in Latin spiritus. The latter leaves a
trace of this double-concept in modern English: it’s not hard to see the
connection between the Latin root of ‘inspiration’, both in its physical,
objectively-observed sense of drawing in breath, and in its more commonly-
used interior meaning, of a very special mental condition.
   In the modern age, the most extensive systems of life-energy work survive
in the Hindu teachings on pranayama, and in the Taoist disciplines of qigong.
As mentioned above, the word ‘pranayama’ means ‘control of breath or life-
force’. Qigong means ‘breath/life-energy work’ or ‘energy cultivation’.
   Teaching about prana or qi permeate many aspects of the esoteric
teachings of those traditions. In the Hindu tradition the control of prana is
central to Kriya Yoga, Tantric sexual alchemy and the healing knowledge of
energy centres in Ayurveda, to mention just a few areas. In Taoism,
consciousness of and control of qi is essential in Tu-na breathwork, esoteric
martial arts, acupuncture, sexual alchemy and the energy magic of qigong. So
we can see that the idea of a universal life-energy, forms an important feature
of esoteric traditions.
The esoteric traditions that came to be written down in Germanic languages
(such as Old Norse and Anglo-Saxon) stand up well in most departments of
magic and inner work—with the notable exception of energy magic.
   I use the term ‘energy magic’ broadly, to cover energy healing modalities,
esoteric fighting arts and sexual alchemy. It’s interesting to consider how this
loss of tradition might have happened, and where esoteric energy ideas still
survive.
   Martial esoterics will have been the province of elite warbands. The
famous berserkers, though it seems doubtful now that they went into battle in
an ecstatic rage that made them seem invulnerable, would in some cases have
been initiates of such warbands. Their initiatic lineage would no doubt have
been the tip of an iceberg of warrior cults, probably sharing clan animals such
as bear, wolf and boar. Such lineages were in any case highly secretive, and
would have been thoroughly stamped out by Christianity in order to gain
closer control of mercenary bands, leaving little trace of their practices. It is
of course remotely possible that these cultic secrets formed the core of
warrior-monastic orders such as the Knights Templar.
   Any energy healing, energy magic and sexual alchemy teaching lineages
that existed would probably have been female, and would have been stamped
out with the breathtaking misogynistic viciousness that the Roman church in
particular is famous for, surviving only in isolated fragments of mediaeval
village witchcraft. It is possible to imagine that these traditions would have
stemmed from a remote background in what was known as seidh, the
predominantly female magical lineages considered as ‘unclean’ (ergi) by
mainstream male culture even before Christianity stepped in.
I indulge in such speculations not only because it is interesting to do so, but
in order to provide wider and deeper context for the scattered islands of
tradition that still rise above the Christian cultural inundation. It is possible
that the lineage of esoteric martial arts represented by Stav in the Hafskjold
family is a genuine survival from pre-Christian lineages, which would
represent the passing on of a traditional teaching within a family line. From
such islands alone, we cannot rebuild an entire tradition of energy work, but,
as shown above, the concepts of wod, athm and astyr rest on a solid enough
ground to build a set of exercises.




                                         Those concepts from pre-Christian
times survived into the High Middle Ages. The five kings in the picture
below are each receiving streams of breath from a figure named as Voden or
Woden.
   This image is from a 13th century manuscript found in Liège, Belgium. I
am indebted to Edred Thorsson’s essay ‘An English Runo-Wodenic Survival
in the Middle Ages’ (2). Thorsson comments: ‘As to the flames which emit
from Woden’s mouth […] they are clearly a representation … of the ‘divine
breath’, of the spiritual quality and power which Woden imparts to his
descendants.’ He notes that this lore was preserved among the English as late
as the 13th century in a world of ‘dual faith’.
   We see, then, that just as Odin, Lodhur and Hoenir breathed life into Askr
and Embla to form the first human couple, Woden breathes the life of
kingship into the mouths of kings. This shows us that athm was seen as fiery,
fluid and transmissible from one person to another.
Heretics of the New Vitalism
As discussed in the Introduction, the traditional views of sensed energy do
not in themselves imply vitalism. However, the various revivals of interest in
‘vital force’ and to a lesser extent, sensed energy, that have happened since
the rise of science tend to be strongly vitalistic.
   Vitalism has been deeply intellectually unfashionable since the rise of the
scientific worldview. The radical reductionism of even healthy scientific
thought (let alone fundamentalist scientism) has rendered life-force a
redundant hypothesis, sliced off by Occam’s Razor; we do not need to
distinguish the activities of living things quite so sharply from the inorganic
substrate of the world—DNA is, after all, ‘just a chemical’.
   This puts the sceptical practitioner of martial arts or energy healing in a
strange position. When you have experienced real life-energy adventures, like
those related in this book, or worked consistently at, say, esoteric martial arts
you have no doubt that these techniques work to produce a sense of
something which feels and behaves very much like life-energy. So the
traditional notions of life-energy become the most obvious, the immediately-
comprehensible articulation of what you are experiencing, as discussed in the
Introduction.
Obviously, there is more to any experience than the first theory you come
across which appears to explain it. H.L. Mencken once wrote: ‘For every
complex problem, there is an answer, which is clear, simple and wrong.’ I am
not saying that traditional energy models are wrong, but I want to test those
ideas against the analytical framework of physical science. Magicians differ
in how useful they find the ideas of science, but those ideas remain as
underpinnings of much important discourse, so the basics of that language
need to be mastered if we want to articulate mysterious ideas outside of our
‘discourse community’ (or if you prefer, ‘echo chamber’ or ‘belief ghetto’).
   The idea of a universal life-force, the vitalist position, has a complicated
history in scientific thought. This is because there is some difficulty in
expressing exactly whether a particular position amounts to vitalism.
   The underlying issue here is that we need different schemes to best
describe and understand the behaviour of systems depending on how many
layers of organization we can detect. We may utilize knowledge of the
biochemistry of say, a cat; a vet will know things about the animal’s
metabolism that helps in his work to heal it, but we do not try to understand
the behaviour of the cat in terms of its molecular structure. Instead of the
biochemical level, we invoke studies of neurology and comparative
behaviour; we treat the animal more as a whole being than a biochemical
approach does.
   Elements and patterns of behaviour are given their own language, their
own discourse. When talking about behaviour, teleology is tolerated more—
that cat is seeking food—but no one calls such multi-level language vitalism.
The difference is that the vitalist approach takes the view that there is a
disjunction, a gap between what we can describe through physics and
chemistry and some relatively ineffable quality, which cannot be studied in
the lab. Or not in a conventional lab. The difficulty with this apparently
simple distinction sometimes rests on what the researcher discovers and other
people’s attempts to replicate the same experiments.
   Vitalism has retreated from fashion with the success of mechanistic
descriptions of life-processes, culminating in the discovery of the structure of
the genetic material DNA in 1953. The vague 1930s world of energy-soaked
gels and colloids gave way to the structural precision of macromolecules such
as DNA and proteins, a world in which mechanism is a reasonable
description of life’s most intimate processes.
   The vitalist stance never went away, but after the rise of the scientific-
materialist worldview vitalists gradually became heretics. This heretic
vitalism had some new features, inspired by science. In 1780, Luigi Galvani
began the investigation of electricity in biological systems when he
discovered that the muscles of a dead frog would twitch when hit by an
electric spark. It isn’t too hard to see where Mary Shelley got her inspiration
for the novel Frankenstein, first published in 1818, and the world of science
entered into a prolonged study of electricity in biological tissues.
In 1839, Dr Karl von Reichenbach left his successful career as an industrial
chemist and set out to investigate od, or odic force, as he called it—a new
force (named after the Norse god Odin) present in people, animals, plants and
the mineral-inorganic world. He claimed that od was similar to magnetism,
electricity and heat, and that it permeated all living things. Proponents of odic
force also claim that it is similar to qi or prana but, unlike those concepts, it is
not associated with breath but with the electromagnetic fields possessed by
biological organisms.
   Von Reichenbach worked with ‘sensitives’, who could apparently detect
od as flashes of light in darkened rooms, and as sensations when they held
their hands near electric wires, telling them whether the current was on or off.
Unfortunately for his theory, Reichenbach seemed to lack any critical
appraisal of his own experiments. His sensitives repeatedly failed to detect
the electric currents in wires, and the explanation he gave for this was so
unconvincing that he lost any support from the scientific community of the
time. Furthermore, his sensitives, which he claimed made up about a third of
the population, usually had to spend hours in the dark in order to attune their
eyes to the faint flashes.
   It is not unreasonable to suggest that there may well have been a marked
psychological effect from working under such an obsessed and stubborn man
as von Reichenbach; people so convinced of their rightness, in the face of the
rest of the world, often have a kind of messianic charisma, deriving from
what trance researcher Dennis Wier has called centric trance (3). This is a
kind of certainty which is so intense it broadcasts itself in every gesture, eye-
contact pattern and speech-pattern. It can have enormous effects on those
around the charismatic—a kind of psychic entrainment into their beliefs. So
the sensitives, who were conventionally characterized as ‘hysterical’—i.e.
‘easily influenced’—were working under a charismatic leader, spending
hours in total darkness. It is not surprising that their results were extremely
hard to replicate. This, plus von Reichenbach’s stubborn refusal to accept any
criticism of his methods resulted in his ideas being relegated to the sidelines
of modern science.
   The only people who take his work at all seriously today are proponents of
the theory of radionics. Radionics is a pseudoscience—and it really does
deserve this name, if we define pseudoscience as a set of truth-claims with a
superficially scientific structure but which does not utilize an acceptable
degree of rigor in its research methods, and therefore cannot be reliably
tested. Radionics treatment involves Victorian-style varnished wooden boxes
with knurled brass knobs, which look wonderfully ‘steampunk’, but contain
nothing recognizable as electrical equipment; the mere setting of the knobs is
supposed to result in the channelling of bio-electric energy of exactly the
right frequency towards the recipient of healing. I was privileged, back in
1982, to witness a radionics healer’s assistant at work, when the practitioner
was away on holiday. My friend had to go in every day and re-set certain
knobs on the boxes to new numbers. I am not saying by any means that there
was any fraud involved; I met the healer in question, and she was
knowledgeable in many fields, and had a good record of healing successes—
with animals as well as humans. In fact, I went to see her about my disturbed
sleep patterns and she made a remarkable diagnosis within minutes of talking
and looking at the condition of my eyes, and gave me some advice which
proved invaluable and which has stood the test of time.
   It seems likely that real, objectively-measurable healing was probably
occurring (though of course I could not say whether these successes were
down to radionic intervention), but I don’t think it had much to do with
electrical energies, biological or otherwise. Any healing that occurred was via
magic, i.e. it was down to the enactment of human will by mechanisms which
are not at all understood by mainstream science.
Another area where people sometimes refer to odic force is dowsing.
Dowsing is pretty near respectable these days—it has real, verifiable effects,
and I shall discuss it below, but again, I very much doubt it has anything to
do with bio-electrical energy in the form of odic force.
   Decades after von Reichenbach, writer, politician and Rosicrucian
esotericist Edward Bulwer Lytton hypothesized a subtle energy called Vril, in
his book Vril: The Coming Race (4). Lytton’s coinage became immortalized
in the name of the popular beef stock drink Bovril.
   A much more influential heretic than von Reichenbach was Wilhelm
Reich. He was a psychoanalyst who studied under Sigmund Freud, but came
to treat libido as an actual, physically-detectable energy, an aspect of a
universal vital force he called orgone.
   For Reich, the orgone had to be physically detectable. However, he
nonetheless insisted that it was a biological energy, not reducible to other
physical types of energy. In a chapter heading in his book The Function of the
Orgasm, he asks ‘What is Bio-psychic Energy?’, and admits that he cannot
fully answer this question. However, he insists it is electrical in nature,
referring to it as bio-electricity on occasion.
   Reich’s philosophy could be described as ‘mechanistic vitalism’; he
claimed that it bridges the gulf between the opposed vitalistic and
mechanistic philosophies of life. Reich’s vitalism demands a very different
way of looking at the world; things are not to be understood merely in the
ways they commonly manifest. Instead, they are to be seen as emerging from
a ‘primordial orgone energy ocean’ which permeates the entire universe. We
are told that ‘mass emerges from this mass-free energy substratum’ (5). Mass
emerges from the ‘slowed-down motion of two or more superimposed orgone
energy units’ (ibid.). ‘The basic point is the emergence of inert mass from
frozen kinetic energy.’ Conversion of energy into mass is of course possible
within conventional physics, so this could be a valid theory, once we allow
the existence of a kind of energy called ‘orgone’. Particles are formed from
void space all the time and, under the right conditions, actually hang around
for a while rather than sinking back into non-existence.
   Reich adduces orgone to explain many physical phenomena that have
conventional physical explanations. For instance, he wrote that the solar
corona, usually attributed to the layer of plasma, ionized gas that extends out
from the sun, actually arises from a haze of orgone energy round our star.
The yellowing of leaves in autumn is due to the retreat of orgone (which is
blue in colour) from the surface of leaves; conventional biochemistry
explains the colour change perfectly and simply by the seasonal loss of green
chlorophyll, resulting in the yellows and oranges of xanthophylls and
carotenes coming to dominate the colours of the leaves.
   Clearly, we are in the presence of a scientist who does not hesitate to
discard the first rule of scientific enquiry—Occam’s Razor, by which we are
enjoined not to multiply entities needlessly; you can leave orgone out of the
autumnal colours and you get a perfectly good explanation; the concept of
orgone is just not required in this instance.
It is of course possible to see Reich’s description as part of a whole way of
apprehending the world, and this is perhaps the best way to understand the
way in which his writing slips between what other scientists would recognize
as science and what amounts to a poetic view of life, close to the organic
subjectivity discussed above under Embodied Wisdom.
   Some of Reich’s experimental demonstrations of orgone also suffered from
what appears to be quite basic errors in good experimental method. What he
claims as one of his most important discoveries is ‘Primary Biogenesis’. In
other words, the emergence of living forms from non-living matter. In
Selected Writings numerous references are made to ‘Experiment XX’, which
is claimed to have generated ‘primitive plasmatic flakes’. These are
considered to be the intermediate stage between inorganic matter and proper
life; from such flakes, ‘single celled organisms developed over the eons’.
   Unfortunately, there is no description of this seminal experiment in the
Selected Writings (6); but it is not hard to find one. Briefly, the method
consists of boiling sieved garden soil, filtering the water off and then placing
samples of the boiled soil-water into sealed ampoules and leaving them for
three weeks. At the end of this period, Reich put the water under an optical
microscope and observed ‘dense flakes’ in it. At the enormous optical
magnification of 3000x, he appeared to be observing these flakes ‘contracting
and expanding’. He concluded that these structures must be ‘bions’—blobs of
‘plasmatic, living substance exhibiting all the criteria of life’.
   Reich claimed that this experiment showed ‘primary biogenesis’, the
beginning of the evolution of life from inorganic matter. Claims of
contamination by bacteria do not stand up well; see for instance James E.
Strick’s Wilhelm Reich—Biologist (7). Reviewing the best and least biased
work on Reich, it still seems clear to me that there is no firm evidence for a
physical life-principle distinct from the organizational qualities of living cells
and the well-known energies that make up their activities.
Reich’s legacy seems to me to be twofold: an enriching of the questions we
have to ask when we bring science together with life-force, and the founding
of an important tendency in psychotherapy. Some of his ideas concerning
psychotherapy rest on unprovable assumptions, but the idea of ‘character
armour’ is an amazing insight. According to Reich, the frustration and pain
we bring forward from childhood trauma we do so by carrying it in tensions
in our musculature. There was nothing like this notion in modern psychology
until Reich suggested it, yet it is of a piece with the ancient Germanic concept
of the hamr, the soul which imprints a shape upon our bodies, a shape which
derives from habitual patterns, patterns which can be dissolved and recast in
shapeshifting acts of magic.
   Reich’s greatest psychotherapeutic legacy is surely Alexander Lowen’s
Bioenergetic Therapy. Lowen was a patient, then a student of Reich’s,
splitting from him in 1952. His writings do not emphasize orgone or Reich’s
dubious physical theories, but give central place to the Reichian concept of
character armouring. Despite Lowen’s obvious respect for his former teacher,
it is not hard to get the impression that their split amounted to Lowen’s
developing what was useful and leaving behind what was useless for therapy
and, what’s more, may eventually have been harmful to the credibility of
therapies stemming from Reich’s original and challenging work.
   The concept of ‘bio-electricity’ is not peculiar to Reich and other Western
vitalists, but is shared by some Chinese researchers. Qigong master and
Western-medicine-trained Dr. Yang, Jwing-Ming gives us the broadest
definition:
   [Qi is] universal energy, including heat, light and electromagnetic energy.
   A narrower definition of Qi refers to the energy circulating in human or
   animal bodies. (8)
   This definition implies that qi in a human being is a generalization of all
the energy systems in the body, but Dr. Yang also offers a narrower, and
more tentative, identification of qi with ‘bio-electricity’. Electrical potentials
are generated all the time in the normal functioning of the body—the flow of
blood will cause charge differentials and thereby generate a (small) flow of
current, and of course nerves work by electrical transmission. The qi channels
in the body follow close by major nerves and arteries, but not exactly; this
should not surprise us, if human-body qi is electrical in nature.
   Qigong, which Dr. Yang defines as ‘the science of working with the
body’s energy field’, recognizes and works with the ‘three treasures’, the life-
principles mentioned briefly above: jing, often translated as ‘essence’, qi
which is energy, and shen, usually rendered as ‘spirit’, though with wider
usages that suggest the broader term ‘consciousness’ may be appropriate. The
mainstream of qigong training consists of converting jing to qi, and using qi
to nourish shen. This may be seen literally as a feeding of qi into the brain,
which energizes it and enables better concentration. This is of course very
close to the circulation exercises outlined in Chapter IV-1.
   The following chapters discuss experiences which are increasingly
challenging for science to accept. This will be rather like passing our sensed-
energy experiences through a series of filters, in order to sort the experiences
into a scale of weirdness.
(*) Strangely enough, theoreticians can also be found in the world of magic
who think their theory is more important than the evidence. This usually
results in their theories becoming dead ends, after a latency period when
people still cling to them out of sentiment or gratitude for having once
explained something.
References
(1) Our firewalk was on the night that the Chernobyl reactor spume reached
Britain. We got rained on, on the way home.
(2) ‘An English Runo-Wodenic Survival in the Middle Ages’. Originally
published in Runa, vol. 1 no. 1. Ostara 1983. Reprinted in Green Runa, Runa-
Raven Press 1996.
(3) https://www.amazon.co.uk/Trance-Technology-Dennis-R-
Wier/dp/1888428384
(4) Available from http://www.jan-
marque.com/Art.project.1.Vril.Power.Bulwer.Lytton.Jan.G.Marque.7.htm
(5) https://www.amazon.co.uk/FUNCTION-ORGASM-Wilhelm-
Reich/dp/0374502048
(6) Wilhelm Reich, Selected Writings, Vision Press Ltd, 1973.
(7) James E. Strick: Wilhelm Reich—Biologist.
http://www.hup.harvard.edu/catalog.php?isbn=9780674736092 Reviewed
on my blog at https://chaotopia-dave.blogspot.co.uk/2016/04/review-of-
wilhelm-reich-biologist-by.html
(8) Dr. Yang, Jwing-Ming, https://www.amazon.co.uk/d/cka/Qigong-
Health-amp-Martial-Arts-Exercises-Meditation/1886969574
Chapter V-1: Sensed Energy Up Close
I’m going to start this investigation with the sensed-energy phenomena which
are the least challenging for physical science to deal with. We’ve already had
a look at one part of the mechanism underlying healing within one’s own skin
—see ‘Part II Conclusion: The Role of the Observer Self in ‘Energy’
Healing’. The examples covered by that model are of the Body Alchemy
kind, the lowest level of weirdness. The next level to examine is where
energy is sent outside one’s own skin, and affects other beings—healing
people, accidentally zapping cats and so forth.
   The phenomena within this chapter do themselves lie on a scale of
increasing weirdness, and suggest three levels of mechanism: electrical fields,
microwave emissions and Prigogine-type (1) dissipative structures.
Sensed Electrical Energy
As a child, I had nine-volt batteries in my transistor radio. These flat batteries
had the two terminals side by side, unlike the cylindrical sort. One way to test
whether a battery was flat was to touch the electrodes to your tongue. The
sensation of electric current is unmistakable, unique—a kind of sharp,
metallic feeling and a sour taste.
   Ever cut your lip and touched your tongue to the cut? Years later I noticed
the similarity of that sensation to the electrical one. Later still, I noticed with
my tongue the quite distinct electrical sensation at the most sensitive parts of
a partner’s erogenous zones.
   These sensations correlate to the fact that different biological tissues have
different electrical conductivities. For instance, the conductivity of dry skin is
considerably less than that of internal tissues, bathed as they are in
electrolytic fluids, which are great electrical conductors. An interesting
connection between tissue regeneration and electrical activity may be
provided by an oft-quoted report from 1974(2):
   […] Like many discoveries, this one was made by accident. In 1974, a
   child arrived at the emergency room of Sheffield Children’s Hospital in
   England. A piece of farm machinery had sliced off her fingertip. The
   standard procedure in such injuries is to smooth the exposed bone and sew
   the skin closed, but due to a clerical mixup, the girl was not seen by a
   surgeon that day. When surgeon Cynthia Illingworth caught up with the
   error a few days later, she was surprised to find the fingertip was growing
  back. She ordered staff not to touch it. Within three months, the bone,
  cartilage, tendons, blood vessels, skin, nail, cuticle and motor nerves had
  grown back as though the accident had never occurred.
  Studies have since documented more than 1,000 such cases. In fact, if a
  finger is guillotined beyond the outermost joint, in a child 11 years or
  younger, it always grows back within 90 days […]
   The interesting thing about this finding is the way in which the fingertip
grew back when the usual surgical intervention was absent; particularly
noteworthy is that the fingertip skin was not stretched and sewn back together
over the end of the wound. As mentioned, skin is far less conductive than the
internal tissues of the body, so it looks like the undisturbed electrical field
generated by the newly-exposed internal flesh may have been responsible for
the much-improved regeneration.
   The acupuncture points themselves have been studied, with some
interesting findings. The points are actually tiny cavities, dips in the skin,
where the conductivity of the skin has been measured as being much higher.
The difference in some studies is sufficiently marked to be able to locate
acupuncture cavities precisely by scanning the skin’s conductivity.
   However, this work has been brought into question more recently, in a
study (3) which shows a rather poorer overall correlation between
conductivity and acupuncture cavity position. Notwithstanding this
ambiguous conclusion, the authors of the study do affirm that the results are
‘suggestive’ and provide pointers to more in-depth research.
   The electrical conductivity model of acupuncture points and channels is
therefore the best biophysical model we have. If it does turn out to be true,
we have a mechanism for the successful application of acupuncture—the
channels themselves would, in such a model, be the most conductive parts of
the body, along which the qi, understood as bio-electricity, would flow.
   The bio-electricity theory of athm opens up some intriguing directions for
medical research, into electric fields in healing.
   In my experience, the easiest kind of magic to get success with is healing
magic. The second is weather magic; if there is a reasonable probability of
the desired weather manifesting, success level are usually quite high, even for
relatively inexperienced magicians. There may be some kind of connection
between the mechanisms involved, and the next story may point up this
similarity.
In 1971 I attended the first Glastonbury Fair. At this stage, it would be many
years before the festival evolved into the ‘instant city’ model, where there are
five- or six-digit crowds; the original event was quite small and intimate. I
arrived in the afternoon and linked up with friends from Sheffield, riding on
that effortless synchronicity that comes when you have a lot of excitement
and expectation invested in a future event but have no idea what it will be
like, and you are therefore open to the chaos of the moment. My friends had
brought along our stash of psychedelics and I wasted no time in swallowing a
large capsule of mescaline crystals. I was expecting my girlfriend to arrive at
some stage—we had set out from different places—so I made my way up to
the top field, near Worthy Farm.
   It started to rain. In the field was a hummock, covered in dancing people,
and from that knot of humans came the sound of vigorous drumming. I
walked over and joined the circle. Maybe a hundred people were dancing
around a group of about ten drummers playing on three Brazilian congas. The
sound was engrossing, magical, euphoric, and it was starting to rain.
Someone started a chant—Rain go away! Rain go away!—and we all took it
up.
   At some point I looked up; it seemed like a great column of energy was
pouring into the sky from our dancing circle. What made this image
interesting was that the clouds were parting, in a circle, exactly where the
‘energy beam’ was hitting them. Within a few more seconds, the circle of
blue sky had spread all over the field and the rain had stopped.
   And so I’d seen weather magic in action, and the pouring upwards of
energy was not unlike the (much less visually impressive!) pouring-out of
energy into a person during healing work.
The above account is about affecting cloud banks that were directly above the
enchanters. What about when the clouds you are trying to affect are, say,
thirty miles away? I am inclined to think that such a distance would
overstretch the energy model; we are into much weirder territory than local
electromagnetic effects. I place an impressive account of remote weather
magic in Chapter V-3, because it has a similar level of weirdness to map
dowsing.
   This version of qi or athm—local electric fields and potentials—is our first
layer. Just as Body Alchemy is the least contentious form of magic, so this is
the least contentious form of energy. We don’t need to think beyond the
contemporary fashions in science to find an explanation for it and thereby
make it believable for those who are stuck in scientific thinking.
   One physical technique which at one time seemed to, as it were, shed some
light on the bioelectricity issue is Kirlian photography. This was a 1939
version of a technology called electrography that had already existed for fifty
years. Back in the 1960s–70s Kirlian was one of the big hopes of the current
vitalist heretics. Kirlian photographs/electrographs (‘electrograph’ is a better
word because the images are produced by electrons, not light) show
characteristic ‘auras’ of light around the images of various substances,
notably biological tissues. You could take a picture of a leaf, tear a piece off,
photograph the torn leaf and see the missing part still there, like the visual
equivalent of a phantom limb. It seemed like science had finally ‘caught up’
with the ‘aura’, but subsequent trials showed that if you kept your equipment
clean there was no phantom leaf section in the second photograph.
   The promise of Kirlian electrography as a diagnostic tool was not fulfilled
either. Changes in the ‘Kirlian aura’ surrounding say, a fingertip were
claimed to reflect the state of health of a patient but were revealed to depend
only on the amount of water in the skin.
   Basically, electric fields around the body are too weak to be photographed
with this technique, which relies on a phenomenon called coronal discharge.
This effect occurs only when there is a very large electric field, almost
enough to result in a spark. There simply are not enough electrons being
emitted from around our skin surface under normal conditions to explain, for
instance, hands-near healing. There are however enough of them to create
other effects.
   You have probably noticed that you can affect a touchscreen without
actually touching it, just by holding your finger a millimetre or so away from
the surface. What is happening is that the screen is generating an alternating
current (AC) signal, which induces a corresponding AC current in your
finger. This bridges the gap between conductors in the screen, the current
flows, and you get the display you were after, all without actually touching
the plastic.
The electrical flows and static fields around the human body are of course the
basis of some very familiar energy-sensations. Deep breathing, especially
when the nostrils are held wide open, can easily produce a pleasant shiver in
the upper parts of the torso. These currents are almost certainly measurable;
Wilhelm Reich had considerable success in the 1930s in correlating skin
sensations during arousal to changes in skin potential.
   To look more closely at the acupuncture issue, some modern
acupuncturists use electrically-stimulated needles, magnets and even lasers to
stimulate the points. The use of magnets in acupuncture is modern, and
experimental. If athm is treated as bio-electricity, it is reasonable to suppose
it will be affected by magnetic fields—electricity and magnetism are two
sides of the same fundamental physical force. Many Chinese and Japanese
practitioners of acupuncture have experimented with magnetic and electric
fields. An example of this kind of experimental work is to attach a magnet to
the skin over an acupuncture point and leave it there for a while.
   Some superb results have also been achieved with electrical stimulation of
needles left in the skin, but apparently the jury is still out as to the
effectiveness of the magnetic innovations, and no-one has yet presented a
theory which ties together these kinds of results. In other words, scientists are
more or less working in the dark when it comes to modern approaches to the
manipulation of qi.
   How much explanatory power does the idea of athm-as-electricity have?
Only a limited amount: we have the distinctly electricity-like sensations of
the Energy Shiver and, probably, the acupuncture points and meridians. Some
aspects of healing with the hands actually on the skin may be electrical in
nature. Other than that, we have to seek elsewhere for explanations of how
athm works.
   A promising model of energy transfer through biological tissues, a model
which could be applied to acupuncture points and meridians, has been taking
shape over the last few decades. By the 1980s the structural components of
cells were understood well enough for scientists to begin to turn their
attention to the cell’s processes, the dynamic characteristics of biological
systems. This led to a model of how energy flows through an organism, in a
kind of relay, where energy is passed by radiation from one molecule to
another, the molecule itself then changing shape and passing the energy on to
the next molecule, like relay runners handing on a baton made of energy. The
energy flips between these two forms, switching from a set of electrical
stresses located in the shape of a molecule to a photon of radiation sent out by
the molecule. At last, science has come up with a rather elegant and powerful
picture of how electricity is passed through our bodies. We shall find this
model useful in the next section, when we consider different kinds of
biological radiation.
   Returning to hands-on healing, one obvious mechanism is the simple
transmission of heat into the patient. If the hands are but a tiny distance from
the patient, then that heat will be transmitted by infra-red radiation. This is no
big deal; everything in the universe transmits infra-red all the time. However,
what if the output of some other electromagnetic frequency, such as
microwave, could be controlled by an act of will on the part of the healer?
Projection from the hands, short distance
As mentioned above, hands-near healers known in China as Yuanqi
practitioners have long been the subjects of biophysical research. Decades
ago, it was noted that Yuanqi healers can choose whether or not to emit
microwave radiation from the palms of their hands. As anyone who owns a
microwave oven might know, microwaves generate heat in water-based
systems, like food, or like the human body.
   It is possible that some of the benefit felt by patients who get this kind of
healing is caused by a gentle kind of microwave stimulation. and the healers
who practice it. Warming up an injured part of the body can often provide
relief—hence the popularity of hot baths and compresses for some ailments
—but it does look like there is more than simply local heating going on with
Yuanqi healing. The latter is capable of much more impressive feats than
merely warming up the affected part, so we have to invoke another
mechanism to understand what is happening.
   A clue to what to look for is suggested by the range of ways in which
acupuncture points are stimulated in the course of treatments. Amongst the
traditional approaches there are the well-known needles, there is
moxibustion, in which herbs are burned above the acupuncture point, and
there is the application of pressure. So Yuanqi healers are stimulating the
acupuncture points with microwave radiation, resulting in the range of
healing effects acupuncture is noted for.
   The issue of electromagnetic emissions from the hands can get much more
extreme than this. Years ago I saw a TV show of a Pacific Island shaman
setting fire to a piece of paper by staring at it. I've also met a man who spent
years travelling the world in search of such marvels, and witnessed
something similar in Hong Kong. My acquaintance was told to present
himself at the Shaolin monastery with a substantial contribution and a copy
of the local newspaper. He was introduced to a monk who accepted the
newspaper off him and stared at it for some time, at which point the paper
started smouldering then burst into flames.
   Although microwave radiation is famous for heating up wet things, it will
also cause paper to burst into flames. This kind of thing is reported all the
time by people doing daring domestic tasks with their microwave ovens. We
know that microwaves can be produced to order by energy-work experts but
of course we cannot know for certain until someone actually does the science
and measures what comes out of the hands of people like that Shaolin monk
and that shaman.
   While we don’t know exactly what kind of radiation people emit when
they cause fire in this way, it definitely involves a massive output of physical
energy of some kind—the Shaolin monk told my acquaintance that there is a
considerable price to pay, and that he would be out of action for some days
after that display. The shaman in the film said something similar.
On one occasion I was privileged to witness an evocation which produced an
impression on film. This was on the occasion of an exorcism, which I discuss
in Bright From the Well. Here’s the short version of that incident.
   The couple who lived in the house clearly had a strange energy transaction
going on; the woman was being drained, and the man spoke rather happily of
energy beings that cuddled up to him like cats. He raised his hand to his neck,
smiling. Our video showed a clear band of smoky light like a translucent
scarf around his neck on two separate parts of the film, both when he was
sitting in the chair where he told us the ‘energy cats’ came to him.
   This was an evocation to visible appearance, done by someone who didn’t
even claim to be a magician. His evocation produced entities which gave out
some other part of the electromagnetic spectrum that can affect regular movie
camera film, and that rules out microwaves and infra-red.
   Was it visible light? It’s possible he was sitting there glowing slightly
while the film crew filmed him and nobody noticed at the time. Otherwise,
we are talking about ionising radiations—ultraviolet for instance. That does
not seem as likely as visible light—the amount of energy needed and the
danger to the transmitter (the evoking man) would be too high. So it’s highly
likely that this event involved a man somehow growing entities that were
stable enough in their light-emitting patterns to show up on film.
   This kind of stability, in a structure which consists of nothing more
substantial than air and radiation, is what we are going to look at in the next
section.
The energy-relay model mentioned above has much more detail than what
I’ve mentioned so far. It originated in 1923 with a biologist called Alexander
Gurwitsch who was investigating what it was that triggered the reproductive
division of cells in plants. He measured a weak radiation, which he called
mitogenic radiation, which seemed to be emitted by cells to trigger other cells
to reproduce.
   The experiments were well-conducted and successfully repeated again and
again, but the idea of mitogenic radiation fell out of fashion as structural
biology started scoring the big successes which led up to finding the
structures of proteins and DNA. The concept was revisited in the 1980s,
when, as noted above, biology was ready to start looking at the dynamic
aspects of cells, and the radiation was measured with modern equipment. A
good summary of this research can be found in Gurwitsch, A historical
review of the problem of mitogenic radiation (4).
   It turned out that the radiation in the energy-relay model was ultraviolet.
So now we know that even that potentially dangerous, ionizing radiation was
produced and emitted by living beings. It is significant that this UV has to be
weak in intensity—intense beams of UV applied to the same tissues just shut
life processes down.
   Another segment of the electromagnetic spectrum that has come into
biological focus is millimetre waves, aka ‘extremely high frequency’ waves.
These occupy a shadowy region between microwaves and infrared—both of
which we’ve been discussing in terms of hands-on healing. They are
currently considered to be very important for communication within and
between living cells (5). Visible light emitted by living tissues—not just the
specialized tissues of fireflies and other luminous organisms but all cells—
may also be important communications systems.
   All of the regions of the spectrum we’ve discussed above have some solid
science linking them to biological functioning. We have good reason to
consider our second model of athm to be electromagnetic. So now we have
on the one hand, short-range electric fields and internal currents. On the
other, electromagnetic radiations which span from microwave through
millimetre-wave and infra-red to visible and ultraviolet. Now we’re going to
look at energy-transforming patterns that stay put longer than they should.
Almost like spirits.
Spheres and Structures
If you have the honour of keeping a cat, especially if it's a young cat, then
you may have noticed it chasing things you can't see. Many years ago,
everyone in a house I lived in was observing the two cats of the household
chasing such things. The invisible objects seemed to be about four inches in
diameter, and it seems like they could roll or bounce or float through the air,
judging by the cats' antics.
   This went on for some weeks, then some members of the household
collected and ate some magic mushrooms. That evening, three people
reported seeing little balls of hazy light, floating and bouncing where the cats
were playing, and elsewhere.
   Dirk Bruere, in his book TechnoMage (reviewed on my blog at (6)) notes
that LSD users were recorded as hallucinating blobs of coloured light when
exposed to magnetic fields in the 50–500nT (nanotesla) range, which is less
than 1% of the earth’s average magnetic field.
   What were the cats and the people seeing? The effects of magnetic fields
on the brain, generating consistent hallucinations? In that case, why would
the balls of light be in a particular place, rather than just spread about the area
where the fields were higher? It appears, on the basis of this slender anecdotal
evidence, that people and cats, under certain conditions, can see either
structures which are created by the magnetic fields, or possibly structures that
just happen to be there, which are caused by something else.
This is the kind of puzzle that arises everywhere we look into subtle energies,
and it leads naturally into a discussion of ‘qi-balls’. The qi-ball is a classic
qigong exercise, aimed at sensing qi externally. Here is how it is often done:

        1. Standing in a relaxed posture (in qigong, Horse Stance is
           preferred), start your breathing cycle. I would recommend EHB
           breathing (see Part III, Chapter 1).
        2. Hold the palms of your hands a number of inches apart and
           breathe the energy out into the space between them. Adjust the
           distance between your hands, adjust your breathing pattern, move
           your hands around until you can 'see' (or SEE) a hazy ball of light.
        3. Play with it, manipulate it.

  The experience of seeing a ball of athm helps us to become sensitive the
athm and to understand its behaviour. But what are we doing here? I suspect
we learning to open up a sense which we normally suppress, because it brings
us too much information, information of the ‘wrong’ kind, information which
does not help us make sense of the conventional world we have enchanted
ourselves into. If that is the case, we have dormant energy senses which can
be quite easily awoken, without the need for psilocybin or LSD.
    And what can we do with a qi-ball, once we’ve made one? A common
exercise is to pass it to another person. It is hard to know exactly what this
means in terms of physics, but one thing is certain—whatever we are
transferring, it is a close-up transfer, not a remote one. This is within the
realm of electrical potentials and short-range energy transfer by microwave.
So what about using energy balls for healing?
    In my interesting and instructive life, I have met many magicians, but very
few who actually make a full-time living out of doing magic. One of them is
Susan Leybourne. She manages to make a living because she is very good at
it. There are only a small number of kinds of spell that professional wizards
are generally asked to do for clients, and one of the biggest categories is of
course healing. One of Susan Leybourne’s successes is a rapid (classed
medically as ‘spontaneous’, but I think we know better!) healing of an
advanced uterine tumour. Here is her report (7):
    This took place in a group of fifteen people of mixed healing ability from
    absolute beginner upwards. It was done as part of a day of practical
    magical experiment and literally took minutes. While demonstrating the
    well-known ‘Sign of the enterer’ as a practical healing technique, I
    focused an energy ball at one participant who was attending the day, but
    was too sick to join in any of the activities and in fact too ill to stand
    unaided. The woman almost fell off her chair with the combined force of
    energy being hurled at her.
  This took place on the Saturday and within fifteen minutes she began to
  feel a lot better and reported feeling normal within the hour. She even
  joked about wanting to go dancing. By the end of the day she was walking
  normally and had no pain. On attending a check-up at the local hospital
  two days later, the tumour was undetectable.
  This healing took place nearly twenty years ago and the tumour has not
  returned. I would explain this result as the combined energy of the group
  ‘shocking’ the etheric body into re-setting itself to its original blueprint.
    However, people also use qi-balls as portals, to carry a magical intention to
someone they want to heal. This is the kind of thing I’ll be discussing in the
next chapter, about information.
    Let us have a look at possible physical mechanisms of things such as
energy balls. In 1977 Ilya Prigogine gained the Chemistry Nobel for
something which a lot of people, not just chemists, have been pondering the
implications of ever since. He studied chemical reactions which behave a
little like living systems—they change in both predictable and chaotic ways,
and they are happy to keep doing this as long as you keep pumping energy
into them in the right way. These self-assembling systems of chemical
components form relatively stable structures which maintain themselves
whilst exchanging energy with their environment. That last part is the
important bit—Prigogine called such systems dissipative structures.
    A macroscopic example of a dissipative structure might be a smoke ring,
rotating in response to air currents but keeping its form for a while. On the
subcellular level it is possible that the ‘pulsating vesicles’ that Wilhelm Reich
saw in sterilized solutions and called bions, believing they were the transition
points between the inorganic world and life, were some kind of dissipative
system.
    Considering our glowing blobs and energetic cat-toys, it may be possible
for energy to be processed by temporarily-stable structures no more
substantial than smoke rings, structures that maintain their coherence for long
enough to float round the house emitting light.
    Such structures may be the basis of all sorts of effects associated with
spirit-based magic. Consider an independent entity created by a magician to
process energy and information, a swirl of structure more stable than a smoke
ring; this is an Energy Magic paradigm picture of a servitor, the relatively
simple spirits that Chaos Magicians create to perform automated repeat
enchantments.
    Now the most important thing about a servitor is its function. This is not
the energy it may be made of, but the information carried by that energy: the
instructions encoded into it so that it can perform its task. This is where we
reach one of the edges of the athm-as-energy hypothesis: we cannot get any
further with our energy considerations, but have to start thinking in terms of
the transfer of information.
    Let’s return to my story about accidentally zapping my friend’s cat,
described in Part III Introduction. Whatever I sent to the cat was transmitted
across maybe three or four yards. In energetic terms, this can easily be
accounted for in terms of microwave or visible radiation (light)—but a low-
level burst of warming radiation or soft light is not, to me, a convincing
explain as to why the cat was so shocked.
   Maybe it was just the sheer unusualness of the effect; I imagine that in
most households, cats are not used to seeing humans project energy across
the room, and anything as novel as that is inherently disturbing to an animal.
   However, it is also possible that there was a packet of information in that
transmission, the content of which was the culprit in disturbing the cat. It is
unlikely that I will ever know.
   We now have three mechanisms for the action of some forms of athm—
electric fields and charges, electromagnetic radiations, and thirdly dissipative
structures. To understand the mechanisms of the weirder sensed energy
effects we now need to move on to the information issue.
References
(1) Ilya Prigogine discovered dissipative structures, more of which below.
https://www.osti.gov/accomplishments/prigogine.html
(2) The source is given in the text as ‘"Newt and Improved", National Post,
January 25, 2002’.
(3) https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23346191
(4) https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/BF01953301
(5) Pakhomov et al. on millimetre waves:
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1521-
186X(1998)19:7%3C393::AID-BEM1%3E3.0.CO;2-X/full
(6) http://chaotopia-dave.blogspot.co.uk/2011/01/technomage-by-dirk-
bruere-review.html
(7) Personal communication, 2016.
Chapter V-2: Remote Magic and Information
The Energy Magic Paradigm (EMP)—the whole idea that you can use
‘energy’ to model what is happening in magic—runs into some serious
problems once we try to use it to explain remote effects.
   This has always been a sticking point between science and magic—every
type of energy studied by physics obeys the inverse square law. If we
consider the aspect or type of athm which is measurable as electromagnetic
radiation—say light or microwaves or infra-red—then its transmission will
obey the inverse square law of propagation. This means that if I am standing
twice as far as you are from some radiating source of energy, I am getting
one quarter of the energy that you are. If I am standing a thousand times
further away than you, I am getting one millionth as much. Avid magical
metaphorists of science, from the 19th century proponents of ether and
vibrations to the full-blown physicalist scheme of Peter Carroll, have
struggled with the problem of ‘spooky action at a distance’, as Einstein called
quantum entanglement.
   But, as everyone who does magic knows, distance is really not a problem.
So we have to start looking outside the energy box for a mechanism for
remote magic.
Remote Healing and Magical Combat—Are These Real Joules?
Here’s an example of a traditional-style EMP treatment of remote healing.
Sivananda (1) recommends for remote healing or ‘absent treatment’:
   You can transmit your Prana through space, to your friend, who is living
   at a distance. He should have a receptive mental attitude. You must feel
   yourself en rapport (in direct relation and in sympathy) with the man,
   whom you heal with this Distant Healing method.
  You can fix hours of appointment with them through correspondence. You
  can write to them: “Get ready at 4 a.m. Have a receptive mental attitude.
  Lie down in an easy chair. Close your eyes. I shall transmit my Prana.”
  Say mentally to the patient: “I am transmitting a supply of Prana (vital
  force).” Do Kumbhaka when you send the Prana. Practise rhythmical
  breathing also. Have a mental image that the Prana is leaving your mind
  when you exhale; it is passing through space and is entering the system of
  the patient. The Prana travels unseen like the wireless (radio) waves and
  flashes like lightning across space. The Prana that is coloured by the
  thoughts of the healer is projected outside. You can recharge yourself with
  Prana by practising Kumbhaka. This requires long, steady and regular
  practice.
   These are usable magical instructions; someone could learn how to do this
and get success. Whatever it is about ‘prana’ that crosses the intervening
space contains something that helps the recipient get better; but what is it?
This magic only makes sense if we think of the term ‘prana’ as including a
component which is definitely not energy. Let’s examine a few cases, starting
with an example a bit like Sivananda’s one above—an (apparently) simple
transmission of healing intention over distance.
Here’s another tale from professional magician Susan Leybourne. She is
reporting on an event which is related to the close-up energy-ball healing
discussed in the last chapter (V-1):

  On the back of this, when a close friend of mine was diagnosed, ten years
  later, with the early signs of multiple myeloma, a form of bone cancer, I
  used the ‘power of place’ as a way of tapping into the original success of
  the earlier case.
  At the same location with a similar group of people including several of
  the original members, I placed one of the same chairs on the exact same
  spot where the patient had sat for the earlier successful healing at the
  approximate same time of day, effectively creating a healing portal
  attached to a time and specific location. I contacted the patient via mobile
  phone and placed the phone on the seat. I repeated the energy-ball
  exercise exactly as before. The cancer was stopped in its tracks and has
  not developed as was initially predicted by medics. (2)
   Here we have left the close-up energy-ball model, and are talking about a
portal which enables something else to cross the miles. That model is backed
up by another of Susan’s successes, in which she performed a cancer healing
using a photo of the recipient, who lived in another country.
   Such a portal enables the healer to project the healing magic from one
location to another without having to lose energy crossing the intervening
distance. The thing transmitted here cannot be energy, but could be
information, consisting in this case of what amounted to a set of instructions
which enabled the recipient to heal.
My own experience of remote magical healing is structurally different but
may amount to the same thing. It rests mostly on magical work that is
predominantly symbolic rather than energy-based—so, unlike Susan’s
example above, it does not even look like energy magic. One anecdote which
I relate in Bright From the Well is a good example of that kind of magic: the
case of my friend B, whose kidney failure was partially-reversed by a group
of Chaos Magicians working remotely, back in 1995. It’s enough to point out
here that it was a full-scale magical ritual involving a doll of B, who had
recently lost two thirds of his kidney function.
   The results of our healing were spectacular enough for his specialist to tell
him: ‘I don’t know what happened here, I don’t know what you’ve been
doing, but keep it up!’ There is no reason to believe that we were transmitting
energy in this case, and every reason to suggest that we were not; whatever
mechanism carried our intention to heal B could again have been a set of
‘healing instructions’—in other words, a pattern of information.
In Chapter III-2, under Group Energy Work, I reported sensing when
someone on the opposite side of a Breath of Light circle had broken the
circle. It is not surprising that I could detect the fact that someone somewhere
had broken the link, but how did I know where the circle was broken, who
had done it? I think there’s too much information in that perception; maybe I
was actually picking up a package of information from that person, via the
bodies in between.
   The popular hands-near healing technique of Reiki fits in here. I didn’t
discuss Reiki healing in Part III, even though a lot of people think about
Reiki as energy healing. Whatever aspects of it might fit into the energy-
magic scheme are duplicated by energy-healing techniques I understand
better, such as the Energy Healing Breath. So I didn’t think it was worth
mentioning as a separate energy-healing technique. However, now that we
are discussing techniques that might be better viewed as something other than
energy work, Reiki becomes interesting, because its effectiveness lies in a
mixture of at least two things: energy healing, of course, but also the use of
symbols.
   To get a Reiki training or ‘attunement’ means to receive a kind of power
arising from the lineage of that particular form of Reiki. This power is
dispensed in three degrees. The basic level is said to confer the power to draw
energy from the universe and pass it on to people. In other words, energy
healing work. The second degree involves using symbols; with this kind of
work, we have left plain, ordinary energy magic behind. One of the symbols
is for doing remote healing, so we are talking about the transmission of
information (or a weirder kind of magic—information is a kind of minimal
hypothesis in these cases). The third level confers the power to ‘attune’ others
to the particular Reiki lineage in question. That is another interesting
mechanism.
   I received all three levels of Reiki attunement years before, without really
asking for them or intending to use them, from a friend and seasoned
practitioner, during an afternoon of magical workings. I investigated, drawing
healing focus for an important healing and skrying the nature of the current.
Here is my diary note:
   I got a payoff from that when I worked on J's back pain the other night - a
   strong sense of flow, not just up from my feet and through my body into
   and through my hands (the feel I have got used to over the last 5 years
   practicing Energy Healing Breath) but all over the surface of my body and
   around me too, which is a nice touch. I discovered I was in the circle of an
   egregore, and that is where the power came from.
   Reiki third level is powered by egregore magic. To some extent, this will
be true of all levels of Reiki, because its practitioners draw power from
belonging to that magical current. This puts Reiki in Weirdness Level 2
(Transpersonal), or even Level 3, in which minds are linked in a more
complex fashion than one-to-one.
   Remote healing is where, if we get good results, we leave one level of
weirdness for another, weirder one: using the terminology I introduced in
Bright From the Well, we are moving from the upper end of Weirdness Level
1—Body Alchemy—and into Weirdness Level 2—Transpersonal
enchantment, where one human nervous system acts on another without a
scientifically-respectable mechanism to account for it.
   One could ask, is remote healing really energy work at all? I would give
that question a qualified No, because I don’t believe that enough energy
could arrive at the target. Let us say that the patient/target is a really long
distance away from the healer, not just in a mile or two, but half a continent
away.
   Maybe it is possible to transmit actual energy from a human body to a
point hundreds of miles distant at a level of power which could cause healing
in the recipient, but I doubt it. Electromagnetic radiations would be diluted to
nothing in the immense thermal noise of the intervening space.
   I think remote healing consists of doing an enchantment on another person,
remotely. Whatever aspect of the universe allows magic to happen, allows
remote healing to happen. Whatever that aspect is, it is not as obvious as
electromagnetism.
Some martial arts experiences I have heard of, make at least Level 2 in the
Weirdness scale.
   A friend of mine, a martial artist with many years of training, had an
extraordinary experience of esoteric combat, which raises some very
interesting questions. He went to visit a renowned martial adept by the name
of H. In the dojo, his host invited him to attack, to run towards him. When
my friend was about six feet away from his opponent, he suddenly and
without warning found himself on the floor, feeling very confused about what
had just happened. A witness to the scene gives the same report—my friend
was running, then suddenly he hit the floor.
  What happened here?
Dr. Yang, Jwing-Ming asks a related question:
  How can Qi be used to bounce someone away with only a touch? We have
  heard in the Chinese martial arts that a very good Qigong master is able
  to bounce (or shock) an enemy away with a simple touch. When someone
  touches a high voltage wire, his body reacts instinctively to protect him,
  and bounces him away. The wire does not exert any physical power. Is this
  what happens with the Qigong master? Does he pass electricity into the
  other person’s heart so that his body bounces him away instinctively?
   Maybe so; but this does not cover the experience of my friend, who was a
couple of yards away when he was ‘hit’. If H was transmitting microwave
energy to him, it is hard to see how this could have done anything more than
warmed my friend up, and that not very quickly; clearly, we need another
theory to account for this.
   My friend speculates that H in some way disrupted his body energies. This
sounds like a good starting point for understanding, if we allow that H was
not just transmitting energy, but information. In other words, this was like a
form of ‘remote acupuncture’, affecting channels that caused the recipient to
fall down.
   This seems to me a workable theory: that an adept of athm can modulate
the microwave signal he is transmitting, like a radio transmitter modulates the
93 Megahertz carrier wave with the frequency fluctuations that make up the
news on BBC Radio 4. Furthermore, in so doing he is transmitting what
amounts to an instruction to his victim, in my friend’s case, an instruction
that somehow unbalances or scrambles his normal athm pathways and makes
him fall.
I have an anecdotal, personal bit of evidence for something much weaker, but
which may be related. When I was 11 years old, my friends and I gathered
round at Ken’s place to conduct telepathy experiments. We split up into
‘transmitters’ and ‘receivers’, and tried it out with words, colours, numbers
and so on. The results were mostly disappointing, and it occurred to me to try
instructions instead. So when it was my turn to transmit, I tried to transmit
the instruction ‘touch that drainpipe’. It worked; maybe, just maybe, I’d got
lucky at something adepts of athm spend years perfecting, and had projected
athm—possibly in microwave form—modulated with an instruction which
reached the recipient’s nervous system and was able to be enacted without
any interference from his conscious mind.
   These experiences fit into Weirdness Level 2, the transpersonal—they
seem to involve the direct transmission of information from one human
nervous system to another. What about information from non-human
sources?
How Weird Is Dowsing?
Dowsing is pretty near respectable these days—it has real, verifiable effects.
Some kinds of dowsing, such as the traditional water-diviner walking over
the land with a twitching hazel-twig, could well be energetically-based.
Maybe some people can make themselves aware of very weak signals from
some part of the electromagnetic spectrum—microwaves, infrared, visible
light or UV—and that is what tells them where water or minerals are. Susan
Leybourne tells of prospecting for diamonds in Liberia, just as it is about to
plunge into civil war (2):
   I was first tested in the UK, by a secretive organisation, prior to being
   flown out to Liberia. The test involved being taken to an overgrown field in
Cheshire, where I was told that a diamond was buried in a plastic bag, a
good three or four feet down. I was not allowed to use any sort of ‘tool’
such as dowsing rods or pendulums, but only my psychic ability.
After walking about the large field for a short time I could soon feel the
pull in my solar plexus when walking slowly, indicating the presence of the
buried stone under-foot and was able to locate the diamond to within one
or two feet. I was re-tested again, once in Monrovia.
I was given a diplomatic visa before leaving the UK, allowing me to leave
Monrovia, the capital, and travel towards the jungles bordering Sierra
Leone, where rebels were still fighting. I worked under military escort, and
was taken to two different locations in the Liberian Jungle, travelling
overland by military jeep, then on foot, trekking through rough bush for
three or more hours, crossing two swamps and a river in a dug-out canoe
where I was then instructed to locate the diamond veins beneath the
ground in rough terrain.
I divined the sites, again without tools but instead had a diamond of the
quality they were looking for, which I held in my hand (or placed in my
mouth on occasions). Within a short time I was able to locate the seams of
diamonds. I recall as I walked, I would say ‘here’, and the workers would
say ‘smo smo?’ meaning a little way down or another word meaning a
long way down. I found I could locate these diamond veins up to six, and
as much as ten feet below ground.
As I walked very slowly, the workers placed sticks in the parched ground
marking out the track I had described. They used short sticks for up to
three feet and bigger sticks to indicate deeper deposits. Even while I was
divining the track, they began digging and I heard excited cheering from
the workers at the beginning of the area. They were digging up diamonds
with only hand tools, such as buckets and spades.
Within a few days I was able to hold in my own hands some of the results
of the first dig, in the Monrovia office, where the stones were placed in
safes.
I also found that by holding uncut stones, I could accurately give the ‘point
of source’ sale value in dollars, which she was surprised to find
  remarkably low, in comparison to the final product in the jeweller’s
  window!
   If this kind of dowsing is mediated by electromagnetic sensitivity, it would
only make Weirdness Level 1, because it is simply an unusual sense that
some people can use.
   This sense may be related to a singular experience a group of four of us
had at Castlerigg stone circle in Cumbria, on the morning of Midsummer
1987. Standing outside the circle (which is actually not circular, more oval)
in order to take a photo, I noticed that one of our party as stepping into and
out of the ring of stones repeatedly. He urged the rest of us to follow suit, and
we all got the same perception: that there was a ringing sound as we stepped
into the stones, which ceased immediately we stepped out. It was a little bit
like tinnitus, which I didn’t suffer from at the time, a high, whistling-ringing
sort of sound.
   The mystery of why our ancestors chose the particular sites they did for
their stone figures is very far from being understood. In 1980 earth mysteries
writer Paul Devereux (3) created the earthlights hypothesis. Basically this
says that places near where tectonic fault-lines cross, which takes in a lot of
megalithic sites in Britain, get lights rising from the earth due to tribo​-
luminescence—light produced by friction between rocks as they move.
Devereux suggests further that these areas, when the earthlight is happening,
affect human consciousness, producing an ESC which may account for
mystical experiences at that site or even ‘UFO abduction’ scenarios. I wonder
if we were present at Castlerigg during some kind of tectonic activity?
   Since it may be mediated by our senses, albeit areas of sensitivity which
most people are not aware of most of the time, this kind of experience is
basically at Weirdness Level 1. But it is an unusual kind of Level 1, and its
mechanism is more challenging to understand scientifically than the dramatic
martial arts event above. At least in that case, we have what is very likely to
have been a transmission of information from one human nervous system to
another; with some cases of dowsing, we have information travelling by
unknown means from the inorganic world.
   The weirdness level shoots up when we look at something like dowsing on
a map; we have to ask how the dowser’s mind gets the information. We are
up in Weirdness Level 4 with map-dowsing; I apply the know-nothing term
‘Strong Synchronicity’ to it; will is involved, and a result involving direct
interaction with the material world, but with no scientifically-respectable
mechanism to account for it.
   Our fourth kind of mechanism is information. With this perspective, we
have left behind Weirdness Level 1 and entered Level 2—the transpersonal,
where people are connected by streams and webs of information. We have
also forayed into Level 3, where we see the role of egregores in the magic.
   One further conclusion to draw from the accounts in this chapter is that we
should not trust one paradigm to give us the best model for our magics. We
have seen clearly how the Energy Magic Paradigm has edges, beyond which
it really does not make any sense. All the Paradigms are like this—just look
far enough and you’ll find they don’t work.
   But there is still more weirdness to come. If we are going to understand
some of the miracles below, we need to mover right through the scale,
through Synchronistic to Utterly Damned.
References
(1) Sivananda - Kundalini Yoga. https://www.amazon.co.uk/Kundalini-
Yoga-Swami-Sivananda/dp/8170520525
(2) Susan Leybourne, personal communication.
(3) http://www.pauldevereux.co.uk/html/body_earthlights.html
Chapter V-3: Realm of the Damned: Energetic
‘Impossibilities’
   A procession of the damned. By the damned, I mean the excluded. We shall
                         have a procession of data that Science has excluded.
These are the opening lines of Charles Fort’s 1919 The Book of the Damned.
The experiences in this chapter fit into Weirdness Levels 4 and 5. Level 4 is
where we enter Harry Potter land—where human will affects the world
without any respectable mech​anism. Beyond that, Level 5 events appear to
violate the laws of physics quite badly. Therefore it is not surprising that they
are unwanted, chunks of indigestible evidence that, were they people, would
definitely not be invited to the same parties as reputable scientists.
   The first such Damned piece of evidence comes from remote weather
magic.
Restraining Distant Clouds
For a truly impressive bit of remote weather sorcery here’s an account from a
professional I introduced in Chapter V-1—Susan Leybourne. She tells of
events that happened while she was working in Liberia, West Africa (1):
   A little known fact about former Liberian President General Charles
   Taylor is that he was a sports fanatic, both playing and watching sports of
   all kinds. I knew his security staff and they would often mention the
   President’s training regime. The day came when the President’s chief
   security officer appeared at the house where I was staying in Monrovia,
   one Saturday morning in late April. He told me the poor Colonel was in a
   bit of a state as the rains had arrived several weeks early, rains that come
   down diagonally and with such force they knock you over in the street. The
   problem was that, there was to be a pro/celebrity open air basketball
   match that afternoon. People had paid US$100+ per seat, and dignitaries
   were flying in from all over West Africa to attend, especially to watch the
   President play basketball. The Colonel had been sent to ask me if I could
   stop the rains. I didn’t know if I could do it but like most things I was
   determined to give it a good shot.
  ‘What time is the match scheduled for?’ I asked. He told me that people
  would be arriving from 3pm. It was decided that a good three-hour
  window from 3-6pm, would be necessary to give everyone a chance to
  arrive and leave afterwards.
  I’d had success with weather work in the past, but never halting a
  premature African rainy season mid-flow. I could only think of my own
  teacher, who had once been called upon to end a six month Moroccan
  drought as a test before being invited to meet a secret society of Islamic
  sorcerers outside Tangier. So, I had the, ‘Of course I can do it’ attitude.
  I went to my room at around 2 pm and can only describe the technique I
  did as mentally gathering up the clouds and holding them about thirty
  miles away from the location of the open air stadium. I did this as a
  sustained focused mental effort, holding the clouds in a far off location,
  imagining them locked in a huge metal box in the sky for the agreed length
  of time. Sure enough, the rains stopped at the location above the stadium
  at around 2.50 and did not return until around 6.30 that night.
   To make any physical sense of this, we have to look at how will can affect
material systems without any intervening human consciousness. We are
beyond telepathy—forms of matter such as clouds have no nervous systems
or even electrically-sensitive gels to pick up our magical instructions. Remote
weather magic, like map dowsing, belongs in Weirdness Level 4; there is
nothing that is scientifically respectable that could account for such effects.
Hang on, though; it gets weirder.
Pete the Poltergeist
The best-know examples of what appear to be gross energetic disturbances
are poltergeist activity. I and a couple of magical friends investigated a
poltergeist-ridden flat in Leeds, in the mid-1990s. Residents had all had cups
flying across the kitchen, mysterious patches appearing and disappearing on
the ceiling (no, not the damp stains that many a student landlord has left
unremedied!) and weird noises day and night.
   During the couple of hours we were there we didn’t witness any activity,
but even the least sensitive of the group (me) could sense a kind of patterning
to the feel of the place, a distortion of the energy that tended to make you
move through the shared, three-bedroom flat in a spiral direction, winding in
to one particular room. This was the room of the man who seemed to be at
the centre of it all. So we asked him about his last few places, and he did
indeed report similar, poltergeist-type occurrences there.
   It wasn’t hard now to see that Poltergeist Pete, as we came to know him,
was the epicentre of all the activity. He was a twenty-something student at the
University, and seemed like a fairly standard human being, no weird
interests, but I caught a secret smile on his face when we talked about the
poltergeist activities. I realized that he was proud of his special status. Maybe
he thought being Pete the Poltergeist was the only way he could get the
attention he craved.
   That was also the pattern I saw in the exorcism investigation discussed in
Chapter V-I; an apparently magically-naïve person who revelled in the
attention that his one magical trick brought him.
   But how had a man with no magical background learned to do something
which magicians sweat for years to be able to do? Maybe he’d picked up the
trick, whatever it was, in childhood, and brought it to bear when his energy
levels were high enough and his frustration with his life intense enough? It
seems that these extreme magical events occur almost exclusively to those
who cannot control them—that they are the products of unconscious
processes rather than the consciously willed miracles that magicians work so
hard for.
Sometimes it seems as if the wild energies of poltergeists are enhanced or
enabled by where they happen. This suggests, at least to me, a connection
between poltergeist activity and the household spirits of an earlier age. In a
folk culture where the spirit world was never far away, no doubt the family
would have heard stories about other odd events in the house over the years
and generations. We read of people feeding certain spirits by, for instance,
leaving fresh milk out overnight. The spirits would do tasks around the home.
They would become part of the family, but like human family members,
would occasionally cause problems. Some spirits would operate a kind of
protection racket, demanding food and attention and causing trouble until
they got it. So the family needed to communicate with the spirits, negotiate
and keep respect on both sides. The opposite arrangement also happened—
Claude Lecouteux (2) quotes a tenth century account of a spirit called the
Hairy One, who haunted a blacksmith, banging hammers all night, until
coming to an arrangement with the victim, who had to leave a pitcher out
which the Hairy One would fill with stolen wine every night.
   I wonder if the smith’s or his neighbour’s household would have had a
young person whose energies were out of balance and who leaked energy
which fed the spirit? In older communities, of larger extended families, this
would be very likely.
   Maybe the Spirit Paradigm is the best way of dealing with poltergeist-type
occurrences. In that case, we can see how, after the witch-persecutions then
the Age of Reason suppressed this method of dealing with these magical
patterns, we no longer had the opportunity to come to a mutually beneficial
arrangement with these entities. So instead of getting them to help around the
farm or protect the household we are faced with wild, rogue phenomena that
are no use to us, except to remind us of what we are not aware of. Poltergeists
are like unemployed, vandal spirits.
The Levitator
Not all such bizarre events are generated unconsciously. Some people seem
to combine some degree of conscious awareness of what they are doing with
such powers. The nearest I ever got to poltergeist-type activity was when I
was quite new to magic, and was having a relationship with a woman who
had something similar to Poltergeist Pete, but a little less secretive about her
powers. For the purposes of this narrative I shall call her Anna.
   Once, we were in my room when there was a loud crash outside my room
door. The floor of the landing was bare floorboards, and it sounded like
someone had hurled, with all their strength, something the weight of a brick
against the floor. I got up to investigate, but there was no-one else in the
house, and no brick.
   It seems that people who have this chaotic energy around them attract it
from the environment too; one day I went to Anna’s house just as a light
summer storm was ending. She was standing in her kitchen, shaking, blinking
with shock—she had been doing her washing, with the window open, when a
bolt of lightning had come through the window and struck her washing
machine. Shortly after that, I went with her to visit Ray Sherwin. She was
telling stories of her elemental chaos, in particular when she had got into her
previous boyfriend’s sports car, and it had blown up. The TV was on in the
background at the time she was telling this tale, and it suddenly sputtered a
few sparks and went out, permanently.
On one occasion we tried to put Anna’s energy to good use, with unexpected
consequences (as told in Bright From the Well). In brief, she and I did some
sexual magic to remove what some people felt as a haunting in the house I
lived in. As we lay quietly, we heard the sound of rain, seemingly inside the
house. On investigation, it turned out that a water pipe had burst in the cellar,
spraying water about ten feet across the room. The temperature had been
freezing, and the pipe had been both damaged and blocked by ice, which had
suddenly thawed near the rupture in the pipe.
   The most spectacular event I witnessed with Anna was also included in
Bright From the Well, when she levitated. I quote from that account:
   …looking up I noticed that Anna, who’d been lying on the floor, was now
   raised off it. It seemed that only the back of her head was touching the
   carpet, and the rest of her was upwards, straight, at an angle of about
   thirty degrees to the horizontal. Her left hand was raised to touch her
   brow, as if she was concentrating. This image stayed perfectly in focus,
   unlike fleeting eidetic input from the deep mind. I looked round at the
   other two witnesses, who looked as silently awed as I was. After a few
   seconds, Anna was flat on the floor again, and I asked her what she’d
   experienced. She replied that she had felt herself drift upwards, just as all
   three observers had witnessed.
   I have never stopped marveling at this. I imagine that, if I’d been the only
witness, I would have eventually rejected the actuality of the experience, put
it down to a folie à deux concocted between myself and my girlfriend. But
this is not possible—all four people in that room saw or experienced what
was happening. And by normal standards of what happens in the world, that
event was impossible.
   If we examine it as a possible case of energy magic, we have to ask: how
much energy would it take to lift someone like that? Assuming Anna
weighed 50 kilograms, and that her midpoint was raised 40 centimetres above
the ground, we get a figure of around 200 Joules of energy (3).
   This is the amount of energy generated by one person exerting themselves
a bit for about two seconds, so this fits with the fact that, given the right
position, I could have raised Anna up by actually applying that amount of
muscle power—but it still seems fantastical that she could have lifted herself
up, with nothing to push against. It’s not the amount of energy that is
surprising and hard to explain, but the way it was applied; it was clear from
looking at her that she was not like someone who has got their feet up on a
chair and the rest of their weight resting on the back of their head. If she had
had her full weight acting on the back of her head, that position would have
been unbearably uncomfortable.
   Thinking about the incident this way gives us another perspective: not only
had her body been lifted up somehow, but it was being supported in place for
what I would estimate as five seconds.
   The physics of being suspended is not as simple as the physics of being
lifted. Two possible models are the lifting effect of upward draughts of air,
like on an air hockey table, and magnetic levitation. Neither of these are
anywhere near actual mechanisms, but I decided to do the calculations for the
air suspension model just to get some idea of the overall levels of energy
expended.
   Making a few assumptions (4), we get a power output of around 16kW.
Applied for five seconds, this means using 80kJ, which is rather a lot more
than the 200J needed to lift Anna up!
To gain some kind of perspective on these energies, here is a short table:
What can you do with 200 Joules of energy?
 Boil nearly 6 grams of water
 Transmit the BBC TV signal from a major transmitter for 2
 milliseconds (5)

 Lift a 50 kg person 40 cm off the ground
What does it take to generate 200 Joules of energy?
 Burning 1/30 of a gram of coal under power station conditions (6)

 About two seconds on a cross-training machine (7)
What can you do with 75,000 Joules of energy?
 Boil over 2 kilograms of water
 Transmit the BBC TV signal from a major transmitter for 75 seconds
 Support a 50 kg person off the ground for 5 seconds
What does it take to generate 75,000 Joules of energy?
 Burning 12.5 grams of coal under power station conditions
 About 12 minutes on a cross-training machine

   It is easy to see from this short comparison how inaccurate our usual
intuitions about energy are, because it seems incredible that you could boil
six grams of water with a tiny speck of coal. We cannot expect much more
help from conventional mechanical models at this stage. As an overview of
Anna’s energetics, it may be worth noting that she is (or was) a small, petite
woman, but she ate more food than I did, at about one and half times her
weight.
To return to the poltergeist model of understanding these extreme events,
recent theories have concluded, like Colin Wilson (8) did 35 years ago, that
poltergeist activity is centred on individuals as distinct from places. In their
paper ‘Some conjectures about the mechanism of poltergeist phenomenon’,
P. Brevetto and V. Maxia conclude that:
   A decrease in entropy […] in brain of pubescent people throws a greater
   amount of entropy (disorder) into the brain environment, which, in
   exceptional cases, originates poltergeist disturbances.
   Making allowances for the shaky translation from the original Italian, the
limitations of this view are still glaringly apparent: the only sources that are
considered are pubescent girls. The reason for this seems to be that these
theorists have come up with a rough sketch of a thermodynamic basis for the
event. This demands a kind of chaotic change of state in someone’s brain,
and the only one they could come up with was the onset of puberty. Of the
five cases mentioned, two of them seemed to be associated with females—
one 11-year old and the other 19 years, the third occurred in a crowded
cinema, where any number of people could have been the source of the
energy, and no pubescent girls are noted in the other two cases. I join with
Brian Josephson, a physicist who is on the editorial board of
Neuroquantology, the journal this paper was published in, who apparently
said "This looks distinctly flaky to me." When even your editor thinks your
data is bad, what hope is there?
   Neither of my ‘poltergeist-like’ contacts fitted into the pubescent girl
category. They were a twenty-something man and a thirty-year old woman.
Brevetto and Maxia come across as the kind of theoreticians who decided
they would clear up some mystery in their lunchtimes, without the burden of
digging deep into the occurrences they provide such glib theories for.
However, it is interesting that they invoke a number of well-known,
respectable physical theories and link them together into a convincing chain
of mechanisms.
   One of the most indispensable links in the chain is a quantum one, an
enhancement of vacuum polarization, resulting in changes in the molecular
bonds in the air’s gases. This idea could get us asking the kind of questions
that could lead to a physical theory of how human nervous systems produce
certain kinds of ‘magical’ effects.
   But I think we need to look further than the idea of pressure differentials in
the air for our levitation mechanism. The energetics just do not add up.
Something that is not energy is causing something to happen which should
require a lot of energy. We are totally out of any version of the Energy Magic
Paradigm.
   At this point, the imagination we use to write science fiction is out best
ally, and it is likely to amount to nothing. We can speculate about some kind
of anti-gravity effect generated by the levitator, but this is not of course any
kind of well-understood mechanism. We have to admit that our search for
mechanisms points up the remoteness of current physical ideas to an event as
bizarre as someone rising into the air and remaining there with nothing to
support them.
   The Conclusions chapter that follows lays out some possible mechanisms
and tries to pull the whole thing together.
References
(1) Susan Leybourne, personal communication
(2) https://www.amazon.co.uk/Tradition-Household-Spirits-Ancestral-
Practices/dp/1620551055
(3) Arrived at using E = height raised x force applied.
(4) Assuming Anna’s one-side surface area to be 0.8 square metres, we get a
flow rate derived from the formula (found at
http://www.veetech.org.uk/Tutorials/tutorial__1____calculating_flow_.htm
):
Air flow rate = Cd.A.[2 ☐ P/ ☐ ]1/2
Where A is the area of the aperture you are blowing the air through, ☐ P is
the pressure difference you want, ☐ is the density of air and Cd is a
coefficient peculiar to the equipment, and which is less than 1.
Taking air density as 1.2kg/cubic metre, Anna’s effective surface area as 0.8
sq. metres, the pressure differential as 625N/sq. metre, and respecting that the
unknown contribution of the coefficient will not substantially change the
broad figures we are aiming at, I get a flow rate of around 25 cubic metres
per second.
The flow rate gives us a fan power derived from:
Fan power = air flow rate x pressure
This gives a fan power of around 16kW.
(5) Winter Hill transmitter, Manchester, runs at around 100kW, so it
produces 100kJ per second.
(6) Calorific value of coal in power stations given as 1.8 kWh per kg, at
www.eia.gov/tools/faqs etc.
(7) According to the machine in my gym, which gave me a power rating of
125W, i.e. 125 J/second.
(8) Colin Wilson: Poltergeist, https://www.amazon.co.uk/Poltergeist-
Colin-Wilson/dp/0450048802
Conclusions
   To pull together the various threads of the book, let’s first look at the Key
Points from the ends of Parts I-IV, and then summarize the key ideas in Part
V.
The Key Points
I: Breathwork comes in many varieties, but they fall on a spectrum between
two poles of techniques that are for health and everyday well-being—the
'preserving' styles and the techniques that are for producing exceptional and
possibly unsettling states of consciousness for healing, magic and so on—the
'disturbing' techniques.
II: ‘Spiritual crises’ may arise through any kind of practice that changes
profoundly your experience of yourself, including some kinds of breathwork.
   Practising breathwork may open us up to changes, through which we are
steered by forms of guidance that are communicated through the body and
feeling.
   The resolution of problems glimpsed in breathwork may occur through art.
III: An energy magic/energy cultivation (Qigong) approach to healing
produces reliable results, often bordering on the miraculous. This is
especially the case with group energy work such as Breath of Light circle and
Chaotrons.
   Energy magic is an extraordinary and unique way of apprehending the
relationship between ourselves and our worlds. It produces reliable results in
healing, and is certainly the best way of using the primary data of embodied
consciousness. In the hands of experts, and sometimes the hands of the naïve
believer, it can lead to extraordinary effects.
IV: Sexual desire and its associated inner sensations can be transmuted using
energy circulation and inner alchemy techniques.
   These transmutations enable, for example:
         - greater and more frequent sexual pleasure;
         - enhanced intimacy which can be expanded into invocation;
         - dreamwork and various kinds of visionary magical work;
         - healing.
Part V: Themes
Below, I summarize all the types of ‘energy’ experiences discussed in this
book. Within each category of weirdness, I’ve arranged the events with the
weirdest later. What this table represents is actually a map of magical effects
and experiences that are sometimes attributed to energy. Of course, it is
actually a map of possible magical mechanisms.

   WEIRDNESS                    TYPE OF                    PROBABLE MECHANISM
    LEVEL                        EVENT

        1             Sensed energy in the body; the         Electric fields and currents
                             Energy Shiver
        1              Hands-near energy healing                  Electromagnetic,
                                                                   e.g. microwave
        1                 Nearby weather magic                    Electromagnetic,
                                                                   e.g. microwave
        1                 UFOs as ‘Earthlights’             Ionization caused by tectonic
                                                                       stresses
        1                    ‘Singing stones’                 Unknown, but probably
                                                                   electromagnetic
        1          Energy spheres; evoked forms that           ‘Dissipative structures’
                             remain visible
        2              Remote ‘energy’ healing                  Information transfer
        2          Group effects—Chaotron, Breath of      Information and electromagnetic
                                 Light                                transfer

        3           Egregore magic aspects of healing,     Information transfer in groups
                              such as Reiki

        4                     Map dowsing                 Unknown; some kind of non-local
                                                               information transfer
        4                 Remote weather magic                      Unknown

        5           Poltergeists, random gross physical              Unknown
                                 disruptions
        5                        Levitation                          Unknown


   The investigations I’ve written about in Part V, into what mechanism
might be responsible for some of the miracles of ‘energy magic’ are, as far as
I’m aware, unique. The option exists to ‘go retro’ and invoke ideas like
‘planes’ of reality, each of which have different laws, the mainstays of
Neoplatonic schemes.
   My attitude to such schemes is that they have had their day. The divisions
Neoplatonist models make between different levels of reality is anathema to
the basic central idea of this book—that we do not need a rigid division
between ‘higher’ and ‘lower’ ‘bodies’ and indeed, that these are bad for us.
   The nearest theoretical considerations to these thoughts might be in the
works of Peter Carroll, who has written a good deal on his physicalist theory
of magic, including an entire book, The Octavo (1).
   However, he does not mention the ‘energy paradigm’ in that book and
devotes a mere five pages in Liber Kaos (2) to what he calls ‘Auric Magic’.
These pages are actually an even-shorter edit of a booklet he distributed
briefly in 1991 called Book Five, written hurriedly after the first edition of
Liber Kaos was already out, in response to his coming into contact with some
very skilled and impressive ‘energy magicians’. In the Auric Magic chapter
in Liber Kaos he writes:
   I suggest that auric magic does not work by these agencies [internal forces
   or energies]. Rather, auric magic is a special case of enchantment and
   sometimes divination.
   This theory is a potentially useful theoretical framework for Weirdness
Level 2 and above, where we cannot any longer rely on respectable physics.
Levels 2 and 3 events involve non-respectable exchanges of information
between human nervous systems, and for Levels 4 and 5 we have no
scientifically-respectable mechanism at all.
   The next sentence starts promisingly—note the reference to information
transfer—then stops short with an uncritical use of Cartesian dualism:
   It works by an exchange of information (not energy) between the
   subconscious (not the body) and the environment, which can include the
   body.
   If anyone can show me the boundary between the ‘subconscious’ and the
body, I might be able to make sense of that statement. Basically, Carroll’s
exposition amounts to giving up on serious consideration of an area of magic
that he had no interest in practising.
So where does this leave us? With a basic disjunction between the most
probable mechanisms for a wide range of magical effects. Starting with the
fairly-respectable mechanisms such as changing gene-expression by act of
will (Body Alchemy), we range through the mysteries of resonance between
human nervous systems to the utterly Damned magics where consciousness
intervenes directly in what we call matter, with nothing like a respectable
mechanism to account for it. The latter types of effect do suggest we are
nowhere near understanding the physics of all the most impressive magics.
   Personally, I am quite comfortable with that disjunction. What matters in
magic, as we have been arguing all along, is our ability to believe in whatever
makes the magic work. Everything else, all that playing around with exotic
theories, is for fun.
References
(1) https://www.amazon.co.uk/Octavo-Sorcerer-Scientists-Grimoire-
Peter-Carroll/dp/1906958173
(2) https://www.amazon.co.uk/d/cka/Liber-Kaos-Peter-J-
Carroll/0877287422
Appendix A:
Chaos Magic—the Main Ideas and Where They
Came From
The Sceptic’s Way
Chaos Magic is not a system invented by a single magical writer, but a whole
approach to magic, the kind of movement within the history of magic that is
often referred to as a current. As far as I know, the first publication to use the
term Chaos Magic was Pete Carroll’s Liber Null (1), in the second red cover
edition by Ray Sherwin’s Morton Press (1978-79). The core idea that the
Chaos current grew from is that we are not stuck with a single belief about
the world but that radically different beliefs about what is going on can be
entertained within the same skull.
   Before this kind of thinking, magic had been in the doldrums for some
years, with a tendency to reduce everything to psychological models. The
reason for this is clear—a population increasingly educated to a scientific
worldview had no room for magic in their belief-worlds, so magic retreated
to the esoteric end of psychology. Even a giant of scientific imagination such
as Einstein found it too big a leap to believe in some aspects of quantum
mechanics because they implied the possibility of ‘spooky action at a
distance’. No-one brought up and encultured in the modern world can easily
bring themselves to believe in magic, and this includes people who’ve grown
up in the depths of the Amazon forest. In the course of interviewing visionary
artist and ex-ayahuasquero Pablo Amaringo, Donal Ruane asked him if he
believed in the spirits all the time, even when not under the influence of
ayahuasca (2). No, replied Amaringo, even shamans can’t believe in the
spirits all the time, not in the modern world.
   Chaos Magic attracted me and many others because it does not require that
you abandon scientific thinking. Rather, you grow accustomed to switching
between viewpoints, depending on which is the most relevant and useful for
what you want to achieve. So it's okay to ‘believe in’ say, subtle energies if
that is what it takes for you to get results in that area. After your energy
magic practice, you can go back to the physics-based view that there is no
evidence for such energies. Chaos Magic was the first approach to magic that
faced up to the challenge of culturally-ingrained scepticism.
Multiple Models
Multi-model thinking as a way of accommodating the existence of magic
seems to have originated with Robert Anton Wilson, who called it multi-
model agnosticism, since the core idea is not to hold on to any belief, but to
admit that one really does not know any ultimate truth. Any perspective we
have on the world is bound to be part of a massive, inclusive gestalt, a whole
bunch of beliefs about the world that come as a complete nested set, every
belief implying every other. These sets of world-describing (or world-
creating) beliefs are known as reality tunnels. Once we recognize that we are
in a particular reality tunnel which limits everything we can think—for
instance Atheist Scientism, Buddhism or Catholicism—we are then free to
shift to another. This is an essential skill for any magician to master who
values their mental health in the modern or post-modern age. Applied to
magic, multi-model thinking went way beyond what the post-Crowley
current called Thelema was doing with belief. It was radical, in the genuine
sense, of looking right into the roots of magical technique.
William Burroughs, Nothing Is True and the ‘23 Current’
If you’ve read anything about Chaos Magic you will probably have come
across the slogan ‘Nothing is True, Everything is Permitted’, bandied about
with varying degrees of irony. In the sound-piece Apocalypse (3) Burroughs
intones: ‘Everything is permitted BECAUSE nothing is true… It is all make-
believe, illusion, dream, art.’ This nihilism is a dramatization of the way we
make up our worlds, an exposure of the inherent fictional qualities of the
realities we each inhabit.
Core Technical Ideas: Carroll, Sherwin and the Early IOT
   Chaos Magic crystallized as a current with the publication of two books in
1978, both issued by Ray Sherwin’s Morton Press. Sherwin’s own The Book
of Results (4) was a small booklet with a set of instructions for doing your
own sigils, with minimal metaphysics. It no doubt encouraged a lot of people
to have a go at making up their own magical spells. Years later the occultural
organization Temple Ov Psychic Youth was adopting this technology in their
monthly sigil-fests. (In fact TOPY Steel, the Sheffield ‘station’, reissued
Sherwin’s books in the early 1990s.) The other 1978 publication was Pete
Carroll’s Liber Null. This was a full technically-slanted articulation of the
multi-model approach, and at its centre was a major insight into what magic
needs in order to succeed. Carroll articulated two ingredients essential to all
spell-casting—belief shifting and what he called gnosis.
   The idea of belief itself as a magical technique is the core of Chaos
Magic’s technical innovation, its technical USP. In magic, we choose a belief
or, more often, a nested set of beliefs, that makes the result we want possible
or, when the magic succeeds, inevitable.
   To view belief as a major principle of magic is a very powerful belief-
about-belief, or meta-belief, as central a magical principle as, for instance,
Crowley’s idea of True Will. Julian Vayne, in Now That’s What I Call Chaos
Magick (co-authored with Greg Humphries) (5) sketches a history of modern
magic which I would broadly agree with, particularly in the way he teases out
central principles from a succession of magical texts. Starting with Eliphas
Levi, who gave us Will, the Astral Light and Correspondences, via the
Golden Dawn with Imagination and Aleister Crowley who enjoined us to
Work Without Lust of Result we come to Austin Spare’s rejection of
traditional systems and embrace of Open-Handed Magic, based on a DIY-
metaphysics.
And Now?
Chaos Magic has, so far, been extraordinarily successful. The magical scene
from the death of Crowley to the late 1970s (leaving aside the magically-
influenced cults that mushroomed in the 60s-70s) seemed to have retreated
into a Jung-influenced psychologism—‘It’s all in the mind (or spirit)’—with
its tendency to treat magic, even from the inside, as an elderly, unrespectable
uncle—now partially re​habilitated—of psychotherapy. Magical orders were
of little help—the OTO seemed to throw out anyone who was at all creative
or who practised any magic outside of a few Crowley-approved rituals.
Along with some vaguely neo-traditionalist yearnings, this mishmash
crystallized (pun intended) into the sloppy, muddled thinking of the New Age
movement. To this tired, enfeebled state of affairs Chaos Magic opposed a
vigorous, rigorous and pragmatic wizardry, a path of power whose core was
the restored romance of sorcery.
   This approach has been immensely influential; it would be hard to find an
area of modern magical practice where its profound technical insights haven’t
been incorporated, though perhaps grudgingly and covertly in some
instances!
   Chaos Magic, in stripping magic back to its essentials, not only faced and
overcame the problem of culturally-ingrained scepticism but also partakes of
what I believe is a very ancient attitude to magic: radical pragmatism.
Traditionalist purists often miss out on the extreme likelihood that our
magical ancestors did not care about writing a book of rules but would have
grasped and pressed into service anything they could get to work for them.
This is the core of the magical attitude.
References
(1) Liber Null, https://www.amazon.co.uk/Liber-Null-Psychonaut-Peter-
Carroll/dp/0877286396
(2) Donal Ruane, unpublished film interview.
(3) https://youtu.be/bubCpbx-DHk
(4) https://www.amazon.co.uk/Book-Results-Ray-
Sherwin/dp/1411625587
(5) https://www.amazon.co.uk/Thats-What-Call-Chaos-
Magick/dp/1869928741
Appendix B:
Resources for Connected Breathwork
To Start Practising
In order to master this technique, you will need a coach. Your coach (not
‘therapist’, because this is an intrinsically enjoyable experience, and oriented
towards individual mastery of the technique) is there to provoke mindfulness,
that's all. Connected breathwork is very safe, and always produces beneficial
effects, but it is difficult to maintain the unusual breathing pattern for more
than a few minutes without someone there to remind you to breath deeper,
faster or whatever is required. After a few hours of coached sessions, you
should have enough experience to do a full session without a coach.
   Most coaches in Rebirthing or Vivation lineages (see Appendix C) aim to
equip the student with enough experience to be able to work alone
indefinitely if desired.
   Check my website at www.chaotopia.co to explore Connected Breathwork
and to arrange your breathwork sessions.
   Although I am based in England, I also coach remotely by Skype video. If
you are based a long way from me, you might consider this form of coaching.
Connected Breathwork FAQs
Is it generally recommended that we do Connected Breathwork every day? If
not, how often?
Connected Breathwork works by integrating unresolved material which is
usually unconscious. We cannot have conscious control over how this
material is processed and integrated—all we can do is cooperate with the
integration process by giving it opportunities to happen.
   The timescale on which material is integrated is not within conscious
control either. When we start doing breathwork, this sends a signal to the
deep mind that we want to cooperate with our transformation, and so 'stuff''
comes up, material that requires integration. After a while of working with
this material, there is no longer the same tension and intensity to our sessions,
and not much happens.
   The frequency with which we need to do sessions tends to decrease after
an initial intense stage. When you first do breathwork, it can be worthwhile to
do sessions two or three times a week or even daily during really intense,
difficult phases (the more emotion you are going through, the faster the
results you get). When things settle down, it is likely to drop to once or twice
a month.
How long should a session last? Is an hour the ideal time?
An hour guarantees that if anything is going to come up, it will. Twenty
minutes I would say is a minimum.
In meditation it is generally assumed that it's better to sit for a short while
every day than one hour a week. Is this valid in Breathwork too?
No; see remarks above.
Is ceremony or ritual necessary for breathwork?
No.
Is music necessary?
Not in Rebirthing, Vivation or other breathwork styles descending from
Rebirthing. The loud music is specifically a Holotropic Breathwork practice.
   See Appendix C.
Is it possible to learn Connected Breathwork when using asthma inhalers?
Yes.
Is it necessary to have an empty stomach to practice Connected Breathwork?
It helps if you have not eaten in the past two hours.
Breathwork Videos Online
There are currently very few about Connected Breathwork.
https://youtu.be/7omuv5B-HhA Seth Bartlett, Conscious Connected
Breathing Tutorial. About 54 minutes. Allows time to try out some aspects of
Connected Breathwork.
https://youtu.be/16SDgLOKy5k Time: 3:55. Liz Green teaches 20
connected breaths (see Appendix 4, Exercises)
https://youtu.be/KMFPvw5YGas How Breathwork Was Reborn: seven-
minute talk by Jim Morningstar on the history of Connected Breathwork.
https://youtu.be/YVILRQ4gHBk 45-minute interview with Christina and
Stan Grof - Holotropic Breathwork
https://youtu.be/wsh2TuVEytk Four minutes. In German with English
subtitles. Gives a vivid impression of the intensity of a Holotropic
Breathwork group session. Holotropic Breathwork with Klaus John - Film
Trailer
https://youtu.be/fotk_ILlggc Time: 3.40. Patricia Bacall: Vivation - 5 Top
Reasons to Do Breathwork
Appendix C:
Some Connected Breathwork Exercises
Being Here Now
You are sitting here… How many other activities are going on in your
awareness? Take a moment to sit quietly and observe the flow of your
thoughts, sensations and feelings. Notice the rhythm of your breath.
   Did you find, after a few moments, that you felt like doing something, the
beginnings of a desire for some kind of activity?
   Your active mind may have told you that you are becoming bored, that you
need more stimulation. You may want to eat or drink something, to talk to
someone, to go out, to read a book, to watch TV, to play on a computer, to
pick up the phone and call someone, to get on with some task that needs
doing. If you refuse the impulse to act, and instead just sit and do nothing,
what happens in your awareness? Again, observe the flow of thoughts,
sensations, feelings and desires, and notice the rhythm of your breath.
   Did you find, after a few more minutes of stillness, that it was difficult to
keep your attention on the rhythm of your breath? That your mind insisted on
flooding your attention with thoughts? You may have noticed what some
people call the internal monologue—the almost-incessant flow of verbal
thoughts, the inner sound of you talking to yourself.
   You may also notice that your breath cycle is frequently interrupted—
especially when you think!
   Now sit quietly again for a few moments, and focus on what is pleasant
about your present state. Make up your mind to enjoy the present moment to
the utmost.
   Did you find, after a few moments, that you got distracted by your
thoughts? That stream of thoughts, that internal monologue, is enormously
powerful, if it can distract you from enjoying yourself!
   Wouldn't it be great if, when you had nothing much to do or think about,
you could just go into a bliss state, just feel really good?
   And what is stopping you from doing just that? Your little experiment just
now suggests that it is the unregulated stream of largely irrelevant and
uninteresting thoughts that stands in the way of ecstasy. However, that is just
a part of it: in order to feel ecstatic, you have to be in the present moment,
really here, now. If you wanted to be somewhere else, or doing something
else, you wouldn't be ecstatic now, would you?
   In order to feel ecstatic in present time, you have to be in your body in
present time. The boredom of pointless mental activity is a screen which
covers our present-time awareness, distracts us from the amazing range of
sensations and emotions that flow through us all the time. When you are
doing Fast and Full breathing, it is impossible to be bored! You will be in an
incredibly rich awareness of feelings in present time, feelings that
increasingly seem like patterns of energy inside you.
   You will learn to breathe continuously and intensely enough to overwhelm
the internal monologue and put yourself in the present moment, in your body,
in feelings. You will learn to appreciate whatever is there, just under the
surface of your thoughts, and so to achieve bliss states more and more
readily.
The Bliss of the Now: Twenty Connected Breaths
Sometimes you may notice that you are not really ‘here’, in present time. You
might be feeling lost in your thoughts about the future or emotions from the
past.
   With breathwork, we are cultivating ecstasy, which starts with being
present, in real time, in your body. Try this exercise, as often as you like, to
bring yourself into present time.
     Sit and relax.
     Pay attention to the current of your breath, connecting each breath to the
     next so that there is no pause between them—as soon as you finish
     breathing in, start breathing out.
     As your exhale ends naturally, start inhaling.
     Take four deeper breaths than usual, followed by the deepest breath you
     can manage.
     Then repeat this cycle four times, giving you 20 breaths altogether, all
     connected, so there are no pauses or holds.
     This brings you back into now, into present time in your body.
     You can do it many times a day—but don't try it while driving, (at least
     not until you are used to the effects!)
The Volume Control
If you’ve started learning Connected Breathwork you’ll know how useful it is
to control the intensity of the sensations you are feeling. We do this by
moving between ‘Fast and Full’ breathing and ‘Fast and Shallow’. These are
your Volume Controls.
   The shift between these breaths does not come naturally, it takes a bit of
practice, which is pleasant to do when you have a few minutes.
   Both of them are practised with connected breathing (no holds or pauses),
through the mouth and with a relaxed exhale.
      - Find a space where you don’t have to respond to anyone or anything
      for a few minutes.
      External noises are fine, just as long as you don’t have to answer them.
      - Breathe through your mouth, working up to a Fast and Full breath—
      something that is a little bit faster and fuller than feels normal.
      - Remember to relax as much as you can.
      - When you start to feel the effects of the F and F breath, start to make
      the breaths shallower.
      - You can keep on doing this until you are panting like a dog—though
      that fast a breath may take some practice.
      - When you feel like it, switch back to F and F. And then to F and Sh
      again.
      - Repeat a few times.
*Allow at least 20 minutes before driving or operating machinery, until you
get used to the mildly altered state.
Overcoming Insomnia
If you suffer from the kind of sleeplessness that’s a result of your thoughts
racing, even when you’re tired, then this technique could bring you a lot of
relief.
   Lying on your back, with your arms at your side, start doing deep, fast
connected breaths. That is, a little faster and a lot deeper than your norm, and
connected—which means as soon as you finish the inhale, you begin the
exhale—there is no pause or hold in this breath cycle.
   Keep this up until you can feel some dizziness or light-headedness, and/or
some tingling in the hands and feet. This is the beginning of the special state
of consciousness that comes about from connected breathwork. You should
find now that your thoughts are less and less important, that your attention is
focused on the sensations in your body.
   Do this for a few minutes, then turn onto your side and curl up. The
relative restriction of breath usually results in rapid onset of sleep.
Sweet dreams!
Appendix D:
Origins and Schools of Connected Breathwork
Origins of Connected Breathwork
Shamanism
Some people claim shamanic practices as the ultimate source of connected
breathing techniques. This is true if we note that the meaning of the term
‘shaman’ has become so diluted as to mean anyone who gets into to ESCs
and uses them in his her spiritual or magical development. Ever since Mircea
Eliade wrote Shamanism: Archaic Techniques of Ecstasy (1) everyone who
writes out a lineage for their technique feels obliged to put ‘Shamanism’ at
the top. To put it in a nutshell, connected breathing is not shamanism but
almost certainly was (and is) used by shamans.
   As to more recent and better-documented lineages, there is some common
ground between connected breathing and some of the more intense
pranayama styles discussed in Chapter I-2. But no-one ever seriously
suggests that there is a lineage there. For that, we must look elsewhere, and
much closer to the modern day.
Wilhelm Reich’s Therapy
Reich used intense breathing techniques with his patients. In a document
called ‘Breathing—The establishment of Natural Respiration as part of
Vegetotherapy’ (2) (hard to find but sometimes quoted) we glimpse what part
breathing plays in the therapeutic session.

         1. Patients breathed in and out deeply. At first, it was obvious that
            this was forced. Reich told his patients to ‘get into the swing of
            it’. A relaxed, open mouth helped the process
         2. After some minutes the patient would exhibit signs of
            ‘inhibitions emerging’, in other words his or her trauma would
            start playing out in terms of muscle contractions.
         3. Reich would sometimes apply ‘gentle pressure’ to the upper
            abdomen of the patient.
         4. The patient’s inhibitions would surface, then Reich would tell
            them to ‘give in’ to the waves of motion which sometimes ripple
            through the patient’s body, leading to a release of the ‘orgasm
            reflex’.
         5. The surrender of self-control in the breathing rhythm is
            particularly important for the exhale. Reich characterized the
            full, relaxed exhale as a natural expression of pleasure.

Looking at this sequence, we can see where the idea that deep, visceral
breathing could trigger the release of repressed material came from. This idea
is carried over into Connected Breathwork.
   How did this transmission of ideas happen? Possibly the lineage runs via
body-therapist Ida Rolf, who worked at Esalen where she would have met
Leonard Orr. Grof seemed to come to it independently, but he will have met
those Esalen people too.
The Two Main Schools: Holotropic and Rebirthing Breathwork
Compared
The two teachers whose work lies at the root of all modern Connected
Breathwork are Leonard Orr and Stanislav Grof. At roughly the same time in
the early 1970s that Orr was developing Rebirthing, Holotropic Breathwork
was devised by Stanislav Grof, the brilliant pioneer in the use of psychedelic
medicines in psychiatric healing. When he was no longer able to use
psychedelics in his practice, Grof developed Holotropic Breathwork to be
able to get his clients into ecstatic consciousness and do the healing with
them.
   These two styles have much in common—continuous breathing which is
somewhat deeper and faster than usual—but some distinct and important
differences in the details of the practice.
   Rebirthing Breathwork emphasizes the connection of the inhale to the
exhale without pausing or holding at all. Holotropic Breathwork also utilizes
connected breathing but also includes hyperventilation.
It is fair to say that no instruction is given in breathing techniques in
Holotropic Breathwork, except the practitioner is encouraged to
hyperventilate. Where a Rebirthing client will be taught to modify their
breathing patterns to avoid the tense, shallow frenzy of hyperventilation, in a
Holotropic session the client will be encouraged to stay with the
hyperventilation and deal with the tetanic cramping which will then occur.
The resulting tetany is dealt with by ‘focused energy release’, in which an
assistant pushes against the part of you which is cramping.
   I am not among those who criticize Holotropic Breathwork for
encouraging hyperventilation as being dangerous; I think it can be
enormously useful for some clients. It is not ‘banned’ from Rebirthing
sessions, and some clients choose to stay in hyperventilation and obviously
get important things from it.
   The overall approach of Holotropic Breathwork strikes me as more hectic
and confrontational than Rebirthing. This is not a criticism—I thoroughly
enjoyed and got a lot out of the Holotropic weekend with Stan Grof I
attended in Brighton a few years ago. The whole experience is very different
from Rebirthing; the use of loud, rhythmic music and a very large group
produces a kind of ‘social permission’ which encourages people to leap
about, babble in tongues and so forth. The result is a kind of benign shamanic
Bedlam.
Perhaps the most significant difference between the two schools is that in
Rebirthing Breathwork and its descendent Vivation the aim is to supply the
client with all the technical skill to the extent that eventually they can go
away and do it on their own. To this end, Rebirthing and Vivation are
practised either in very small groups or in one-to-one sessions, whereas
Holotropic Breathwork is generally practised in large groups, often more than
a hundred people in one space. Because of the way that Holotropic
Breathwork requires such large resources and an entire weekend for even a
basic approach to it, the sessions tend to be rare events, and very expensive.
This makes it more exclusive and organization-oriented than Rebirthing.
   As a result, a lot of people find the Rebirthing/Vivation approach more
flexible when it comes to their own rhythm, their own step-style of deep
transpersonal development. And of course that's the ultimate arbiter—the part
of you that decides how fast your liberation can proceed over any given day,
week or year.
   In the end, it does come down to two slightly different approaches, each of
which are suitable for different people, and different stages of your individual
development.
The Modern Day
   Leonard Orr associated Connected Breathwork with the restimulation of
birth trauma memories, and coined the term Rebirthing for his form of it.
This is a very 'leading' belief, and most clients in Rebirthing sessions will
eventually experience birth memories. His students Jim Leonard and Phil
Laut reinvented the whole process and called it Vivation. Whilst this may be
a clumsy neologism, it does the job of de-coupling connected breathwork
from the loaded linguistics of ‘rebirthing'. Laut and Leonard emphasized
instead the ecstatic features of the experience, rather than programming their
students for trauma and breakthrough. As far as they were concerned, what
matters is not that people break through traumas, but that they achieve bliss.
   Other schools of connected breathwork have since been developed. Gay
and Kathlyn Hendricks created Radiance Breath work and Integrative
Breathwork was developed by Jacqueline Small out of Holotropic
Breathwork. All of these techniques are based on the use of prolonged intense
breathwork to integrate troublesome, uncomfortable and painful emotions
and sensation into full-blown bliss.
The Present (and Future) of Breathwork
   Breathwork is undergoing interesting times. How do we breathwork
coaches position our work in the larger world?
   There is a currently a tendency in the Connected Breathwork community to
favour the technique becoming a licensed branch of psychotherapy, or an
adjunct to therapy. Writers such as Gunnel Minett (3) stress the advantages of
getting involved in the psychotherapeutic mainstream, getting connected
breathing recognized as an adjunct to therapy.
   This would certainly be a good thing for psychotherapy, but it may not be
so good for existing Connected Breathwork coaches who wish to continue to
offer training in this technique but have no intention of qualifying as
psychotherapists, if recognition were to result in legal restrictions on
Connected Breathwork practice.
   My current view is that this valuable technique should be available to any
who want to use it. On that basis, this book exists to introduce it to people as
an ‘underground’ discipline, a free thing you can learn to do for yourself and
those around you.
References
(1) Mircea Eliade - Shamanism: Archaic techniques of ecstasy,
https://www.amazon.co.uk/d/Books/Shamanism-Archaic-Techniques-
Ecstasy-Bollingen/0691119422
(2) ‘Vegetotherapy’ sounds very weird to the English reader; suffice it to say
that it has nothing to do with vegetables and is a clumsy translation that
means ‘therapy involving the autonomic nervous system’.
(3) http://www.florisbooks.co.uk/book/Gunnel-
Minett/Exhale/9780863154645
Appendix E:
Physiology and Safety in Connected Breathwork
Physiology of the Connected Breathwork Extraordinary State
In the course of normal breathing, only about 15% of the volume of air in the
lungs gets replaced with each breath. Deep down in the tiny alveoli, the
elastic bubble-sacs where air meets blood with only a thin layer of cells
between them, there is always a residual amount of the waste gas carbon
dioxide.
   It turns out that the presence of this waste product is not in any way a
problem, and in fact helps keep the composition of the blood on an even keel.
When we breathe deeper and faster far more of the gas volume gets replaced
with each breath. If we are doing exercise, our muscles are producing more
carbon dioxide, so the level of it is not dramatically affected. However, when
we combine fast, deep breathing with immobility, as we do when we are
breathing fast and full in Connected Breathwork, the flushing out of the lungs
causes the carbon dioxide level to drop.
   This situation has the medical name of hypocapnia, and a range of effects
on the body. One of the latter is constriction of the blood vessels in the brain,
leading to passing feelings of dizziness, typical of the first few minutes of
deep, fast connected breathing. This is one of the reasons why it’s not a good
idea to drive whilst doing this kind of breathing.
   Hypocapnia is generally regarded as medically harmless. However, the
drop in brain oxygen can lead to anxious moments. This can of course be
controlled by the breather if they have a coach or are practiced at this kind of
breathing. That is why Vivation and Rebirthing coaches teach the client the
Volume Control (see Chapter I-1), so that they can be in control of their level
of emotion.
   A further effect is that reduced carbon dioxide in the blood also causes the
blood to become more alkaline (‘alkalosis’). This in turn changes the balance
of ions in the blood and causes some nerves to fire more readily. and
increased nerve and muscle excitability. This leads to pins-and-needles
tingling in the early stages of fast and full breathing and in much more
extreme cases the cramping known as tetany.
   Also, because the brain stem regulates breathing according to the level of
blood CO2, hypocapnia can suppress breathing to the point of blackout. This
is entirely harmless if you have a coach and are not moving around at the
time; the breathing just starts up again when the carbon dioxide level has
risen sufficiently. I give an account in Chapter I-1, under ‘Stopping
Breathing’, of this happening to me.
   I looked into hypocapnia when a client got in touch with me, worried
because he’d read up on it on a medical website. We discussed it and his
fears were allayed; medical texts treat any abnormality as a problem. Of
course, if any symptoms like those associated with hypocapnia arose
spontaneously we would have good cause to be worried, because they could
well be pointers to a real medical problem. But as long as we know we are
inducing it in ourselves, and know techniques to stop it (just breathe
shallower) then we have no need to worry. Applied deliberately and
consciously, Connected Breathwork is no more dangerous than running for a
bus.
The Hyperventilation Issue
As noted in Appendix D: Origins and Schools, Holotropic Breathwork is
happy to encourage hyperventilation. Some Holotropic coaches have
suggested a new term for hyperventilation when it’s in a breathwork context
—‘superventilation’. This makes some sense—when we say
‘hyperventilation’ we are using a term coined by medical science to describe
a mild medical emergency, not a practice entered into by choice, with a clear
beginning and end. An argument along these lines is pursued by Gunnel
Minett (1).
  Another slant on the whole question is that André van Lysebeth in her
book Pranayama (2) classes both Kapalbhati and Bhastrika as
hyperventilation!
References
(1) http://www.florisbooks.co.uk/book/Gunnel-
Minett/Exhale/9780863154645
(2) Andre Van Lysebeth, Pranayama: The Yoga of Breathing, p83 in the
edition here: https://www.waterstones.com/book/pranayama/andre-van-
lysebeth/9780955241239
Bibliography and Recommended Reading
Connected Breathwork in General:
Dave Lee - Connect Your Breath! Breathwork, Ecstasy and Healing. Booklet
and CD set. Pub. Attractor, 2002.
All the basic information relevant to all schools of Connected Breathwork,
plus a 60-minute audio CD which works as a ‘virtual coach’ for solitary
sessions. Available from the author, from
http://www.chaotopia.com/publications/
Gunnel Minnett - Exhale: An Overview of Breathwork. Floris Books, 2004.
Thoughtful overview of Connected Breathwork as therapy.

Rebirthing:
Catherine Dowling - Rebirthing and Breathwork. Piatkus, London, 2000.
Very good general introduction to Rebirthing.

Vivation:
Jim Leonard and Phil Laut - Vivation: The Science of Enjoying All of Your
Life. Vivation Publishing, 1990.
Originally published as Rebirthing: The Science of Enjoying All of Your Life.
Excellent introduction to Vivation and Rebirthing by the teachers who broke
away from Rebirthing to form Vivation.

Holotropic Breathwork:
Stanislav Grof & H. Bennett - The Holotropic Mind. Harper Collins, San
Francisco, 1992.
Grof ‘s books are very interesting and highly recommended for anyone
pursuing deep personal development. They do not, however, tell you
anything about how to actually do breathwork.
Kylea Taylor - The Breathwork Experience.
Very readable and practical introduction to Holotropic Breathwork.

Pranayama
Yogi Ramacharaka - Science of Breath. London, L.N. Fowler & Co., Ltd.,
1903.
Contains a number of useful exercises. Now available free from
http://www.arfalpha.com/ScienceOfBreath/ScienceOfBreath.pdf
Andre van Lysebeth - Pranayama: The Yoga of Breathing. Harmony
Publishing, Edinburgh, 2007.
Excellent broad account by a Westerner steeped in yogic learning.
B.K.S. Iyengar - Light on Pranayama. Crossroads Publishing Company,
2013.
Useful reference book.

Energy Cultivation
The best books in this area tend to be found on the qigong/Taoist alchemy
shelves. Dr Yang’s books are generally clear and practical:
Dr Yang, Jwing-Ming - The Root of Chinese Qigong. YMAA, 1997.
Dr Yang, Jwing-Ming - Qigong for Health and Martial Arts. YMAA, 1998.
