 The Outer
 Planets &
Their Cycles
 The Astrology
of the Collective
BOSTON PUBLIC LIBRARY
  Copley Square
              Reviewers' comments on
          The Outer Planets & Their Cycles:

“...a book that every astrologer should read. Dr. Greene
brilliantly gives insight to the outer planets, interpreting the
effect of their transits on the collective psyche....Strongly
recommended!”
                                                    — Kosmos

“A fascinating work...I found Ms. Greene’s information to
be mind-expanding and her style of presentation very easy
to follow.”
                             — Welcome to Planet Earth

“Liz Greene’s observations and conclusions do justice to the
complexity and depth of both life and astrology....Throughout
the book there are many fruitful diversions covering such
topics as the meaning of the Water houses, retrograde and
unaspected planets, and specific combinations of the outer
planets with Jupiter and Saturn....It combines the best of
intuition and empiricism, and is lucid, enlightening and
immensely stimulating. For me it provided a sense of renewal,
a re-affirmation of the importance and profundity of astrology.
The book deserves to be read and re-read by all astrologers.”
                          — The Astrological Journal (UK)

“...an interesting and absorbing book, and I would thoroughly
recommend it.”
                   — Journal of the Seasons (New Zealand)

“Another fine accomplishment by Liz Greene.”
                — Journal of the Fraternity of Canadian
                                             Astrologers
        Digitized by the Internet Archive
           in 2017 with funding from
           Kahle/Austin Foundation




https://archive.org/details/outerplanetstheiOOIizg
CRCS PUBLICATIONS
   Post Office Box 1460
Sebastopol, California 95472
           U.S.A.
    Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data

     Greene, Liz.
        The outer planets & their cycles.
            (The astrology of the collective.)

   1. Astrology--Addresses, essays, lectures.
2. Planets--Miseel 1anea--Addresses, essays, lectures.
I. Title. II. Series.
BF1708.1.G75 1983       133.5*3          82-45633



© 1983, 1996 by Liz Greene

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conven-
tions. Printed in the United States of America. No part of this book may be
used or reproduced in any manner whatsoever (including photocopying)
without written permission from the publisher, except in the case of brief
quotations embodied in critical or scholarly articles and reviews.


INTERNATIONAL STANDARD BOOK NUMBER: 0-916360-60-1
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOG CARD NUMBER: 82-045633
Published simultaneously in the United States and Canada by:
                               CRCS Publications
             Distributed in the United States and internationally by
                               CRCS Publications
                (Write for current list of worldwide distributors.)
Cover Design: Image & lettering both by Rebecca Wilson
Illustrations & charts all drawn by Liz Greene
                            Contents

Introduction                                            1

Lecture One                                             4
Lecture Two                                            29
Lecture Three                                          55
Lecture Four                                          79
Lecture Five                                          115
Lecture Six                                           137
Lecture Seven                                         162

Illustrations:
# 1    The structure of the psyche
       & it’s relation to the inner & outer planets    12
# 2    Birth chart of Adolph Hitler                    56
# 3    Birth chart of Karl Marx                        62
# 4    Birth chart of Nikolai Lenin                    66
# 5    Birth chart of Sigmund Freud                    70
# 6    Birth chart of Carl Gustav Jung                 71
# 7    Birth chart of John F. Kennedy                  88
# 8    Birth chart of Salvador Dali                    89
# 9    Birth chart of Israel                          106
#10    Birth chart of the Islamic Republic of Iran    104
#11    Birth chart of the United States of America    105
#12    Birth chart of the Union of
       Soviet Socialist Republics                     116
#13    The beginning of the Piscean Age               163
#14    The beginning of the Aquarian Age              164
                       Publisher’s Note
We are pleased to reissue this unique book, for which there has been
continuous demand during the period it has been out of print. Al-
though historical events have made a few parts of this book appear
somewhat dated, they also have usually vindicated the author’s
general observations and have proven her to have been strikingly
prescient when discussing certain world trends and national charts,
for example, that of the USSR.

Although mundane astrology elicits considerable interest from both
astrologers and the general public, there is little literature available on
the subject; and hence, it seems appropriate to make this volume
available once again. But in perhaps a more important sense, this
book’s value and usefulness extends far beyond the subject of social
trends, cultural changes, and political developments. The sections
related to the impact of the outer planets on not only generational but
also individual psychology remain as vivid and perceptive now as
when this book was first published in 1983.

                                         The Publisher
                                         Spring, 1996
                          Introduction

    Since this book was first published, my work as a Jungian analyst
has offered me rich opportunity to watch the workings of the outer
planets in the dreams and ongoing life experiences of my analysands
as well as my astrological clients. This direct experience of what
previously had been intuitive speculation based on horoscope read-
ings alone has confirmed my feeling that the outer planets are deeply
significant representatives of the collective operating within the
individual’s life framework, and that they perform like a force of fate
 —blind, compulsive, overwhelming and often destructive—unless the
ego can develop enough insight to distinguish itself from the collective
currents of which it is a part. As Jung puts it in Volume 16 of the
Collected Works, “Tn these circumstances the immunising of the
individual against the toxin of the mass pysche is the only thing that
can help.” More than anyone else except perhaps the psychotherapist
and the priest, the astrologer today must respond with equilibrium to
the chronic terror of holocaust and apocalypse which is so widespread
at present and generates so much anxiety in people’s lives. It was to
these themes that these Wrekin Trust conference lectures were
originally addressed, and the urgency which I felt then about the need
for greater understanding of the outer planets among the astrological
community has not decreased in the intervening years.
   Although the material in these lectures is about larger movements
in the collective, and includes interpretation of the horoscopes of
various countries, it is nevertheless oriented primarily toward indi-
vidual interpretation. It is the individual who in the end gives
expression to collective myths and visions, and society is ultimately a
conglomerate of individuals, not an abstract entity with an indepen-
dent existence. The outer planets are transpersonal, that is, beyond
the personal, but they reveal themselves through the psychology of
individuals, that is, through you and me. For this reason I feel that if
one is genuinely concerned with issues of good and evil in the world,
then one will ultimately need to encounter these issues within oneself.
That is the only place where any hope of resolution can be found.
Projecting good and evil into countries and ideologies is a fascinating
and relieving pastime, but leads nowhere except into hopelessness
and despair—at present a common enough state. My intention here
is to raise questions and help promote individual reflection and
application of what astrological insights we may have about the outer
planets in our own lives. That was the original purpose of these
lectures, and the purpose remains unchanged.
                                                                L.G.
                           Lecture One
     One of the primary reasons why I chose the particular subject
of this conference is that there seems to be a tremendous amount
of millenarian fear around at the present time, and I am concerned
with what this might mean. I would define millenarian fear as an
expectant waiting for the end of the world to come. Now there are
some very good rational reasons for this, like the prodigious
amount of Russian armaments on the German border, and the
proliferation of nuclear weapons and nuclear power plants.* If you
turn on your television set or pick up a newspaper you can get
extremely frightened very quickly, and it would be both dishonest
and stupid to pretend that these dangers are not real. But there is
also an atmosphere which I don’t really think arises from these
dangers alone, and which possibly makes it even more difficult
to react with L sane response to critical but nevertheless poten-
tially manageable external situations. We stand at the end of a
century and at the end of a millennium, as well as at the end of
an astrological age. Very strange fantasies erupt in society at such
times, which may be related to but are not caused by affairs in
the outside world.
     Something seems to be going on at a subterranean level which
catches all of us and throws us into a state of anxiety which is
above and beyond the ordinary conscious reactions we might have
to things read in the newspaper. It is a sense of the advent of
something, a sense of great change. If you are familiar with the
predictions of psychics about the end of this century, you will
know that these usually deal with tidal waves, giant earthquakes,
the landing of flying saucers, the Second Coming of Christ, and
the earth shifting on its polar axis. But these kinds of predictions
aren’t unique to us in the twentieth century. They are archetypal
images of change, deep psychic change at an unconscious collec-
tive level. You can meet these images in the dreams of individuals
who are undergoing profound shifts and transformations in their
inner and outer lives, and you meet the same images in the mouths
of prophets at the end of the millennium, whichever millennium it
is. Those of us who work in the astrological field have only to
open an ephemeris and look at the rather peculiar conjunctions
which are approaching in the next twenty years. It isn’t as though

*Ed. note. These observations were made in 1980.
Lecture One                                                          5


they have never happened before. But when they coincide with
the end of a millennium, then people tend to panic, even astrol-
ogers who ought to know better. Someone rang me up recently,
quite late at night, and said, “I understand that you’re an astrolo-
ger. Is it true that all the planets will collide in 1984?” This is the
sort of thing I mean. I must admit that I find it disturbing, because
there is an ominous foreboding in the atmosphere that is not
necessarily in line with world events. It seems to me that there is
enough difficulty in trying to deal with actual facts, let alone these
strange fantasies and terrors. Some of these fantasies are exagger-
atedly spiritual, like the Second Coming, and some of them are
exaggeratedly concrete, like a worldwide holocaust.
     On the other hand, even though we can try to understand
these undercurrents from a psychological point of view, it’s
equally useless to pretend that we are so sane and rational and
perceptive that we won’t react in the same way everyone else
does. The collective unconscious, which is Jung’s term for the
deep strata of the human psyche which are common to us all, is
something we don’t know very much about. We know a good dead
about collective consciousness, which concerns the rules and
structures that society creates and by which we supposedly learn
to live with and cooperate with each other. But the underground
stream that runs beneath the surface of those structures—that is a
mystery. We only recognise its existence when it bursts into ex-
ternal life, and one of the ways in which it shows itself is that an
entire group or country goes berserk and you have one of those
gigantic upheavals or revolutions which ends in a bloodbath. An
entire nation can plunge into psychosis in the same way an in-
dividual can, and a lot of apparently very rational people disappear
and become one screaming mob. You can observe a small para-
digm of this at any football match. There are people who are more
prone to being infected by it than others. There are people who
are permeable to perhaps a greater extent than others. There are
people who believe they are immune, yet who are in the greatest
danger. There are people who seem to have an inherent natural
connection with this world of collective unconscious psyche, and
somehow find a way to live with it and mediate it. These are the
artists and visionaries. Because they are familiar with it, and can
offer it some kind of voice through their personal creative efforts,
they are not as surprised as the rest of us when an eruption sud-
denly occurs in the world. I’m thinking now of William Butler
6                                       The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


Yeats and his poem, The Second Coming, which was written long
before the rise of Nazi Germany and was his vision of the new
astrological age—a rather terrifying vision, not at all imbued with
love and brotherhood. The artist and the visionary are driven by
the images that rise out of that strange world, and its compulsions
become their message. The line is very blurred between the artist
and the psychotic, I believe because both have dealings with this
realm. And there are people who actively attempt to manipulate
its energies, for good or ill.
     I think Adolf Hitler is a good example of someone who suc-
cessfully manipulated the images of the collective unconscious for
his own dubious ends. There are quite a number of gifted manipu-
lators in the fields of politics and religion. These are issues which I
think must be talked about, not only because of what lies ahead
of us in the next few decades, but also so that we can look back
historically at what has happened when major conjunctions and
millenarian visions have occurred before, and draw some lessons
from the past. This might equip us to measure better the trends
that are coming up, in the same way that any of you studying
individual astrology will measure your experience from the past
to interpret a new horoscope in the present.
     I believe we can tell a lot from the individual birth chart about
permeability or receptivity to the realm of the collective uncon-
scious. People are very different in the ways in which they experi-
ence and relate to this mysterious world, in the ways they inter-
pret it, and in the channels through which it expresses itself in
their lives. This is why one person will sense some great change
coming and panic, while another will trundle along innocently
enough until the roof blows up over his head.
     This is ground which is not generally covered in astrology,
although Jung wrote a great deal about his observations in this
area. Many people feel his work on the archetypes and the collec-
tive unconscious was his greatest contribution to psychology.
Most of our modern therapies deal with the individual, whether
internally or in terms of his adjustment to society. That is as it
should be, because there is no way to “treat” the collective
through therapy. We can only explore ourselves. This is another
reason why the eruptions of the collective are such a problem and
such a mystery. Jung worked a great deal with myths, which he
felt were the images through which the collective expressed itself
culturally. I feel we must begin bringing some of this material into
Lecture One                                                          7


astrology. In earlier times, particularly during the Renaissance,
astrologers did work with what they understood as the manifesta-
tions of the collective, through eclipses and great conjunctions.
But their interpretations were always very literal, about wars and
plagues and the deaths of kings. Now we don’t consider these
things very viable, and have lost a good deal of the knowledge of
the Renaissance about astrological influences on political affairs.
As I said earlier, I am concerned about these issues because a lot
of people are very frightened, and the astrologer quite naturally
gets asked first if the world is going to end. I would like to inject
a slightly more hopeful note into all this millenarian terror. It
isn’t hope built on an idealistic or mystical belief that we are
about to reach an apotheosis of human spirituality or glory. I
would be fairly stupid if I believed that, given the current state
of things. That might be true at Wrekin Trust conferences, but it
isn’t true anywhere else. Nevertheless these are tremendous,
powerful, creative energies, and they don’t always have to mani-
fest in a solely destructive way. I have no answers about what to
do with them, but I think it might make a difference if we could
understand them a little better, and see where they are working
in our individual lives.
     I must apologise to the absolute beginners in the room, be-
cause we will be discussing quite a few horoscopes which you will
not be able to read. It did say in the programme, however, that
some basic astrological knowledge was essential for participation
at the conference, so you have only yourselves to blame. You were
also asked to bring your own individual charts, and hopefully if
some of you have questions and would like your charts used as
an illustration, we can draw them on the blackboard. There is
obviously no time to give a chart reading to everybody in the
group. I will also be referring to the charts of people who figure
or have figured importantly through history, as vessels or medi-
ums for the collective, ranging from the very dark ones to the
very light ones. We can investigate what there is in the birth
horoscope that might suggest the particular susceptibility to this
realm. Some people, as I said, have a very minimal relationship
with it. They aren’t aware of it at all, although of course it is still
part of the psyche and will ultimately affect them. Other people
smell changes coming twenty or thirty years before they arrive,
and the images begin appearing in their dreams and their fantasy
life as well as in their artistic creations. I mentioned Yeats before,
8                                      The Outer Planets & Their Cycles

               ,   \



with his rather terrifying prophecy of chaos and disorder un-
leashed in the world. He writes about a “grim beast” whose hour
has come round at last, “slouching toward Bethlehem to be born.”
Yeats died just as Hitler was preparing to invade Poland. He wrote
the poem before anyone could have known what was going to
happen in Germany. I would not say it was a “prophecy” of
Hitler, because Yeats was very concerned with astrology and with
the astrological ages, and this was his vision of the Aquarian Age.
But it was also the experience of an overpowering image of immi-
nent chaos and rage bursting from the depths of the collective,
which happened shortly after Yeats’ writing, to choose Germany
as one of its midwives.
     Millenarian fantasies seem to be cyclical. They seem to erupt
not only every thousand years, but also at the midway points,
perhaps every five hundred years. This is certainly the case with
millenarian movements within the Christian world. And they also
tend to erupt around the periods of great conjunctions. I will
give you an example of how this works. In the Year of Our Lord
1524 as it was called, there was a monumental conjunction of
planets, far more impressive in fact than the ones which are due
in a few years’ time because of the number of planets involved.
You can well imagine that in 1524 every astrologer went quite
hysterical, because they only knew of seven heavenly bodies and
all seven were in conjunction in the sign of Pisces. In fact Neptune
was also involved in this conjunction, but they didn’t know about
that. Naturally everyone assumed the world was about to end, and
they meant this very literally. No talk of symbols or the collective
unconscious. Pisces is a water sign, and if everything in the heavens
is in Pisces, why, then, the world is obviously going to end by
flood. In the year 1000 everyone also expected the world to end,
and the fact that it hadn’t didn’t reassure people in 1524. One
astrologer in England built himself an ark, which was rather sensi-
ble in terms of all that water. Obviously people in the sixteenth
century couldn’t think in terms of psychological or inner change.
We don’t even really understand these things now.
     1524 came and went, and not a lot happened. At least, not a
lot happened on a literal level. There were a few wars, but that
was usual, and there was nothing exceptional about France invad-
ing Italy or the Austro-Hungarian Empire invading France. There
was a little outbreak of the Black Plague, localised in the south of
France, but it was nothing like the big outbreak in the fourteenth
Lecture One                                                        9


century which killed a third of the world’s population. Over the
decade building up to and following the great conjunction in
Pisces—and we should remember that these conjunctions have a
build-up and a dissemination time just like any other transit or
progression—not a lot happened to justify all that terror. The only
odd thing was that a very recalcitrant and bad-tempered monk
called Martin Luther went around nailing nasty statements about
the Church to cathedral doors, and a few people listened.
     So the world ended, in the sense that the prevailing and un-
questioned view of the world ended. A great crack appeared in the
unshakeable bastion of the One True Faith which had dominated
the Western world for fifteen hundred years. It is hard for us to
understand now just how monumental an event this was. Until
Luther there was simply no spiritual reality except the Catholic
Church. The general populace, apart from a few rampant heretics,
would never have dared to even question this sole road to salva-
tion. What I hope this story suggests to you, as it does to me, is
that the ending of the world may occur on subtler levels than the
concrete one.
     If it’s time for something to end, the level on which the ending
manifests may vary. This depends also on what is existent in the
world which is going to be affected by the emerging new energies.
I think it depends very much on the structures existent within
society, how flexible or rigid they might be, and how able they
are to accommodate change. It also depends very much on the
state or quality of consciousness in the individual in society,
because nothing can come into expression except in accordance
with the form which carries it.
     The conjunction of 1524 brought about a change which had
already been prophesied and had been in the cooking pot for a
long time. It was already in the wind through Henry VIII, who
inaugurated his break with the papacy for personal rather than
visionary reasons. It simply took the channels which were open.
One of the funnier aspects of it is that the astrologers who were in
favour of the Reformation, which meant primarily those living in
Germany and Switzerland, immediately went around saying that
the great conjunction of 1524 was a herald of Luther, that the
stars were on his side, that it favoured him and showed that God
wanted the Church to change its corrupt ways. You see how we
can make anything political, even the planets. Anyway, my feeling
is that a similar imminent change is now in the wind. There is an
10                                               The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


urgent collective yearning which is being expressed in many differ-
ent ways. I think the trend toward “inner” exploration, which
includes the development of new therapies and meditation and
astrology and other related quests, reflects this yearning for some
alternative vision of reality. Of course if there is a change immi-
nent, there is also going to be a fear of death, because something
must die to allow that change to occur. You can see this once
again in the dreams of individuals going through deep changes in
the personality. They dream of people dying—mother, father, old
selves that are outworn—and they often feel a lot of panic and
depression until the new thing has emerged and they understand
the necessity of the old thing passing away.
    You cannot have change without something dying. Any move-
ment of this kind in the psyche tends to collect images of death
around it. Religions have always known this, which is why they
have always been attached to myths of dying and resurrected gods.
An experience of new birth and redemption must always be pre-
ceded by the death of an old attitude. Initiation rites from all
cultures portray a symbolic death, which heralds the birth of the
“saved” or “redeemed” soul. Many artists experience deep depres-
sion before the onset of a new creative burst of energy. So I feel
that a good deal of the millenarian fear which is around now, as
in the past, has as much to do with the anticipation of change as
with an actual expectation of destruction in the literal world.
    Now I am not implying that I think the next twenty years
are going to be absolutely wonderful, any more than they were
after the conjunction of 1524. The immediate repercussions of
the Reformation were the outbreak of religious wars throughout
Europe, which continued into the next century with the Thirty
Years’ War and which we still have to face in the problem of
Northern Ireland. Luther brought not peace, but a sword. I have
no doubt that we will have some nasty shocks in the next two
decades, even though God is purportedly an Englishman and
therefore civilised. We are human, not angelic, and there is a good
deal of poverty, oppression and rage throughout the world. The
line-up of Uranus, Saturn and Neptune to which we look forward
later in this decade* is, I am sure, going to produce some upsetting
effects politically and economically. You can imagine that it
would upset an individual on whose chart it landed, and it will
land on the charts of several countries, including Britain, America
and the Soviet Union. No doubt it will upset the collective where-

*Ed. note. This line-up occured in the late 1980s to early 1990s.
Lecture One                                                        11


ever there are flash points. But that is not quite the same thing as
the world ending.
     There is a very important difference between the approaching
conjunction and the previous occurrences of these planets lining
up together. In the earlier centuries when great conjunctions
occurred, there was no sense of “individual.” No one walked
around contemplating the meaning of his identity and his inner
self, except for a few Neoplatonists who tended to consider such
things important. If a person has a sense of individuality above and
beyond the place in society that he occupies, then the effect of
collective changes on that person is going to be quite different.
     This ties up with something that Jung was preoccupied with.
He makes the statement that if there is something wrong with
society, then there is something wrong with the individual, and if
there is something wrong with the individual then there is some-
thing wrong with me. He seems to suggest that when something
is due to erupt in the collective, the only safety and sanity to be
found is in the firm sense of your own individuality. Otherwise
there is no way in which the eruption can be channelled without
you becoming a victim of the collective. Then you are blindly
carried along with it, and because it is blind and undirected by
consciousness it doesn’t reason politely and set up careful stand-
ards to assess who should pay and who shouldn’t. These erup-
tions run like a torrent, with a ruthlessness that one finds only
in blind nature but not in the reflective mind of an individual. One
finds it in the natural side of civilised man, the collective instinc-
tual side of him of which he is largely unaware. The collective
doesn’t theorise. It flows toward its goal in the same way that a
baby is born. If you’re caught by it, then you must go along with
it, and there is no guarantee of the outcome. You might have a
Renaissance, which happened around 1500, or you might have a
Nazi Germany. Both potentials exist in us, both in society and in
individuals. So understandably Jung is concerned with these
things, and whenever he writes about the phenomenon of Nazi
Germany he repeats again and again his feeling that if we do not
want a repetition of this experience, we cannot expect laws and
legal structures and religious ideals and political parties to prevent
it. We have no hope at all except to see where the battle is being
fought within ourselves, and to try to distinguish between our
own individual values and the urgent movement that is erupting
around us.
12                                    The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


    I would like to put a diagram up on the blackboard now which
I hope will illustrate this rather difficult idea of collective and
individual. It comes from Iolande Jacobi’s book on Jung’s psychol-
ogy, and I think it is very useful.




     Illustration 1: The structure of the psyche & its
              relation to the inner and outer planets.

Seen from above, the individual mountain peaks look like com-
pletely separate entities. You could say that the top section of
each mountain represents the individual personality. On this
level we are separate, because we are completely different from
each other. Every person has a different horoscope, and when we
consider the individual points in a horoscope, such as the ascend-
ant and the midheaven and the sun and moon, we are looking at
a map of a distinct individual. In a sense you might say that astro-
logically, the sun, the moon, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter and
the four angles of the chart concern those energies and needs and
characteristics that belong to the individual. Likewise I think the
sign and house placements of these planets, and their aspects,
describe the individual personality.
     Underneath that layer is another layer. The mountains are still
separate, but this deeper stratum represents a layer of the psyche
which depth psychology has been probing and exploring for some
time. Jung called this layer the personal unconscious, and Freud
called it the subconscious. This is that side of the personality
which lies in shadow, which we cannot see because it’s behind us.
It’s still individual, but most of the time we would prefer not to
know that it belongs to us. Here is all the material from childhood,
Lecture One                                                       13


parental complexes, repressed traumas and wounds, buried emo-
tions, unlived potentials, undeveloped talents. What lies at the top
of the mountain I know to be mine. What lies here in this middle
section belongs to me, but I may be very unaware of it. There’s a
threshold between the two areas, and it’s the crossing of this
threshold and the freeing of contents trapped in the middle which
occupy many psychotherapeutic efforts. The more a person can
accommodate what is hidden in this shadow-realm, the more
complete he becomes, and the more of his own life he lives.
     I think that in astrological terms I would place Saturn on this
threshold between the light and the dark sides of the personality.
Saturn is the ring-pass-not. He rules the boundaries. I think he also
rules the boundary to the lower region here, the place where the
individual mountains meet in one great land mass. These appar-
ently separate forms really emerge from the same roots. They
aren’t individual at all, when you view them from this level. And
here I would place the outer planets—Uranus, Neptune and Pluto.
I suppose if any of you are experimenting with Chiron, then he
also would be placed here in the collective realm.
    When you look at a horoscope, the inner planets can tell you
a good deal about individual temperament and potential. The
outer planets will tell you much more about the mass to which
the individual belongs. The outer planets have much longer cycles.
Uranus has an eighty-four-year cycle. He spends about seven years
in each sign. Neptune takes about one hundred and sixty-eight
years to go around the zodiac, and spends about fourteen years in
each sign. Pluto takes two hundred and forty-eight years, and his
orbit is elliptical, so he rushes through Scorpio in about twelve
years and crawls through Taurus in around thirty. These slow
planets have a lot to do with the generation to which a person
belongs. They are concerned with currents within those genera-
tion groups. A generation is a very loose entity. We use the word
colloquially when we talk about generation gaps between older
and younger people. But there isn’t any rigid line of demarcation
between one generation and the next. The different groups over-
lap, depending on whether you want to consider Uranus, Neptune
or Pluto. The age difference between an individual and his parents
can vary enormously, because there are women who bear children
at fifteen and men who father children at seventy. There is no
clear biological demarcation for what constitutes a generation. But
there is a clear line of basic attitudes which stamp a seven-year
14                                     The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


group who all have Uranus in a certain sign, and a fourteen-year
group who all have Neptune in a certain sign, and an eighteen-to-
thirty-year group who all have Pluto in a certain sign. So you have
a collective of people who all respond to a particular myth or
pattern embodied by the outer planet.
     A simplistic but reasonable metaphor for this is that of a musi-
cal score. There is one underlying rhythm, the rhythm of the bass
notes or the drum which defines the entire structure of the piece.
Then there is a slightly faster line which adds different qualities
and expressions. Finally, there is a melody line on top which
dances in and out of the other two, but synchronises with them.
So there are several different patterns going on, but together they
make a complete piece. For example, if you were born in 1946
you will have Neptune in Libra, and Uranus in Gemini, and Pluto
in Leo. If you were born in 1951, Neptune will still be in Libra
and Pluto will still be in Leo, but Uranus will have moved into
Cancer. So in some respects there are similarities which you will
share with everyone who has Neptune in Libra and Pluto in Leo,
but you will be different in terms of the expression of Uranus.
     One way of seeing the patterns these outer planets make is to
consider that different generation groups have a different vision of
life. There are certain values which are important to a particular
group which might not mean anything at all to the group preced-
ing them and the group following them. I would like to spend
some time talking about what each of these outer planets might
mean, because I think having some sense of what they represent
can help us to understand not only what collective values we
carry ourselves, but also how all the different groups weave
together to make a pattern within the collective organism. I am
convinced that the main effect of the outer planets is through the
unconscious. They are not energies which the ego can harness and
manipulate and control. They simply don’t operate like that. You
can always try controlling a transit of Uranus, Neptune or Pluto,
but I wish you luck.

Audience: One thing about that map I haven’t properly under-
stood is the extent to which people live unconsciously. When you
talk about the collective unconscious, do you mean that every-
body has the same unconscious? To what extent are people linked
to the unconscious? Does the collective unconscious link every-
body in this room, for example, at a certain level?
Lecture One                                                      15


Liz: I can’t really give you absolute answers to those questions,
anymore than I can illustrate these things properly with a two-
dimensional map on a blackboard. I can only talk from what I
have seen and experienced, as well as quoting from people like
Jung who obviously have seen and experienced considerably more
than I have. But yes, there is a very basic level in which all human
beings share the same instinctual patterns of behaviour. This not
only applies to biological patterns such as sex and aggression and
hunger, but to aspirations and religious visions as well. We all
seem to have the same psychic structure, and that structure ex-
presses itself in similar myths throughout the ages. Freud spent a
lot of time exploring the instinctual patterns of the collective un-
conscious, although he called it the id and not the collective un-
conscious. He postulated two basic instincts which existed in every
human being—the instinct to reproduce and the instinct to destroy.
He called these Eros and Thanatos, sexual desire and death-wish.
Jung spent a lot of time exploring other drives which he felt were
also inherent in every human being. He was very concerned with
the religious instinct, the thing in us which takes biological urges
and transmutes them into images and symbols which become sig-
nificant in a religious way. Jung felt that the urge to transmute
basic instinctual stuff into transcendent images was as innate a
thing as the sexual drive. From what I have seen in my short years
of experience, both seem to me to be right. These are drives which
are unanimous among everyone. No one is exempt. The manner
and quantity of different instincts may vary from one person to
another, but no one is without them.
    Those are perhaps the most basic levels where we are all the
same, where we share the same unconscious urges and patterns.
Then there are levels where one group differs slightly from another
in the expression of these things. This is apparent from racial and
national collectives. If you study the myths from one culture,
they may have the same ultimate structure, but the flesh on the
bones is different from the myths of another culture. This isn’t
because of the climate or what they have been taught in school.
Myths emerge spontaneously and shape a culture. It seems that
after the most basic level of shared human instincts, some differ-
ences begin to appear between different peoples. You can see this
immediately from a study of comparative religion across cultures.
The worship of the Great Mother, for example, was widespread
throughout the Mediterranean. You never find her worshipped
among northern peoples such as the Teutonic tribes, who are
16                                    The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


more addicted to a great Sky-father. This suggests some difference
in the psychic orientation of these different peoples. You can find
rational explanations for this: the Mediterranean cultures were
predominantly agricultural and therefore symbolised the fertility
of the earth as a divine Great Woman, while the northern tribes
tended to be nomads and herdsmen who were used to wide
spaces, where weather and winds and harsh sun and other phe-
nomena from heaven were more important. I would not want
to get into an argument about whether the external world shapes
the archetypal image or the archetypal image shapes the external
world. In the end you must simply consider these different gods,
which embody the values of a people. We all share a common
Judeo-Christian heritage. Whether you are a practising Christian
or Jew makes very little difference. This level is unconscious, and
its energy is vital and alive whether your ego agrees with those
viewpoints or not.
    Our Judeo-Christian heritage is embedded in our blood and
bones, regardless of whether we are technically religious. The
image of God throughout Judeo-Christian culture is the same,
despite the ideological differences of Catholic, Anglican, Mormon,
Hassidic Jew, Reform Jew or whatever. We worship one god and
we call that god HE. God is male, God is spirit, God is eternal and
omniscient, and God is not matter. We have many different sub-
cultures represented here in this room. Some of you may be
Celtic, some Saxon, some Jewish, some German. Each of you will
have a more individual mythology that belongs to your racial
background. These things are like geological strata that make
many different layers and designs, beneath which the same bed-
rock lies.
    I don’t think racial and national myths appear in the birth
chart, anymore than the sex of a person is represented. These
are the unknown factors which are not described by the person’s
horoscope, which I hope you will have all realised. There is a mys-
terious centre of the personality which is also not in the horo-
scope. I am sure you will understand what this means if you
consider that the chart in front of you could be the chart of a
chicken. It might be that of an opera house. There is nothing
in that horoscope that announces that it’s the natal chart of a
human being. And there is nothing in the horoscope that tells you
whether it’s a German or an Italian or a Swede or a Lebanese Jew
or a Chinese. These are mysterious factors that you must consider
Lecture One                                                        17

in conjunction with the horoscope. They will affect the ways in
which the person expresses his horoscope, just as the fact of
whether the person’s a man or a woman will affect the expression
of the chart. The person who comes from a background full of
Indian or Chinese myths is going to build his individuality on bed-
rock which is different from the person who is drawing from a
Teutonic or Anglo-Saxon background. An Arab may have the
same horoscope as an Englishman but his religious symbols and
cultural values make him use the horoscope differently. This isn’t
because of teaching or conscious values. It’s innate, it’s a psycho-
logical inheritance as powerful as genetic inheritance. This is the
strange thing about it. You can take a person who has been trans-
planted very early in life and educated in the ideas and laws and
attitudes of an entirely different culture, but in the dreams the
symbols of the ancient roots immediately surface.
     Jung was convinced that we cannot outgrow or escape our
roots without suffering some psychological damage. That doesn’t
mean that the individual can’t develop himself above and beyond
what his culture has to offer. But somehow we must learn to cope
with the collective from which we spring, because it is as impor-
tant a part of psychic life as the more personal qualities we believe
to be our own.
     The outer planets don’t describe those basic mythic images
like the Great Mother or Wotan or whatever. I think they describe
a different aspect of the collective, an aspect which is constantly
moving and changing. There are great movements of ideas and
visions which erupt in society and find their way into the mouths
of many people all at once. The outer planets don’t describe racial
or national myths, because everyone in the world has the same
outer planets in the horoscope, and an American and a Japanese
both born in 1944 will both have Uranus in Gemini and Neptune
in Libra despite their different gods. Now I would like to consider
these planets in more detail, because I don’t think we understand
them very well. I certainly don’t understand them very well, and
most textbook descriptions understand them even less. As usual
I have found more help from reading mythology and other sym-
bolic languages than from orthodox astrological texts. If you pick
up one of the older, classic astrology texts, it is likely to tell you
that Uranus means change, inventiveness, revolution and perver-
sity. Neptune means drugs, deception, confusion. Pluto means
death and rebirth. Those words sound very profound and mean-
18                                      The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


ingful. They’re useful sometimes, such as trying to tell a client
under a Neptune transit that he’s likely to feel confused. But what
do these planets really mean?
     Uranus is the first god in Greek myth, the heavenly father who
engenders the universe. He emerges from the womb of Gaia, who
is Mother or Chaos, and then he mates with her. Uranus belongs to
the air, to the sky. He is a sky-god. He is a god of ideas, and flies
on the wings of thought. In esoteric circles this is sometimes
called the Divine Mind. Plato wrote about the Divine Ideas, upon
which all worldly forms are patterned. It’s as though something
exists before the universe is formed, which is the idea of a uni-
verse. So Uranus has something to do with a pattern, an ordering
force which does not yet have body. Uranus comes to a bad end
in myth, because he’s castrated by his son Kronos. His severed
genitals fall into the ocean, which is fertilised by his seed, and out
of the foam springs Aphrodite, the goddess of love. Uranus is a
fertility-god, but not in an earthy sense. He fertilises with creative
thought, with spirit. I think we can see his footsteps in history
whenever a great new creative idea erupts in the collective. Around
the time of the discovery of Uranus, the idea of democracy and
the freedom of the individual was a powerful force that changed
society. During the French Revolution, the justification of the
Reign of Terror was the cry of liberty, equality, fraternity. The
French monarchy was deposed in the name of an idea, and the
idea was a tremendous force which generated great changes in
France. Ideas can be moving forces in the world, just as powerful
as economic pressures. They erupt from the collective and seize
the minds of a people, and then there is nothing that can be done
to stop it, even attempts at suppression.
     During the Italian Renaissance another idea took hold of
people which caused enormous changes in society. This was the
idea that man’s nature was divine. That may sound terribly simple,
but it wasn’t simple then. It was heresy. If man is God, then he
doesn’t need intermediaries to interpret God’s will to him. He’s
capable of experiencing his own contact with the divine. If he
doesn’t need intermediaries, then he doesn’t need the Church for
his salvation. He might need it as a fellowship or an inspiration,
but he isn’t dependent upon it for his experience of grace. That
idea contained immense power. It allowed men to explore other
philosophies and gods without fear of being tainted. It spawned
the creative flowering which we call the Renaissance. It restored
Lecture One                                                      19


dignity to man, who was no longer a mere worm stained by
original sin who had to live his life consumed by guilt and fear.
Pico della Mirandola’s oration to man begins: “What a great mira-
cle is man! He partakes of the nature of both gods and daimons.”
     This kind of eruption of a powerful idea which seizes men’s
imaginations is what I associate with Uranus. The trouble with
these ideas is that they come from the heavenly world, and so
they are usually a little too advanced for the world at the time.
The divine dignity of man which captured the creative minds of
the Renaissance was a little too much to swallow, and so it was
duly suppressed because Uranian ideas are inevitably too far ahead
of the culture which breeds them. If an idea suddenly bursts into
being in the outer world, it has had to travel up from the depths,
and it’s coloured by the sign through which Uranus is passing.
That sign represents the sphere of life which will be changed or
transformed by the new idea. A few people become its mouth-
pieces, and it starts to work like yeast within society. But it will
take a very long time before the forms of the world can be altered
enough to accommodate it. Or you might say that it will take a
very long time before individual people are capable of integrating
it into their lives without some frightening distortions. Jung
thought it took around eighty years for some new content emerg-
ing from the collective unconscious to work its way through the
different levels of society. He was making an intuitive assessment,
since of course there is no way we can measure such things. But
this time span he gives is roughly the time it takes Uranus to re-
turn to any given sign. Uranus’ cycle, as I said, is eighty-four
years.
     It’s the prophets and visionaries and artists who seem to catch
the new idea while it’s still boiling and bubbling in the depths.
Eventually it becomes something popular among the mass of
people, but usually by that time they’ve burned the prophet at
the stake or ruined him. Then they say, “We have a wonderful
new idea. Why don’t we make a set of laws which incorporate it?”
Then they give honour to the handful of Uranian people who first
had the idea, even though it was originally heretical. The problem
of Uranus in myth is that Saturn-Kronos castrates him. It’s only
much later that he’s regenerated as Aphrodite and translated into
something creative and harmonious which the world likes.
     We can go back to our map of the mountains and imagine a
Uranian idea travelling slowly upward from the bedrock into the
20                                     The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


lives and minds of individual people. If you remember, I placed
Saturn on the borders between the individual and the collective.
So Saturn is the first thing that the new idea hits on its way
upward and outward into the world. Saturn is the boundary which
separates me from you. So the people who will feel the rush up-
ward of these new movements and ideas are, I think, the people
who have Saturn and Uranus in strong aspect in the birth chart. I
think this group of people, particularly those who have Saturn
conjuncting Uranus, get the itch first. They sense the need for
change on an ideological level, and they become the willing or
unwilling mouthpieces for the new idea before it becomes some-
thing acceptable in society.
     A person who has Uranus in strong aspect to the sun or the
moon or Mercury or Mars will also feel this rush of anticipation
about the new idea, but it will affect that person differently. It
will express itself through some personal area of life. If Uranus
aspects Venus, for example, then the person will act out that new
idea through his relationships, without necessarily being aware of
it as a “new idea.” But the impact is very different when Uranus
hits Saturn. There is a jarring with that contact. I think it creates
an urgency. Something is knocking on the door very loudly and
persistently, and if you don’t listen then it threatens to break the
door down. And Saturn, because he’s the form-builder and is
concerned with worldly issues, feels the necessity to do something
practical with the new idea. The moon and Uranus may simply
feel very rebellious, and Mercury and Uranus may devote a lot of
time to studying and thinking about the new thing. But Saturn
must build it into his world.
     Neptune is very different from his heavenly, airy brother.
Neptune is a god of water in myth, and governs the depths of the
sea. He rules a realm where everything is ambiguous. Forms blend
and dissolve, and colours merge. Water is one of the primary
symbols of the world of feeling. It’s also one of the most ancient
images for the feminine womb out of which life emerges. The
name Mary has its roots in the word mer, which is the sea. This is
the sea which is the womb of life. It’s the world of the emotions
and the imagination.
     When Uranus captures a person, it’s through an idea which
takes possession of him. When Neptune captures a person, it’s
through the world of dreams and longings and yearnings. Neptune
often manifests through what we experience as glamourous or
Lecture One                                                        21


fashionable. The way in which glamour affects us is very different
from the impact of an idea or an ideology. Of course they can join
together. Socialism can be both a logical ideology and also a
glamourous fashion. But the feeling of magic and glamour is a
separate thing from the feeling of truth which accompanies a
powerful idea. When a style of clothing abruptly becomes fashion-
able, all of a sudden everyone is wearing it and no one really
knows why. The style appears in every shop window and every
fashion magazine and even people who like to think of themselves
as highly individual turn up in it. Several designers may turn up
with the same thing at the same time and they haven’t stolen the
design from each other, it’s more that some image or “look” is
surfacing and the more intuitive or creative person gives shape to
it. Suddenly everyone has long hair, or suddenly skirt lengths go
up or down. Suits from the 1940’s become de rigeur. Stiletto heels
are back in style. Science fiction films flood the cinema. Punk is
the latest craze.
    These are Neptunian trends. They creep up on us from a feel-
ing level. They’re not ideologies. They may at first strike you as
ridiculous or banal, because they seem to have so little to do with
our lonely strivings toward growth and consciousness. But these
trends are tremendously powerful. They are responsible for vast
sums of money moving back and forth within society, and they
touch us on very subtle levels. I think they are more important
than they seem, because they reflect yearnings and dreams and
longings that are translated into images which the consumer
eagerly buys. It’s as if all the deep longings in the collective mani-
fest themselves in this way, whether it’s a religious movement or
a fashion trend. This is where we are reaching blindly toward
something divine, which embodies itself in the length of a skirt.
    I have been very struck by Warren Kenton’s books on the
Kabbalah, where he connects Neptune with the very top of the
Tree of Life. This highest point on the Tree is the ineffable, the
glimpse of the divine which is the most human beings can compre-
hend of the mystery of the godhead. It’s called the Crown, and it’s
the place where the sense of lonely separateness is dissolved into
an experience of unity and bliss. When we are compelled by
fashions, we are experiencing something that surfaces from the
deepest yearnings of the heart, and I don’t think that clothing
and cosmetics and visions of what is beautiful are any less valid
carriers of this than religious symbols. These things emerge from a
22                                      The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


level that is not concerned with our ethics of right and wrong.
They make us feel better, they take us out of ourselves.
     Neptune is also connected with the figure of the mermaid or
melusine in fairy tales, who beckons the mortal man to sub-
merge himself in the magic depths of the lake or sea. In rites of
baptism, these waters cleanse and purify. They can also disinte-
grate the personality. They are terribly enticing, because you no
longer have to strive and struggle and experience separation and
conflict and loss. In the depths of the sea you merge with the
source. Religion might call that a union with God, while more
reductive psychologies might call it a longing to return to the
maternal womb.
     So the apparently banal trends of fashion tell us a lot about
what an entire collective yearns for. These trends are symbols. If
you look at what is fashionable in this way, it’s quite fascinating.
It’s a pictorial story of what the collective secretly needs and longs
for, although these longings could never be translated into worldly
terms that made any sense. The god who lives in the depths of the
ocean spins out a dream. Neptune passes through a particular sign
and suddenly the collective reaches toward that sign and its
symbols because that is where the soul beckons. When Neptune
moves on into the next sign then the symbols go dry, and what
was fashionable for fourteen years now seems ridiculous. So we all
rush out and buy the new style.
     Now perhaps we can consider some of the possible meanings
of Pluto. There are many curious features about this planet which
make it a kind of renegade. He doesn’t obey the rules. His orbit
is elliptical, and there is a phase in the orbit where he is actually
closer to the earth than Neptune, although the plane of the orbit
is slanted slightly and isn’t aligned with the plane of the other
planets’ orbits. This phase of Pluto’s orbit seems to occur when he
is transiting through Scorpio. Pluto will be entering Scorpio in
November 1983 for around twelve years, and of course this
phase of his orbit is the passage through his own sign.
     Dane Rudhyar attaches considerable significance to the period
when Pluto is closer to the earth than Neptune, and talks about it
as a “fertilising.” I decided to investigate some of the historical
movements that occurred during the various times when Pluto
moved through Scorpio, and unearthed some rather interesting
things. For example, Pluto went into Scorpio in the last decade
of the fifteenth century. That time is extremely important because
Lecture One                                                       23

it marked the dawn of the Florentine Renaissance. On a cultural
level it was certainly a period of immense fertilisation, a true re-
birth of lost knowledge and spiritual vision. The actual incidents
which led to this massive explosion of human creativity are
typically Plutonian. Cosimo de Medici, the ruler of Florence, had
a taste for collecting lost Greek manuscripts, and some of these
fell into his hands after the sack of Constantinople in 1453. One
of these was a strange document which was later called the Corpus
Hermeticum. It was actually written in the second century A.D.,
but Cosimo’s translator, Marsilio Ficino, thought he had found a
text more ancient even than the Bible, and spread around the idea
that a great and ancient sage called Hermes Trismegistus had
written the text. The philosophy embedded in this text altered the
thinking of the whole of Europe.
     The Corpus Hermeticum was not Christian, and it led to a
flowering of interest in the pagan gods as well as a fascination for
the Kabbalah, the Tarot, and talismanic magic. It postulated that
the universe was one great unified life, and that what was above
was a reflection of what was below. It spoke about the reincarna-
tion of the soul. It praised the dignity and divinity of man, the
great miracle who is both beast and god. This world-view we
would now call Hermetic, or Neoplatonic. At the time it was an
immense heresy, because of its overriding injunction that the gods
were found in life, in flesh and in form, as much as in heaven.
     A number of very important people were born under this
transit of Pluto in Scorpio, as well as the main philosophical
thrust of the Renaissance. Among these people was Martin Luther,
whose impact on the religion of the time was monumental.
Another was Paracelsus, who is sometimes considered the father of
modern medicine. These people born with Pluto in Scorpio
anchored the ideas which the transit brought by their life-work.
They transformed some of the apparently unchanging structures
of society. Any Renaissance always implies the death of some-
thing, and the age of the Church Fathers and the narrowness of
medieval thought came to an end when Pluto entered Scorpio at
the end of the fifteenth century. I suppose it would be forgivable
to say that this transit ended the era of medieval man.
    There was another transit of Pluto through Scorpio in 1240.
This period is another time when strange philosophical ideas
began to percolate through the Christian world. It was the time
of the Knights Templar and of the flowering of Kabbalism in
24                                    The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


Spain. It was also the time of the troubadours and the Courts of
Love. This period is sometimes called the High Medieval Renais-
sance, and it contains the same peculiar flowering of arcane ideas
that the later Renaissance does. Alchemy was also at its height at
this time, and the philosophy of Ramon Lull, which was once
again Kabbalistic and Neoplatonic, was spreading around Europe.
I can of course be accused of reading things into these two periods
because I am looking for something, but any student of Hermetic
philosophy quickly discovers that it has a cyclical life. It erupts
into the collective for a brief time, and then its adherents are
persecuted and it goes underground, only to erupt again around
two hundred and fifty years later. That is of course a cycle of
Pluto. Therefore it didn’t surprise me to discover later that the
transit of Pluto through Scorpio during the eighteenth century,
around 1740 to be precise, coincided with the rise of Freemasonry
and with the birth of Franz Mesmer, who incorporated the Her-
metic world-view into a scientific method of exploring the human
psyche which eventually fathered modern psychology.
    I am becoming convinced that Pluto is concerned with a cer-
tain vision of the universe, which is basically Hermetic and which
has a tendency to surface when the supporting structures of
society begin to break apart. Man has always explained his reality
in physical terms, and has built his social structures in an extro-
verted way. Something seems to happen when Pluto enters his
own sign that concerns cracks in the wall of this extroverted
world-view. It is as though there is something which we loosely
call “lost knowledge,” which is really knowledge of the universe
that comes from a different place than the senses and their percep-
tions. This “lost knowledge” suddenly surfaces, wearing a new
costume, when Pluto moves into his own sign.
    The fact that Pluto is soon to move into Scorpio once again
has of course raised many questions in my mind. If I have really
found some kind of pattern in Pluto’s transits through history,
then the ancient Hermetic world-view ought to be on the horizon
now, just getting ready to make itself felt again. Of course I can
see its tracks in Jung’s psychology, which is, in the end, built
upon the same world-view after you grapple with terms like
“collective unconscious” and “synchronicity” and “archetype.”
Jung’s psychological vision of life, which he tried to anchor
firmly in observation and empiric research, is in the end cut of the
same cloth as the Corpus Hermeticum. I am also inclined to look
Lecture One                                                        25


at the recent flowering of astrology and its allies, the Tarot and
the I Ching, as another sign of the same thing. Astrology also
seems to have a cyclical flowering, and not surprisingly it trots
alongside Hermetic philosophy, because it’s one of the best
vehicles for the vision of what is above being like what is below.
    I don’t think that this is really philosophy in the sense that
Uranus is tied to conceptual visions of the universe. This is some
kind of profound sensing of the nature of life itself, which has
been articulated in some very funny language each time Pluto
goes through Scorpio. It’s as though this profound sensing cuts
through all the religious dogmas and political visions and pene-
trates to the very core of man’s soul. It’s also a perennial phi-
losophy, or world-view, and it has been hacked to pieces over and
over again only to rise once more in new clothing. These move-
ments which I am calling Plutonian seem to attract a good deal of
anger and persecution from collective authority, but they are
indestructible. They keep coming back again and again. There
is a common root behind Freemasonry and Lullism and Neo-
platonism and Hermetism and depth psychology, although I’m
sure a lot of people would get very angry hearing me make those
connections.
    Pluto is the great time-keeper of the collective. All these little
individual mountain peaks have gone their way for a while happily
thinking they’ve solved all the questions and mysteries of life,
and they’ve built a society according to one model or another and
now they know all about the nature of God and man. Then along
comes Pluto and something is revealed which holds incredible
depths and blows apart that very complacent set of values. Pluto
heralds the death of religions and cosmologies, and offers the same
intense vision to replace them each time.
    I’m sure you will have worked out by now that the individuals
who are going to be most sensitive to these things are those who
have Saturn and Pluto in strong aspect in the birth chart, just as
Saturn-Uranus people hear the voice of the new idea and Saturn-
Neptune people smell the scent of the new mystical vision. I see
that some of you are laughing at this as though it makes sense to
you. I think Saturn-Pluto conjunctions glimpse the approaching
death of society’s gods and the gradual re-emergence of that
ancient vision of life. I suspect that some Saturn-Pluto people
help that death along by playing the role of saboteur, while others
immerse themselves in the perennial philosophy. But these people
26                                   The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


are buffeted most strongly, because they must embody Pluto in
some way in their lives.

Audience: How did these planets come to be named?

Liz: That’s a very curious thing. The man who discovered Uranus
called it after himself, and for a while the planet was known as
Herschel. That’s really an offense against aesthetic taste. After
Saturn, Jupiter, Venus, Mars and Mercury comes Herschel. I don’t
know why it eventually got called Uranus, but somehow the name
and the meaning of the planet are synchronous. There is also a
curious synchronicity between the time when the planet is dis-
covered and the emergence in society of values and experiences
which the planet represents symbolically. It’s as though the
planet breaks upon consciousness in both a literal and a symbolic
way. I can’t really answer you as to why Uranus is called Uranus
and Neptune, Neptune. I can only say that in some mysterious
fashion they get the right names.

Audience: What about Pluto?

Liz: Well, the story is that it was named for Mickey Mouse’s
dog, because Percival Lowell, who discovered the planet, had a
daughter who was very attached to this dog called Pluto. I think
it’s an apocryphal story, but it’s as good as any other. Probably
Pluto was called Pluto because it’s so far out in the dark depths
of space. Since all the other planets bear mythological names,
Pluto would be the obvious name for a planet so hidden and
mysterious. We project our mythic fantasies onto the cosmos.
The same thing could be argued about the seven planets known
to ancient astronomers. Mercury is called Mercury because he’s
the fastest and tiniest of the planets. Mars is red and therefore
called Mars because that’s the god of war and bloodshed. I think
there is justification for suggesting that we project our images
onto physical planets because they carry physical features which
connect with the fantasies. But that doesn’t explain why the solar
system should so agreeably provide a hook for those projections.
Pluto might have been named because someone thought the
ancient god of the underworld would be a fitting figure for a
planet hidden in the underworld of space. But Pluto also behaves
Lecture One                                                      27


like the god of the underworld, and for that I can offer no answer.
The name is synchronous with the meaning. Probably there is
some deep law at work, but I could not possibly offer a rational
explanation to a scientist.
     The values and visions which belong to Uranus, Neptune and
Pluto were of course around long before the planets were dis-
covered. They have always been with us. There are people in
history who have embodied these values and visions, like Para-
celsus who had the sun conjunct Pluto in Scorpio. I don’t think
there is any difference between a modern individual with strong
outer planet contacts who is in touch with the movements in the
collective, and a twelfth century individual who has these same
contacts and who is also their mouthpiece. But there was no col-
lective conception of what these planets might mean before the
time of their discovery. They couldn’t be anchored in external life.
They were probably discovered when their time was ripe. I’m
inclined to revert to a more archaic way of looking at things,
and tend to see the planets as something alive and numinous. They
were once called gods, and if you prefer the term archetype it
doesn’t lessen their mysterious power in any way. I don’t see why
we shouldn’t see the planets as evolving and changing in the same
way that other life forms evolve and change. Perhaps when it’s
time for them to be embodied in the world, they’re discovered by
somebody’s telescope. That, at any rate, is my fantasy about it.

Audience: Does that mean that things may happen in the collec-
tive unconscious which can’t be lived out in the world?

Liz: I suppose you could say that. I think things happen in an
individual’s dreams which can’t be lived out in his life often for
many years, if ever. If a child of five dreams of meeting a magical
androgynous figure with bird-claws and wings who can make gold
out of mud, he isn’t going to be able to do very much except tell
somebody he had a very strange dream. That may represent a
potential which he gets a glimpse of when he’s seventy and has
flogged many long miles. I’m sure the same applies for the collec-
tive. One individual who glimpses a potential vision for society
may be very fired by it during his lifetime, but everyone just
laughs at him because it will take another five hundred years
before the collective can do anything with it. The eruption or the
28                                     The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


change may affect an individual, but it can’t yet affect society
because society isn’t ready for it, so it goes underground for
another cycle.
    This has always been the role of the prophet and the artist.
The prophet can sense these potentials. He can read the dreams
of the collective which are sent by the gods, and he paints the
painting which is really the voice of the collective reaching out for
its dreams. I mentioned Yeats earlier, and there are countless
others, individual voices who sense the future unfolding. But
usually these people don’t make much impact during their time.
They are seen as curiosities, and it’s generally long after they’re
dead that anyone recognises the truth of their vision. If you have
come into personal contact with such people then you may be
profoundly affected, and your life may be changed. But society
as a whole may suddenly start giving the person’s work value
after two hundred years, claiming that this was a great poet. They
recognise it only after the poet’s vision has already surfaced and
become something recognisable by the mass of people.
                            Lecture Two
     This morning I would like to begin by discussing a few ex-
amples of the workings of outer planet conjunctions with Saturn,
which I began to touch on last night. This will be specific inter-
pretive material, and I am going to focus on the conjunctions that
have occurred during this century between Saturn and Uranus,
Saturn and Neptune, and Saturn and Pluto. I have been accumu-
lating a rather strange body of information on the Saturn-Pluto
conjunction from clients who were born between 1946 and 1948,
when it was in Leo. Before I begin with this material, do any of
you have any burning questions or thoughts that have come out
of last night’s session?

Audience: How about giving your own chart?

Liz: I never give my own chart. Are there any other burning
questions?

Audience: Can you say something about Pluto in Libra?*

Liz: I can try. Let’s begin with what Pluto means. Pluto destroys
or breaks down or heralds the end of certain kinds of forms, and
reveals a more eternal or more profound vision beneath. If you
consider those spheres of life which Libra rules—which means
predominantly relationships, not only marriage and the concept
of marriage but also world relationships, diplomacy between
countries, political treaties and arrangements like NATO, alliances
between political parties and so on—then you can get some idea
of where Pluto is going to overturn old methods and attitudes.
One of the effects of the transit of Pluto through Libra is cer-
tainly the altering of existing attitudes toward relationship. I
think it is certainly connected with the rise of the feminist move-
ment. Of course these issues have always been with us, and in-
dividuals have always struggled with them, but they have never
assumed the proportions of a movement. Divorce laws are chang-
ing, contracts between people who are cohabiting but are not
married are assuming new importance, homosexual relationships
are gradually becoming more recognised.

*Ed. note: Pluto transited Libra from 1971 to 1983.
30                                    The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


     I also think that our concepts of alignment between nations
are also changing radically during this transit. There has been a
certain amount of naivete about which countries are “good guys”
and which are “bad guys,” and about who has the right to in-
terfere with whose development. My generation was certainly
brought up with very defined black-and-white ideas about good
nations with a good way of life and evil nations who are the
enemy. Pluto is still in Libra and will be there for another two
or three years, and I am hesitant to make any concrete predic-
tions about what it will do. There is a conjunction of Saturn and
Pluto in 1982 and 1983, and this is liable to crystallise whatever
changes are going to happen. Wars usually break out under Saturn -
Pluto conjunctions or just preceding them, and that may radically
affect who is whose friend in the international alignments. When
Saturn conjuncts one of the outer planets, things have a way of
manifesting in the world in a very literal fashion, which is not so
obvious when the outer planet is passing alone through a sign.
Something happens on the world stage when Saturn is around, so
I would rather not attempt to foresee more than some kind of
crisis and realignment of allegiances nationally and politically. I
think the changes in marriage and divorce laws and in attitudes
toward relationships are increasingly obvious. Pluto entered Libra
for the first time in October 1971, and we have come a long way
since then in terms of greater sophistication and insight into the
dilemmas of partnership. Things will never be the same again.
Although individuals have always tried to make headway in these
spheres, the collective has been stuck in some very rigid patterns
which are now beginning to break up and reform.
     I’m going to put this diagram of the mountains back on the
blackboard. I would like you to keep the diagram in mind, be-
cause I think it helps to ground this paradox of collective and
individual. Several people have asked me to talk about Chiron,
and I am rather ambivalent about doing that, firstly because I
don’t know very much about him. Secondly, I am not sure how
seriously Chiron will be treated by astrologers in the future. There
was a great flurry of interest around the time the “miniplanet”
was discovered between Saturn and Uranus, but in the end it may
turn out a bit like the asteroids—-a sort of specialised refinement
rather than a main component of the horoscope. Anyway I think
I will do what I can with Chiron now and get him out of the way
before I move on to individual horoscopes.
Lecture Two                                                         31


     The first article on Chiron appeared before any real research
had been gathered, and it had a kind of irresistible intellectual
attractiveness. Because the planet or asteroid or whatever it is
wandered into the solar system rather later than the other planets,
Chiron is a maverick, a newcomer. The authors of the article
connected this maverick quality with the Sagittarian Centaur, who
apparently wanders about shooting arrows off into space and
chasing various things. Centaurs don’t, in fact, behave like this.
The two main mythic figures, Chiron and Nessus, are quite the
opposite. But the kind of intuitive logic that made the authors
of the Chiron article assign it as the ruler of Sagittarius is terribly
attractive. The deduction was that since Chiron is a wanderer and
a maverick among planets, therefore it should co-rule Sagittarius
and should mean things like the wanderlust and desire for change
and expansion in a person’s horoscope.
     I am not very happy about that interpretation. It came too
quickly and without any real empiric backup. I think we must
start experimenting with Chiron in our own charts and see what
he does. I have done a little work with Chiron in clients’ charts,
but I am still very hazy about the meaning. I have a few clues,
but no more than that. I’ve also tried another approach to Chiron,
which is the thing I’ve already mentioned—the strange synchroni-
city between the time of a new planet’s discovery and the emer-
gence of the values the planet represents into collective conscious-
ness. It’s worth looking first at the discovery of Uranus, Neptune
and Pluto to demonstrate this phenomenon.
     Uranus was discovered between the American Revolution and
the French Revolution. Both these political events concerned an
eruption into society of an idea—the idea of the democratic state
governed by and for the people, where society has the right to
elect its ruler. Now democracy was an idea that was tossed around
in ancient Greece, but it meant something rather different. The
Greek idea of democracy included a large slave population, and
the people eligible for election had to come from a particular
social class with particular training. Greek democracy was cer-
tainly never government by and for the people. It was govern-
ment by a noble elite who elected each other in and out of office.
The vision of a democratic state is not new, but no nation had
ever been capable of achieving anything near it until those two
revolutions in the eighteenth century. I think the very profound
idea that an individual should not be bound by inheritance and
32                                     The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


ties of blood is a truly Uranian idea. It places consciousness and
freedom of will above nature. Whether it is practically possible in
a complete sense is not the point. The discovery of Uranus coin-
cided with the very first attempt to build a nation’s constitution
on such ideas.
     Uranus also coincided with the dawn of the technological age.
I think there is once again an idea behind this kind of movement—
the same idea that man should not be bound and limited by
nature, but can by the power of his intellect find methods and
implements to break the control of the forces of nature. This is
the same ethic as the one underlying the political movements of
the time. Man should by the power of his mind be allowed to
become master of the world that he lives in. When you realise
how much men bowed to the idea of fate and the bondage of
nature in earlier centuries, then you will see what a very differ-
ent spirit entered the collective at the time of Uranus’ discovery.
     Pluto is also very interesting to consider in terms of what was
happening in the world at the time of his discovery. Pluto’s find-
ing coincides first of all with the rise of the Third Reich. I will
be referring again to this connection, because I feel there is a good
deal we don’t understand about Pluto and I am convinced there
is a relationship with the psychological phenomenon of Nazi
Germany. What happened in World War Two is still a great mys-
tery. It cannot be explained away by economic and political
analyses. Something very archaic and dark erupted into society.
We now have a tendency simply to blame Germany, but I am
not convinced it’s that simple. Something was unleashed around
the time of Pluto’s discovery which I think has something to do
with the collective shadow. Obviously there have been other
eruptions of this kind in history. There have been massacres and
witch hunts and genocide in every country in the world. But this
latest version of it also contained a successful manipulation of
those more bestial or archaic forces, and I think the issue of
power over these energies is connected with Pluto.
    There have always been mad dictators, but I think the Third
Reich was a first because it used psychological knowledge to
further its ends. Dictators usually dictate with armies, not with
the power of hypnosis over the masses. I am sure that the posi-
tive features of this kind of insight are very bound up with the
development of psychotherapy and analysis, but so far we have
really seen primarily the worst of Pluto. Every planet has its dark
Lecture Two                                                      33

and its light side. Perhaps the darkness of Pluto has as much to do
with his repression as it does with any innate malevolence on the
part of the planet. But I feel the kind of power issues that emerged
in the 1930’s are very relevant to the meaning of Pluto.
     I am sure there are many more correlations to be found with
the discovery of the outer planets. Neptune, for example, was
discovered around the same time that hypnosis began to be used
and the first real explorations into the unconscious began. So
when I began to consider Chiron, I understandably asked myself
what new things might be emerging in the collective which are
completely different from what has happened before and which
might be synchronous with the finding of a new planet.
     The thing which struck me first, which of course may be a
good intuition or a merely subjective fantasy, is that the attitude
toward the body is changing in an entirely new way. Perhaps the
name Chiron is in the end as appropriate as Uranus, Neptune and
Pluto are, because in myth Chiron is primarily a healer. He’s not
just your ordinary garden-variety centaur. He is a full-fledged god,
brother to Zeus, and he is a teacher, a sage and a physician or
healer. He knows all the secrets of nature—he distills potions and
works with herbs and knows alchemy and teaches the wisdom of
the earth to men. He’s an earth deity, and his particular skill is
that of healing the body.
    This seems to me to be important because something very
interesting is beginning to happen in the field of medicine. Of
course “fringe” or alternative medicine has been around for a
very long time, but it has mainly been considered fringe. The body
and the psyche have not been seen as a single unity since the
collapse of the Renaissance, and the belief in that unity was a
mystical one rather than one based on empiric evidence. But there
seems to be a gradual movement now toward a unified vision of
body and psyche, and this is totally new in terms of science and
medicine. Psychiatry, which is the poor bastard hybrid in between,
has never successfully bridged the chasm, but I am seeing more
and more doctors take seriously not only the findings of acu-
puncture and homeopathy and herbalism, but also the findings
of psychology about the inner meaning of physical symptoms.
    I think this is also connected with the emerging realisation on
the part of physicists that matter has intelligence. There is a vast
no-man’s land between the material sciences and the study of the
psyche, whether it’s called psychology or some more esoteric
34                                     The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


name. So I have been suspecting that if we have truly discovered a
new planet, this is the great new uncharted territory we are
entering synchronous with Chiron’s discovery. I’m not sure how
true all this is, but it’s a very creative fantasy.
     What I have found with individual horoscopes is that Chiron
does seem to behave like a full-fledged outer planet. By that I
mean that the crises and difficulties in the house in which Chiron
is placed are beyond the control of the individual, and the changes
which occur under Chiron progressions and transits expand and
alter the consciousness of the person undergoing them. Outer
planets have a certain feeling which is very different from the
inner planets. If you have a difficult aspect to Mars by progression,
for example, or a conjunction of Saturn or Jupiter by transit, you
may discover things about yourself, but they are things which
you can handle, and which belong to the human realm. You may
get insights about discipline or self-sufficiency or loneliness or
defensiveness under Saturn, but these are issues that can be
integrated into your personal life if you have the stamina to deal
with them. They may hurt, and you may not like them, but they
don’t raise the hair at the back of your neck. The progressions and
transits of the inner planets concern issues which emerge from the
top two levels of the mountain peaks in the diagram. These may
be unconscious issues, but it’s your unconscious, rather than the
collective one. I realise that is a harder distinction than actually
occurs in practise, but it gives a rough idea.
     With the outer planets, on the other hand, you are introduced
to an unknown realm. The outer planets stretch consciousness
beyond the individual himself. They confront the person with
mysteries, with fate, with forces that are much larger than his
own little life. In the pictographic language of China, the word
crisis is a combination of danger and opportunity. It’s dangerous
because it involves elements which are alien and unknown to the
personality. It’s an opportunity because it offers potential for
the personality to enlarge and connect with something more
transpersonal. The outer planets usually shatter one’s entrenched
views about the nature of reality.
     From the little I have been able to observe, Chiron behaves in
this way. Things seem to happen, either inside or outside, where
ego control is simply inappropriate. The ego can’t get its grubby
little hands on these changes and turn them into something
personally manageable. Personal will seems to be quite irrelevant
Lecture Two                                                        35


with the outer planets. It’s much more important for the inner
planets, because this concerns owning and giving direction to your
own drives and needs. But with the outer planets, pitting your
will against them only messes you up badly. The most frequent
occurrence I have found so far with Chiron transits and progres-
sions is illness. Usually it’s the kind of illness that requires some
understanding of its origins and its meaning, rather than simple
treatment in an ordinary sense. Illness is one of the prime movers
for us, because it awakens so many fears and terrors and fantasies
that centre around what the body means.
     There are classic crisis situations that are popular with the
outer planets. One is that relationships or marriages threaten to
break apart. Another is the change in vocation or direction,
whether it’s voluntary or forced from without. I already men-
tioned illness. Spiritual or religious crises are common, and so are
the deaths of parents. These events are usually what we consider
to be the causes for inner change, but events such as these coinci-
dent with outer planet movements are reflections, rather than
causes. They correspond to some profound internal change which
can’t be understood or lived until an outer event occurs that
completely changes one’s life patterns.
     There is one other thing about Chiron that I have noticed,
which makes me suspect even more that it’s earthy in nature
rather than Sagittarian. Chiron appears with great regularity in
synastry on close relationships. I’ve found this particularly with
sexual relationships. This has again led me to consider Chiron as
having something to do with the nature of the body itself. Usually
sexuality is considered in traditional astrology to be under the
rule of Venus and Mars, and also Pluto if you consider a more
psychological view of it. But these planets describe emotional
needs and qualities to which we are attracted. They don’t really
tell us why we should find some physical bodies beautiful and
others repulsive. There is a mystery about body chemistry which
no amount of psychological mapping seems to be able to answer.
Some of the newer therapies such as bioenergetics concern them-
selves with body energy. We’re back again to the borderland
between psychic and physical.
     This is really all I can say about Chiron. I haven’t the foggiest
notion how to interpret it in a practical way by house and sign.
I said that I have only intimations. I have a very strong feeling
that it’s earthy in nature, and because of this, if we must assign
36                                       The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


it to a sign of the zodiac, I would suggest either Taurus or Virgo,
both of which share a ruler with another sign. Virgo is not very
comfortable with Mercury because there are attributes in Virgo
that aren’t really described by the Mercurial rulership. And I think
there are qualities in Taurus which don’t really fit Venus. But you
will have to experiment for yourselves, because these are intui-
tions, not gospel truths.

Audience: Could you say a little more about outer planets bring-
ing crises? Do you mean by transit?

Liz: Yes, I mean when an outer planet makes a strong aspect by
transit to something in the birth chart. The thing that is threat-
ened and changed is described by the planet that is aspected. For
example, if Uranus is transiting opposite your sun, then you must
look at your sense of individuality. The sun describes our basic
view of ourselves, our feeling of being special, separate individuals.
If Uranus hits this point, it’s as though the planet is saying, “Sorry,
but this just won’t do. Your view of reality is too limited. I’ll
just hammer you a little bit and make a few cracks in that solid
wall, and then you’ll discover that life is different from what you
imagined and you’re also different from what you imagined.” Of
course people react very differently to such an experience. Some
people say, “Good heavens, I’ve had a major revelation.” Others
get terribly angry and blame everyone in sight for shaking their
lives up. Some people welcome the possibility of change, while
others fight it and therefore bring the roof down on their heads
because the planet has nowhere else to go except into events.
     I think this is a very difficult issue for many people to take.
You can meet someone who has been plodding along in the same
job for twenty years, with the same attitudes and the same rigid-
ity. He’s never allowed any new potentials to develop in his life
because he’s playing safe. Along comes an outer planet, and
suddenly something terrible happens. He unconsciously sets him-
self up to lose his job, or it’s just fate that he loses it. Then he has
to start thinking of what his life has really been about all these
years. It’s very hard and very painful, and if he fights against it
then things just go from bad to worse. But if he takes the situa-
tion as something needed, something which can help him grow
and develop, then he’s greeting the outer planet as a friend, and
I think he gets the more creative edge of it. This is what I mean
by crisis.
Lecture Two                                                      37

     Now I would like to go on to the aspects of the outer planets
in individual charts. I would first like to talk about what happens
to the person who is tied intimately to the collective, and also
about possible reasons why we have such great difficulty in
accepting what the outer planets bring us. Natal aspects between
inner planets and outer ones are almost impossible to be gracious
about. They cause an endless amount of trouble. For example,
you can consider an opposition between Venus and Pluto. That
aspect has a very bad reputation in relationship matters. It’s as
though the person is a participant in a play where the director
insists he play a part he doesn’t personally like. With Venus-
Pluto you are simply not allowed to live with others in a super-
ficial way. You can meet someone when you’re quite young, and
think they’re really nice and lovely, and you both fall in love and
want to get married and settle down. Then you buy a nice house
in a nice suburb and have 2.3 children and two cars and theoreti-
cally you should both live happily ever after. But if you see a
signature like Venus-Pluto in your birth chart, there is no way that
you’re going to be able to get away with that. You are given a
different fate. On a conscious level you might want security,
contentment, peace and happiness. We all do. But those things
will be shattered at some point, so that you can get a glimpse of
the enormously complex inner world that underlies all that nice
collectively acceptable domesticity. In other words, relationships
will force you to deepen and become aware of darker and more
powerful currents in yourself and in life. All relationships become
a gateway to Pluto. So every time you allow anyone close to you,
you invoke Pluto, and expose yourself to the experience of being
changed and challenged and forced into your darker and less
conscious emotional needs and drives. There is no way that can
be avoided if you have Venus-Pluto, except to avoid intimate
relationships, which is what many Venus-Pluto people tend to do.
     I don’t feel that Venus-Pluto is a bad aspect. What seems to
make it behave badly is the refusal to allow this deeper level of
experience into a relationship. I think it makes a difference if a
person can accept this path as part of his life. Then he might have
more chance to work with Pluto creatively, instead of being the
planet’s victim. Pluto doesn’t have to destroy relationships, but
he will certainly do that if you are very stubborn and pretend that
everything can be solved by pleasant discussion or denial. If you
are determined to keep everything peaceful and calm and do
everything you can to avoid confrontations either with your
38                                     The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


partner or yourself, then of course Pluto will turn destructive,
because instead of permitting the relationship to change you, you
are then demanding that the relationship itself change. It usually
does, in a devastating way. There is a tendency when this happens
to blame the partner, but if it’s the partner who walks out, you
can be pretty sure it’s the Venus-Pluto who has architected it.
     Sometimes the need to destroy is experienced inside oneself.
I think that’s a progression upward from blaming the other person,
but it’s much harder to recognise that you are trying to kill some-
thing you love. It makes no sense, and goes against any rational
reason or moral decency. Whether this leads in the end to staying
or leaving isn’t really the point. I think the point is to discover
that emotions are often terribly ambivalent and that love is far
more complicated than Bride Magazine is prepared to admit. The
capacity to betray is one of Pluto’s faces, and to find that you
yourself are capable of betraying someone you love is pretty
difficult if you have any idealism at all in matters of love. To
discover that love can die is also an awful face of Pluto, because
we want to believe that it’s permanent if it’s the real thing. Power
battles and manipulation and cruelty and sexual control are other
Plutonian favourites. Obviously a person with Venus in Aquarius
opposite Pluto in Leo, or Venus in Taurus in square to Pluto, is
not going to be very happy about all this because the conscious
values are so much at odds with Pluto’s primordial nature.
     If you can somehow come to terms with throwing away your
copy of Bride Magazine then that’s a beginning. The experiences
of Pluto become part and parcel of one’s love life if he aspects
Venus. Probably the hardest thing to live with under this aspect
is the loneliness one feels in pursuing the strange underworld path.
There aren’t any collective guidelines, and the collective standards
of one’s world tend to be very intolerant of Pluto. Pluto is a loner,
and it is a very lonely experience going down into the labyrinth
to meet yourself. But that meeting offers depth and strength and
a quality of love that is impossible to find in any other way. And
I think it’s a kind of fate.
     This is an example of what happens when an inner planet
contacts an outer one. A strange fate intrudes into an apparently
ordinary personal sphere of life, and the individual is pulled into
experiences which he usually feels he didn’t ask for and certainly
doesn’t like. There is something rather archaic and impersonal
about the outer planets, and we find ourselves behaving in ways
Lecture Two                                                       39


that don’t feel like our usual selves. This is why they can be very
frightening. One gets a glimpse of something that has the power of
a god, and collective consciousness can’t help because its rules are
quite ineffectual. This is part of the reason why outer planets are
often painful and disagreeable. One must find completely different
values and standards to deal with them, and that means separating
from the comforting shelter of conventional codes. These codes
are as much inner as outer, and don’t just mean rules about sexual
behaviour. Inner conventional codes tell us it’s right or wrong to
feel certain things or want certain things, whether this is acted out
or not.
     An aspect such as sun conjunct Neptune is not in itself a bad
aspect, anymore than Venus opposite Pluto is bad. Nor is it good.
It’s simply there. Charts don’t moralise and say this is a good or
a bad quality to have. They make no statements of that kind. We
tack our morals onto astrology, but the planets and signs make no
comment. They merely suggest that this is your piece of cosmos
for a lifetime, and you must make of it what you can. The sun
conjuncting Neptune suggests that the issue of individuality, of
becoming oneself, gets bound up with the longing for the mystical
union and the dissolving of individual boundaries. To put it in
the form of truism, the person must lose himself in order to find
himself. There is a constant conflict between the sun and Neptune,
because they pull in different directions. But if they’re in conjunc-
tion, then ultimately they are going to try to create an individual
who is both himself and who can be open to the larger whole of
which he is a part. In a sense, that person has an open door from
the personal level down to the collective unconscious level. All of
the longings and yearnings and dreams and visions of his collec-
tive seep through into his own feeling life, and he is irresistibly
attracted to those movements where these longings can find a
place.
     A person with sun-Neptune can’t escape this fate, although I
think many people with this aspect will try to shut out Neptune.
The longing for something ineffable and the sense of the world’s
suffering are very real things for Neptunian people, and they can
be felt as a terrible threat because they imply a disintegration of
the personality. Neptune identifies with the figure of the victim,
and generally feels that the world is a pretty awful place and can
he please go home soon. One of the things which I think can
plague sun-Neptune is the uneasy remembering of where one
40                                    The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


comes from, the place where there wasn’t any conflict or suffer-
ing or struggle to be an individual alone in the world. But these
fantasies are not just personal ones, and it would be a mistake to
reduce them to a longing for mother’s womb. They are a deep
religious urge in the collective, to which the sun-Neptune person is
privy. So he must somehow find a way to combine his own talents
and goals with these collective longings, because he’s a mediator
of them for the group.
     I once did a chart for a woman with the sun in the first house
opposite Neptune in the seventh. She was a rather sad person,
because she felt she had never been able to have anything in life
she really wanted. Her father had been an alcoholic, and much of
her childhood had been spent avoiding scenes in the household
between her parents. Her mother had been a very practical,
managing woman, who of course blamed the weak father for
everything. My client eventually married a nice, promising young
man, but an ill fate seemed to dog her, because after a couple of
years of marriage the husband became alcoholic. The woman
divorced this man, and a few years later married again. The second
husband again turned out to be alcoholic. It finally began to dawn
on her that something was at work in her life that was beyond her
control. She was a lot like her mother in that she felt the way to
get things one wants is to dominate everybody in sight until they
cough up the goods. She became very frightened when she saw
this pattern at work. As Ian Fleming once wrote, “Once is chance,
twice is coincidence, and three times is enemy action.”
     The opposition of the sun and Neptune certainly placed a fate
on this woman, but I don’t think it was that she was doomed to
spend her life with alcoholic men. Somehow she managed to
throw off the inner responsibility which sun-Neptune required of
her. Admittedly it isn’t an easy aspect to try to live, not least
because ordinary social standards run against all the things Nep-
tune represents. But my client was too frightened of the dissolu-
tion and entry into the magical world that I think Neptune re-
quires, so she projected her Neptune on her partners. This is to
be expected when it is in the seventh house. The alcoholic father
described by sun-Neptune is not just an alcoholic. He is a distorted
symbol of someone thirsting for the spirit, and I did mean that as
a pun. But there is a close connection between the kind of alco-
holic who drinks to find some magical or transcendent reality and
the mystic who is also looking for the same experience of losing
Lecture Two                                                         41


himself in the divine. My client’s sun-Neptune describes an in-
heritance from the father, which is a deep spiritual thirst. She
couldn’t accommodate this with her conscious personality, which
was very practical. So she rejected the father, and found husbands
who enacted the same Neptunian tendencies in the same negative
way.
     What this woman did is what most of us habitually do with
outer planet aspects. We tend to project them into rather dis-
torted forms. Neptune materialises as the alcoholic or the deceit-
ful partner, and Uranus dresses as the partner who leaves you, and
Pluto disguises himself as the partner who has power over you or
has some pretty complicated sexual and emotional patterns. But
I think it’s possible to at least try to live these things in one’s own
life. That can be exhilarating and creative, if we can come to terms
with the fear. The child with strong outer planet aspects tends to
be singled out when he’s young. He’s usually the one the other
children think is a little weird. He may suffer from a lot of collec-
tive pressure in the form of conventional expectations, especially
if the outer planet is in a prominent place like the ascendant or
the midheaven. Because this child answers to a different drum-
beat, he is often avoided by his soberer fellows who have aspects
like sun-Saturn and sun-Jupiter and sun-Mars and are better
adapted to the social order. A person with strong outer planet
contacts may have a disruptive effect in the group, because the
outer planets tend to feel threatening to more Saturnian values.
Sometimes you can see the opposite extreme to the woman I just
described. The person may get so used to having strangeness
projected onto him that he begins to identify wholly with the
outer planet. Then he becomes the anarchist or the dropout or
the renegade against the social order. In pursuing this path to the
extreme he loses the sun, which means he no longer has a sense
of his own individual values. He is nothing but a mouthpiece for
the collective unconscious, and he can be very destructive not
only to others but also to himself.
     Outer planet aspects aren’t the easiest things to carry. I think
they require a lot of insight. In some ways it’s fortunate if the
outer planets aren’t too active in the horoscope, because you
have a better chance for a relatively comfortable, placid and un-
eventful life. A lot of people value this highly, and I don’t think
it should be sneered at. Jung suggests that the unconscious should
be left alone unless it starts knocking at the door, and if you are
42                                    The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


well adapted to ordinary life, and have good relationships with
other people and aren’t in wild pursuit of some other-worldly
vision, that doesn’t mean you’re “unevolved.” It just means
you’re sound. But if you have a dominant outer planet in the
chart then you must come to terms with it. I think one place to
start is to see where it might be projected.

Audience: Does this apply to the sun and moon?

Liz: I think it applies to everything in the chart. We don’t only
project the outer planets. We also project many other bits of
ourselves. It’s just that the outer planets are much harder to
recognise as “mine.” They aren’t really “mine” or “yours.”
They’re an “it,” and it’s better if one preserves that sense of
separateness while still recognising that they operate in one’s
personal life. If the sun is the thing which is projected, then I
think this means the person has no clear sense of himself and his
own individual values. He’s a collective creature in the ordinary
sense, which means a mouthpiece for conventional social opinions
and values. Or he may be a creature dominated by the deeper
unconscious collective, in the form of the outer planets. But
either way he hasn’t got a strong ego, a strong sense of his own
person. That becomes his task, and he may rely on others to pro-
vide the feeling of individuality in his life.
     If the moon is projected, then I think the person is very dis-
associated from his feeling needs. He isn’t aware of being related
to others, and may rely on someone else to do his feeling for him.
I won’t run through all the planets because I think you can work
this out for yourselves. But I have found that it’s typical, maybe
inevitable that we project the outer planets. Perhaps we always
will, and can only accommodate a very little bit of what they
might mean. I think it becomes dangerous when we’re completely
devoid of awareness of them, which is when they behave like
blind fate.
     I would like to talk now about what happens when Saturn
gets mixed up with the outer planets. The conjunctions of Saturn
with Uranus, Neptune and Pluto represent a group of people all
born within two or two and a half years of each other. They are
a kind of small generation group. Not everyone has Saturn con-
junct an outer planet. The squares, trines and oppositions work
in similar ways, but I will talk mainly about the conjunctions
Lecture Two                                                        43


because they’re much more obvious. From around May 1941 to
April 1943 Saturn and Uranus were conjuncting. They started off
in Taurus and they continued to conjunct in the first decanate
of Gemini. This is a two-year generation group. Saturn and Uranus
will be conjuncting again at the end of 1986 for around two years,
starting in Sagittarius and moving into Capricorn. They also con-
juncted at the end of the last century. There are usually two or
three of these conjunctions during the course of a century.
     There was a Saturn-Neptune conjunction in Libra from the
end of 1951 to the end of 1953. There was another between 1916
and 1918. There will be a final conjunction of Saturn and Neptune
this century between 1988 and 1990. There have been two Saturn-
Pluto conjunctions this century, one between 1915 and 1917 and
another from the autumn of 1946 through the end of 1948. And
there will be a third between January 1982 and the beginning of
1984. This gives you an idea of the cyclical nature of the con-
junctions. They tend to occur around forty years apart with each
outer planet. Sometimes they overlap, which is the case in the late
1980’s when the Saturn-Uranus conjunction meets the Saturn-
Neptune conjunction.
     I mentioned before that the major movements which arise
from the deep collective layers of the psyche run into Saturn
first on their way out into life. Saturn is the natural barrier of the
ego, the defensive aspect of the ego which tries to preserve its
autonomy and its separateness. People who have Saturn aspecting
the outer planets tend to feel the impact of collective currents
very strongly, and in an uncomfortable way, because there is an
urgency to anchor them in order to render them safe. Saturn is
concerned with building forms to contain chaotic energies. So a
person with Saturn-Uranus must do something with the new ideas
that are flooding into his awareness. It isn’t enough for him just
to be forward-looking and eccentric and unconventional, which
might be sufficient for sun-Uranus. Saturn-Uranus has the re-
sponsibility of actually constructing some vehicle, because other-
wise he will feel perpetually threatened and anxious. I think it’s
important to remember that Saturn rules Capricorn and the
tenth house, and is concerned with the public arena of the world.
Saturn-Uranus is in the curious position of having to do some-
thing in the world with his social or political vision, but without
either losing his sense of realism and worldly wisdom or crushing
the vision into a too conventional framework. That’s a pretty
44                                    The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


delicate balance, and you usually find that the person is tipping to
one extreme or the other, and finding his enemy “out there” in
society as either the violently anarchistic Uranus or the oppressive
authoritarian Saturn.
     With Saturn-Neptune, it isn’t sufficient to simply pursue the
mystic’s path, or become an artist or a musician and give voice to
the images from the depths. Saturn-Neptune must make Neptune
work in the world in some way, and that’s even more difficult
than Saturn-Uranus because Neptune’s diffuse vision of inclusive
love is very far away from earthy Saturnian reality. The dream
of the utopian society is a very urgent vision for many Saturn-
Neptune people, and they try to implement it by forming alterna-
tive social structures such as communes or esoteric groups. As with
Saturn-Uranus, it’s difficult to stand in the middle, and much
more common to tip to either extreme. Either the material world
is condemned as crass and unspiritual, or the mystical world is
condemned as irresponsible and degenerate.
     Saturn-Pluto puts a person in touch with the necessity for
endings. Either he must perpetrate the destruction of something
in society, or he must facilitate its transformation. He carries the
responsibility of finding a place for the primordial instincts in
the world, which means that he has to face both the deep trans-
formative power of the instincts and also their savagery. Very
often Saturn-Pluto becomes a saboteur, working toward toppling
some entrenched structure or set of values. In many ways he may
find himself the enemy of everything patriarchal, where emotions
and instincts have been suppressed for too long. Or he may fly to
the opposite extreme, and fight the instincts in a very tyrannical
way. Saturn-Pluto is a very compulsive and obsessive combination,
because Pluto is a raw force of nature with the most tremendous
power. It’s not surprising that many Saturn-Pluto people are
rather paranoid, and fear the destructive power of the mass as well
as the destructive power of their own emotional depths.
     Obviously if you are quite young these Saturn contacts with
the outer planets can be terribly uncomfortable and frightening.
Many people have some form of breakdown early in life, because
the ego isn’t yet strong enough to give shape to the energies push-
ing in from the unconscious. Of course we are given absolutely
no education about these things, so a person who is being driven
a little wild by the pressure of the outer planets is often treated
in a very uncomprehending way. The critical factor seems to be
Lecture Two                                                      45

the strength and health of the ego. One of the ways in which the
pressure shows itself is in a tremendous affinity with causes. Outer
planet contacts with Saturn tend to reflect a propensity for join-
ing movements in a rather fanatical way. Or sometimes you see the
opposite, where the individual feels himself to be the personal
enemy of such movements, as though it were his sole responsibil-
ity for stamping them out. If the person is frightened enough of
the impact of the outer planets, he can take the role of Saturn and
try to repress all the Uranian, Neptunian and Plutonian elements
in society.
     Naturally, not every single person with Saturn conjunct
Uranus, Neptune or Pluto will feel the same way and do the same
thing. Probably it depends on how strongly the conjunction is
placed in the horoscope. The house placement matters, and so do
the aspects to other planets. I think the conjunctions represent a
responsibility that belongs to a particular generation group, and
that group will elect mouthpieces who give voice to its meaning.
Many people with these conjunctions are quite unconscious of
them, but there is a pressure that builds up from the group and it
bursts out through the mouths of the spokesmen.
     I spent quite a bit of time thinking about the Saturn-Uranus
group born between 1941 and 1943. What happened to them?
Who are they? What has this group done with its conjunction? The
first thing that occurred to me was that this group really formed
the bedrock of the whole hippie generation. One of the earliest
voices of the enormous cultural movement that has changed so
many things in the last couple of decades was Bob Dylan, who is
one of the Saturn-Uranus group. I think the words from one of
his songs expresses nicely the sentiments which began to break
through: “You’d better start swimming or you’ll sink like a stone/
For the times they are a-changin’.” Dylan and Joan Baez and the
Beatles formed the vanguard of a movement that expressed a
political ideology through music. This I think is appropriate for
Saturn conjunct Uranus in trine to Neptune. The music-politics
combination was more than just fashionable. It changed lifestyles
in an irrevocable way. Morals and religious attitudes and relation-
ships with one’s country were turned about completely. It would
be hard to overestimate the yeasting effect of these people. The
Beatles brought a funny little Indian man who called himself the
Maharishi into public prominence, and lo and behold, everyone
began meditating. Many things which have now become virtually
46                                     The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


respectable were for this group initially heretical and iconoclastic.
Not only was this Saturn-Uranus group giving voice to an ideology,
it was also expressing the imagery and spiritual sentiments of
Neptune. I think this is why the particular combination of politics,
drugs and music had such an effect.
     Obviously Bob Dylan is not the only way to explain a Saturn-
Uranus conjunction. But he’s a good example. The thing which is
most characteristic is not that a singer became popular. That hap-
pens all the time. It’s that a few people expressed attitudes which
spread like a bush fire. When someone symbolises something that
the collective has secretly been striving toward without realising
it, then that person has enormous influence.
     I’m much vaguer about the current Saturn-Neptune group. At
the moment they are just beginning to experience the Saturn
return, and I’m not at all sure what they will do. I talked earlier
about the urge to anchor some mystical or spiritual vision in
society, and I’m sure the products of this group will develop along
those lines. I know a bit more about the Saturn-Pluto group born
just after World War Two because they had their Saturn return a
couple of years ago, and that period just after the Saturn return
seems to be the most popular time for visiting an astrologer. I’m
not sure why, unless it’s that one has come to terms with certain
things under the Saturn return, and then there is a period of re-
orientation when the person sits about wondering which way to
go next.
     The peculiarities of Saturn-Pluto have struck me as particularly
interesting because of the frequency of what a psychotherapist
would call “symptoms” such as claustrophobia. I began inquiring
more deeply into these things with my Saturn-Pluto clients. One
of the first things that emerged was an almost universal hatred of
crowds. The experience of panic in crowds seems surprisingly
common among this group. As you might expect of a conjunction
like this in Leo, there isn’t an overwhelming love of authority
either, but this goes deeper than the usual father-problem. It seems
to be a real hatred of any figurehead who has the power to influ-
ence the mass. I have seen a very strong anarchistic streak in
Saturn-Pluto, which expresses as a desire to destroy. Often the
object of destruction is unclear, but it’s usually someone or some-
thing in authority.
     I think there is a lot of violence inherent in the Saturn-Pluto
conjunction. This may be expressed on a physical or an emotional
Lecture Two                                                      47

level, but either way the responses are closer to jungle law than to
 so-called civilised behaviour. Obviously this is hard to take in
 oneself if the rest of the chart is very gentle or refined or con-
trolled. There also seems to be a fierce isolation expressed by
Saturn-Pluto. I have found when teaching groups that the Saturn-
Pluto people don’t like to be considered one of the group. The
whole feeling of “group” in the popular Aquarian sense is highly
irritating to many Saturn-Pluto people. They tend to enroll in a
seminar or workshop and lurk about in the back and take what
they want from it and then leave, but they won’t “share” accord-
ing to humanistic psychological jargon. They don’t think of them-
selves as members of a group.
     I have also found that you cannot push Saturn-Pluto people.
I think there have been many problems among this group with
early education, because the moment you attempt to impose any
ideology on them, or assert any kind of control, you get a very
perverse and very violent reaction. Naturally the degree of this
varies, just as the degree of political iconoclasm varies in Saturn-
Uranus. Some Saturn-Pluto people are much more obvious in
their hatred of imposed restrictions. I think this expresses what I
mentioned before about Pluto being the enemy of patriarchal
systems and laws. You can reach Saturn-Pluto through feeling, but
you cannot reach it through authority. Mars came along during
1948 and met up with the Saturn-Pluto conjunction, and this par-
ticular section of the group is understandably much more overtly
angry, although the anger and aggression may be unconscious.
     There is one more curious thing about this conjunction which
runs deeper than behaviour patterns. I have met with a number of
Saturn-Pluto people whose dream material throws up frequent
images of the last World War. These often focus on the theme of
the concentration camp, and on the German-Jewish dilemma. The
first time I met with this kind of imagery I worked with it in terms
of the individual’s experiences. But after I encountered it a few
times I became increasingly curious about it. The Saturn-Pluto
conjunction in Leo occurred after the war had ended, and there-
fore cannot be a direct childhood memory or experience. But the
feeling of it is as though this group had a direct experience of the
horror of the Holocaust. Now we can get into a huge argument
about whether this demonstrates reincarnation at work, but I am
not really interested in that because there is no way we will ever
know. But I am very interested in the Holocaust as a symbol. The
48                                    The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


core of the imagery is the issue of persecutor and persecuted,
which is embodied in the Nazi hunting the Jew. We must ask what
the figure of the scapegoat means, and what this might represent
in society. The scapegoat is the dark, rejected, shadowy side of
man, and the image of the blonde German superman attempting
to root out the dark Jewish “inferior” man is really a very archaic
mythic theme. In some way the problem of Saturn-Pluto is about
an attempt to reconcile these two sides of life, and the inner con-
flict can be very violent because I think the Saturn-Pluto person
has both a Hitler and a persecuted scapegoat inside him.
     Most of these Saturn-Pluto people whom I questioned are
neither German nor Jewish, so it can hardly be an issue of racial
allegiances. I have also met the same themes among the earlier
Saturn-Pluto group who were born during the First World War,
and they of course did not absorb Holocaust themes in child-
hood as the later group might have done. But these people have
told me some very funny things. They say, “Yes, I have a re-
current dream of being in a gas chamber.” One individual said,
“Whenever I get into a crowded bus or subway I start fantasising
soldiers coming in.” Although these images are cloaked in modern
dress, the theme is not new. It’s an ancient one, and I might go
so far as to say that the responsibility falls on the Saturn-Pluto
group to find some resolution of this terrible split between the
light face of civilisation and the dark face of the primitive man.
No one feels that split more acutely than Saturn-Pluto.
     Of course the more esoterically inclined can say that the
Saturn-Pluto people born between 1946 and 1948 simply rein-
carnated in rather a hurry and really did experience the Holocaust.
But that explanation, although it might be a valid one, doesn’t
really describe the psychological importance of the conjunction,
or what it might be for in a creative sense. Certainly it feels to
Saturn-Pluto as though the person really did experience the war,
but I understand this to mean that the person contains within
himself a particular quality of conflict which the war also em-
bodied. Perhaps these people may have something to say about
whether such a thing will ever happen again.
     More than anyone else I think the Saturn-Pluto group has a
deeper understanding of what that war was really about. Saturn-
Pluto mistrusts mass psychology for some very valid reasons. We
tend to see the last war as a political problem, brought about by
a dictator who wanted Germany to rule the world. But it’s much
Lecture Two                                                      49


subtler than that. There are lots of ways to rule a world, without
necessarily having to engage in hunting scapegoats or “inferior
races.” That is a psychological phenomenon of a group casting
its shadow on another group to avoid the experience of its own
evil, and it’s a problem that is not limited to wartime Germany.
     I have had the feeling for a long time that Pluto symbolises
an archaic feminine power which has been excluded from religious
worship for a very long time. I think Pluto has many connections
with the Great Mother who was revered all over the Middle East
and the Mediterranean as the goddess of fertility and death. She
has been particularly repressed among those countries in northern
Europe, who have always worshipped a sky-god. In Aeschylos’
trilogy, the Oresteia, the Furies are outraged because Mother-
right has been violated, and they inflict punishment and madness
on Orestes. I have a fantasy that the Goddess has become quite
outraged at her neglect, and her revenge is the kind of eruption
of madness we witnessed forty years ago. This is what I believe
rose to the surface under the guise of Naziism. I cannot think in
terms of it being the “fault” of the Germans. Perhaps the German
nation was a weak link because it was in such a state of internal
collapse. An individual who is in a very low and disintegrated state
is much more prone to invasion by the unconscious. Perhaps also
the collective background of Germany made it a likely vessel
because the Teutonic peoples always gave precedence to a male
deity, and never worshipped the Mother as the Mediterranean
cultures did. That would mean that there was little or no real
understanding or integration of the feminine, and therefore no
way of coping with its angrier face. They were simply taken over.
But this might have happened anywhere. It would be a mistake to
blame the Holocaust on political principles.
     My feeling is that Pluto, the Dark Mother, erupted in rage and
violence through a particular political entity which gave her a
vehicle. Until the rise of the Third Reich we liked to think of our-
selves in the West as essentially civilised and moral. Then we were
shocked at the cruelty and atrocity of something which we still
persist in believing was exclusively the property of the Germans.
But I think the problem lies closer to home. Until a person can
face those forces in himself and make some sense of what is hap-
pening, then he will continue to project his Pluto on races and
nations. I think the enactment of the last war is really an individ-
ual issue. You can see so many individuals still obsessed with it. I
50                                    The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


don’t just mean concern with what happened; I mean the exist-
ence of a Neo-Nazi party in many countries, including America.
The motifs and imagery of the Holocaust exercise a queer fascina-
tion on us all. They are profound symbols of an internal collision.
     I suppose I have the fantasy that the people who are born with
Saturn in strong aspect to Pluto have some particular individual
issue to understand about all this, and perhaps also some responsi-
bility in the outer world because they are better placed to under-
stand it in themselves. There seems to be quite a lot of honesty, at
least self-honesty, in that Saturn-Pluto group, and I have heard
many of them express their concern and fear because they are
aware of a particular violence or sexual cruelty in themselves. I
suspect that this violence is not exclusive to Saturn-Pluto, but
rather that Saturn-Pluto cannot avoid seeing it and feeling the
necessity of understanding it and trying to work with it. I think
maybe that is their contribution to the collective.

Audience: Don’t you think this is a reincarnation idea? I have
had what I thought were reincarnation dreams, and in one of
them I finished up in a concentration camp in Germany in the
last war and was actually living during that time. As far as I know
it could have been an experience of reincarnation. I have no other
explanation for this.

Liz: That’s why I’m trying to approach it psychologically. I’m not
quarrelling with the idea of reincarnation, but I think your dream
has a symbolic inner meaning as well. For you to be in a concen-
tration camp says something about how you might feel in your
life now. Whether it also means you literally were in a camp
doesn’t alter that. Do you have a Saturn-Pluto aspect?

Audience: Yes, I have a Saturn-Pluto opposition.

Liz: I really don’t know about the metaphysical side of all this.
Different people believe different things. The one thing I am
pretty certain of is that such an image means something to the
person as he is in the present life. It’s a psychological statement.
They’re not mutually exclusive. One could argue that you have
a tendency to feel victimised and persecuted by authority figures
because you had a bad past life experience. That’s as may be. But
the reality is that you feel that way now, and your dream states it
Lecture Two                                                               51


very baldly. I would be more interested in what side of you the
Germans represented, and why a state of internal persecution
existed between two different aspects of you, than I would be
interested in whether you were really alive in 1943. That won’t
help you now.
     If you really want to get a strong taste of what Saturn-Pluto
feels like, then you must look at the images of the last war, be-
cause the last war is a paradigm of Saturn-Pluto. It’s a powerful
symbol of what I feel this aspect is about, including the over-
whelming Plutonian dictatorship and the crushed scapegoat that
is hunted and persecuted, which is also in a strange way Pluton-
ian. All the sexual sadism and dreams of racial purity and super-
men are bound up with Saturn-Pluto. Watching Wagnerian opera
is an education in Saturn-Pluto as well.
     Oddly, Israel was born as a state under that same Saturn-Pluto
conjunction that followed the Holocaust. This is either a piece
of immense cosmic irony, or it’s something very profound. Un-
fortunately the behaviour of this very great and dedicated new
nation sometimes verges horribly close to the very thing that
engendered its birth.* This suggests something very paradoxical,
which Jung called enantiodromia. That means that if you polarise
very violently against an opposite, you have a tendency to secretly
become that opposite without realising it. I feel this is the danger
of polarising with any of the outer planet conjunctions with
Saturn. If you fight too hard against one side, you wind up being
taken over by it unconsciously. The same danger lies in Saturn-
Uranus and Saturn-Neptune. If Saturn tries to fight too hard
against Neptunian idealism and romanticism by attempting to be
incredibly practical, it tends to secretly behave like a religious
fanatic bringing the kingdom of heaven down to earth, without
even being aware of its messianic aura. It works the other way,
too. Saturn-Uranus may polarise on the Uranian side and talk
about freedom and change of the educational system and over-
throwing of conventional authority, but unconsciously it will be
as authoritarian and rigid and tyrannical as the very thing it kicks
against. You can see what a tremendous challenge aspects like
these are to the individual.


*This comment was made in reference to the situation in the Middle East in
1980. The present situation between Israel and the Palestinians in the summer
of 1982 tends to make me wish to repeat that comment even more forcibly.
52                                    The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


    I think a good historical paradigm of Saturn-Uranus is the
French Revolution, just as the last war is a good paradigm of
Saturn-Pluto. The French Revolution was spawned by an idea, or
three to be precise—liberty, equality, fraternity. It was supposed
to provide these noble ideals for everybody, by overthrowing the
effete monarchy. It ended in a bloodbath which was the complete
antithesis of liberty, equality and fraternity, and after ail that
effort another dictator eventually took control in the form of
Napoleon. These things just don’t seem to work very well when
we try to act them out in society. They have to be dealt with in
the individual.

Audience: What is the difference between an idea and a myth?

Liz: I suppose they often overlap. But to me an idea is something
conceptual and abstract. Liberty, equality and fraternity are
concepts of a particular kind of social relationship. The myth of
Prometheus who brings fire to mankind has some of the same
feeling, but it’s a spontaneous image which people don’t think
about. It arises from the unconscious as a compelling image, but
the intellectual content is hidden in the image. I think Uranian
ideas often have a myth embedded in them, but people usually
think they are being enlightened and rational when they perpe-
trate an idea. The myth is translated by the thinking function
into something recognisable in space and time. The ideological
content of the French Revolution began with the observation that
the peasants were being oppressed. The ideas of the Revolution
were believed to be rational, reasonable, fair and possible. There
are many myths where someone oppressed or imprisoned is set
free, often with violence. But no Greek would have claimed that
the story of Zeus and his brothers and sisters overthrowing the
tyranny of their father Kronos was an idea for the perfect Greek
state. It was a religious statement about what the Greeks believed
to be the gods or ruling powers of the cosmos. A group of people
will sit down and discuss an idea. You cannot sit and discuss a
myth like that. You simply experience it as something alive and
numinous.
    Myth bursts into life in ways that are nonrational. Much of the
Nazi myth burst out in Wagner’s Siegfried. I don’t think anyone,
particularly Wagner himself, could have sat down with a cigarette
and a brandy and said to himself, “I have this great idea for a new
Lecture Two                                                        53


German state.” Wagner didn’t make Siegfried. Siegfried possessed
Wagner, and after Wagner he possessed Germany. Much later,
when everyone had got properly possessed, then people began to
come up with ideas about nationalising industry and restoring
German pride and purifying the race. I don’t know. Perhaps
Uranian ideas are vehicles for myths which communicate them-
selves in a form which people think is rational.
     I think sometimes one can have an idea and in order to propo-
gate that idea myths can be drawn on. I’ll give you an obscure
historical example. In the early seventeenth century a man called
Friedrich, the Elector-Palatine—which means one of several Ger-
man princes ruling over a small chunk of the Austrian Empire-
tried to make himself King of Bohemia. He did this to challenge
the Catholic rule of the Habsburgs, and to allow a country where
Protestants could enjoy freedom of worship. He and his followers
believed in an idea, which wasn’t a new one but which meant a
lot to Friedrich. He promoted his idea by utilising myth. He was
involved with the founding of the Rosicrucian Brotherhood, which
began spreading the myth of the invisible elite of spiritual initiates
who guided the affairs of ordinary men. This is an ancient myth,
and it shouldn’t surprise those of you who have only come upon
it in Alice Bailey or Theosophy. Friedrich had the idea of a
spiritually enlightened state where all could enjoy their own forms
of worship. This was an anomaly in Habsburg-controlled Catholic
Europe. Of course he got stamped out. But it was a nice idea, and
good politicians have always known the value of backing up
Uranus with Neptune.
     Apropos Uranus and Neptune, I think Marxism is an interest-
ing example of the combination of idea and myth, or perhaps the
combination of ideology and religion. Marxism is as much a
religion as it is a political system, although typically the dedicated
Marxist considers himself above religion which is only the opiate
of the masses. Marx himself was born under a Uranus-Neptune
conjunction in Sagittarius. Although I run the risk of angering any
Marxists in the group, I think Marxism is as mystical as Rosicru-
cianism. The Perfect State is an ancient myth, and one of its
oldest symbols is the Heavenly Jerusalem. The passionate belief
in the State is not very distinguishable from the passionate belief
in the Heavenly Jerusalem. But it poses as an idea, because there
is a rational content to Marxism which is not present in mystical
Christianity.
54                                    The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


     There are a great many ideas or systems of ideas which have a
hidden religious content. I think there is a strong flavour of this
in much of Freud’s psychoanalytic theory. Freud rejected God,
but he raised the instincts to the status of a deity. Freud’s id is
not really very far away from the Yahveh of his Jewish ancestors,
who is all-powerful and attempts to exact obedience. There is a
religious feeling in the psychoanalytic movement as much as there
is a religious feeling in Marxism. Both pretend to be wholly
rational. The mystical content may in the end be more valid to
the individual than the ideological content. But most systems of
ideas are very ashamed of admitting any traffick with the mystical
or mythical.

Audience: Something that strikes me is that Russia’s present posi-
tion in the world seems to tie up with the two Saturn-Pluto con-
junctions you mentioned. The Russian Revolution occurred during
the first conjunction and the rise of Russia as an important world
power occurred during the second one.

Liz: I was going to put up Russia’s chart tomorrow so that we
could discuss it, so I would rather leave that until later. The idea
was to show that the same principles that work within an individ-
ual’s psyche also operate within the psyche of a nation. In Russia’s
horoscope in fact there is a Saturn-Neptune conjunction in Leo
opposite Uranus in Aquarius. This horoscope is based on the time
that the Bolshevik party took power. But we can go into it in
more detail tomorrow.
                      Lecture Three
     I would like to begin today with some example charts of
 famous persons where the outer planets seem to be a key of some
 kind to the individual’s motivations. I don’t mean by this that the
 outer planets, or anything else in the horoscope for that matter,
 will describe such things as genius or greatness for good or evil. It
 is very easy to take a chart such as that of Hitler, which is one of
 the ones I want to discuss, and try to see from it why he was able
 to acquire the power he did. But I don’t think the chart will tell
 us that. Without hindsight you could not really have estimated
 what this man became. Also, there were many babies born around
 the same time as Hitler. But a psychological portrait is possible
 from the chart, and in particular I am going to look for any pro-
 pensity for being open to and channelling or being a vehicle for
 collective influences. I don’t think one can look at Hitler’s chart,
 or Marx’s, which is the other one I want to discuss, and tell from
the natal horoscope that these men would have the effect they had
 on history. But it’s their sensitivity to history that will show, by
 which I mean their receptivity to the collective currents of their
times. This kind of receptivity can of course come out in very
 different ways. It might drive one person completely mad, it might
express in another through an artistic medium, it might manifest
in a third as a political talent, and in a fourth it might never ex-
press at all but would provide a very potent psychic atmosphere
which eventually infiltrates the person’s children and affects the
course of their lives. But I think that both Hitler and Marx are
very good modern examples of men who became lenses for move-
ments that erupted out of the collective, irregardless of any moral
judgment we might have on the rightness or wrongness of those
movements.
     The outer planets in this horoscope, or in any other, will not
tell the astrologer whether they are going to express in a “right”
or a “wrong” way. If there is such a thing as morality in the un-
conscious, it is the morality of nature, not that of our civilised
egos. Probably whether someone decides to behave, or is com-
pelled to behave, in a socially appropriate or inappropriate fashion
depends a great deal on the state of consciousness of the individual
who is experiencing these collective energies. I think we must
56                                   The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


consider them amoral. Sometimes things serve an evolutionary
purpose or a function in individual development or social de-
velopment which everything in us declares is immoral. But I
would not like to make a judgment. In Hitler’s chart there is a
Pluto-Neptune conjunction placed in Gemini in the eighth house.
This conjunction receives no major aspects from other planets,
which I feel is a very important point. Uranus is placed right on
the ascendant. In Marx’s chart there is a Neptune-Uranus con-
junction. This conjunction is in square to Saturn and Pluto. These
are the particular configurations in the two charts that I would
like to discuss now.       MO




                                     IC
     Illustration 2: BIRTH CHART OF ADOLPH HITLER
         April 20, 1889, 6:30 PM, Braunau, Austria
         Source: Howe, Astrology, A Recent History,
                  "Baptismal records in Braunau".
Lecture Three                                                       57

     Pluto and Neptune in the eighth house and Uranus in the
twelfth in Hitler’s chart suggest to me a marked receptivity to
ideas and movements percolating on a deeply hidden level. Be-
cause Uranus is very concerned with ideologies, its position here
implies that Hitler was peculiarly vulnerable to any new political
movements that might be lurking around during his lifetime. This
doesn’t say that he would be inclined to “good” or “bad” politi-
cal movements. I think the key to what he picked up lies in the
state of Germany after the First World War, because Germany was
in a state of collapse and disintegration and the time was ripe for
something to come bursting out. Hitler’s chart doesn’t make him
a Nazi, but it suggests that if the thing we call Naziism is floating
around, this man would resonate to it like a tuning fork. Uranus
is opposite Mercury, so here again is the suggestion of someone
whose thinking and perceptions are going to be strongly coloured
by those ideological movements which are not quite ready to
manifest fully into society. The direction of Hitler’s ideas in his
youth was already firmly set and borne along by the new currents,
long before the country as a whole was prepared to take them
seriously. So the placement of Uranus simply tells us that here is
a political animal, with a political vision that was not really
thought out as his own but which more or less “appeared” in his
mind full-blown, because he was drawing it from the unconscious
psyche of his collective. There is of course nothing strange about
this aspect, you can find it in a lot of people’s charts. Usually
when I find Uranus placed like this in the twelfth house, there
is a very strong interest in political movements and ideologies,
but it is in a rather compulsive as opposed to reflective way.
     The Pluto-Neptune conjunction on the other hand is rather
strange, especially because of its lack of aspects. These two planets
don’t conjunct very often. When a planet is unaspected in a chart,
it is a kind of unconscious pocket in the psyche. It is a drive or
impulse which does not really relate to anything else in the per-
son’s life. Often he doesn’t even know it’s there, until it’s triggered
by a transit or a progression or by something in someone else’s
chart. It’s as though there is a god who has no ordinary outlet in
the life of the individual, so that it cannot accommodate itself
to external life in a gradual way. It remains primordial and un-
polished, full of tremendous energy which has no outlet. It just
sits there and builds up steam. An unaspected planet is very raw
and archaic. It has no social graces, but behaves as though it had
58                                     The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


just been let out of a very old prison. You can see this principle
                               v

at work with unaspected inner planets as well. Often there is a
kind of blank place, and the individual is sometimes very ignorant
of that side of himself until it erupts. I suppose a very simple
analogy would be that of the owner of a house which has an un-
known tenant in the basement. The tenant has always been there,
but the occupant has no idea of his existence. Occasionally there
is a knock or two at night, in one’s dreams, but otherwise it’s
very quiet. The occupant doesn’t even know there is a basement
in the house, let alone someone living in it. Then one day the
tenant decides to emerge, so he suddenly throws open the door
to the living room, or equally frequently, just crashes through the
floorboards, and then he has to be reckoned with. And sometimes
he takes possession of the entire house, and ties up the occupant
helplessly in a chair.
     When the unaspected planet is an outer planet, then it is in
many ways much more critical, because it’s so difficult to estab-
lish a dialogue with something collective. It can seem so potent
and alien. An unaspected Venus which erupts may plunge the
person into compulsive erotic or emotional states, but eventually
these can be accommodated into his life. But Neptune and Pluto
are too archetypal, too mythical. This conjunction in Hitler’s
chart is not likely to be easily integrated through a creative med-
ium. And a little reflection on the state of the personal planets in
the chart suggests that there are many areas of personal blockage
and hurt and negativity that would make it doubly difficult to
integrate something so powerful. What is likely to happen is that
the grandiose mythic vision of Pluto-Neptune feeds into the
personal feelings of inferiority and rejection and infantility of the
Mars-Venus in square to Saturn, and swells it up like a toad. I
think it is very much like what in medieval times would have been
called a state of possession.
     I don’t mean this in a literal demonic sense, because Pluto and
Neptune are not inherently evil. But in a psychological sense,
something unconscious and very potent swamps the ego and takes
control. It overwhelms the ego and floods in and takes over,
twisting all the personal energies to its own ends. This is psycho-
logical possession. One of the more lurid examples of this in psy-
chiatric literature is the situation of multiple personality, where
the autonomous psychic images are completely disconnected from
each other and take turns in expressing through the person’s
Lecture Three                                                      59


mouth. This is common enough, although less flamboyant, in cases
of hysterical dissociation, where the person cannot remember the
giddy, giggling, volatile person he was fifteen minutes ago, or
where he goes on a drinking binge and then cannot remember
anything at all—not only of what he said or did—but of why he
even began it in the first place.
     In all these cases something in the unconscious breaks through
the barrier and takes possession of the ego. If a person is relatively
aware, it is tormenting, because it’s experienced as a terrible com-
pulsion. Or he may develop amnesia about it, or let it just dis-
appear altogether. When it’s an outer planet, then the thing that
floods in is something very collective. There is a film called The
Triumph of the Will, which was made as a propaganda film by the
Nazi party, which is a rather terrifying visual enactment of what I
am talking about. You can see Hitler preparing to give a speech to
an audience. He stands rather diffidently in the background,
obviously unsure of himself, very eager to please. He climbs up to
the podium, and smiles and dimples and shuffles a bit. You can
see the Libra ascendant in all this shuffling and shyness and fear
that people won’t like him. He begins to speak in a fairly ordinary
voice. Then something begins to happen. His gestures change
completely and begin to become rather jerky, and his voice alters,
and his eyes glaze over. You can see the tenant in the basement
rising up to take control of the house. All of a sudden this rather
shy and diffident man begins to radiate immense charismatic
power. He is giving voice to what everyone in the audience is
caught by. They are all in a state of participation mystique, and
the collective vision has taken possession of them all.
     Neptune, as I mentioned before, is connected with dreams and
religious longings; the yearning for return to the source. Pluto is
connected with the urge for destruction and renewal, the tearing
down of the old world order so that something new might be
born. If you put these two principles together, what you have is
essentially a religious or mystical movement which is dedicated
to the destruction and rebuilding of society. I think this is very
literally what Hitler attempted to perpetrate as the vision of
National Socialism. He was the figurehead for a tremendous dicta-
torial-mystical cult. The Pluto side of it says something like,
“The new world must be created. The old one must be utterly
annihilated, and all elements which taint or spoil it must be
destroyed.” The Neptune side says, “The new superman is God’s
60                                    The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


chosen vessel. He is the vessel for the light. He is the embodiment
of God on earth, and rules by sacred right.” This conjunction is
bumping around here unaspected in the eighth house. So when it
erupts, it is likely to do so in a completely uncontrolled way,
because there is nothing in the chart to help channel it.
     Hitler was part of the fabric of his time, and was a mouth-
piece for the Pluto-Neptune conjunction. No doubt there were
other mouthpieces as well, some of a much more creative and
beneficent kind. But he met the requirements of his time. I think
it is a mistake to make him responsible for them. There were a
good many civilised and liberal-minded Englishmen and French-
men who thought at first that he might be able to do something
really constructive in Germany, because this mystical vision of
rebuilding society was around in the collective, not just in Hitler.
This conjunction occurred everywhere, not just in Germany.
Japan and Italy polarised with Germany, but they could not have
done so if there were not some innate receptivity to the vision. A
whole generation was born with Pluto conjuncting Neptune,
including the German Jews who were victimised and the Allied
armies who fought Germany and Italy and Japan. The eruption of
the collective vision of this generation belonged as much to the
“good” side as the “bad,” just as the same experience binds the
rapist and the raped, or the murderer and the murdered.
     One may well ask why what erupted was so particularly
odious. I don’t think this odiousness is inherent in the conjunc-
tion, although one would expect Pluto and Neptune to produce
something drastic and obsessive for good or ill. But I think if
energies like this, which contain both a dark and a light pole, try
to surface through a particular kind of cultural lopsidedness or
paralysis, then the likelihood is that it is predominantly the dark
face which will reveal itself. The same principle I think applies
both to an individual and to a nation. If an individual is lop-
sided and overdeveloped in one direction and frozen and twisted
and underdeveloped in another, then the eruption of the uncon-
scious brings up the lopsided shadow with it. I don’t feel it’s
coincidental that both Pluto and Neptune are feminine planets,
dealing with the emotional and instinctual and imaginal realms.
Germany has always been a peculiarly patriarchal culture, whose
chief deity was a male storm-god, Wotan. The development of the
feminine side of the psyche in Germany was perhaps rather handi-
capped by the bias of the cultural values. So when these two
Lecture Three                                                     61


feminine planets burst through, it would seem reasonable to sup-
pose that they would behave in a pretty archaic way when they
did.
     You can see that without hindsight one could not determine
that this was Hitler’s chart. But you could determine that this is
an individual who has a propensity to be taken over by the collec-
tive unconscious. If you bear this in mind, and then consider his
tenth house Saturn in Leo with its suggestion of personal ambition
and almost overwhelming need to compensate for his loneliness
and isolation and repressed anger through public recognition,
then you can see how the two separate things might combine. The
tenth house Saturn also describes the very difficult mother-
relationship he had, with a domineering and overpossessive mother
and a father who died when he was quite young. This kind of
family background and rather neurotic drive are not especially
uncommon. The insecurity and ambition would naturally force
him to seek recognition, and to seek it in a distorted way with
rather grandiose fantasies of his own importance and talent. As
soon as he achieves any position of this kind, then the Pluto-
Neptune drive would begin to push through into the public eye.
You can then put these things together with the Mercury-Uranus
opposition across the ascendant-descendant axis, which suggests
a very fine capacity to grasp the intricacies of an ideology or
political system and articulate it in a Li bran, that is, logical and
reasonable, way. I think the key to the whole chart is the un-
aspected Pluto-Neptune conjunction.
     Now, all this hindsight is very nice. But the problem is that
when a conjunction like this is percolating in the collective, an
entire generation is bound to it without being at all aware of what
is happening. The ordinary decent citizen who lives on the surface
of life, be he English, American, German, French, Italian or
whatever, sits around with his rather narrow vision of reality and
then suddenly, the next thing he knows, there is an oppressive
government in power, left or right, and then he shrugs and says,
“Well, I was only following orders. What could I have done? They
would have shot me if I had argued.” And he never puts two and
two together, that he and his millions of fellows if they had been
just a little more conscious, would have seen what was happening
in the world outside because they would have seen it in them-
selves first. This is why I tend to keep going on and on about
what these things represent within the individual, because if there
62                                    The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


is a potent outer planet influence in your own horoscope then
there is a powerful current at work in your generation group and
therefore in you. If you, or I, don’t understand what that is about,
then someone else will sooner or later announce it, by saying, “I
am the voice who can answer all of your aspirations. I am the one
who knows better than you what you need.” And then you’re
caught, hypnotised, and you follow, and then you cease to be an
individual at all.
    Now let’s move on to Karl Marx’s chart and the Uranus-
Neptune conjunction under which he was born. These two planets
together suggest a mystical or religious vision coupled with a
                     MO




 Illustration 3: BIRTH CHART OF KARL MARX
       May 5, 1818, 2:00 AM, Treves, Prussia
   Source: Wemyss, Famous Nativities, "2:00 AM as
   recorded" (Jones, Sabi an Symbols gives 1:30 AM).
Lecture Three                                                     63


political ideology. The Plutonian element is absent here in the
conjunction, but Saturn and Pluto are in square to it. We can deal
with the Uranus-Neptune conjunction first.
     This is another individual who was born at a time when the
collective was seized with the germ of a new vision. The conjunc-
tion falls in Marx’s tenth house, which suggests that his calling
or vocation would be intimately connected to giving that vision
form in society. In Hitler’s chart, the outer planet conjunction
falls in a watery house, the eighth. It’s lurking in the unconscious.
Hitler wasn’t “called” in the sense of a vocation. He was called to
aggrandise himself personally, and became a victim of this un-
conscious conjunction. But with Marx you might say that he felt
personally impelled to contribute this philosophy, even though it
isn’t really “his.” The politico-religious vision of Uranus-Neptune
is really Marx’s profession. I find it interesting that it’s pitted
against Saturn and Pluto in the first house of the chart. Although
Saturn and Pluto are not technically in conjunction, both are in
square to the Uranus-Neptune conjunction. Now I mentioned
before that neither Saturn nor Pluto are especially fond of author-
ity, because both of these planets try to claim authority for
themselves. On a personal level, Marx was an autocrat, he had a
terrifically domineering personality. But his political philosophy
is completely different, and the man is at odds with what he
preaches. There is a terrific conflict within this chart, between the
autocrat and the humanitarian. In Hitler’s chart there isn’t really
a conflict. He was just rolled along by the power of the Pluto-
Neptune conjunction. But I think that Marx probably suffered
from this conflict between his principles and his personality. Here
is someone who believes in freedom yet is personally autocratic.
I think also that Marxism contains a kind of projection of one
end of this conflict. The tyrannical, controlling enemy is found
without rather than within. These squares between Saturn and
Pluto and the Uranus-Neptune conjunction are very difficult, and
it isn’t surprising that even a man of Marx’s intellectual stature
couldn’t cope with the ambivalence of being both a dictator and
a member of the ordinary mass. The fantasy of a perfect state
which is like a benign mother-god, taking care of each individual
and free of greed and aggression, is I think very much the kind of
image I would associate with Uranus-Neptune, especially as this
conjunction falls in Sagittarius which is prone to be terribly
idealistic anyway. But Saturn in the first house will always seek to
64                                    The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


protect its own territory first, because it’s much too cynical to
believe that people can will themselves into altruism because of
a theory. And Pluto of course obeys jungle law, because it’s also
too realistic about the darker aspects of human nature to trust in
anyone doing something just because it might help humanity.
     I find this chart very interesting, because you cannot separate
a philosophy or a psychological system from the person who
propounds it. I am also very interested in the way in which Marx-
ism is interpreted. Whatever Marx meant by his vision, it has
certainly taken on some strange forms in the twentieth century.
Most Marxists that I have met are very annoyed if I suggest that
their political system is really a religious vision, because the
Marxist is supposed to be militantly atheistic. But militant atheism
is, in American jargon, a dead giveaway, because if a person is
really an atheist he simply doesn’t care. If he’s militant, he’s
trying to stamp out something in himself.
     I would like you now to look at Lenin’s chart which I have
put up on the board, because it’s quite fascinating to see the way
in which Lenin interpreted Marx. Are there any questions or
comments first about these two charts?

Audience: Both Hitler and Marx have the sun in Taurus. Can you
comment on that?

Liz: Only the usual, which is to describe the basic characteristics
of Taurus which you all know. The sun describes what a person is
really like, what kinds of things he personally values and wants to
express in his life. In Hitler’s case I fear it was mainly the more
negative aspects of Taurus that showed themselves, because there
was so little room for a healthy personality to express itself.
Taurus is a deeply sensual and physical sign, and the squares of
Venus and Mars to Saturn suggest that any opportunity of living
this sensual nature in a harmonious way was blocked by fear
and isolation and mistrust. I think that if you frustrate some-
thing so basic, it turns cruel. I have seen this before with both
Taurus and Scorpio, because both signs are so instinctual and
cannot really reflect reasonably on the causes of their frustration
without considerable effort. So they turn vicious out of hurt and
rage. If you frustrate the sensuality that is inherent in Taurus, it
can turn brutal. But I don’t really think the historical Hitler that
we see in film clips has any Taurus left to show. There’s nothing
but Pluto-Neptune pouring out.
Lecture Three                                                      65


Audience: It’s interesting that Hitler had a knowledge and interest
in astrology. I wonder to what extent he manipulated that knowl-
edge to support his political ideas.

Liz: To a great extent. It’s pretty common knowledge now that
Hitler had a stable full of astrologers to advise him, and when they
began to advise him with warnings instead of promises of victory
he began to shoot them. It’s a risky profession. There was an
immense revival of magical cults during Hitler’s rule, and military
orders like the SS were quite heavily steeped in ritual magic. There
is quite a lot of interesting literature available on the influence of
occult societies before and during the Third Reich. I suppose these
too were part of the Pluto-Neptune vision to which he was sensi-
tive. He certainly manipulated all of it. Even the silver and black
that dominate the visual presentation of the Reich are symbolic,
ceremonial colours, and the swastika is an ancient symbol. There
was a very extensive knowledge of the use of such things in
Hitler’s party. It’s certainly very Plutonian, because it plays on
the unconscious of the nation.
     Both these charts show the potential for a certain kind of
personality with certain kinds of motivations. The missing piece
to the mystery of why people like Marx and Hitler affect the
world so profoundly lies, I think, in the world, rather than in the
horoscopes. If the collective needs a particular kind of mouth-
piece for its inarticulate longings and needs, then it will find one.
Marx seems to have been more of a Taurus than Hitler because
he managed to live a stable family life in a rather traditional way.
But no one would have paid any attention to Das Kapital if it had
not embodied something that answered a secret collective longing
for a large group of people. Both these charts show a propensity
to serve as a mouthpiece for a particular collective vision. You
can’t look at Hitler’s chart without hindsight and say, “This man
is going to be responsible for the murder of six million Jews and
the destruction of half of Europe.” If it were ever possible to work
out the chart of Jesus Christ, and there have certainly been specu-
lations enough, I am sure we would be completely baffled at the
absence of anything superhuman. But the longing for a Messiah
was hot to boiling at the time of Christ’s birth, and the man and
the myth ran together. I doubt that you would find a configura-
tion in the chart which said, “This is the Messiah.” The same ten
planets were in the heavens then as are in the heavens now. But
the dawn of the Piscean Age had arrived, and the collective needed
66                                     The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


a new myth and a new vision of God. This is why I am so inter-
ested in what happens to individuals where the outer planets are
strongly marked in the horoscope. They are prone to becoming
vessels for the collective, but if they live this out unwittingly and
unconsciously, then they may become victims of the collective,
or express its longings in a rather unpleasant way.

                  MO




Illustration 4: BIRTH CHART OF NIKOLAI LENIN
 April 22, 1870 (NS), 9:42 PM, Ulyanousk, Russia
 Source: Erlewine, Circle Book of Charts, who gives
          his source as Rudhyar, American Astrology
          magazine, June 1938.

   Now let’s look at Lenin’s chart. Remember that in Marx’s
horoscope Uranus and Neptune are conjuncting. Here in Lenin’s
chart, Neptune is in 19 degrees of Aries, in square to Uranus in
18 degrees of Cancer. The conjunction for which Marx was a
mouthpiece has here appeared as a square, which I think is very
Lecture Three                                                    67


relevant in terms of the way Lenin interpreted Marx. The politico-
religious vision in Marx is a unity, it’s all of a piece and has the
powerful suggestion of an answer. In Lenin the vision splinters,
and one half is opposed to the other. Here is another first house
Saturn, which is interesting. It seems that both these men who
professed to have such concern for the rights and freedoms of
others were not actually very prone to offering it in actual life.
And we have another sun in Taurus here. Although Marx thought
religion was the opiate of the masses, his vision was permeated
with a kind of religious idealism, a feeling for the brotherhood of
man which comes from a heart level as much as an intellectual
one. In Lenin, there does not seem to have been any possibility
of bringing together the feeling values of Neptune with the hard
political system of Uranus.
     The way in which we tend to experience squares is that two
urges or needs or sets of values are fighting. This is a very basic
interpretive principle. The combination of energies, Uranus and
Neptune, is the same whether it’s a square or a conjunction.
There is an attempt to bring together the theoretical evolutionary
vision of Uranus with the mystical longings of Neptune. But the
difference between the conjunction and the square lies in the way
the individual experiences them. If they are in conjunction, they
feel like something united, that can potentially be put together.
If they are in square, they feel like two irreconcilably conflicting
things, and the person will generally take the side of one against
the other. I think that the militant atheism which I mentioned
before is typical of the square rather than the conjunction. The
square makes it an obsessive issue. If you side with Uranus against
Neptune, which would be more likely in Lenin’s case because
his moon is in Aquarius and his sun in Taurus and he would be
inclined more to the rational thinking side of things, then it seems
that mysticism is going to be the enemy of the ideological system.
Not only mysticism, but everything Neptunian, which means the
arts and the imagination in general. Lenin’s idea of communism
has a very different flavour from that of Marx, because he has
made Neptune the enemy.
     Uranus and Neptune were in opposition just before and during
the First World War, during the period leading up to the Russian
Revolution and the seizing of power by the Bolsheviks. This is an
interesting aspect which will probably appear in the charts of some
of the older members of the group. The opposition started with
68                                   The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


Uranus in Capricorn opposing Neptune in Cancer, and continued
for a while into Aquarius and Leo. I have done quite a number of
charts for people belonging to this group, and one of the things
that has struck me, which I hope does not upset anyone here, is
that this is a sacrificial generation. It has passed through two
world wars, terrible economic depression, and the complete
destruction and transformation of social and personal values.
Neptune in Cancer is intensely mystical and devotional, not just
about God but also about the home, the family, the fatherland or
motherland, the parents, and the little plot of land one owns.
Wherever Neptune is, that is where a generation tries to experi-
ence the divine. Cancerian things become sacred to the group
with Neptune in Cancer. This is pitted against the hard reality of
Uranus in Capricorn, where the world is an impersonal place
which can only be made sane and orderly by discipline, hard
work, and obedience to temporal law. The economic and political
horrors that this generation has passed through seem to me to
reflect the split between one set of values and another.
    In a sense, these three examples of the aspect reflect three
different renditions of the same thing. Marx gives voice to the
conjunction as a vision of human potential. Lenin comes along
and gives voice to the same vision, but it has fallen apart and
now seems only possible if some fundamental feeling values are
stamped out. Soviet Russia and a whole generation of people born
at the same time experience this vision as an impossible tension
between opposites, first trying to go one way and then another.
The sentimental vision of human brotherhood and the cold
cynicism of an order which requires rigid authority to keep co-
herence are now completely at odds. Uranus and Neptune will
be conjuncting again in the 1990’s. Perhaps there is a chance for
that generation to bring the whole thing back together again.

Audience: It seems as if it isn’t possible to have an objective
vision of things without getting your own chart mixed up in it.

Liz: Yes, of course. How are we supposed to see except through
our own eyes? You can’t separate a person from his politics or
his philosophy or his beliefs. There always have been and always
will be people who propound theories of human nature and social
development, believing that they have discovered the truth. What
they have discovered is their truth. This applies to psychologists
Lecture Three                                                      69


such as Freud and Jung as well. It applies on every level, to all the
different branches and schools of therapy and education. One can
only describe one’s own experience of life, even if it is a collective
vision which also belongs to a generation of people. Even if your
theory is based on observation, the observer affects his experiment
and selects those “facts” which reflect what he perceives as facts.
There is no such thing as an objective psychology, unless this is
taken into account. Jung began his work as a disciple of Freud.
Then he broke away, because he disagreed with certain funda-
mental concepts in Freud’s system and his experience showed him
other things. But what his experience showed him was his ex-
perience, which was in turn coloured by his own psyche and his
own horoscope. Perhaps he saw more than Freud. Naturally my
personal feeling is that he did. But that was contingent on his
own perceptions being potentially broader. And he certainly
didn’t see everything.
     Let’s have a look at the charts of Freud and Jung. Freud was
a Taurus with Scorpio rising. Although Freud, like Marx, decried
religion, God was alive and well and hiding in the sexual instinct.
For Jung, who was unashamedly religious although in a rather
unorthodox way, God was alive and well and hiding in the core
of human individuality. That is not surprising in light of his sun
in Leo and his Aquarian ascendant. If you consider the psycho-
logical viewpoints of these two great men in terms of their horo-
scopes, it becomes apparent that they have each focussed on what
they understand best. Where they differ from Joe Bloggs who runs
the Psychocybernetic-Gestalt-Massage Centre down the street and
who also has a map of the human psyche, is a bit of a mystery,
because I don’t think horoscopes show genius. But both Freud and
Jung have the sun in strong aspect to an outer planet, which at
least suggests that they were receptive to a more transpersonal or
deeper level of human experience than just their own personal
lives. They are not only describing their own psychologies, but
also something broader, more collective, more universal.
     Freud had the sun conjuncting Uranus. In a sense Freudian
psychology is a kind of ideology, a map of social restructuring,
because the rampaging id which is the source of human pathology
must be first understood and then tamed by the ego. Freedom
from the imprisoning terrors of the unconscious comes from
understanding and harnessing the natural forces. This is very
Uranian. Freud wanted very badly to be scientific, and on the
70                                    The Outer Planets & Their Cycles
                         MO
                          /S




     Illustration 5: BIRTH CHART OF SIGMUND FREUD
          May 6, 1856, 6:30 PM, Freiburg, Germany
      Source: Jones, The Life & Work of Sigmund Freud


surface he seems to be, although underneath you can feel the
dogmatism and rigidity which are not really part of a truly scien-
tific viewpoint. But Freud had absolutely no time for the mystical.
Human biology was a great mystery for him, but he persisted in
seeing it as nature rather than as nature and spirit both. Jung also
tried to present himself scientifically, but it comes across as
more of a surface irritation, an annoyance with his psychiatric
colleagues that he has not been taken seriously. But it is obviously
an imaginal and nonrational experience that drives him, rather
than an ideology. He had the sun in exact square to Neptune.
Religious feeling is apparent throughout his work, and the road to
Lecture Three                                                    71

                 MO




  Illustration 6: BIRTH CHART OF CARL GUSTAV JUNG
     July 26, 1875, 7:32 PM, Kesswil, Switzerland
    Source: Baumann-Jung, "Some Reflections on the
            Horoscope of C.G. Jung," Spring, 1975.



an experience of the numinous is through submission to it, rather
than control of it. That is very Neptunian.
    Both these men had the sun placed in the seventh house. They
would therefore be likely to develop their own individualities
through the catalyst of others, which is of course the core of all
analytic work. Whether an analyst is Freudian or Jungian, it is the
relationship between two people which is the cornerstone of
the work. They both gave expression to the outer planet vision
through vocations which involved others.

Audience: What was Freud’s attitude toward astrology?
72                                     The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


Liz: I don’t know whether he had any special attitude toward
astrology in particular. Certainly in his early work anything that
smacked of the occult was an irritation to him. But it seems that
at the end of his life he began to reconsider some of the more
mysterious phenomena he encountered. It isn’t surprising that the
so-called supernatural would be disturbing to a sun in Taurus,
which is a very pragmatic sign. But with Scorpio on the ascendant
he can’t have been unaware of the mysterious and inexplicable
happenings in a person’s life. I would interpret a great conflict
between the Taurean scientist and the Scorpionic fascination with
mysterious depths. One cannot avoid encountering strange syn-
chronous phenomena in analytic work. Any dealings with the
unconscious force a person to recognise the nonrational side of
life. Not everything can be explained biologically. Freud’s Scorpio
ascendant led him very deep indeed. But I think that of all the
signs, the sun in Taurus finds it hardest to live in that nonrational
world. If something can’t be demonstrated with facts and ex-
plained concretely, then Taurus will recoil and become frightened.
     Jung on the other hand wasn’t at all impelled to reject the so-
called occult world. He postulated it psychologically rather than
esoterically, but he didn’t have to repudiate it. From very early
life he was subject to strange inner experiences and visions. This
seems to me typical of the sun-Neptune aspect. Also, as a fire
sign, he had less need to relate everything to the body. One can
see this difference among many astrologers. Uranus is supposed to
rule astrology, but I think that many more Uranian astrologers
are really interested in the system and the laws which lie behind
the system. The logical basis of astrology appeals to Uranus. So
does the research side of it. The magical element is rather offensive
to Uranus, in the sense of something inexplicable which must be
felt rather than understood. The Neptunian viewpoint is more
comfortable with the subjective experience of astrology, and the
imagery of it, and the more so-called spiritual aspect of it. Some-
one who is terribly Neptunian will often find statistical research
quite offensive, because it denies any kind of fluidity or sub-
jective reality. Jung was of course not wholly Neptunian, because
of his Aquarian ascendant and Saturn rising in Aquarius. I think
he suffered a conflict between the richness of his inner experiences
and perceptions and the need to communicate them in a logical
way which would be comprehensible to his colleagues. But I think
at the core, the bias of Jung’s work is toward Neptune, while the
Lecture Three                                                       73


bias of Freud’s is toward Uranus. And the strange paradox is that
it is Freud’s work which comes across with a more dogmatic
religious tone, while Jung’s is much more open and reasonable.


Audience: Are you saying that the two points of view are com-
pletely incompatible?


Liz: No, I’m not saying that at all. But I think it’s difficult to find
the place where they meet. The experience of Neptune’s world
defies the intellect. It’s terribly difficult to communicate, let
alone justify with any kind of logical system. But a purely Nep-
tunian mysticism without any grounding in the laws of reality
is worse than useless, because it can delude the person into be-
lieving that his vision is greater than reality. One without the other
is incomplete. I think we need both points of view. But they are
hard to put together, because we tend to favour one or the other.
It seems that this kind of pairing of opposites is a basic propensity
in human beings. The conscious attitude takes one side and the
unconscious takes the other and starts tugging. When a person tries
terribly hard to explain everything from a rational basis, that is
when he is in most danger of becoming irrational in his obsession
with rationality. The moment he tries to dissociate himself from
the evidence of his senses and the facts of the world around him,
that is when he is in most danger of becoming hyper-rational in
his attempts to control his reality. Neitzsche wrote about the
opposing viewpoints of the Apollonian and the Dionysian, which
have a tendency to switch places if they are pushed too far.
     This is largely why I am a little cynical about ideologies and
polarised political viewpoints. The further you take the right or
the left, the more they become like each other. They become each
other. Hitler and Stalin are interchangeable. I think a good ex-
ample of this is the tract that was published in The Humanist a
while ago by a number of scientists against astrology. Probably
most of you have seen it or heard of it. It was an attempt to de-
bunk astrology in the name of science. It was so emotional and
irrational that it made me fall about laughing, although it was
attempting to say that those who believe in astrology are emo-
tional and irrational people. But this is very common. I think the
only place of sanity is somewhere in the middle, giving respect to
both worlds.
74                                        The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


Audience: Is it likely that people who have contacts between an
inner planet and both Uranus and Neptune are going to feel
compelled to choose between them?

Liz: Yes, I think this is what happened to Lenin. Uranus and
Neptune are in square, and with a square the tendency is to side
with one end and project the other one. The rejected end of the
square becomes the enemy outside. I think something similar
would have happened if he had had the sun conjuncting one and
square the other. It’s very useful, if you have these strong outer
planet contacts in the chart, especially if two contradictory ones
such as Uranus and Neptune are involved, to consider what sort of
ideologies or collectives you like and dislike intensely. It’s an
excellent exercise. Do you despise socialism? Do you loathe
capitalism? Do you hate wealthy businessmen? Do you idealise
the unions? Do you have a horror of religious people? Do you
think the peace movement can do no wrong, or the police no
right? It’s very revealing to reflect on one’s strong collective
antagonisms and idealisations. You’ll often find outer planets
involved in squares and oppositions to inner ones with very strong
or obsessive likes and dislikes in this kind of direction. Very often
Saturn gets cast as the arch-conservative, and Pluto as the fascist.
Uranus will wear the face of the revolutionary, and Neptune the
peace-loving utopian dreamer.
    I have noticed a typical pattern with Pluto squares and opposi-
tions to the sun. These people often complain of others who come
into their lives and dominate or manipulate them. They are often
very liberal themselves, and have a horror or a loathing of any-
thing powerful or ruthless. Yet they are carrying this propensity
in themselves. I was very interested in the way in which Jimmy
Carter, who has a sun-Pluto square, got himself tangled up with a
dictator like Khomeini. In some way there was a strange fate
about that collision. My fantasy is that Khomeini acted out
Carter’s Pluto. Carter was the reasonable Libran trying to be fair
and co-operative. His own unlived strength and ruthlessness
materialised for him in the world.*



 ♦Another good example more recently is Mrs. Thatcher, who is also a Libran
 with sun in square to Pluto, and whose entanglement with the Argentinian
junta has a similar fatedness about it.
Lecture Three                                                      75


Audience: Can you talk about the Uranus-Pluto conjunction in
Virgo?

Liz: Yes, certainly. That conjunction was operative from around
1963 through to 1968. For a period of time during those five
years, between the spring of 1964 through the end of 1966,
Saturn was hovering around in opposition to the conjunction.
Uranus together with Pluto suggests to me a political vision
coupled with an urgent need to destroy old forms and attitudes.
It’s obviously rather obsessive and potentially violent. The key-
note with Neptune, which if you remember was coupled with
Pluto in Hitler’s chart, is salvation for divine ends. But the keynote
with Uranus is freedom from constraint, and if you put this with
Pluto’s urgent emotional necessity, then the seeking of that
freedom isn’t likely to be particularly gentle.
     I am better versed with what was happening in America during
that time than I am with what was happening in Great Britain
because I was living in America then. Of course my perceptions
and memories are subjective ones, but they might point in a par-
ticular direction. One of the major events that occurred under the
conjunction was the Viet Nam War. I don’t think the war itself
is necessarily typical of the conjunction, since we tend to have
wars going on all the time and just about any heavy configuration
appears to set them off. But the repercussions of that war are very
important. There was a tremendous rebellion against it, of a
unique kind. I think the general attitude in the two World Wars
was that it was noble to fight for your country because that was
what you were brought up to believe. If you were conscripted,
then you went to war, and you didn’t question the rightness of it.
But people didn’t react in that way to Viet Nam. The unques-
tioned acceptance of authority broke down. The sixties of course
saw the birth of the drug and dropout generation, the great hippie
movement. The things which were being attacked were typically
Virgoan: ordinary nine-to-five jobs, humdrum worldly existence,
unquestioned obedience to the system, petty materialism, pre-
occupation with order and conventional morality.
     The vision of a freer and more meaningful life was not pursued
with care and forethought, of course, because Pluto isn’t inter-
ested in preserving what is of value in the old order. It just wants
to wipe the slate clean. That is what a great many people did
during the sixties. Now the generation of people who were born
76                                     The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


then are now in their ’teens. I don’t think it’s a generalisation to
say that they are a very intense and anarchistic group in many
ways. Their music reflects the inherent violence of Uranus-Pluto.
It’s quite different from the rock music which emerged from the
people born with Uranus in Gemini in trine to Neptune in Libra.
Punk rock is violent and nihilistic. It’s a bit different from Wood-
stock. There is quite a lot of violence coming from this group in
Great Britain at the moment. They are embodying the same
strange spirit that passed through those of us who are older during
the sixties. Perhaps when they begin to reach mid-life and the
age of greatest external effectiveness, they will truly change the
old order. I would expect the thrust of this to be in the areas of
work, health, ecology, all the typical Virgo areas.
     Some of this group have Saturn in opposition to the Uranus-
Pluto conjunction. Saturn has been moving through Virgo lately,
and I think this may have some connection with the violence that
is erupting, because Saturn always tries to actualise things. Saturn
has been triggering that conjunction. Who can blame them for
being violent? That combination of planets is terribly explosive,
and a fifteen- or sixteen-year-old psyche cannot contain it as con-
structively as a forty-year-old.

Audience: It would be very interesting to meet a cross-section of
the young people born during the Uranus-Pluto conjunction who
are the children of the hippie generation, just to see the difference
in consciousness.

Liz: I have met two or three. That doesn’t count as a statistic.
But those two or three charts that I’ve done have suggested cer-
tain things to me. The parents all have Uranus in Gemini and
Neptune in Libra, and often they are in trine. There is a typically
airy idealism about this group. Even the people born with Saturn
conjunct Uranus in Taurus have the conjunction in trine to Nep-
tune. The vision of a new world is very strong, but it’s a vision
that comes out through ideas, music, attitudes about love and
personal relationships, things that are much gentler. Their chil-
dren are more cynical, just as the hippie generation rebelled
against cynical parents. Here the offspring are the cynical ones.
The earthy sign in which the conjunction falls comes through
very strongly. We usually imagine that the parents, who are
older and have experienced more, are therefore more realistic
Lecture Three                                                     77


and worldly. But here it seems to be reversed. These children are
very bitter and very pragmatic. Perhaps they need to be. I don’t
really know.
     When major transits occur over one of these outer planet
configurations, it’s like a signal which mobilises an entire genera-
tion. It’s almost a sort of massive army, a group which has an
undeclared purpose in terms of collective evolution and develop-
ment, and when the natal configuration is triggered, then the
army is sent into action. Obviously these things occur in the un-
conscious. But I think it’s this effect of transits later on over the
natal configurations of outer planets which bring the meaning of
the thing out into society. You might notice that all your friends
of the same age group begin going through personal crises at the
same time. The group is like an organism, and begins moving
through important stages of development, although if you see this
individual by individual you might not make the connection. Of
course there are casualties when these triggers occur. Some people
can’t meet the challenge, or the pressure on the psyche becomes
too great. Others strengthen and become very creative. I am con-
vinced that generations have a meaning and a purpose just as an
individual has a meaning and a purpose for being alive, although
it’s perhaps impossible to ever really know fully in a rational way
what that meaning might be.
     I mentioned the group born with Uranus in opposition to
Neptune in the first decades of the century. Perhaps these people
were meant in some way to be a sacrificial group. They certainly
suffered a great many things which we will very likely never
suffer, as though they cleaned something out of the collective
for those of us who came later. That is perhaps a rather mystical
way of looking at it, but I sometimes have the feeling that these
people are a kind of bridge over which their children and grand-
children have walked. Some of them are very sorry for them-
selves, and therefore antagonistic toward younger people who do
not have to suffer what they suffered. But many others I have
met seem to have an understanding of this contribution to the
next generation through sacrifice and the taking on of a burden.
There is a synchronicity between outer worldly events and the
individuals who grow up through those events. The people pro-
duce the events and are also the recipients of them. In some way
they are the same thing.
     Perhaps people who are not bound by strong outer planet
78                                   The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


configurations are in some way freer. I’m sure that to have Uranus
conjunct Pluto in your birth chart means that you are driven
toward some collective end, and your personal life is going to be
affected by that in a way which other people are not. Some gen-
erations are terribly strongly marked, and obviously stand for
something, while others are more blurred and are simply people
moving through life. If you are tied by the outer planets, then
you as an individual are tied to the collective in some unusual
way. And if this is so, then I suspect it’s very wise to get some
sense of what that might mean. Your fate is bound up with the
collective, and it may become very difficult to pursue a life of
benign placid continuity, either because you yourself suffer
from an intense inner restlessness, or because the world rather
nastily intrudes on you. But in the end the inner and the outer
correspond, and we all meet the outer planets in one place or the
other, if not both.
                      Lecture Four
    Before we begin today, are there any leftover questions from
the last session?

Audience: When you’re talking about generation influences, the
influences of the outer planets, do you use larger orbs than those
you would use for a natal chart?

Liz: No, I would use the same orbs, of around eight to ten degrees
for conjunctions and squares and oppositions. But I think that two
planets in the same sign, even if they are not technically con-
juncting, tend to give some feeling of a conjunction. That is no
different from the same thing in a natal chart. For example, during
the two years or so that Saturn takes to move through a sign,
there will be times when it isn’t quite in conjunction with an
outer planet also passing through that sign. The two both retro-
grade and do a little dance back and forth together. I think there
is some of the same feeling during those gaps, but it isn’t quite as
intense an influence. A person with an exact or close conjunction
will naturally feel the impact much more powerfully.

Audience: You would use an orb as wide as ten degrees?

Liz: Yes, particularly with a conjunction. There seems to be a lot
of argument about orbs, and I can only tell you what I have
learned to use from my own experience. I’m inclined to give
importance to wide aspects, but I would look quite carefully at
which planets were involved. I would certainly use ten degrees for
major aspects involving the sun, moon and Saturn. I also think it
depends on where these planets are placed, so that if the sun is,
say, in the midheaven, it will be very prominent in the chart, and
then I would consider that its sphere of influence is greater. I
also suspect that it depends on the person. A very loose conjunc-
tion or square will give the same characteristics as a tight one, but
they are more diluted, and the individual has more flexibility with
it. Also, if he’s putting a lot of energy into working at that aspect,
or developing it in his life, then it will become more obvious
because it’s becoming more conscious.
80                                     The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


     An example of this might be a person with a wide sun-Neptune
trine or conjunction who decides to study music. Although the
looseness of the aspect means there isn’t the same compulsive
feeling, the fact that he’s trying to develop himself along the lines
of the aspect means that it will become more important in his
life. I know that a good many astrologers like using narrow orbs
of six to eight degrees, but that is simply how I feel about it.
     This same problem of orbs arises when you’re trying to in-
terpret transits and progressions as well. Many people think of
transits and progressions as operative only when they are exact.
But I feel there is a period of build-up which goes on for quite a
long time before the aspect is exact. You can smell it in the wind,
so to speak, before it becomes apparent in your life. With a major
progression such as that of the sun over a natal planet, I think
there is a three or four year build-up. It doesn’t just suddenly
arrive one morning out of nowhere. The psyche has been prepar-
ing for it for some time. I feel we are sometimes a little too tight
and literal in the way we work with orbs.
     I would like to talk now about the signs which the outer
planets rule, because there are colourations in these signs which
I think are not terribly easy to understand if you are considering
them from the old traditional descriptions. Our understanding
of the three outer planets is very new, and there is no reason to
suppose that our understanding of Scorpio, Aquarius and Pisces
is all that complete. These signs are all co-ruled, as you know.
Scorpio used to be assigned to Mars, Aquarius to Saturn and Pisces
to Jupiter. Scorpio was called the night house of Mars in medieval
astrology, Aquarius was the day house of Saturn and Pisces was
the night house of Jupiter. The two signs given to Saturn, Capri-
corn and Aquarius, were said to reflect two different faces of
Saturn. One represented the principle of order and boundaries
expressing itself on the material plane, and the other the same
principle on the mental or spiritual plane. Pisces and Sagittarius
were said to reflect the principle of expansion and growth and
faith on the emotional plane and the intellectual one respectively.
And Aries and Scorpio were said to represent the principle of
aggression and will operating on the creative and procreative
levels. So our old descriptions of Aries and Scorpio describe both
as willful and determined, but Aries becomes the pioneer or the
athlete, while Scorpio becomes the disciplined soldier or surgeon.
Pisces becomes the priest or the nurse, while Sagittarius becomes
Lecture Four                                                       81


the philosopher or teacher. Capricorn becomes the businessman or
the politician, while Aquarius becomes the scientist or social
reformer. I think you are all familiar with these traditional read-
ings of the signs. You can still find them in modern textbooks,
and I think they are true so far as they go. It’s a great mistake to
dispense with the old rulers. I am certain that they are still valid,
and one of the ways in which this can be seen is when Mars makes
a major progression and you see the repercussions through the
house which Scorpio rules in the birth chart.
     For example, the Saturnian element is very obvious in Aquar-
ius. If you get into an ideological discussion, you become aware of
the orderliness and discipline of Aquarius’ thinking, and even
sometimes of the rigidity and conservatism, although the ideas
themselves may be eclectic and innovative. The competitive in-
stinct in Scorpio is very obvious as well. Scorpio is just as deter-
mined to win as Aries, but he just tends to be quieter about it.
And the religious feeling and hopefulness which is associated with
Sagittarius is just as apparent in Pisces.
     But despite the importance of the old rulers, I think that these
three signs need to be involved in some way with the collective.
Because of the connection with the outer planets, they are bound
to issues larger than the personal. I have seen a very sad and lost
look many times in Scorpios and Aquarians and Pisceans when
their lives are too narrow and dedicated wholly to personal pur-
suits. I feel this is because something in these signs needs a link
with larger human movements and endeavours. If you take the
typical Aquarian or Piscean and put him to work in a bank and
give him no outlets, not even reading, where he can swim in wider
waters, then I think he becomes increasingly frustrated and restless
and neurotic, because the nature of the signs requires some kind of
deeper food. We are all familiar with cases where the sun in any
sign can become frustrated and twisted because of difficult aspects
to it, or because the individual can’t live his own nature out in
context of his environment and his lifestyle. Earlier I mentioned
Hitler as a rather twisted sun in Taurus. I think the same applies
to Scorpio, Pisces and Aquarius, but the real nature of these signs
is a little less simple, and the average collective blueprint for life
doesn’t take into account those broader needs.
     When I am talking about these three signs, I hope you realise
that I don’t mean only the sun placed there, but also the ascend-
ant and any other emphasis such as a stellium. The same principle
82                                    The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


applies. But because the sun is so bound up with personal fulfill-
ment and confidence, it’s much more obvious if the person’s life
doesn’t mirror his own internal needs. By the way, I also hope you
realise that when I say “collective” I don’t mean “spiritual.” I
am not equating these terms in any way. When Jung writes about
the collective unconscious, he is not implying that it is a higher
spiritual entity. The eruption of Nazi Germany should be a good
illustration. Jung referred to the collective as the “objective
psyche,” by which he meant that it was much older and deeper
and more inclusive than the individual’s personal, subjective
psychic experience. It contains the heritage of the whole of man’s
development as well as man’s future, but no one person can
encompass it, hence it is “objective.” Strong outer planet contacts
don’t make you “spiritual,” whatever that means, nor are they
“more evolved.” There are few less evolved spiritual beings than
some of the masterpieces of brutality whose charts we have looked
at such as Hitler and Lenin, so lest you imagine that prominent
outer planets confer God’s grace, remember them along with any
number of people locked up in psychiatric hospitals. I once met a
rather peculiar lady who said she was an “esoteric astrologer,” and
she told me that only people with the sun in aspect to Neptune
were capable of spiritual evolvement. I am afraid I think this is
rather idiotic, since I once did the chart of a pedigreed poodle who
had the sun in aspect to Neptune, and he was a very obnoxious
dog.
     I hope I have made this clear. Perhaps I should have said it
earlier, since there is a good deal of pseudo-spirituality around
among astrologers. Strong aspects to the outer planets mean, I
feel, that your life will be connected to a greater or lesser extent
with the larger collective movements and yearnings of your time.
How this manifests depends very much on your time, as well as
your own capacity to give shape to these things. At any rate, I
feel there is a necessity in Scorpio, Aquarius and Pisces to find
someplace in their lives for a view of reality that extends beyond
the purely personal sphere. Otherwise I think these signs can
become terribly negative. They have the worst reputations of all
the zodiac. The classic charge against Pisces is that of drugs and
alcohol, and so far as I have seen, this is perfectly true. A great
many Pisceans drown in that water, not because the sign is in-
nately alcoholic, but because they are thirsting for something
beyond a wholly material perception of reality. The opening of
Lecture Four                                                      83


the door might come through a strong religious aspiration, or a
creative outlet such as music or poetry or acting, or an experience
of the unity of life that comes through service of some kind. But
if the door is never opened, then the only way to the spirit is
through spirits, if you will excuse the horrible pun. I think this is
very important to consider if you are doing vocational counseling,
for obvious reasons. Even if Pisces wants to go and study com-
puters or become a civil servant, he must still have some place in
his life for the myths and the music and the poetry and the
imagination.
     There are a good many pathetic Pisceans wandering about
trying desperately to become good accountants or stock brokers
or insurance agents and wondering why they feel so hopeless and
depressed and lethargic while their Taurean and Capricornian
compatriots really enjoy their jobs. The same problem applies with
Scorpio. I think that Scorpio is very bound up with the darkness
of the collective, and with the primitive and primordial instincts
that have been repressed and shut out by civilised society. Scorpio
needs to be connected with this great reservoir of dark vital life.
If he isn’t involved with it, either through psychology or medicine
or politics or whatever, then I think it turns poisonous in him and
bursts out toward other people or becomes self-destructive. If he
tries to pretend that such things don’t exist, then they come at
him from the outside. And I think Aquarius must be involved with
the idea of progress, the idea of the possibilities of man in some
way. He needs to know that he is part of a larger human family
that is moving somewhere, toward something. Otherwise he begins
to become very cranky and obsessive and dissociated.
     I wanted to mention this because I feel these three signs are
rather eccentric. I hope I haven’t insulted anyone. But having an
outer planet as a co-ruler complicates things as you can see. We
are all collective creatures at bottom, and we are all mouthpieces
for whatever is going on in the human family while we are alive.
But the focus for some is more diffuse than for others. These
three signs are often accused of antisocial behaviour, because they
tend toward strange interests and odd viewpoints. I feel that this
is natural, due to the rulership of the outer planets. Most of our
inbred models of normality are Saturnian, and it is terribly easy
for the Piscean and the Scorpio and the Aquarian to feel very
misunderstood and peculiar, an outsider.
     I think we must also consider the houses of which the three
84                                       The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


outer planets are the natural rulers, because I think planets placed
in the eighth, eleventh and twelfth can be very troublesome if
there is no understanding of them. The traditional meanings given
for these houses are pretty thin and unsatisfying. I know that this
is familiar material for most of you, but it is worth mentioning.
Somehow I am not very edified by finding the eleventh house
described as “clubs and societies,” or the eighth as either “death”
or “legacies.” And the twelfth has deeper levels than “hospitals
and prisons.”
     Let’s begin with the eighth house. The signs and houses form
a cycle of development, a circle of experience that ends with a
new beginning. The definitions traditionally given for the first
seven houses are usually pretty clear and workable, because up to
that point the cycle of development concerns the individual him-
self, with his own values, attitudes, family, pleasures, habits, and
so on. A person is born at the ascendant, and the first house is his
identity. Then he begins to develop his resources in the second
house, and learns to interact with the environment in the third.
He becomes aware of his roots and his need of others in the
fourth, and finds his capacity to create in the fifth. In the sixth
he refines and perfects the skills of living, and in the seventh he
becomes aware of others as objective outer things that are separate
from him and must be accommodated.
     Then we come to the eighth house. How do we get from the
encounter with the other to insurance policies and legacies? I
think we must stay with the idea of a cycle. Something happens
as a result of an individual’s encounter with other people. He will
not be the same any more if this encounter has been genuine,
because another person will always force you to discover things
about yourself you didn’t know before. You find that there are
undercurrents, drives, even a fate which is at work in any deep
relationship, which reveals an entire unseen and unknown world.
This is the unconscious, which has a good deal more to say about
why we are in relationships than the ego does. So the encounter
with the other person in the seventh house leads to the encounter
with the other in oneself in the eighth. And the frightening thing
about that other is that it is not just one’s own. It’s all the silt and
accummulation of mother and father and masculine and feminine
going back for aeons. It’s the underworld of the psyche, which is
the place to which Persephone gets abducted when Hades or Pluto
grabs her and takes her in his black chariot into the halls of the
Lecture Four                                                       85


dead. All of Libra’s ideas about human interchange tend to fall to
pieces when confronted with the Scorpionic side of life, which I
think is nicely described by Freud in his work. The eighth house
is a battleground, a place of collision. The individual must submit
to something other, whether that other is his own repressed dark-
ness or his fate.
     Out of this collision there comes the realisation that something
other than the ego runs the show. Eventually the other is formu-
lated into a sense of meaning and of the divine, so we move to
the ninth house with its quest for the experience of God. If a
person encounters fate, he begins to ask questions. From the
formulation of a personal philosophy, the individual moves into
the tenth house, and tries to actualise his beliefs through some
constructive contribution to the world around him. After he has
climbed his way up into the world and assumed worldly responsi-
bilities, then he begins to question the point of it all. It begins to
dawn on him that he is part of a larger human family with its
own vision and pattern of development into the future. He be-
comes aware that people are not so dissimilar to each other, that
the human psyche operates according to certain basic laws and
patterns. That is the eleventh house. Finally even the separateness
of human individuality fades in the face of the unity of the whole
of life, with its past reaching back into the animal and vegetative
kingdoms. The matrix or sea of life is there at the bottom, the
sea of the unconscious without form or definition. I think the
twelfth house is far more than hospitals and confinement. It is
the root from which myths spring, the sea of the imagination and
the most ancient past.
     If you find several planets in the twelfth house in a chart, then
I think the individual must learn something about the imaginal
realm. If he doesn’t come to terms with it then it dismembers him.
The twelfth house is a mediumistic house, because it contains the
entire history of human experience. This is of course similar to
having strong contacts to Neptune, or having a strong emphasis
in Pisces. If there are many planets in the eleventh house, then one
must learn to work with the movements toward consciousness
which are developing during one’s lifetime. If there are many
planets in the eighth, then the individual must learn to look dark-
ness in the face.
     I think that a person can have many problems if the sun or
other emphasis highlights one of these three houses, if he tries to
86                                     The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


approach the crises that life brings him from a very narrow per-
spective. In some way that individual is living through issues which
are critical to the whole group, not just himself. That doesn’t
mean he shouldn’t deal with the personal side of it, but it makes a
difference if the broader perspective is understood as well. If you
can’t see how your own dilemma is in some way exemplary of
issues which are critical for your time, then the feelings of isola-
tion and dissociation are often overwhelming.

Audience: What do you think is the difference in meaning be-
tween a planet and the house it naturally rules?

Liz: A planet represents a dynamic energy. It’s an alive, active
thing, which has motives of its own and is trying to get some-
where. A house on the other hand is a realm of experience, a
theatre. A planet is an actor, and the house is the backdrop
against which the actor plays. If you have the sun conjuncting
Neptune, then you have two actors who are wedded to each
other, and the two together will represent an urge to transcend
life, to touch the divine, to escape the confines of limited material
reality. But if you have the sun conjuncting Saturn and they are
placed in the twelfth house, the two actors are not concerned with
transcendence. They are going to try to build permanence and
self-sufficiency and strength to cope with life. But the environ-
ment in which they must seek their goal will be the world of
dreams, fantasies, inner religious longings, routes for escape back
into the original womb. The actors are still going to have to
eventually build a strong, solid ego. But their ground of learning
will be the mystical world.
     The planets in their signs are the stuff of which we’re made.
The houses are the arenas of life in which we are destined, or
fated, to learn to become ourselves. Sometimes these two are
horribly opposite, such as Saturn in the twelfth, or Neptune in the
second. Sometimes they are in accord, like Jupiter in the ninth
or Venus in the seventh. The stuff of which you are made may
not agree with the experiences life brings you, but you will be
confronted with those experiences over and over again until some
kind of fusion or integration begins to happen. I think that in
practise the circumstances often sound very similar. But I believe
the planets themselves are the most important factors in the
chart.
Lecture Four                                                      87


Audience: In your book on Saturn, you use planets and houses as
if they were the same thing.

Liz: In practise they sound very similar. It helps us to understand
the planet, the sign and the house if we draw comparisons. For
example, knowing something about Scorpio’s behaviour offers a
lot of insight into Pluto, and you need to grasp both to get a sense
of the eighth house. The same meaning underlies the trinity of
sign, planet, house. But there is a difference, and I think it has to
do with motivation versus fate. On some level of course these
things are the same. But the planet shows the desire, and the
house shows what is permitted. Perhaps it’s superfluous to think
in terms of separating them, because Venus in the eighth house
tells a similar story to Venus in Scorpio and Venus conjunct
Pluto. But I find it helpful to differentiate between what is ex-
perienced as one’s needs and what is experienced as the arena in
which those needs are confronted, challenged and met.

Audience: If there are any new planets waiting to be discovered,
what will we do with them?

Liz: Assign them as co-rulers, I suppose, in the same way that we
have assigned Uranus, Neptune and Pluto. Mercury rules two signs,
and perhaps Virgo or Gemini could do with a co-ruler. The same
applies to Venus, which rules Taurus and Libra. I’m sure we’d
think of something. New planets don’t reverse everything we have
inherited of traditional astrology. They open up a new dimension
both in terms of the meaning of a sign and in terms of human
experience. We aren’t the same now as we were a century ago, and
certainly very different from medieval man. Our consciousness has
changed, sometimes for the better and sometimes at great cost.
The newly discovered planets reflect newly discovered aspects of
life. The three signs co-ruled by the outer planets have a different
perceptive orientation from the other nine signs. It’s like a kind of
developed peripheral vision that picks up things moving in the
background that are ordinarily invisible.

Audience: Can you comment on John F. Kennedy’s chart? I
believe he had a lot of planets in the eighth house.

Liz: Yes, there are five planets in the eighth house. Mars, Mercury
88                                    The Outer Planets & Their Cycles




  Illustration 7: BIRTH CHART OF JOHN F. KENNEDY
   May 29, 1917, 3:15 PM, Brookline, Massachusetts
    Source: Doane, Horoscopes of the U.S. Presidents


and Jupiter all conjunct in Taurus, and the sun conjuncts Venus
in Gemini. The Taurus planets are all in square to Uranus in the
fourth house, and the sun-Venus conjunction squares the moon
in Virgo. Apart from what that eighth house emphasis might say
about his sex life, I would interpret it as indicating a man whose
fate would inevitably involve him with the collective shadow.
There is all sorts of behind-the-scenes murk suggested by that
line-up. Saturn and Neptune are also conjuncting in the mid-
heaven. That suggests to me that in some way Kennedy was a
collective sacrifice. I am not sure that I would always interpret a
full eighth house as a violent death, because I have worked with
Lecture Four                                                    89


clients who have managed to carry a heavily tenanted eighth house
into old age. But I would interpret a collision with the darker
elements in the collective, which are of course inevitable in poli-
tics, but not everyone becomes the victim of them.
     Another interesting example of outer planet houses heavily
tenanted is Salvador Dali. Dali is a raving eccentric, which is a
euphemism, and he is also the mouthpiece and chief exponent
for the surrealist movement in art. In his chart the sun conjuncts
Mercury and Mars in the eleventh house, while Pluto and Neptune
fall in the twelfth. Surrealism has a strong ideological bias, and
when it first burst upon the creative world it carried with it some
                                        MO




                       1C

  Illustration 8: BIRTH CHART OF SALVADOR DALI
    May 11, 1904, 8:45 AM, Cadaques Garona, Spain
             Source: Jones, Sabi an Symbols
90                                           The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


definite ideas about the world of the dream and the unconscious
and the place of art in overturning concrete reality to open the
way to the dreamworld. Dali and most of his compatriots were
very influenced by Freud, and I think the whole movement has
an Aquarian stamp because of this strongly structured and almost
political bias.
     There are innumerable other examples which I could use to
illustrate this issue of heavily tenanted eighth, eleventh and
twelfth houses. I think you get the picture. I would say that the
operative word is movement, not in the sense of motion but a
movement, a trend or powerful current of some kind that attracts
or compels the individual and eventually becomes the ground for
his personal fulfillment. Movements of this kind are in no way
characteristic of the other houses or signs. Some of you are asking
about particular people in history. Stalin had the sun in the
twelfth house. I expected to find a sun-Pluto aspect in his chart,
but there is none to be seen. But there is the mediumistic sun in
the twelfth. Perhaps he was a medium for something at work in
the collective body of Russia, just as Hitler was a medium for
Germany. Perhaps his twelfth house sun says something about a
violent catharsis that needed to occur in the nation. Someone
asked about Edgar Cayce, who was a literal medium. He had
Mercury, Saturn and Venus lined up in the eighth house. Some-
one also asked about Gandhi, who was another twelfth house
sun, and another medium for his collective. We could go on like
this for hours with famous peoples charts.

Audience: I think it’s interesting how the outer planets at the
moment are passing through signs which are more collectively
orientated, toward the latter part of the zodiac.

Liz: Yes, I think it’s interesting too. The rest of the century will
see them grouped in Sagittarius and Capricorn, with Pluto in
Scorpio.* I suppose one way of reading that would be to say that
the major changes they are likely to precipitate concern collec-
tive institutions and mores, such as the legal system, religious
movements, the monetary system, and so on.

Audience: Can you comment on what happens if the outer
planets are retrograde in a birth chart?

* During the mid-to-late 1990s, Uranus and Neptune move into Aquarius, and Pluto
moves into Sagittarius.
Lecture Four                                                      91


Liz: I think that any retrograde planet tends to interiorise the
expression of the planet. It operates on a more subjective and
covert level. The meaning of the planet doesn’t change, but its
capacity for extroverted expression is altered. Retrograde planets
have a very hard time telling you about themselves. For example,
a retrograde Venus is just as orientated toward relationship, but
it’s very often a relationship with an idealised inner image of the
person, and the actual partner often doesn’t know very much
about what is really going on. If Uranus is working on a more
extroverted level, it will express through active changes and
separations in life. But if you interiorise it, then it will begin to
revolutionise one’s thinking, and one’s world of ideas may be
very full of anarchistic or eccentric or advanced themes, but
one’s outer life may remain very conventional and staid. When
Neptune exteriorises itself it will often make sacrifices for others,
but if it interiorises then the issue of an inner mystical devotion
and offering up of self becomes more important than loving
gestures to the outside world. Pluto will seek power and change
in the outer world, but if you introvert it then it becomes ob-
sessive about altering the inner world. I would hesitate to say
whether either of these is preferable. Nor do I think a couple of
retrograde planets make a person introverted in Jung’s sense of
the word. But the planet itself works more on an interior level
if it’s retrograde.

Audience: Which house system are you using with these example
charts?

Liz: They’re all drawn up for Placidus house cusps. I prefer the
quadrant systems to equal house because in the quadrant systems
the axis of the MC and IC are the cusps of the tenth and fourth
houses, and are emphasised in that way. The equal house system
can give you something completely different on the cusps of the
tenth and fourth, and the MC and IC float loose and seem to be
unimportant. And I feel they are terribly important because they
tell you a great deal about family inheritance and about the
parents. As the tenth and fourth are the parental houses, it seems
to me absurd to separate them from the midheaven axis.
    This problem of house division is of course a long-standing
problem. As with all other problems of this kind in astrology, I
92                                    The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


think you must work with various systems and choose the one
which you feel works best for you. My orientation is much more
psychological than that of many astrologers and I always pay
careful attention to the family background. Perhaps that’s not so
relevant for other approaches to a chart, so an equal house chart
might work on another level. But for me the keynote of the tenth
house is the world. Mother is our first physical world, before we
discover the bigger one outside, and the attitudes toward one
shape the attitudes toward the other. Saturn as the natural ruler
of the tenth is called the Lord of the World, and in Kabbalism it
is the Great Mother. The midheaven is the cusp of the tenth
house in quadrant systems, and is the point of inheritance from
the mother as well as the obligations to the world.
    I think you must simply do your charts by both systems for
a while, if you have questions about this. Some people always do
both, but I have abandoned using equal house because I’m not
very happy with the information it reveals in terms of the psy-
chology of the individual. I think you must also watch the pro-
gressions and transits in your own chart, to see, say, when some-
thing goes over a planet that might be either in the tenth or the
ninth or the eleventh, to see what sphere of life is affected. That
way you can gather your own evidence. I would be very hesitant
to say that equal house is invalid and Placidus the only proper
house system. But for my purposes I prefer Placidus.

Audience: Many textbooks say that the tenth house is the father
and the fourth house the mother.

Liz: Yes, I know. That’s yet another unsolvable problem. I think
the tenth house represents the mother because in my experience
that is who the house describes. By this I don’t mean that planets
in the tenth say what kind of person the mother is on a behav-
ioural level. But I think the psychic inheritance from the mother
is indicated. Very often it’s her unconscious life that is repre-
sented, the unlived drives which were very strong in her but not
properly expressed, which it then becomes the child’s responsi-
bility for carrying. Or you could also say that the planets in the
tenth house describe the psychic image of the mother which we
carry, which may not be wholly conscious and may not always
correspond to how she acted. But if you dig a little into the
Lecture Four                                                     93


person’s deeper feelings about the mother and look for the traces
in his relationships with women in general, you can see that the
figure represented by the tenth house is very powerful in the
person. The fourth house seems to me to say the same kind of
thing about the father. It’s the psychic inheritance of the father.
     The point has been raised in various places that this connec-
tion of tenth with mother and fourth with father applies because
of the particular parental structure in our society. That may be
true, because in Western families not much is seen of the father,
while the mother is omnipresent and is a much more powerful
psychological force, not only because she gives birth to us and
nurtures us at the beginning, but because she’s often the only
one there during most of childhood. I don’t really know whether
the tenth house is the mother or whichever parent happens to be
playing the mother. Some people feel the latter is the case. Some-
times you see exceptions, but not very often. I think it would be
a valid generalisation to say that the orientation of our culture
is a patriarchal one, because law is so terribly important, as well
as outer achievement. By this I don’t mean that men rule us, in
the way an extreme feminist would think. But both men and
women in our society tend to give more value to intellectual
achievement, material success, structured family life, a society
governed by clearly defined laws and a hierarchical social system.
This is perhaps a reflection of the religious values which have been
dominant for us for many centuries, which are Judeo-Christian
and which postulate the highest spiritual value as masculine.
     I’m not suggesting that this is good or bad, because societies
produce the values they need at any given time in history. But I
think that this emphasis on one end of a pair results in the com-
pensation of the unconscious in the other direction, just as in an
individual too much emphasis on the intellect will cause an up-
heaval in the psyche from the feeling side. So the real psycho-
logical power in the home is wielded by the mother, whose value
is less in the world’s terms and therefore becomes greater in the
unconscious. We are all horribly bound up with mother. I think
this is why every person who propounds any kind of psychological
theory places such enormous emphasis on her. She is huge for us
in this culture, in a very unconscious way. Perhaps the tenth house
represents the parent who is the strongest representative of one’s
fate, the thing which shapes the person. So mother is that person
94                                     The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


in a world structured as ours is. I don’t know. These are just ideas.
In actuality I think the tenth house is the mother because in my
experience of reading charts, that is how it seems to come out.
     If you do any work in counseling or psychotherapy, you very
quickly discover the phenomenon of the absent father. Everyone
seems to have an absent father. The father is the hidden parent,
the one about whom least is known. But he is the source, and it’s
his name we carry. The fourth house is the hidden origin, the place
from which we come, the seed of which we are a product. Father
is so often a lost image in our world. He’s away at work or off to
war or preoccupied, or if he divorces or separates then mother gets
the children and he has weekend visiting rights. We don’t always
know who father is. But we often have a surfeit of mother. She
becomes Saturn for many people, the figure with the scythe who
draws the limits of one’s development and castrates or cuts down
anything which tries to move beyond her. I wouldn’t want to
postulate the sociological reasons for this, because I am never sure
how much is social conditioning and how much is archetypal
and whether you can really separate them.

Audience: Can you comment on what happens when Jupiter is
aspecting one of the outer planets?

Liz: Let’s consider Jupiter first. I think that Jupiter is connected
with the urge to believe in something, with faith and optimism in
the future. Saturn is a bit like the stick with which the donkey is
beaten from behind that gets him moving. But Jupiter is the
carrot dangling in front of him that he’s forever trying to reach.
Jupiter says, “This could be better. You could be more than you
are. You have potentials you haven’t lived yet.” Jupiter is con-
cerned with what might be, rather than with what is. He’s the
character in the play who whispers in everyone else’s ear that life
could be a lot more interesting and what’s a nice person like you
still doing in a place like this?
      When Jupiter is involved with the inner planets, then that
spirit of optimism and the feeling of life as an adventure or a quest
gets mixed up with very personal areas of life. Jupiter and Venus,
for example, will together turn relationships into an adventure
which can open up horizons for the person. Jupiter and Mercury
will make learning and understanding a source of inspiration and
adventure. When you put Jupiter with any of the personal planets,
Lecture Four                                                       95


or in the signs that they rule, or their houses, then the ways in
which the person will seek to expand and develop himself are
fairly concrete and understandable and communicable.
     But if you tie Jupiter up with the outer planets, then the road
of development and adventure and meaning leads away from the
purely personal and into a much larger life. The human family as
a collective whole becomes the adventure, and it’s a lot harder to
articulate that in a way which is comprehensible. Jupiter together
with Uranus, for example, or in Aquarius, or in the eleventh,
opens up the whole panorama of human evolution and social
development and the growth of consciousness. It isn’t just your
ideas, or my ideas, it’s the world of ideas and their development
through history. Or if you place Jupiter with Neptune, or in
Pisces, or in the twelfth, it’s not so much a personal religious
search that attracts you, but rather the vast theatre of religious
yearning as a whole, and the experience of human suffering and
whatever meaning there might be in it. You can see that Jupiter
bound up with Neptune gets contaminated, in a way, with the
religious spirit, rather than just your religious aspirations. Jupiter
in the twelfth house is a kind of mediator for the spiritual long-
ings of the collective, and that can place a burden on the person
who has it there because he immediately wants to help everybody.
The sense of shared suffering and shared longing for grace and
redemption will often push the person into a vocation which deals
with people’s pain. Sometimes these are the individuals who
devote a lifetime to caring for ailing parents, or sacrifice a great
deal of their own personal satisfaction because of that sense of
human despair and longing.
     The problem with Jupiter in this context is that it’s very easy
to lose the sense of one’s own boundaries. There is a tendency to
forget that one person cannot heal mankind, or understand every-
thing about human development, or carry everybody’s shadow.
Some clarity is needed, because Jupiter inflates and sees hopeful
visions which aren’t always able to be achieved. I think we can
learn a great deal from the meaning of the houses and signs oppo-
site those three collective ones. Leo and the fifth house are oppo-
site Aquarius and the eleventh, so the balance to getting com-
pletely lost in an idea of the perfect social order and the perfect
humanity is a little healthy selfishness and self-indulgence. Virgo
and the sixth house are opposite Pisces and the twelfth, so the
antidote to crucifying yourself in the name of alleviating other
96                                      The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


people’s pain is a sense of physical boundaries and time and space
and a recognition of limits. Taurus and the second house are
opposite Scorpio and the eighth, and the thing which offsets
drowning in the murk of other people’s and one’s own repressed
desires and aggression and passions is a good sense of your own
tastes, values, and the need for some permanence and security in
your material life.
     Someone asked earlier about Saturn in the twelfth house. One
of the things that I think Saturn represents is the defense system
of the organism. It’s our skin, the psychic organ which structures
and draws boundaries and protects and shuts out harmful or
threatening experience. I think Saturn in the twelfth is terribly
sensitive to the chaotic unconscious dream-world of the collective,
but the person finds it terrifying and tries to defend himself
against it, either by walling it out altogether or trying to formulate
it into definite, manageable, safe tools. The house in which Saturn
falls is the arena of life where you have the most fear, the most
insecurity, and also, on a better note, the most determination to
become self-sufficient and conquer the frightening thing. In some
ways a twelfth house Saturn is an excellent position for explora-
tion of the inner world, because it’s so careful and cautious. But
sometimes I have seen people who project the frightening forces
of the collective onto external institutions and groups, and then
they become very busy defending themselves from something
they imagine is in the outside world. Obviously that can lead to
a lot of trouble with authorities and so on.
     I spoke earlier about Hitler with his twrelfth house Uranus.
I think the receptivity to collective currents of ideas is enhanced
when Uranus is in the twelfth. One picks up things that are around,
as if there were a radio antenna picking up all the latest broad-
casts. I’ve noticed that a twelfth house Uranus is often full of ideas
and intuitions of a political kind, what’s going to happen in the
world and who’s going to do what to which country. And very
often these intuitions are accurate. This can be a gift, but as with
all the outer planets there must be some strong sense of who you
are as an individual, as well as a realistic observation of what the
world is actually like at the moment. Otherwise one just gets
carried away, and the next movement that comes along takes you
with it. Whether you were right or not about your political visions
becomes rather irrelevant.
Lecture Four                                                      97


Audience: What about Pluto in the twelfth house?

Liz: I think this has something to do with sensitivity to the dark
in the collective. It’s rather paranoid. Planets in the twelfth house
tend to lie about very unconsciously. One isn’t aware of carrying
them most of the time. A twelfth house Pluto is very open to the
primitive drives in the collective, which are as you may imagine
not always pleasing and attractive. But usually there is only a
vague sense of unease around crowds, or a fear of groups. Pluto
has a tendency to erupt, however, and then it can be very dis-
turbing, because you may have a bad attack of agoraphobia or
claustrophobia, or people suddenly become very threatening when
there are more than three of them in a room, or the dark element
floods the ego and the person begins to behave in a very dictatorial
or explosive fashion. If a person with Pluto in the twelfth spends a
lot of time around groups, he is liable to pick up the unconscious
undertow, especially if there is a lot of repressed aggression or
resentment. Then the person will suddenly erupt and start behav-
ing badly, because he’s acting out all the emotional murk that
everyone else has sat on. And of course he gets blamed, and feels
terrible because something just came over him. I have noticed
this particularly with groups which are very civilised and good and
nice and full of well-motivated helpful people. Planets in the
twelfth house smell out everything that is not revealed which is
being carried around by the group, and Pluto in particular will
pick up the primitive.
     There is another interesting area connected with the outer
planets which I would like to talk about now. This deals with the
qualities of masculine and feminine which they represent. The
outer planets when they are experienced as images in dreams and
fantasies have a very mythical cast. Venus, for example, is a warm,
human, accessible woman, and will often wear the face of some-
one that you love. But Neptune and Pluto are not human and
accessible. They’re collective and their images are very impersonal
and archetypal. They might be the Virgin Mary, or the Terrible
Dragon. Those are images which are universal to mankind, and
don’t bear the personal stamp of one’s own individual experience
and feeling.
     I think we are all affected in terms of our images of male and
female by the kind of parents we had. A woman’s first experience
98                                    The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


of men is of course her father,' and her gradually developing image
of the masculine is in part coloured by what kind of father she
had. This means not only how he behaved, but what he was under-
neath, his unconscious life as well. The first woman a man meets
is his mother, and his image of the feminine is strongly coloured
by the maternal experience. You can also say that a woman will
model her femininity in the beginning after the mother, and a mam
will model his masculinity after his father. This is an unconscious
process, and it happens when we are very young. There is also a
component in these images of masculine and feminine which is
highly individual, and doesn’t spring from the environment or the
parents. This is what is in your own birth chart. The sun and
moon, and Venus and Mars, describe to a great extent what our
own individual experiences of male and female are, inside and
outside.
     These two components overlap. There is a mystery in that,
because what you have in your own horoscope belongs to you,
and is part of your own pattern of development, but often the
parents are described very specifically, as if there were a co-
incidence of inner and outer images. So your experience of mother
through the moon and Venus and the tenth house is not only
your own, but also your mother’s. Your experience of father
through the sun and Mars and the fourth house is not only your
actual father but the father principle in yourself, and your image
of father in the world. The women and men in one’s life, whether
mother or sister or nanny or adolescent love or husband or wife,
bear the stamp of the qualities which are there in the chart in
the beginning.
     This is the personal aspect of the image of masculine and
feminine. There’s also a collective component to these images.
There is a level where a universal experience of man and woman
lies below the highly distinctive individualised one. We each have
our own personal attractions and dislikes and tastes in the matter
of what qualities of male and female we encounter. One man
might please me while another will repel me. None of us fall in
love with everybody. There is a boundary line, just as there is a
line drawn on the map of the mountains which I put on the black-
board at the beginning. Below that line the distinctive differences
start merging, and there are basic archetypal attributes which
belong to male and female which are inherent in the human ex-
perience.
Lecture Four                                                      99


    I think the outer planets are related to these archetypal
images, which are very potent and profound and often terrifying.
You can meet them in many dreams, and they are far more
numinous and disturbing than the dream-figures wnich belong to
our personal lives. Sometimes a person will become obsessed with
this kind of image, and then he cannot possibly form a relation-
ship with another individual, because he is forever looking for the
archetypal figure. No human being is satisfactory. I saw a rather
disturbing film recently called Bad Timing, and the woman por-
trayed in the film is a very classic anima type as Jung might
describe it. She is elusive and unpredictable, unpossessable, erotic,
destructive, eternally enticing, eternally chaotic. She isn’t an
individual woman, but an image of the feminine in its most allur-
ing and dangerous form. She’s the sort of hysterical, disintegrated
anima type that John Fowles writes about in The French Lieu-
tenant's Woman. If a film director manages to successfully portray
this kind of collective image, then the film affects people very
powerfully. Or if an author catches these qualities then his book
will appeal to a mass reading audience, because this kind of figure
is universal in the collective unconscious. She’s eternally enticing
to men, and many women are caught by her and act her out, and
lose their own individual souls in the process.
    When we experience these figures in our lives, then our dia-
logue about them becomes very predictable. After you have heard
a few hundred people describe exactly the same situation, you
begin to wonder if there isn’t a factory hidden away somewhere
where these behaviour patterns are manufactured. The rather
hysterical woman I described before is very Neptunian. She isn’t
the only face of Neptune, but she’s a very characteristic one. The
compassionate and spiritually redeeming woman is another face of
Neptune, and the collective has found its best image of her in the
cult of Mary.
    There are characteristic archetypal masculine images as well.
Once again, they are the meat of films and novels. The current
antihero is I think a characteristically Uranian figure. Uranus is
a sort of embodiment of the logos principle. He rules through
mind, not through brawn, and often he’s so abstract that he be-
comes a machine, or an invisible god. He’s the principle of will,
cold, clear, decisive, and impersonal. He’s also the winged god,
the creative, aspiring spirit which can’t be contained or possessed,
but which alights for a while and then goes on his way.
100                                   The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


    You can see that if a person has Venus strongly aspected to
Uranus or Neptune or Pluto then the experience of love and rela-
tionship gets coloured by these more mythical images. The ordin-
ary happy married life that our society upholds is often just not
enough for the person, because he is chasing after some trans-
personal or mythical experience through love. Archetypal images
always seem more glamourous than actual people. Of course the
fact that they don’t exist in embodied form causes some prob-
lems, but the pursuit continues. You can see this problem very
often with moon-Neptune or Venus-Neptune in a man’s chart.
He will tend to seek a very idealised image of woman, who is a
sort of cross between a siren and the Virgin, and who doesn’t
present him with terrible human foibles like headaches, period
cramps and emotional demands. The mystical vision of woman is
much more enchanting to him than the actual one, in part because
it can’t be possessed and therefore never disappoints or pushes
him into actual life through responsibilities and feelings.
    These aspects in both men’s and women’s charts explain a
good deal of the sort of problems that erupt despite the best
intentions in relationships. The experience of the collective image
is an important and valid one, but it’s not very productive when
one demands that it be embodied by a single individual. It can
dominate the early part of life and then it’s usually justifiable,
but pursuit of it in tangible form in later life is often very un-
happy and disillusioning and desperate. Sometimes it’s a creative
form that the image needs, and in many ways the portrayal of it
through films and novels is a way in which both the artist and his
audience can have a collective experience without too many
individual lives being shattered pointlessly. At the very least,
understanding that these planets describe inner states rather than
people can give some meaning to the difficulties that one exper-
iences in relationships through them.
    The ways in which creative people have given expression to
these outer planets is extremely interesting. Goethe is a good
example, because of his creation of Faust. Goethe had a sun-
Pluto square in his birth chart. He also had a Scorpio ascendant,
so the Plutonian element in the chart is very emphasised. I men-
tioned Jimmy Carter earlier, who had this same square, and also
Margaret Thatcher. Both of these people found political arenas
in which to both express and battle with Pluto. But Goethe chose
to create a work of art which is truly Plutonian. Faust embodies
Lecture Four                                                                      101


the whole spectrum of power and darkness and dismemberment
and salvation that are contained in Pluto. I have always thought
that Plutonian people never made very good Christians, because
Pluto’s combination of God and the devil is more akin to gnos-
ticism or dualism than it is to Christianity. How much Goethe
was able to work off through his art and how much he was tor-
mented himself by Pluto I couldn’t say. But he has given us a
monumental creation that encapsulates what I understand to be
the conflict of opposites contained in that planet.
     Another good example is Chopin. He had the sun in Pisces in
square to Neptune. Chopin’s music is to me an embodiment of
Neptunian pathos and melancholy and longing and delicacy.
Wagner is also an interesting example. He had the sun opposite
Uranus. The mythology of The Ring is thinly disguised political
ideology—the gods are degenerate and dying, and man must be-
come god for the new society to be born. Madame Blavatsky, who
founded the Theosophical Society, is another sun opposite Uranus.
The impeccably organised vision of the cosmos which she per-
petrated is characteristically Uranian. Although Theosophy isn’t
very popular anymore and those with a bent in that direction
prefer more psychologically sophisticated terminology, neverthe-
less we astrologers owe a good deal to Madame Blavatsky. It was
the Theosophists who unearthed astrology and dusted it off and
brought it back into the modern world.
     There are any number of excellent examples of well-known
people who have expressed their dilemma with an outer planet
through creating some artistic or political or psychological vessel
through which the energy can be expressed. I mentioned Jung and
Freud earlier. The list is endless. I hope that this illustrates the
way in which the outer planets can seize a person and compel him
to follow them, either creatively or destructively, into some kind
of wider vision. I don’t think that because the sun doesn’t aspect
Uranus, Neptune or Pluto, that this possibility is denied a person.
There is no such thing as a chart without these planets, and they
are going to express through some area of the individual’s life.
The danger is in not knowing what they want, or in trying to shut
them out, because then one tends to become their victim rather
than their co-operative vessel.
     Someone has asked if I would comment on the Jupiter-Saturn
conjunction and whether this has any bearing on the situation
between America and Iran.* Jupiter and Saturn come into con-

*Ed. note: This refers to the seizing of American hostages by Iran. The hostage crisis
lasted from November 1979 to January 1981.
102                                    The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


junction in December of this year* in around seven or eight de-
grees of Libra. The conjunction continues through January,
February and March, and back and forth during the whole of
1981. These are of course not outer planets, and in a sense they
don’t belong in this conference, but everyone seems a bit worried
about the conjunction here so I suppose I should try to sound
intelligent about it. One of the things which other astrologers
have noted about Jupiter-Saturn cycles is that they coincide with
important economic fluctuations such as sudden rises and depres-
sions in the stock market. There is also the curious phenomenon
of American presidents dying in office who have been elected
under Jupiter-Saturn conjunctions since they have occurred in
earth signs. I think in many ways it might be more relevant and
interesting in the context of this workshop to talk about the
conjunction in relation to the charts of particular countries.
Talking about the meaning of the conjunction would be fascin-
ating but its effect on specific trouble spots is even more fascinat-
ing. Usually if a country’s chart is affected by Jupiter-Saturn it
will be through the economy. Or the rulership changes, which is
the old meaning of Jupiter-Saturn as it was interpreted in the
Middle Ages. Something old and outworn is dethroned and there
is a burst of new energy and some chaos before a new, younger
thing emerges.
    The three charts which I think might be worth looking at are
those of America, Iran and Israel. I was also going to talk about
Russia’s horoscope, which I will do shortly. I’m not an expert in
mundane astrology, and my tendency is to look at a country’s
chart psychologically, in the same way that I would look at an
individual’s. So I cannot make concrete predictions that will help
anybody invest money at the right time. I think there are other
astrologers who have made more of a speciality of this field, which
is certainly a worthwhile one to examine. There is also the prob-
lem of the accuracy of these national horoscopes. Israel, for
example, is given two quite different charts according to the two
source books I have looked at. The one which has ten degrees of
Libra rising, which I will be using, is based on the data given in
the Times when the state was proclaimed in 1948. This chart
appears in Charles Carter’s book on political astrology. There is



*1980.
Lecture Four                                                                      103


 another chart which gives a one degree Scorpio ascendant which
 has been calculated by the American Federation of Astrologers.
 I don’t know which is accurate. The same problem occurs with
 America’s chart, because of the uncertainty of the time of the
 signing of the Declaration of Independence. I have used the chart
 Dane Rudhyar gives in his book on America’s astrology. Iran’s
 chart is a dog’s breakfast, because when a country changes form
 as drastically as Iran has, then it is in a sense born anew. But from
 what moment should one date the birth of Khomeini’s Iran?
 From the moment his foot was placed on Iranian soil? Or the
 moment of the collapse of the Shah’s government? You can see
the problems with national charts. Nevertheless it’s worth com-
 menting on, if for no other reason than to open up speculation
and illustrate the way in which a nation is a collective entity with
its own psyche. A nation is born at a particular moment, although
it might be a little difficult to get the information, and it embodies
a particular pattern of development in the same way that an
individual does. It has a fate and a bias of temperament and con-
flicts and insecurities and gifts and potentials, and the psychic
mechanisms such as compensation that are at work in individuals
are also at work in nations. Nations also project parts of their
charts just as people do, and elect another nation to become the
carrier of one end of a natal square.
     I’ll begin with America because even with the problem over
the time of birth, at least there is agreement about the day and
therefore we can see what the Jupiter-Saturn transit in Libra will
do to the natal planets. I am personally convinced by Rudhyar’s
chart because it seems to me to describe what I see very accu-
rately. Saturn is in the tenth house in Libra, and the midheaven is
around two degrees of Libra. Saturn falls in square to the natal
Jupiter-sun conjunction in Cancer in the seventh house, which
deals with the other whether it’s another person or another
country. The tenth house in mundane charts always refers to the
style of government, the leader, just as in an individual chart it
is the person’s image or persona in the eyes of the world, the
thing which rules him in terms of external standards of behaviour.
     Now, the Jupiter-Saturn conjunction lands on the midheaven-
Saturn midpoint, and hovers around Saturn for quite some time.
That suggests some turmoil in terms not only of the present gov-
ernment, which would be very unlikely to survive another term
in office after a transit like this,* but it also suggests to me that

*Ed. note. This was an accurate prediction. President Jimmy Carter was defeated in the
November 1980 election.
104                                   The Outer Planets & Their Cycles
                                          MV




                      IV
Illustration 10: BIRTH CHART OF THE ISLAMIC REPUBLIC
                          OF I RAN (Khomeini)
        February 11, 1979, 2:00 PM, Teheran, Iran
   Source: Moore, The Book of World Horoscopes


America’s image of authority and rule in the world might take a
bit of buffeting. Saturn in Libra tends to set itself up as the
arbiter of rights, the fair judge and leader and guide. That is of
course the role America has played for a long time in terms of
presenting itself this way to other nations. This transit is of
course a Saturn return as well as a Jupiter-Saturn conjunction,
so there would be a maturing process at work, a growing up
through limitations or difficulties or even humiliation of some
kind which would make the country more realistic about itself
and its position.
    The fact that the transit stirs up the natal squares suggests to
Lecture Four                                                   105
                     /VIC,




Illustration 11: BIRTH CHART OF THE USA
 July 4, 1776, 5:00 PM, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Source: Rudhyar, The Astrology of America's Destiny



me that the conflict might erupt through a collision with another
country. Although this does not have to mean a war, it is certainly
a confrontation. Saturn in square to the sun in a person’s chart
suggests a deep sense of inadequacy and insecurity, and a need to
prove oneself over and over again to others. I would say the same
thing about the aspect appearing in a national psyche. It is a de-
fensive aspect, and when Jupiter is thrown in it can become boast-
ful and self-aggrandising in order to mask the feelings of doubt.
Obviously this kind of configuration has its creative side, because
it forces growth and fosters a determination to succeed. It’s just
that there is a kind of obsessiveness about the growth. So this is
106                                   The Outer Planets & Their Cycles
                               ftc




                                 xc
Illustration 9: BIRTH CHART OF ISRAEL
          May 14, 1948, 4:00 PM, Tel Aviv
Source: Carter, Introduction to Political Astrology


the basic psychic pattern which the transiting Jupiter-Saturn
conjunction will trigger. There are implications of an overesti-
mation of something in relation to another country, and a blow
to the image or the national pride, and a re-evaluation of stan-
dards and goals as a result.
     The Jupiter-Saturn conjunction falls on the ascendant of
Israel’s chart. It also conjuncts the natal Neptune, which is in
ten degrees of Libra in both Carter’s and the AFA charts. Saturn,
I should mention, will be hanging about in the first half of Libra
long after Jupiter has moved on, so the effects of this transit will
probably last for quite a while, through the first half of 1982 at
Lecture Four                                                           107


least. Jupiter and Saturn moving over the ascendant suggests to
me that it is the personal identity of the nation which is being
affected. The ascendant is the thing toward which we aspire, the
myth which we try to live. We may not be equipped to live it very
well because the rest of the chart may contradict it, but we will
try nevertheless. The Sagittarian ascendant in America’s chart
seems to me to be much more descriptive than the usual Gemini
ascendant given, because the dream of the American is the life of
the free individual with space to roam in and his own autonomy
over his own lifestyle. Sagittarius is a cowboy at heart, whereas
Gemini is a cultured intellectual—not the thing I would associate
with the image of the typical American as he presents himself to
the world.*
     So Israel sees itself as either a Libran or a Scorpio, depending
upon which chart you prefer. I can’t really assess this, because I
have never lived there and have no direct experience of the nation.
Libra is an idealistic sign, and despite the various encounters
Israel has had with its neighbours in the years since it was founded,
I think there has always been an attempt to present itself as a
place where a formerly persecuted people can live in peace and
without threat. The ideal of Israel is a great dream, and I think
there is a case to be made for that Libran ascendant with its hope
of an orderly, beautiful, harmonious life. The transit of Saturn
over this point, which means over Neptune as well, suggests a
disillusionment, a recognition of the fact that the world might
not be like that. Saturn transiting over Neptune in an individual’s
chart has a very disillusioning effect, because some great dream
or fantasy that has always been cherished tends to take a batter-
ing from material reality. If the fantasy has any truth in it, it is
left more realistic, and if it’s just wild, then it collapses altogether.
Jupiter makes things want to grow, but Saturn curtails the growth
through harsh reality.
     The effect of this conjunction on a country is going to be
much the same as the effect on an individual. If you have an
ascendant somewhere within orb of the seven or eight degree
point of the conjunction, then Jupiter will bring out the need to
open up your life, to develop yourself either through relation-
ships or through separating from relationships. But Saturn pro-
motes the realisation that you are limited by circumstances and
by your own fears and blockages. Saturn forces a confrontation
with responsibility, with what hasn’t been done or sorted out. The
*Ed. Note: Barry Lynes, in his books The Next 20 Years and Astroeconomics,
presents extensive research supporting a USA chart with Sagittarius rising.
Lynes’ impressive work draws the conclusion that an Ascendant of 7° Sagit-
tarius correlates most precisely with both transits and historical events.
108                                    The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


vision of a free future arises just at the moment when you are
feeling most inadequate and least able to manifest it. The reac-
tion of course'varies. You can try to put the two things together,
and use the vision as a goal toward which to work, taking care of
what needs to be looked at internally or externally. That would
be a more creative way of reacting. Or you can overcompensate
and get terribly restless because of the feeling of restriction, and
start blaming everything and everyone in sight for the fact that
you can’t have this beautiful thing you suddenly realise you want.
    Of course an individual has options which a country doesn’t,
because an individual can bring his consciousness to bear on a
problem. A nation must react, because the mass is a very un-
conscious organism, and the less individual the people are in a
nation, the more wildly it will react to planetary pressure. If I
saw the squares between Saturn and Jupiter conjunct sun in
America’s horoscope in a person’s chart, linking the seventh and
tenth houses as they do, I would probably suggest that the person
try some analysis to get at the root of the insecurities that make
him behave so compulsively. But a country unfortunately can’t
go into analysis. The blinder and more indoctrinated the people
are in a country, the more hysterical their responses are likely to
be when a sensitive point gets triggered. But a people don’t be-
come more conscious except by each individual coming to terms
with his own issues. That is very difficult, and is the thing most of
us would rather avoid dealing with. It’s far easier to go along with
whatever is happening and then get very angry wrhen a country like
Iran misbehaves. Or, on the other hand, if you’re Iranian, to get
very angry if America misbehaves.
    The chart for Iran which I have put up on the board is set for
the collapse of the Shah’s government and the establishment of
the Islamic Republic under Khomeini. I have no idea whether it’s
a correct chart or not. That’s the problem with many of these
mundane horoscopes, because sources conflict. This chart gives an
ascendant of seven degrees of Cancer, with Venus in seven Capri-
corn on the descendant. The Jupiter-Saturn conjunction would
therefore square both the ascendant and the natal Venus. A
square to the ascendant is much like a conjunction, but it’s more
aggressive and unpredictable. So the things I said about the Jupiter-
Saturn over Israel’s ascendant would apply here, about the urge
for sudden expansion and perhaps rather inflationary ideas about
the country’s own importance, coupled with a sharp backlash
Lecture Four                                                     109


either from hostile neighbours or from internal stress. If I were
going to visualise a myth about the Cancer ascendant, I would
use words like tradition and return to the roots, and also I would
think of a clannish, introverted, self-contained entity which tried
to create a culture based on a fantasy of the glorious past. I
would expect hypersensitivity to criticism and a strong national
feeling of a family rather than a political entity. I think all these
things are true about the new Iran. The square to Venus at the
descendant from the transiting Jupiter-Saturn certainly suggests
trouble with previously friendly countries, and a disillusionment
which is typical of Saturn-Venus about just who are one’s friends
and enemies.
     While I enjoy speculating about the effects of the transit in
the charts of countries, I am not totally happy about the accuracy
of the ascendants in these charts, which makes me rather reluc-
tant to talk in other than general terms. I would on a concrete
level expect some sort of embarrassment or humiliation for the
American government because of the tenth house Saturn, and I
would expect Iran to get involved in a scrap of some kind with a
neighbour, perhaps Israel, although there are other Muslim coun-
tries who do not like Khomeini. That is as far as I would wish to
go. I suppose also that I am not unduly alarmed by Jupiter-
Saturn, because neither is an outer planet and the forces which
are unleashed in the collective are not so terrifying or overwhelm-
ing as those which the outer planets represent. If the Jupiter-
Saturn affects your own chart, then you must find your own
solution to the problem of a sudden burgeoning of hope and
enthusiasm and sense of new possibilities, coupled with a restric-
tion or problem that prevents that hope from materialising.

Audience: Can you say something about the chart for Great
Britain?

Liz: Yes, but I am worried about spending a great deal of time on
these national charts at this point. There is the same problem here
as to which chart is correct. There is a chart for England, based on
the crowning of William the Conqueror, which gives the sun in
Capricorn at the midheaven and an Aries ascendant. Kings were
traditionally crowned at noon when the sun was at the zenith so
the time is probably accurate. There is also a chart for the United
Kingdom, which is the incorporation of Scotland and Wales, and
110                                    The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


Northern Ireland, and interestingly this too gives the sun in Capri-
corn, with a Libran ascendant. The ascendant is seven degrees of
Libra, so the Jupiter-Saturn conjunction would land on it in the
same way that it lands on the ascendant of Israel. There is a third
chart for Great Britain which represents the union of England and
Scotland in 1707, and that has the sun in Taurus with a sixteen
degree Capricorn ascendant. One thing is apparent, which is the
dominance of Capricorn in all three horoscopes.
     Now I realise the difficulty in offering generalisations about a
country, because people will always stand up and say that it’s
different in their village and so on. But as I was not born in
England, I have a slightly more unjaundiced view of it from the
outside, and the Capricornian qualities are very apparent to me.
Although the English forever protest that they are no longer a
class-structured society, they of course are precisely that, and
any American who has been born in a genuinely class-free country
is struck by the class distinctions, no matter how hard people
protest against them. It’s deeply embedded in the British psyche.
Capricorn is a hierarchical sign, and firmly believes that every-
thing has its appropriate place. It’s a deeply conservative sign,
and I mean the word in its broad sense, not in its specifically
political one. A taxi driver was quoted recently in the Times as
describing what he felt to be the basic British attitude toward
life. He said, “If it moves, club it to death.” Put euphemistically,
that means a certain caution about new and progressive elements.
Ideas and products which are quickly taken up in America and
Germany and Holland eventually seep into England twenty years
later. That is terribly Capricornian. So is the incredible solidity
and determination and doggedness, which only becomes apparent
when a war or some other disaster shakes people out of their
muddling-through approach. Then the Capricorn spine of stain-
less steel shows itself.

Audience: I suppose things will get shaken up quite a bit when
Uranus and Neptune move into Capricorn.

Liz: Yes, I was building up to talking about that transit. That was
going to come later. But yes, I would expect quite a shakeup. I
think the strongly Capricornian feeling here is very difficult for
many fiery types, who find it restrictive and oppressive. Other
people who are fiery or lack earth find the opposite, that it’s a
Lecture Four                                                    111


very stabilising place, because you simply can’t extend beyond a
certain limit. If nothing else, the weather stops you. The physical
and psychic climate foster introversion. In a place like California,
or Australia, the beauty of the climate and the open space bring
people out of themselves into a much more physical and extro-
verted existence. But an English winter drives you into yourself,
which is frightening for some people and very creative for others.
Things must be grounded in England, properly rooted, or they
die. You can’t live on potential and promises in the way you can
in many American cities. In this way a country affects an in-
dividual, just as an individual affects a country.
     You can do a synastry between your own chart and the chart
of a nation, if you can obtain it, and see where your own values
might agree or conflict with, say, the style of government or the
mythic vision of that country. It’s possible to begin to take these
charts quite seriously, and to see that the world is a series of
intricately interconnected psychic entities, some large and some
small, none of which are wholly independent of or unaffected by
the others. A country has its birth according to the birth of the
constitution which states its form and its laws. Some countries
have several charts. France, for example, has undergone many
metamorphoses. Initially it was a kingdom, but the kingdom was
much smaller than modern France and was surrounded by in-
dependent duchies and fiefs of the Holy Roman Empire. It’s had
a series of republics, and it has had an emperor. The political
entity which we now know as France would have to be assessed
by the horoscope for the Fifth or Gaullist Republic, because that
forms the constitutional basis for modern France. The Iranian
chart on the board is Khomeini’s Iran, which is very different
from the Shah’s Iran. But each state is a living entity, which has
its own psychic laws.
     It also becomes possible to get a glimpse of why nations line
up on a particular side of the fence against other nations. They
are attracted to and recoil from each other just like people do. The
charts of national rulers also link up with one another, which is
not surprising, and it contributes to why Jimmy Carter might get
on with Margaret Thatcher and not with Khomeini. With all the
interlocking aspects which one finds between the charts of nations
and the charts of rulers, it isn’t surprising that a transit which
triggers one will trigger another. National charts are as psycho-
logical as individual ones. America’s sun-Saturn square is no less
112                                    The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


inner than a person’s, and no less indicative of deep feelings of
inadequacy and deep compulsions for achievement in compen-
sation.
     Uranus, Neptune and Pluto can also be seen similarly in a
national chart. I think they represent deeply unconscious col-
lective movements which erupt through the houses in which they
are placed, just as the inner planets represent the more conscious
values and goals of a nation and a person. Israel has a Saturn-Pluto
conjunction, which suggests the same kind of internal conflict
with the shadow side of life as I would interpret in an individual’s
Saturn-Pluto conjunction. But countries have less freedom, be-
cause they are expressive of the psyches of millions of individuals
operating through the basic framework of the national chart, and
of those millions of individuals a not very sizable proportion take
time to reflect on their own actions and feelings and attitudes.

Audience: What about the points where people like Hitler appear
who alter a country’s destiny? Does that show in the transits and
progressions to a country’s chart?

Liz: I think it’s a bit like the times when major changes are hap-
pening in a person and a significant figure appears either in the
dream life or outside. Transits and progressions reflect changes in
consciousness, and herald new things emerging into life. Those
kinds of changes are personified, or condensed to use Freud’s
word, into a particular image or figure which is a symbol for the
new energy or change. I think an important political, religious
or artistic figure appears in a country’s life in exactly the same
way, who reflects or embodies the thing which is trying to emerge
from the collective. You can see this process very clearly if you
observe the patterns of dreams. A particular kind of figure may
suddenly begin to appear in the dreams when everything in ex-
ternal life seems relatively peaceful and quiet. A thief steals some-
thing, or a black man climbs in through the window, or a mys-
terious woman begins to beckon the dreamer. Then a few nights
later the same motif is repeated, although the form may change
slightly. If a motif keeps repeating like that, then it implies that
some new psychic content is getting ready to enter the person’s
awareness and his life. This may occur as an inner change, or it
may synchronise with an actual individual appearing on the scene
who is the catalyst for the person undergoing change. I think a
Lecture Four                                                     113


person appearing in the context of national destiny serves exactly
the same role. Hitler was a catalyst, an embodiment of something
already at work in the depths of the German psyche. This some-
thing found the right mouthpiece, as it always seems to do. If
Jimmy Carter blunders in his role as President of the United States
and gets the country into an embarrassing or dangerous political
situation, then that will coincide with transits across the coun-
try’s chart which necessitate this kind of experience. Then the
people elect exactly the right leader to fulfill the need. The lead-
er’s chart is usually strongly connected to the country’s chart,
and the same transit hits them both.

Audience: Most sources give Gemini as the American ascendant.
Why do you feel it’s Sagittarius?

Liz: I didn’t come up with that ascendant, Dane Rudhyar did. I
am reacting on a purely subjective and intuitive basis when I say
that I feel Sagittarius is much more appropriate. I think the
ascendant concerns things like the image, of a person or a coun-
try, and the vision of that person or country in terms of what
they are striving to become. You run into it everywhere. I have
always associated Gemini with intellectual gifts, because it’s an
airy sign. Gemini when it’s being typical is a model of dilettante
culture. Love of learning and scholarship, love of language and
the artful uses of it, subtle wit, polish and sophistication are all
traits I connect with Gemini. I am afraid this is just not the image
of the typical American. Of course there is no such thing as a
typical American, because it’s a huge country with many different
environments and cultural influences. But there is a myth of the
typical American, which you can see on any television com-
mercial. That mythic image permeates all sorts of things. Sagit-
tarius on the other hand is a much more active, energetic sign
than Gemini. Its cry is always freedom and individuality. Sagit-
tarius is a homegrown philosopher, with homely sayings about
life, not an erudite wit who can quote Voltaire and Heraclitus at
you. It’s a bit of a cowboy, in love with the open spaces and with
physical fitness and stamina. It’s a big sign in every way, always
striving to get bigger. It’s religious in a rather indiscriminating
and sometimes bigoted way, with a great heart but not very much
subtlety. I think all those qualities are typical of the myth of the
American. I can think of no country in the world which houses as
114                                    The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


many different religions, yet which is as peculiarly narrow and
bigoted in its religious outlook.

Audience: Even California?

Liz: Particularly California. Each one of the hundred thousand
cults and sects in California has the right to exist and hates all
the other ninety-nine thousand and ninety-nine. But the thing
about Sagittarius is the tremendous optimism and religious spirit.
Everything is in the name of God and country, God being first
but naturally assumed to be on the country’s side in any event.
The American myth is embodied in the cowboy. That’s not
Gemini. By no stretch of the imagination can you turn sophis-
ticated Gemini into a cowboy, except at a fancy-dress party when
he can act the role beautifully for twenty minutes.
    As I warned you earlier, I’m not an expert on mundane or
judicial astrology. I’m mainly interested in it from the point of
view of the psychology behind political movements. But mun-
dane astrology has until this century always had a very high
place in astrological history. Modern astrology is no longer a unity
which studies all branches. It has split up, so that there is an area
where statistical correlations are more important and an area
where psychology is more important, and so on. That is perhaps
necessary now. We are much more specialised and differentiated
than we were five hundred years ago. But the charts of nations
were as important as the charts of individuals once upon a time,
and the same dynamics have always applied to both. If Jupiter
conjunct Saturn arrives on your natal tenth house Saturn and you
get into a dreadful scrape with your colleagues at work and you
wind up being made to look very silly and have to re-evaluate your
capacities and mistakes, that is no different to what America feels
under the same transit. The only difference is in the size of the
entity, and perhaps in the deadliness or potential constructive-
ness of the reactions on a grander scale. And if you don’t have a
Jupiter-Saturn transit but your country does, and your country
goes hysterical in reaction, you can begin to see that perhaps you
don’t have to go hysterical too.
                         Lecture Five
     I wanted to talk for a bit about Russia’s horoscope, and then
I would like to go into the conjunctions of the outer planets
which are approaching in the next two decades, which seem to be
frightening everybody so much. This chart is given by the AFA for
the time of the Bolshevik Revolution and the taking of power by
Lenin. Once again, I cannot guarantee the accuracy of the ascend-
ant because I doubt that anyone stood by with a stopwatch, but
the placements of the planets are accurate and they are extremely
interesting.*
     It’s probably worth mentioning, or repeating, that this horo-
scope represents a political entity rather than the “soul of the
nation” as some people describe the qualities of a people. The
things which we all imaginatively attribute to different national-
ities as basic characteristics are I think very different from this
kind of horoscope. The psychological qualities of a people can-
not be mapped, because you cannot find a birth time when that
people was born. I suppose if you want to think in more mystical
terms, it’s a bit like the dichotomy between a person’s birth chart
and his soul or Self, which is a great mystery and is most certainly
not in the birth chart. My fantasy is that the soul of a nation or a
people will undergo a series of incarnations, which are represented
by the different governments and birth horoscopes of nations. So
what we are looking at is not Mother Russia as her people feel
about her, but a political entity which was born on 7 November
1917 in accordance with certain ideological precepts. Perhaps this
is one of the incarnations of the soul of Mother Russia. Perhaps
it isn’t the last one either. Nations have lifespans too. No nation
continues forever in the same form, although some are much
longer lived than others. I think that a nation’s chart also suggests
the depth and stubbornness of its conflicts. Whenever I see con-
figurations involving the fixed signs in an individual chart, such as
a T-cross or a grand cross, I am left with the impression that these
issues are very deeply embedded in the individual’s character.
Perhaps they are issues which have been in the family psyche for
many generations. There is a sense of immense solidity both to
the character and to its problems, and any changes that the person
tries to make in terms of character take a very long time and move
*Ed. Note: Barry Lynes’ extensive research on the natal chart of the USSR
results in a chart with 26°50' Virgo rising, drawn for Nov. 8, 1917 at Petro-
grad. Numerous USSR charts are hypothecized due to the chaos at that time.
116                                  The Outer Planets & Their Cycles

                                           WO




      Illustration 12: BIRTH CHART OF THE USSR
              November 7, 1917, 10:52 PM, Leningrad
         Source: Moore, The Book of World Horoscopes



very slowly. Configurations involving cardinal and mutable signs,
on the other hand, can shift their expression rather dramatically.
     One of the most noticeable things in the Russian chart is the
conjunction of Saturn and Neptune in Leo, and the opposition of
Saturn to Uranus in Aquarius. I spoke earlier about contacts of
Saturn with the outer planets as having a quality of compulsive-
ness, because the powerful undercurrents arising from the collec-
tive psyche break through and threaten the shell of the ego,
forcing the person to do something actively with the pressure.
Now Saturn-Neptune has the flavour of a mystical vision, a re-
ligious longing. In Leo it has a peculiarly autocratic flavour.
Lecture Five                                                        117


Saturn-Neptune in Leo would say something like, “I am God’s
emissary on earth, destined to bring you the One Truth which will
overcome all evil and create the perfect kingdom of God on earth.”
There is a very strong sense of one’s own inner divinity with this
conjunction in Leo, and that can be very creative in an individual
if there are suitable outlets for the urge. It’s a bit trickier with a
country, because you can at least argue with a Saturn-Neptune
person who is convinced that he is always and ultimately right.
Interestingly this conjunction falls in Russia’s twelfth house,
where it hides in the depths of the unconscious. It’s a kind of
ancestral vestige of the days of the czars.
     Saturn in opposition to Uranus again suggests a rather com-
pulsive issue around freedom, individual rights, democracy, and
so on. I get very much of the feeling of the workers’ beautifully
organised utopia with Uranus in the sixth. Saturn-Uranus will
certainly attempt to create a society which operates according to
an impeccably organised, carefully thought pattern of equality
and sharing. Or at least it will pretend to do so, but the Saturn-
Neptune conjunction in the twelfth suggests something else at
work beneath the surface, which is not in the least inclined to
equality and sharing.
     As if these two Saturnian contacts weren’t difficult enough,
the sun in Scorpio, and Mercury, are in square to all three. So
there is a fixed T-cross at work in this chart. The sun-Saturn
square is one which I’ve already mentioned in relation to the
American chart. The same deep underlying insecurities afflict
both nations. In an individual’s chart there is usually an issue with
the father when the sun is in square to Saturn. Often there is no
father, or there is a feeling of the relationship having failed, so that
the person is forever fighting authority in the world yet longing
for it at the same time. I don’t think it’s unreasonable to suggest
that the issue of a lack of strong paternal models is a problem for
both Russia and America. America has never had a ruling family,
with a king who could stand in as father, and Russia murdered its
royal family and killed the father and his heritage. There is a
terrific sense of alienation when the contact with the father is
lost. Many more politically left-wing orientated people in England
snipe at the royal family, but it stands as a very potent archetypal
image of stability and continuity. There is a different feeling with
a country where no such figurehead is present to take the un-
conscious projection of parental authority and strength.
118                                               The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


     Another characteristic of sun-Satum is its slight colouration of
paranoia, I think in part because of the same issue of feeling no
sense of continuity. There is a feeling that no one will provide
support, they must always do it themselves. This produces a
marvellous self-sufficiency, but it’s also very difficult for rela-
tionships with others because one can never receive anything
comfortably without suspicion of dependency. There is often a
great overcompensation, and a touchiness about receiving help or
gifts of any kind. You can see these patterns to a greater or lesser
extent in any sun-Satum configuration in an individual chart. I
think the same applies to the country. You can see a little of why
when America and Russia get together to talk about reducing
nuclear armaments and learning to trust each other, it eventually
goes sour. Both national charts have the sun-Saturn, and neither
is able to trust anyone at all.
     You can, I hope, begin to get a feeling of the national psyche
from this configuration of sun, Saturn, Neptune, Uranus, Mercury.
Tremendous idealism has to sit side by side with a religious fervour
that the political ideology denies, and the need for absolute con-
trol and autocracy has to jostle with a genuine belief in individual
freedom. If this were a person, I would send him into analysis
immediately. Russia copes with the terrific tension and pressure
by invading other countries and operating a police state under the
guise of a free society, where people are forever trying to escape
and disappear, and where it is necessary to censor all communica-
tion that might reveal the truth. This is very sad, because the
dream of Uranus and Neptune is probably very real in the national
psyche. The autocratic quality of Saturn in Leo wages internal
war against the liberal ideology of Uranus, and both of them
undermine the stable sense of identity which the sun represents.
     The transits across this chart reveal the aliveness of national
horoscopes. Each time Saturn has passed across the natal sun, the
Russian leader has died or been removed from office. This is the
case when Stalin took over from Lenin, when Kruschchev took
over from Stalin, and when Brezhnev took over from Kruschchev.
Brezhnev is of course due soon, because Saturn will be in Scorpio
in a very few years’ time.* That’s not a startling prediction, because
he’s getting a little shaky in his old age. If Saturn is approaching
the sun by transit in an individual’s chart, the year preceding the
exact transit is usually fraught with a lot of soul-searching and the
death of old attitudes and values which were once dominant. In an

*Ed note: Brezhnev died November 1982. Transiting Saturn was still only in late Libra,
but transiting Uranus, at 3° Sagittarius, was square to the natal Mars (2° 56’ Virgo) in
the Soviet Union chart..
Lecture Five                                                     119


inner sense, the old king dies and there is a period of confusion
and sometimes depression before new values emerge. What has
happened in Russia is that just preceding the transit, the old
leader dies or is deposed, and there is a power struggle which goes
on until someone emerges at the top. The country of course can-
not vote for its ruler as it might in a democratic system, so there’s
no chance for the soul-searching and reflection to take place.
     What hasn’t happened to Russia is the approaching transit of
Pluto through Scorpio. The present political entity is too young
to have experienced this transit before. I will be very curious
indeed to see what comes of it. If Saturn brings down the head of
the government, what will Pluto do? Perhaps the entire structure
will change. Pluto always brings profound changes and rids a per-
son of things which he has outgrown. It’s a kind of fate. If the
person can’t meet the challenge to change, then he breaks down.
That is very likely to happen in Russia, because there isn’t a great
deal of inclination shown to alter the system in any way except
to tighten it. The conjunction of Saturn, Uranus and Neptune in
Capricorn which we have approaching toward the end of this
decade will conjunct Russia’s natal Venus in Capricorn in the fifth
house, and oppose natal Pluto in the eleventh. This happens at
roughly the same time that Pluto hits the natal sun. Now in an
individual’s chart Venus deals with relationships and partnerships,
and transits like this would put enormous pressure on that side of
life. You often see marriages breaking down when the outer
planets transit over Venus. Russia is a conglomerate of many
different nations, not all of whom went into the marriage very
willingly. Poland and Czechoslavakia and Hungary may be think-
ing of divorce. I would understand those transits in part to mean
that there is some kind of severing of the interconnecting coun-
tries that make up the Soviet Union, which of course they could
only do if the central government were to collapse. Otherwise
they would simply be trampled again, as they have been in the
past. Put simplistically I would say that there will be a tremendous
eruption from the collective, perhaps the beginnings of an internal
revolution, happening at the same time that the central authority
is not in a position to prevent it. Then there would be a period of
disintegration, and a potential for a new birth. If this were an
individual, he could seek help of various kinds to retain some ego
continuity while the changes were happening. But a country can’t
get help of that kind. And a sun-Saturn country wouldn’t ask for
120                                               The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


it anyway. So it may be that Pluto takes on the very literal mean-
ing of death, and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics will no
longer be a union.*
     I think that these national charts are representative of a kind
of specific incarnation for the soul of a people. You can’t really
tell anything about the qualities of the soul, any more than you
can determine the qualities of a human soul from the birth chart.
This particular mundane chart is a terribly difficult one, I think by
far the most difficult of the ones we have looked at so far. The
nature of the aspects and the houses in which the planets are
placed suggest a breakdown of some kind as an inherent potential
from the outset. The tension is too great. An individual might
handle it and create from it. But countries are more fated.

Audience: Russia tried to set up a father figure in Stalin, but in
the end it didn’t last. They had to pull him down.

Liz: Yes, I suppose that’s why he was permitted to get away with
what he did. The need for a strong paternal figure was so great.
The czars were called “Little Father,” which I think is interesting
as well. Stalin had the sun in Capricorn, so he presented a good
hook for the collective’s paternal projections. In a sense what we
are dealing with here might be considered a mythic theme which
runs through the history of the Russian psyche. At least this
theme has been present since the founding of Russia as we know
it. The aspect of sun and Saturn deals with conflicts around the
father, and that is a mythic theme. An individual’s life is inter-
sected by mythic themes, and some of these can be seen through
the sign emphasis and the aspects. The quarrel between the old
king and his son is symbolised in part by the quarrel between the
sun and Saturn. Here we have a nation who is also embodying the
mythic relationship between the old king and his son.
     You cannot of course take a horoscope and flatly declare that
a person’s “myth” in the sense that Jung means it is so-and-so
based on the horoscope. You can only get inferences of particular
dramas that are likely to repeat and repeat during the course of
life on many different levels. One of the dramas or themes which
I associate with sun-Saturn is the loss of the father, and the search
to find him in some form, and the perpetual dissatisfaction and
anger which emerge when he is found. At the same time that the
father must be overthrown, he is also sought. I think that Russia
*Ed note. This prediction, made in 1980, was fulfilled with the breakup of the Soviet
Union in August 1991. Transiting Pluto made multiple passes over the USSR natal Sun
(14° Scorpio) from 1989 through 1990. At the time of the dramatic breakup of the central
government, transiting Pluto was stationary conjunct the natal Mercury at 17° Scorpio.
Lecture Five                                                     121


is perpetually seeking these father-figures, but when they have
ruled for a while they are experienced as terribly repressive, and
then they must be rejected and a new one found. The father
inevitably fails with sun-Saturn, because ultimately any father
“outside” is not the object of the quest. It’s an internal ordering
principle that is sought. It may sound bizarre to you, but in a way
Soviet Russia would do much better to restore their old royal
lines. Of course they can’t, but sun-Saturn is a lot like sun in
Capricorn with its love of hierarchy and tradition. But with the
square, it takes immense effort to acknowledge this, because one
fights a square.
     With an individual who has a configuration such as this T-cross
in the Russian chart, you can help as an astrologer by putting the
person in touch with the mythic themes which form the backdrop
of his experiences. This is a connection which Jung felt to be very
important, because if it happens in depth, rather than merely as
an intellectual theory, it gives dignity and insight into what other-
wise seem really petty and pathetic problems. A myth reflects an
archetypal pattern, and that can help a person to understand that
there are things at work in his psyche and his life beyond his sick-
ness and trouble. It should also be possible to do this with a
nation, but that would take a very enlightened ruler. In a sense
this is a religious function, this connecting of ordinary life and
myth. It’s really the role of the priest, who helps an individual get
in touch with his gods. With some knowledge of depth psychology
it might be possible to reintroduce a nation to its lost myths.
     It’s interesting to look at the Russian chart from the point of
view of what myths are alive in it, and what might be offered to
its people along the lines of the myth. Russia has been very in-
terested in parapsychology and the unknown aspects of the mind
for a long time, but this is primarily from a scientific and not a
mythic point of view. Concern with unseen matters is character-
istic of Scorpio, but a rigidly materialistic approach to them is
not. Perhaps that’s a reflection of the sun-Uranus square, but the
square between sun and Neptune requires something more mys-
tical, perhaps more freedom for the orthodox rituals of the
church. There has always been a deep mystical feeling in the
Russian people, but it isn’t permitted expression now.
     I think it’s worth considering now the conjunction which is
approaching toward the end of the decade, because the Russian
chart of all the national charts we have looked at is most strongly
122                                   The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


affected by it. So I would think that this country is certainly one
which will react powerfully to the conjunction. The conjunction
consists of first Saturn and Uranus in Sagittarius at the end of
1986. This goes on through 1987 and then finally in February
1988 Saturn and Uranus move into Capricorn and begin to con-
junct Neptune. In June of that year Saturn and Uranus move
retrograde back into Sagittarius for a while, and then at the end
of the year they are all lined up in Capricorn again. This continues
through February 1990. Then Saturn moves out of orb of the
Uranus-Neptune conjunction which continues through the winter
of 1997.
    When Saturn gets mixed up with the outer planets, one of the
results is that things exteriorise themselves in concrete terms in
the world. I would therefore expect that, although the conjunc-
tion represents many other things on a deeper level, one of its
effects is to produce concrete changes in Russia. There is a tend-
ency at the moment for many astrologers and psychics to think
in terms of holocausts and tidal waves and atomic destruction
and the earth leapfrogging on its polar axis. But the core of an
outer planet conjunction is, as we have seen with the Uranus-
Neptune conjunction that occurred at the time of Marx’s birth,
a change in the values and needs of the collective. It doesn’t in-
herently mean disaster. The people who are born under that
conjunction will reach adulthood in the new millennium, and they
will no doubt manifest in their lives the vision which the con-
junction reflects. I am not saying that there will be no problems
of a political or economic kind. But I would be surprised if the
world ended. It’s very possible that the Russian regime may
topple, but, depending on your point of view, that could be seen
as the beginning of a new world rather than the end of one. Cer-
tainly that would be the feeling of nations like Hungary and
Czechoslavakia and Poland.
    I would like to spend a bit of time analysing this conjunction.
We’ve already met with its components, Uranus and Neptune.
Briefly, this suggests a new social or political vision emerging out
of the collective, coupled with a mystical or religious yearning.
But the coming conjunction falls in Capricorn, whereas when
Marx was born it was in Sagittarius. So the realm of life which is
contained in the vision is different. We must first ask what spheres
of life are represented by Capricorn. I think one of Capricorn’s
connections is the principle of government. Capricorn is also
Lecture Five                                                       123


concerned with social hierarchy. I think the sign has much deeper
and subtler levels, which are reflected by the old Renaissance idea
that Saturn ruled the world of the occult and the initiate as well
as the world of substance. Capricorn is also symbolic of the soul’s
imprisonment in physical reality, and the typical Capricornian
depression is very bound up with the feeling that the world is a
place of bondage, to the body, to responsibilities, to law, to con-
science, to God. There are characteristic moods in Capricorn, and
they are often about isolation, separateness, and self-sufficiency.
Capricorn crystallises and structures and concretises. The valuing
of tradition and the forms of the past also belong to the sign. I
am sure there are many more things I could mention, but these
are some of the main themes. I suppose I would encapsulate it by
saying that the mastery of the world by the ego is Capricorn’s
intent, just as the striving for goodness and wisdom to fulfill the
divine intent is at the core of Sagittarius.
     Marx and his generation changed the religious bedrock on
which human ethical codes were based, by postulating that the
real dominant in life was property, not God. Now we have a
similar kind of change or reversal about to happen in connection
with Capricorn’s meaning. Of course we can only speculate, and
not speculate very well, because any genuine change by the outer
planets can’t be anticipated or it wouldn’t really be a change. It
would just be an alteration or an extension. You can only compre-
hend what you are able to comprehend through the quality of
your ego consciousness, and if that is changing then the change is
into the unknown. But at least we can try a few intuitive hunches.
     I think the conviction that material reality is the only reality
is a typically Capricornian vision, and all of the strivings and ethics
and behaviour patterns of Capricorn stem from this view of the
nature of reality. It’s possible that this central attitude, in which
we are all born and develop, may change. It’s almost impossible
to imagine what that would be like, because we have in our life-
times never seen things differently. Certainly our ideas of govern-
ment and of who is a suitable leader are built upon the same
world-view. This was not always the case, and I think it’s part of
the reason why we find it so difficult now to really understand
the medieval mind, or the mind of the ancient Greek where the
world teemed with gods. The isolation and defensiveness of Capri-
corn stems from this same identification with not only material
reality, but with the power and effectiveness of the ego. I don’t
124                                    The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


think it would be too farfetched to envision changes through
scientific research which offer us a completely different view not
only of the physical universe but of the nature of the human
being.
    Now this conjunction transits across Russia’s natal Venus and
comes into opposition with the natal Pluto, and this occurs during
the same period that transiting Pluto moves across Russia’s natal
sun. Because Venus concerns partnership arrangements, which in
terms of countries translates into allies and satellite nations, I
would expect the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics to become
something other than a union. Venus-Pluto has a way of trying to
coerce partners, because the problem of power enters into rela-
tionships, and this is precisely what Russia has done. These forced
marriages may explode. If the central government is in a state of
chaos and change through the transit of Pluto, and a new vision of
reality begins to seep its way into the collective which undermines
the present material ethic, then it wouldn’t be surprising to see a
revolution within the country. The innate religious spirit in the
Russian people has been imprisoned and repressed, and it would
very likely break through if it were given half a chance.
    If an individual were challenged in this way, he might go
through a very turbulent time, and perhaps have a breakdown of
some kind, so that the rigidity of the ego’s viewpoint could alter
and become more flexible and inclusive of new attitudes. This
might coincide with the breakup of a marriage, and a time of
depression and isolation and gradual reorientation. But the Rus-
sian government does not have the flexibility of an individual
psyche. If Russia breaks down, a completely different form of
rulership will become necessary. There is no room for move-
ment in this country’s system, as there might be for example in
England with her diversity of political parties. So it can only
break down.

Audience: Perhaps there will be a return to a feudal system.

Liz: I don’t think it’s possible to go backward once the collec-
tive has moved beyond a particular phase. A country can break
down and disintegrate and fall into chaos, but something new will
always emerge. The feudal system was built upon a society where
there was no concept or experience of individuality. You were a
king, a prince, a knight, a merchant, a priest or a serf. The experi-
Lecture Five                                                     125


ence of individual worth and value is I think here to stay. Feudal-
ism could never work in a world where individual consciousness
has developed to the extent it has. In very backward nations it
might still be operable, but I don’t think that’s the case with
Russia.
     On the other hand the tradition of kingship, seen in a new
light, might not be impossible. The mystical view of kingship is
that he rules but does not govern. He is a symbol of God on earth,
but not a tyrant or a dictator. The psychological importance of
a royal family is that they carry the projections of the Self for the
collective. They represent the permanent, ancient thing which
time cannot alter and which carries the powerful symbol of royal
lineage. Of course in the modern world we are skeptical of these
things. But kings and queens are one of the commonest dream
motifs, and despite conscious cynicism they still carry powerful
meaning for us.
     So far my observations on the coming conjunction haven’t
turned up anything horribly destructive. I am sure that great
changes are signified, but they don’t have a violent feeling about
them, at least not in any extraordinary sense. Capricorn is a good
solid sign, and I think the fantasy of the end of the world is the
way in which the unconscious portrays great changes in conscious-
ness. It’s probably worth looking at what happened the last time
Saturn, Uranus and Neptune were all lined up together. When
Marx was bom, Saturn was not included in the conjunction. The
last time in fact was in around 1307. Now I’m sure that this date
is not going to make you all leap out of your seats because it isn’t
a very memorable date historically speaking. The conjunction
occurred then in Scorpio. A few things did happen which were
ultimately of great significance, but they seem small from the
event point of view. The King of France at that time, Philippe
le Bel, needed money. In order to get it, he decided to appropriate
the vast monetary resources of the Knights Templar, the warlike
religious order which kept a semi-independent political state and
only answered to the Pope for its authority. But Philippe couldn’t
disband the Templars without getting a papal ratification, and the
Pope refused. Being resourceful, he had the Pope assassinated, and
bribed the college of cardinals to elect his own candidate as Pope.
This new Pope still showed reluctance, so Philippe had him kid-
napped and taken to France and installed at the papal palace at
Avignon. This is what is known as the Babylonian Captivity.
126                                     The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


     Now apart from being an interesting piece of historical trivia,
this event had vast repercussions. Medieval Europe saw the Church
as the one infallible and unshakeable thing in life. Life was pretty
hard and unreliable, what with plagues and lawlessness and
famines and so on. The Pope was God’s Vicar on Earth, much
more infallible and semi-divine than we imagine him to be now.
What Philippe le Bel did was throw the Church into chaos, from
which it never properly recovered. For a time there were two
Popes running concurrently, one in Rome and one in Avignon.
Each thought the other one was the Antichrist. It was said that
during the time of the Babylonian Captivity, no one was saved.
The total faith in the Church was seriously rocked, and no sooner
did it begin to attempt a recovery than the Reformation started.
So the year 1307 marked the beginning of the end of the absolute
power of the Church, the one voice which declared the nature and
meaning of reality for the whole of the known world.
     I think this little historical vignette is very instructive for us
now, because I understand this conjunction to mean that some
basic interpretation of reality which we have taken for granted for
a long time and which holds absolute authority for us will begin to
be shaken. I don’t know what that could be. One can only specu-
late. The previous conjunction which I mentioned occurred in
Scorpio, and one might think in terms of the issues that Scorpio
deals with. The nature of good and evil and the conflict between
them, the duality of man as beast and spiritual being, the nature of
power, are all Scorpionic issues. The core of the medieval Church
rested on the idea that man was a creature of sin, fallen from grace
because of Adam’s error, steeped in carnal desires and bestiality,
and that the One True Church could save him from damnation.
The means of enforcing these beliefs were fairly Scorpionic too,
such as torture and severe penances. One can make a case for the
great change occurring in man’s view of God and the Devil.
     I keep going back to the issues with which Capricorn is con-
cerned, and each time I think about it I come up with the material
view of reality. By this I don’t mean materialism as a financial or
economic viewpoint. A Marxist would probably hope that this was
the case, but frankly I don’t think money is really a Capricornian
problem. But seeing the world only through the senses is, and my
own subjective feeling about this conjunction is that it will affect
our assumptions about the nature of the physical universe and the
human body. I don’t interpret this as a great millenarian explosion,
Lecture Five                                                        127

for all the reasons which I have just talked about. I don’t doubt
that many things will change and perhaps become rather difficult
in a material sense, because the world is getting itself into trouble
with its energy resources and there are many problems connected
with distribution of wealth. But I have yet to be convinced that
this conjunction heralds the Third World War. The European
Economic Community might become a United States of Europe,
and you might have to run your car on chicken droppings, but I
somehow expect that the world will still be here by the year
2000. I fancy that I can already see the direction this all might go
in, because of the new discoveries which are being made about the
apparent intelligence and interconnectedness of what we pre-
viously thought was inanimate matter. But I suppose like every-
body else I will have to just wait and be surprised.

Audience: Could we be confronted with the end of the belief that
a good life depends on technology and the whole materialistic-
industrial idea?

Liz: I have no idea. I suspect that these kinds of hopes and ques-
tions stem from one’s own personal political viewpoint, but the
outer planets bring changes that can’t really be envisaged because
we have never experienced them before. The question you have
raised isn’t a new one. People have been complaining about that
since the Cretans invented a flushing toilet. I think it’s something
more profound than that. I would suggest you read Norman
Cohn’s book, The Pursuit of the Millenium. The fantasy that the
destruction of evil technology and machines will lead back to the
golden age where no one quarrelled about property is an archetypal
fantasy. It was around in the Middle Ages very strongly. All this
means is that we are projecting our own evil onto machines. That
doesn’t accomplish a lot. Technology has made our lives enor-
mously fruitful, and given us a chance to develop inwardly. Tech-
nology is the outward reflection of differentiated ego conscious-
ness. If an individual projects all his values into his gadgets, that is
his problem, not the inherent evil of the gadget. The medieval
millenarian cults had the same idea about medieval technology.
The devil was in material things, because it’s much harder to look
at the devil in yourself. Besides, I don’t think Capricorn is con-
cerned with technology. That is much more Aquarian and in line
128                                   The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


with Aquarius’ vision of man’s intellect gaining mastery over
nature by stealing her secrets.
     Pluto is transiting through Scorpio while this conjunction is
moving through Capricorn. I mentioned some things earlier about
Pluto in Scorpio, and how this transit of the planet through its
own sign seems to resurrect ancient views which have been dead
for a long time and which deal with the nature of the soul, im-
mortality and rebirth. I find this combination of transits exciting
rather than terrifying. In a worldly sense I am sure Russia will be
strongly affected, but that doesn’t disturb me because I do not
have great sympathy for the human imprisonment which occurs
under that political system. Apart from this, I have no clear idea
of mundane changes. I think it’s possible to become very stupid,
and because of the tension which deep collective changes gen-
erate, run around trying to blame one political system or another
for all the world’s woes. But I suspect that it’s wiser to be prag-
matic and wait, because the outer planets are always surprising.
Because it falls in an earthy sign, the conjunction makes me feel
much more that we might emerge with a better understanding of
the physical world we live in, rather than being blown up. But of
course I can be accused of being an optimist.
     The conjunction affects the charts of other nations as well,
and one of them is England. Whether you take the chart for the
crowning of William the Conqueror or the chart for the found-
ing of the United Kingdom, the sun is in Capricorn and will be
transited by the conjunction. Likewise America will be affected by
the conjunction, because it falls in opposition to America’s sun,
Venus and Jupiter in Cancer. I think this time that I will leave you
all to speculate on what it all might mean.
     The sphere of religion is perhaps also connected to the ap-
proaching conjunction, because I think Capricorn concerns the
formal side of life in general and the formal side of religion in
particular. The religious spirit is not necessarily reflected by
Saturn, but the dogma of religion is, because it is the formal
container in which the mystical vision is enclosed. Religious
dogma is an effort to recreate a mystery which occurred once,
whether that is embodied in Moses receiving the Tablets of the
Law or the birth of Jesus or the revelation of Mohammed or the
enlightenment of the Buddha. Form is in this sense an effort at
making continuous and eternal something which is by its nature
momentary and miraculous. I feel that the formal issues of religion
Lecture Five                                                      129


are very important to many Capricorns, and much of the sign’s
journey involves loss of faith, despair, finding of faith and humil-
ity. We associate the knees with Capricorn, and the knees are what
we kneel on when we make obeisance.
     I have noticed a peculiarity about Saturn placed in the ninth
house, which of course is the house associated with religious
attitudes and the person’s image of God. Planets in the ninth
describe what kind of God we experience, and what powers and
attributes we give to the divine. Saturn in the ninth is an Old
Testament god, who upholds principles such as justice, law,
humility, correct behaviour, conscience, and good works. Saturn
in the ninth is terribly sensitive to the formal side of religion with
its codes of behaviour, which in some cases leads to the person
becoming anti-religious because he can’t live with the demands of
his God within himself. So he rejects religion in the hope that it
will take away his conscience, which is almost always horribly
highly developed, and then discovers that God gets just as angry
from the unconscious. The Old Testament Yahveh is a proud and
jealous God, and he probably loves Job because Job is another
Capricorn like himself, enduring and long-suffering and uncom-
plaining and as stubborn as a mule. I have the feeling that there
are spheres of religious outlook which are going to be strongly
affected by the conjunction, and they deal with the formal or
dogmatic aspects of religion rather than the inherent beliefs.
Perhaps the structure of the great religions which have existed for
so many centuries will undergo some change. That’s certainly a
strong possibility, since there is already a great deal of unrest and
dissatisfaction within the religious communities.

Audience: Could the conjunction falling on England’s chart mean
that England loses her sovereignty and becomes part of Europe,
or something like that?

Liz: I don’t know. Your speculations are as good as mine. That’s
certainly a possibility. There are all kinds of possibilities. The
nature of England as a monarchy could change. The structure of
the government, with its House of Lords and House of Commons,
could change. Or it could maintain all these things and become a
state in a united Europe. I really have no idea. The only thing I’m
fairly certain about is that total destruction is Pluto’s talent, and
130                                   The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


Pluto is not part of this conjunction. This is change without total
destruction.

Audience: I know you’re leaving it up to us to speculate, but
can’t you do just a little speculation about the way the conjunc-
tion affects America’s chart? My speculations are pretty alarming,
because the seventh house is the house of enemies.

Liz: Well, there is always that possibility. I would prefer to in-
terpret the seventh house as the house of relationships, in which
both friendly terms and conflicts are experienced. I can only tell
you what I would say if it were a person with the sun, Venus and
Jupiter in the seventh and the conjunction of Saturn, Uranus and
Neptune transited through the first house and opposed those
Cancer planets. If Pluto were involved, I would expect power
struggles, a bitter divorce with a lot of manipulation and diffi-
culty, or the death of the partner, or the person realising that he
can no longer tolerate the other in his life. But Pluto is not in-
volved here. Saturn usually carries with it soul-searching confron-
tations with oneself, and acceptance of limitations, and loneli-
ness. Neptune often brings disillusionment and a dream that
doesn’t quite work out as expected. And Uranus suggests to me
separations, a parting of the ways. All these planets are moving
through the first, which means that the person himself, or country
itself, is the one doing the soul-searching and changing. It isn’t
someone outside causing it.
     I think I mentioned earlier that seventh house suns are not
terribly self-sufficient. They need relationships in order to de-
velop, and they don’t like being alone for very long. There is a
tendency to get bound up in everybody else’s business, and to
function as a mediator. A seventh house sun can be a very creative
mediator. I have seen many people with this placement in the
helping professions, Jung among them, and likewise Freud. They
are drawn to trying to resolve conflicts, and in the process they
themselves develop and grow. I think this is typical of America.
America has its hands in every country’s business. It tends to
promote the image of the mediator, policing the world to keep it
free. Although America is insular in terms of its culture, and many
Americans pride themselves on never having left their home towns,
it is not in the least insular in terms of political and economic
entanglements with other nations. This tendency to try to mediate
Lecture Five                                                    131


is on the one hand admirable, and on the other rather unfortunate,
since other countries sometimes become resentful at the inter-
ference. Also, since America’s sun is in square to Saturn in the
tenth, there is the unpleasant hard reality of its own government
sometimes meeting a somewhat lower standard than the one
which America demands that its fellow countries meet. In short,
the sun-Saturn square has a touch of self-undoing about it. The
very noble ideals of the seventh house collide with the embarrass-
ment of internal politics.
     The issue of America’s entanglements with other countries is
the thing which I think is affected by the transit. Whether the
trigger is, for example, the Arab nations refusing to supply oil, or
whatever, it looks to me like a period of national soul-searching
and tightening of belts. I think there will be a severing of depend-
encies, which will come as a great shock to the people because
there is so much of an illusion of self-sufficiency. The resources
for self-sufficiency are of course there, but they haven’t been
properly tapped. In an individual’s chart, this kind of transit
suggests that the sense of identity is being given a good working-
over. America’s identity is much too bound up with how the rest
of the world sees it. Venus and Jupiter together in the seventh
suggest a kind of extravagance, not only materially, but in terms
of the sense of self-importance. I think this is likely to be a mar-
vellously creative transit, because it’s a kind of growing up. I
don’t intend to offend the Americans in the group, and I don’t
mean all this in a nastily critical way. But America, unlike the
European countries, is a very young nation with tremendous
vitality which has never been invaded or conquered or forced into
submission, and which has never had to undergo the centuries of
grinding struggle and poverty that have afflicted Europe. The
1929 depression was a ghastly shock to America, because such a
thing had never been experienced before. But every country in
Europe has a long history of terrible deprivation, war, invasion and
chaos. When I say that I think the transit is a growing-up time, it
isn’t meant as an insult, but as a statement of how things might
actually be.
    As the conjunction moves into the latter part of Capricorn,
Saturn moves ahead and is no longer involved. Uranus and Nep-
tune then move across America’s second house Pluto. This house
deals with the resources and wealth both of a country and of an
individual. Because Saturn isn’t involved, I would say that this
132                                    The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


might concern changes in values. The American emphasis on
material wealth and expansion is perhaps going to undergo quite
a change. Pluto in the second house is a very acquisitive position,
and tends to be intense and passionate about its wealth, but it also
tends to undergo radical changes at long intervals. In mundane
astrology Pluto is said to rule monopolies and huge conglomerates
of companies, because of the issue of power involved. So I would
say that there is a good possibility of major changes in this sphere.
You can certainly piece together a scenario out of this. Of course
it might not be the right scenario. But it’s the way I am inclining,
rather than envisioning war with Russia.
     I think in the end it’s equally productive to consider this con-
junction in terms of what it does to your own chart. That’s per-
haps more edifying because we can only talk about countries in
terms of generalities, whereas an individual knows the pattern of
his own life much more intimately. Besides, he has some say in
what happens to him individually, much more than he does about
his country. I know how easy it is to become alarmed about outer
planet transits, because they are beyond the individual’s scope and
control. But if they bring changes which are difficult or unpleas-
ant, we all have some say about how we are going to respond to
those changes. I think that what Jung says is very relevant—that
an individual’s life is characteristic of himself. What comes into
your life is needed and is an opportunity. I think this is particu-
larly true of the outer planets, which frighten the ego but open it
up so that the person can live more of what he potentially needs
to become.

Audience: Can you say anything about earthquakes? A number
of astrologers feel that the conjunction will set off a giant earth-
quake in California.

Liz: I have no idea. There have been expectations of a giant
earthquake for a long time. I think one would have to look at
California’s chart, which I haven’t got. A state has a chart just as
a nation does. If the entire state were going to drop off into the
Pacific Ocean, then I think the conjunction would have to be
hitting something pretty powerfully in California’s birth chart.
I really can’t speculate about earthquakes. There are a number
of clairvoyant prophecies about this, but I am always suspicious
because clairvoyant visions are like dreams, they often symbolise
Lecture Five                                                    133


something rather than stating a literal fact. One could make a case
for this because California’s oil is critical to America’s economy;
and if there were a massive disaster, then it would hit America’s
pocketbook very hard, which might be indicated by the transiting
conjunction moving across the second house Pluto. I really don’t
know. I have personally always feared a major earthquake in
California, but that’s more to do with my own fantasies than with
any astrological prognostication. An earthquake is a very pri-
mordial symbol of destruction. It’s an act of God, which is what
insurance policies call it. There is obviously room for some re-
search here. But I would want to see California’s chart before I
really began to speculate.

Audience: What part of the chart would you look at?

Liz: The ascendant, because it’s the entity itself, the corporeal
form. The ascendant in an individual’s chart is the point of his
incarnation. So it traditionally rules the physical body, and the
basic outlook toward life. I think the same applies to the ascen-
dant of a state or city or country. The tenth house represents the
style of government, just as the tenth house in the person’s chart
represents his conscious social values and codes of behaviour. We
like to be seen as our midheavens, but what we truly are in essence
is much more the ascendant and the sun. The second house is
the entity’s resources, and so on. If a person has a strong transit
through the tenth house, then he will often change jobs, or alter
his career goals, or present himself in a completely different way
to the world. But a strong transit over the ascendant changes your
basic character. Or maybe I should say that it reveals more of your
basic character than you had previously been aware of.
     I will repeat for the third time that I’m not an expert on mun-
dane astrology. You might read Charles Carter’s book on political
astrology, which is very good, but there are very few books in
print at the moment where any new light has been shed on this
area of astrology. Once upon a time it was terribly important to
study the charts of nations and cities. I found a book recently in
the British Museum Library which dates from the sixteenth
century, which is a sort of Renaissance version of Margaret Hone.
It’s a huge three-volume text for the student of astrology, un-
fortunately written in Latin. Most of the instructions are devoted
to the interpretation of judicial charts, the charts of cities and
134                                   The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


nations. There are a handful of birth horoscopes of the individual
notables of the time, various kings and princes and dukes. But the
main emphasis is on mundane charts. The author was a man called
Luc Gauricus, who was astrologer to several ruling Italian families.
He wouldn’t have dreamt of doing his work without having to
hand the birth horoscopes for the cities of Florence, Venice,
Mantua, and so on. Otherwise how could he have told his patrons
what was going to happen to them? We have lost all this now. I’m
quite ignorant of the really subtle principles of mundane astrol-
ogy, and I think someone will eventually have to translate Luc
Gauricus’ work into English so that we can relearn what was once
an honoured aspect of astrological study.
     There was of course no psychological interpretation of the
chart in the sixteenth century, because there was no concept of
a psyche. Plato and other Greek philosophers had a lot to say
about the psyche, but the mainstream of astrology parted ways
with Plato some time before Luc Gauricus. So all the individuals
and countries that Gauricus writes about are fated. There is no
such thing as choice. King Henri II of France will die in his forty-
first year in a joust through a wound in the eye. As it turns out,
Gauricus was quite accurate about that one. King Henri died
precisely on time as predicted. It would never have occurred to
either Gauricus or King Henri, who knew about the prophecy,
that there was any way out. There was no concept of internalising
a problem. But the principles of mundane astrology have perhaps
not changed so much. I think that nations are a little less fated
than they were because people in general are a little more con-
scious and much of the world is freer and can at least make a
show of electing or removing its rulers. But maybe that’s unduly
optimistic, because Nazi Germany was only forty years ago, and
Khomeini’s Iran is not so very different from a fourteenth-century
Italian city-state with a tyrannical ruler.


Audience: How would you set up a chart for a country with no
particular founding, such as Wales?


Liz: You can’t. You would have to use the chart for the United
Kingdom, but as any Welshman could tell you, Wales has its own
identity. But there are nations which exist as psychically inde-
pendent entities yet which are not separate countries in a political
Lecture Five                                                      135

sense. In a literal sense, Wales is not a separate country. Whether
that’s right or wrong I leave to the Welsh to debate.

Audience: Perhaps you could work with the chart of a national
hero, such as Owen Glendower.

Liz: That’s certainly a possibility, if you could get Owen Glen-
dower’s chart. But I’m afraid it’s about as accessible as Jesus
Christ’s chart. Owen Glendower is a myth as well as an actual
man, and he certainly embodies the free spirit of Wales. But
there is no birth data on him. The best you could do with Wales
would be to work with individual Welsh towns and cities, each of
which will have a charter for its birth as an entity. I’m afraid there
isn’t much else you can do.
     The same problem exists with Scotland. I think many parts of
modern nations feel they are really not the same as the main
political body, yet their birth data is impossible to obtain. Or you
can find a people such as the Basques who try to fight violently
for their autonomy. The duchy of Lorraine has always resented
being part of France. The American South of course fell into
civil war in an effort to establish its own autonomy. All the
satellite nations of the Soviet Union have their original identities
such as Latvia and Lithuania and so on. But we can’t do charts
for them. At least not yet.
     It may sound terribly unfair if you are very patriotic about
Wales or Scotland or Lithuania, but as I said before, these mun-
dane horoscopes are political entities, not the souls of peoples.
Wales is not a separate country. I don’t mean to offend the Welsh,
but it is part of the United Kingdom, which has a birth chart.
England is easy, because of the chart for the crowning of William
the Conqueror. But the problem arises again with Germany.
Modern West Germany is hardly representative of the German
people in a historical sense. Germany was never united until
Bismarck’s time. Bavaria was a separate kingdom and so was
Prussia. There were individual duchies and states loosely bound
under the umbrella of the old Habsburg Holy Roman Empire.
All you can do is throw up your hands and resign yourself to the
horoscope for West Germany which was born after the last war.
     There is a mystical tradition that different nations are ruled
by different signs in a soul sense. That is, the true national char-
acter is reflected by a particular sign, regardless of what political
136                                   The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


entity has been foisted on that national soul at any time in his-
tory. That’s an attractive idea, but of course one can’t work with
it practically. I can imagine that Russia might be a Scorpio or
Germany might be an Aries or whatever, but I can never know
whether that’s my own projection on that nation. So we’ll leave
that side of it out. It’s a bit like trying to get a chart for the
individual Self, which is what Alice Bailey writes about. It’s
wonderful stuff, and very inspiring, but you can’t do anything
with it in a practical sense. It’s all very well to believe that you
respond to the Seventh Ray and that your soul is really a Virgo.
But in the end you’re stuck with the horoscope for your birth,
because in the end that’s the life you’ve got to live. I hope I
haven’t depressed any Welshmen. But I don’t suppose I have,
because my impression is that they have a pretty clear sense of
the soul.
                        Lecture Six
    Several people have asked questions about individual con-
figurations in their own charts involving the outer planets, and I
think it would be a good idea to spend some time discussing these
points. One query made to me earlier was about the effect of the
Jupiter-Saturn conjunction over a fifth house sun and Neptune. I
would say very briefly that this is probably about the opening
up of creative channels. The sun in the fifth house is not auto-
matically self-expressive and spontaneous and creative. There is
always a struggle with the sun, and it doesn’t get moving until
the thirties. And Neptune, which brings the mystical, imaginal
world into focus, suggests to me that in order to develop your
own sense of individuality you will have to let go long enough to
allow the nonrational realm to touch you. I get the feeling of
someone who desperately needs to let the world of dreams and
fantasies and moods and irrational feeling states up into con-
sciousness, because until you can do that you’ll never feel like an
individual. I think Jupiter might trigger the eruption of that
world, while Saturn demands that you find an outlet for it other
than emotional hysteria or wild fantasies of what you might do
one day.

Audience: That’s very      interesting, because it’s crossed my sun
once already and I felt   I was coming unglued. It was a very reveal-
ing experience, but I      was getting worried about what would
happen when it crossed    the second time.

Liz: Nothing is going to happen that’s particularly different from
what’s already started to happen. You might see different facets
of a basic problem. When a planet makes a retrograde passage over
a particular point in the chart, it’s a bit like successive chapters in
the same book. Different action occurs, but the same theme runs
all the way through. Events may differ, but the underlying mean-
ing is the gradual unfoldment into consciousness of whatever the
birth planet represents. I have noticed that the first transit often
opens up a new area—something new is discovered, either outside
or inside oneself. The retrograde passage on the second round is a
kind of consolidation and effort to understand what it is that has
138                                    The Outer Planets & Their Cycles
                               \   .


been happening. But there is often a blocked or unresolved feeling
with that retrograde passage. One can’t do anything yet with the
insights. Then the third chapter comes when the planet moves
across going direct, and there is usually some kind of breakthrough
or external change which allows you to make use of what you
have learned. Events may surprise you, but the underlying theme
will be the same.

Audience: I’ve got the sun, moon and Jupiter in Taurus and
Mercury in Gemini. I don’t know much about it. I wonder if
you’d care to comment.

Liz: I wouldn’t really. I think this is part of basic interpretation,
and I don’t want to get tied up doing that since I would like to
keep to the main theme of the collective. Perhaps someone else
would like to say something.

Audience: Well, I have Mercury in Gemini like this lady, and it
tends to make me very talkative.

Liz: Perhaps you can talk to each other. I think that if Mercury
is in a sign different from the sun-sign, what the individual says
and what is really motivating him are often very different. Perhaps
that applies to you. Mercury in Gemini is very quick and fluid
and versatile. It can come up with quick answers and get a quick,
clear picture. Taurus is a much slower sign, and the deeper values
are much earthier. I think your head runs much faster than the
rest of you. It may take you a while to work out what you really
want.

Audience: Can I ask you about Venus-Pluto? I have them con-
juncting in the tenth house.

Liz: I think I said a bit about Venus-Pluto earlier. Venus governs
one’s ideals and values in relationships. I think that having Pluto
with it suggests that you are meant to develop those values on a
deeper level than the ordinary social definitions allow. Pluto
forces a person to confront the unconscious side of a relationship,
which is both enriching and terrifying. If you build a relationship
around that kind of honesty, then you’ll be able to make it work.
But if you try to cling to a more superficial way of interpreting
Lecture Six                                                    139


love, then the relationship will probably break up. There isn’t a
bad fate around Venus-Pluto. But I think there are issues which
most of us don’t want to deal with, such as the inevitable hate
and power struggle that runs along side by side with intense love.
Also the irreconcilable dilemmas between male and female become
apparent with Venus-Pluto. These things must be incorporated
within the relationship. If you and your partner hide behind the
newspaper each morning and pretend that everything is lovely and
never quarrel, you’re asking for trouble if you have Venus-Pluto.
The fact that this Venus-Pluto falls in your tenth house suggests
to me that both very intense passions and power orientation are
qualities which you associate with your mother. For that reason
you might try to disidentify from them, rather than living them in
yourself. So I would say that there is also an issue with the
mother, which may make it difficult for you to allow that deeper
level of relationship to come into your life. That would eventually
need to be faced.

Audience: I would like to ask a question on synastry involving
Pluto. I have Saturn in my twelfth house, and it conjuncts my
partner’s Pluto which is in her twelfth house.

Liz: Yes, that’s fine, because I wanted to talk about the outer
planets in synastry anyway. I think you must first think about the
map I put up on the board of the mountains. Powerful urges and
images come up from the depths and they are stopped at the
barrier of the ego by Saturn. Where Pluto is concerned, the urges
are those of the uncivilised, primordial man. In an individual’s
chart where Saturn and Pluto are conjuncting, those primitive
desires and emotions will frighten the individual, and he’s likely
to try to control them. Eventually they will break through the
barrier, and the worse the control that has been imposed on them,
the worse the impact. There is a furiously controlled feeling about
Saturn-Pluto people unless they are willing to take the challenge
of accepting and integrating that wild, raging, passionate instinc-
tual creature that is the core of their animal self. So you must
apply this same principle when the contact occurs between two
charts.
    I immediately sense a power struggle which will occur, and
that isn’t necessarily a bad thing if you are both conscious of it.
Pluto will try to break down the defenses of Saturn, usually
140                                    The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


through emotional or sexual channels. Saturn in turn will try to
control and limit Pluto, because there is a fear of the intensity
that might erupt into the relationship. Sometimes you see this
through heavy atmospheres, where Pluto really works on Saturn
through black moods and scenes and difficult silences. Eventually
I think Pluto wins this contest, if winning is the word, because
Pluto is a collective planet and represents a vital need of all men
and women, not just the individual’s personal feelings. Saturn
fears Pluto’s power. Saturn’s typical defenses are hyper-rationality,
coldness, criticism, rejection and a sort of wet-blanket atmosphere
that spoils everything for the other person. In the long term, Pluto
gradually erodes some of Saturn’s rigidity and Saturn helps to
civilise Pluto. I don’t think it’s a bad combination. But I think
there must be a lot of honesty, both self-honesty and honesty
with the other person. Pluto carries the projection of the Dark
Mother, and as this is a woman on whom you are likely to hook
this archetypal image, you are likely to be very afraid of the power
of her sexuality and her feelings. I think you will have to try to
separate the archetypal image from the actual woman, who is
probably not the witch you imagine her to be in your fantasies.
     What makes aspects like this so difficult is the reluctance
which people feel about working with them. I think there is a
nakedness required in relationships with these combinations, and
the defensiveness makes us try on all kinds of false pride and
manipulation and dirty tricks in order to prevent the partner from
seeing our fear and our need. Pluto is particularly embarrassing
because most of us like to imagine that we are gentle, civilised
people who don’t have these savage, unrelenting emotions in us.
But I suspect that cross-aspects like this can be a marvellous gift,
if one can meet the challenge. Relationships like this force us to
deepen and grow. If you just want things easy and comfortable
and don’t like your person threatened, you should stay away. You
can’t treat a relationship like this in a conventional way, hoping
that everything will stay quiet and comfortable at home while
you get on with bigger and better things. But the fact that you’ve
got embroiled in it suggests to me that you want something
deeper, so you have the thing you need.
     I think contacts like these can be very painful and ugly at
times. There can also be unpleasant endings and separations.
But the opposite is also true, and the profound sense of intimacy
and companionship is far greater and more enduring than the
Lecture Six                                                     141


box-like shape which a more superficially inclined person makes
for his relationships. If you can go your own way in terms of re-
lationship values, and not rely on the collective model, then you’re
fine with aspects like this. But you must get out of your head the
conventional idea of a normal relationship.

Audience: Could you comment on Pluto in the midheaven?

Liz: Yes, I should say something about the outer planets in gen-
eral when they’re found in the midheaven. First let’s consider the
MC-IC axis itself. The MC or midheaven is first of all the inher-
itance from the mother. It’s what has come down to you from
the maternal line, and it must be concretised in the world. Mother
among other things is a symbol of form, of matter and material
reality. She is the body out of which we come. So mother and
world are bound up with each other, and the inheritance from the
mother is also bound up with the vocation in life. This point in
the chart isn’t about one’s job. It’s about vocation or calling, the
ideals which we seek to actualise in the world. One of the things
I’ve noticed about outer planets in the midheaven is that it’s very
difficult to be satisfied with an ordinary job. One must feel that
he is working for and with the collective in some way. So often
it takes a long time before the person finds work which really
suits him and gives him a sense of purpose. The outer planets
are a pretty powerful psychic inheritance from Mother, and she
is often terribly powerful and threatening because there is some
very powerful urge or dynamism in her that cannot be expressed
and which the child must concretise.
    Now Pluto is concerned in part with the dark side of human
nature, the depths of the unredeemed and uncivilised shadow. This
is the dross which society has rejected, yet which still has tre-
mendous vitality and potential. So Pluto in the midheaven implies
that you must find work which will help you to confront and
shape this darker face of life. Pluto represents power, the power of
the unconscious and the instincts. There is always the problem
with Pluto that the person who is meant to learn to work with
power must first be the victim of power for a time. Otherwise
he cannot use it responsibly. I’ve noticed that Pluto in the mid-
heaven favours professions that encounter the dark, such as
medicine and psychology, and also professions that deal with the
darkness in society, which of course opens out into politics.
142                                    The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


Carter and Nixon both have tenth house Plutos. The mother has
enormous power when Pluto is in the tenth, and the individual
often feels that he is her victim.

Audience: My tenth house Pluto doesn’t make any major aspects.

Liz: Well, I think it’s likely in that case that you aren’t very aware
of the fact that it belongs to you. An unaspected planet behaves
in a very autonomous fashion. I think I mentioned this before.
It often projects itself outward onto someone or something else,
because the rest of the chart isn’t naturally linked with it. Here it
would very likely represent a terrific and rather dark power
attached to the mother, which you might not realise is also some-
thing in you. And you might also project that power into society,
into large organisations or government or wherever you feel there
is power, and feel overwhelmed and threatened by it. But in the
end you must still try to work with it. I think Pluto feels very like
fate, because it’s a blind, instinctual force. It isn’t something one
would have chosen. Perhaps if you found a field of work which
really allowed you to interact with that darkness, you would be
compelled and fascinated by it but would always feel that some-
how it wasn’t what you would have liked to do.
     Outer planets in the tenth house can give many problems with
ordinary employment, because the midheaven is how the world
sees you, and if you are carrying Pluto around in a very uncon-
scious way, then for no observable reason people whom you work
with might feel threatened by you, or get into power battles with
you. Others feel something threatening and they counterattack,
but to you it might just feel like attack. Then one has the so-
called problem with authority which Pluto in the tenth often
displays. But it must be made conscious. It isn’t really your
mother.
     There is a similar issue around Uranus and Neptune in the
midheaven. Trying to follow an ordinary line of work brings
many difficulties with it, because there is always a restless dis-
satisfied thing underneath that wants to be involved with the
collective in some way. Other people pick this up if one is very
unconscious of it, and they react to it. You can learn a lot about
your tenth house by the way you are treated at work. But I
think the usual textbook description of “unusual professions”
is quite true. These planets in the tenth need outlets that connect
Lecture Six                                                       143


up with the psychic life of the group. This is why you find so
many of them in the entertainment fields such as films and music,
and on the stage, and in the political arena, and in fields of re-
search where breakthroughs are promised.

Audience: Would the same thing apply to me, with the moon
conjunct Uranus in Cancer in the midheaven?

Liz: Yes, in general the same thing would apply. But Uranus is
not concerned with the unredeemed shadow side of life. It’s
concerned with the new idea which will open up consciousness,
and the new discovery which will enlighten or improve society.
I have found that Uranus is very drawn to bringing new ideas to
the public. It must function in a mentally alive atmosphere. And
too much limitation or restriction is obviously going to cause
problems. The moon is one’s need for security, so this urge of
yours to promote new things for others is also something you need
for your emotional stability. Again traditionally, a tenth house
Uranus can’t work well for other people. It’s the classic image of
the individual who cannot bear a superior standing over him tell-
ing him what to do or think. One must be free to get one’s hands
on the stuff of new ideas. This kind of placement suggests all
sorts of things to me—media, communications, education, any-
thing which allows you to change the consciousness of the people
you are dealing with.
     The moon is the chart’s anchor. It’s the safe place, the place
where we go for safety. If everything else is falling to bits, we run
for the house where the moon is placed. So you would run into
your career and your feeling of usefulness to the public. You also,
in a sense, run to Mother. The moon in the tenth is a very strong
emotional tie to the mother, a similarity of feeling responses.
Her attitudes are also your attitudes. The rather rebellious, edgy,
impulsive, inspired quality of moon-Uranus is the inheritance from
the mother. It’s also the difficult aspect of the relationship with
the mother, the ambivalence she must have felt about being a
mother at all. The need for freedom to move and share ideas is
both hers and yours, although she probably wasn’t able to live
it. So you must in a sense live out her unlived life, and contribute
something to a world larger than immediate family.

Audience: Can I change the theme of the discussion slightly? I
                                                              f


144                                      The Outer Planets & Their Cycles

                                 '   t



can apply what     you say to my chart, which also has Uranus in the
midheaven. But      I have it in square to Venus. I have a feeling that
means that my       ideas and innovations never come to fruition. At
least that’s how   I feel about them.

Liz: In what house is your Venus placed?

Audience: In the ascendant.

Liz: I think that Venus-Uranus squares in general suggest a strong
conflict between the need for others and the compulsion to pursue
one’s own vision, chasing after those wonderful ideas about how
to change the world. Venus-Uranus in square can really interfere
with your dealings with other people, and perhaps part of the
reason why you can’t follow things through is that you alienate
the people you need to help you. Venus in the ascendant gives a
certain quality to the personality, a very agreeable and reasonable
and pleasant demeanor. It will always try to mediate and keep
peace and please others. But Uranus in the midheaven is of course
not in the least concerned with pleasing others. There is a great
instability about it, which in part reflects the instability of the
original relationship with the mother. I always get the feeling
when Uranus describes the mother that she was pretty unhappy
about being a mother in the first place. The instability that is
reflected is both a quality of lack of commitment in her and the
same lack of commitment in you.
     I have a feeling that you get scared also when you come up
with something because you might offend someone with it.
Squares vacillate enormously. You can’t follow the independent
spirit because you need people to like you, but your need of
people makes you angry so you break away at the critical mo-
ment. I think there is a great insecurity about Venus-Uranus
aspects. One has been subjected to broken or severed relation-
ships quite early in life, and there is a tendency to expect the
same later. I think there must be a way in which you can try to
live both ends of this square. Venus and Uranus aren’t mutually
irreconcilable. They seem that way very often, and you particu-
larly see it in the dithering that people with this aspect do about
permanent relationships. Yes I want it, no I don’t. There is always
the terror that someone else will take your freedom away, but
it’s really your own longing for relationship that interferes with
the craving for perfect freedom.
Lecture Six                                                      145


     Venus-Uranus is often afraid of compromising, because of the
Uranian ideal of perfect truthfulness and the belief that one must
be brutally honest in order to live up to the ideal. You can often
hear Venus-Uranus going on about how people can’t own each
other and how jealousy and emotionality in relationships is an
unevolved state. That’s the Uranian vision. But they get tripped
up terribly by their own unconscious emotional needs. Some-
times this happens because someone else gives you a hard time,
and sometimes it’s the repressed feelings which come up as apathy
and depression and an inability to finish anything. I think one
must learn to give equal value to both ends of this square. The
more honest you can be about your need of other people, the
easier that square will become. But if you try to be wholly Uran-
ian, Venus will retaliate. Likewise if you try to be wholly Venus-
ian and everyone’s favourite nice person, then Uranus will un-
consciously sabotage your relationships by making enemies
unwittingly.
     You can think of a square as two characters in a play. They
are scripted to quarrel with each other, even if they don’t feel
like it, because that’s the script. So they begin to haggle, and each
side becomes very uncompromising. Uranus is desperately afraid
of being human, and Venus is desperately afraid of being alone
and inhuman. You can see the same dynamic with Venus in
square to Pluto or Neptune. Venus wants lovely, nice, peaceful,
happy relationships and Pluto insists that love is worth nothing
without hate, conflict, battle and reconciliation. Or Venus wants
a solid, safe, secure, physically real relationship, but Neptune
insists that only the things of the spirit are of any value and
sexuality is definitely not the way to find God. One must find
room in one’s life for both.

Audience: I have Venus in square to both Saturn and Uranus,
which are in the twelfth house. Venus is in Virgo in the third.
Does that mean I have three characters who are fighting instead
of only two?

Liz: Yes, in a sense it does mean that. Saturn is concerned with
self-protection, not with relationship. Saturn is the voice which
warns us against too much vulnerability or dependency on another
person. Uranus doesn’t want to be tied either, but for different
reasons. The ideal of freedom conflicts with the demands that
arise from dealings with another. And Saturn and Uranus are of
146                                   The Outer Planets & Their Cycles

                              '   «


course inimical to each other in many ways, because Saturn
clings to what is safe and practical and secure, while Uranus will
dare anything in the name of an ideal.
     I get a feeling from this kind of configuration that you would
have great difficulty in deciding whether to bother about any
relationships at all. If you project the Saturn-Uranus end of the
square, then very likely you will be or have been hurt by some-
one else who cannot give you the commitment you crave. But if
you allow the conflict to be conscious and recognise that it’s
your own, then I think there are issues around trusting other
people with your needs which are quite difficult. Sometimes I
have seen this combination give a feeling of coldness, but it isn’t
really cold. It’s terribly frightened both of being hurt and of
being prevented from being an independent individual. There is
a great fear of losing the other, and a reluctance to take that
risk. Much of this will probably connect with childhood experi-
ences, because this configuration often means that one loses a
parent, either physically or psychologically, and the fear of
separation runs very deep.
     Saturn in the twelfth has a rather suspicious feeling about it,
because Saturn defends himself from anything which might
undermine the ego’s position of strength, and the twelfth house
exposes one to the chaos and boundlessness of the unconscious.
So I would expect that you are not only afraid of intimacy be-
cause of the problem of rejection and abandonment, but that
you’re afraid of it also because of the loss of self which happens
if you let another person through the boundaries. Relationships of
a deep kind threaten to unlock all that is hidden and unknown
about yourself. What I can’t tell from the chart is whether you act
out this suspicion and reclusiveness yourself, or whether you find
other people who will act it out for you. With Venus in Virgo
it’s likely that it’s you yourself who cannot open up with others.
A more effusive Venus might seem much more open and covertly
push the partner into rejection.
     I don’t think squares have to remain completely antagonistic.
We can go a long way toward some kind of reconciliation. I don’t
think it ever becomes perfect, and I would be surprised if you
were ever one hundred per cent sure in a relationship either about
your own commitment or about your partner’s. But I think the
more extreme reactions to aspects like this don’t have to keep
recurring. I think Venus-Saturn has a tendency to react badly if
Lecture Six                                                       147


there is hurt or disappointment in love, with the attitude that it
just isn’t worth it and why bother to try again. It can get horri-
bly gloomy and fatalistic about all future relationships being
doomed to failure. This is taking the childhood wound and seeing
it in the future instead of recognising that it’s the past. Then one
creates that future, because one never opens up. But loneliness
and acceptance of separations is terribly important for someone
with these aspects to go through. If one can take the limitations
of other people in terms of love, and not keep looking for the
parent who was lost and then being furious because the partner
hasn’t turned out to be perfect, then I think the way through for
these aspects is the way of compassion for a basic human condi-
tion. Uranus finds it hard to accept this kind of thing, because one
has such a rigid idea of how it ought to be. I think you may have
to learn that other people are also frightened of being hurt, and
that you can overuse your sensitivity and destroy relationships
which could be very fulfilling even if they don’t fulfill the fantasy.
     In many ways the main difficulty with configurations such as
this one which involve outer planets is that the body of collective
values and standards about relationship is not a lot of use. When I
use the word collective here, by the way, I don’t mean the collec-
tive unconscious in the sense in which I have been describing those
deep currents and movements which erupt into society. I mean
social law, social standards on a conscious level which we are
taught along with our ordinary education. Marriage in the eyes
of the collective in this sense is something which is supposed to
entail absolute commitment, and if there are problems then they
must be solved within the unshakeable framework of the marriage.
But Uranus finds a lot wrong with the institution of marriage as it
is practised, and the idealism of this planet is not just illusion.
There is a powerful urge to change or improve something which
may be too rigid or outworn. Sometimes Uranus goes to ridicu-
lous extremes, and denies the psychological differences between
men and women, and the archetypal meaning of marriage as a
symbol. But if you have an aspect between Venus and Uranus,
you must find new values in relationship in some way. And collec-
tive standards can’t really give much of a guideline. The art, I
think, is to find a way to blend the new with the old, rather than
totally destroy something precious in the name of a theoretical
freedom.
     There is the same problem with Neptune and Pluto. They pull
148                                   The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


the person into experiences for which collective standards have no
explanation or acceptance. Pluto introduces us to the beast in
ourselves, and we’re taught that this thing has no value and must
be eradicated or subdued. But when we do that too forcibly, then
all the passion goes out of life. And Neptune tries to break down
the conscious emphasis on the material side of things, so that a
sense of the divine can be experienced in any aspect of life. Outer
planets force us to find highly individual ways of coping, because
they always personify the new thing which has not yet become an
entrenched part of social conditioning. With Venus in aspect to
Uranus, you are not only going to be exposed to a vision of love
and relationship which seems contradictory to what you have
been taught to expect. You’re also exposed to the anarchy and
chaos of Uranus, which can only see what must be shattered with-
out recognising the things of value that must be included in the
new thing.

Audience: I can’t accept your equating anarchy with chaos.

Liz: Well, that’s fine, but they are synonymous to me. Anarchy
to me is a state of chaos. It’s a rebellion against what is, without
any creative means of integrating what’s of value in what is, with
what ought to be. This is the smashing of idols which one thinks
are evil, without any sense of their value. Uranus is not concerned
with feeling values, which are subtle and elusive and in contra-
diction to ideology. Something may be wrong in principle but
right to an individual because of the irrational and inexplicable
choice of the heart. Uranus must trample on the heart because
otherwise it gets in the way of general principles. I feel that
anarchy is the negative face of Uranus, just as sadism and exploi-
tation are the negative edges of Pluto, and deceit and regression to
infantility are the negative edges of Neptune.
    The French Revolution is a good example of Uranus run
amok. An altar was erected to Reason, yet this was one of the
most profoundly unreasonable events in history. The ideas on
which the Revolution were based were sane enough to begin with,
and change was desperately needed in the face of the corruption
of the ruling French monarchy. But once it got going, it was
merely a bloodbath, and any sense of proportion was lost. Feeling
gives us proportion, because it responds to individual situations.
The French Revolution fell into anarchy, or chaos, if you like.
Lecture Six                                                        149


This is what I mean. The anarchy of Uranus in terms of relation-
ship lies in its tendency to smash things because they aren’t wholly
right in principle, without attending to what might be right in
feeling, that could be salvageable.
     I think it’s helpful today, as it was natural to the Greeks and
to the astrologers of the Renaissance, to understand these outer
planets as though they were gods. This is true of all the planets. If
you study any ancient pantheon of deities, you find that each god
has a very distinct identity and very distinct attributes. All the
gods are double-faced, they have a creative pole and a destructive
one. Each deity is incomplete without the others, and each has his
or her excesses. There is a tremendously creative face to the outer
planets, and also a terribly destructive one. They go together.
They’re much more extreme than the inner planets both in the
best and the worst sense. Uranus embodies the human capacity
to transform life through understanding and vision, through
clarity of mind. It’s where we part ways with the other kingdoms
of nature, because no animal can look forward and envision a
better future for itself. But Uranus also embodies the human
capacity to destroy life because it isn’t living up to the ideal of the
better future. In mythology Uranus is merciless, he consigns his
own children to the depths of Tartaros because he finds them too
ugly and earthy.
    Pluto I think embodies the power of nature to survive and to
endure death and destruction without ever losing her creative
potency. In nature nothing can ever be truly annihilated, be-
cause even if species become extinct, the life force continues and
another better adapted species evolves. This kind of deathlessness
is not spiritual immortality, but the sheer indestructibility of life.
But Pluto also embodies the black heart of nature, which resists
any attempt at cultivation and civilisation and wreaks revenge on
any injury done her even if it’s in the name of progress or develop-
ment. Pluto embodies what the Furies meant in Greek myth, the
revengeful powers of instinctual life which will not tolerate viola-
tion by an arrogant ego. If these are unleashed, then we com-
pulsively destroy ourselves and each other, and that is nature’s
revenge.
    Neptune embodies the deep inner wisdom that the human soul
emanates from the divine, and that all living things are inter-
connected and part of one immense source of creative life. This is
a profound experience of the heart, which of course cannot be
150                                   The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


proven in rational terms, but stands behind some of our highest
ethics and our compassion for the rest of life. But I think Neptune
also embodies the thing in us which refuses the responsibility for
taking charge of our own lives, because Neptune would rather bask
in the fountain of eternal grace and let someone else work and pay
the bills and even suffer for us as long as we don’t have to accept
the loneliness of being human. The negative face of Neptune is a
cannibal, who justifies any amount of manipulation and theft in
the name of sacrifice and so-called love.
     You can see that any strong contact with an outer planet can
unleash both aspects of it. You can’t have one without the other.
There is always a treacherous element with the outer planets,
which is why I become amused when astrologers think they’re
spiritual. When these planets get mixed up with Venus or hang
about the seventh house or the eighth, then these extremes of
experiences will come out in personal relationships. You can see
why they cause so many problems to a more superficially minded
person who hopes that everything will be alright if he can just be
reasonable and talk things over with his partner. The outer planets
are always as capable of destroying as they are of building. The
only thing that can mediate them is the human ego with its
values, because otherwise we are overwhelmed.
     These are in many ways gods which are very unwelcome in
the Judeo-Christian West. Uranus and Neptune and Pluto don’t
really fit religious dogma about the nature of God. If you follow
an orthodox religion with any depth and seriousness, the outer
planets can be an enormous problem, because they compel us into
irrational behaviour and challenge conventional ethics. Of course
it’s immensely creative if you are involved with the arts, or if you
deal with other people in depth, because strong outer planet
contacts bring you to the root forces which drive the mass of
humanity. But being aware of those things constitutes a kind of
wound. The vision can never be actualised in any complete way,
and there is always that potential for destruction. I sometimes
feel that the inner planets are innocent in a curious way, even
Mars, because they don’t deal with what lies at the bottom of
things. They aren’t extreme.

Audience: Would you say the same about a semi-square?

Liz: A semi-square is like a diluted square. It’s the same principle
Lecture Six                                                     151


of friction, but not as compulsive. But yes, much of the same
flavour is there, thinned out by two parts water.

Audience: And the quincunx?

Liz: Yes, any aspect to an outer planet brings one into contact
with that energy. A quincunx is a very irritating aspect, because
in some ways there is an attraction, the signs which are naturally
in quincunx each have what the other lacks. But they suddenly
repel each other, and I think it’s a very erratic and irritating
aspect. It isn’t as pushy as the square family of aspects, and never
degenerates into open conflict. I think it’s a bit like one of those
friendships where you really try to like each other and you some-
times get on but somehow there are always little nasty remarks
and a chilly atmosphere at the end of the evening. But if a quin-
cunx involves an outer planet, then I think you must read it like
any other aspect. An aspect is an enforced marriage between two
principles which may or may not get on. And there can be no
divorce.

Audience: I have Neptune on the descendant. Can you comment
on that?

Liz: Any planet on the descendant concerns the image of the
other, the expectations of the partner who will, one hopes, offer
completeness. Planets at this cusp tend to be projected onto
others. I think they belong to us, but they never really wholly feel
like our own. We need another person to give them life and
activate them. I think Neptune tends to produce a longing for the
redeemer. One hopes that the other will be that magical, tender,
elusive, divine creature who can raise one out of the muck and
somehow convey an experience of oneness. I think another way
of putting it is that one seeks the experience of the divine in the
partner, which is always very dangerous. There are fantastic
romantic ideals about relationship. One doesn’t watch where one
is going. The other person is never seen very clearly, but only
through a rosy haze.
    So of course there are experiences of disillusionment and dis-
appointment, and often something must be sacrificed, because you
aren’t going to find God embodied in a human being to the extent
that Neptune seeks it. This placement of Neptune has a funny
152                                    The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


reputation in textbooks, and is associated with deceit. I think the
deceit only happens because of the wild idealism. If you really
think you’ve married the Redeemer, then the poor partner can
begin to stagger a bit under the load of the projection, because he
or she can never be human. So often the partner goes off quietly,
because it’s nice to be approached on a flesh and blood level
sometimes. Or disillusionment can drive the seventh house Nep-
tune into looking elsewhere, hoping and hoping that the Redeemer
will appear. I think by Redeemer I mean someone whose love can
cleanse one of one’s sins. That is a very common hope with Nep-
tune. If only someone loved me enough, I wouldn’t go on hating
myself. It’s a poor prognosis for relationships if one is unconscious
of it. I think there can be a sensing of something divine or ecstatic
in love, if one knows enough not to expect the partner to always
be the embodiment of it.

Audience: Neptune is transiting across my midheaven at the
moment. Would this affect my work, or partnerships since it’s at
the descendant in the birth chart?

Liz: I think it would affect both. The end result of the transit
would be to bring about changes or realisations in your relation-
ships with others. But the place of action, so to speak, would
probably be your goals. The tenth house isn’t just work. It’s goals.
It’s the point where we seek to achieve something actively in the
world. Neptune transiting in the midheaven suggests a great deal
of confusion and disorientation, a change in goals and a feeling of
muddle. I would guess that you used to know perfectly clearly
where you wanted to go and now you’re not so sure any more.
Neptune brings longings out of us for what we can’t have and can’t
eyen name. It might be that this change and loss of clear direction
is bound up with a relationship, as if the other person were a
catalyst of some kind. But perhaps it might give you a chance to
give concrete form to something you have previously only looked
for in other people.

Audience: My wife is a musician, and so am I, but I don’t work
professionally. But I’ve been feeling lately that we ought to work
together at it.

Liz: I hope you do. I think this kind of thing is the glimpse of
Lecture Six                                                        153


something that Neptune brings, and if you pursue it it will prob-
ably never be as glorious as you had imagined but it would be
much more enriching than where you are now.

Audience: I have a Saturn-Uranus conjunction in the sixth house,
which is very close to the seventh. Would you read that as in the
sixth or the seventh? Do I have to have Uranian relationships?

Liz: Do you want me to tell you that yes, you must have them?
It’s not like prescribing a pill. It’s probably you that secretly wants
them. When a planet is very close to an angle like the descendant
or the midheaven but is in the preceding house, it throws its
influence into the next house and that is where its main effect
lies. It’s a bit like a person standing in a doorway looking into
the next room. His presence is still around in the room he is
leaving, but his main interest is in the room he’s entering. And
yes, I think Uranus will affect your relationship life. You surely
don’t need me to tell you that, most people are pretty aware of
Uranus when it acts up. The complexity with you seems to lie in
the combination of Uranus and Saturn. Saturn, as I said, is highly
self-protective, and in terms of relationships it either avoids any
deep and lasting commitment altogether by choosing safe or brief
encounters, or it puts an over-emphasis on security and stability
and rules within the relationship. Saturn always fears change, un-
less the person is controlling the change himself. I don’t know
whether you’re liable to project Saturn on your partner, and
blame him for restricting you, or whether you’re likely to project
Uranus, and blame him for being uncommitted. But you’ve got a
nice dilemma between the need for secure, traditional structures
and the need for exciting new encounters.
     Uranus will usually overpower Saturn in the end, so that
changes will occur either very literally or more subtly within your
relationship life which force you to unbend a little and not be so
suspicious of other people. Uranus in the seventh makes relation-
ships the catalyst through which your ideas about yourself and
about life change and evolve. I’ve seen people with Uranus in the
seventh who always do the leaving, and I’ve also seen the reverse,
where they are the ones who are left. But it’s as though Uranus
is saying, “Sorry, but nothing in life is as permanent as you try to
make it.” This of course hurts Saturn, who would like to freeze
everything into granite so that one can’t be hurt by life.
154                                    The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


     If you want to look at it in another way, I think that Uranus
brings the sensitivity to the new vision into the sphere of relation-
ship. What has worked for everybody else doesn’t work for a
seventh house Uranus, because it’s always restlessly looking for
new ways of dealing with others which are an improvement on the
old institutions and attitudes. If you are unconscious of this, or
feel threatened by it, then you will probably precipitate a breakup
which forces you to face it anyway. If you know about it and try
to work constructively with it, then it can help you build a very
individual kind of relationship which is fulfilling but not dictated
by other people’s rules. With Saturn there you need something a
little less wild than some seventh house Uranuses might like, but
within a fairly conventional outer framework you need a very new
kind of enactment with your partner.
     I think that what we can solve within ourselves, or at least
come to terms with, we can also offer to others. So my final
comment on that placement is that probably you can develop a
great deal of insight into the more general or universal problems
of marriage and relationship because you would be so acutely
aware of what is wrong between people. That can be a great gift
if you work in any field that puts you in contact with others. I
think it’s interesting to remember that both Jung and Freud had
Uranus in the seventh, and their insights into the dynamics of
human interchange have opened up life for a great many people in
a very new way.

Audience: What happens when the outer planets are unaspected?

Liz: I think I spoke about that in relation to Hitler’s chart earlier.
When a planet is unaspected, it becomes very difficult to know
that it’s there. It hides. Sooner or later it erupts. You don’t have
to deal with it constantly as people do who have it in strong
aspect, but on those occasions when it does erupt it takes over
your life for a time. I’ve noticed that when a planet is unaspected
the person has a propensity for attracting partners who embody
that planet, or whose birth placements trigger the unaspected
planet. It’s as though the sitting tenant in the basement would
really like to be included in the life of the household but he’s
inarticulate and just doesn’t know how to get upstairs, so he
starts dropping bottles with messages in them out of the window.
Other people pick up the bottles and knock on the front door. So
Lecture Six                                                        155


you are indirectly pushed into discovering the thing which has
been hiding.
     Obviously the reasons why people become attracted to one
another are enormously complex and very mysterious, and I don’t
think we will ever know all the answers. Plato called Eros a great
daimon, and there is a very irrational thing at work in our attrac-
tions and repulsions which can never wholly be psychologised or
analysed. But I think a great many relationships have parental
roots, certainly in the earlier part of life. We tend to work out our
mother and father problems and confusion about sexual identity
on our partners, and it’s pretty rare to see the partner as an
actuality at all in the beginning of a relationship. All kinds of stuff
gets projected from both sides, because we need these relation-
ships to discover ourselves. I don’t think there is such a thing as a
normal relationship anyway, and when the outer planets get
mixed up in it then you really have to throw away ideas about
normal and abnormal.
    The outer planets do suggest, however, that something more
extensive than personal parental issues is being constellated. On
the other hand our parents sometimes are experienced with the
archetypal force of the outer planets, so they may still be mixed
up in it. But relationships which are outer-planet prone have a
very strange, compulsive, exhilarating feeling about them, both
for good and for ill. There is a feeling of fate. Outer planets don’t
always mean multiple marriages, they are perfectly capable of
sticking with the same partner. But the relationship itself is
generally unusual in some way, or goes through many changes
and transformations which shake the whole life. There are people
for whom partners are like furniture, meant to be sat on or dined
on at the proper hour and then left to gather dust in the interim.
You cannot do this when outer planets are connected with Venus
or the seventh house.
    The feeling of destiny is sometimes very strong, and I have
heard many people use similar expressions when talking about a
relationship which feels “meant.” It can’t be avoided. Uranus in
particular has a disturbing habit of seeing somebody on the other
side of the room and knowing with great finality that this is it.
Usually we get over the idea of instantaneous love after a few
bruises and the discovery that it takes a long time to get to know
somebody else. But Uranus knows immediately and whatever
problems ensue, that same feeling of destiny hangs around, even
156                                    The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


if the relationship doesn’t work out. I’m not sure what “meant”
means, except that the other person is the necessary trigger for
psychic growth. The frightening side of this is the feeling that one
is not in control. That is quite true, we aren’t in control when the
outer planets are around. The ego does not like the feeling of
being borne along on a current without a paddle. So however
wonderful and ecstatic the experience is, there is a great uneasi-
ness and a fear that it might suddenly turn nasty. The fear is much
greater if you’re a more Saturnian or earthy temperament, for
obvious reasons.
     It’s worth remembering that the three outer planets have
elemental affinities and are therefore more or less acceptable to
individuals depending on their general birth chart pattern. Uranus
is an airy planet, and I think it’s much more welcome to an airy
temperament. I think water signs have quite a horror of Uranus
because it so often brings separations. Just the inner experience
of separation is horrible to many watery people, even if the part-
ner is sitting in the next chair preoccupied with his own thoughts.
Water needs to feel in touch all the time, and Uranus tends to just
go off into the ethers. Neptune and Pluto, on the other hand, rule
watery signs, and although they are still likely to be difficult, they
aren’t as alien to watery types as they are to the air signs. Gemini
and Libra and Aquarius are very light and idealistic and clear, and
Pluto’s brand of seething murk is definitely not attractive to them.
Neptune is disturbing and frightening because of the fogginess and
loss of clarity and feeling of enchantment. The air signs are not in
favour of living in a magical world of spells and intuitions and
strange visions. They like to know the reasons for things.
    I think the element of fire is very inimical to Saturn, but it’s
less disturbed by Pluto and Neptune. Uranus is fine for fire as
long as the changes which ensue are not cramping or limiting.
But fire of all the elements is least frightened by the unexpected,
because fire tends to busily rush about wondering what it all
means and looking for future potentialities in the new situation.
Earth is probably least comfortable with the outer planets in
general because they represent the unknown and earth is safe
with known facts. I have found that very earthy astrologers get
very alarmed by outer planet transits, because they start making
concrete predictions. Everything is experienced in concrete terms.
And not every event is concrete. There are very potent emotional
and mental events which don’t touch the body or the external
circumstances, but which alter the soul.
Lecture Six                                                     157

    Fire, which I think symbolises what Jung means by intuition,
has a great many failings in ordinary life, but it has one great
advantage in terms of the outer planets, and that is the love of the
new. I have seen many fire sign clients talk about their hunch that
some big change is coming, when a transit of an outer planet is
shown in the chart. The client may know no astrology, but he
senses something and starts preparing for it. That is a great help
with the outer planets because an attitude of open expectation
is probably the best. But of course no chart is purely fiery, and
there is always some area of fear. Nevertheless I think we can all
learn from the typical fiery approach, even though there is no such
thing as a purely fiery person. This approach is really hamfisted
when trying to get on with the issues of everyday living, but it’s
great with the outer planets.

Audience: In other words, if you have an outer planet transit
coming, suspend your air sign judgments and your water sign
likes and dislikes, and wait hopefully to see what happens.

Liz: Exactly. Since all three outer planets are very slow and do
their retrograde dance a few times over any point in the chart,
there’s lots of time to get accustomed to what the transit might
mean. Some older writers such as Alan Leo tend to refer to Nep-
tune and Uranus as malefic. Alan Leo didn’t know about Pluto,
but I’m sure he would have thought Pluto was the most malefic
of all. Sometimes there are very difficult experiences that come
with these planets, and sometimes tragedy. But “malefic” implies
that they have bad intent and bad effect, and although it’s easy
for me to say and hard for anyone to live, even the tragedies that
occur under the outer planets are meaningful and can open up life
if we allow it. It seems to me a fairly jaundiced view on the part
of astrology to figure that anything beyond the seven known
planets has got to be nasty. I have never been convinced that
transits put into a life what isn’t innately potentially there any-
way.
    So yes, I think it’s very important to suspend judgment if
one is trying to understand the effects of these planets. This is
particularly true when they erupt into relationships. If you are in
the middle of a very compulsive experience and there is an outer
planet involved, it isn’t of very much help to wonder whether you
should or you shouldn’t. You probably won’t find an answer. It
might be more relevant to ask what it means to you, before you
158                                      The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


make any far-reaching decisions or judgments. One of the func-
tions of the outer planets is that they crack the shell of conven-
tional morality, in order to allow a different and deeper kind of
morality to emerge. Or another way of putting it is that they
push a person into discovering what his real morality is, rather
than what he thought it was.
    One of the most interesting cross-aspects that I have found in
chart comparison is Saturn in one person’s chart contacting one
of the outer planets in another’s. Someone asked earlier about a
Saturn-Pluto contact across two charts. The scenario is fascinating,
and can also be quite devastating if you are the one caught in it
instead of astrologising about it. Outer planets really bring the
conservative element out of Saturn. The Saturnian person may
have previously been quite liberal and free, but the moment he
gets around an outer planet in his partner’s chart he suddenly
becomes very tight. He begins to make comments about the
partner’s eccentricities. Even if he does precisely the same things
himself, he will find something to criticise. Sometimes this comes
out in the smallest ways, such as criticism about eating habits or
dress or one’s weird friends. I have seen this in really unconven-
tional people who are the last ones to be accused of Saturnian
rigidity. But when Saturn is threatened by the outer planets then
this very conservative quality comes to the surface. We all have
Saturn in the chart, and we all therefore have a level of respect
and need for social mores. Whether this is conscious or uncon-
scious, nevertheless it’s there in us all. It’s as well that it is, or we
would have no sense of social responsibility or order. But outer
planets tend to bring it out in an extreme form. Saturn becomes
threatened, and his first offering is his disapproval.
    The Saturnian person may then try to stifle the partner. He
may actively try to prevent some part of the other person’s ex-
pression, or make his disapproval so clear that the partner feels
intimidated. I think that Saturn tends to feel rather irrelevant in
the face of Uranus, Neptune and Pluto. Of course if you per-
petually try to obstruct something that volatile in another, then
eventually the other person becomes increasingly resentful and
rebellious. You can see the same curious transformation at work.
An ordinary sedate, conventional, ordinary person begins to be-
come increasingly Uranian, or Neptunian, or Plutonian, in the
face of Saturnian pressure. Uranus may show overt rebellion, or
simply walk out. Neptune begins to become increasingly evasive,
Lecture Six                                                       159


and starts fighting back with atmospheres and emotional manipu-
lation and a covert implication that you are really being terribly
petty and mean and thick. Pluto may strike back through sexual
games, or through hatred. If one falls into the outer planet, one
can lose all sense of the value of the relationship, because the
destructive side of the outer planet has been unleashed. Then it
moves beyond your control, and you act out the outer planet for
the other person.
     You can see that it takes a lot of effort to see what’s going on
in this kind of interchange. I am inclined to go back again to the
need for emotional honesty, especially with oneself. I think a lot
of responsibility falls on the shoulders of the Saturn person,
because it is his personal fears and insecurities which set the ball
rolling.

Audience: It would be interesting to see the charts of the people
with whom Hitler was closely involved, to see whether his un-
aspected Neptune and Pluto were strongly affected.

Liz: Yes, I would be interested in that too, although I don’t have
horoscopes for Eva Braun and Himmler and the rest of the pack.

Audience: What orbs do you allow in synastry?

Liz: I tend to use fairly large ones, no different from the orbs
within a natal chart. I know that isn’t usually acceptable, but it
seems to me to work. In practise, I think eight degree orbs for a
conjunction across charts definitely produce a reaction. There is
perhaps less compulsiveness about wider orbs, just as with a natal
chart, but that doesn’t mean the connection isn’t there. Close
orbs in synastry are immediately recognisable. If you meet some-
one at a party for the first time, and you have some exact aspects
between the two charts, then you will react strongly right from
the outset. But the more you get to know someone, the more the
wider orbs come into play. If you live with a person, or are a
member of the family, then the bigger orbs are definitely opera-
tive. If you only see someone at seminars once every two weeks
and never talk to them about much except the weather, then
those wider orbs are not noticeable. I think you must look at what
kind of relationship it is. Some aspects aren’t really relevant if
the relationship is of a very circumscribed kind. They just don’t
160                                  The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


have a chance to come into play. But I think in general that we
constrict our orbs too much in synastry work. This is particularly
true about the sun and moon.

Audience: What about Saturn?

Liz: Yes, Saturn as well. Saturn is a very powerful planet, and I
think it’s as important as the sun and moon. I’ve always felt that
the sun and Saturn tell you about the spinal column of the birth
chart. Both planets pertain to the ego, in its creative and its
defensive aspects. The sun and Saturn are the bedrock of the
personality.

Audience: What aspects would you particularly look at in com-
paring two charts?

Liz: Any aspects. I think minor aspects such as the semisquare
and semisextile and sesquiquadrate operate within relationships
just as much as the major ones do. In progressions, you learn very
quickly that minor aspects are very important. It’s a mistake to
overlook them. Progressed minor aspects trigger off major natal
aspects.

Audience: Do you use composite charts? And if so, how would
you read the outer planets in a composite chart?

Liz: I do work with composite charts, despite the fact that they
irritate me in principle because they ought not to work. But they
are uncannily truthful about describing the main areas of focus
and conflict in a relationship, and they are even sensitive to
transits. Even worse, you can do a synastry between a composite
chart and a third party, and it reveals a lot about how the third
party will affect the relationship. I find composite charts quite
extraordinary. But they offend me because there is something so
impersonal about them. They describe an entity which doesn’t
really have any volition to change. It just exists in an abstract
form. You can set up a composite chart between yourself and
Cosimo de’ Medici, and it would be perfectly valid even though
he’s been dead for six hundred years. This bothers me. A com-
posite chart describes something which has an existence independ-
ent of the human souls which blend to create it. It’s almost like
a machine.
Lecture Six                                                      161


     I think the outer planets have the same meaning in a com-
posite chart as they do in an individual one. But there is no real
link with an ego which can work with them. I think Uranus
implies the sphere of the relationship where two people will
experience separateness, freedom from the relationship, and dis-
ruptions from uncontrollable sources. Neptune, I would say,
suggests the sphere where sacrifices must be made, where too much
idealism leads to expectations that cannot be wholly fulfilled and
lead to disappointment. And Pluto I think deals with the sphere
of life which because of its problems and conflicts leads to change
or transformation in both people involved in the relationship.
     So far as I have seen, these placements in composite charts
do work out within the relationship. The thing that bothers me,
as I have said, is the feeling of inevitability about it. All one can
do is be aware that something in the chemistry of the relation-
ship is going to lead to benefits and conflicts in particular areas.
Maybe then both people can try to allow the relationship to
stretch enough to hold these things, rather than being surprised
by them when they come to the surface. But perhaps it’s neces-
sary to accept that certain aspects of our relationships are fated
or inevitable, and that life is a blend of choices and necessities.
Jung once described free will as the ability to do gladly what one
must do, and I suppose the composite chart shows what one must
do in terms of a relationship while the other type of synastry—
comparing cross-aspects and so on-^describes the areas where we
can bring consciousness to bear and change things. We are fated
by what we are, and if two people come together, their individual
natures in combination are going to produce certain inevitable
results.
                      Lecture Seven
     I would like to begin this session with a rather curious map,
which is the idea or design of Gret Baumann-Jung, Jung’s daughter.
She is an astrologer, and she devised this particular map, so I claim
no credit for it whatsoever. But I find it very interesting, although
it is in many ways a kind of intuitive way of looking at things
rather than something very pragmatic which can be statistically
proven. It’s a way of mapping an astrological age, to get a sense of
where the emphasis will lie in terms of values, ethics, conflicts, and
change in different spheres of life during the 2100 or so years that
form the astrological aeon.
     What she does is place the sign which rules the age on the
ascendant of the horoscope, and then all the other signs follow in
order around the wheel. We can start by doing this with the
Piscean Age which according to our traditions is just in process of
its last gasps.
     You can see that if Pisces is placed here on the cusp of the first
house, then Aries falls on the second. This suggests that the gen-
eral collective attitudes toward second house matters during the
Piscean Age—money, security, stability—are going to carry a cer-
tain aggressive, one-pointed, self-centered quality. Taurus falls on
the cusp of the third house, so the mental attitudes are pragmatic
and based on perception by the senses. Knowledge or wisdom
acquired through other modes of perception is not really accept-
able to Taurus, because its strong point is dealing with material
reality. This gives you some idea of the general way of working
with such a map. Scorpio appears on the cusp of the ninth house,
so the general collective attitudes toward religious matters will be
emotionally rather than rationally based, very intense, perhaps
dogmatic and even warlike. I think you can see that history bears
these generalisations out, because in the case of the last sign
mentioned, no other astrological age has produced religions
which are so passionately intolerant and ready to slaughter any-
thing resembling heresy than the great religions of the Piscean
Age. And Leo, the sign which is most related to the principle of
individuality, falls on the cusp of the sixth house, which suggests
that the route toward individual consciousness and development
has focused on work, on duty, and on the rituals of ordinary life.
Lecture Seven                                                 163




 Illustration 13:     THE BEGINNING OF THE PISCEAN AGE




    Having given you this rough idea of how to work with the
map, we can try putting Aquarius on the ascendant to get a sense
of how things are likely to change.
    Here Leo, which was previously found on the sixth house
cusp, now turns up on the seventh. That implies that just as in
the Piscean Age the individual value was found in mundane life
and its rituals and obligations, now in the Aquarian Age the in-
dividual value and development is to be found in human rela-
tionships and the balancing of opposites. As a kind of intuitive
suggestion of where we might expect change, I find this rather
hopeful, because rather than finding meaning only in your job and
164                                   The Outer Planets & Their Cycles




 Illustration 14: THE BEGINNING OF THE AQUARIAN AGE




your small daily concerns, it can now be found in interchange
with the other, both externally and internally. I think depth
psychology is certainly pointing in this direction—that relation-
ship both outer and inner, rather than good works and meticulous
observation of duty, is the path of individual development.
    It also might be interesting to look at what happens to Capri-
corn, which in the Piscean Age chart falls on the eleventh house
cusp, and here in the Aquarian Age chart comes up on the cusp
of the twelfth. I would take this to mean that the sense of limita-
tion and bondage and obstruction—the experience of the shadow
—has fallen on the shoulders of “other people” in the Piscean Age,
Lecture Seven                                                    165


so that the collective feeling is about the obstruction of other
countries, other political parties, other social groups. Now it lands
squarely in a house which deals with the unconscious, particularly
the collective unconscious, as if the realisation might finally dawn
that the enemy lies within and is an accruing of many aeons of
collective conflict and murk inside. The limitations of life are
experienced from within, rather than in the form of other people,
as if we might at last take up the burden of our own ambivalent
and complex human natures.
     Now, that’s a sort of introduction to the chart. What one does
next is plot the transiting planets across it. The transits of the
inner planets are of course going to shoot by incredibly quickly,
and they won’t make much noise in the course of two thousand
years. But the transits of the outer planets are much slower, and
one can expect, during the course of a lifetime, to see them em-
phasising some area of conflict in the collective. Uranus takes
about seven years to move through a sign, so it will make the
round of this chart in eighty-four years, and spend those seven
years in one house. Neptune will spend around fourteen years in
one house, and Pluto a varying time from twelve to thirty years.
That’s long enough to see some manifestation of this activity. This
gives a sense of an underlying rhythm, a rise and fall of new ideas,
movements and visions arising from the collective, which cycle
around the “world horoscope” many times during the course of
the age.
     So we might look first at Pluto, which is in Libra at the
moment and would be found somewhere in the eighth house of
the chart, if we assume that the ascendant is now the very earliest
degrees of Pisces or the very last degrees of Aquarius. Don’t forget
that we are moving backward with the ages, not forward.
     Uranus has been moving through the ninth while in Scorpio,
if we take 0 degrees of Scorpio as the cusp of that house, and
Neptune is somewhere in the tenth. Pluto going through the eighth
house suggests to me that profound changes have been occurring
for some time in our attitudes toward sexuality and in our con-
frontations with the primitive or instinctual depths of ourselves.
Once Pluto moves into Scorpio it will begin to affect matters of
religion, but there are still a couple of years to go while it com-
pletes its radical transformation of our hidden animal natures. Put
in simpler terms, the last twenty years or so have seen a revolution
in our attitudes toward sex, whereas once Pluto enters Scorpio the
166                                   The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


next twenty will see a revolution in our forms of worshipping
God. Uranus has already beert exploding things in the religious
sphere, and I cannot help but make a connection with the erup-
tion of “fundamentalist” movements such as that happening in
Islam. In the last few years new sects of a revolutionary kind have
been proliferating all over America. There is a real boom in eccen-
tric offshoot religions at the moment. That will probably quiet
down when Uranus moves into Sagittarius, and then Pluto not
long after will begin its slow and more profound undermining of
our collective religious structures and standards. When Uranus
moves into the tenth it will no doubt lead to changes in styles of
government and reshifting of class structures and political party
systems, because those are tenth house matters.
     Now perhaps it might be interesting to plot our conjunction
in Capricorn on this chart, that we have been discussing over the
course of the weekend. Previously we looked at this conjunction
in terms of the charts of particular countries, and in terms of
psychological meaning of such a line-up for the deeper collective.
Here in this chart for the end of the Piscean Age and the beginning
of the Aquarian, the line-up falls in the eleventh. I think the most
general meaning of the eleventh is that it represents the human
family, the group. It’s also the goals and ideals of the group, in
terms of the evolution of consciousness and the development of
society into a better vehicle for human beings to live their lives.
So all the things we have envisioned for ourselves as the proper
and ethical development of social groups, our visions of the ideal
society, must change profoundly. It’s as though we will have to
conceive of the nature of man differently, because all our efforts
for a “better world” have been based on certain assumptions made
about man as a social animal with certain needs and character-
istics, and many of these may be found to be wrong or outdated.
     When Uranus and Neptune and Saturn conjuncted in Scorpio
in 1307, they fell in the ninth house of this chart for the Piscean
Age. I think I expressed my feeling of what happened on a collec-
tive level at that time—the unshakeable belief in the Church and
the infallibility of the Pope were dealt a death-blow. Appropri-
ately, this is a ninth house matter. It would be hard to imagine
that it could be anything except a ninth house matter. That is a
very clear and rather disturbing example of the fact that this
chart, although it seems such a wild and speculative piece of
intuitive vision, actually works. In a few years Pluto will enter
Lecture Seven                                                    167


 Scorpio while the other three heavy planets are playing about in
 Capricorn, and Pluto will then take its turn through the ninth
 house—which, at the dawn of the Aquarian Age, would have
twenty-nine degrees of Libra on its cusp. This suggests something
even more momentous in terms of religious changes, because
Pluto doesn’t just alter aspects of something. It wipes out the
entire thing and begins again. Pluto has of course been through
the ninth house before, since it makes its round in two hundred
and forty-eight years. But it hasn’t passed through the ninth house
at the start of the Aquarian Age, when new religious images and
directions are likely to be emerging from the collective anyway.
    The sign of the age, the sign which falls on the ascendant of
this “world horoscope,” represents I think something very similar
to what it represents in an individual horoscope. The ascendant is
the thing toward which we strive, the glimpse of the divine toward
which life drives us. Often this is acknowledged very reluctantly,
and I have met many people who dislike their rising signs, largely
because this sign represents something they must come to terms
with whether they approve or not. But it’s as though God, or life,
formulates itself into experiences which are typical of the sign on
the ascendant, and those are the things which make one grow and
for which, if one is honest, one longs. An astrological age is no
different, really. The stamp of the Piscean Age was, in many ways,
the longing for union with the divine, and the escape from the
mortality and corruption and darkness of earthly life. Life through
the eyes of Pisces is at best something to be shaped into a worship
of God, not something which is good and beautiful in itself. The
three great religions which were founded under the Piscean Age—
Christianity, Buddhism and Islam—all carry this theme in one way
or another. The stamp of the Aquarian Age is of course likely to
be very different, and our religious needs are likely to change
accordingly. Spirit and matter are not so split for Aquarius as they
are for Pisces. God is alive in matter and reveals itself as the laws
of nature and the laws in particular of human nature. I think it’s
possible that Pluto’s transit through Scorpio in the ‘eighties and
’nineties will give us some idea of the shape of religion in the
future.
    The great conjunction of 1524, which scared all the astrologers
half to death, would have fallen in the first house of the chart,
right across the ascendant. This was a conjunction of sun, moon,
Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn and Neptune, although they
168                                   The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


of course didn’t know about Neptune. This conjunction coincided
with the dawn of the Reformation. That implies that the currents
at work behind the issues of the Reformation were not so much a
ninth house matter as a first house matter, a defining or redefining
of the Christian myth in more conscious terms. That is what I
think happens when important transits occur across the ascendant.
We are forced to redefine our experience of ourselves and what we
are really like. The dominant issue of the Reformation to my
mind was the problem of whether man needs the edifice of the
Church as his sole route to God, or whether he is capable of rely-
ing on his own inner guidance and conscience. There wasn’t really
any question about the validity of the Christian myth—but rather
a question of whether individuals had the right to interpret it
individually. That is much more a first house matter than a ninth.
    Very often the first place one sees new issues emerging from
the collective is in the dreams of individuals. Jung wrote exten-
sively about this in relation to the dreams of his German patients
before the outbreak of the last war. He knew from these dreams
that something monumental and very dangerous was about to
burst loose from the collective psyche, which he felt was con-
nected with the ancient Teutonic deity Wotan who had been long
neglected and seemed to be stirring again. I suspect that if there
are new religious forms or symbols of collective import then they
are going to cast their shadows before them in the dreams of
individuals now. I can’t really comment on this, because I don’t
think I have been observing it for long enough, but one of the
most consistent themes which I keep running across is a very
angry feminine deity who seems to wish to become conscious
and acknowledged. I will leave you to think about that one,
because it is only my intuition. But I have a very strong feeling
that whatever religious crises or dilemmas arise at the dawn of
the new era, one of the main components is going to be prob-
lems of the feminine aspect of the godhead, which hasn’t been
given a lot of notice for the last two thousand years.
    I know that there are a lot of images around in dreams as well
as in clairvoyants’ visions of earthquakes and tidal waves and
other gigantic catastrophes. I cannot comment on whether these
things are literal or not, because I’m not clairvoyant, and even if
I were I wouldn’t jump at the idea that they were necessarily
concrete. I have met these motifs in individuals’ dreams, and they
indicate a tremendous upheaval in the unconscious. These kinds of
Lecture Seven                                                   169


dreams almost always herald major transformations in the person-
ality, and the ego often feels terrified and threatened because new
elements are going to come to the surface and old attitudes are
going to die. The enormity of the catastrophe reflects the enor-
mity of the threat to the ego’s old standpoint. Sometimes dreams
like this imply a danger that the ego may be swamped, but I don’t
think they state that it will be—only that it could be, if it isn’t
understanding what is required. I am inclined, therefore, to take
these pronouncements of clairvoyants as though they were
dreams, since I think both come from the unconscious, and I
feel they reflect an enormous upheaval in the collective uncon-
scious which could, but doesn’t have to, swamp the ego, or in
collective terms, the structures of society. The person who is in
touch with this realm and can sense the upheaval is, in astrological
terms, someone who can tap the twelfth house.

Audience: Can you comment on the association of the twelfth
with the house of karma?

Liz: Karma is a very difficult word, because I think we have dis-
torted it enormously from its original meaning. Karma in Indian
thought is the principle of cause and effect. It has no particular
morality attached to it, since all occurrences in the world belong
to the realm of illusion anyway, “good” deeds as well as “bad.”
Man sows his seed without thought or consciousness of the con-
sequences, and then later he must reap what he has sown. It is a
law of nature, not a system of reward and punishment. When
Theosophy got its hands on the idea of karma, it was sifted
through the peculiar morality of late Victorian thought, and it
became a kind of ding-dong idea. If you did something bad in
your last life, then you got punished in this one, and if you were
good and moral, then you reaped rewards in this one. I think this
is a horrible distortion of a much more profound idea which links
up with what the Greeks called heimarmene, the chain of eternal
causation in nature. We cannot see that chain of causes because its
roots lie in matter itself. Karma in this sense is about substance.
Like attracts like. You are made of particular substance through a
chain of endless causes which may be your past lives or may be
your heredity or may be the eternal interaction of life on the
planet. This is the substance of which you are made, and you will
attract in life those people and situations which are made of
170                                    The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


similar substance. It’s a bit like playing a note on a guitar and
having it picked up by a nearby tuning fork, which is attuned to
the same pitch. As Jung puts it, a man’s life is characteristic of
himself.
     If you look at karma in this way, then the entire horoscope is
karmic, because it describes your substance. I think that the
twelfth house carries the connotation of that part of your sub-
stance which stems from the past. As to which past, I would be
hard-pressed to say, because the past of a family is just as potent
as the possible past of other incarnations. Family ghosts and
myths and unresolved complexes are incredibly potent powers,
and so are racial and national pressures which have been accruing
over centuries. Perhaps there really isn’t any conflict between the
idea of psychological family inheritance and past life inheritance,
since presumably one gets the family one deserves. But I think
the twelfth house describes this realm of heimarmene, the unseen
chain of causation that stretches back into the past, the past of
the family, of the nation, of the race. If there are planets in the
twelfth house in the birth chart, then they will not only describe
the individual’s needs. They will also describe him as expressing
the needs of the collective from which he springs. He embodies
his family past, and he must create his life within the limitations
of this inherited package.
     If a person is sensitive to this deep underlying stratum of life,
then he will in a sense be carrying group karma. But I want to
stress that I don’t mean the term in any moral sense. He is carry-
ing group substance, family substance. He can’t just go off and try
to lead a completely independent and self-made life. There are
larger, more collective issues which he must come to terms with,
before he is allowed to go free. I think this is the connotation of
bondage which is so often associated with the twelfth. It’s bond-
to collective issues from the past which must be faced and worked
with creatively. This isn’t any more “karmic” than having lots
of planets in the second house and therefore having to come to
terms with material reality and money and self-sufficiency. It
just feels stranger when it’s the twelfth because it isn’t your own.
It’s collective.
     I have found that people with strongly tenanted twelfth
houses often feel terribly lonely, because they live with under-
currents and perceptions that most of us never see and don’t know
exist. I have known some of these people to have a rare gift of
Lecture Seven                                                    171


sensing the soul of a place, the long past which lives in a house
or a part of the landscape. I made the acquaintance of someone
with several planets in the twelfth who couldn’t bear to drive
through northern France, because this part of France is so soaked
in the blood of so many wars over so many centuries. For her it
was a reality, and an unbearable experience, whereas anyone else
would have called her hysterical. I think that the events of history
and the experiences of human souls leave residues, and these
residues linger and themselves become causes for the behaviour
of the people who afterward live in those places. The twelfth
house senses all these things. The problem is that the person often
doesn’t know what it is that’s affecting him so strongly. He just
feels crazy, and other people’s rationality makes him doubt his
own perceptions.
    I’m not really sure what this might have to do with the kinds
of changes which we can expect over the next few decades. But
I would like to believe, I suppose, that the worlds of the eleventh
and twelfth houses, which really in the end deal with the inter-
connectedness of life and the unseen world of archetypal domi-
nants, are going to make their entry into our vocabulary. That
would indeed be the end of a world and the beginning of a new
one. I don’t feel this is an issue of “spirituality” so much as an
issue of consciousness. Much of that unseen world is very dark,
and certainly isn’t just benign and light and full of love and
compassion. But it belongs to life nevertheless. I would also like
to believe that I can see the incipient signs of this in individuals.
I’ve been doing charts for seventeen years, and once upon a time,
when I started, people came because they were in trouble caused
by life, other people, outside situations. It was extremely rare to
meet anyone wanting a horoscope who right from the outset was
prepared to view his own psyche as the initiator of his trouble.
Also, it was extremely rare to meet anyone who didn’t have a
sense of shame or failure because of his conflicts. We have been
brought up to believe that the natural state of man is harmony
and placidity, and that if an inner opposition or conflict arose, it
meant one was sick.
    I have found that this has changed over the last few years. I
have met more and more people seeking help who are prepared
to look at their own role in their trouble. I have also met more
and more people who are aware that conflict is inherent in the
human psyche, and that there is no shame or admission of guilt
172                                    The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


in acknowledging it and wishing to learn more about it. I find this
terribly encouraging. I would like to believe that it reflects a very
subtle but very important change beginning in the collective,
which is very much about taking responsibility for the fact that
our lives are characteristic of ourselves. Naturally if you take this
to its obvious conclusion it doesn’t herald an age of love and
brotherhood, but more likely an age of a great deal of individual
agony. But I can’t help feeling that if I am prepared to work with
my own agony, and you are prepared to work with yours, then
maybe the collective won’t have to plunge itself into blind agony.
At the moment all our family scapegoats, the schizophrenics and
the anorexics and the depressives, act out all our collective pain,
while the rest of us get on with it blandly and free of conflict.
Think what it would mean if each of us confronted our own
individual psychosis. You see why it’s easier to drop the subject,
and even to use astrology as a means of escape.

Audience: When does the Piscean Age actually end and the
Aquarian Age actually begin?

Liz: There is considerable argument about that. I doubt that one
can be very exact. The decision about which star marks the end
of the constellation of Pisces and the beginning of the constella-
tion of Aquarius is not one I would care to make. I think it’s
possible to talk in terms of an overlap, which lasts for perhaps a
century. I have heard many dates given. For all I know the Aquar-
ian Age began last Tuesday. I feel it’s more creative to think of
this century as a transitional one. There is a smell of decay rising
from the fading body of Pisces, and a smell of rising sap from the
ongoing birth of Aquarius, and I think at the moment they’re
very mixed up together.

Audience: I can’t help feeling slightly upset at what you are
saying. We keep reading that the new age is about the brother-
hood of man.

Liz: No doubt it is, but if that’s the vision which is emerging from
the collective, then we must first go through the long and bloody
process of discovering why we have never been able to experience
brotherhood. No individual becomes conscious of himself instan-
taneously and without suffering, and no collective does either.
Lecture Seven                                                     173


The psyche just doesn’t work like that. If something must die,
then it’s going to raise a hell of a fuss in the process, and if some-
thing is being born, it’s going to cause pain to the thing giving
it birth. You can give a woman an anaesthetic when she is giving
birth to a baby, but you can’t anaesthetise the soul, not without
paying an awful price. I’m afraid I’m a little jaundiced about all
these hopes for the age of love and brotherhood arriving next
month. It’s a bit like getting married in a beautiful dress with a
wonderful bouquet of flowers and then believing that because you
have just married, you will now understand marriage and be able
to live the symbol immediately. No marriage works like that, and
I don’t think the Aquarian Age does either. It may be that Aquar-
ius will bring us the awareness that we are indeed part of a vast
interconnected life entity, both biologically and psychologically.
But the awareness is going to force up everything in us which
obstructs us from living our vision. Jung thought the Aquarian
Age was about the final collision between good and evil, and if I
understand him properly I think he means, as usual, the collision
of these opposites within the individual. That is more in line with
what I would imagine than what we have been told by our more
mystically inclined astrology books. We have an enormous chal-
lenge on our hands, and an enormous struggle, the outcome of
which I am sure is not yet determined. We’re beginning to intro-
ject God, and that’s horribly dangerous as well as being potentially
creative.
    I associate Aquarius with the myth of Prometheus. He is the
Titan who steals fire from Zeus to give to mankind. Prometheus
is committing a sin, because he brings man divine consciousness,
which Zeus has deliberately withheld because he doesn’t want
man to realise that he has the same divine spark as the gods. Now
Prometheus has done a very noble deed, he’s the great mythic
social worker, and he is punished horribly for it and bears his
punishment unflinchingly. But he’s also a fool, because he doesn’t
take into account what man might do with his fire. Man might
inflate and blow the gods right out of heaven, and blow himself
up as well. There is always great danger in the increase of con-
sciousness, because the shadow can appropriate the new gifts for
its own purposes, and only the terribly frail voice of inner con-
science and inner integrity can put up a fight. I wouldn’t trust
Prometheus, and I don’t trust the outcome of the Aquarian Age as
a necessarily foregone and wonderful paradise on earth.
174                                     The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


     There are many references made to the text of Revelation in
terms of the dawning of the new age. If one reads Revelation psy-
chologically, I think it describes the rising up of the collective
shadow, which we have seen already in this century and will no
doubt see a good deal more of unless it can be handled individ-
ually. If this great upsurge of darkness is not to happen in the
collective, then it must happen in the individual, in each of us one
by one. That is what I understand by Jung’s idea of the confron-
tation of good and evil. There are other prophetic texts around
which also seem to describe a similar collective event. Nostra-
damus is of course one of the more famous prophets, and Malachi
is another interesting one.
     Malachi was concerned exclusively with the destiny of the
Church, which of course in his day, the twelfth century, was the
only one. He seems to have had a vision of the precise number of
Popes, and after he has listed them and attributed a particular
image or symbol to each one, he prophesies that there will no
longer be a Pope in Rome. What he means is not very clear. He
might be prophesying the end of the Catholic Church, or he might
be describing its transformation. Once again I find it helpful to
take him symbolically, even though he is so apparently concrete
and specific in his prophecies. The Pope is not just a physical
person, he is also Christ’s Vicar, the intermediary between man
and God. In Malachi’s day, there was no other route to God. If
there is no longer an intermediary, how are man and God to meet
each other? If a person dreams that the Pope dies or is no more,
then I would be inclined to read into it a movement toward a
more direct experience of the spirit, and the end of an external-
ised projection of spiritual authority. That is not to say that
there should or should not be an actual Pope. But taken inter-
nally, I think it’s a statement about direct experience of the spirit.
     Nostradamus seems to have concerned himself with a much
broader spectrum than just the Papacy. His prophecies have con-
tinued to baffle people since the sixteenth century, and many of
them are ambiguous enough to interpret in just about any way
you like. But he does seem to have been rather gloomy about the
last decades of the twentieth century. Although he combined his
apparent clairvoyance with astrology, he would not have known
about the conjunction of Uranus, Neptune and Saturn, because
Uranus and Neptune hadn’t been discovered. The conjunctions
which preoccupied him were Jupiter and Saturn, and also Mars
Lecture Seven                                                    175


and Saturn. Nevertheless he thought some monumental catas-
trophe was due at the end of this century, followed by some
kind of golden age. Once again there is a proliferation of images
of a great upheaval in the collective. The collapse of the Papacy
also seems to have occupied Nostradamus, but once again I am
inclined to take it more symbolically.
     Poets are also prophets, and one of the more powerful pro-
phecies I have read is W. B. Yeats’ poem, The Second Coming.
Yeats was also very versed in astrology, and he was very particu-
larly writing about the changing of the astrological ages. The
poem begins, naturally, with a description of disintegration
and upheaval in the collective, and the advent of a “rough beast”
with the head of a man and the body of a lion—Leo and Aquarius
being the opposites for the new age. This poem is not a pro-
phecy about an age of love and brotherhood, but about collective
turmoil and chaos and the emergence of a new religious vision
“slouching toward Bethlehem to be born.”
     I am sorry if I have upset anyone with these things, but it is
perhaps wiser to be realistic. I think if one just does horoscopes
and reads Theosophical books, then it all seems so easy. But we
are not easy, we are terribly complex, all of us, and anyone with
any experience of psychotherapy will know that you cannot force
growth. The psyche has its own laws and there is a great dis-
crepancy between what we are and what we would like to be. I
am in no way pessimistic, only realistic. It would be nice if we had
Aquarian Age pills which would magically transform us all into
the sort of people Aquarians like to envisage. But the problem
of love isn’t really solvable by idealistic thinking. That is surely
apparent to you all.
     I had a rather strange experience a few years ago apropos this
issue of Pisces and Aquarius and the particular viewpoints of the
different astrological ages. I had occasion to attend a conference
at that time, which was meant to be a sort of gathering of pro-
fessional people in various psychological, spiritual and alternative
healing fields. The subject of the conference was the Aquarian
Age. There were two extraordinary speakers at this conference.
I will not mention names, although some of you will no doubt
recognise the first one, as he tends to attract a fair amount of
publicity to himself. He spoke about the Second Coming of Christ,
He addressed us in a reassuring, intimate, soothing voice, and told
us how Christ was going to return with his disciples. He presented
176                                   The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


this happening as a concrete event, a recurrence of what happened
two thousand years ago, as though it were an exact repetition
which would take place despite the modern world with its tech-
nology, its cynicism, its agnosticism and its jadedness with gurus
and spiritual truths. He was certainly a very powerful and charis-
matic speaker, although being rather pagan in sympathy I have yet
to be convinced of the First Coming, let alone the Second. Never-
theless I will listen to anything once.
     The second speaker then proceeded to tell us about the exist-
ence of extraterrestrial beings who were at this very moment
preparing to land on earth. He was not in the least bit religious in
the ordinary sense, but spoke with considerable technological
acumen about the nature of the spaceships and the methods by
which they had already made telepathic contact with particular
human beings. He saw this great imminent event in the same
terms as the first speaker saw his vision of the Second Coming.
Both expected it to herald the dawn of the Aquarian Age, and
both thought it meant the subsequent spiritual enlightenment of
mankind.
     I found this juxtaposition quite fascinating. Both of these
men were attempting to describe the same thing, but in totally
opposite metaphors. One saw the imminent change in straight
Biblical terms, complete with miracles and attendant phenomena.
The other saw it in straight technological terms, scientifically
explicable and rational. These different metaphors were no doubt
right and appropriate for the different psyches of the two men. I
felt that one spoke in the metaphor of the Piscean Age, and the
other in the metaphor of the Aquarian. But both were attempt-
ing to articulate a kind of inner vision. Perhaps they were both
awfully concrete about this vision. I would be inclined to see it
that way, because an event only assumes such cosmic proportions
if a myth is being born synchronous with the event. For that
reason I am much more interested in the birth of the Christian
myth at the beginning of the Piscean era, than I am in the birth of
an historical personage called Jesus. If that sounds anti-Christian,
I assure you it isn’t, it’s just anti-literalness.
     But this thing which the one gentleman called the Second
Coming is a vision which is increasingly prevalent. A very large
number of people attend this man’s lectures, and contribute large
sums of money toward his enterprise. I would not in any way
mock the anticipation of such an event. But I would suggest that
Lecture Seven                                                     177

it is an inner event rather than an outer one, and I would go even
further and suggest that it is already happening within individuals.
That little spark of increased responsibility and recognition of an
inner and very mysterious process is to me the signpost of the
Second Coming, although not in any sense that a more Biblical-
minded person might understand it. It’s such a small and humble
thing, that little bit of consciousness. One sees it in analytic work,
the long slow sifting through such apparently banal and mundane
and intimate life details, and the growing feeling that somewhere
inside is an orderly pattern, a Something which is the creative
shaper of one’s life. I do hope there will be UFO landings, I think
it would be quite exciting, and it would also be fascinating if Jesus
Christ returned, although I have a horrible feeling if he did, he
would be diagnosed as schizophrenic and locked away in Broad-
moor for making so much trouble. But neither of these metaphors
really strikes me very much as a symbol for what is coming. I am
more convinced and much more awestruck by the process which
takes place in individuals.

Audience: I’ve recently read something about the Hindu idea of
the Kali Yuga and the cycle of creation and destruction. Accord-
ing to their thinking, we are heading toward the destruction phase
of the cosmic process.

Liz: Yes, I have encountered this idea of the Kali Yuga. I think
it is another great mythic interpretation of a symbol. In the
Middle Ages people were very fond of thinking of the world in
similar terms, the idea that there was once a Golden Age and then
men began to become corrupt and deteriorate and eventually
there will be destruction by fire or water and the Golden Age
will return. The idea that history is cyclical on a grand scale, that
God breathes in and out and creation manifests and unmanifests
is a very ancient idea. I am once again inclined to take these things
as imaginal interpretations of a basic psychic process which
describes the development of consciousness. One can take this
theme of the Golden Age very individually, as an archetypal
experience of the bliss of union with Mother-God in the womb.
Birth is like a Fall, an entry into darkness and corruption and
mortality. As the ego develops it becomes increasingly separate
and isolated and alone, until the sense of alienation becomes
almost unbearable and the fantasies arise spontaneously about the
178                                    The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


blissful past which also becomes the blissful future when one will
be reunited with the source in death or in paradise.
     That may sound horribly reductive and psychological to some
of you, but there is nothing reductive about an archetypal ex-
perience. Whether we speak of the experience of the soul on its
own plane before incarnation, or of the unity of the unconscious
of mother and child in the womb, the experience is a numinous
one and we are forever trying to find it again. In a sense this
expulsion from paradise, from the unconscious, is also true his-
torically. There is a movement out of the participation mystique
and the unconsciousness of the primitive, toward what we call
civilisation and the development of the conscious ego. Anthro-
pology bears out the myth of the Golden Age in terms of the
development of individual and tribal consciousness. The only cure
for too much corruption is a death, an ending, and then a rebirth.
I think there is an equation of unconsciousness with innocence,
and of consciousness with corruption. In a sense, Prometheus’
fire is the same as Adam’s bite of the apple. It is a sin against
Mother Nature.
     This is one of the themes in Goethe’s Faust. The great sin is
the tampering with nature, because the moment we tamper and
rob the unconscious of its treasure in order to build up the ego,
we are stealing something from God. And God is very jealous of
that treasure. This is also the mythic theme of the dragon fight,
to retrieve the treasure that the dragon guards. Siegfried does this
in Wagner’s Ring, and so do a hundred Greek and Teutonic and
Celtic and Indian heroes. In the Garden of Eden, God is very
jealous of the Tree of Good and Evil, and even more jealous of
the Tree of Life. The fruits of these trees would make man God,
and God fights back in the same way that the unconscious fights
back when one tries to bring anything into consciousness. Yet
that same unconscious paradoxically encourages the process, just
as God paradoxically has created Adam with the will to make
his choice.
     So the Fall is a symbol of man’s corruption and descent, or
ascent, depending on how you look at it, into consciousness. The
only resolution for deepening corruption is some kind of cyclical
return to the source, a cleansing or baptism by water or fire, so
that there can be a reuniting of the two severed parts. The destruc-
tion of creation is also a renewal of creation, a return to the
Father or the Mother.
Lecture Seven                                                    179

Audience: The myth of the Garden of Eden was originally Sumer-
ian, and the serpent wasn’t a symbol of evil.

Liz: Yes, I am familiar with that. But the collective has chosen to
remember it in another way, and it is what the myth has meant
to us for so many centuries that I think is relevant. Because we
seem to contain an innate guilt for the development of human
consciousness, we look back over our shoulders and feel we have
sinned. Whether the myth was changed or misinterpreted is in-
teresting but in a sense irrelevant, because the myth which is alive
for us in the West is the myth of Adam’s fall. Perhaps the Sumer-
ians felt less guilt about consciousness. Or maybe they were
typical of ancient cultures, and were not far removed from the
unconscious, so there was not so much awareness of a loss and a
Fall. I have a feeling that this underlying, archetypal guilt is one
of the reasons why we must justify our psychological tampering
with illness. We only really look within if we are driven to it, not
if we are left alone. Any descent into the unconscious psyche is
a loss of innocence. It is particularly hard on innocence because
one discovers that the gods themselves are muddled and in need of
transformation, and that is gross heresy in terms of Western re-
ligious tradition. The worst corruption, which the alchemists were
steeped in, is the shocking recognition that God is not yet con-
scious and may need a little help. But rather than face what this
might mean, we project our corruption onto the world outside
and look at our monetary system and our technology and say,
“Oh, how corrupt and sinful and disgusting.” Then we have
millenarian visions of the end of the world and the return to the
Golden Age, or we try to go back to nature to recapture our
innocence by eating wholemeal bread, just as Marie Antoinette
used to dress up as a shepherdess and play with lambs and goats
in the gardens of Versailles in order to escape her corruption and
get back to the Golden Age again.
     This seems to be a deep collective vision in us all, the belief
that once we were innocent and lived in harmony with God and
nature, and now we are corrupt and have lost our souls. The prob-
lem is how to make the return without the destruction of all
that we have built. The Tarot describes this circle of innocence
descending into corruption and returning to innocence again in a
very beautiful way. The Fool begins the cycle of the Trumps, and
he is innocent. He is in a state of unconsciousness at the beginning.
180                                    The Outer Planets & Their Cycles


He travels through the different paths reflected by the other
Trumps, passing through Death and the Devil and his redemption
in the Hanged Man. At the end of the cycle we are back to the
Fool again, who has no number on his card, because he is at the
beginning and the end of the journey.

Audience: Is innocence unconscious or instinctual?

Liz: That’s a very difficult question. No one seems to be very
clear about just what is meant by instinct. Certainly instincts are
unconscious, in the sense that they are not contrived by the ego
but exist as a life-support system within every living organism,
within the flesh itself. In that sense they are innocent. The very
potent fantasy of the “natural” man which fascinated Gauguin
and D. H. Lawrence so much is a vision of the divine innocence
of the instincts. One of the most omnipresent symbols of this
divine innocence is the image of the child, the divine child. The
child lives from his centre, from his Self, from his instincts, but
he also represents the potential for new consciousness. We project
this inner experience of divine, childlike innocence on our actual
children, who may not be in the least innocent and certainly carry
inherent predispositions of character which make them individ-
uals. But we like to believe that children are innocent blank
slates, because we project this vision of the divine child upon
them. Children can be horribly cruel and quite violent, as Melanie
Klein writes about so well. But the divine child is the embodi-
ment of innocence, the thing that existed before the ego became
alienated from the instincts and from the unconscious.

Audience: In Eastern teaching the world and its corruption are
only illusion anyway, and the reality is the state of oneness with
God.

Liz: Well, I can’t argue with that, can I? No doubt somewhere the
soul is dreaming and what we think is life is really its dream. This
is also the Hindu idea of the Kali Yuga. Brahma breathes in and
the manifest universe disappears. Brahma breathes out and the
manifest universe comes into being. I’m sure at the moment that
Brahma is writhing in his sleep, having a bad dream. I’m not really
in a position to say what is Truth and what is Reality. I haven’t
the foggiest idea. But one of the things I have been trying to
Lecture Seven                                                   181


communicate to you during the course of the weekend is that the
end of the world is an archetypal theme and describes an inner
process, and that it might be very helpful and relevant to us all
if we could learn to distinguish a symbol from a concrete prog-
nostication of doom. The millenarian myth is a cyclical myth,
and has a tendency to erupt at regular intervals from the collec-
tive psyche at points of great change. If we don’t make the effort
to understand what might be trying to emerge on an inner level,
then we compel the myth to actualise in the most concrete form,
and then we really will have the end of the world, because we
possess the technology to bring it about.
    Obviously something is happening to us all. Each person’s
perception of it is coloured by his own psychic constitution, his
own dreams and aspirations and visions and insecurities and fears
and parents and ideologies. I have yet to be convinced of such a
thing as complete objectivity. Perhaps all one can do is be con-
scious of where the individual ends and the collective begins, and
to be aware of the mythic element in our terror of holocaust. This
is a time of immense mythic blossoming, although you wouldn’t
think it if you turned on the television. But the dawn of a new
astrological age always releases new myths. These themes are all
around us, and astrologers are particularly subjected to them—the
end of the world, the return of the Golden Age, the vengeance of
God, the cleansing of sins. So I think it is a wise idea to remember
these things when next someone asks you in terror if the Uranus-
Neptune-Saturn conjunction means the end of the world. The way
we feel about these things reflects our own individual capacity to
cope with the changes that are around and inside us. Blind fatal-
ism of a negative kind and blind fatalism of a positive kind are
both ways of avoiding the very difficult and ambivalent place in
the middle, where there might be some choice but where the
choice ultimately depends upon individual responsibility. I wish I
had answers but I am afraid I am much too preoccupied with
trying to find some for my own life.

Audience: Can you recommend any reading material on these
themes?

Liz: Yes, a good place to begin might be Norman Cohn’s book,
The Pursuit of the Millenium. He is concerned with the outbreaks
of millenarian spirit during the Middle Ages, but he is drawing
                     GROS BOOKS
THE ANCIENT SCIENCE OF GEOMANCY: Living In Harmony with the Earth by Nigel
  Pennick $14.95. The best and most accessible survey of this ancient wholistic art/science,
  superbly illustrated with 120 photos.
AN ASTROLOGICAL GUIDE TO SELF-AWARENESS by Donna Cunningham, M.S.W. $8.95.
 Written in a lively style, this book includes chapters on transits, houses, interpreting
 aspects, etc. A popular book translated into 5 languages.
THE ART OF CHART INTERPRETATION: A Step-by-Step Method of Analyzing,
  Synthesizing L Understanding the Birth Chart by Tracy Marks $8.95. A guide to
  determining the most important features of a birth chart. A must for students!
THE ASTROLOGER'S MANUAL: Modern Insights into an Ancient Art by Landis Knight
  Green $12.95, 240 pages. A strikingly original work that includes extensive sections on
  relationships, aspects, and all the fundamentals in a lively new way.
THE ASTROLOGICAL HOUSES: The Spectrum of Individual Experience by Dane Rudhyar
  $10.95. A recognized classic of modern astrology that has sold over 100,000 copies, this
  book is required reading for every student of astrology seeking to understand the deeper
  meanings of the houses.
ASTROLOGY: The Classic Guide to Understanding Your Horoscope by Ronald C. Davison
  $8.95. The most popular book on astrology during the 1960s fk 1970s is now back in
  print In a new edition, with an instructive new foreword that explains how the author’s
  remarkable keyword system can be used by even the novice student of astrology.
ASTROLOGY FOR THE NEW AGE: An Intuitive Approach by Marcus Allen $7.95.
  Emphasizes self-acceptance and tuning in to your chart with a positive openness. Helps
  one create his or her own interpretation.
ASTROLOGY IN ACTION: How Astrology Works in Practice, Demonstrated by Transits,
  Progressions A Major Chart Themes In Famous People’s Lives by Paul Wright $12.95.
  Penetrating exploration of astrological symbolism. Includes the charts of Woody Allen,
  Brando, Prince Charles, Sean Connery, Cezanne, Dylan, Lennon and many more.
ASTROLOGY IN MODERN LANGUAGE by Richard Vaughan $12.95, 336 pages. An in-depth
  interpretation of the birth chart focusing on the houses and their ruling planets
  including the Ascendant and its ruler. A unique, strikingly original work.
ASTROLOGY, KARMA L TRANSFORMATION: The Inner Dimensions of the Birth Chart by
  Stephen Arroyo $12.95. An insightful book on the use of astrology for personal growth,
  seen in the light of the theory of karma and the urge toward self-transformation.
  International best-seller! New edition, now with comprehensive index!
THE ASTROLOGY OF SELF-DISCOVERY: An In-Depth Exploration of the Potentials
  Revealed in Your Birth Chart by Tracy Marks $ 12.95, 288 pages. Emphasizes the Moon
  and its nodes, Neptune, Pluto, 8. the outer planet transits. An important and brilliantlv
                                                                                          y
  original work!
ASTROLOGY, PSYCHOLOGY AND THE FOUR ELEMENTS: An Energy Approach to
  Astrology A Its Use In the Counseling Arts by Stephen Arroyo $9.95. An international
  best-seller. Clearly shows how to approach astrology with a real understanding of the
  energies involved. Awarded the British Astrological Assns Astrology Prize A dassir
                                                                                aasslc
  translated into 8 languagesl                                       **
STEPHEN ARROYO’S CHART INTERPRETATION HANDBOOK: Guidelines for
  Understanding the Essentials of the Birth Chart $9.95. Shows how to combine
  keywords, central concepts, and Interpretive phrases In a way that Illuminates the
  meanings of the planets, signs, houses, and aspects emphasized in any chart.
CYCLES OF BECOMING: The Planetary Pattern of Growth by Alexander Ruperti $15.95,
  274 pages. The first complete treatment of transits from a humanistic and holistic
  perspective. All important planetary cycles are correlated with the essential phases of
  personal development. A pioneering work!
DYNAMICS OF ASPECT ANALYSIS: New Perceptions In Astrology by Bil Tierney $12.95,
  288 pages. Ground-breaking work! The most in-depth treatment of aspects and aspect
  patterns available, including both major and minor configurations. Also includes
  retrogrades, unaspected planets more!
A JOURNEY THROUGH THE BIRTH CHART: Using Astrology on Your Life Path by Joanne
  Wickenburg $7.95. Gives the reader the tools to put the pieces of the birth chart together
  for self-understanding and encourages creative interpretation by helping the reader to
  think through the endless combinations of astrological symbols.
NEW INSIGHTS IN MODERN ASTROLOGY by Stephen Arroyo Liz Greene $10.95. Deals
  with myth, chart synthesis, relationships, Jungian psychology related to astrology. A
  wealth of original ideas!
THE LITERARY ZODIAC by Paul Wright $14.95, 240 pages. A pioneering work, based on
  extensive research, exploring the connection between astrology and literary creativity.
NUMBERS AS SYMBOLS FOR SELF-DISCOVERY: Exploring Character & Destiny with
  Numerology by Richard Vaughan $8.95, 336 pages. A how-to book on personal analysis
  and forecasting your future through Numerology. Examples include the number patterns
  of a thousand famous personalities.
THE OUTER PLANETS &. THEIR CYCLES: The Astrology of the Collective by Liz Greene
  $12.95. Deals with the individual’s attunement to the outer planets as well as with
  significant historical and generational trends that correlate to these planetary cycles.
PLANETARY ASPECTS - FROM CONttlCT TO COOPERATION: How to Make Your Stressful
  Aspects Work for You by Tracy Marks $11.95, 225 pages. This revised edition of HOW
  TO HANDLE YOUR T-SQUARE focuses on the creative understanding of the stressful
  aspects and focuses on the T-Square configuration both in natal charts and as formed by
  transits progressions. The most thorough treatment of these subjects in print!
THE PLANETS AND HUMAN BEHAVIOR by Jeff Mayo $9.95. A pioneering exploration of the
  symbolism of the planets, blending their modern psychological significance with their
  ancient mythological meanings. Includes many tips on interpretation.
THE PRACTICE AND PROFESSION OF ASTROLOGY: Rebuilding Our Lost Connections
  with the Cosmos by Stephen Arroyo $7.95. A challenging, often controversial treatment
  of astrology’s place in modern society and of astrological counseling as both a legitimate
  profession and a healing process.
REINCARNATION THROUGH THE ZODIAC by Joan Hodgson $7.95. A study of the signs of
  the zodiac from a spiritual perspective, based upon the development of different phases
  of consciousness through reincarnation.
RELATIONSHIPS &. LIFE CYCLES: Modern Dimensions of Astrology by Stephen Arroyo
  $10.95. Thorough discussion of natal chart indicators of one’s capacity and need for
  relationship, techniques of chart comparison,   using transits practically. New edition,
  now with a comprehensive index.
A SPIRITUAL APPROACH TO ASTROLOGY by Myrna Lofthus $14.95, 444 pages. A
  complete astrology textbook from a karmic viewpoint, with an especially valuable 130-
  page section on karmic interpretation of all aspects, induding the Ascendant MC.
YOUR SECRET SELF: Illuminating the Mysteries of the Twelfth House by Tracy Marks A
  Guide to Using Astrology Your Dreams for Personal Growth. $12.95. This important
  book demonstrates how working with dreams is one of the most effective gateways into
  the hidden meanings of the Twelfth House.
CHINESE VEGETARIAN COOKERY by jack Santa Maria $9.95. VEGETARIAN magazine called
  this “the best” of ail the books on Chinese vegetarian cookery. It is by far the most
  accessible for Westerners and uses Ingredients that are easily found anywhere.
HEALTH BUILDING: The Conscious Art of Living Well by Dr. Randolph Stone $10.95. A
  complete health program for people of aJI ages, based on vital energy currents. Indudes
  instructions on vegetarian purifying diets and energizing exerdses for vitality beauty.
CATCHING GOOD HEALTH WITH HOMEOPATHIC MEDICINE: A Concise, Self-Help
  Introduction to Homeopathy by Raymond j. Garrett &<TaRessa Stone $8.95. Indudes
  dozens of fasdnating personal stories of striking cures, as well as guidelines to choosing
  effective remedies for first-aid and sports injuries.
POLARITY THERAPY: VOL. I          II: The Complete Collected Works by Dr. Randolph Stone,
  D.O., D.C. $30.00 each. The original books on this revolutionary healing art, available for
  the first time in trade editions. Fully illustrated with charts diagrams. Sewn binding.
PROTEIN-BALANCED VEGETARIAN COOKERY by David Scott $9.95, 184 pages. The only
  cookbook that focuses on the crudal issue of protein balance and protein-suffidency.
TAI CHI: TEN MINUTES TO HEALTH: The Most Comprehensive Guide to Yang Tal Chi by
  Chia Siew Pang Goh Ewe Hock $16.95, 132 pages. The most comprehensive manual on
  Yang style Tai Chi available, which breaks down the movements in more detail than any
  other book. Recommended by American Library Assodation’s “Booklist."




     >a/e of this ma                              y<




                                          - • ith(        }rai$




For more complete information on our books, a                         CRCS Publications
complete catalog, or to order any of the above                     Post Office Box 1460
publications, WRITE TO:                                     Sebastopol, California 9S473
                                                                                   U.S.A.
           3
  BOS ON    UB   BRARY




3 9999 03072 943 6




                         v
Astrology/Psychology
                                  k   X




 "Throughout the book there are many fruitful diversions covering such
 topics as the meaning of the Waterhouses, retrograde and unaspected planets,
 and specific combinations of the outer planets with Jupiter and Saturn....
 Enlightening and immensely stimulating."—The Astrological Journal (UK)
 "...a book that every astrologer should read. Dr. Greene brilliantly gives insight to
 the outer planets, interpreting the effect of their transits on the collective psyche....
 Strongly recommended!"                                                      —Kosmos
     This volume comprises talks given by Liz Greene at a weekend program in
 England. It not only explains significant historical and generational trends that
 correspond to vast planetary cycles, but it also discusses the individual's attunement
 to the outer planets and the collective psychological forces they represent.
    Among the subjects discussed are:
 • Aspects between the outer planets and the personal planets, and the
   corresponding ability to tap into collective energies.
 • Transits of the outer planets to individuals’ natal planets.
 • Generational aspects such as Saturn conjunct Pluto, Saturn conjunct
   Neptune, Uranus conjunct Pluto, Saturn-Uranus aspects, etc.
 • Charts of people who were especially attuned to collective energies:
   Marx, Hitler, Lenin, Jung and Freud.
 • The birth-charts of America, the USSR, Iran and Israel.
     At a time when “mass psychology" is virtually no better understood than one
 hundred years ago, in spite of innumerable historical, sociological, and psychologi-
 cal studies of the subject, this book provides convincing evidence that astrology may
 indeed be the most accurate and useful framework for studying, predicting, and
 understanding the hidden forces which motivate human beings.


    Iiz Green is an accomplished astrologer, student of mythology, and a practicing
 Jungian Analyst. The author of such outstanding books as Relating and Saturn: A
 New Look at an Old Devil, which synthesize an in-depth approach to astrology with
 Jungian and mythological insights, she has also jointly written New Insights in
 Modern Astrology with Stephen Arroyo and a series of books with Howard Sasportas.

                                                      ISBN 0 916360 60-1
                                                            -       -



                                                                             5 1 395>

 A CRCS PUBLICATION                       $13.95


                                                    9 780916 36 603
