  The Collected Works of
Marie-Louise von Franz




          MLvF



        Volume 1




       General Editors
        Steven Buser
        Leonard Cruz
Marie-Louise von Franz
      1915-1998
                 Volume 1




  Archetypal Symbols
     in Fairytales
The Profane and Magical Worlds


    Marie-Louise von Franz


 Translated by Roy Freeman and Tony Woolfson
   in collaboration with Emmanuel Kennedy




  CHIRON PUBLICATIONS • ASHEVILLE, NORTH CAROLINA
     Logo of the Foundation of Jungian Psychology, Küsnacht Switzerland:
    Fons mercurialis from Rosarium Philosophorum 1550 (Fountain of Life).




      ©2021 Stiftung für Jung’sche Psychologie Küsnacht, Switzerland.
 All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored
in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form by any means, electronic,
             mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
            without the prior written permission of the publisher,
     Chiron Publications, P.O. Box 19690, Asheville, N.C. 28815-1690.

      Original title: Symbolik des Märchens – Versuch einer Deutung
           Copyright © 1952, 1960 Bern, revised edition 2015
         Verlag Stiftung für Jung’sche Psychologie, Küsnacht ZH

                      www.ChironPublications.com

             Interior and cover design by Danijela Mijailovic
                       Cover Image by Martina Ott
                Proofreading editing by Mathabo le Roux
            Printed primarily in the United States of America.
             Translated by Roy Freeman and Tony Woolfson

                   ISBN 978-1-63051-854-7 paperback
                   ISBN 978-1-63051-855-4 hardcover
      “But all the story of the night told over,
      And all their minds transfigur’d so together,
      More witnesseth than fancy’s images
      And grows to something of great constancy;
      But, howsoever, strange and admirable.”

Hippolyta in Shakespeare A Midsummer Night’s Dream
          Act V, Scene 1
                             Foreword


During her lifetime Marie-Louise von Franz expressed the wish that her books
and essays might one day appear in the form of a Collected Works. As the
main heir to her literary legacy, it became the task of the Foundation for
Jungian Psychology, Küsnacht, to fulfil her wish.
     As a first step, the Board of the Foundation decided to publish all of her
books in German in a revised, and in some cases expanded, format by the
Foundation’s own publishing house. For her lectures or talks, the Foundation
drew upon manuscripts, tape recordings or notes, as far as these were
available.
     Marie-Louise von Franz left behind a handwritten list of all her
publications that she herself had both compiled and commented upon. In it,
she indicated which editions in her view best reflected her work. Some were
first editions in English or French. In these instances, the revised German
editions were adapted to reflect the foreign language publications. The texts
she wrote in German were largely adopted as they were.
     Occasionally, slight alterations have been made to facilitate both the
reading of the text and its understanding. In some places, footnotes have been
added to refer to more recent research results, or further explanations have
been added in endnotes. In line with the German editions, the Foreword of
each volume of the Collected Works in English includes a description of the
respective circumstances surrounding its creation and translation.
     The Foundation is very grateful to Alison Kappes-Bates, Hirzel, for her
adaptation of the existing older English editions to the new, revised German
editions. Alison Kappes-Bates, whose mother-tongue is English, was a close
companion to Marie-Louise von Franz for almost 20 years, including taking
care of her in her final years. Where necessary, Alison Kappes-Bates has
provided new, and sometimes first, translations of parts of the German texts.
Both her experience in her field of expertise and her closeness to the author
ensured a quality of work that reflects the German editions.
     After several years of negotiation, the Foundation succeeded in signing a
framework contract for the Collected Works with Chiron Publications in
Asheville, North Carolina, United States. It is planned for the Collected Works
to be published in its entirety within the next ten years. The Foundation would
like to thank Len Cruz (CEO), Steve Buser (COO) and Jennifer Fitzgerald
viii     ARCHETYPAL SYMBOLS IN FAIRYTALES

(Editor), along with all the Chiron Publications employees who have
contributed to the creation of the Collected Works. The Foundation is also
grateful to the graphic designer, Martina Ott, Zürich, for her creative ideas
and suggestions concerning layout and cover design. The combined efforts of
all those mentioned above have made it possible to realise Marie-Louise von
Franz’s dream and to publish her enduring works, also for an avid English
readership, in a revised and attractive form.
     The origin of Archetypal Symbols in Fairy Tales has its own special history.
A German philologist by the name of Hedwig von Beit, who had a particular
interest in fairytales but was unable to interpret them, asked C. G. Jung if he
might help her to interpret fairy tales in his sense. Jung referred von Beit to
the young Marie-Louise von Franz, who took on the task with great enthu-
siasm. Over a period of eight years, she worked intensively on interpreting
over 900 fairytales submitted by Hedwig von Beit. After taking on the final
editing and publication of the three-volume work, and to the great
disappointment of Marie-Louise von Franz, Hedwig von Beit published the
work solely under her own name. The publication was received enthusiasti-
cally in scientific circles.
     On Jung’s advice, Marie-Louise von Franz waived taking any legal action
in war-torn Germany during the period of its reconstruction.
     Thanks to the long-standing efforts of Emmanuel Kennedy, Gommiswald,
the successor of Francke Verlag, Tübingen, eventually transferred all
publishing rights of the work to the Foundation for Jungian Psychology,
Küsnacht. At last, the three volumes could be republished under the name of
their rightful legal author by the Foundation’s own publishing house.
     Emmanuel Kennedy was responsible for the new German publication of
Symbolik des Märchens (Archetypal Symbols in Fairy Tales). In the Foreword,
he explains in detail the origins of the work. The English translation of the
present volume was provided by Roy Freeman, Lucerne, with the assistance
of Anthony Woolfson, Zürich. The Foundation is very grateful to Messrs.
Kennedy, Freeman and Woolfson for their efforts.

On behalf of the Foundation for Jungian Psychology, Küsnacht,
August 20, 2020

PD Dr. Hansueli F. Etter,
President
                      Table of Contents


Introduction                                                1

Section 1: The Profane and Magical Worlds and their
Main Figures                                        15
1.    The Indefinite Place                                 19
2.    The Moon                                             27
3.    The Hole in the Earth, the Sky-Hole, and the Cave    39
4.    The Well                                             45
5.    Water                                                49
6.    The Island                                           53
7.    The End of the World                                 57
8.    The Clashing Rocks                                   61
9.    The Forest (Woods)                                   63
10.    The Mountain                                        65
11.    The Upper and the Underworld                        89
12.    The Timeless Realm                                  95
13.    The Realm of the Dead and the Spirit World         105
14.    The Inhabitants of the Land of the Spirits         113
15.    Ghosts (Spirits) as Demons                         133

Section 2: The Archetypal Figures of the Magical          155
16.   The Daemonic Father                                 159
17.   The Great Mother                                    201
18.   The Image of the Daemonic Son [the shadow]          277
19.   The Magical Daughter [the anima]                    385

Bibliography                                              529
Index of Authors                                          553
Index of Fairytales                                       557
Subject Index                                             569
x          ARCHETYPAL SYMBOLS IN FAIRYTALES

A word of caution from Marie-Louise von Franz

    Many years after working on Archetypal Symbols in Fairytales and having
her own practice as a Jungian analyst, engaging in research, and widely
lecturing on fairytales, Marie-Louise von Franz wrote:

     When people have sniffed a little whiff of Jungian psychology, they
     may be worse than if they knew nothing, for they take a fairytale and
     a few of the Jungian concepts and pin these on to the figures, e.g. the
     ego, the anima, the Self. This is worse than no interpretation for it is
     unscientific, not objective, infantile, and even dishonest, because in
     order to be able to pin Jungian concepts onto such a being, you are
     obliged to twist the story. If you are careful, you will see that these
     concepts of Jungian psychology cannot without restriction be used
     for the interpretation of fairytales. When I discovered this myself I
     suddenly realized that it must be so because a fairytale is not produced
     by the psyche of the individual and is not individual material. When
     we speak of the anima, we think of a man as an individual, of the
     anima of a certain being, or the ego is the ego of a person, and the
     shadow means the person’s inferior side. But such terms must not be
     sneaked into a tale where they do not belong, and if they have been
     conceived in the course of the observation of many individuals it is
     quite questionable whether the concepts can be applied to material
     like fairytales – material which probably has been produced by many
     persons, or a group.1




1
 Marie-Louise Von Franz, The Psychological Meaning of Redemption Motifs in Fairytales, Inner City,
Toronto 1980 10-11.
                                      Introduction
                        (unchanged from the Francke edition of 1997)



1   A fairytale, a story of wondrous events, can impress the thoughtful listener
    like a riddle that hides a secret. The tale seems to spark a desire to comprehend
    more, to uncover the hidden meaning. Quite often, however, trying to discover
    the meaning of a tale leads to different interpretations that not only engage
    the imagination, but inspire the intellect to explore more. It appears that all
    attempts to interpret fairytales have so far failed to pay adequate respect to
    their idiosyncratic truths and to the consistency of psychic processes of the
    soul1 that shimmer out of fables, legends, and fairytales. In the present work,
    therefore, the authors attempt to interpret psychologically certain fundamental
    processes of the soul that present themselves in a series of images in fairytales.
2        The history of fairytales and their research up to the beginning of the 20th
    century is comprehensively covered by Johannes Bolte and George Polívka,
    in their Anmerkungen zu den Kinder und Hausmärchen der Brüder Grimm2
    among many other sources. This five-volume work offers a general and easily
    understandable overview of the main theories up to that time. Prior to the
    18th century, a scholarly examination of fairytales and their relation to poetry,
    mythology, and folklore in Europe did not exist. The 19th century ushered in
    an age of more intensive thought and passionate veneration that spurred
    research into fairytales. The works of the Romantics in particular helped
    research to outgrow the 18th century attitude that to a large extent denied
    assigning any kind of meaning to fairytales. Johann Wolfgang von Goethe’s
    (1749–1832) literary fairytales (1795) contributed in no small way to raise the
    value of folktales. Around the same time, Johann Gottfried von Herder (1706–
    1763) had sensed something of the nature of fairytales in his attempt to view
    them in a unified way. He considered folkloristic legends and great myths
    together, considering them to be the “result of popular beliefs.” He writes:
    “where one dreams because one does not know, believes because one does not
    see [but] affects with the whole, undivided, and unschooled soul. . .”3 Even

    1
      [German original: Folgerichtigkeit seelischer Vorgänge, the German words Seele and seelische pose
    special problems to translate.]
    2
      Johannes Bolte, Georg Polívka, Anmerkungen zu den Kinder- und Hausmärchen der Brüder Grimm,
    Vol. 1, Dieterich’sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, Th. Weicher, Leipzig 1913; Vol. 2, 1915; Vol. 3, 1918; Vol.
    4, 1930; Vol. 5, 1932.
    3
      Johann Gottfried von Herder; Bernhard Suphan (ed.), Herders Sämmtliche Werke, Volume 1–33,
    Weidmann’sche Buchhandlung, Berlin 1877–1913 Vol. 9, 525.
    2           ARCHETYPAL SYMBOLS IN FAIRYTALES

    earlier, Giambattista Vico (1668–1744) had expressed similar, if not identical,
    thoughts in that he viewed myths – referring not only to Greek myths but also
    fables4– as catching glimpses of general concepts or images emerging from
    powerful fantasies and exhibiting similar ideas on the plane of whole
    civilizations. He considered fantasy to be “extended or pooled memory.”5
3        The Brothers Grimm, Wilhelm and Jacob, were the next authors to take
    up the serious study of fairytales. From the 19th Century onwards, their
    insights shaped the opinions of fairytale collectors and fundamentally
    dominated fairytale research. Their narrative style set the standard for fairytale
    collection in Europe for years.6 Wilhelm Grimm, in his general considerations
    at the end of the Anmerkungen zu die Kinder- und Hausmärchen der Brüder
    Grimm7 wrote:

4        The correlation between fairytales of different epochs and widely
         separated regions, as well as cultures closely bordering each other, is
         based partly on underlying ideas and representations of particular
         characters, and partly on special interrelationship and solutions to the
         incidents. . ..
5        All these together are like a spring whose depths one does not know,
         but from which everyone can draw according to their needs.8

6   He also saw in fairytales “. . . vestiges of beliefs reaching back to the oldest
    times, which speak of things beyond the senses in terms of images.”9

7       It is not the intention of the present work to discuss the numerous theories
    that have evolved since the fairytale research of the Brothers Grimm. Here we
    will mention only a few of the most influential ideas. To explain the
    remarkable similarities of the motifs in fairytales of all lands, investigations

    4
      Italien favelle, new Italian favole.
    5
      Cf. Giambattista Vico, Die neue Wissenschaft über die gemeinschaftliche Natur der Völker (Principi di
    Scienza Nuova). Nach d. Ausg. v. 1744, übers. and eingel. v. Erich Auerbach. 2. Auflage, W. de Gruyter,
    Berlin 1744 (2000) 66–67, 79, 96, 168 [pages in the German or Italian edition, for English, see
    Giambattista Vico, Principi di Scienza Nuova (The New Science of Giambattista Vico), Cornell University
    Press, Ithaca 1968 and Giambattista Vico, Scienza Nuova (The New Science) (edition 1725), Cambridge
    University Press, Cambridge, UK 2002, Trans by Pompa, Leon. Vico believed that societal life depends
    primarily on the power of human imagination to narrate the meaning of events through myths. Rational
    forms of understanding then gradually develop from these mythical commonalities.] Cf. also Adolf
    Thimme, Das Märchen. Handbücher zur Volkskunde, Verlag von Wilhelm Heims, Leipzig 1909 19, Vol.
    2.
    6
       See Werner Lincke, Das Stiefmuttermotiv im Märchen der germanischen Völker, Verlag Dr. Emil
    Ebering, Berlin 1933, German. Studien, no. 142 163.
    7
      Commentaries (Anmerkungen) to The Nursery and Household Tales of the Brothers Grimm (hereafter
    referred to as KHM after the German title).
    8
      Grimm, Wilhelm and Jakob (ed.), Kinder- und Hausmärchen, gesammelt durch die Brüder Grimm,
    (MdW), Band 3, ed. by Fr. v. d. Leyen, Verlag der Dieterich’schen Buchhandlung, Göttingen 1856 405–
    406.
    9
       KHM, Vol. 3, Göttingen 1856 p. 409. In original German übersinnliche can also be translated as
    “supernatural.”
                                                                            Introduction                  3

    focused on the search to find the “original homeland” of fairytales. Theodor
    Benfey (pp. 1809–1881) proposed India as the land of origin and this was
    largely accepted by many researchers.10 Other scholars attempted to situate the
    original homeland in Egypt or Babylon,11 mostly due to information from
    anthropological and ethnological research. It soon became obvious, however,
    that the question of a so-called original homeland was inadequately posed.
    Similarly untenable are the so-called natural-mythological explanations,
    according to which images in myths and fairytales represent either astro-
    nomical or meteorological phenomena, or organic-vegetative life.12 Although
    there is no doubt that many mythological images allude to various natural
    phenomena, a one-sided reduction of their meaning to physical processes has
    been shown to be incorrect.13
8        Ethnological-anthropological research also provided fruitful initial
    hypotheses to explain myths and fairytales. It revealed links between many
    fairytale motifs and primitive customs, rituals, rites, and magical beliefs of
    the soul.14 (The attempt, on the other hand, to explicate myths as mere copies
    of these rituals must be rejected as being inadequate, since it does not account
    for the individual forms and their modifications.) On the basis of these
    interrelations, Adolf Bastian (1826–1905), proposed that the universal
    occurrence and similarities of mythological thought of different cultures be
    explained by principal structural similarities of human psychic life.15 Bastian
    saw in the mythical representations what he called “elementary ideas,” the
    “raw material. . . which, according to our present knowledge, we cannot go
    beyond. . . ”16 He writes of the elementary material (of thought) in the spirit of

    10
       See J. Bolte and G. Polívka, Anmerkungen, Vol. 4, Leipzig 1930 p. 289ff., J. Bolte and G. Polívka,
    Anmerkungen, Vol. 5, Leipzig 1932 p. 249. Concerning the shortcomings of Benfey’s theory and a
    summary of refutations, see A. Thimme, Märchen, Leipzig 1909 p. 15ff., 21–22, 69ff..
    11
       More at J. Bolte and G. Polívka, Anmerkungen, Vol. 5, Leipzig 1932 p. 256.
    12
       Cf. in general J. Bolte and G. Polívka, Anmerkungen, Vol. 5, Leipzig 1932 p. 253ff. and the editorial
    group of the Mythological Library.
    13
       Cf. here Wilhelm Wundt, Völkerpsychologie. Eine Untersuchung der Entwicklungsgesetze von Sprache,
    Mythus und Sitte, Wilhelm Engelmann, Leipzig 1910–15 p. 5, 53ff.; Elard Hugo Meyer, “Germanische
    Mythologie”, in: Lehrbücher d. germ. Philologie Vol. 1, Mayer & Müller, Berlin 1891 p. 293; further
    Ludwig Laistner, Das Rätsel der Sphinx. Grundzüge einer Mythengeschichte, Verlag Wilhelm Hertz, Berlin
    1889 Vol. I, vii Vol. 1–2; Otto Rank, “Der Mythus von der Geburt des Helden. Versuch einer
    psychologischen Mythendeutung”, in: Schriften zur angewandten Seelenkunde, No. 5, ed. by Sigmund
    Freud, Franz Deuticke, Leipzig and Wien 1922 p. 6; Herbert Silberer, Problems of Mysticism and Its
    Symbolism, Moffat, Yard and Company, New York 1917, Trans. Smith Ely Jelliffe p. 207; C. G. Jung, The
    Structure of the Psyche, in: Sir Herbert Read et al. (eds.), Collected Works, Vol. 8: The Structure and
    Dynamics of the Psyche, 2nd Ed. Princeton University Press, Princeton CW 8 ¶323ff.
    14
       Cf. Edward B. Tylor, Primitive Culture: Researches into the Development of Mythology, Philosophy,
    Religion, Art and Custom (two volumes), John Murray, London 1871; Theodor Waitz, Anthropologie
    der Naturvölker, Teil 1 and 2, Friedrich Fleischer, Leipzig 1859 (cf. especially Vol. 1); Andrew Lang,
    Custom and Myth, 2nd edition. Longmans, Green, and Co., London 1885 and Andrew Lang, Myth,
    Ritual, and Religion, Longmans, Green, and Co., London 1887. For application of these results in
    particular to fairytales by Saintyves, Nodermann, Naumann, Huet, see the literature in J. Bolte and G.
    Polívka, Anmerkungen, Vol. 5, Leipzig 1932 p. 257.
    15
       [For more on Bastian’s concepts of “psychic unity,” see Klaus-Peter Köpping, Adolf Bastian and the
    Psychic Unity of Mankind, Lit Verlag, Münster 2005.]
    16
       Adolf Bastian, Beiträge zur vergleichenden Psychologie. Die Seele und ihre Erscheingungsweisen in der
     4           ARCHETYPAL SYMBOLS IN FAIRYTALES

     natural people,17 which one should study with statistical-natural science
     methods. The elemental ideas, which he also called a “mirroring reflex image”
     in the human soul, appear in numerous ethnic derivations, which he
     designated as “ethnic elementary ideas” or their different local elaborations
     as “folk ideas.”18 Due to his lack of knowledge of unconscious psychic
     processes of the soul in mankind, it was impossible for Bastian to provide
     further evidence for the emergence and functioning of his elementary ideas.
     He could go no further than asserting their existence.19
9        The hypothesis of fairytale motif migration cannot, in spite of everything,
     be tossed overboard since distant peregrinations of single motifs can indeed
     be substantiated. These findings have, with a certain justification, led numerous
     researchers to renounce fundamental questions concerning the emergence and
     meaning of myths and fairytales and to turn to individual literary-historical,
     philological, aesthetic, and folk psychological studies.20 Here too we include
     the Finnish school,21 with its commendable catalogues of motif statistics. We
     note, however, that their hope of thereby finding a particular primordial form
     and original homeland for individual fairytales is misguided.22
10       In contrast to those researchers who discount the question of meaning in
     fairytales, individual devotees have emerged from time to time. Often labelled
     as unscientific, these writers have aspired to prove a deep, primal, mysterious,
     and universal wisdom in the tales.23 Anthroposophic attempts to interpret
     fairytales also follow similar assumptions and often contain perceptive


     Ethnographie, Ferd. Dümmler’s Verlagsbuchhandlung (Harrwitz und Grossmann), Berlin 1868 62 also
     63, 70, 71.)
     17
        “Elementarstoffen (des Denkens) im Geiste des Naturmenschen”, ibid p. 71.
     18
        Cf. Adolf Bastian, Die Verbleibs-Orte der abgeschiedenen Seele, Ein Vortrag in erweiterter Umarbeitung,
     Weidmannsche Buchhandlung, Berlin 1893 5–6, 83, 90, 94.
     19
        Cf. A. Bastian, Verbleibs-Orte, Berlin 1893 p. 30. Cf. for more about the acceptance and resistance to
     Bastian’s ideas, see Hanns Bächtold-Stäubli, Handwörterbuch des deutschen Aberglaubens. W. de Gruyter
     & Co. Bd. I–VII, Berlin and Leipzig 1927–1936. Vol. VIII–X, Berlin 1936–1942. editor unter bes.
     Mitwirkung von E. Hoffmann-Krayer and Mitarbeit zahlreicher Fachgenossen, under Elementargedanke
     (“elementary ideas”). Hermann Güntert takes up Bastian’s ideas and speaks of “mythical monads” (Mythen-
     monaden) in Hermann Güntert, Der arische Weltkönig und Heiland. Bedeutungsgeschichtliche Untersuchun-
     gen zur indoiranischen Religionsgeschichte und Altertumskunde, Max Niemeyer, Halle a. S. 1923 391.
     20
        Some authors here are: J. Bédier, G. Huet, W. Mannhardt, R. Köhler, P. Herrmann, Rittershaus, A. Bonus,
     A. Van Genepp, A. H. Krappe, J. De Vries, H. Hamann, P. Cassel, F. S. Krauss, L. Frobenius, H. Usener, A.
     Wünsche, L. F. Weber, R. Petsch, M. Grünbaum, A. van Deursen, A. Olrik, A. von Loewis of Menar, F.
     Panzer, A. Wesselski, W. Lincke, E. Tegethoff, B. Schweitzer, H. de Boor, M. Lüthi. Cf. also in general J.
     Bolte and G. Polívka, Anmerkungen, Vol. 5, Leipzig 1932 p. 257ff., and Johannes Bolte, Lutz Mackensen,
     Handwörterbuch des deutschen Märchens, Volume 1–2, W. de Gruyter & Co., Berlin and Leipzig 1930/1934,
     among others, under Anthropologische Märchentheorie [anthropological theory of fairytales], Anord-
     nungsprinzipien [ordering principles], Geographisch-historische Methoden [geographic-historical methods],
     Formsinn [sense of form], Einfache Formen [simple forms], Fassung [framework, setting].
     21
        K. Krohn, A. Aarne, St. Thompson, and Andrejev among others. Details and references in J. Bolte
     and G. Polívka, Anmerkungen, Vol. 5, Leipzig 1932 p. 263f. Cf. the still [as of 2010] active Folklore Fellow
     Communications published by the Kalevala Institute of the University of Turku, Finland.
     22
        Concerning the objections of A. Wesselski, F. Panzer, and others, see J. Bolte and G. Polívka,
     Anmerkungen, Vol. 5, Leipzig 1932 p. 264.
     23
        For examples, see J. Bolte and G. Polívka, Anmerkungen, Vol. 5, Leipzig 1932 p. 256.
                                                                               Introduction                   5

     interpretations.24 Even if we can only partly agree, we grant that the incentive
     for these attempts springs in and of itself from a correct feeling for the deep
     meaning of fairytales. It is the same feeling that many people unswervingly
     sense as arising from the fairytale itself, since the soul unconsciously resonates
     with the narrative content.
11        Bastian and the anthropological school, including the so-called animists
     (Animisten),25 extended the horizons of fairytale research and placed the
     human being and the psychic-spiritual26 structure at the center of attention.
     They also urged the application of empirical methods of research instead of
     the rationalistic-deductive analysis of their predecessors.27 They thus paved
     the way for a psychological theory of fairytales based on objective facts. This
     was possible because the phenomenon of the unconscious28 had now been
     discovered and included in the scientific horizon. Numerous observed facts
     that previously could not be rationally integrated into the prevailing view of
     conscious psychology were now open for clarification. This also resolved the
     difficulty that many researchers had when their relatively good interpretations
     of a rite or folktale did not find confirmation in the conscious minds of the
     traditional folk.
12        In a certain opposition to the main direction of the old “rational
     psychology,” which was essentially limited to the investigation of sensory
     activities and rational processes and only conditionally accepted the
     hypothesis of the unconscious,29 Arthur Schopenhauer (1788-1860) and Carl
     Gustav Carus (1789-1869) indicated the existence of the unconscious as a
     psychic form of life that is not identical to the ego. Carus stated that
     consciousness arises secondarily out of the unconscious. In his writings30 one

     24
        References worthy of mentioning include: Rudolf Steiner, Märchendeutungen. Vortrag gehalten zu
     Berlin, 26. Dezember, Berlin 1908, und Rudolf Steiner, “Märchendichtungen im Lichte der
     Geistesforschung”, in: Ergebnisse der Geistesforschung, Band 11, ed. by Marie Steiner, Zbinden und
     Hügin, Basel 1942 4–8; Maria Brie, Das Märchen im Lichte der Geisteswissenschaft, Preuß and Jünger
     (Inh. Kropff and Weinberger), Breslau 1922 3–12, 22ff.; Walter Ebersold, Unsere Märchen, Roter Reiter-
     Verlag, Zürich 1946, bes. S 45–47; Rudolf Meyer, Die Weisheit der deutschen Volksmärchen, Verlag der
     Christengemeinschaft, Stuttgart 1935 esp. pp. 13–22, 99–100, 126–128, 204; Rudolf Meyer, Die Weisheit
     der Schweizer Märchen, Columban-Verlag, Schaffhausen 1944 esp. pp. 9ff., 17ff., 41, 115.
     25
        E. Tylor, Primitive Culture, London 1871; see further Robert Ranulph Marett, The Threshold of
     Religion, Methuen & Co. Ltd., London 1909; John Murphy, Primitive Man: his Essential Quest,
     Humphrey Milford, London 1927, and to a certain degree also James George Sir Frazer, Golden Bough,
     a Study in Magic and Religion, Macmillan & Co., New York 1922.
     26
        [In German, seelisch-geistig.]
     27
        Concerning the limited use of these theories, see Marett’s attack against Tylor related to the meaning
     of the word “animism,” Encyclopaedia Britannica under Animism.
     28
        In the psychology of C.G. Jung, the expression “the unconscious” refers to “the interior world of the
     psyche.” (C.G. Jung, CW 5, Symbols of Transformation ¶450). [The term pertains here exclusively to “the
     collective unconscious,” that is, the world of the archetypes common to the human psyche in general.]
     29
        Cf. C.G. Jung, On the Nature of the Psyche, in: Sir Herbert Read et al. (eds.), Collected Works, Vol. 8:
     The Structure and Dynamics of the Psyche, 2nd Ed. 2nd edition. Princeton University Press, Princeton
     CW 8 ¶343–355.
     30
        Cf. Carl Gustav Carus, Psyche, zur Entwicklungsgeschichte der Seele, Kröners Taschenausgabe, Nr. 98,
     mit einem Nachwort, ed. by R. Marx, Alfred Kröner Verlag, Leipzig 1931 106. Further examples pp. 72,
     244, 377, 396.
     6           ARCHETYPAL SYMBOLS IN FAIRYTALES

     finds that he thought the spirit31 emerged out of a plurality of persistent ideas,
     which he compared to cell monads.32 From their combination, there evolves
     a spiritual33 organism that is aware of the self. The unconscious is the more
     general – or the more connected to the world – part of the soul, and also the
     further basis for consciousness.34 He writes that one can:
13        . . . compare the life of the soul with ceaseless ever-widening circles
          of a greater current, which are lit only at one tiny place by sunlight,
          that is, from consciousness. That the unconscious is the basis of
          conscious life of the soul can be recognized by observing that the
          larger part of our conscious thoughts are time and again submerged
          back into unconsciousness and only partly and then singly do they
          appear again in consciousness.35

14   Since the unconscious is connected to the world, dreams contain a certain
     truth, which is observed by consciousness in the form of a symbol as it emerges
     from the unconscious.36
15       Unfortunately, this insight of Carus’s did not bear fruit for fairytale
     research. In contrast, near the end of the 19th Century, Ludwig Laistner
     (1845-1896) undertook in his Das Rätsel der Sphinx37 – notably alone and in-
     dependently – the attempt to explain fairytales, local legends, and folkloristic
     motifs as nightmare phenomena.
16       Only after Sigmund Freud (1856-1939) scientifically and systematically
     researched the phenomenon of the unconscious and, in particular, its main
     expression in dreams, did fresh light fall on the problem of fairytales. A
     number of notable works emerged from Freud’s school including Franz
     Riklin, “Wunscherfüllung und Symbolik”;38 Karl Abraham, “Traum und
     Mythus”;39 Otto Rank, The Myth of the Birth of the Hero and Psychology and
     the Soul;40 Ernest Jones, Der Alptraum;41 Dr. Aigremont, Volkserotik and
     31
        [Geist, there is no unambiguous translation of Geist or geistigen, it can mean spirit, mind, or psyche;
     as well as, ghost and ghostly.]
     32
        [In German: Zellenmonaden.]
     33
        [geistiger. Alternate translation: psychic.]
     34
        C.G. Carus, Psyche, Leipzig 1931 p. 216 [referring to “. . . the three developmental steps of the soul:
     unconsciousness, worldly consciousness (Weltbewusstsein), and self consciousness.”]
     35
        C.G. Carus, Psyche, Leipzig 1931 p. 1–2.
     36
        Cf. C.G. Carus, Psyche, Leipzig 1931 p. 216–17.
     37
        See above, fn. 36.
     38
        Cf. Franz Riklin, “Wunscherfüllung und Symbolik im Märchen”, in: Schriften zur angewandten See-
     lenkunde, no. 2, ed. by Sigmund Freud, Franz Deuticke, Leipzig and Wien 1908, Verlags-Nr. 1457, in
     particular, p. 5.
     39
        Cf. Karl Abraham, “Traum und Mythus”, eine Studie zur Völkerpsychologie, in: Schriften zur ange-
     wandten Seelenkunde, no. 4, ed. by Sigmund Freud, Franz Deuticke, Leipzig and Wien 1909, Verlags-
     Nr. 1517, in particular, pp. 4–9.
     40
         Cf. Translations of Otto Rank, “Der Mythus von der Geburt des Helden. Versuch einer
     psychologischen Mythendeutung”, in: Schriften zur angewandten Seelenkunde, No. 5, ed. by Sigmund
     Freud, Franz Deuticke, Leipzig and Wien 1922 and Otto Rank, Seelenglaube und Psychologie. Eine
     prinzipielle Untersuchung über Ursprung, Entwicklung und Wesen des Seelischen, Franz Deuticke, Leipzig
     and Wien 1930, Verlags-Nr. 3345, the latter in particular, p. 103– 06.
                                                                               Introduction                  7

     Pflanzenwelt and Fuss- and Schuh-Symbolik;42 Geza Roheim, Spiegelzauber;43
     and Georg Jacob, “Märchen und Traum”.44 In these works, attempts were made
     to uncover the same psychic motifs in fairytales and legends that one finds
     in dreams of modern people. The predominant view that sees these motifs as
     erotic tendencies proves unsatisfactory, however, since the meaning of the
     unconscious material is not thereby exhaustively explained. Herbert Silberer
     tried again in his Problems of Mysticism to elaborate not only a reductive but
     also an anagogic symbol interpretation.45
17       The main virtue of Freudian psychology for fairytale research is that it
     revealed the principal affinity of dreams of modern people to the conceptual
     world of children and archaic peoples. Freud conjectured that there is a
     meaning in the images of dreams and myths that can also be expressed in
     conscious language. Differing from this view, Carl Gustav Jung (1875–1961)
     saw in these images the expression of a psychic basic structure46 that, working
     unconsciously, triggers spiritual and instinctual functions of the soul.47 The
     forces which underlie these images Jung called archetypes:48

     41
         Cf. Ernest Jones, Der Alptraum in seiner Beziehung zu gewissen Formen des mittelalterlichen Aber-
     glaubens, Psychoanalytischer Verlag, Leipzig 1912.
     42
         Dr. Aigremont, Volkserotik und Pflanzenwelt. Eine Darstellung alter wie moderner erotischer und
     sexueller Gebräuche, Vergleiche, Benennungen, Sprichwörter, Redewendungen, Rätsel, Volkslieder,
     erotischen Zaubers und Aberglaubens, sexueller Heilkunde, die sich auf Pflanzen beziehen, Erster Band,
     Hallescher Verlag für Literatur und Musik, Gebr. Trensinger, Halle a. S. 1909 and Dr. Aigremont, Fuss-
     und Schuh-Symbolik und -Erotik: Folkloristische und sexualwissenschaftliche Untersuchungen. Mit einem
     Geleitwort von Dr. Friedrich S. Krauß, Deutsche Verlags-Aktien-Gesellschaft, Leipzig 1909.
     43
         Cf. Géza Róheim, Spiegelzauber, Vol. 6, Internationaler Psychoanalytischer Verlag, Leipzig and Wien
     1919, Internat. Psychoanalytische Bibliothek.
     44
         Cf. Georg Jacob, “Märchen und Traum. Mit besonderer Berücksichtigung des Orients”, in: Beitr. z.
     Märchenforschung d. Morgenlandes, Band 1, ed. by Georg Jacob and Theodor Menzel, Orient-Buch-
     handlung Heinz Lafaire, Hannover 1923.
     45
         Cf. H. Silberer, Problems of Mysticism, New York 1917 p. 216. Note the rather severe application using
     the example of a fairytale in ibid pp. 217ff. Cf. also the general concept of symbols in “Über die
     Symbolbildung”, in particular Herbert Silberer, “Über die Symbolbildung”, in: Jahrbuch für psycho-
     analytische und psychopathologische Forschungen, Vol. 3, ed. by Ernst Bleuler and Sigmund Freud, Franz
     Deuticke, Leipzig and Wien 1912 pp. 662–682.
     46
         [seelischen Grundstruktur.]
     47
         On the importance of an auseinandersetzung [consciously working through with one’s own
     unconscious figures, emotions, drives, etc.] as the way for modern people to experience the meaning
     of mythological images, see in general C.G. Jung, Collected Works (CW) passim, especially C.G. Jung,
     “Psychological Commentary on ‘The Tibetan Book of the Dead””, in: Sir Herbert Read et al. (eds.),
     Psychology East and West, 2nd edition. Princeton University Press, Princeton CW 11, CW11 ¶831ff.
     and C.G. Jung, “Psychologie und Religion”, in: Zur Psychologie westlicher und östlicher Religion, GW 11,
     2nd edition. Rascher Verlag, Zürich und Stuttgart 1963 ¶106 f. Further H. Zimmer: “The merit of the
     new depth psychology is that it unearths that which is timeless in us, in a form appropriate to our times,
     so that we can comprehend it and live by it. This psychology and the analytic method by which it
     operates constitute no more than a symbolic and visual means of obtaining knowledge about our being,
     it is a science born of our time and our predicament with which it will also pass away, but for that very
     reason it is to us more intelligible than any other set of symbols. . . It is our way of giving name and
     form to the intangible reality within us, it is the special form of māyā through which the reality of the
     soul can manifest itself in our historical moment.” (Heinrich Zimmer, On the Significance of Indian
     Tantric Yoga, in: Spiritual Disciplines: Papers from the Eranos Yearbooks, Princeton University Press,
     Princeton NJ 1960, Bollingen XXX-4 28–29.) Cf. also Heinrich Zimmer; Joseph Campbell (ed.), The
     King and the Corpse, Tales of the Soul’s Conquest of Evil. Princeton University Press, Princeton NJ 1972.
     48
         Cf. C.G. Jung; Sir Herbert Read et al. (eds.), Psychological Types, 2nd edition. Princeton University
     Press, Princeton CW 6 ¶746. Cf. further C.G. Jung, CW 11, Tibetan ¶845 and C.G. Jung, CW 8, On the
     Nature of the Psyche ¶397ff.
     8           ARCHETYPAL SYMBOLS IN FAIRYTALES

18        These are the universal dispositions of the mind, and they are to be
          understood as analogous to Plato’s forms (Eidola), with which the
          mind organizes its contents. One could also describe these forms as
          categories in analogy to logical categories, which are always and
          everywhere present as the basic postulates of reason. Only, in the case
          of our “forms,” we are not dealing with categories of reason but with
          categories of imagination. As the products of the imagination are
          always in essence visual, their forms must, from the outset, have the
          character of images and moreover of typical images, which is why,
          following St. Augustine, I call them “archetypes.”49

19   Noteworthy here is that Meister Eckhart (ca. 1260–ca. 1328) also uses this
     concept and indeed he sees in these primordial images (Urbildern) the only
     possibility for the soul to realize itself. In his “Sermon on Ephesians 4:23,” he
     wrote:

20        Now St. Augustine says that together with the essence of the soul in
          her highest part, which is called mens in Latin or “mind”, God created
          a power which the masters call a container or shrine of spiritual forms
          or formal images.50

21   And in another place Meister Eckhart writes:

          Whenever the power of the soul touches creatures, so do they take
          this and create images in the likeness of the creature and take this unto
          themselves. From this so do creatures know. . . And from the present
          images so do they approach the creatures, when the image is a thing,
          that the soul creates with the powers. If it is a stone, or a horse, or a
          human being, or whatever they call it, so do they take the image for
          that which they have drawn and make out of these one.51



     49
        C.G. Jung, CW 11, Tibetan ¶845. Cf. further C.G. Jung, “Concerning the Archetypes, with Special
     Reference to the Anima Concept”, in: The Archetypes of the Collective Unconscious, CW 9/I, 2nd edition.
     Routledge and Kegan Paul, London 1969 ¶111ff.; C.G. Jung, CW 11, “Psychology and religion,” ¶88;
     C.G. Jung, CW 9i, “Mother Archetype” ¶148 f. Concerning seeing the being of things with the “eye of
     the soul” in the antique mysteries, see Hans Leisegang, Die Gnosis, Kröners Taschenausgabe Vol. 32,
     Alfred Kröner Verlag, Leipzig 1924 9. Silberer writes in H. Silberer, Problems of Mysticism, New York
     1917 p. 255 of the so-called initial motifs of the elementary types. For information on the history of the
     concept of the archetype, see the clarifying study by Paul Schmitt, “Archetypisches bei Augustin und
     Goethe”, in: Eranos-Jahrbuch 12: Studien zum Problem des Archetypischen, ed. by Olga Fröbe-Kapteyn,
     Rhein-Verlag, Zürich 1945, Festgabe 95ff.
     50
        Meister Eckhart (trans. Davies), Selected Writings, London 1994 p. 235. [For original German see the
     Pfeiffer version Meister Eckhart, Deutsche Mystiker des vierzehnten Jahrhunderts. 2. Vol.: Meister Eckhart,
     Teil 1, ed. by Franz Pfeiffer, Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, Göttingen 1906 318 on Ephes, IV. 23.]
     51
        For original see Meister Eckhart (Pfeiffer), Predigten, Göttingen 1906 p. S. 3 on Wisdom 18:14.
                                                                                 Introduction                   9

22        Archetypal images can manifest spontaneously anytime and anywhere.52
     This fact makes it unnecessary to look for explanations in speculative
     hypotheses about the migration of fairytale motifs. The similarity of the motifs
     is related to the structural identity of the human psyche. The archetype itself
     is an indeterminate form, not identical with any specific mythological image;
     the latter is one possible form in which the underlying archetype can manifest
     itself. We can never know what an archetype is, in and of itself; we are
     dependent upon the multitude of individual forms that make the archetype
     visible. Fairytales, with their myriad and remarkable motifs and deeds that
     time and again group together, offer a rich source of these images. These tales
     are like colorful blossoms on the gigantic tree of the spiritual and psychic inner
     life of human beings. In the present work we cannot, unfortunately, recount
     the individual tales in all their diversity and beauty, but only briefly sketch
     their variations. We will try, however, not to obscure their abundance and
     riches.
23        The path taken to approach the meaning of fairytales is similar to that
     taken to interpret dreams. A dream image taken out of context does not lend
     itself to being replaced by a single, unequivocal rational concept, since it is in
     the nature of these images that they express facts of the soul in specific
     concrete forms, which can only be approximately described through a long
     process of conscious realization. Johann Jakob Bachofen (1815–1887) in his
     book, An Essay on Mortuary Symbolism, writes:

24        The symbol plucks all the strings of the human spirit at once; speech
          is compelled to take up a single thought at a time. The symbol strikes
          its roots in the most secret depths of the soul; language skims over the
          surface of the understanding like a soft breeze. The symbol aims
          inward; language outward. Only the symbol can combine the most
          disparate elements into a unified impression. Language deals in
          successive particulars; it expresses bit by bit what must be brought
          home to the soul at a single glance if it is to affect us profoundly.53

25       In order to uncover the meaning of the symbol’s concise form, we
     amplified single fairytale motifs using a wide range of comparative material.
     To check the correctness of an interpretation of an image or motif we can

     52
        In contrast to the idea, the archetype does not lend itself to abstract rational processing: “The
     primordial image has one great advantage over the clarity of the idea, and that is its vitality. It is a self-
     activating organism ‘endowed with generative power’.” (C.G. Jung, CW 6, Psychological Types ¶754).
     One could also say, “that it [the primordial image] seems to strive for its own realization, being sensed
     by the mind as an active determinant.” (C.G. Jung, CW 6, Psychological Types ¶736). [Jung later preferred
     the term archetype to the terms primordial and archaic image.]
     53
        Johannn Jakob Bachofen, “An Essay on Ancient Mortuary Symbolism”, in: Myth, Religion, & Mother
     Right, selected writings of J. J. Bachofen. Transl. by Ralph Manheim. Bollingen Series LXXXIV, Bollingen,
     Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ 1973 49–50.
     10          ARCHETYPAL SYMBOLS IN FAIRYTALES

     follow the complete course of the fairytale. Only when we can apply a
     consistent interpretation to the whole fairytale, that is, when the meaning
     follows not only a single image, but fits the whole story and reflects a coherent
     developmental sequence,54 and arises out of the fullness of an extended series
     of motifs, can we assume that we have captured the essentials.55 Just as we must
     take dreams in their entirety to find their meaning, and just as a painting not
     only comprises a single figure, so we must consider all parts of a dream or a
     painting and their relationships to each other together to be the artist’s intent
     to express something inexpressible. Similarly, it is necessary to take all their
     various forms into account when searching out the meaning of fairytales. As
     little as it is possible to study drama and only be interested in the movements
     of the main characters, so it is in fairytales: no single thread creates the whole
     fabric. All motifs in fairytales have a specific and noninterchangeable place in
     the total structure. It can even be that the same motif at different places in the
     tale must be interpreted differently.56 A purely scholarly collection of similar
     motifs is only the initial step. The next step is to investigate the special
     functions of the images in the fairytale in relationship to the whole story. Thus
     one can encompass the whole and interpret the closed circle of the images
     within this context. A coherent meaning appears only in relation to all the
     characters of a fairytale.
26         When considering what happens in a fairytale, one notices that the sense
     of space, time, and causality is missing,57 a characteristic, which also appears
     in the thought and behavior of primitive peoples and children, and which
     Lucien Lévy-Bruhl has called pre-logical thought.58 It corresponds to that
     spiritual state when humans had not completely developed out of the
     unconscious into consciousness, and so confirms the view of fairytales as


     54
        [Sinneinheit, literally “a unit of meaning.”]
     55
        The truth of our statements still remains contingent since: “Those who argue reveal more about their
     own limits and prejudices, especially when a particular meaning inspires them to think they can draw
     gold from those depths.” Heinrich Zimmer, Weisheit Indiens. Märchen und Sinnbilder, L. C. Wittich
     Verlag, Darmstadt 1938 11. See also p. 101. Cf. further Heinrich Zimmer, “Maya” der indische Mythos,
     Deutsche Verlags-Anstalt, Stuttgart and Berlin 1936 169–170.
     56
        Cf. also Zimmer, “Each scene and object in them (myths and fairytales), in fact everything that occurs,
     can appear as a sign not merely for differences, but even for the diametric opposites, each in its own
     right, each according to the context and interrelations in which it stands, according to the place and
     within its series of signs, and according to its position in the bend of the curve [Schwunge der Kurve].”
     (H. Zimmer, Maya, Stuttgart and Berlin 1936 p. 168.)
     57
        Cf. among others, C.G. Jung, CW 8, On the Nature of the Psyche ¶405fn. 117, ¶471, esp. ¶440; C.G.
     Jung, Mind and Earth, in: Sir Herbert Read et al. (eds.), Civilization in Transition, Princeton University
     Press, Princeton CW 10, Trans. by R. F. C. Hull ¶49ff.; C.G. Jung; Maria Meyer-Grass Lorenz Jung (ed.),
     Children’s Dreams, Notes from the Seminar Given in 1936–1940, Princeton University Press, Princeton
     2008, translated by Ernst Falzeder and Tony Woolfson, 1936/37, 1938/39, 1939/40; cf. also C.G. Jung,
     “Über den Archetypus. Mit besonderer Berücksichtigung des Animabegriffs”, in: Zentralblatt für Psy-
     chotherapie Vol. 9, Nr. 5 1936 269 [references as in original].
     58
        In Lucien Lévy-Bruhl, The “Soul” of the Primitive, Macmillan, New York 1928, Lucien Lévy-Bruhl,
     How Natives Think, authorized translation by Lilian A. Clare (1926), Washington Square Press, Inc.,
     New York 1966.
                                                                                    Introduction                    11

     quasi-primeval happenings, acts of archetypal figures, the observed natural
     relationship of childlike peoples to the nature of fairytales.
27        In spite of this insight we still do not really know in detail the process of
     how fairytales evolve. Max Lüthi achieved a significant step forward in that
     he showed local legends to be a more realistic and primary product of the
     soul.59 As opposed to local legends, Lüthi identifies fairytales as being
     abstractions.60 But what he calls “abstraction” aims – translated into our
     terminology – at a formal description of the archetypal images, which in
     fairytales, in contrast to local legends – as far as they work abstractly and strip
     everything down to bare essentials – still remind us of a primal experience.
     (To this abstraction belongs what Lüthi calls the two-dimensionality,
     geometrical linearity, abstractness, extremeness, and bluntness of fairytale
     motifs. With these he includes their lack of feeling life, single-strandedness of
     the plot, rigidity of form, and isolation and interconnectedness; in general,
     what he calls the “abstract” style of the fairytales.)61 Seen from the psycho-
     logical viewpoint, local legends are to a large extent factual reports of magical
     incidents, which represent the experience of an invasion by the world of
     archetypes into consciousness. These build upon and keep alive an immense
     treasure trove of archetypal notions in peoples the world over, out of which
     grows, as Lüthi correctly observed, the remarkable “abstract” interrelationship
     of a fairytale storyline.62 Indeed, local legends offer psychological researchers
     the advantage of illuminating the total human situation, in which the
     numinous experience of the archetypes takes place. Fairytales, on the other
     hand, have an advantage over legends in that they more purely represent the
     archetypes and let them become more clearly comprehensible in their
     “network of roots” and their dynamic functions.63 Legends illuminate more

     59
        Cf. Max Lüthi, Die Gabe im Märchen und in der Sage. Ein Beitrag zur Wesenserfassung und
     Wesensscheidung der beiden Formen, Inaugural-Dissertation der Philosophischen Fakultät, Universität
     Bern, Bern 1943 114–15, Max Lüthi, The European Folktale: Form and Nature (trans. by John D. Niles),
     Indiana University Press, Bloomington & Indianapolis 1982 11ff.
     60
        Cf. “The gift of fairytales and thus the fairytale itself, exhibits the last clarity of the outer and inner
     form. With their blurring of contours, legends mirror the rich and, precisely because of that, incom-
     prehensible concreteness of real things and processes.” M. Lüthi, Die Gabe, Bern 1943 p. 118. [English
     translation not found in The European Folktale.] Cf. also M. Lüthi, Die Gabe, Bern 1943 p. 119.
     61
        Cf. among others M. Lüthi, The European Folktale, Bloomington and Indianapolis 1982 p. 15ff., 37,
     51ff., 66, 77–79.
     62
        “The abstract, isolating, diagrammatical style of the folktale embraces all motifs and transforms them.
     Objects as well as persons lose their individual characteristics and turn into weightless, transparent
     figures.” (M. Lüthi, The European Folktale, Bloomington and Indianapolis 1982 p. 66.)
     63
        Lüthi writes (in The European Folktale, Bloomington and Indianapolis 1982, 62) about the “unrealistic
     rigidity” of fairytales. “The folktale (Märchen) does not confirm or explain, anything, it simply represents
     [p. 59] …It merely observes and portrays. And this dreamlike vision of the world, a vision that demands
     nothing of us, neither faith nor avowal, accepts itself so matter-of-factly and is given verbal expression
     so unerringly that we let ourselves be carried along away by it in a state of bliss [p. 85] . . . In its [i.e. the
     folktale’s] view, things become light, weightless, transparent as the deceptive veil of apparent reality falls
     away. Whatever in the real world is bound in a complex net of interdependencies and reciprocal ties
     appears in the folktale in its ultimate isolation and capacity for universal interconnection [p. 87] …the
     world of the figures that folktales presents to us – from the stars and the minerals and all the various
     12          ARCHETYPAL SYMBOLS IN FAIRYTALES

     the suspenseful relation of this life to another world or to an awareness of the
     unconscious. Fairytales, on the contrary, illuminate the unconscious forms
     and regularity64 of the natural laws of the soul in a more stripped down
     (abgelöster) form.65
28        This regularity mirrors itself in fairytales, not only in the primeval66
     images, but also in whole sequences that are in themselves kinetic types and
     combine in different ways in different tales. The primordial images are not
     only images, but also psychic powers.67 The circumstance that in fairytales not
     only motifs, but also complete episodes, repeat themselves, facilitates our
     efforts to interpret them. We refrain, therefore, from striving for completeness
     in listing all parallel tales or motifs in the assumption that by thoroughly
     handling the essential types, interpretation of other material with the same or
     similar content will naturally follow. Due to the fluid character of the
     archetypes and their overlapping of contours, our attempts to define the basic
     forms admittedly exhibit a certain fuzziness.
29        We focus in the following on fairytales and leave aside other genera, such
     as literary tales, animal tales, stories, and legends,68 and only occasionally

     objects to flowers, animals, human beings, and spirits – is of value in itself, and what holds it together
     it together is not the ‘justice of events’ but rather the rightness of events in general [p. 89] …Not for a
     moment does its abstract portrayal leave us in doubt about the fact that it intends to portray what is
     essential, not merely what is real.” M. Lüthi, The European Folktale, Bloomington and Indianapolis 1982
     p. 89–90.
     64
        [German: Gesetzmässigkeit.]
     65
        Cf. the similar results of Lüthi’s research in M. Lüthi, Die Gabe, Bern 1943 p. 140. See also, “Not only
     does the folktale (Märchen) lack a sense of gap separating the everyday world from the world of the
     supernatural. In its essence and in every sense, it lacks the dimension of depth. Its characters are figures
     without substance, without inner life, without an environment; they lack any relation to past and future,
     to time altogether.” M. Lüthi, The European Folktale, Bloomington and Indianapolis 1982 p. 11.
     66
        [German: urtümlich.]
     67
         Cf. C.G. Jung, “On Psychic Energy”, in: Sir Herbert Read et al. (eds.), Collected Works, Vol 8: The
     Structure and Dynamics of the Psyche, 2nd Ed. 2nd edition. Princeton University Press, Princeton CW
     8 ¶26ff., and C.G. Jung, CW 6, Psychological Types ¶355.
     68
         For reasons mentioned below, we do not consider the large collection of oriental fairytales. The
     collection of A Thousand and One Nights comprises many layers and is enriched by ingredients of varied
     literary character and contents from many lands (cf. J. Bolte and G. Polívka, Anmerkungen, Vol. 4,
     Leipzig 1930 p. 397ff, and Enno Littmann (ed.), Die Erzählungen aus den Tausendundein Nächten,
     Deutsche Ausgabe in sechs Bänden. Zum ersten Mal n. d. arabischen Urtext der Calcuttaer Ausgabe
     vom Jahre 1839, Insel-Verlag, Leipzig 1923 Appendix Vol. VI, p. 681ff.). It would have exceeded the
     framework of the present work to uncover the primary content of this opulent product of the oriental
     art of storytelling. Unfortunately, the volume Arabic Fairy Tales, A Thousand and One Nights in their
     Original Form (K. Dyroff) in the collection, Folktales of World Literature (Märchen der Weltliteratur in
     the following abbreviated as MdW ), published by Verlag Diederichs, Jena, which we could have
     certainly used for our purposes, did not appear before the present book went to press [1952]. Similarly,
     Thousand and One Days, (cf. Paul Ernst (ed.), Tausend und ein Tag / Orientalische Erzählungen. Erster
     Band, ausgew. and eingel. v. Paul Ernst. Übertr. v. Felix Paul Greve, Insel-Verlag, Leipzig 1909
     Introduction p. 7ff.). Also the collection of Turkish tales coming by way of India, Tuti-Nameh or The
     Parrot Book carries so much the character of a didactic novel that it will not be considered here (cf. J.
     Bolte and G. Polívka, Anmerkungen, Vol. 5, Leipzig 1932 p. 188 and Georg Rosen, Tuti-Nameh. Das
     Papageienbuch. Eine Sammlung orientalischer Erzählungen. Nach der türkischen Fassung übersetzt von
     Georg Rosen, Volume 17, Bibliothek der Romane, Insel-Verlag, Leipzig 192- Foreword to the 1st ed.,
     415ff..) It is regrettable that for the present research, we could use only a few examples from the land
     which offers a sheer inexhaustible wealth of fairytales and which Benfley would like to denote as the
     original home of fairytales (i.e. India). Due to their artistic and consciously created, novel-like,
                                                                              Introduction                 13

     include them to extend our horizons. Also, we only discuss sources and formal
     criticism in a few exceptional cases.
30        As mentioned above, investigation of parallel patterns of behavior of
     fairytale figures demonstrates that some important motifs and problems could
     be taken together. This situation was used as a basis for the division of
     chapters. Furthermore, it became evident that all the fairytale images lead to
     one central secret, whose meaning the following attempt to interpret hopefully
     approaches.
31        Fairytales that we felt deserved a more extensive discussion are marked
     with an asterisk, for example: “Help in Need”* (China). This marking serves
     as a guideline throughout the first and continues in the second volume
     (Archetypal Symbols in Fairytales. Antitheses and Renewal) of this book. These
     more important fairytales are noted in the index volume and are all
     characterised in the same way. Other fairytales mentioned in the text also
     appear in the index, but without an asterisk. In addition to this fairytale index,
     there is also a bibliography of referenced literature, an author, and a subject
     index.




     Buddhistic-didactic clothing, and the heterogeneity of elements in collections such as the Pantschatantra
     and the Kathasaritsagara by Somadeva, it would require extensive literary and religious-historical
     research to bring out the original kernel. For similar reasons, we refrain from discussing literary
     fairytales such as collected and/or retold by Musäs, Hauff, Bechstein, Andersen, etc.
           Section 1
The Profane and Magical Worlds
    and their Main Figures
              The Profane and Magical World
                  and their Main Figures


32        Fantasy brings the future world to our doorstep; either in the heights
          or in the depths or in the transmigration [of souls]. We dream of
          traveling through the universe; is then the universe in us? The depths
          of our psyche we know not, but inwards goes the mysterious way. In
          us or nowhere is eternity with its worlds: the past and the future.


33        Die Phantasie setzt die künftige Welt entweder in die Höhe oder in
          die Tiefe oder in der Metempsychose zu uns. Wir träumen von Reisen
          durch das Weltall: ist denn das Weltall in uns? Die Tiefen unseres
          Geistes kennen wir nicht. – Nach innen geht der geheimnisvolle Weg.
          In uns oder nirgends ist die Ewigkeit mit ihren Welten, die Vergan-
          genheit und Zukunft.

     Novalis Fragmente Nr. 593.


34   The world in which the fairytale’s story unfolds is not our normal everyday
     world. We encounter miraculous appearances, wonderful events and
     surprising developments as if they were a matter of course. We meet talking
     animals, witches, and dwarves; characters and events that do not occur in our
     conscious wakeful state. In a fairytale, the laws of time and space lose their
     validity: the maiden in “Sleeping Beauty (Little Briar Rose)” awakens in full
     beauty after a hundred-year sleep, or the young spinning girl in “Mother
     Holle” falls into a well and arrives in a heavenly world where snow falls down
     to Earth. One could describe the sphere in which fairytales transpire as a
     magical realm in contrast to our profane world.1 This magical realm is often
     located in a particular place, the most important examples being: Heaven,
     Earth, the depths of the Earth, the forest, a lake, the ocean, a remote island,
     the moon, a mountain, a cave, the northern mists. Gerardus van der Leeuw
     (1890-1950) summarized all these magical places as the land of the soul and
     1
       The authors thank Dr. Armin Kietzmann, Altenhagen (Hannover), for the initial suggestion to divide
     fairytales into these two realms.
     18          ARCHETYPAL SYMBOLS IN FAIRYTALES

     described its main aspects.2 This realm can be found in the consciousness of
     primitive peoples as an untracked, desolate beyond that at the same time is
     paradoxically immediately next to where normal people live. It is the gruesome
     abode of the dead and can just as well be a beautiful Garden of Paradise like
     the Garden of the Gods of Euripides or the Island of the Blessed. Sometimes it
     lies in the West, sometimes in the East, North, or South; sometimes it is
     earthly, sometimes heavenly; but it is always otherworldly. At times, natural
     peoples imagine this realm to be simultaneously in different places without
     facing any conflict with the illogicality of their conception of space.3
35        The storylines of fairytales have preserved this character of the land of the
     soul. The enchanted kingdom into which the hero steps at the beginning, or
     which from the outset is present, has all the characteristics and aspects
     mentioned above. Strikingly, inside this soul land we almost always find some
     kind of a constructed (usually geometrically divided) center: a castle or a
     palace, a four-cornered house, or a round lake with a mountain or island in
     the middle. The important processes take place in this center; it is here that
     we touch the central problem of the fairytale.
36        The transition from everyday life, that is, the realm of normal conscious-
     ness, to the numinous otherworld, is particularly clearly portrayed in the
     account of the acts that take place in the magical arena. To illustrate this, we
     begin with the following examples.4




     2
       Cf. G. v. d. Leeuw, Religion in Essence, Vol. 1 p. ¶46, pp. 317–322.
     3
       Cf. G. Van der Leeuw, “That in this way different localities often arose simultaneously, troubled neither
     primitive mentality nor thought of antiquity, as. . . in the case of Egypt; and the inhabitants of Eddystone
     (Mandegus) Island also seek the beyond in a distant country, but at the same time in a cave on their
     own island. . . Much the most preferable place, however, for this near-and-far, sought by the soul, is the
     underworld, or rather in the earth.” (G. v. d. Leeuw, Religion in Essence, Vol. 1 pp. 319–320.)
     4
       Cf. also the investigation of H. Silberer, Symbolik des Erwachens und Schwellensymbolik Überhaupt
     [Symbols of Awakening and Barrier Symbolism] on the self portrait of the transition to sleep in the
     dream.
