
Chinese Traditional Herbal Medicine 
Vol I. Diagnosis and Treatment 
Michael Tierra
1 
LAc.
1 
OMD
1 
A.H.G. 
and Lesley Tierra
1 
LAc.
1 
A.H.G. 
DISCLAIMER 
This book is a reference work, not intended to diagnose, prescribe or 
treat. The information contained herein is in no way to be considered 
as a substitute for consultation with a qualified health-care profes-
sional. 
Copyright© 1998  Michael Tierra 
ALL  RIGHTS RESERVED.  No part of this book may be produced in 
any form or by any electronic or mechanical means including informa-
tion storage and retrieval systems without permission in writing from 
the publisher, except by a reviewer who may quote brief passages in a 
review. For inquiries contact Lotus Press, PO Box 325, Twin Lakes, WI 
53181 U.S.A. 
First Edition 1998 
Printed in the United States of America 
ISBN  978-0-9149-5531-3 
Library of Congress Catalogue Number 98-66146 
DEDlCATlON 
To Dr.  Miriam Lee, a courageous pioneer of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine in California. Suffering legal harassment in the early years, 
she most generously and openly shared her wisdom and skill with a 
whole generation of Western practitioners, who revere her with great 
honor and respect. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Dr.  Naixin Hu, TCM Doctor and former professor of herbal medi-
cine at the Traditional Chinese Medical College in Shanghai, for 
critically reviewing and contributing many valuable suggestions. 
Thomas Garan, who helped in compiling and editing many portions 
of the text. 
Bill Schoenbart, TCM practitioner, who was able to bring his deep 
understanding of Traditional Chinese Medicine and his skill as an 
editor to this book. 
Ewan Klein, TCM practitioner in Scotland, who helped review the 
manuscript. 
Marjorie Wolfe who helped with the editing and collating of the text 
and thus developed her computer skills. 
Baba Hari Das, Yogi and Healer for his inspiration and transmission 
of yogic pranayarnas. 
CONTENTS 
Foreword  vi 
Introduction 
I 
History  of  Chinese  Herbalisim 
5 
2 
The  Theory  of Yin  and  Yang  13 
3 
The  Five  Elements  28 
4 
Fundamental  Substances 
65 
5 
The  Eight Principles 
93 
6 
The  Six  Stages  of  Disease 
and  the  Four  Levels  of  Disease  121 
7 
The  Organs 
134 
8 
Causes  of  Disease  162 
9 
The  Four  Methods of  Diagnosis 
195 
IO 
Patterns  of  Disharmony 
II 
Differentia[  Diagnosis  244 
I2 
Eight  Methods  of  Herbal  Treatment  306 
IJ 
Whole  Nutrition  314 
14 
Herbal  Preparations  &  Treatments  345 
Appendix 
Accessory  Healing  Therapies  for  the  Herbalist  355 
Bibliography  377 
Endnotes  379 
Sources  and  Resources  381 
         385 
        lndex  389 
lndex  of  Chinese Herbal Formulas  399 
FOREWORD 
Chinese Herbal Medicine, one of the most precious resources from my 
mother country, is fmally beginning to achieve the recognition it deserves 
in the Western world. Today we see how not only acupuncturists, but a 
wide range of health care practitioners, including medical doctors, 
herbalists, chiropractors, nutritionists, and midwives, are increasingly 
using Chinese herbs for their patients. Acupuncture has been well known 
for some time as an independent health care method, but people are 
just now beginning to understand more clearly that acupuncture and 
herbal medicine are the two parts of a complete system of healing, 
called Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM). 
The organization of training in Chinese medical universities can 
give some insight into the scope and depth ofTCM, arid the balance 
between the different parts ofTCM. Each province in China has one 
government sponsored University ofTCM. The largest in Beijing has a 
staff of several thousand, maintains a large hospital, and runs more 
than a dozen independent research institutes. 
There are usually three departments: Materia Medica, Acupuncture 
and Herbal Medicine. The Materia Medica department is concerned 
with pharmacological and botanical descriptions ofthe herbal medicines, 
plant collection, storage and preparation. Graduates get four years of 
training, and occupy positions similar to pharmacists here. They also 
carry out scientific research to ensure safety and efficacy of the herbal 
materials. They do not prescribe. Students in the acupuncture department 
study for 5 years, with the same basic medical theory as herbal doctors, 
but with more attention on needling and less on herbs. Their training is 
similar in format to graduates of American acupuncture schools, but 
one to two years longer. The department of herbal medicine is by 
far  the  largest  university  department,  typically  occupying 
approximately 60% of the classroom space, compared to 25% for materia 
medica,  and  perhaps  only  about  15%  for  acupuncture.  This  is 
quite  the  reverse  in  the  West  where  acupuncture  has  thus  far 
defined the public and legal recognition ofTCM. 
It is my one sadness that Chinese herbalism has not yet achieved 
its own independent prominence, as befits its stature in China. Only 
recently with the separate certification by the National Commission for 
the Certification of Acupuncturists (NCCA) has there been a separate 
testing and certification procedure for  the certification of Chinese 
herbalists. While not officially recognized in all states, it nevertheless 
easily and facilely establishes the possibility for the recognition of a 
VI 
professional class of herbalists in America, albeit Chinese herbalists. It 
is  up  to  the  new  generation  of  herbalists  to  form  these  laws. 
TCM students of the herbal medicine department major in herbal 
medicine, minor in acupuncture, and, after graduation, prescribe herbal 
medicines to their patients. Unlike in the West--where there is huge 
schism between traditional medicine and conventional Western allopathic 
medicine-TCM doctors occupy positions equal in stature to the Western 
style family doctors. They practice side by side as equals in all Chinese 
hospitals under the combined Westem/fCM system throughout China. 
What  a  great benefit to our Western  patients  if there was greater 
acceptance, respect and dialogue between Western and Tmditional doctors. 
If more Western doctors could learn to embrace the well established 
efficacy ofTCM, there would be much less abuse of extreme therapeutic 
procedures and the unnecessary use of conventional Western drugs for 
conditions that herbs or acupuncture could better treat. After all, Chinese 
herbs excel at nourishing and detoxifying the body at a  deep and 
fundamental level, and supported in this way the body has a much 
greater capacity to heal itself; can anyone deny this truism? Western 
medicine, in contradistinction, is powerful and heroic, and able to 
maintain life in times of severe crisis or dysfunction. Yet it is difficult to 
name a single prescription pharmaceutical which can nourish the 
lungs, the kidney, the heart or the Spirit in order to prevent the onset of 
crisis. 
From my years of teaching herbal medicine to Europeans studying 
at the Chengdu University ofTCM (Sichuan province), and my more 
recent experiences treating Westerners at Chrysalis Natural Medicine 
Center in Wilrnington, Delaware, I have become acutely aware of the 
problems confronting Western students of Chinese Herbal Medicine. 
Even for the Chinese student, it is a formidable task, requiring 5 years 
of medical school, with 6-8 hours a day of study, six days a week. Their 
training covers TCM medical theory, pharmacology, acupuncture, internal 
medicine, diagnostics, and prescription formulation. Students must be 
able to read, comprehend, and recite passages from the ancient textbooks 
(many written in our Classical language), and know the properties and 
uses of over 1,000 herbal medicines and hundreds of formulas.  Recently 
standards have been increased, with several years of postgraduate study, 
including study of Western medicine, necessary to become a doctor. 
How much more difficult it must be for the Westerner, who does not 
have direct access to the literature, the herbal medicine university, or the 
teaching hospital. 
VII 
Chinese Medicine has faced many challenges over the centuries, 
from political opposition in the past to the recent opposition of those 
claiming that it has no basis in science. Yet it has met and overcome all 
of those challenges, and is now flourishing all over the world, in large 
part due to the efforts of the many pioneers who have strived, at great 
cost and effort to themselves, to bring the knowledge of the healing 
powers of Chinese herbs to the aid of those who are suffering and sick. 
I consider my close friends and colleagues Michael Tierra and Lesley 
Tierra to be two of those pioneers. Michael, after distinguishing himself 
more than thirty years ago in the field of Western herbalism, was among 
the small group of visionaries who recognized the importance of Chinese 
herbalism at that time, and along with his wife, Lesley, were among the 
handful who have steadfastly pursued the arduous task of mastering the 
essence of that knowledge. Their new work, written in their characteristicly 
clear and lucid style, will bring a wealth of traditional knowledge to all 
those fortunate enough to realize its significance. 
Naixin Hu, OMD 
L.Ac eo-director of Chrysalis Natural Medicine Center 
Former Acupuncturist to the Royal Family of Egypt 
V111 
lNTRODUCTlON 
The inspiration for this book grew out of a need for an accessible and 
comprehensive introductory text which would combine all the most 
salient aspects of Traditional Chinese Herbalism, such as the history, 
theory, diagnosis, Materia Medica, formulary, dietary guidelines and 
treatment protocols. After years of teaching Chinese Herbalism through 
the East West correspondence course and the American School of 
Herbalism, it became obvious that there was a need for a single volume 
that includes all the information needed by a new student. 
The basis of Chinese medical theory is rooted in Confucian, Taoist 
and Buddhist philosophy. The perspective is always one of activating 
and supplementing the body's innate healing capacity to restore biological 
balance and harmony. From there, it extends to assume universal value 
and meaning beyond cultural and philosophical sectarianism. The 
theories and principles of Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) are being 
successfully applied to the use ofWestem drug therapy, vitamins, minerals 
and other supplements. Chinese physiology, as described in this book 
from a TCM perspective, has been fully validated in our own research to 
reflect the most profound and significant aspects ofWestem physiology. 
The difference is simply that the orientation ofTCM is more functional, 
referring to in-depth physiological interactions, while Western scientific 
physiology is more mechanically specific. 
For example, when reading the description of the meaning of the 
Kidneys in the chapter describing the TCM definition of the Organs, it 
can be seen that besides the actual function of the anatomical kidneys, 
the TCM Kidneys include the adrenal glands and the entire endocrine 
system. Another great Organ constellation ofTCM is the Spleen. The 
Western spleen is a blood and lymphatic organ while the TCM Spleen, 
by interpreting its designations, refers to the pancreas as well as the 
most fundamental aspects of cellular metabolism. 
So why is this important, one may ask? Why are such seemingly 
imprecise descriptions of two well known physiological organs, expressed 
in obtuse TCM jargon, useful to the Western physiologist-researcher or 
to the most fundamental understanding of medical practice throughout 
the world? To resort to the well known cliche,  "the proof is  in the 
pudding." If by applying the principles ofTCM we are able to utilize 
therapies, treatments and herbs to safely and effectively benefit the 
endocrine glands or strengthen cellular metabolism, two mechanisms 
which have profound significance in terms of maintaining health, optimal 
longevity, and successful treatment of what are regarded as incurable 
conditions, this would be a definite enhancement of all systems of medical 
practice. Economically it is of tremendous advantage since the practice 
ofTCM, unlike contemporary Western medicine, is remarkably low-
tech. Biochemists and pharmaceutical companies, if they were liberated 
from current economic demands and constraints, could investigate the 
traditional indications of Chinese herbs to understand deep complex 
physiological responses and processes. These qualities make a particular 
herb, such as Astragalus membranaceus (Huang Qi), beneficial for the 
immune system and cellular metabolism), or Rehmannia glutinosa (Sheng 
Di  Huang or Shu Di  Huang) a  safer and less crippling alternative 
treatment strategy to the use of cortisone. 
The most important aspect of traditional Chinese herbal medicine 
that will probably take most people more than a lifetime is the art of 
diagnosis. It is one thing to present all the various aspects of it in a text, 
but altogether another to be capable of evaluating the information derived 
from an assessment of symptoms to arrive at a successful therapeutic 
result. This can only come from experience and practical hands-on 
guidance from an experienced practitioner. 
To learn Chinese medicine one must be guided, at least in the 
beginning years, to focus on narrowing down centuries of accumulated 
knowledge to what is essential for beginning practice. Eventually one 
must learn nearly 400 herbs in the Materia Medica and at least 50 to 100 
formulas with possible variations. 
Today we see attempts, including in our own books, Planetary 
Herbology  and The Herbs of  Life,  to expand the practice of Chinese 
Herbalism to include herbs and healing modalities from around the 
world and several healing disciplines. While doing this, it must be 
remembered that Chinese Herbalism, while capable at least theoretically 
of such expansion,  is a circular system where theory, enetgetics, diagnosis 
and practice are all interdependent. An energetic system such as Chinese 
Herbalism is complete in itself because it attempts to describe dynamic 
living relationships between all aspects of human existence. 
Despite the necessity to achieve precision, diagnosis, as important 
as it is, becomes only a prelude or hypothetical strategy for treatment. 
Just as all herbalism is fundamentally empirical, the success of a diagnosis 
is always tested in the result of treatment.  From that perspe(.tive, Ym or 
Yang Deficiency; for instance, has no further meaning than if through 
the use of appropriate Ym or Yang tonics we are able to achieve a successful 
result. For this reason, Chinese herbalism can seem ambiguous and 
2 
confusing because, with the centuries of accumulated information, it 
virtually has an infinite number of strategies that can be applied to 
diagnosis and treatment. 
The practice of Chinese Herbalism is like a detective mystery 
where diagnosis becomes the gathering of evidence. Differential diagnosis 
means that no single piece of evidence necessarily tells all. One interprets 
a particular TCM condition based on the primary complaint, after which 
it is confirmed through the process of assessing the various patterns, 
conditions and pulse and tongue signs. For this, the most important 
tool is our discretionary powers of observation and evaluation. There is 
a considerable level of subjective evaluation, but there must always be 
enough objective evidence in order to initiate an effective treatment. 
Another vision that led to writing this book was to describe the 
holistic aspect ofTCM through the integration of complementary healing 
modalities, including diet, exercise, lifestyle and meditation. Too often 
we have seen patients who have received acupuncture and/or herbal 
treatment with poor results because the diet or some other lifestyle 
factor was not appropriately modified. The ancient approach ofTCM 
further included emotional and spiritual aspects of living, Barefoot 
Doctor techniques such as moxibustion, dermal hammer, scraping and 
cupping and therapeutic exercises, like Tai Chi and Qi Gong. While it is 
not within the scope of this book to be exhaustive in all these aspects, 
we feel that we present enough of these accessory healing modalities to 
provide an integrated therapeutic model for including these therapies 
along with the specific indicated hexbal formulas for each of the disease 
pattern syndromes. 
Like the writing of any such book, this has been a particularly 
laborious process which we sincerely hope will meet with appreciation 
by students and practitioners who desire to learn one of the most inspired 
natural healing systems on earth. 
esfJJ 
3 
ONE 
HISTORY OF CHINESE HERBAUSM 
As  with  all  traditional cultures,  the  knowledge of the therapeutic 
properties of plants and other natural substances is empirical. 1his means 
that the knowledge of their properties and uses was and still is primarily 
based upon trial and error. At first the experience of the uses of herbs 
was passed down orally. Later, the accumulated knowledge of their 
therapeutic effects was written. 
The earliest recorded Chinese hetbal was the Sben Nong Pen Tsao 
]ing or Emperor Shen Nong's Classic Herbal. Shen Nong, the God-
Farmer, was one of three legendaty kings of andent Chinese hist01y. He 
was also known as Di Huang, King of the Earth, while the other two 
were Tian Huang, the King of Heaven, and Ren Huang, the King of 
Humans. 
Before Shen Nong, Chinese society was based on hunting and 
gathering. Legend states that to encourage greater social stability and 
continuity, Shen Nong was the first to teach farming and agriculture to 
the Chinese people. In addition, he was also the first to bestow upon 
them the knowledge of medicinal herbs. The legend goes on to state 
that because of his compassion for the sick, each day he would go into 
the fields and forests and poison himself a hundred times by tasting 
various plants and substances, each time fmding a natural antidote. The 
result of Shen Nong's discoveries was the knowledge of the healing 
properties of plants, which were first recorded in the Sben Nong Pen 
T'sao,  meaning Shen Nong's Herbal. 
Out of myth and legend, Chinese herbalism evolved, and every 
official herbal has since been titled Pen T'sao in honor of Shen Nong's 
contribution. The first Sben Nong Pen T'sao published in 200 BC was 
lost, but subsequent references inform us that it contained 365 herbs. 
These were subdivided as follows:  120 emperor herbs of high, food grade 
quality which are non-toxic and can be taken in large quantities to 
maintain health over a long period of time; 120 minister herbs, some 
mildly toxic and some not, that have stronger therapeutic action to heal 
diseases; and 125 seiVant hems that have specific actions to treat disease 
and eliminate Stagnation. Most of those in the last group are toxic and 
~ 
5 
are not intended to be used daily over a prolonged period of weeks and 
months. 
Hua  Tuo  (100-208  AD)  is  regarded  as  one  of the  greatest 
acupuncturists and surgeons of Chinese medical history. He is famous 
for the discovery and use of a special set of accessory points along the 
spine which are called "Hua-Tuo" points. He was also·a highly skilled 
herbalist. 
There is a famous story that describes the psychological aspect of 
healing that was part of his practice. It involved a famous governor who, 
having been sick for a prolonged period, bestowed generous gifts on his 
renowned physician, Hua Tuo, in expectation of herbal treatment. The 
governor eventually became increasingly frustrated and angry because, 
despite his lavish endowments, Hua Tuo did not give any medicine to 
relieve his malady. In fact,  he would taunt and scoff at the governor. 
This eventually resulted in the necessity of Hua Tuo having to flee the 
district for his life to escape the governor's wrath. Fortunately, the 
governor was unable to apprehend the exiled Hua Tuo. His anger, however, 
rose to such a pitch of intensity that he vomited dark bile and blood, 
after which he completely recovered. 
Between 220 and 589 AD, China was once again wracked by civil 
wars. As a result, the Shen Nong Pen Tsao]ing was threatened by abuse 
and neglect. During this time Buddhism was promulgated throughout 
the Northern and Southern Dynasties of China. Northern Chinese society 
was strongly influenced by the cultures of the steppe and the Sino-
Tibetan frontier region, tended to lack strong central direction, and was 
warlike and illiterate. In contrast, the Southern Dynasty situated around 
the Yangtse basin was aristocratic and sophisticated. Famous Buddhist 
caves with giant carvings were created as natural sanctuaries, and the 
emperor came to be regarded as the living Buddha. There was a wide 
dissemination of knowledge between distant cultures as Chinese monks 
such as Faxian ventured into India during the 5th century, and Indian 
monks of the 6th century disseminated Indian culture throughout China. 
Because of commercial trading, there were also influences to and from 
Japan, Korea and far-off Arab lands. 
During this time alchemy was further developed. Taoism, medicine 
and alchemy being closely linked, the Taoist quest for longevity begun 
in earlier times persisted with research and experimentation in the 
consumption  of cinnabar that  unfortunately  led  to  a  plethora  of 
characteristic symptoms of mercury toxicity prevalent at this time. 
With  the  interest  in  alchemy  came  the  development  of 
pharmaceutical science and the creation of a number of books, including 
~ 
6 
Tao Hong Jing's ( 456-536) compilation of the Pen T'sao ]ing]i Zhu 
(Commentaries on the Herbal Classic), based on the Shen Nong Pen 
T'sao ]in  g.  In that book 730 herbs were described and classified in six 
categories: 1) stones and metals (minerals), 2) grasses and trees, 3) insects 
and animals, 4) herbs, fruits and vegetables, 5 grains, 6) named but 
unused. This has become the most influential and oldest herbal still 
intact  to  be  found  in  the Tun Huang District  northwest  of Kansu 
Province. 
Because of frequent wars, medicine developed to the extent that 
the first Chinese text on surgery was written during this time. Another 
contribution of the Chinese Middle Ages was the. establishment of the 
first formal Chinese medical school, created in 443 by the Emperor's 
physician Qin Chengzu.  Before this time medical knowledge was 
exclusively passed down from master to pupil. 
During the 2nd century, Wang Shuhe compiled all previously known 
knowledge of the pulse in his famous Maijing (Pulse Classic). This in 
turn led to the introduction of pulse diagnosis into Arabic medicine. 
The Tang Dynasty (618-907) is regarded as the greatest dynasty in 
Chinese history because of the many contributions to art, medicine and 
the sciences made during that period. The Tang Xin Pen T'sao (Tang 
Materia Medica), the official materia medica of the Tang Dynasty, was 
China's first illustrated hetbal and contained 844 entries. Besides officially 
sanctioned herbals, many works by independent citizens were also 
generated during the Tang, including the Yue Xing Pen T'sao (The Book 
of Herb Properties) by Zhen Quan.lt was when Zhen Quan was 120 
years old that Emperor Tai Zong (629-649) visited him and the aged 
herbalist bestowed his herbal upon the Emperor. 
Sun Simiao (581-682), regarded as the King of Doctors, was perhaps 
the most popular figure in Chinese medicine. Having steeped himself 
in the three pillars of Chinese wisdom based on Confucianism, Taoism 
and Buddhism, Sun, being of fragile health, decided to dedicate his life 
to the study and practice of medicine. 
Sun refused tempting offers of wealth and prestige from various 
emperors of the time to live the life of a humble country doctor. As  a 
result Sun Simiao is revered as a great humanitarian. His practice and 
knowledge are known only through two works, Qianjin Yaofang 
(Prescriptions of the Thousand Ounces of Gold) and Qianjin Yifang 
(Supplement). Because Sun regarded human life as precious, the term 
gold reflects his regard for human life. 
Sun regarded the integration of acupuncture, moxibustion and the 
use of drugs as a complete system of medicine. Relying solely on the 
7 
Four Methods of Diagnosis (observation, listening, interrogating and 
palpation), Sun considered that pulse should only be studied after 
listening to the patient, observing the tone of voice and complexion. He 
also strongly advocated prevention and pre-diagnosis to be superior than 
the treatment of disease. The ideal physician, Sun Simiao's interest and 
influence extended to his incorporation of the principles of the Shang 
Han Lun,  proper harvesting of medicinal plants, the causes of disease 
and his enthusiastic advocation of maternal and infant care. 
In Qianjin Shi Zhi, Sun said: "In the old days, herbalists collected 
herbs themselves at the right time and in  the right place, and they 
processed the herbs properly. That is why they were able to cure nine 
out of ten of their patients. Nowadays, doctors only know how to 
prescribe. Most of the herbs they are using were not collected and 
processed properly so they can only cure five or six out of ten of their 
patients." More than any of his particular contributions, the exalted 
personage of integrity, compassion and benevolence of Sun Simiao 
~ 
8 
remains as a  shining influence and ideal for the future  practice of 
medicine. 
During the Song dynasty (960-1279), the first  herbal that was 
officially published was the Kai Bao Pen Tsao (Kai Bao was the name of 
the emperor of that time) in 973. It was later revised and enlarged by the 
Taoist, Liu Han, and others and published as Kai Bao Zbong Ding Pen 
Tsao (Revised Kai Bao Herbal). 
In 1552, during the later Ming Dynasty (1368-1644), another one 
of the greatest Chinese herbalists, Li Shi Zhen (1518-1593) began work 
on the monumental Pen T'saoKanMu (Herbal with Commentary). Li 
dedicated his life to travel throughout the distant reaches of the empire 
to consult directly with people in many places regarding local remedies. 
He further consulted 277 herbals as references, as well as the classics, 
histories and many other books- a total of approximately 440 in all. 
After 27 years and three revisions, the Pen Tsao KanMu was completed 
in 1578. The book lists 1892 drugs, 376 described for the first time, with 
1160 drawings. It also lists more than 11,000 prescriptions. 
Li's compilation of the Pen Tsao KanMu represented an attempt to 
correct the errors of his predecessors regarding the names and descriptions 
of medical substances. He also carefully noted the time and methods of 
haiVest and the preparation and use of drugs. He derided as foolish the 
belief that the Ling Zhi mushroom (Reishi or Ganoderma lucidum), 
could prevent death. Besides his monumental Materia Medica, Li Shi 
Zhen was also the author of the Binbu Maixue (A Study of the Pulse) 
and Qijing Bamai Kao (An Examination of the Eight Extra Meridians). 
During his lifetime he was also regarded as a great physician who set 
forth the hitherto unique concept of the brain as the location of the 
principal vital influence, i.e., mental awareness. Li relied heavily on the 
classics, the Huangdi Neijing and the Sbang Han Lun, yet maintained a 
fresh aitical stance whenever he personally obseiVed in pmctice situations 
and conditions that were at variance with tradition. Among his many 
contributions to pathology was his obseiVation of cholelithiasis as a 
disease distinct from mere hypochondriac or epigastric pain. He also 
promoted the use of ice to bring down fever and the technique of 
disinfection which involved soaking patient's clothes in a steam bath to 
protect family members from contamination. To protect patients from 
epidemic disease, Li advocated the burning of Atractylodes lancea (Cang 
Zhu) as a fumigant. 
As with Sun Sirniao and other great Chinese physicians, Li attributed 
greater significance to prevention than cure, following the approach of 
the Neijing, which states: "To cure disease is  like waiting until one is 
thirsty before digging a well, or to fabricate weapons after the war has 
commenced." 'rhus the Pen T'sao Kanf!. Mu list-; more than 500 remedies 
to maintain and strengthen the hody, with over 50 of these created by Li 
Shi Zhen himself.  He descrihed the use and preparation of a wide variety 
of  preparations,  including  ointments,  pills  and  powders,  and 
recommended the prepardtion of various medicinal hroths with herbs, 
including wheat, rice, chestnut, radish, garlic, ginger and vital organs 
and parts of various animals. 
LiShiZhen 
Li Shi Zhen W<L'>  a gre'dt phannacognoci.st, phanTJacologist, physician, 
zoologist, botanist and mineralogist and made a profound and lasting 
contribution to humanity as well as the Chinese people in  particular. 
Like Sun Simiao, he was also a great humanitarian with high Confucian-
inspired medical ethics, promoting all to the care and welfare of their 
fellow humanity. l11e most popular image we have of him is observing 
the flower of the Datura. 
During the Qing dynasty, beginning in  1644 to the first Opium 
war in  1839-42, more than 20 herhals were published. These included 
~ 
10 
the Pen  T'sao Kan Mu Shi Yi (Herbs Not Listed in the Pen T'sao Cao 
Kang Mu).  During this period European influence gradually spread 
into China. The Huangdi Neijing (Yellow Emperor's Classic of Internal 
Medicine) became recognized as the bible of Chinese medicine, with 
wide interest from commentators extending from the 17th to the 19th 
century. The fame and reputation of the Shang Ran Lun as well as the 
companion book, Chin Kuei Yao Lueh (Prescriptions from the Golden 
Chamber), both by Chan Chung Ching, also grew during this period. 
One of the most important evolutions that occurred during this period 
was the treatment of diseases caused by Heat, in contrast to the Shang 
Han  Lun  (Cold  induced diseases).  While  the  notion  of Heat as  a 
Pathogenic Influence was first formulated by Liu Wansu, it became 
more firmly established as a Pathogenic Influence during the 17th century, 
when Wou Youxin postulated and observed the effect of epidemic 
pestilence and plague as Heat diseases entering through the mouth and 
na>e. 
From 1842-44 various treaties, missionaries and foreign doctors 
established hospitals, treaty ports and the translation of Western medical 
works. Chinese doctors began to be educated in Western medicine and 
were even sent abroad to study. Along with Western medicine, the practice 
of Chinese medicine, based on time honored tradition, continued 
throughout the period from 1840 to 1911. The physician Zhu Peiwen, 
author of Huayang Zangxiang Yuezuan (1892), conceptualized a 
comparative understanding of the Organs based on Chinese and Western 
concepts. He decided that there were both advantages and disadvantages 
to Chinese and Western approaches. 
From 1911 to 1949, with the establishment of the People's Republic, 
the nationalist government under Sun Yat-sen declared in 1924 that 
China must grasp the initiative and not remain backward. Since Sun 
Yat-sen received Western-style medical training, he probably was a strong 
advocate of establishing Western medicine as the primary medical 
approach. There were considerable benefits in improved public hygiene, 
especially in urban areas, with clear running water and the establishment 
of a central bureau to help combat epidemics. In rural China, however, 
Traditional Chinese Medicine continued to be practiced, with training 
continuing to be based on student apprenticeship. 
It was the vision of Mao Zedong, who declared Traditional Chinese 
Medicine a national treasure, that we must strive to explore it fully and 
raise it  to a  higher level.  As  a  result, Traditional Chinese Medicine 
represents an attempt to rationalize Chinese Medicine with Western 
scientific medicine, by initiating state sponsored research of herbs and 
treatments and downplaying the role of Taoist-Buddhist psycho-spiritual 
~ 
11 
practices. With the introduction ofTCM in the West, there is currently 
a renewed interest in the value of a psycho-spiritual orientation to the 
treatment of disease, which is the original basis of Chinese Medicine. 
12 
TWO 
THE  THEORY  OF 
YlN  AND  YANG 
The practice of Traditional Chinese Medicine seeks to understand and 
evaluate the state of balance or imbalance of a person using the bipolar 
principle of Yin and Yang. Yin is the expression of the receptive or 
passive polarity, while Yang is an expression of the aggressive or active 
polarity. In terms of Chinese herbalism, Yin embodies the qualities of 
cold, damp, immobility and substance, while Yang embodies the qualities 
of warmth, dryness, movement and ephemerality. Yin is like a vessel 
that receives the energy or Qi of life, while Yang is that which warms, 
enlivens and circulates. 
Following the paradigm ofYin and Yang, all herbs and foods as 
well as physiological symptoms are classified as Hot or Cold, Dry or 
Damp, External-acute or Internal-chronic, heavy or light. Also included 
are various pscho-physiological qualities such as aggressive or timid, 
happy or sad, and so forth.  Rather than limiting diagnosis to specifically 
named pathologies, the symptoms and signs of imbalance in terms of 
the various Yin-Yang diagnostic parameters are truly wholistic and 
spedfically interconnect with the use of herbs, foods, exercise and lifestyle 
to restore balance and health. 
Even beyond this, Ym-Yang is the foundation of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine. Like the grandest and noblest music of life, the physician's 
goal, at least from one perspective, is to assist the patient in perceiving 
and experiendng the underlying harmony and unity through all diverse 
moods and complexities.  In this,  it  is  not unlike  one of the great 
monuments of classical keyboord music, Bach's Goldberg Variations, where 
with repeated hearing, we gradually perceive more of the unity of divine 
energy or Qi. This is represented by the beginning theme as it evolves, 
transforms and.dances through the moods and complexities of the 30 
variations, only to return in the end to the simplicity and purity of the 
original  theme. This great music,  like our life,  seems to exist as a 
compelling challenge from some unknown source. We are able to witness 
the myriad diversity of things, through the various signs and symptoms 
of TCM,  to reconnect with our inner and outer nature and to help 
reestablish our experience of unity and wholeness. 
IJ 
Is this not also in harmony with the inner meaning of healing, 
which is "to make whole", to perceive those finely woven strands of 
themes and melodies that weave in and out of each life, along with their 
many contrasting moods, as a variation or phase of the greater whole? It 
is sad to consider that perhaps many of us may never reach the point in 
our lifetime were we can perceive the essential purity of. existence in this 
way, as we become entranced with the eternal Yin-Yang dance where 
action continually engenders reaction. Disease becomes, then, the ultimate 
challenge to make our peace, within and without, to finally return to an 
awareness of what is of essential importance throughout. It is out of the 
perception of that greater unity that the wise physician invokes all three 
kingdoms of nature; in the process selecting those particular foods and 
herbs from the vegetable kingdom, minerals from the mineral kingdom 
and parts from the animal kingdom as a gesture of healing reintegration. 
All  life is a  dance, as we continuously posture and reposition 
ourselves with all the elements of our lives, our ancestry and parentage, 
our food, our personal relationships, our work, and the climate we live 
- all the unique stresses and stimuli that sometimes propel us forward 
while at other times seem to cause us to bog down. It is the play of light 
and dark and of all the dual expressions ofYm and Yang dancing through 
the elements of physical manifestation. 
From the beginning to the end we have universal life energy or Qi 
connecting and animating all phenomena. Then what need is there to 
presume a personal divine hand in it? The occasional sounding of a 
compassionate note in the harmonies of one variation or a caring glance 
from a friend or healer should be enough to intuit the presence of the 
divine as a positive motivating spirit underlying the music of life. 
Even if there were no other practical value associated with the 
study of Traditional Chinese Medicine other than its ability to train the 
senses to perceive the expression of Qi or vital energy throughout all of 
nature, this alone would make it a worthwhile endeavor. However, there 
are the practical rewards of being able to enlist the healing forces of 
nature for the benefit of ourselves and others that deeply adds to our 
experience. 
Taoism, the religious philosophy from which TCM emanates, 
believes that Qi is equivalent to the Great Spirit of creation. And so, the 
closeness of the Great Spirit to our very essence is reflected in the fact 
that Qi also connotes 'breath' in Chinese, which in turn is similar to 
the Yogic defmition of 'Prana' or 'life breath'. Beyond this, according to 
the Hindus, lies the supreme 'Atrnan' made visible through the eternal 
dance of Shiva and his consort, Shakti. This would also agree with the 
14 
old testament, where it is stated that no man has ever seen God or that 
the Supreme Name of God is unutterable. How could anything so all 
pervasive and unlimited be adequately conceived in the limited minds 
of humans, except through intuition? To diverge even further,  the 
Moslems invoke God by the two syllable formula "Al-lah". Here one 
primal syllable is simply the reverse of the other, reflecting the supreme 
as the two poles of duality similar to the Chinese concept ofYin-Yang. 
Yin and Yang is an expression of the natural law of homeostasis. 
As simply and eloquently stated by T.Y.  Pang:
1 
"The virtue ofYin is in 
tranquillity while that ofYang is action. Yang gives life, Yin fosters it; 
Yang creates, Yin grows; Yang kills, Ym preserves; Yang generates energy, 
Yin makes form. Yin and Yang are relative and are related. There is Yang 
within Yin and Yin within Yang." 
Yin represents the negative or receptive pole, while Yang is the 
positive. (The terms negative and positive are not qualitative terms but a 
simple description of one of the most fundamental laws of the universe.) 
The Chinese character for Yin literally means the cold, dark, or Northern 
side of the mountain, while the character for Yang is the sunny, or 
Southern, side. The ancient Chinese learned to apply the concepts of 
Yin and Yang to all aspects of natural phenomena, eventually developing 
the philosophies that became Taoism. 
The Taoist priests who developed the principles of herbal medicine 
based on Yin-Yang theory extended them to the classification of foods, 
herbs, activities and diagnosis. The ideal was (and still is) to achieve a 
balance  between  the  outer Yin-Yang  influences  of diet,  activity, 
environment and seasons and the inner influences of one's constitution. 
The balance ofYm and Yang, however elusive it may be to achieve, 
represents ideal health. Imbalance remains the simplest definition of 
sickness and disease.  Qi  is  the dynamic energy that is  constantly 
transformed from negative to positive and vice versa as it flows between 
these two poles. 
BACKGROUND 
The "Oracle of Changes", known as the 1-Ching, dates back to around 
700 B. C., and is the earliest attempt to graphically represent the various 
cycles and transformations ofYin into Yang and vice versa. The 1-Ching 
utilizes a combination of broken Yin lines and unbroken Yang lines. 
The addition of a third line in various positions forms eight trigrams. 
Juxtaposition of these trigrarns in various permutations creates the 64 
hexagrams that are the basis for the entire book. The significance of the 
various permutations of broken and unbroken lines graphically represents 
15 
the various cycles ofYin-Yang transformation. What is most impressive 
about the study of the 1-Ching is the insight that Yin-Yang is not static, 
but a dance of transformation and change. When this process ceases, 
chaos and death result. 
In Western physiology the closest approximation we have to the 
concept ofYm-Yang is the prindple ofhomeostasis. However, the concept 
ofYin-Yang explaining the integration and relationship of all natural 
phenomena in a practical way is unique to Traditional Chinese Medidne. 
Many think of traditional Chinese society as fundamentally orderly. 
Certainly when one considers the many remapping changes that Western 
European nations have undergone over the last 2000 years, we might 
agree. On the other hand, as Chinese culture has been able to evolve 
even through Mongol invasions and even greater devastation wreaked 
by European influences, the enduring philosophies ofYin-Yang and the 
Five Elements stand as a testimony to their cohesiveness. 
Even in popular Western literature, Chinese heroes and villains 
behave with great protocol and decorum and follow vety specific paths 
to achieve their goals. This tendency is due to the pervasive influence of 
Yin-Yang philosophy and Confucianism, which teaches that evetything 
and evetyone has its appropriate role, opportunity, time and place. 
These great Chinese philosophies evolved in reaction to the early 
period of total unrest and chaos called the Warring States ( 476-220 BC). 
This time was similar to, but even more chaotic than, the Middle Ages 
of European feudalism.  In any case, there arose a profound need for 
order and a  philosophy that would support the establishment of that 
order. 
Political influences not withstanding, Chinese philosophy and 
medicine are fundamentally holistic, with their roots in nature and 
empiricism. The Yin-Yang and Five Element doctrines emanated from 
the so-called NatuF.alist School, primarily expounded upon by Zou Yan 
(350-270 BC), and forms the theoretical basis of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine. 
THEORY 
Qi and the Yin-Yang theoty are the unifying theoretical basis of 
Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) and connect the individual with 
all aspects of being. The principles are not always easy to apply to the 
state of a given individual, but the theoty in itself represents an essential 
thought process for gaining an understanding and intuitive feeling for 
all natural phenomena. To even begin considering things in terms of 
Yin and Yang is a profound healing idea regardless of the conclusions. 
~ 
16 
Yang includes the outgoing masculine or motivating force as well 
as the body's capadty to generate and maintain warmth. It can be equated 
with hyper-metabolic qualities which affect all organic processes, including 
warmth,  libido,  appetite,  digestion  and  assimilation.  Its  normal 
manifestation is comparable to our concept of zest for life. 
Yin is receptive, fluidic, cooling and equated with hypo-metabolic 
qualities and conditions. Physiologically it represents innate capacity or 
substance, including blood and all other fluids in the body. These nourish, 
nurture and moisten all aspects of the body including the organs and 
tissues. 
There  are  four  major  aspects  of the  Yin-Yang  relationship: 
opposition,  interdependence,  mutual  consumption,  and  inter-
transformation. They are described as follows: 
1) Opposition: Yin and Yang are opposite states of expression contained 
in all of life. For example, Heaven is Yang while Earth is Yin, rising is 
Yang and descending is Yin, outward is Yang and inward is Yin, light is 
Yang and dark is Yin, activity is Yang and rest is Yin. 
In the body, signs that are hot, restless, dry, hard and fast are Yang, 
such as fever, restless sleep, dry eyes or throat, hard lumps and talking 
fast. Signs that are cold, quiet, wet, soft and slow are Yin, such as chills, 
lack of desire to talk, loose stools, soft lumps and walking or talking 
slowly. 
However, Yin and Yang are not absolutes, but relative, as there is a 
seed ofYang within Yin and vice versa. They are in a  dynamic and 
constantly changing relationship with one another, a flowing balance 
of many opposite forces. A summaty of these opposite forces is as follows: 
Qualities:  Yang 
Heaven 
sun 
immaterial 
generation 
enetgy 
creation 
activity 
Tendency  develop, expand 
Position  outward 
Structure  time 
Direction  ascending; right 
Yin 
Earth 
moon 
material 
growth 
form 
materialization 
rest 
condense, contract 
inward 
spice 
descending; left 
17 
Compass  east, south  wet,  north 
Col  or  bright  dark 
Temperature  hot  cold 
Weight  light  heavy 
Catalyst  ftre  water 
Light  light  dark 
Construction  exterior  interior 
Work  physical  psychological 
Attitude  extrovert  introvert 
Biological  animal  vegetable 
Energy  aggre$ve  receptive 
Nerves  sympathetic  parasympathetic 
Tastes  spicy-sweet  sour-bitter-salty 
Season  sununer  winter 
2) Interdependence: While opposite qualities of each other, Yin and 
Yang are also interdependent; one cannot exist without the other. 
Everything contains these opposite forces which are both mutually 
exclusive and dependent on one another. 
For instance, if the stomach and intestines do not move, food and 
drink can't be digested or absorbed. Yin (Blood) depends on Yang (  Qi) 
to circulate it throughout the body, while the organs that produce Qi 
are dependent on Blood to nourish them. Thus,  structure (Yin) is 
dependent on function (Yang) and vice versa. Without structure, the 
function would not perform while, without function, the structure would 
lack movement and ability to perform. 
The qualities of interdependence ofYin and Yang can be seen in 
the following theorems: 
Theorems  of Yin  and Ytmg 
1.  Infinity divides itself into Yin and Yang. 
2.  Yin and Yang result from the infinite movement of the 
Universe. 
3.  Although they are opposite ends of a continuum, Yin and Yang 
are complementary and form a unity. 
4.  Yang contains the seed ofYin and Yin contains the seed of 
Yang. 
5.  Yin is centripetal and Yang is centrifugal; together they produce 
all energy  and phenomena. 
6.  Yin attraCts Yang and Yang attracts Yin. 
7.  Yin repels Yin and Yang repels Yang. 
8.  The force of attraction and repulsion between any two 
phenomena Lo;  proportional to the difference between their 
Yin-Yang constitution. 
9.  All things are ephemeral and constantly changing their Yin-
Yang constitution. 
10. Nothing is neutral; either Yin or Yang is dominant. 
11.  Nothing is solely Yin or Yang; everything involves polarity. 
12. Yin and Yang are relative: large Yin attracts small Yin and large 
Yang attracts small Yang. 
13. At the extreme of manifestation, Yin turns into Yang and Yang 
turns into Yin. 
14. All  physical forms are Yin at the center and Yang on the surface. 
3) Inter-transformation:  As stated before, Yin and Yang are dynamic 
states which actually transform into each other. At their extremes, Yin 
can change into Yang, and Yang can change into Yin. We are familiar 
with this in the daily cycles of our lives as night turns into day and then 
day turns into night; winter eventually turns into summer while summer 
moves into winter; and birth eventually turns into death. 
This waxing and waning ofYin into Yang and vice versa is not 
random, but only occurs when the condition is  ripe for it,  when a 
certain stage of development has been reached. This is experienced in 
the body when we work without cessation (Yang), ultimately ending up 
exhausted and depleted (Ym). 
In pathological terms, an excess of Cold can change into Heat and 
vice versa. For instance, a cold may begin with chills and progress to 
severe fever and even pneumonia. Frostbite can result in a burning 
inflammation. Heat changing to Cold occurs as a result of an acute 
inflammatory symptom that weakens the vital force and degenerates to 
a more chronic, Cold condition. Further, during the course of an extreme 
fever with restlessness, irritability and a strong pulse (Yang), the patient 
suddenly becomes listless, the temperature lowers, the face turns pale 
and the pulse becomes very weak (Yin). In many hot tropical countries, 
food is  heavily spiced with chili peppers. This results in excessive 
perspiration which makes one feel cooler. 
Deficiencies and Excesses can also cause manifestation of their 
opposites. A Deficiency of Spleen energy can result in an Excess of 
Dampness, while a Kidney or Liver Ym Deficiency can lead to an Excess 
of Liver Yang (hypertension). 
This thinking also extends to the use of Yin or Yang foods and 
herbs. Too much Yang sweet flavor will cause Yin exhaustion. Overuse 
of tonic herbs can have the paradoxical opposite effect of causing 
19 
exhaustion and stagnation. In excess, extremely hot spices can over-
stimulate and exhaust the Qi. 
Recognizing that Yin and Yang are mutually transformative is an 
important way of helping us refrain from overdoing anything that could 
ultimately upset our balance and health.  A summary of the  inter-
transformation ofYin and Yang is stated in the follmying Laws: 
Laws  Governing Yin  and  Yang 
1. All things are the differentiated apparatus of One Infinity. 
2. Everything changes. 
3. All antagonisms are complementary. 
4. No two things are identical. 
5.  Every condition has its opposite. 
6. Extremes always produce their opposite. 
7. Whatever begins has an end. 
4) Mutual Consumption: The dynamic balance of Yin and Yang is 
maintained by a continuous adjustment of each of their relative levels. 
In the waxing and waning of the seasons, when winter is ending Yin 
begins to decrease while Yang increases; when day comes to an end, Yang 
decreases while Ym increases with the development of night. Thus, while 
continuously balancing one another, they also consume each other. When 
one increases the other must decrease: when Yin increases, Yang is 
consumed, and when Yang increases, Yin is consumed. 
In the body this is seen in four possible states of imbalance: Excess 
ofYin, Excess ofYang, Deficiency ofYin and Deficiency ofYang. Thus, 
when Yin is in Excess (Cold Dampness, for instance), it consumes the 
Yang (the warming fires get dampened and put out). Likewise, when 
Yang becomes Excess (Heat and activity), Ym is consumed and becomes 
Deficient (exhaustion and weakness). 
Further, when Yin is Deficient, it causes Yang to appear greater 
than it is, while when Yang is Deficient, it causes Yin to appear greater 
than it is. This gives rise to the terms "false Yin" and "false Yang" as 
neither is a case of true Yin or Yang Excess, but an apparent state of 
Excess occurring only because the other is Deficient. 
Empty ("xu") and full ("sbi") are further terms used to describe 
Deficiency and Excess. Because it is important to see the difference 
between these four states, the following is a more detailed description of 
their pathological imbalances. 
Full Yin  imbalances bring about symptoms of excessive fluid 
retention and lethargy. People experiencing full Yin, or an Excess of 
Yin, tend to retain water, may be more plump or swollen and have 
~ 
2.0 
symptoms of Dampness, and yet may have adequate enetgy. Spicy, warm-
natured herbs, such as ginger and cinnamon, and diuretics, such as Fu 
Ling mushrooms, can help promote the elimination of excess water in 
such cases. 
Empty Yin diseases are strumous (Deficient), involving emaciation 
and weakness with wasting Heat symptoms, termed "false Yang". Such 
individuals are nutritionally depleted to the point that they begin to 
manifest false Heat symptoms, but in the context of Deficiency rather 
than Excess. For instance, an individual who is emaciated, runs on 
nervous energy, talks fast but peters out quickly, sleeps poorly, and has 
little stamina and low resistance is experiencing Empty Yin, or Yin 
Deficiency. 
Quite often, these people show a greater than average resistance to 
antibiotic therapy, which makes their infections particularly troublesome 
to treat. They require more neutral or cool-natured tonics, either alone 
or in judicious combination with heat-clearing herbs, for effective 
treatment. In this case you want to tonify the Yin with appropriate Yin 
tonics, such as ophiopogon root, asparagus root, marshmallow root and 
rehmannia root. Milder Qi tonics with Yin nourishing properties can 
also be used, such as polygonatum (Solomon's seal root). 
Full Yang symptoms represent a significant degree of Heat, such 
as high fever, restlessness, red complexion, loud voice, aggressive actions, 
strong odors, yellow discharges, rapid pulse and hypertension. Heat 
clearing herbs that detoxify, drain Fire and Heat and promote bowel 
movements are most useful here. These can include the Ayurvedic formula 
called "Triphala", red clover blossoms, cascara bark, rlmbarb root, lonicera 
blossoms or chrysanthemum flowers, to name a few. 
Empty Yang is a type ofYang Deficiency accompanied by symptoms 
of lethargy, coldness, edema, poor digestion and lack of libido. Here 
there is a lack of Heat and activity to perform adequate functions in the 
body. Foods and herbs that tonify Yang and Qi are needed here, such as 
more red meat, root vegetables like carrots, and herbs such as ginseng, 
astragalus, Dang Gui (which, although it is a Blood tonic, has warming, 
circulation-enhancing properties), ginger, cinnamon, fenugreek, cuscuta, 
psoralea, morinda and eucommia. 
Excess Yang and Deficient Yin are both associated with too much 
heat, irritability and other Yang symptoms. However, in each of these 
cases, the symptoms arise from two entirely different imbalances, so the 
two syndromes are not the same. With Excess Yang there are true Heat 
signs, but with Deficient Yin, there is an underlying weakness with 
superficial Heat signs. 
11 
Similarly, a Deficiency ofYang has similar symptoms to an Excess 
of Yin,  but because each originates from a different point of either 
Excess or Deficiency, they also are not the same. A Deficiency ofYang 
causes Coldness and hypo-functioning of the Organs with the result of 
tiredness, lethargy and edema occurring, since there is little Heat and 
activity to give energy or transform Fluids. An Excess of Yin, on the 
other hand, results in significant Dampness in the body, from copious 
discharges to a full rounded body. 
YIN  AND YANG  IN  CHINESE ANATOMY 
AND PHYSIOLOGY 
All parts of the body have a Yin-Yang relationship to each other. 
Here is a general classification: 
YANG 
external (skin) 
upper body 
posterior-lateral 
OOck 
functional-transportive 
Qi 
defensive Qi 
six Yang organs 
YIN 
internal (Organs) 
lower body 
anterior-medial 
front 
structural-transformative 
Blood and body fluids 
nutritional Qi 
six Yin organs 
The six Yin Organs of transformation are considered the most 
important in Chinese medical theory. They are the Heart, Spleen, Lungs, 
Kidneys, Liver and Pericardium. The six Yang Organs of transportation 
are hollow and serve a more external function as transport for food and 
waste. They are the Small Intestine, Triple Warmer, Stomach, Large 
Intestine, Bladder and Gall Bladder. 
A balance of Yin and Yang function is essential for the proper 
functioning of all organs. In Traditional Chinese Medicine the Yin-
Yang theory is applied to the state of individual Organ functions, such 
as the " Yin of the Kidney" (referring to that aspect of Kidney function 
that relates to Fluid balance and urine), or the "Yang of the Kidney" 
(relating to the function of the adrenal glands). Because the Kidneys are 
central to the entire theory of Chinese Medicine, they are considered 
the "storehouse of Qi" and the "root of Yin and Yang" for the whole 
body. This means that through the complex action of adrenal medulla 
and cortical hormones the Kidneys are able to regulate the organic 
functions of the entire body. 
ll 
Thus,  the  Kidneys  are  fundamental  to  the  basic  inherited 
constitution of the individual as a whole and the storehouse of "Inherited 
Qi" or "Ancestral Qi." Herbs that tonify Kidney Yin are demulcent 
diuretics, such as asparagus root and rehmannia glutinosa, while herbs 
that tonify Kidney Yang have warming diuretic properties, such as juniper, 
dogwood berries and cinnamon. 
The Lungs need to maintain a proper balance of moisture (Yin) 
and dryness (Yang). They also need Yang strength for inhalation and the 
Yin potential for release and exhalation. Therefore, there are specific 
treatments for the "Yang of the Lungs" or the "Yin of the Lungs." Herbs 
that increase the Yang of the Lungs are Qi tonics such as ginseng, 
codonopsis and astragalus, and herbs that are wanning and stimulating, 
such as anise seed, elecampane and angelica. Herbs that increase the Ym 
of the  lungs  are  cooling,  demulcent  herbs,  such as  comfrey and 
marshmallow roots. 
The Heart also needs a proper balance ofYin (Blood and Fluids) 
and Yang (neurological impulse) to function correctly. The Yang function 
of the Heart refers to the impulse, arterial and venous pressure, while 
the Yin function is related to the quality and amount of blood present. 
Many Heart problems are caused by exhaustion of Heart Qi, a Yang 
phenomenon improved by herbs such as ginseng. Other conditions are 
related to a lack of Heart Yin and Blood, a Yin phenomenon that is 
treated with herbs such as Dang Gui and biota seeds. The Pericardium, 
sometimes called the "Heart Protector,"  is the sixth Yin Organ and for 
all practical purposes serves as an extension of the TCM Heart. 
Stagnant conditions ofYin Fluid and Blood may be caused by an 
excess of both Yang and Yin. This results in impaired Organ function 
that can be improved through the use of diuretic and blood-moving 
(emmenagogue) herbs, such as hawthorn berries and/or motherwort 
herb. Problems can also stem from an imbalance known as "Heart Fire", 
a general condition of hyper-function of the Heart and circulation usually 
associated with an acidic condition of the Blood. Alterative herbs such 
as coptis, golden seal, and oregon grape root are appropriate. 
As  the Liver tends to require more Yin (Blood and Fluids) for 
proper function,  it is most frequently threatened by an Excess Yang 
syndrome associated with hypertension, depression and anger. Thus, 
beneficial herbs for the Liver might be cooling herbs, such as dandelion 
root,  herbs to tonify Blood and Yin, such as Chinese lycium berries, or 
herbs to relieve Wmd or spasms, such as lobelia or cramp bark. A category 
of warm-natured herbs useful for regulating and smoothing Liver Qi are 
carminative herbs, such as fennel seed, cyperus and citrus peel. These 
l.J 
herbs actually help stimulate the production and secretion of enzymes 
by the Liver to aid digestion. 
The Spleen-Pancreas, on the other hand, has a basically Yang 
function responsible for a variety of actions associated with digestion 
and assimilation of food and fluids. Therefore, the most frequent problem 
of the Spleen-Pancreas is "lack of Spleen Yang," a condition associated 
with edema, damp swelling, poor digestion, hypoglycemia, fatigue and 
tiredness. Herbs that tonify Qi, such as ginseng, codonopsis and astragalus, 
as well as diuretics, such as atractylodes, the mushroom Poria cocos and 
Western gravel root, are all good Spleen-strengthening herbs. 
Yin  and Yang  in Relationship  to  Seasons,  Diet and  Activities 
Yin and Yang is a way of describing the relative states of balance or 
imbalance between the individual and any or all external factors affecting 
his or her existence. Based on these principles, it is important to adjust 
diet and herbs according to seasonal and individual lifestyle differences 
so that they can be truly healing. During the cold seasons, it may be 
more appropriate to eat foods of a more substantial, Yang-warming nature, 
such as cooked whole grains with a little animal protein, and cooked 
rather than raw vegetables and fruit.  On the other hand, during the 
hotter seasons one might use more seasonal raw fruits and vegetables. 
Because children have a much higher metabolism than adults, 
they can usually tolerate more Yin-cooling fruits.  Similarly, a woman 
who is pregnant might require less Yang-heating foods and more Yin-
cooling substances at different stages of her pregnancy, due to a higher 
Yang metabolism during that time. In all cases, whole grains are the 
"staff of life" and represent a balance of all parts of the life cycle of a 
plant and ofYin and Yang energies. Therefore, they should constitute 
the central pillar of our "daily bread." Above all, we must learn to adjust 
our diet and health program so that it is in harmony and balance with 
all external and internal emotional changes we might be experiencing. 
Since Ym and Yang are mutually related, there is always a tendency 
for the body to compensate an Excess of one with an apparent Deficiency 
of the other. We can see this clearly in the progression of daily and 
seasonal cycles. Daytime is Yang and night is Yin. Individuals lacking in 
Yin-strength will experience more symptoms in the evening, the time of 
Ym. 
Similarly, winter is Yin and summer is Yang. This means that our 
bodies must adjust to the change of the coming season over the course 
of Spring or Fall. As the Yin of Winter changes during the Spring to the 
Yang of Summer, or the Yang of Summer changes back in the Fall to the 
Y m ofWmter, we are particularly vulnerable to the excesses of the previous 
season. These may manifest as allergies and other upper respiratory 
diseases as well as a variety of gastrointestinal problems. 
Our body adjusts to outer Yin or Yang seasonal influences by 
complementary relationships within the body. When it·is cold outside, 
our body counterbalances the outer cold with a greater concentration of 
inner  warmth.  Conversely,  when  it  is  hot  outside  our  body 
counterbalances with a greater concentration of internal coolness. In 
this way homeostasis is maintained. 
We see how this works particularly in terms of how our digestion 
and eating habits change throughout the seasons. During the Summer, 
our inner gastric fires are weaker, and we should eat lighter foods and 
resist the temptation to overindulge in excessively cold Yin foods that 
can further suppress our digestive fires.  Most people notice that as the 
heat of summer progresses, digestion becomes more sensitive, and there 
is an increased tendency towards gastrointestinal diseases, dysentery, heat 
stroke and other conditions described as "Summer Heat", which can 
include all of the above plus feverish symptoms. 
In the Wmter, despite the outer cold, our digestion becomes capable 
of handling larger quantities of heavier, calorie-rich foods. This is like 
stoking the fires of a wood-burning stove to ward off the outer cold. If 
we continue to eat raw, cool natured, Yin-type foods and do not supply 
our body with sufficient proteinaceous, higher-calorie foods, our body 
will tend at first to burn off its own excess reserves. For those who have 
too much excess to begin with, this is good, but those who have already 
consumed their excess run into problems as the body starts to chip away 
at  vital  nutrient  stores  in  order to  maintain  sufficient  strength  to 
withstand the outer Cold-Damp influences. It is something like burning 
your house down to keep warm. This is one cause ofYin Deficiency. 
Food and activity are natural means of creating a balance with our 
external environment. It is not easy to describe, because each person's 
needs differ according to our pre-existing Yin-Yang constitution, balance 
and activities. Potential dietary imbalances, especially an excess of calorie-
rich foods, can be balanced with greater levels of activity and exercise. A 
diet with fewer calories and less protein can be balanced by a reduction 
in physical activity. The key in all cases is balance. 
Foods that are  more appropriate for Spring and Summer are 
vegetables, seasonal fruits,  lighter grains, beans and legumes and a small 
amount of dairy. Foods that are more appropriate for Fall and Winter 
seasons include squashes, root vegetables, heavier grains such as brown 
rice,  mochi (pounded sweet rice), beans and animal protein (such as 
fish). Cooked fc:xxls are more appropriate in the Wmter while a somewhat 
greater quantity of raw fruits and vegetables can be eaten in the Summer. 
Since food is considered the best tonic, tonic herbs for empty 
conditions are best taken cooked in soups or sweet rice congee porridge 
(see Chapter 13 for specific instructions and recipes). In most other 
cases, tonics are best taken before meals to prepare the· body for effective 
absorption. Cleansing herbs are better taken after meals, to promote 
thorough elimination. 
YIN  AND YANG  IN  HERBAL  HEALING 
Chinese medicine is based on the systematic application ofYin-
Yang principles to diagnosis and treatment. Every symptom and every 
herbal  treatment  can be  evaluated in  terms  of Yin  and Yang.  All 
pathologies, herbs and foods are classified accordingly. There are four 
basic treatment choices: 
1. To tonify Yang 
2. To tonify Yin 
3. To eliminate excess Yang 
4. To eliminate excess Yin 
Herbs, too, are classified according to Yin-Yang characteristics, as 
they have the potential to either raise  the organic metabolic function of 
an organ process that may be too weak or low, or lower one that is too 
high and congested. Thus, like foods, herbs are classified according to 
their  basic  energetics:  their  relative  hot-warm-neutral-cool-cold 
characteristics. Based on these classifications, they are given to individuals 
to balance Excessive or Deficient states. 
Herbs can also play a role in helping to maintain balance through 
the seasons. Generally, we take herbs that are warming and tonifying 
during the Winter and cooler-natured herbs that nourish Yin-essence 
during the Summer. Herbs that are good to include with food during 
the Winter include Chinese ginseng, astragalus root, Dang Gui, angelica, 
cinnamon bark, garlic and ginger. Beneficial herbs that are good during 
the Summer include ophiopogon root, rehmannia root, American ginseng 
and asparagus root. Chrysanthemum flower tea is particularly good to 
drink throughout the Summer and Fall because it is cooling and has 
slight Yin tonic properties. Chamomile tea is also appropriate during 
this time of year.  During the summer months, American ginseng is a 
better choice than Chinese ginseng because it is more lubricating and 
cooling. 
Pathologies  ofYin and  Yang 
Pathologies ofYin and Yang involve their four basic states: Deficient 
Yin,  Deficient Yang, Excess Yin and Excess Yang. They are described in 
detail in the Chapter, Patterns of Disharmony. 
THREE 
THE  FLVE  ELEMENTS 
Next to the Yin-Yang doctrine, the Five Elements, or Five Phases (Wu 
Xing), is the second most important principle of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine. Five Element Theory recognizes that qualities and things can 
simply be what they are without necessarily being the opposite of 
something else. As such, it provides an alternative to the dualistic approach 
of the Yin-Yang doctrine. 
The Five Elements _ A ~  were frrst described around 3000 years 
ago in the Yellow Emperor's Classic of Internal Medicine (Huangdi Neijini> 
as follows: "Heaven has four seasons and five elements to allow cultivation, 
growth, harvesting and storing. It produces cold, heat, drought, humidity 
and wind. Man has five vital organs that transform the five influences 
to engender happiness, anger, vexation, sadness and fear." It probably 
originated around 4000 to 5000 years ago. 
The Chinese Five Elements, described as Wood, Fire, Earth, Metal 
and Water, represent interactive phases or processes that are fundamental 
to humankind and nature. Originally the Five Elements were probably 
a further subdivision ofYm-Yang aspects, extending into four subdivisions 
with  Earth  in  the  center.  Eventually,  Earth,  with  its  own  set  of 
relationships, began to be thought of as one of the five. 
The Five Elements describe the dynamic functional relationship 
between all aspects of nature as well as the energetic relationship between 
~ 
l.8 
the twelve internal Organs and other physiological processes. It goes 
further to describe the interaction of all parts of an individual, including 
both internal physiological and psychological processes, with external 
factors such as season, climate, foods and other variables. In this way it 
shows us how an imbalance in one phase or Organ process can influence 
an imbalance in all other phases. It is inclusive of the Ym-Yang concept 
but goes a step further by subdividing the energies according to their 
influence on particular Organs. 
Implicit in each of these systems is the perspective of life as a 
process of constant flow,  interaction and change. All  phenomena, 
including herbs and foods, are contained within the Chinese Five Element 
cycle, allowing a balance of creative engendering and control. This system, 
therefore, is another way to describe the vision of health as balance and 
of disease as a manifestation of imbalance. 
The Five Element concept evolved out of an ancient people who 
lived closely with the earth and followed the cycles of nature. Today, 
with artificial lighting and heating, foods imported from all around the 
world and jet travel,  many of us have forgotten the once powerful 
influence of the seasons upon our daily lives. Ancient sages, however, 
perceived the cycles of seasonal change, the cycles of each day and the 
progression from birth, infancy, puberty, adolescence, adulthood to old 
age as a predictable and orderly process that exists through all aspects of 
life. 
As a result the Five Elements are an expression of those natural 
cycles, beginning with the seasons and extending out to explain the 
principles of transformation and change throughout all of nature and 
human psycho-physiological processes. The following table outlines the 
primary correspondences of the Five Elements: 
WOOD  FIRE  EARTH  METAL  WATER 
Planet  Jupiter  Mars  Saturn  \enus  Mercury 
Direction  East  South  Center    North 
Col or  Green  Red  Yelbw  White  Black 
Sea,om 
Spring  Summer  Indian Summer  Autumn  Wmter 
        
Wind  Heat  Moisture  Dryness  Cold 
limate 
YinOrgan  Uver  Heart  Spleen-Pancreas  Lungs  Kidneys-Endocrine 
YangOrgan  GallBladder  Small Intestine  Stomach  Large Intestine  Bladder 
IU.>.H  Birth  Growth  Transformation  Harvest  Stor.ige 
Sense  Sight  5peWI  rase  Smell  Hearing 
Body Part  Muscles/Ligaments         Flesh  Skin 
Ilcre; 
External  Nails  Complexion 
Manifestation 
Ups  Body Hair  Head Hair 
 
19 
Body Orifice  Eye;  Toogue  Mouth  Na;e  Ears, anus, Urinary 
organs 
Bodily Secretion 
Tear.; 
SWeat  Lymph  Mucous  Saliva 
Bodlly Sound  Crying  laughter  Singing  Sohhing  Groaning 
Spiritual  Ethereal Sou V  Hun  Spirit/Shtn  Thought/Yl  Corporal SouV PO  Will/Zhi 
Quality 
Emotion  Anger  joy/Levity  Worry  Grief  Paranoia 
Dynamic  Spiritual  VISionary  Intellectual  Vitality  Will 
Controls  Spleen  Lungs  Kidneys  Uver  Heart 
Activity  Seeing  Walking  Sitting  Reclining  Standing 
Grains  Wheat  Corn  Millet  Rice  Beans 
\egetahle  I.rek  Shallot  Hollyhock  Scallions  Leaf of Bean Plant 
Animal  Chicken  lamb  Cow  Horse  Pig 
Fruits  Plum  Apricot  Date  Peadl  Chestnut 
Benefits  Sv.re  Sour  Salty  Bitter  Spicy 
when eaten 
Injures  Spicy  Salty  Sv.re  Sour  Bitter 
when overeaten 
Each of the Five Elements has a dynamic inter-relationship with 
the others. These relationships are incorporated into two cycles: the 
Shen cycle and the Ko cycle. The Shen cycle moves clockwise and is the 
engendering or creative movement. Thus, Fire creates an ash that 
engenders Earth; Earth creates or engenders Metal; Metal turns into a 
liquid when it melts to engender fluidity; Water nourishes the growth 
of the plant kingdom so it engenders Wood; and finally, Wood feeds 
Fire when it burns. This engendering cycle is described as a parent-child 
relationship where Fire is the parent of Earth, Earth the parent of Metal, 
and so forth. Therefore a parent is responsible for nurturing its child, or 
the following Element. 
The Ko cycle is sometimes called the controlling cycle. By this 
definition, Wood controls Earth by pushing through soil during its 
growth, Earth controls Water by damming it, Water controls Fire by 
putting it out,  Fire controls Metal  by melting it and Metal controls 
Wood by breaking it.  The controlling cycle reflects the role of the 
grandparents as protectors of custom and tradition in traditional Chinese 
society, and their control over the behavior of the grandchildren. Thus, 
Wood is the grandparent of the grandchild-Earth, Earth is the grandparent 
of the grandchild-Water, and so forth. As such, the grandparent controls, 
or keeps in check, its grandchild Organ. 
Within each phase there are closely related Yin and Yang Organs 
that follow the Husband-Wife Law. This states that to help one is to 
benefit the other, and that to harm one is to harm the other. Thus, the 
Stomach is the husband of the Spleen-Pancreas; the Colon is the husband 
of the Lungs; the Kidneys are the wife of the Bladder, the Liver is the 
~ 
JO 
wife of the Gall Bladder and the Small Intestine is the husband of the 
Heart.  Thus,  treating  the  husband-Stomach  assists  the  process of 
assimilation represented by the wife-Spleen-Pancreas; to treat the wife-
Kidneys helps the husband-Bladder, and so forth. On the other hand, a 
depletion of the wife-Lung can cause a depletion of the husband-Large 
Intestine and similarly for the other Elements. 
Each of the Five Elements embodies a particular energy, or Power, 
as follows:  Wood embodies birth, ideation, creativity, expression; Fire: 
impulse, consciousness, spirit, mental processes; Earth: centeredness, 
nourishment,  thought  processing;  Metal:  elimination,  letting  go, 
regulation and conduction of energy throughout the body; Water: will 
power, essential power, inherited constitution, fluidity. All these qualities 
can appear active when the Organ is in balance, or over-stimulated or 
suppressed if the Organ is correspondingly Excess or Deficient. 
For example,  an imbalance  in Wood can cause an Excess or 
Deficiency in one's creativity and expressiveness with resultant feelings 
of frustration that give rise to anger, moodiness and depression. An 
individual with an Excess in Wood will tend to have a shouting, angry 
tone of voice even in normal speech, while a person Deficient in Wood 
may be very timid and repressed with little tendency towards self-
expression. 
An imbalance in Fire is represented by an inappropriately happy 
or over-indulgent partying mood which would be an Excess, or a marked 
lack of happy feelings, which would be a Defidency. Fire corresponds to 
the Heart, and since the Heart also rules the Mind, conscience and 
speech, one with an imbalance of Fire and Heart Qi may exhibit a 
variety of psychological problems which affect one's ability to relate to 
the external world, such as neurosis or schizophrenia. 
An Earth imbalance is represented by problems in assimilation of 
either food, drink or, on a more subtle level, ideas and concepts. There 
may be a lack of centeredness and grounding, a tendency to look to 
others for personal support, a yellowish pallor and an overly sweet manner 
of expression with perhaps a singsong voice or total absence of vocal 
inflection. 
An imbalance in Metal may cause a general blockage of energy 
flow,  giving rise to stiffness, rigidity, or an inability to let go of past 
occurrences. The individual may have a whining or sobbing sound to 
their voice, a whitish pallor, a tendency towards mucus, physical weakness, 
lung problems, sinus congestion and!  or cough. 
A Water imbalance will be associated with inherited weaknesses, 
lack of will power, lack of power or strength, aching feelings in the 
JI 
lower back or joints and a tendency towards fatigue,  dark coloration 
and a low, groaning or gravely sound to the voice. 
It is possible to become skilled at identifying a person's Five Element 
imbalance by observing how they walk, their taste and calor preferences, 
the tone of voice, personality types and so on. For example, patients 
who wony about money, express negative attitudes of insufficiency and 
inadequacy, need to sit and cannot stand long, have a light low groaning 
tone in their everyday voice and a darkish pallor, especially under the 
eyes, are recognized as being a Deficient Kidney-Adrenal type. In other 
words, who we are and how we act, as well as our physical-mental-
emotional imbalances, reveals our predominant constitutional Element. 
Although this aids in identification of the underlying constitution, 
often the Five Element understanding alone does not provide enough 
information to effectively treat acute colds, flu,  skin conditions or 
digestive  disorders.  When  we  look  closely  to  find  Five  Element 
correspondences, we usually fmd that all Five Element indications are 
present in everyone, and thus the key is in recognizing the primary 
imbalance. While Five Element analysis offers a more constitutional or 
underlying cause of disease, other TCM systems such as Eight Principles 
or Symptom-Sign diagnosis afford a more direct strategy for treatment. 
Five Element imbalances tend to remain even after the presenting 
complaint is resolved, because we all exhibit a predominance or deficiency 
of one Element or another. 
Thus, instead of a treatment protocol, the Five Element system is 
like a  "user's guide" to the specific needs and requirements of the 
individual body.  By learning to recognize our tendencies and limitations 
within the Five Element system, we are better able to understand them 
and utilize their various aspects to create greater harmony and well-
being in our lives. If there is one dominant principle of Chinese Medicine 
and Five Elements, it is to keep the energy flowing with as much integrity, 
grace, compassion and awareness as we can.  It is  to this end that 
acupuncture, diet and herbal medicine are ultimately intended. 
Following is a description of the characteristics of each of the Five 
Elements. 
W O O D ~ 
In the Five Element system we begin with Wood because that is 
where the new energy first arises. As a young sapling is eager to burst 
forth in the Spring to realize the opportunities of the new light, the 
Wood person displays a similar need for expansiveness and growth. 
Jl. 
Motivation, daring and planning are the Positive qualities of the Wood 
person, while control over those individuals and circumstances that 
may impede their ambitions are the negative ones. Confronted with 
obstacles, the Wood person experiences extreme frustration, anger and 
possibly depression. 
The  key  personality  characteristics  of the  Wood  person  are 
controlling, planning and organizing. Comparing each of the personality 
traits of the Elements, Fire generates enthusiasm, Earth grace and leisure, 
Metal detachment and letting go, Water apprehension and fear,  and 
Wood planning and organizing. 
1) Yin Organ:  Liver 
The Liver is like a "general" or "planner" in charge of formulating 
strategies to setve the pwpose and goals of the body-mind. Physiologically 
it has the most complex functions. It is responsible for detoxifying, 
filtering,  nourishing, restoring and storing blood. In doing this, the 
Liver chemically counteracts foreign toxins that enter the blood and 
eliminates these through the bile, along with the waste of broken down 
blood cells. 
These toxins are either endogenous or exogenous. Exogenous, or 
external,  toxins  occur  from  environmental  pollutants,  additives, 
preservatives and hydrogenated oils in foods, impure water and air, and 
other toxins. Endogenous, or internal, toxins are created as a hormonal 
or neuro-transmitter response to external stimuli. This includes the 
secretion of adrenaline in response to fear and anger, the secretion of 
sexual hormones and, in general,  the ability to switch between the 
mobilizing  functions  of the  sympathetic  nervous  system  and the 
nourishing and maintaining functions of the parasympathetic nervous 
system. 
These secretions, manufactured and sent into the blood from diverse 
areas of the body, setve as a command for various physiological processes 
to occur. These include regulating and transforming glycogen stored in 
the liver to maintain normal blood sugar levels, stimulating digestive 
and sexual secretions and a wide range of other more subtle hormonal 
responses. 
When the body-mind response is no longer required because the 
original need for the mobilizing hormonal secretion has passed, the 
hormonal secretions need to be canceled. A healthy Liver neutralizes 
hormonal secretions which are no longer needed. If the Liver is backed 
up with other vital tasks, such as filtering and eliminating complex 
exogenous toxins, the hormones continue to circulate in the blood and 
~ 
JJ 
become endogenous toxins.  Unfortunately, if the system becomes 
overloaded beyond capadty with both endogenous and exogenous toxins, 
like a frustrated commander or general, the Liver gives a chemical 'file 
it' command for them to be stored in various cells throughout the body 
awaiting future detoxification and elimination. This can put a burden 
on  the  body,  especially  the  various  tissues  and  cells  that  must 
accommodate the presence of the various toxins. 
If they are allowed to remain, however, they are capable of causing 
cysts and tumors in the area where they are located. In women this may 
include various fatty tissues such as those found in the breasts (near the 
Liver) and female reproductive organs. They can also be lodged in other 
organs and glands in the body which themselves may have been the site 
of extraordinary  stress,  such  as  the  lungs  (from  smoking),  the 
gastrointestinal tract, the pancreas or the Liver itself. Certain glands and 
organs, such as the female ovaries or male prostate, can also become the 
Liver's dumping ground for metabolic waste and toxins. 
The capacity to overcome addictions, let go and relax is the result 
of a healthy Liver.  Because of its ability to regulate the sympathetic and 
parasympathetic nervous systems, the Liver governs the entire nervous 
system. From all of this we understand how TCM considers the Liver's 
ability to regulate Qi of paramount importance. Both the Liver and its 
Yang counterpart, the Gall Bladder, control proper neuro-muscular 
tension throughout the body-mind. This includes the ligaments and 
tendons responsible for neuro-muscular coordination. 
Because the Liver is involved with the storage of the Blood, it is 
responsible for maintaining a wide range of other physiological functions 
and systems. These range from sexual potency, regularity of the monthly 
menses of women, the condition of the fingernails and toenails, and the 
eyes. In addition, it regulates various psycho-spiritual processes including 
our creativity, drives and ambitions. 
The Liver is involved in a wide variety of complaints, ranging from 
hepatitis, cirrhosis, gallstones, diabetes, hypoglycemia, female menstrual 
cycle issues, problems assodated with menopause, infertility, leukonhea, 
herpes simplex, hypertension and depression, to name a  few.  It is 
remarkable that, for the many conditions that modem Western medicine 
employs suppressing drugs and tranquilizers and an increasing variety 
of chemical mood regulators (most of which have Liver toxicity as a 
prominent side effect), the ancient Chinese created herbal formulas to 
regulate the many complex Liver functions involved as the underlying 
cause for these conditions. 
~ 
34 
2) Yang  Organ:  Gall  Bladder 
In the government of the body-mind, the Gall Bladder is the official 
of pure and proper judgment. It is responsible for our ability to make 
decisions and to manifest the courage necessary to execute them. Just as 
in folk parlance we associate the phrase "a lot of gall' with the gall 
bladder, an inability to formulate decisions or a lack of courage is psycho-
spiritually a sign of Gall Bladder imbalance. 
As the Yang Organ counterpart of the Liver, the Gall bladder is 
directly responsible for the discharge of bile, which in turn greatly 
facilitates the digestion of fats and oils. Diverse conditions ranging from 
gall bladder issues to problems with the ligaments and tendons and 
tension headaches can indicate Gall Bladder imbalances. 
3) Season: Spring 
Spring, the season for Wood, signals the new growth of plants. 
This is an ideal time to consume wild edible greens such as dandelion 
leaves, chickweed, watercress, malva and lamb's quarters leaves, all of 
which impart the energy of Spring to the Liver and aid in its blood-
detoxifying and Qi regulating functions. 
4) Climate: Wind 
Diseases and conditions aggravated by Wind reflect a  Wood 
imbalance. In Chinese medicine, Wind refers to those pathological 
conditions that tend to proliferate and spread such as colds, influenza, 
allergies and various skin diseases, all of which are considered External 
Wind. It also exists as Internal Wind, manifesting in diseases that involve 
muscular coordination and tension such as migraine headaches, tremors 
and epilepsy. 
5) Direction: East 
The direction for Wood relates the injurious effects of the East 
Wind on diseases caused by an imbalance of the Wood element. 
6) Time of Day:  11  P.M.  - 3 A.M. 
For each of the Five Elements and their associated Yin and Yang 
Organs, there is a time of day that is optimum for the function of its 
corresponding Organ. For the Gall Bladder it is between 11  P.M.  and 1 
A.M., while for the Liver it is between 1 A.M.  and 3 A.M. 
This means that a significant portion of the complex functions of 
detoxification, regulation and nourishment involved with the Wood 
Element are accomplished during 11  P.M.  - 3 A. M.,  the normal sleep 
~ 
35 
hours.  By so doing,  imbalances characteristically created from  an 
overabundance of physical and mental activity during the day are 
processed and put to rest in the evening. To accomplish this, during 
sleep and Liver time a large amount of the body's blood is stored in the 
Liver. This poses a problem for many who work at night or regularly go 
to bed late, as then the Gall Bladder and Liver are unable to adequately 
perform their vital functions, ultimately resulting in an imbalance in 
these organs. 
7) Color: Green 
Green is the calor associated with Spring. When we detect a greenish 
pallor on the skin, it is associated with a  possible imbalance of the 
Wood Element. 
8) Flavor: Sour 
The Flavors  are a  direct sensory experience of the chemical 
constituents of therapeutic substances such as herbs. As such, they seJVe 
a similar purpose for the traditional herbalist as chemical constituents 
do for the biochemist and pharmacist. In TCM, there are many instances 
where the flavors assigned to an herb are more a reflection of their 
therapeutic properties and effects than their actual tastes. 
The sour taste is associated with fermented foods and substances 
that tend to be high in enzymes useful for digestion. It also has a mouth-
puckering, astringent or contracting quality that is used to help retain 
fluids, stop hemorrhage and leakages, and contract and restore tissue 
that has lost its tone. 
9) Sound: Shouting 
Stagnant Liver Qi is associated with anger and frustration. The 
individual has a need to assert control over many situations, which 
causes them to develop a shouting angry tone of voice even in normal 
conversation. 
10) Smell: Rancid 
Individuals who have a Wood Element imbalance may have a sour 
or rancid body odor. 
11) Body Orifice: Eyes 
The Liver nourishes and supplies essential nutrients to the eyes. 
One of these is beta carotene, abundantly present in Chinese Lycii benies 
( Gou Qi Zi) which tonify the Blood of the Liver.  Red or dry eyes and 
excessive tearing or a lack of tearing all indicate Liver imbalances. 
12) Body Part:  Muscles and Ligaments 
Lack of either mental or physical flexibility can indicate a Wood 
imbalance. The Liver and Gall Bladder must appropriately retain and 
secrete bile into the Small Intestine, making them the model for all 
restraining and contracting functions. If this process becomes imbalanced 
or exaggerated as a result of psychological or metabolic imbalance, it 
mirrors this contracted state to other tissues such as the muscles and 
ligaments, whose job is also involved with contracting and releasing. 
13) External Manifestation: Nails 
Problems associated with the nails of the hands and feet are an 
indication ofWood imbalance. This includes any conditions of brittleness, 
yellowness, striation_<;, paleness or fungal degeneration. 
14) Emotion: Anger 
Anger arises out of fear (which precedes it as part of the Water 
Element). When plans and expectations are blocked, the result is anger. 
As with all the emotions corresponding to each of the Five Elements, 
either an Excess or complete lack of the correlating emotion can be 
indicative of Wood imbalance. However, what most aggravates the Wood 
personality is being blocked or unable to manifest their dreams, and 
anger is the result. 
An Excess liver manifests as an aggressive overbearing temperament 
with a shouting voice. Using the Shen cycle of the Five Element system, 
Liver-anger is aggravated from fear and paranoia, the emotion of the 
Water Element. Following the Ko cycle, Liver anger is controlled with 
grief and sadness, the emotion of Metal. From this we see how Five 
Element psychotherapy can employ supporting or counterbalancing 
emotions to move blocked emotional patterns and attitudes and effect 
positive mental changes. This is advantageously employed in a kind of 
traditional psychotherapy and counseling characteristic of shamanistic 
healing. 
15) Inner Resource: Hun 
Chinese medical philosophy sees body, mind and spirit as integrated 
with each other, and each Organ has its unique psycho-spiritual potential. 
The Liver is the house of the Hun or Ethereal Soul. This is the aspect of 
the Soul that survives after death, returning to the world as pure spirit. 
~ 
37 
It is the Soul counterpart of Sben, the Spirit. The opening to the Liver 
and Hun, the eyes, are often termed the "window of the Soul". 
Hun is rooted and nourished by Liver Yin and Blood. It is most 
active at night during sleep and helps determine the quality of sleep 
experienced.  Hun pertains to mental and spiritual achievement and 
provides psychic abilities, intuition and inspiration. It is also responsible 
for balancing and harmonizing the Seven Emotions. Hun is also that 
quality of the psyche which gives us the capacity to plan our life and 
find a sense of direction and purpose. 
Balanced  WOod  Type 
The balanced Wood type tends to be creative, expressive and highly 
motivated. As such we might think of them as having an entrepreneurial 
temperament. They require an outlet to vent and express the unique 
aspects of their creative nature and temperament. Wood types are those 
individuals who are driven to excel in their focused endeavor. Like the 
young sapling first  breaking through the earth with freshness and 
enthusiasm in Springtime, they thrive on opposition and resistance as 
they pursue their goals and ambitions. Acute diseases that are likely to 
occur with the Balanced Wood types involve Qi congestion and stagnation 
as it mainly affects the digestive tract: food stagnation, bloating, gas, 
indigestion and constipation. 
Deficient  WOod  Type 
The Deficient Wood type, still manifesting a tendency to outer 
drive, has an inner hollowness that causes them to fall short of their 
goals and ambitions. This brings with it a kind of brittle sensitivity that 
frequently dips into depressive states. While there is a desire for expression 
and creativity, they seem, for various reasons, unable to manifest their 
dreams. One of the problems with Deficient Wood types is infertility, 
for example,. 
Peculiarly enough, both the Deficient and Excess Wood types still 
strive to manipulate and control their outer circumstances, sometimes 
with a tendency to aggression towards others. The difference is that, 
while the Excessive Wood type is more extroverted and overt in their 
method, the Deficient Wood type is more covert, but in their own way 
just as determined. 
Deficient Wood types tend towards Qi, Blood and Fluid stagnation 
and Deficiency and should be treated with the appropriate herbal and 
dietary approaches. Women tend to have trouble with their menstrual 
cycles. Both men and women have a tendency to excessively push against 
their limitations and develop anxiety, insomnia and hypertension so 
that some degree of mild sedation and tranquilizing is also indicated. 
~ 
J8 
Some herbal formulas that a r e ~  for Deficient Wood types include 
those  that  regulate  Liver  Qi,  such  as  Bupleurum  and  Peony 
Combination (Xiao yao wan) and Disperse Vital Energy in the Liver 
Powder ( Chai hu su gan san); those that sedate and nourish the Liver, 
such as Zizyphus Combination (Suan zao ren tang), and those that 
relieve depression, such as the above mentioned Bupleurum and Peony 
Combination (Xiao yao wan) and Bupleurum, Dragon Bone and Oyster 
Shell Combination (Chai hu long gu mu li tang). Herbs that nourish 
Blood and Yin include Rehmannia Six Combination (Liu wei di huang 
wan) and Dang Gui Four Combination (Si wu tang). 
Excess  WOod  Types 
Excess Wood epitomizes the extreme of Excess and stagnation 
syndromes. While stagnation and congestion are the primaty characteristic 
imbalances ofWood, the Excess type is more archetypal. The personality 
of this type is the classic aggressive dominating personality whose voice 
even in normal speech sounds shouting. 
These individuals are motivated to dominate any pursuit with which 
they are involved. As such they are the classic type A personality with all 
of the associated shortcomings as well as physical and psychological 
symptoms. Psychologically, these include initability, aggression, hysteria 
and depression. Physiologically, Excess Wood types have problems with 
hypertension and other cardio-vascular complaints, chest tightness, 
abdominal bloating, gas, constipation, insomnia, nervous twitching, 
spasms and all problems associated with the Liver and Gall Bladder. 
Therapeutically they are treated with a diet low in primary protein 
including dairy and meat, and tend to improve on a lighter vegetarian 
diet. As indicated, they should use herbs and formulas that promote 
elimination, including cholagogues (herbs that discharge bile) such as 
capillaris (Yin Chen Hao), coptis (Huang Lian), scutellaria (Huang Qin) 
and gardenia fruit (Zhi Zi); laxatives such as rhubarb root (Da Huang) 
and mirabilitum (Mang Xiao);  herbs that relieve congestion such as 
green citrus (Qing Pi), bupleurum (Chai Hu) and cyperus (Xiang Fu); 
and herbs and minerals that calm and sedate such as Zizyphus spinosa 
(Suan Zao Ren), dragon bone (Long Gu) and oyster shell (Mu Li). 
Formulas such as Major  Rhubarb Combination (Da cheng qi 
tang)  and Minor' Rhubarb  Combination  (Xiao  cheng qi  tang)  are 
indicated when there is constipation; for Liver and Gall Bladder toxicity 
problems use Capillaris Combination (Yin chen hao tang), Coptis 
and Rhubarb Combination (San huang xie xin tang), Pueraria, Coptis 
and Scutellaria Combination (Ge gen huang lian huang qin tang) or 
Siler and Platycodon Combination (Fang feng tung sheng san); and 
~ 
39 
for  stagnation  and  congestion  consider  Bupleurum  and  Peony 
Combination (Xiao yao wan) and Disperse Vital Energy In The Liver 
Powder (Chai hu su gan san). 
F I R E ~ 
Fire represents light and warmth. Life is the capacity to moderate 
and contain the energy of the sun in plants and animals. It is the energy 
of Fire that is the very essence of Qi, and it imparts vitality, liveliness, 
joyousness and love to the universe and throughout all living beings. 
To be without the essential spark of life is to be cold and alienated 
from everyone and everything. The energy of Fire is joy and gaiety. 
Laughter, the sound associated with the Fire Element, is an expression 
of our inner Fire energy, and like fire,  it easily spreads and elicits a 
similar happy response from others. Our capacity to give and receive 
love is  in proportion to the strength of the Fire Element, so that it 
governs our ability to communicate and relate to others. 
1) Yin Organs:  Heart and  Pericardium 
Fire is the only Element that has four corresponding organs. The 
Heart is a Yin Organ and is considered the supreme controller presiding 
over all aspects of psycho-physical activities throughout the body-mind. 
As in common folk knowledge, the Heart is not only responsible for 
circulation but includes all mental processes including our thoughts, 
aspirations  and  dreams,  so  that  it  is  responsible  for  insight  and 
enlightenment. 
The other Yin Organ of Fire, the Pericardium, is actually the sac-
like tissue that surrounds the physical heart. It is also known as Heart 
Protector or Circulation Sex. Despite its physicality, the Pericardium is 
a function rather than a specific Organ and, as such, is regarded as an 
extension of the Heart. The fact that it is sometimes called Circulation 
Sex reflects its importance as the Organ function governing relationships 
and sexuality. 
2) Yang  Organs:  Small Intestine and Triple Warmer 
The Small Intestine is the Yang Organ corresponding to the Heart, 
and it represents the Fire Element's potential for clarity. As the Chinese 
state, "the Small Intestine separates the pure from the impure," which is 
reflected in good digestion and assimilation as well as enhanced mental 
clarity. 
The Triple Warmer, having no specific physicality or location, is 
even more of an Organ function than a specific Organ. It is divided 
into the Upper, Middle and Lower Warmers: the internal organs and 
area from the base of the sternum upwards is the Upper Warmer, from 
the base of the sternum down to the navel is the Middle Warmer and 
the area below the navel is considered the Lower Warmer. The Triple 
Warmer regulates warmth and water metabolism throughout all the 
internal systems and is the process by which the body-mind relates 
physically and mentally to all of its parts. 
3) Season: Summer 
Summer is a time when the sun is at its zenith and all living things 
flourish in the abundance of resources. 
4) Climate: Hot 
Either a strong preference for,  or abhorrence of, hot weather is an 
indication of a Deficiency or Excess of Heat. According to TCM theory, 
all heat and warmth emanate from the Heart, so that hot weather can be 
injurious to the psycho-physical functions of the Heart  -Mind. If there is 
Heart Deficiency, on the other hand, one is less able to tolerate cold 
weather. 
5) Direction: South 
This is the area that receives the greatest concentration of light and 
warmth from the sun. It is the exposure to the sunlight of the South 
that provides for maximum plant growth. 
6) Time of Day:  11  A.M. - 3 P.M. 
Based upon sun time, from 11  A.M.  to 1 P.M.  is Heart time and 
from  1 - 3  P.M.  is  Small  intestine time.  Then from  7  - 9  P.M.  is  the 
Pericardium time and finally from 9 - 11  P.M.  is  the Triple Warmer 
time. 
7) Color: Red 
Red, whether it is a flush on the complexion, a reddened area of 
inflammation or e.ven a show of blood during hemorrhage, indicates 
Heat or Fire. 
8) Flavor: Bitter 
One of the paradoxes of the Five Element system is that while the 
Fire Element represents heat and warmth, it is assigned the bitter flavor, 
41 
which is energetically cooling and detoxifying. The bitter flavor is a 
dominant quality in most medicinal herbs that are used for toxicity and 
inflammation. This is because the biochemical constituents of bitter 
tasting herbs include various alkaloids and bitter glycosides that have 
the potential to neutralize toxic wastes in the body as well as possessing 
antibacterial and antiviral properties. Herbs with a bitter flavor are also 
drying, so that in addition to their detoxifying effects they help resolve 
purulent and inflammatory discharges. Finally, digestive bitters, an 
alcoholic liqueur taken before or after meals, is traditionally used to aid 
digestion and to relieve gas and bloating. 
9) Sound: Speech and  Laughter 
Laughter and speech are the sounds of the Fire Element. Individuals 
whose normal speech is punctuated with frequent laughter may indicate 
a Heart imbalance. Conversely, a noticeable absence of laughter reflects 
a Heart-Mind Deficiency. Similarly, an imbalance of Fire is also reflected 
in the individual who either talks too much or too little and/or when 
their speech manifests a great deal of excitement. 
10) Smell: Scorched 
Often it is possible to detect a noticeable scorched or burnt smell 
on an individual who has a Fire imbalance. 
11) Body Orifice: Tongue 
The Heart opens to the tongue. Talkativeness, lack of desire to talk, 
stuttering and aphasia all indicate Heart conditions. 
12) Body Part:  Pulse and Blood Vessels 
The blood vessels are the way all parts of the body communicate 
with each other through the Heart. The condition of the blood vessels 
is strongly influenced by the activity of the Heart, which serves as a 
pump sending blood throughout the body. Conditions such as hardening 
of the arteries or increase of undesirable forms of cholesterol and lipids 
in the veins and arteries put more stress on the Heart, which can lead to 
heart disease. 
13) External Manifestation: Complexion 
The face is .rich in blood vessels, which are controlled by the Heart; 
thus, its condition is reflected in the face through its calor and luster. 
When the Heart functions well, Blood is plentiful and the face will be a 
normal  red calor with sheen and moisture.  When Heart Blood is 
4:Z. 
insufficient, the face will be pale and lusterless. If Heart Blood is stagnant, 
the face will be purple. 
14) Emotion: Joy 
Joy is the emotion of the Heart.  For most of us, joy has a  very 
positive connotation and certainly not what we would be inclined to 
consider as an imbalance. From another perspective, people who party 
and celebrate excessively, if for no other reason than overindulgence, are 
frequently prone to heart attacks. The Heart governs the blood vessels, 
and an overindulgence in the enjoyment of rich desserts causes fatty 
deposits in the arteries which can lead to heart attacks and strokes. 
It is  no accident that the Heart,  the seat of the Mind and the 
emotions, is a universal symbol for love and affection. Further, bodily 
heat and warmth comes from the Heart, which, on a  psychological 
level, extends into charisma and warmth for others. 
15) Inner Resource: Spirit (Sben) 
The Chinese Five Element Theory, together with most of the great 
religions, refer to the Heart as the seat of the Divine. Spirit is an essential 
diagnostic indication, the lack of which prevents healing of any disease. 
On the other hand, an abundance of Spirit is an inspiration and healing 
not only to one's self, but to all who encounter its influence. 
Spirit is a lack of negativity. It manifests as boundless positive 
creative energy and compassion for others. Certainly this transcends the 
physical implications of the physical heart, which in the modem world 
has become a  disposable organ and accepted candidate for organ 
transplant and replacement. The attainment of Spirit can come from 
inspiration, and is a potential with which one is either innately born or 
one acquires as a result of consciously maintaining a positive oudook, 
regardless of outer circumstances. 
To some extent Spirit is at least partially inherited and partially 
acquired, but there is another more spiritual-physical aspect that is 
reflected in an inner harmony of body and mind and that might also 
have a material chemical component. Individuals who have experienced 
altered states of consciousness through the use of hallucinogenic 
substances under. some circumstances seem to discover latent spiritual 
resources that they had not previously realized. 
Yet, altered states of consciousness can be achieved without the aid 
of hallucinogenic substances through meditation, chanting, prayer and 
ritual irrespective of any religious affiliation. In our time, there is an 
increased tendency to seek out occasions that will heighten spiritual 
es«3 
43 
awareness - the awareness of ourselves and all existence as spirit. 
Considering that Heart disease is the number one cause of death in the 
Western world, does this not also reflect agreement with traditional 
beliefs that modem humankind is indeed starved for more Spirit in 
their lives? 
Balanced Fire  Type 
Fire has to do with excitement, communication and relationship. 
A balanced Fire type communicates with a great deal of innate enthusiasm 
and interest. They have a naturally positive, happy and spirited way, 
even when confronted with what others might consider to be a negative 
experience. They are great talkers and their speech frequently tends to be 
too rapid. Having a more sensitive temperament, they seem to have a 
lively concern and involvement in whatever their interest may be. 
They are easily excited by various circumstances and events and are 
capable of an extreme display of emotional enthusiasm. Because of this, 
it is not always easy to determine their deeper concerns, so that underneath 
their outer enthusiasm may be a lurking sadness or depression. Acute 
diseases, to which they are most prone, are inflammatory in nature, 
such as infections and inflammations. 
Deficient Fire  Type 
Individuals who are lacking in Fire typically have "hypo" type 
symptoms such as hypothyroid, hypoglycemia and hypo-adrenals, 
although the latter two are applicable to Earth and Water Deficiencies 
as well. However, it is not uncommon for one to have multiple similar 
metabolic imbalances simultaneously. 
The opposite of the Balanced Fire type, Deficient Fire individuals 
tend to be noncommunicative, reclusive, timid and shy in nature. While 
they tend to be uninterested in outer physical events, they have a decided 
introspective leaning with a marked interest in things that are more 
psycho-spiritually oriented. Deficient Fire individuals tend to feel colder, 
with a pale complexion that is  more the absence of redness than the 
white col or associated with Metal. They are more prone to chronic 
complaints associated with their low metabolism. 
Dietarily, Deficient Fire types do well with all cooked foods, more 
red meat, especially lamb, and warm natured Qi, Blood and Yang tonics 
that include Dang Gui (Angelica sinensis), ginseng (Panax ginseng), 
codonopsis (Dang Shen), as well as internal Yang warming hetbs such as 
cinnamon bark and ginger. Formulas that one might consider are Vitality 
Combination (Zhen wu tang), Ginseng and Astragalus Combination 
(Bu zhong yi qi tang) and Aconite, Ginger and Licorice Combination 
(Si ni tang). 
~ 
44 
Excess  Fire  Type 
Excess Fire individuals display an exaggeration of most balanced 
Fire traits. They have a tendency to excessive and rapid talk, even to the 
point of irritation and obnoxiousness, with a penchant to interject their 
opinion regardless of the level of information or even the appropriateness 
of their remarks. Their degree of insensitivity to what is happening 
around them is manifested in their impetuousness and impatience as 
well as a quality of joviality and laughter that seems almost always present 
in their manner and vocal inflection. Because of their tendency to over-
socialize and indulge themselves, Excess Fire types are prone to a variety 
of inflammatory as well as cardio-vascular diseases. These include 
arteriosclerosis, angina, heart disease and strokes. 
Dietarily, Excess Fire Types require little or no animal protein, and 
should especially avoid high-fat flesh foods such as beef and lamb. They 
should limit their fat and oil intake and eat a larger proportion of fresh 
vegetables and fruits. They need herbs that are more detoxifying and 
eliminative with cholagogue (bile dispersing), laxative, diuretic and 
decongesting properties. They can use formulas that contain rhubarb 
root, mirabilitum, Chinese skullcap (Scutellaria baicalensis), coptis and 
gardenia fruit.  Formulas that are useful for this type include Coptis 
and Rhubarb Combination (San huang xie xin tang), Pueraria, Coptis 
and Scutellaria Combination ( Ge gen huang lian huang qin tang)and 
Siler and Platycodon Combination (Fang feng tung sheng san). 
EARTH..J:. 
The Earth Element relates to processes involved with nourishing 
and  supporting  life.  This  includes  digestion,  assimilation  and 
transportation of food and fluids and represents solidity and stability. 
This also encompasses personality and mental concepts such as grounding, 
focusing and centering as part of its manifestation in the individual 
person. 
Originally Earth was in the center of Four Elements. This was 
because it supported all the other elements and their corresponding 
Organs. Eventually, it became part of the five with its own corresponding 
Organs and qualities. Notwithstanding, the Earth Element, which includes 
the Stomach and Spleen-Pancreas, is the source of acquired Qi from 
food and drink, and therefore has a unique role to play in supplying Qi 
to each of the Organs. 
~ 
45 
1)  Yin Organ:  Spleen-Pancreas 
The  Spleen-Pancreas  transforms  and  transports  food  and  fluids, 
deriving  from  them  the  essential  factors  that  ultimately  create  Blood 
and  Qi in  the  body.  Thus,  the Spleen  includes  as  part  of its  functions 
the Pancreas (with  its  regulation of blood sugar and digestive  enzymes). 
The  basic  indications  for  Earth  imbalance  include  diseases  associated 
with digestive  imbalances and appetite, either too much or not enough. 
Concomitant with  digestive  weakness  are  mental  symptoms  of lack  of 
focus  and ungroundedness associated with pancreatic weakness and  low 
blood  sugar. 
2)  Yang  Organ:  Stomach 
The Stomach is  in charge of receiving ingested  food  and drink and 
then  "ripening"  and  "rotting"  it  through  its  digestive  process.  It then 
sends the pure portion to the Spleen for  its metabolic processes, and the 
impure  part  to  the  Small  Intestine  for  further  digestion.  The  Stomach 
"hates to be  hot or dry and  likes  moisture",  the opposite of the Spleen. 
3)  Season:  Late  Summer 
Late  summer  is  a  time  when  all  living  things  reach  their  stage  of 
maximum maturity and fruition,  and this  time of year correlates to  the 
Earth Element. However, because the Earth Element is  neutral in relation 
to  all  other  Elements,  it  also  corresponds  to  the  end  of each  season 
when  each  Element's  energies  returns  to  the  Earth  Element  for 
replenishment. 
4)  Climate:  Humidity (Dampness) 
It is in warm tropical climates that diverse and abundant life thrives. 
Because  Dampness  is  an  External  Pathogenic  Influence  that can  injure 
Earth,  overweight  individuals  who  have  problems  with  edema  and 
Dampness  may  have  an  adverse  reaction  to  damp  and  humid  climates. 
5)  Direction:  Center 
Because  the  Earth  Element  is  the  source  of Qi and  Blood  in  the 
body  and  thus  supports  the  activities  of all  the  other  Organs,  it  is 
considered  to  be  the center.  Thus,  being off-centered  reflects  our being 
out of balance with  Earth. 
6)  Time of Day:  7  - 11  A.M. 
The  biological  time  for  the  Stomach  is  from  7 - 9  A.M.;  for  the 
Spleen  it  is  from  9 -11  A.M.  For  this  reason,  the  Chinese  believe  that 
this  is  the  optimal  time  to  receive  quality nourishment. 
7)  Color: Yellow 
Yellow is  the color associated with Earth. Many people have trouble 
with  this designation because a characteristic yellow pallor is  associated 
in Western medicine with liver and gall bladder diseases such as  hepatitis. 
From  a  TCM  perspective,  a  yellow  pallor  may  reflect  a  problem  that 
began  with  the  Liver  and  then  later  extended  itself via  the controlling, 
or  Ko,  cycle  to  invade  or  attack  the  Spleen  (Earth  Element).  A  pale 
yelow  color  indicates  a  Spleen  imbalance  due  to  Deficiency.  A  bright 
yellow  in  TCM  signifies  Damp  Heat,  and  whether  we  are  considering 
hepatitis from  the perspective ofWestern medicine or Damp Heat from 
the  perspective ofTCM, the herbal  treatment for  both is  essentially the 
same, employing the use of cholagogues and diuretics to clear Dampness. 
8)  Flavor:  Sweet 
The flavor for Earth is sweet. We crave sweet flavor not only because 
we  have  spoiled  our palette  but  because  the  essential  flavor  associated 
with  nourishment  is  sweet.  A  craving  for  sweet,  therefore,  reflects 
malnourishment. The  stronger our craving,  causing  us  to  desire  sugary 
excessively  sweet  foods,  the  greater  our need  for  balanced  nourishment 
from  complex  carbohydrates  such  as  whole  grains,  beans,  dairy  and 
meat.  Simple,  refined  sugar  tends  to  stimulate  our  Earth  Organs  and 
launch them into an addictive reactive response that ultimately leaves  us 
exhausted,  depressed  and  asking  for  more. 
In  TCM,  food  is  considered  the  first  tonic.  Sweet  and/  or  acrid 
flavored  tonic herbs, such as ginseng (Ren Shen), astragalus (Huang Qi), 
atractylodes  (Bai  Zhu),  jujube dates  (Da  Zao),  become  superior  tonics 
when  cooked with  foods  such  as  soups  and  congees  (porridge). 
9)  Sound: Singing 
The Singing sound corresponds to the Earth Element.  We frequently 
encounter  individuals  with  a  sing-song  speech  inflection.  Not 
uncommonly they may also  impress  us  with  their "sweet"  manner and 
sound.  Considering  that  "sweet"  diseases,  such  as  hypoglycemia,  are 
associated  with  Spleen-Earth  imbalances,  and  that  this  disease  is  often 
associated  with  a kind  of unfocused  "spacy"  or "dreamy"  attitude,  it is 
not  uncommon  that  an  exaggerated  "sweetness"  together  with  a  sing-
song  vocal  inflection  is  associated  with  Earth  imbalances.  Musically, 
the  grounded  sound  of the drum corresponds  to the  Earth. 
~ 
47 
10)  Smell:  Fragrant 
The smell associated with Earth is  fragrant or sweet. While in many 
cases  this  can  invoke  the  fragrance  of blooming  flowers  and  ripe  fruit 
on the trees,  the odor on a person with an Earth imbalance is  a kind of 
cloying  sweet  fragrance. 
11)  Body Orifice: Mouth 
Because food,  drink and air first enter the mouth where the initial 
location  of digestion  occurs,  the  lips  and  mouth  are  traditional 
correspondences for the Earth element. The tissue of the GI  tract extends 
itself to  the  mouth  and  gums,  and  the  state  of these  bodily  areas  is 
indicative of the condition of the Stomach  and  Spleen. 
12)  Body Part:  Flesh 
Flesh  is  governed  by Earth and  includes  muscles  and  fatty  tissues. 
The areas where this is  most likely to show up in excess are the buttocks, 
abdomen  and  thighs. When  these  parts of the  body appear  flabby and 
enlarged,  it  is  a  sign  of Earth  imbalance  caused  by  weakness  of the 
Spleen Qi in transforming and transporting Fluids. In Western medicine 
this  corresponds  to  the  abundance  of swollen  lymph  nodes  in  these 
areas. 
13)  External Manifestation: Lips 
The lips  directly connect with  the  mouth,  the orifice of the  Earth 
Element, and so show the condition of the digestive Organs. Dry lips or 
inflamed gums indicate Stomach Heat, while swollen lips indicate Spleen 
Dampness. 
14)  Emotion: Pensiveness 
Pensiveness,  or over-thinking,  includes both the negative  aspect  of 
worry and the seemingly less  negative  process of over-thinking.  In some 
sense nostalgia, dwelling on the past, and sympathy, or over-concern for 
another,  are  also  encompassed  by  the  Earth  Element.  Any  repeated  or 
fixated  process,  be  it  physical  or  mental,  can  lead  to  stagnation  of Qi 
through  the  Five  Elements.  Students  who  intensely  study  for  an 
examination  frequently  experience  chest  discomfort,  an  indication  of 
stagnant Qi,  and  digestive  problems  associated  with  bloating and  gas. 
On  the  other  side,  so  many  individuals  with  known  problems 
associated  with  the  Spleen  and  Pancreas,  such  as  high  or  low  blood 
sugar,  complain  of being  unable  to  quiet  their  thoughts.  Sometimes 
these have  no particular emotion but are simply repetitive and obsessive. 
Nostalgia and  sympathy are  two  other thought processes which,  if 
habitual  and  repetitive,  indicate an imbalance of the Earth Element.  In 
some  sense  an  excess  of either of these  thought processes  reflects  some 
lack  of contentedness with  the present.  With  nostalgia,  a  sweet  feeling, 
one  may  overly  dwell  on  fond  events  of the  past.  To  the  extent  that it 
causes  one  to  escape  or  not  be  fully  in  the  present,  this  becomes  an 
imbalance. With sympathy, it is  more difficult because most of us would 
like,  and  indeed  need,  to  be  more  compassionate  and  sympathetic  of 
others.  This  becomes  a  problem  when  our  overly  sympathetic  feelings 
towards others become projections of our inner fears  of inadequacy, and 
they can  then  interfere with  the  normal  and  customary flow  of Qi. 
There  are  individuals  who  simply  are  unable  to  say  no  to  the 
expressed  desires  and  needs  of others.  If,  in overly attempting to  satisfy 
the needs of others, we damage or incapacitate ourselves, such sympathetic 
response  might  be  inappropriate.  From  the  opposite  perspective,  an 
insatiable craving  for  sympathy indicates  a deep emotional hunger and 
consequently,  an  Earth  Deficiency. 
15)  Inner Resource:  Thought (Yi) 
Earth  is  responsible  for  thought,  ideas  and  inspirations. 
Overthinking  and  worry,  on  the  other  hand,  injures  Earth  energy. 
Individuals who are prone to excessive worry or are  unable to control or 
stop  their  thoughts  have  a Spleen  imbalance.  Occupations  that require 
little physical activity and a great deal of thought increase physical Damp 
stagnation  that manifests  as  obesity,  indicating Spleen  Dampness. 
As  we  digest  and  absorb  food  and  drink,  we  also  assimilate  and 
absorb  information  and  ideas.  Therefore,  it  is  not  uncommon  for 
individuals  who  are  distracted  and  worried  to  have  difficulty  with 
digestion.  Just  as  there  must  be  a  balance  of diet  and  emotions  for 
physical  health,  there  must also  be  a balance of thought and  activity. 
Balanced Earth  Type 
Balanced  Earth  people  present  a  balanced,  strong  physical 
appearance  and  an  easy going,  casual  but compassionate  manner.  They 
tend  to  have  an  abundance  of Qi  and  virility,  good  digestion,  strong 
practical o p i n i o n ~ ,  and  an appreciation for  pleasure as  well  as  aesthetics 
in  the  form  of art  and  music.  They  have  a  well  established  sense  of 
"center" and Self, making them both practical and strongly self-motivated 
in  all  their endeavors. 
~ 
49 
Deficient Earth  JYpe 
A  Deficient  Earth  person  is  frequently  in  need  of sympathy and 
support from  others. They tend  to have  low energy and weak  digestion. 
The  stool  is  generally  loose  and  unformed  with  frequent,  clear  urine. 
Sexuality  may  be  more  for  closeness  and  warmth  rather  than  pleasure 
and  lust.  Lacking  a  strong  inner  drive,  they  require. reassurance  from 
others  for  many aspects  of their life and  are very guarded  in  taking on 
difficult projects that require prolonged effort. They may also have issues 
involving abnormal sweet cravings. They do best in warm sunny climates 
but  may  be  less  comfortable  in  either  extreme  cold  or  hot  climates. 
Emotionally, they tend to be overly compassionate, identifYing sometimes 
inappropriately  and  without  any  basis  in  fact  with  the  discomfort  of 
other individuals or creatures. 
Diet should consist of mostly cooked  foods  high  in whole grains, 
protein and  some  regular  use  of flesh  foods.  Vegetables  should  include 
potatoes, squash, cauliflower, carrots and broccoli. Herbs for the Deficient 
Earth  type  primarily  include  Qi  and  Blood  building  tonics  such  as 
astragalus  root (Huang Qi), ginseng  (Ren  Shen)  and codonopsis (Dang 
Shen).  Formulas include Major Four Herbs (Si  jun zi  tang), Major Six 
Herbs (Liu  jun zi  tang)  and  Eight Precious  Herbs (Ba  zhen  tang). 
Excess  Earth  JYpe 
An  Excess  Earth  person  exhibits  excessive  signs  of Dampness  and 
edema  throughout  the  body.  They  may  be  overly  opinionated  with 
difficulty understanding another's  point of view.  Their digestion  tends 
to  be  slow  and  congested  with  a tendency towards  constipation  or gas. 
They  crave  sweets  but  also  appreciate  hot,  spicy  foods  which  help  to 
disperse stagnation. While they require more physical activity to maintain 
balance,  they  are  generally  slow  moving  and  phlegmatic.  Climatic 
humidity is  a cause  for  much  discomfort. 
They are  often  individuals  who  state  that  at  one  time  they  had  a 
great  amount of physical  energy  but later  in their life  cycle,  because  of 
being weighed down by Damp accumulation, they easily tire and complain 
of a lack  of physical  stamina. They can  be  compassionate  towards  that 
which  they  understand  but  have  difficulty  in  comprehension. 
Aesthetically they tend to appreciate those art forms that tend to stimulate 
and  arouse  strong emotions  and  passions. 
Diet  for  the  Excess  Earth  type  should  be  low  in  animal  protein, 
including  all  dairy.  In  contrast,  it  should  be  higher  in  whole  grains, 
vegetable protein and  leafy vegetables.  Herbs should consist of reducing 
and  eliminative  herbs  including  laxatives  such  as  rhubarb  root  (Da 
~ 
so 
Huang), cholagogues such as  bupleurum (Chai Hu), coptis (Huang Lian) 
and gardenia fruit (Zhi Zi), and diuretic and Spleen Dampness removing 
herbs  such  as  poria  cocos  (Fu  Ling),  alisma  (Ze  Xie)  and  pinellia  (Ban 
Xia).  Excess Earth also needs herbs that clear food congestion and promote 
digestion  (Qi  regulation).  Herbs  that  remove  food  congestion  include 
crataegus  (Shan  Zha)  for  digesting  meat,  Masa  fermentata  (Shen  Q!I) 
and  Chicken  gizzards  Oi  Nei Jin),  sprouted  rice  (Gu  Ya)  and  sprouted 
barley (Mai Ya)  for  digesting grains.  Carminative herbs  that regulate Qi 
include  cardamon  (Sha  Ren),  saussurea  (Mu  Xiang)  and  tangerine  peel 
(Chen  Pi). 
Laxative  formulas  include  Major  and  Minor  Rhubarb 
Combinations  (Da  cheng  qi  tang  and  Xiao  cheng  qi  tang).  Formulas 
that  promote  digestion  include  Stomach  Purging  Decoction  with 
Pinellia  (Ban  xia  xie  xin  tang)  and  Citrus  and  Crataegus  Formula 
(Bao  he  wan).  Formulas  that  remove  Excess  Dampness  include  Poria 
Five  Herb  Combination  (Wu  ling san),  Stomach  Purging  Decoction 
with Pinellia (Ban xia xie xin tang) and Hoelen and Areca Combination 
(Wu  pi  yin). 
M E T A L ~ 
Today  we  think  of  Metal  as  a  metaphor  for  dense  material 
manifestation. With the dawn of the age of Metal being in close proximity 
to  the time when  the Five  Element  theory was  evolving,  ancient  people 
undoubtedly  had  a  much  different  idea  concerning  the  metaphorical 
meaning  of Metal  than  we  do  in  our time.  Their  perspective  of Metal 
included not only the utilitarian uses of iron and brass, but more precious 
metals  such  as  silver  and  gold  that  were  harder  to  mine.  To  ancient 
people,  therefore,  Metal  signified  a  refined  aspect  of  material 
manifestation. 
Perhaps one of the most important metaphors associated with Metal 
is  its correspondence with Autumn as a time ofletting go and detachment. 
Thus,  Metal  is,  in  a  sense,  the  most  spiritual  of all  the  Elements  and 
involves  transmutation  from  the  base  physical  matter  of Earth  to  its 
spiritual essence of Metal. It is  from  the refined essence ofWater, Wood, 
Fire  and  Earth  tliat  the  finest  metals,  such  as  gold,  evolve.  For  this 
reason,  the  power  of Metal  is  sometimes  referred  to  as  alchemical,  the 
transmutation  of base  substances  into gold. 
There are  many profound lessons  to be learned  about evolution as 
we  meditate upon the significance of Metal. The connection of receiving 
cosmic spiritual energy is  akin to the breath, for it is  upon the essential 
~ 
51 
rhythm  of the breath  that all  physical  activities  depend.  It is  also  from 
breath  control,  as  found  in the  "inner"  teachings  ofYoga and  Chinese 
Q!  Gong,  that the secret of quieting and  focusing  the mind  is  achieved 
and spiritual powers  are  made manifest. Thus, the Lungs  are  regarded as 
the home of the Corporeal Soul (Po ).  It is  at this level  that we experience 
our  feelings  from  the  most  base  sensations  of pain  and  itching  to 
emotional  feelings  of grief and  sadness.  It is  through the experience of 
these  uncomfortable  feelings  and  sensations  that  we  are  prompted  to 
learn to detach ourselves from  the base  material of the body to  come in 
contact with  the  refined  Metal  essence  of the Spirit. 
Thus,  the  personality  of Metal  is  one  who  is  naturally  detached 
and protected from negative outside influences (be it demons or viruses) 
and  in  touch  with  their  spiritual  essence.  While  Metal  is  present 
everywhere,  to  find  or  utilize  its  virtues  requires  effort  and  patience. 
With each calm, rhythmic breath cycle we  take in positive cosmic energy 
of heaven and release negative tendencies and energies that are no longer 
needed  for  growth  and  survival. 
People who have fallen out of rhythm with their breath by becoming 
off- centered  tend  to  lose  rhythm with  the cycles  of their  higher  needs, 
and  they become vulnerable  to  outer negative  spiritual  and  pathogenic 
influences.  In  this  sense,  upper respiratory allergies  mystically represent 
some  level  by  which  we  are  out  of rhythm  with  some  factors  of our 
external  environment.  One  of the  most  frequently  used  methods  for 
treating allergies is  immunization, where Western medicine injects small 
quantities of allergens to protect us from outer viral diseases.  Interestingly, 
homeopathy also  utilizes  the same  reactive,  allergenic substances but in 
submicro  potencies  to  help  attune  us  to  those  aspects  of our  outer 
environment which  are  the cause  of our allergic  reaction. 
Asthma and emphysema are diseases where one literally loses one's 
breath.  Certainly  there  are  many  causes  including  hereditary, 
environmental and dietary,  that aggravate  these  terrible conditions, but 
one of the  most important treatments for  these conditions is  the study 
and  practice  of pranayama  (Yogic  breath  control)  and/or  Q!  Gong 
(Chinese  Taoist  breathing  practices).  To  overcome  all  obstacles  in  life, 
heal  disease,  manifest  supernormal  powers  and  strength,  the  object  is 
ultimately  for  us  to  learn  to  get  in  harmony  and  regularity  with  our 
breath  and  ultimately,  our lives. 
1)  Yin  Organ: Lungs 
Assigning the Lungs,  which  have  to do with air and  breath,  to  the 
Metal  Element at first  seems  to  present some  difficulty.  Air  is  the least 
solid element and yet it is  this that is  assigned  to what may superficially 
~ 
52 
be  considered  as  the  most  dense  of all  the  Five  Elements.  Only  if we 
consider the importance of iron for  the circulation of oxygen and  food 
throughout  the  blood  and  into  the  cells  of the  body,  as  well  as  the 
processes  of excretion  governed  by  the  Lung's  Yang  counterpart,  the 
Large  Intestines, are we  able to understand how the ancient Chinese had 
such  a profound  understanding of complex  physiological  processes. 
Minerals, dense though they may be, are vital catalysts for some of 
the  most  complex  physical  reactions  in  the  animal  and  vegetable 
kingdoms. Thus, the Lungs are responsible for creating physical strength. 
They govern  the  Exterior  and  are  responsible  for  preventing colds,  flu, 
allergies,  acute rheumatic and skin conditions through the Wei  Q!. The 
Wei  Q!  in  TCM  is  equivalent  to  the  external  immune  system  and  is 
governed  by  the  Lungs.  Weakness,  or  Deficiency,  of the  Lungs  is 
characterized by increased sensitivity and vulnerability to External diseases. 
2)  Yang  Organ:  Large  Intestine 
The  Large  Intestine  represents  the gross  process  of elimination on 
all  levels.  Without proper elimination,  the  body will  become  toxic  and 
weak. 
3)  Season:  Autumn 
As  stated previously, Autumn is  the time ofletting go as  the energy 
retracts  back  into  a  state  ofWinter storage. 
4)  Climate:  Dryness 
Autumn is  also  the dry season. The primary complaints associated 
with both the Lungs and the Large Intestines are either excessive Dryness 
or Dampness  in  the  form  of mucus. 
5)  Direction: West 
West  represents  the  setting  sun,  the  time  of life  to  harvest,  store 
and  let  go  for  the  coming Winter. 
6)  Time of Day:  3 - 5 A.M. 
This  is  the  optimal  time  to  perform  Chinese  Q!-Gong  or Yogic 
pranayama  or  breath  control  exercises.  Problems  that  regularly  occur 
during this two-hour time period can indicate a Lung imbalance. Between 
5 - 7 A.M.  is  the biological  time for the Large  Intestine and the optimal 
time  for  defecation. 
7)  Color: White 
This  the  non-color  of purity,  detachment  and  withdrawal  from 
~ 
53 
worldly  affairs.  A  pale  cast  on  the  face  can  be  an  indication  of either 
Blood  Deficiency  or  Metal  imbalance.  Since  the  Lungs  govern  the 
circulation of Blood and Qi.,  there is a corresponding relationship between 
the  two  concepts. 
8)  Flavor:  Spicy or Acrid 
The  spicy,  or  acrid,  flavor  indicates  the  presence  of volatile  oils 
that  disperse  outwards  and  downwards  for  elimination  either  through 
the perspiration or from  the Urinary Bladder.  Herbs such as  cinnamon 
and  ginger  and  foods  such  as  onions  and  garlic  are  typically  used  to 
promote perspiration and treat colds and flu. Warm spicy herbs are  also 
used  to  promote  urination, especially when  taken  cool. 
9)  Sound: Sobbing or Crying 
Since the corresponding emotion for  Metal  is  grief and sadness,  a 
sobbing tone of voice, even when there is  no ostensible reason or awareness 
of sadness,  is  indicative of a Metal  imbalance. 
10)  Smell:  Rotten 
It is  during Autumn  that dead  leaves  and decaying  things  assume 
a  rotten  odor.  Similarly,  the  odor of mucus  expelled  from  the  lungs  is 
typically a metallic,  rotten  smell. 
11)  Body Orifice:  Nose 
The nose is  the outer opening of the Lungs. It also has an Elemental 
Yin-Yang  relationship  with  the  Large  intestine.  Both  Lung  imbalances 
and constipation can manifest as  upper respiratory and sinus congestion. 
12)  Body Part:  Skin 
The  Skin  is  considered  the  'third'  Lung  because  to  maintain  life, 
like the Lungs, it accomplishes a certain amount of respiration, absorption 
of nutrients  (such  as  vitamin  D)  and  elimination  of waste  through 
sweat.  The  pores  must  be  capable  of dilating  to  promote  perspiration 
and  elimination,  and  contraction  to  keep  out  External  Pathogenic 
Influences. The energy that specifically accomplishes this emanates from 
the  Lungs  and  is  called  the  Wei  Qi,  or  Defensive  energy,  and  is  an 
important aspect  of the immune system  in  general.  Many skin diseases 
are  the  result  of constipation  and  can  be  treated  by  promoting  bowel 
elimination. 
~ 
54 
13)  External  Manifestation:  Body Hair 
Any abnormal manifestations of the body hair, as  opposed to head 
hair  which  is  governed  by  the  Kidneys,  can  indicate  an  imbalance  of 
Metal. 
14)  Emotion: Grief 
Grief and  sadness  are  the emotions of letting go  and  releasing  the 
past.  While  they are  capable of plunging us  into the depths of despair, 
they  can  also  promote  detachment  from  other  worldly  concerns  and 
promote  the  possibility of greater  self knowledge  and  strength.  On the 
other  hand,  prolonged  or  intense  grief can  injure  the  Lungs,  causing 
asthma,  bronchitis or pneumonia. 
15)  Inner  Resource:  Corporeal  Soul  (Po) 
The Lungs harbor the Po,  or Corporeal Soul. As such, they represent 
the  relation  between  our spiritual  and  physical  being.  It is  through  the 
rhythm  of breath  that we  are  able  to  coordinate  our  true  inner  needs 
and  drives with  the outer world.  The breath also  promotes  the creation 
of Q!  and  activates  the  circulation  of Q!  and  Blood  throughout  the 
entire  body. 
Balanced Metal  Type 
Metal  represents  the highest degree of adjustment, refinement and 
sensitivity. There is  a sense of belonging and order, both in terms of the 
personal  relationship  with  one's  self as  well  as  with  the  macrocosmic 
order of climate and outer relationship with events and others. A balanced 
Metal type is neither thrown off balance by outer atmospheric influences 
that  might generate  cold  or allergic  reactions,  nor by emotional  shock 
which  can  influence  the  rhythm of one's breath. 
Consider how when one travels  there is,  for  most at least,  a period 
of bowel  irregularity.  With  the  balanced  Metal  type  there  is  an  even 
rhythm  both in receiving on the subtle level  of the psyche as  well  as  the 
physical  level  of breath  and,  on  the  gross  level  of the  large  bowel,  a 
letting  go.  In  a word,  the  balanced  Metal  type  is  able  to  regulate  their 
physical and emotional life with outer climate, circumstances and events. 
Deficient Metal  Type 
The  Deficient  Metal  type  lacks  the  inner  strength  to  withstand 
either  atmospheric  fluctuations,  such  as  minor  airborne  irritants  like 
dust  or  pollen  for  instance,  or  psycho-physical  shocks  that  might 
precipitate  an  irregular  breathing  pattern,  represented  by  such  diseases 
~ 
55 
as  asthma  and  emphysema.  We  see  them  as  being  highly  sensitive  and 
emotionally vulnerable as well as  having Deficient Wei Qi, or a weakened 
outer defensive  immune system.  This  makes  them highly susceptible to 
colds, flu,  sinus congestion and allergies.  They may have  problems with 
bowel  irregularity,  not  so  much  because  of Excess  congestion  and 
stagnation,  but  from  a  lack  of energy  to  effect  a complete  and  regular 
bowel  evacuation. 
Psychologically  these  individuals  require  rhythmic  evenness  and 
regularity  that will  allow  them  to  organize  the  various  aspects  of their 
psycho-physical  lives,  which  is  what  Metal  types  are  most  inclined  to 
want  to  achieve.  Because  of their  inability  to  create  such  organization 
for themselves, they tend to fall victim to outer irregularities and mishaps. 
Diet  for  Deficient  Metal  types  should  include  regular  servings  of 
rice,  the  specific grain  for  strengthening the Lungs.  If there is  phlegm, 
dairy  should  be  avoided  (although  boiling  or  precooking  dairy  will 
lessen its mucus forming propensity). Herbs for treating Metal Deficiency 
include  Qi  and  Immune  tonics  such  as  astragalus  root  (Huang  Qi), 
polygonatum (HuangJing), ophiopogon root (Mai Men Dong), American 
ginseng  (Xi  Yang  Shen)  and  pseudostellaria  (Tai  Zi  Shen).  Formulas  to 
consider  are  Jade  Screen  Immune  Tonic  (Yu  ping  feng  san)  and 
Ophiopogon  Combination (Mai  men dong tang). 
Excess Metal  Type 
Excess  Metal  is  physically  manifested  as  congestion,  characterized 
by the tendency towards  either yellow or Hot Phlegm, or white or Cold 
Phlegm.  Here one characteristically is  reacted  upon once again  by outer 
airborne influences or inner emotional responses to release and discharge 
that which has accumulated. By harmonizing with the Autumnal aspect 
of this  event,  which  is  to  shed  or  let  go  of that  which  is  no  longer 
needed, the Excess  Metal type is easily able to restore balance and normal 
circulation.  Fasting  and  withdrawal  from  worldly  concerns  is  most 
appropriate  for  Excess  Metal,  since  what  is  to  be  eliminated  is  that 
which  has  been  taken  on as  a result  of the Excess  of Earth. 
Excess  Metal commonly involves  Phlegm congestion and  allergies. 
Herbs  used  to  treat  asthma  and  allergies  include  ephedra  (Ma  Huang) 
and xanthium (Cang Er Zi).  These are  included in various formulas  for 
allergies  and  colds  including  Ephedra  Decoction  (Ma  huang  tang), 
Minor  Blue  Dragon  (Xiao  qing  long tang),  Xanthium  Powder  (Cang 
er  san)  and  the  famous  Chinese  patented  formula  called  Bi  Yan  Pian. 
Besides  these,  there are  highly effective  herbs  for  treating  a variety 
of upper  respiratory  conditions.  These  include  herbs  that  expel  Cold 
Phlegm,  such  as  platycodon  root  Oie  Geng)  which,  because  it  has  a 
neutral  energy,  is  effective  by itself for  clearing  the  Lungs,  and  pinellia 
(Ban  Xia),  which  is  one of the  most effective  herbs  for  clearing  Phlegm 
Dampness  and  mucus.  Pinellia  is  used  in  Citrus  and  Pinellia 
Combination  (Er  Chen  Tang),  available  as  a  patented  product,  a 
commonly used formula for drying and eliminating Cold Mucus. Other 
herbs  are  especially used  to expel  Hot Phlegm,  such  as  peucedani (Q!an 
Hu),  fritillaria (Chuan Bei  Mu) and trichosanthes root (Tian Hua Fen). 
Herbs  that  inhibit  the  cough  reflex  include  apricot  seed  (Xing  Ren), 
aster  root  (Zi  Wan),  coltsfoot  flowers  (Kuan  Dong  Hua)  and  loquat 
leaves  (Pi  Pa  Ye). 
WATER  1 J ~ 
Water embodies the latent potential of all life forms.  It is  a reservoir 
from which the potential for all  life- past, present and future- emanates. 
In  TCM,  the  Water  element  embodies  the  inherited  constitution,  or 
Ancestral  Q!,  that determines  one's development,  growth  and  strength. 
It  is  the Self which  consists  of the  innate reserves  inherited  from  one's 
forebears  and  from  which  emanates  the  primal  spark  utilized  by  the 
body  to  initiate and  maintain all  vital  functions. 
The important characteristic of Water  is  its  ability to flow,  making 
streams, rivers, ponds, seas and oceans ofliquid flowing energy. Similarly, 
in the body the Water Element is  that which circulates, lubricates, sustains 
and  deeply  nourishes.  This  includes  the Blood,  lymph and  the  flowing 
aspect  of Q!  in  the  form  of bioelectrical  nervous  energy,  as  well  as  the 
fluidity  of the  endocrine  system,  all  internal  secretions,  perspiration, 
tears,  saliva,  sexual  secretions,  lactation,  the  lubrication  of the  Lungs 
and all  other mucus membranes of the body, and  the moisture required 
for  proper  elimination  from  the  Large  Intestine  and  the  Bladder.  The 
fluid  aspect  of the Water  Element  is  also  responsible  for  maintaining 
lubrication,  agility,  suppleness  and  softness  of the  joints,  muscles  and 
the  skin. 
In TCM, the· Kidneys, as  the Yin  Organ ofWater, embody all  of its 
aspects,  including  the  regulation  of the  endocrine  system.  Obviously 
this  goes  beyond  the  role  of the Kidneys  per se  and  includes  the  small 
pea-like glands attached to them called the Adrenal glands. These regulate 
most  of the  endocrine  functions,  especially  the  sympathetic  and 
parasympathetic  nervous  systems,  through  their  secretion  of Yang-
~ 
57 
stimulating adrenaline-type hormones and Yin-nourishing, cooling anti-
inflammatory cortical  hormones. 
Symptoms  of Water  imbalances  include  urinary  diseases,  edema, 
lower  back  and  joint  pains.  It  also  includes  a  myriad  of conditions 
normally  associated  with  the  endocrine  system  such  as  impotence, 
infertility, mal-development, premature aging and fatigue.  Further, there 
are  a  range  of other conditions  such  as  hair loss,  premature graying  of 
the hair and  hearing  problems  that indicate Water  imbalance (which  is 
usually Deficient). 
1) Yin Organ:  Kidneys 
As  stated,  the  Kidneys  are  the  root  of Yin  and  Yang,  regulating 
endocrine  response  throughout  the  body.  They also  regulate  Water  by 
maintaining the optimal balance of intracellular and extracellular fluid 
and  the  elimination  of fluid  waste  through  the  urine.  Still  another 
important Kidney function is  calcium metabolism and the maintenance 
of the bones. 
2) Yang Organ: Urinary Bladder 
The  Bladder is  more  mechanically responsible  for  the elimination 
of Fluid  waste. 
3)  Season: Winter 
Winter is  a time of storage and retreat.  It is  at this time that the life 
force  lies  dormant, collecting itself beneath the ground  for  the coming 
Spring.  Kidney  imbalances  and  symptoms  such  as  lowered  immunity, 
coldness and frequent urination frequently reveal  themselves at this time 
of year. 
4)  Climate: Cold 
Cold  specifically  taxes  the  reserves  of the  TCM  Kidney-Adrenals; 
thus  they  respond  adversely  to  cold  foods  and  fluids  and  cold  drafts, 
particularly directly on the  lower  back where  the  kidneys  reside. 
5)  Direction:  North 
North,  the direction  ofWinter, is  associated  with  Coldness. 
6)  Time of Day:  3 - 7  P.M. 
Bladder time  is  between  3 and  5 P.M.  and  Kidney  time  is  between 
5 and  7 P.M.  Maximum benefits  are  achieved  if corresponding teas  are 
taken  and/or  acupuncture  points  are  treated  during  the  correlating 
biological  time  for  the  Organ.  This  is  the  time  when  each  Organ 
flourishes,  and any weakness in the Organ often results in an appearance 
or a worsening  of symptoms  during its  time. 
7)  Color:  Black 
Individuals whose  facial  pallor emanates  a dark  or black color are 
considered  to  have  Kidney-Adrenal  Deficiency. 
8)  Flavor: Salty 
Salt is  necessary to  retain sufficient fluid  to  support and maintain 
all  the  functions  associated  with  Water.  Since  the  human  body  is 
comprised  of approximately  78%  water,  it  is  obviously  a  vital  and 
necessary Element for our survival. A relatively small increase or decrease 
of the  Water  Element  can  put  a  severe  stress  on  all  homeostatic 
mechanisms. A sufficient amount of unrefined salt that naturally occurs 
with a variety of essential trace minerals is  necessary to maintain proper 
Fluid  balance.  TCM  recommends  that  herbal  tonics  for  the  Kidney-
Adrenals be taken with a pinch of salt that helps potentize and carry the 
effects  of the  herbs  into  the  Kidneys. 
9)  Sound: Groaning 
When  we  become  tired  and  fatigued,  we  develop  a  lower  pitched 
sound  that resembles  a groan,  indicative  of Kidney Deficiency. 
10)  Smell:  Putrid 
This  odor  is  difficult  to  distinguish  from  Metal  but  represents  a 
further  degree  of decay  and  rottenness. 
11)  Body Orifices:  Ears,  Urethra, Anus and Genitals 
Imbalances  and  diseases  associated  with  these  bodily areas  can  be 
indicative  of a Water  imbalance. 
12)  Body Parts:  Bones and  Bone Marrow 
The  Kidney-Adrenals  are  responsible  for  maintaining  calcium 
balance  in  all  the  bones  of the  body,  including  the  teeth.  They  also 
govern  the  bone  marrow,  which  plays  a  vital  role  in  maintaining  the 
deep  immune system of the body. The brain is considered in TCM to be 
one  of the  "curious  Organs"  and  is  called  "the  sea  of bone  marrow". 
Therefore  the  Kidney-Adrenals  also  govern  the brain. 
~ 
59 
13)  External Manifestation: Head Hair 
The condition of the hair on the head is  indicative of the condition 
of the Kidneys. If it is  thin, dry and splits easily, it represents Deficiency. 
Premature graying or hair loss is a further indication of a Water depletion. 
It is  not  uncommon  for  women  after  childbirth,  or  for  those  under 
long  term  stress,  to  develop  bald  patches.  This  is  :usually  caused  by 
Blood  and  Kidney-Adrenal  Deficiency.  Further,  individuals  who 
experience  traumatic shock often  have  their  hair  turn gray or fall  out. 
14)  Emotion:  Fear 
Extreme fear or shock can injure the Kidney-Adrenals and precipitate 
chronic  problems  later  in life.  A common tragedy  is  the  impaired  and 
stunted  growth  syndrome  that  occurs  as  a  result  of childhood  trauma 
and  abuse.  Besides  this,  there  can  be  many  other  chronic  Kidney 
imbalance symptoms  that tend  to  manifest  later  in  life. 
15)  Inner Resource: Will (Zbi) 
An  individual who  lacks  personal  motivation  or will  power  has  a 
Water  imbalance  in  the  form  of Kidney-Adrenal  Deficiency.  Water  is 
the deep  reserve  that gives  power  to all  activities and  processes.  In  most 
cases,  individuals  who  lack  motivation  and  will  power  have  Kidney 
Yang  Deficiency.  Following  Five  Element  theory,  Earth  controls  or 
subdues  Water.  The  flavor  associated  with  Earth  is  sweet  so  that  an 
excess  of sweet  in  the  form  of unrefined  sugar  in  all  forms,  including 
alcohol,  saps  will  power  and  establishes  the  basis  for  all  physical  and 
mental  addictions. 
It  is  becoming  commonly  understood  that  marijuana,  an  anti-
motivational  drug,  diminishes  our  will  and  drive.  From  the  TCM 
perspective,  it  is  never  appropriate  to  sedate  or  weaken  the  Kidney-
Adrenals, which  is  exactly what marijuana does.  The associated  fear  and 
insecurity that sometimes accompanies  marijuana use  further  points to 
its  debilitating  effects  on  those  whose  Kidney  Qi  is  already  low.  The 
hallucinations and vivid colors can be understood from the Five Element 
perspective  that Water  is  unable,  at  least  momentarily,  to  control  Fire 
(hallucinations  and  visions).  Finally,  another  long  term  side  effect  of 
continued  marijuana abuse  is  impotence and  infertility. 
Balanced  water  Type 
Water  represents  the  inner  Self.  Since  it  is  one's  very  essence,  it 
cannot  be  understood  in  any  sense  as  Excess,  but  only  as  Deficiency. 
This is where the concept ofWill, assigned  to the Kidneys, is understood 
as  the primary function of Water. It is  through the will, or innate power 
~ 
6o 
of the  body,  that the Self is  able  to  arise.  Whatever we  may  understand 
as  the singular characteristic ofWater, it is in its flowing forth, supporting 
and  empowering  all  psycho-physiological  processes  that  it  takes  on  its 
richest  meaning.  The  most  recurrent  theme  of ancient  Taoism  is  the 
metaphorical  description  of the  power of the flowing  movement of Qi 
compared  to  water  in  a  stream  that ultimately bypasses  and  overcomes 
all  obstacles  in  its  path. 
God  and  inner Self in  Chinese  medical  philosophy are  a dynamic 
expression  of ephemeral  being  through  eternity.  In  the  individual 
personality, that divine expression is  directed through the primal power 
of Will  to  initiate  and  maintain  the  initial  lifespark  impetus  into  full 
manifestation. 
To describe the Balanced Water type, therefore, is to give embodiment 
to  the perfect human which, at least on this daily level  of survival, does 
not exist.  Nevertheless,  those who achieve the closest to  the ideal of the 
Balanced Water  type  would  manifest  a high  level  of self awareness  and 
confidence with a sense that they are acting from a place of deep strength 
and  inner  reserves.  When  emotional  or  physical  stress  does  occur,  the 
flowing  nature  of their  highly  developed  Water  Element  seems  to  not 
leave  any  lasting  scars.  Further,  because  of the  power of their  perfected 
Will,  they are  able  to  manifest a high  degree  of stamina and endurance 
when  challenged. 
We  find  this  expression  of deep  flowing  strength  in  all  areas  of 
human occupation and  endeavor.  This  includes  their relationship with 
others  which,  because  of their  self-confidence  and  reliance,  does  not 
have  the taint of deadly possessiveness and angry frustration that comes 
as  a result  of deep-seated  fears.  It is  also  present  in the  management of 
survival  and  economic endeavors.  If there  is  one predominant positive 
characteristic  to  the  Balanced  Water  type,  it  is  the  ability  to  be  fully 
present for whatever presents  itself with  the appropriate degree of inner 
discipline.  Because  they are  so  closely attuned  to  their inner self,  outer 
vicissitudes  and  shifts  of fortune  do  not easily  throw them  into  a state 
of insecurity and  fear. 
Yin  Deficient  ~ t e r  Type 
Water Yin  Deficiency appears  as  a kind  of auto-consumption,  but 
in  fact  it  is  the  very  Essence  that  is  unrestrainedly  leaking  out.  Thus, 
there are symptoms of night sweats, insomnia, nervousness, anxiousness, 
irritability,  thin  or  emaciated  appearance,  frequent  urination  and 
inflammatory  conditions  that  are  more  localized  in  the  extremities, 
such  as  a Yin  Deficient sore  throat or genito-urinary inflammation. 
Unlike  Excess  conditions, Yin  Deficient  inflammatory symptoms 
do  not  arise  from  a  whole  bodily  context  of Excess,  but  rather  from 
wasting  and  Deficiency  that  predisposes  them  to  a  recurring  chronic 
expression.  It is  the  lack  of inner  reserves  that  causes  the  Water  Yin 
Deficient personality to have a comparatively low  tolerance for  physical 
or emotional stress, which is  the precipitating cause for.all Yin  Deficient 
symptoms. Yet another defining characteristic is  that Water Yin Deficient 
conditions tend not to readily respond to anti-inflammatory treatments 
with  antibiotics, Vitamin  C  or Heat clearing  alteratives. 
With  the inability to  contain and  restrain  the Self,  there  is  a kind 
of over-sensitivity,  hollowness  and  inappropriateness  to  the Water  Yin 
Deficient  personality.  The  problem  is  that while  there  are  many  fitful 
and empty jabs at self expression, the Water Yin  Deficient type lacks  the 
stamina, endurance and,  above all,  inner focus  to see  things  through  to 
completion. 
Obviously,  one  would  use  foods  and  herbs  that  embody  the 
characteristic qualities ofYin such as  moist, demulcent, solid, substantial 
and  cooling  foods.  Oils  and  fats  are  Yin,  so  pork  is  the  most  Yin  of 
animal foods,  while okra and  malva are  the most Yin  of vegetables. The 
best  oil  to  use  is  ghee  (clarified  butter)  as  it  increases  metabolic  fires 
without being heating to the body.  Herbs that have demulcent, nutritive 
and  tonic  properties are  indicated  as  well  as  demulcent astringents  that 
prevent  leakage  of Q!  and  Fluids,  such  as  Chinese  schizandra  berries 
(Wu Wei  Zi) and cornus, or dogwood, berries (Shan Zhu Yu).  One could 
think of a powerful tonic astringent, such as  schizandra, as  an herb that 
cements  the  aura  of the  personality and  helps  the  body  to  contain  its 
energy. 
The primary formulas for treating Yin Deficiency are Anemarrhena, 
Phellodendron and Rehmannia Combination (Zhi bai di huang wan) 
and  Rehmannia Six Combination (Liu  wei  di  huang wan). 
Ytzng  Deficient  ~ t e r  Type 
A Yang Deficient Water type includes Coldness, timidity, fatigue, 
lack oflibido, back and joint pains, (especially the lower back and knees) 
and frequent urination. In this condition, there is an inability to circulate 
and  maintain  one's  dynamic  life  processes  on  both  the  inner  organic 
level  as  well  as  the outer level  of procreation and lifework.  An  inability 
to exercise and/or a lack of exe'rcise are primary aggravating factors with 
Yang  Deficient Water  types. 
In general there is  a diminished ability to  maintain one's self both 
in terms of the normal use of the joints of the body as well  as  the ability 
to  engage  in  creative  projects.  The  Yang  Deficient  Water  type  seems 
~ 
62 
unable  to  mobilize  their  resources  and  whatever  energy they may have, 
either in their own maintenance and defense or the prerequisite attention, 
care  and  protection of others. 
Sometimes this withdrawal from  life appears as physical detachment, 
but  there  is  no  wisdom  in  renouncing  that  which  one  is  unable  to 
attain.  As  a  result,  Yang  Deficient  types  are  particularly  susceptible  to 
delusion based on falsely  upheld spiritual values,  a kind of'sour grapes' 
attitude  that allows  for  a  particular form  of arrogant self-righteousness 
which  occurs  in  some  forms  of Yin  Deficiency  as  well.  At  this  stage, 
both  the  Yin  and  Yang  Deficient  personality  is  nearly  lost  to  further 
enlightenment except through some awakening.  Depending on how one 
uses  the  opportunity,  physical  crisis  may  either  plunge  one  into  utter 
despair  or  it can  lead  to  a  greater  depth  of letting  go  and  serving  the 
Soul's  preeminent  need  to  evolve  into higher  knowledge  and  truth. 
Since  a  perfect  balance  of Yin  and  Yang  and  the  Five  Elements 
seems impossible, at least on this level of earthly existence, we must view 
imbalance as  a stress or motivating force that drives us onward, to further 
and deeper levels of Self knowledge.  From this perspective, besides showing 
who  we  are  in  relation  to  nature,  Yin  Yang  and  Five  Element  theories 
also  reveal  by implication,  perhaps,  who  and  what we  are  not. 
For example,  from  the Five Element perspective, we  are not simply 
a controlling and aggressive  individual but someone with a Liver-Wood 
imbalance  that can  be  corrected  through  any number of means  from  a 
simple change of diet to a profound psychological awareness,  nor are we 
a sad  and negative  individual  but someone influenced by an imbalance 
of Metal and Water. Our joy and happiness, therefore, also merely emanate 
from  our  Heart-Fire  Element  while  our  compassion  and  caring  traits 
stem  perhaps  from  our Spleen-Earth  energy.  In  other words,  these  self 
analytical  systems  serve  a  function  of aiding  detachment  to  outer 
appearances. To be caught up in misidentifying with any of these qualities 
and  Elements,  is  to be  in a state of illusion or self-deception. The point 
then becomes  that if we  are  not simply a bag of flesh  and bones with a 
number of personal  traits  thrown  in, who  and what are we? 
If our  goal  in  life  is  simply  and  only  to  maintain  harmony  and 
balance  between  all  of the  Elements  at  all  times,  there  would  be  no 
transcending  purpose  to  existence  and  what  we  call  life  would  be  a 
rather  boring  and  dull  experience.  In  other  words,  from  a  practical 
Taoist  perspective,  the  Five  Elements  can  be  used  as  a  method  of 
understanding  and  treating  our  imbalances  as  well  as  a  psychological 
tool  to  help  us  transcend  them. 
The  major  formula  for  Kidney  Yang  Deficiency  is  Rehmannia 
Eight Combination (Ba wei di huang wan) and Replenishing the Yang 
Decoction (You  gui  yin). 
INTERACTION  OF THE  FIVE  ELEMENTS 
In health there is  a dynamic  interaction between.all  Five  Elements 
and  the internal  physiology,  but in sickness  an  imbalance between  one 
or more of the organic cycles will be evident and most usually affects an 
imbalance of either its parent, child, grandparent or grandchild through 
the Shen or Ko  cycles. This will  reflect itself both physically and on the 
mental  and  emotional  levels. 
For example, ifWood is  in Excess, a condition of negative influence 
or control over Earth can affect poor digestion with a tendency towards 
indigestion, gas, acid belching and nausea. IfWood is Deficient, problems 
with  the  Liver  can  impair one's  ability  to  gain weight  and  cause  blood 
and  lymphatic  toxicity,  weak  digestion  and  infertility. 
If there is  Excess  Fire, we  may see symptoms of over-talkativeness, a 
tendency  to  inappropriate  laughter  and  giddiness,  feelings  of excessive 
Heat with redness of the face,  and heart and circulatory problems. Heart 
Excess  can give  rise  to  cardio-pulmonary disease,  because  the Heart-Fire 
overdominates  the  Lungs-Metal. 
When Earth is  in Excess,  there may be  symptoms of bloating with 
gas  and  constipation.  Deficiency  may  cause  weak  digestion,  difficulty 
assimilating  food,  fluids  or,  on  the  mental  level,  ideas.  If Earth 
overdominates  Kidney-Water,  urinary  problems  may  be  aggravated. 
Problems  with  digestion  can  be  exaggerated  with  strong  cravings  for 
sweet and a tendency towards  mucus discharges.  If the mucus discharges 
occur  in  the  sinuses  and  Lungs,  it  is  considered  a  problem  between 
Earth  and  Metal.  A  discharge  from  the  reproductive  Organs  involves 
the  Liver  and/or Kidneys  as  well. 
A  Deficiency  in  the  Water  Element  indicates  basic  inherited 
weaknesses  and  retarded  growth  patterns.  This  can  result  in  Kidney-
Water's  inability to nourish Liver-Wood, which  may produce symptoms 
of body  stiffness,  dryness,  impotence,  infertility  and  headaches.  The 
inability ofWater to control Fire can cause an apparent excess  of Fire, as 
in chronic fevers  and certain heart and circulatory disorders. If Water is 
in  Excess,  it can  dominate  Fire,  giving  rise  to  heart  problems  resulting 
in severe  edema  and  water  retention. 
FOUR 
FUNDAMENTAL SUBSTANCES 
Q!,  BLOOD,  FLUID,  ESSENCE AND  SHEN 
The  Fundamental  Substances  form  the  foundation  of the  body.  They 
have  their  own  particular  origins,  functions  and  purposes,  and  yet  are 
mutually  interactive  and  supportive.  They  include  Q!,  Blood,  Fluids, 
Essence  and  Shen  (Mind  and  Spirit). 
"Q!"  is  the  fundamental  activating  force  and  energy of life.  It is  a 
part  of Yang  and  includes  motivation  and  warmth  for  the  body.  Q! 
transforms, transports, holds, protects, raises  up and warms. The concept 
of"Blood" is similar, though broader in definition to, Western medicine 
and  includes  circulation,  stagnation  and  hemorrhage.  "Fluids"  describe 
all  the  various  fluidic  substances  including  saliva,  sweat,  urine,  tears, 
lymph and other secretions. Both Blood and Fluids are a part ofYin and 
embody the ability to nurture, moisten and lubricate. The anabolic phase 
of generation, growth  and  development as  well  as  the catabolic phase of 
aging, death and disease necessitate the dynamic interaction ofQ!, Blood 
and  Fluids. 
Essence  is  the  basis  of reproduction,  development,  growth,  sexual 
power,  conception,  pregnancy  and  decay  in  the  body.  It  also  forms  the 
basic  constitutional  strength  and  vitality.  When  it manifests  as  Q!,  it  is 
known as  Original Q!. Essence also  includes semen and the reproductive 
capacity of the body. In its most broad and comprehensive sense, "Essence" 
refers  to  the  overall  hormonal  strength  that  regulates  normal  growth, 
metabolism and sexuality. Although not a Fluid, it is  Fluid-like and so is 
considered  a part of Yin.  It is  stored  in  the  Kidney-adrenals. 
Shen  encompasses  both  the  Mind  and  the  Spirit.  It  reflects  the 
entire  physical,  emotional,  mental  and  spiritual  health  of the  body.  It 
includes the capacity to think and act coherently, the force of the human 
personality, and the joy to  live.  It also includes the spiritual aspects of all 
the organs, especially the Yin organs. It is  distinguished by the sparkle in 
the eyes,  an overall  vivaciousness  and  the will  to live.  Shen  is  housed  in 
the  Heart.  Because  of its  active  nature,  it  is  a  part ofYang. 
Q!, Blood and Fluids are often termed the Chinese Three Humours. 
They represent broad categories of physiological functions for classifying 
and  matching  imbalances  and  diseases  with  corresponding  herbal 
treatments.  They  are  similar  but  not  identical  to  the  concept  of 
"Tridosha",  also  called  "Three  Humours"  (Water,  Fire  and  Air),  which 
forms  the basic diagnostic approach of Ayurvedic and .Tibetan medicine. 
Q!:  THE  PRINCIPLE  OF  UNITY 
The  Tao  that can  be  told is  not the  eternal  Tao. 
The  name  that can  be  named  is  not the eternal  name. 
The  nameless  is  the beginning of heaven  and  earth. 
The  named  is  the  mother of ten  thousand  things. 
Ever  desireless,  one can  see  the  mystery. 
Ever  desiring,  one can see  the  manifestations. 
These  two  spring from  the same  source but differ  in  name; 
this  appears  as  darkness. 
Darkness  within  darkness. 
The gate  to  all mystery. 
1 
Q!  is  the all-pervasive  animating force  of nature.  Because  it is  the 
expression  of both  the  quality  and  substance  of all  things,  it  is  both 
quantifiable and  ephemeral.  It expresses  itself both as  a general  quality 
of energy  as  well  as  the  energetic  manifestation  of a  specific  part  or 
organ. 
In its cosmically supreme form, Q! is  the subtle unifying energy of 
all phenomena. In nature it is expressed as  movement, evolution, climate, 
growth, function and appearance. Within the realm of the body it is  the 
energetic  potential  of each  part,  especially  each  of the  vital  Organs.  In 
the  plant  kingdom  it  is  perceived  as  the  unique  form,  color,  flavor, 
texture  and  unique  biochemical  configuration  of each  plant  species. 
Similarly, we  identify Q! as  both the unique and  particular qualities  of 
manifestation  throughout  the  human,  animal,  vegetable  and  mineral 
kingdoms,  a continuum of mental,  physical  and spiritual qualities  that 
Western philosophers and physicists describe as "energy". It is also known 
as  "life  force",  "vital  life  force",  in Ayurvedic  medicine  as  "prana"  and 
to  the Japanese  as  "ki". 
Q!  is  ever-changing  and  mutable.  Thus  it  manifests  differently 
according  to  circumstances  and  environments.  Because  Q!  appears  in 
various  degrees  of manifestation,  both  material  and  immaterial,  it  is 
beyond  duality and  forms  the  common  thread  from which  all  creation 
~ 
66 
is  manifest.  The  traditional  symbol  of Q! is  the sun as  the giver  of life. 
It is by definition unlimited, and is  sometimes equated with the concept 
of the Supreme Ultimate.  Practically speaking, however,  Q! manifests as 
essential  vitality,  digestive  power,  growth,  reproductive  energies,  and  so 
forth.  Even  the  potential  of our  inherited  constitution  for  ongoing 
health  is  an expression  of a kind  of "Inherited Q!". 
Just  as  science  has  discovered  that  the  DNA  molecule  is  the  all-
pervasive  code  of life  manifesting  as  different  tissues  and  organs 
throughout the body, Q!, which is  essentially one, manifests in different 
forms  and  qualities  depending  upon  its  functions  within  the  body.  In 
TCM,  Q!  has  two  major  aspects  in  the  body.  In  one,  it  represents  a 
refined  aspect,  or  Essence,  which  nourishes  the  body-mind  complex. 
This  Essence  is  expressed  in  different  forms  according  to  its  location 
and function in the body. In its second aspect, Q! indicates the functional 
activities  of the  internal  organs  themselves. 
THE FORMATION OF Q! 
Q!  is  basically  generated  in  the  human  body  from  three  sources: 
Pre-Heaven  Essence,  Post-Heaven  Essence  and  air  brought  in  and 
transformed  by  the  Lungs.  "Essence",  or  "Jing"  as  it  is  often  called, 
represents  the  refined  aspect  upon  which  the  grosser  manifestation  of 
the body is  based.  As  such,  it  is  considered  precious  and  something  to 
be  guarded  and  protected. 
"Pre-Heaven Essence" is  an expression of the potential of the father, 
the mother and the grandparents as  these unite to create a newly conceived 
child.  Thus,  Pre-Heaven  Essence  represents  our  essential  "inherited" 
constitutional  strength.  This  essence  in  the  form  of Q!,  rather  than 
fluid,  is  called  Original  Q!,  Prenatal  Q! or Inborn Q!. 
"Post-Heaven Essence", on the other hand, represents what happens 
to  us  after  birth.  It  is  affected  by  what  we  acquire  from  air,  food  and 
water.  Post-Heaven  Essence  is  also  influenced  by various  stresses,  both 
emotional  and  physiological.  This  essence  in  Q!  form  is  called  Grain 
Qi,  Food  Qi or Central  Q!. 
Since our capacity to derive nourishment from  air,  food  and water 
is  dependent  upon.  our  ability  to  digest  and  transform  these  ingested 
materials into the fabric of our being, there is a close relationship between 
Pre-Heaven  and  Post-Heaven  Essence as  they manifest in the strength of 
our  Lungs,  Stomach  and  Spleen.  In  TCM,  the  Spleen  represents  our 
fundamental  capacity  to  transform  and  transport  food  nourishment 
into cells  throughout our body. Thus, the Chinese Spleen is  a reflection 
of our essential  metabolic  strength.  This  is  manifested  in  its  ability  to 
acquire energy from  food,  or Grain Q!.  The  Lungs  in TCM  are,  among 
other functions,  responsible for inhaling air and extracting energy from 
it,  called  Natural  Air Q!,  Gathering Qi or Pectoral  Q!. 
Thus,  the process  of Qi formation  is  as  follows:  Original Qi from 
the Kidneys goes to the area of the Spleen and Stomach where it combines 
with Grain Q!. This continues upward  to the Lungs where  it mixes with 
Natural Air  Q!.  From  there  it  turns  into Qi for  the whole  body,  called 
True  Q!,  Normal  Qi  or  Upright  Q!.  This  last  stage  of Qi  formation 
produces  the  Qi which  circulates  in  the  inner  and  outer  layers  of the 
body and nourishes the Organs. It does so by taking two different forms, 
as  Nourishing Qi and Defensive Q!. Qi in the human body is  generated 
from the following three sources:  Pre-Heaven  Essence which is  inherited 
or innate  constitutional  potential  from  parents  and  grandparents  and 
forms  the Original Qi that resides  in the Kidneys; Post-Heaven  Essences 
which  is  what we  acquire after birth from  air and  food;  and  Essence  or 
Jing,  refined  aspects  of the body upon which  the grosser  aspects  of the 
body manifest. 
THE  CLASSIFICATIONS  OF  Q! 
ORIGINAL QJ (Yl/AN  Q/) 
Original Q!, also  called  Prenatal, Inborn, Primordial and Genuine 
Qi, is  the most important and fundamental biological Qi category.  It is 
pre-Heaven  Essence  in  its  Q!,  rather  than  Fluid,  form.  Stored  in  the 
Kidneys,  it also  includes  both  the  Original Yin  and  Yang  Qi energies, 
and thus is the source ofYin and Yang in the body. Original Qi depends 
on  nourishment  from  Post-Heaven  Essence  developed  by  the  Spleen 
and Stomach  into Grain Q!.  Therefore, what we  eat and drink and  how 
well  these  substances  are  transformed  in  the  body greatly influence  the 
body's  Original Qi and Yin  and Yang  energies. 
Original Qi moves  from  the "life fire"  or "vital gate"  between  the 
Kidneys (ming men)  and circulates throughout the entire body to  all  the 
Organs, muscles, skin and so forth.  It is  thus the foundation of vitality, 
stamina and proper functioning of all systems  in the body.  Original Qi 
has several  functions.  It is  the motivating power of the vital activities in 
the  body,  it  is  the basis  for  Kidney Qi and  shares  its  role  in providing 
the  necessary heat for  the  body's  functions.  It  is  the  activating  force  in 
changing natural Air Qi into True Qi in the body, it aids the production 
of Blood  in  the  body through  the  transformation  of Grain  Qi  in  the 
Heart,  and  it  spreads  throughout  the  internal  Organs  and  channels  in 
~ 
68 
the  body,  coming  to  rest  at  the  Source  points,  as  they  are  called  in 
acupuncture. 
Deficiency of Original Qi manifests as  a fundamental weakness  of 
any  or  all  Organ  functions.  There  may  be  chronic  symptoms  of low 
vitality,  coldness,  slow  metabolism,  slow  growth  and  development,  a 
reduction  of physiological  functions  and  a tendency to  frequent  illness 
with  slow  recovery.  For  instance,  an  individual  who  is  born weak  and 
malformed  or  has  become  weakened  because  of poor  air,  food,  fluid 
and  lifestyle  habits,  and  has  difficulty  healing  a  broken  bone  later  in 
life,  is  considered  to  have  an Original  Qi deficiency or impairment. 
Original Qi Deficiencies are  treated with good quality food,  water, 
air,  rest and appropriate tonic herbs, especially those prepared with food. 
Tonic  herbs  that may  be  used  to  nourish  Original  Qi include ginseng, 
codonopsis, astragalus, jujube dates, Dang Gui, Polygonum multiflorum, 
ophiopogon, lycium berries, schisandra berries and prepared rehmannia. 
In  acupuncture,  the  Source  points  located  on  the  twelve  channels  are 
needled,  with  moxabustion  (penetrating warmth  generated  by  burning 
Artemisia  vulgaris  near  and  over  the  selected  points)  at  the  navel  and 
the  Sea  of Qi  point,  located  an  inch  and  a half below  the  navel. 
GRAIN QJ (GU  Ql) 
Grain  Qi,  also  known  as  Food  Qi or  Central  Qi,  constitutes  the 
creation of Qi from food  and drink. It represents the energy of digestion 
as  it manifests  in the Middle Warmer of the Stomach and Spleen.  Food 
first  enters  the  Stomach  where  it  is  "rotted  and  ripened",  and  is  then 
transformed  by  the Spleen  into  Grain  Qi.  This  Qi is  not yet  in a  form 
the  body  can  use,  but  must  combine with  Original  Qi and  rise  to  the 
chest  to  mix  with  Natural  Air  Qi  to  form  the  True  Qi useable  by  the 
body. 
NATURAL AIR QJ (ZONG Ql) 
Natural Air Qi has  several  other names: Ancestral  Qi,  Pectoral  Qi, 
Gathering Qi, Essential  Qi and  Chest Qi.  All  refer  to  the Qi produced 
by  the combination of Grain Qi with  air brought in by the Lungs.  It is 
a subtle and refined form of Qi that nourishes the Heart and Lungs and 
promotes  circulation  of Blood  and  Qi.  It  regulates  the  rhythmic 
movement of the heartbeat and respiration. It also gathers in the throat, 
aiding  speech  and  strength  of voice.  Further,  Natural  Air  Qi  flows 
downwards  to  aid  the  Kidneys,  while  the  Original  Qi of the  Kidneys 
flows  upwards  to  aid  respiration.  They  therefore  mutually  assist  each 
other. 
~ 
6g 
If Natural  Air  Q! is  weak,  the  feet  and  hands will  be  cold,  speech 
impeded,  respiration  or heartbeat  uneven,  breathing shallow,  heartbeat 
abnormal,  circulation  slow  or  poor,  limbs  cold  or voice  soft  or weak. 
Thus,  breathing  exercises  are  very  beneficial  to  strengthening  Natural 
Air Q!. 
TRUE Q! (ZHEN  .Ql) 
True Q!,  or Normal, Upright or Meridian Q!,  is  the  final  stage  of 
Q! transformation. This  is  the Q! useable by the body and is  the energy 
which penetrates and permeates the entire body and nourishes the Organs. 
It comes from the transformation of Natural Air Q! in the Lungs through 
the catalytic action of Original Q!.  It takes  two  forms,  Nutritive Q! and 
Defensive  Q!. 
NUTRITIVE Q! (YING .Ql) 
Nutritive Q!, or Nourishing Q!, has two main functions: to produce 
Blood and to nourish the entire body. When True Q! enters the Heart it 
is  transformed  into  Blood.  This  Q!  then  circulates  within  the  blood 
vessels  and channels,  moves  the Blood and  nourishes  it.  It is  thus often 
called  Nourishing  Q!,  or  Nourishing  Yin,  since  in  comparison  to 
Defensive  Q!,  it  has  a  Yin  rather  than  Yang  function.  This  is  the  Q! 
activated  by acupuncture. 
DEFENSIVE Q! (WEJ.Ql) 
Defensive  Q!  represents  the  surface  immune  system's  ability  to 
protect  the  body  from  attack  of any  exterior  pathogens:  Wind,  Cold, 
Heat, Damp, Dryness and Summer Heat. It travels on the surface of the 
body between the skin and  muscles,  regulating the opening and closing 
of the  pores  and  moistening  the  skin,  muscles  and  hair.  It is  a  more 
Yang  form  of Q!  than  Nutritive  Q!,  which  is  more  Yin  and  serves  to 
nourish  the  interior. 
In addition, the circulation of Defensive Q! is associated with sleep. 
During  sleep,  Defensive  Q!  circulates  in  the  interior  of the  body  and 
during  waking  hours  it  circulates  on  the  surface  of the  body.  When 
Defensive Q! is weak,  it may circulate longer on the surface of the body, 
thus  shortening sleep  duration.  Frequently  people  awaken  between  3-5 
am when this occurs. Since the Lungs regulate the circulation of Defensive 
Q!,  a weakness  of the Lungs  is  most frequently  related  to  a weakness  of 
the  Defensive  Q!,  and vice  versa.  Such  a weakness  often  manifests  as  a 
tendency  to  catch  colds  and  flu.  Spontaneous  daytime  sweating  may 
also  occur since weak  Defensive  Q!  may  not properly open or close  the 
pores. 
The term "Upright Q!"  is  often  used  to describe  the body's ability 
to resist Exterior Pathogenic Influences. It is  not another type ofQ! but 
describes  the combination of Natural  Air  Q!  from  the  Lungs  with  the 
deeper  immune  Q!  originating  from  the  combination  of Essence  and 
Original Q!  transformed  by  Kidney Yang. 
Q!  Classification 
Original Qi (Yuan  Qi) 
Grain  Qi (Gu  Qi) 
Natural  Air  (Zong  Qi) 
Origin  in  the  Body 
Derived  from  Pre-Heaven 
Essence,  stored  in  the Kidneys 
and  is  the foundation  of all 
Qi in  the body. 
Emanates  from  the Stomach 
and  Spleen  and  is  derived 
from  food. 
Lungs 
True  Qi (Zhen  Qi)  Exists  in  the Meridians  and 
Internal  Organs. 
Nutritive Qi (Ying  Qi)  Derived  from  the True  Qi 
in  the  Heart. 
Function 
Source ofYin and Yang  in 
the  body,  emanates  from  the 
"life gate"  of  the  Kidneys 
to  manifest  as  the essential 
vitality and  stamina of the 
entire body. 
Combines with  both  the 
Original  and Air Qi to  make 
True Qi which  is  the  daily 
useable energy. 
Nourishes  the  Heart and 
Lungs,  promotes  circulation. 
Final  stage  of Qi 
transformation.  It penetrates 
and  permeates  the entire 
body and  nourishes  the 
Internal  Organs. 
Produces  Blood  and 
nourishes  the entire  body. 
Defensive  Qi (Wei  Qi)  Circulates on  the  surface  of the  The surface  immune system 
body during the day  and  regulates  the opening and 
internally at  night.  It is  regulated  closing of the  pores  of the 
by the Lungs.  skin,  moistens  the skin  and 
hair,  influences  the duration 
of sleep. 
THE  FUNCTIONS  OF  Q! 
The  basic  functions  of Q!  in  the  human  body  are  to  transform, 
transport,  hold,  raise  up,  protect and  warm. 
QJ TRANSFORMS 
Q! is  the transforming or changing power in the body. It transforms 
food  into Q!,  Blood  or Body Fluid,  and  these  can  be  changed  into any 
of the others according to  the body's  needs.  The waste  from  eaten  food 
is  transformed  into  feces,  urine,  tears  and  sweat.  Qi  is  also  the  basic 
metabolic  power  of the  body.  Specifically,  in  the  Spleen  it  transforms 
food  into  Food  Essence,  or Grain Q!;  in the  Heart it transforms  Grain 
71 
Q! into Blood; in the Kidneys  it transforms Fluids and in the Bladder it 
transforms  urine. 
QJ TRANSPORTS 
The  movement  of Q!  is  vital  to  life  and  promotes  the  functional 
activities  in  the  body on  all  levels:  voluntary and  involuntary,  mental, 
growth and development. There are  four basic ways  iri  which Q! moves: 
ascending,  descending,  inwards  (entering)  and  outwards  (exiting).  For 
example, Spleen Q! transports Grain Q! upwards  to the Lungs, Lung Q! 
transports  fluids  to  the  skin,  Kidney  Q!  transports  Q!  upwards,  Liver 
Q! transports Q! smoothly and evenly in all directions, Lung Q! transports 
Q! downwards, Stomach Q! transports Q! downwards and Large Intestine 
Q!  and  Urinary  Bladder  Q!  transport  feces  and  urine  outwards 
respectively.  This  transporting  function  is  also  a  regulating  one, 
controlling  and  adjusting  the  movement,  secretion  and  excretion  of 
substances  in the body. 
QJ HOLDS 
Q!  also  has  the  function  of holding,  retaining  or  consolidating 
substances  and Organs in the body.  It helps keep  Blood  in its  pathways 
and  Organs  in  their  proper  positions,  adjusts  the  appropriate  flow  of 
sweat,  urine  and  saliva,  prevents  Body  Fluids  from  escaping,  and 
consolidates and stores sperm. Various Organs' Q! divides these functions: 
Spleen  Q!  holds  in  the  Blood,  fluids  such  as  saliva  and  supports  the 
Organs;  Kidney  Q!  holds  in  sperm  and,  with  Urinary Bladder  Q!,  the 
urine;  and  Lung  Q!  holds  in  sweat. 
A weakening of the Q! holding function may result in hemorrhage, 
spontaneous  sweating,  polyuria,  salivation,  spermatorrhea,  premature 
ejaculation and prolapses, such as  the Stomach, Kidneys, Urinary Bladder, 
uterus  or anus. 
QJ RAISES UP 
Specific  types  of Q!  rise  in the body.  Spleen  Q!  raises  the Organs, 
keeping them in place, and its Grain Q!  rises  to the Lungs  to form True 
Q! and  later  Blood.  Kidney Q!  rises  to  keep  Essence  and sperm in,  and 
it  rises  toward  the  Lungs  to  receive  the  descending  air.  The  Q!  raising 
function  is  a  further  part of the  holding and  transporting functions. 
QJ PROTECTS 
Q!  protects  the  body  from  the  invasion  of Exterior  Pathogenic 
Influences.  It moves  in  the  chest,  abdomen  and  between  the  skin  and 
muscles,  and  it  regulates  the  pores  and  sweat  glands. 
QJWARMS 
A function ofYang, the warming aspect of Q! maintains the normal 
Heat of the body and  all  of its  parts.  It is  mostly a function  of Kidney 
Yang,  although  Spleen Yang  and  Heart Yang  contribute. 
Overall,  these various  Q! functions  appear in the body as  follows: 
Kidney Q! transforms Fluids, moves Q! upwards, holds urine and warms 
the  entire  body.  Spleen  Q!  transforms  and  transports  food,  holds  the 
Blood  in  the  vessels,  raises  the  Organs,  warms  and  supports  overall 
metabolism. Heart Q! transforms Grain Q! into Blood, circulates Blood 
through the vessels  and produces  Fire.  Liver Q!  regulates  and transports 
Q!  smoothly  and  evenly.  Lung  Q!  transports  Q!  downwards  and,  by 
ruling  the  pores  of the  skin,  protects  the body from  external  invasion. 
If, for example, Kidney Q! is weak and unable to transform Fluids, 
there  might  be  symptoms  of edema  or  frequent  urination  associated 
with aching soreness of the joints and lower back. The individual will be 
highly  reactive  to  cold  temperatures.  Formulas  containing  rehmannia, 
cinnamon bark  and  prepared  aconite  are  indicated. 
If Spleen  Q!  is  weak  there  may  be  appetite  disorders,  tiredness, 
excessive  bleeding  (especially  during  menstruation),  prolapse  of the 
internal Organs and  generally low energy and metabolism.  In cases  like 
these, formulas containing carminatives, such as citrus peel or cardamom, 
are  given  to promote digestion,  and  ginseng, codonopsis and astragalus 
are  used  to  tonify Q!. 
If Heart Q! is  Deficient, anemia, coldness, cold hands and feet  and 
pallid complexion may become evident. Formulas containing Dang Gui 
are  used. 
When Liver Q! fails  to evenly regulate and transport Q!, emotional 
symptoms such as  mood swings, anger and depression often occur along 
with  a  tight,  constricted  feeling  in  the  chest.  Formulas  containing 
bupleurum  are  used. 
If Lung  Q!  is  deficient,  there will  be  shallow respiration,  tiredness 
and a tendency to catch colds frequently.  Formulas containing astragalus 
root are  used. 
PATHOLOGIES  OF  Q! 
Several  pathotogies  of Q!  exist  and  involve  either  insufficient  Q! 
or stagnant Q!  in which  Q!  is  either flowing  improperly or is  impeded. 
Deficient or stagnant Q! is  usually associated with specific organs, such 
as  Deficient  Spleen  Q!,  or stagnant  Liver  Q!.  Disharmonies  of Q!  are 
outlined  in  the  Chapter on Patterns  of Disharmonies. 
~ 
73 
METHODS  TO  BUILD AND  STRENGHTHEN  Q! 
BREATHING PRACTICES 
Perhaps  the  best  therapy  to  strengthen  the  Lungs  is  breathing 
exercises.  There  are  several  specific  Yogic  practices  that  have  their 
counterparts  in  Chinese  Taoism,  called  Qi Gong.  They  help  to  purify 
the  body-mind  and  optimize  energy  in  the  main  centers  of the  body. 
Several specific Yogic practices and Qi Gong exercises are detailed in the 
Appendix:  Accessory  Healing Therapies  For  the  Herbalist. 
QJ MEDITATION- FILLING  THE  ESSENCE 
Another  method  to  strengthen  Qi  is  meditation.  After  doing 
breathing practices, it is  easier to concentrate and derive optimal benefit 
from  meditation. One simple meditation involves bringing a slow breath 
down  to  the  place  known  as  the Sea  of Qi,  located  an  inch  and  a half 
below the navel. As you breathe,  imagine that each inhaled  breath feeds 
pure light energy into your body to gradually expand to form a luminous 
golden  ball.  Concentrate on  the  gradual  expansion  of this  golden  ball 
of light energy  in  the 'dan  tien'  just below  the  navel  as  it encircles  first 
the  entire  body,  then  the  room  and  finally  the  world,  to  extend  into 
space.  Remain  focused  on this  feeling  of Qi abundance for  at  least  ten 
to  twenty  minutes,  then  slowly  visualize  the  contraction  of the  light 
back  to  its  origin  in the body. 
OTHER 
Other  methods  for  circulating  Qi  include  dance,  Hatha  Yoga, 
movement,  play,  sports,  hiking,  moderate  aerobic  exercises  and  other 
such  activities. 
Herbs  and  Foods  are  also  an important source  of Q!.  A Qi Tonic 
soup  can  be  prepared  as  follows:  cook  together  6  grams  each  of 
codonopsis,  astragalus  and  dioscorea,  8  to  10  jujube  dates,  3 grams  of 
tangerine  peel  and  a few  slices  of fresh  ginger with  brown  rice,  organic 
beef or lamb,  potatoes,  onions and  carrots. 
A Qi tonifying congee is  made by combining 4 slices of astragalus, 
6 to  9 grams  of codonopsis  and  10  to  15  red  jujube dates  in two  quarts 
of water and  1 cup of sweet  rice.  Allow to  cook slowly over low  heat or 
in a crock pot for  6 to  8 hours.  Have a bowl  of this porridge first  thing 
each  morning. 
BLOOD 
Blood is  a red  liquid  rich  in  nutrition which  circulates within  the 
blood vessels.  It is  different  than  the Western  concept of blood  in  that 
ttracteristics and  functions  are  broader.  Blood  is  a very  dense  and 
74 
material  form  of Q!  and,  as  such,  is  inseparable  from  it.  Q!  activates 
Blood, giving it life and movement. Blood is considered a Yin substance, 
as  it  is  dense  and  fluid. 
FORMATION  OF  BLOOD 
Blood  originates  from  two  sources:  Grain  Q!  created  from  food 
and  fluids,  and  bone  marrow  formed  from  life  Essence.  The  Stomach 
first  receives  and  "ripens"  food,  and  then the Spleen  transforms  it into 
a very  refined  substance,  Grain  Q!.  Spleen  Q!  transports  the Grain  Q! 
up to the Lungs where it mixes with the pure aspect of air brought in by 
them.  Lung  Q!  then  propels  this  mixture  to  the  Heart  where  the 
transformation  into  Blood  is  completed.  From  this  we  see  an  example 
of how  Q!  makes  Blood  move,  and  further  understand  part  of the 
principle  that the  Heart governs  Blood. 
The  second  source  of Blood  is  from  bone marrow.  Essence  stored 
in the Kidneys produces Marrow which, in turn, generates bone marrow. 
Blood is  then produced by the bone marrow. Thus, the Kidneys and the 
Spleen  are  both important sources  for  generating  Blood. 
The main source of Blood is  food  Essence developed in the Spleen 
and  Stomach.  Thus,  the  nutritional  value  of the  diet,  as  well  as  the 
strength of the Spleen and Stomach, directly influence the formation of 
Blood.  This  is  why  the  treatment  of Blood  Deficiency  often  includes 
tonics to strengthen the Spleen and Stomach functions, and why proper 
diet  is  so  important  in Chinese medicine. 
ORIGIN  OF  BLOOD 
The  Stomach  receives  and  'ripens'  food,  the  Spleen  transforms  it 
into  Grain  Q! and transports  it  to  the  Lungs.  This  mixes with  the pure 
aspect of air,  then the Lungs  propel  this mixture of Grain Q! and air to 
the  Heart where  it is  transformed  into  Blood. 
FUNCTIONS  OF  BLOOD 
The  main  function  of Blood  is  to  nourish  the  body.  It  circulates 
continuously within  the  vessels  traveling  to  the  organs  in  the  interior, 
and  to  the  muscles,  tendons,  bones  and  skin  in  the exterior,  providing 
nutrients  to  these  areas.  Blood also  has  the  function  of moistening  the 
body.  The  Blood 'of various  Organs  ensures  that  the  skin,  hair,  eyes, 
sinews  and  tongue  are  properly  moistened. 
Sufficient  Blood  is  also  necessary  to  provide  a  strong  nourishing 
foundation  for  the  Mind. When Blood  is  Deficient, the  Mind  lacks  its 
foundation,  resulting in  restlessness,  anxiety,  slight  irritability, a feeling 
of dissatisfaction  and  insomnia. 
~ 
75 
THE  RELATIONSHIPS  OF  BLOOD WITHIN  THE  BODY 
The normal circulation of Blood results from the mutual action of 
the  Heart,  Lung,  Spleen,  Liver  and  Kidney.  The  Heart  circulates  the 
Blood,  Lung  Qi  enters  the  Heart  to  promote  the  movement  of Blood 
and  Qi,  the  Spleen  keeps  Blood  flowing  within  the  vessels,  the  Liver 
stores  the  Blood  and  helps  it  flow  smoothly,  and  the  Kidney  Essence 
can be transformed  into  Blood.  For example,  a Deficiency of Heart Qi 
and Lung Qi may lead to stagnation of Blood of the Heart; a Deficiency 
of Spleen  Qi  may  lead  to  hemorrhage;  irregular  Liver  Qi  may  cause 
stagnation; and a Deficiency of Kidney Essence can lead  to a Deficiency 
of Blood. Since Blood also  nourishes Essence,  Deficient Blood can lead 
to  a Deficiency of Essence.  Of all  these,  the Heart, Spleen and  Liver are 
the most  important and  have  special  relationships with  Blood. 
HEART 
The Heart governs the Blood. It is the place where Heart-Fire (Yang) 
transforms  the  mixture  of Grain  Qi and  pure  Air  into  Blood  (Yin).  It 
also  is  responsible for  the circulation of Blood  throughout the body to 
all  the organs,  muscles,  tendons,  sinews,  skin  and  hair. 
LIVER 
When a person is  active,  Blood flows  to the muscles  and  sinews  to 
moisten them for flexibility and movement. When a person rests,  Blood 
moves  back  to  the  Liver  where  it  is  stored  and  regenerated,  thus  the 
importance  of rest  and  lying  down  when  there  is  Deficient  Blood 
(especially  Liver  Blood).  Liver  Blood  functions  to  moisten  the  eyes, 
promoting  good  eyesight,  and  the  sinews  and  tendons,  supplying 
flexibility and  suppleness of the joints. The  Liver  also  has  the  function 
of smoothing and regulating the flow of Qi and Blood. Thus, it regulates 
the  rate  of Blood  flow  within  the  vessels  according  to  different 
physiological  needs  such  as  activity or rest. 
Liver  Blood  supplies  the  uterus  with  Blood  and  is  extremely 
important  for  a  regular  and  healthy  menstrual  function.  Because  the 
Liver also regulates the rate of blood flow,  periods which are too light or 
heavy are often due to a disharmony of the Blood of the Liver.  Deficient 
Liver  Blood  can  lead  to  amenorrhea  or  scanty  periods,  while  stagnant 
Liver  Blood  can  cause  painful  periods. 
SPLEEN 
The Spleen  is  the origin  of Blood,  as  it  produces  Grain  Qi which 
transforms  into  Blood.  The  Qi  of the  Spleen  is  also  responsible  for 
keeping  Blood in the vessels  so  that it does  not extravasate.  If Spleen Qi 
is  Deficient, it cannot hold the Blood in its pathways and hemorrhaging, 
broken  blood  vessels  and  a tendency to  easily bruise  may result. 
BLOODANDQJ 
A traditional saying states that "Q! is the commander of the Blood. 
Blood  is  the  mother of Q!."  This  refers  to  the  inseparable  relationship 
between  Blood  and  Q!.  Blood,  a  part  of Yin,  creates  Q!,  while  Q!  is 
responsible for Blood circulation. Grain Q! from food is the foundation 
of Blood; combined with oxygen  from  Lung Q!,  it is  essential for Blood 
production. Thus  if Q!  is  Deficient,  Blood will  also  eventually become 
Deficient.  This  is  why Q! tonics  are  frequently given  with  Blood  tonics 
when  strengthening  Deficient Blood. 
Q!  is  the  force  which  moves  and  circulates  Blood,  and  it  is  Lung 
Q!  which  infuses  the  Q!  into  the  blood  vessels.  If Q!  is  Deficient  or 
doesn't  move  sufficiently,  it  stagnates.  Because  it  can't  then  push  the 
Blood,  Blood  stagnates  also.  Since  Q!  is  in charge  of holding Blood  in 
the  vessels,  if it  is  Deficient,  Blood  may  move  out  of its  pathways, 
resulting  in bleeding  or hemorrhages. 
In  turn,  Blood  nourishes  the Organs which  produce and  regulate 
Q!. It also provides a material foundation for Q! which prevents it from 
rising up or "floating", causing symptoms of Deficient-Heat. Thus, Blood, 
as  mother, is essential for nurturing Q!, and Q!, as commander, activates 
the circulation  of Blood. 
BLOOD AND ESSENCE 
Essence  stored  in  the  Kidneys  is  one  of the  sources  for  forming 
Blood. On the other hand, Blood nourishes and replenishes the Essence. 
Further,  the  Kidneys  are  the  mother of the  Liver  according  to  the  Five 
Elements, so  Essence and  Blood  mutually influence each other. Thus, a 
Deficiency of one leads  to  a Deficiency of the other. 
PATHOLOGIES  OF  BLOOD 
There  are  three  basic  categories  of Blood  pathologies.  These  are 
Blood Deficiency, Blood Heat and Blood stagnation. In Blood Deficiency 
there is  insufficient Blood to nourish and moisten the body. This usually 
affects  the  Organs  with  which  it  has  special  relationships.  In  Blood 
Heat,  too  much  Heat  in  the  body,  usually  in  the  Liver,  causes  Heat  in 
the  Blood  and  pushes  it  out  of the  vessels.  Stagnation  occurs  from 
Blood  moving  improperly due  to  Coldness,  Heat  or stagnation  of Q!, 
or  injury.  All  of these  are  discussed  in  the  Chapter  on  Patterns  of 
Disharmonies. 
~ 
77 
METHODS  TO  STRENGTHEN  BLOOD 
A blood  tonifying soup can be  made  from  15  grams  of astragalus, 
4  grams  of Dang  Gui  and  a  few  slices  of fresh  ginger  combined  with 
organic lamb (or beef). Various grains,  such  as  rice,  can  be  added  along 
with vegetables, including onions, potatoes and carrots. This is  the most 
effective  formula  for  anemia  or  Blood  Deficiency.  The  preponderance 
of the  Q!  tonic,  astragalus,  exemplifies  the  principle  of Q!  as  the 
"commander" of Blood. 
FLUIDS 
The  term  Fluids (Jinye)  refers  to  all  liquids  in the body other than 
Blood.  It  includes  both  intracellular  and  extracellular  fluids,  and 
undoubtedly  includes  what  we  know  as  the  lymphatic  system.  Body 
Fluids  are  divided  into  two  kinds.  ]in  are  the  clear,  light  and  watery 
dilute  Fluids  which  flow  easily  and  quickly  with  Defensive  Q!  in  the 
Exterior  pores,  skin  and  muscles.  They  are  controlled  by  the  Lungs, 
which  disperses  them,  and  the  Upper  Warmer,  which  controls  their 
transformation and movement. Their function is  to moisten and partially 
nourish the skin and muscles. They also become a component of Blood, 
helping to thin it and prevent its stagnation or coagulation.]in manifests 
as  sweat,  tears,  saliva  and  mucus. 
Ye  are  the thick,  heavy,  turbid  and  dense  Fluids which  flow  slowly 
with  the  Nutritive  Q!  in  the  Interior  joints,  viscera,  bowels,  brain  and 
marrow. They are controlled by the Spleen and Kidneys, which transform 
them,  and  the  Middle  and  Lower  Warmer,  which  move  and  excrete 
them. Ye  functions to moisten and nourish the joints, brain, bone marrow 
and  spine. 
Fluids  also  are  needed  to  lubricate the eyes,  ears,  nose  and  mouth. 
Because  it  is  difficult  to  separate  these  two  types  of fluids  completely, 
they are  combined  into  the one expression, jinye. 
FORMATION  OF  FLUIDS 
Body Fluids  are  formed  from  what we  eat  and  drink.  The  process 
of forming  Fluids  occurs  through  several  refining  stages.  Each  stage 
further  separates  the  Fluids  into  pure  and  impure  portions.  Thus  the 
saying  that  there  is  "pure within  the  impure"  and  "impure within  the 
pure".  The  pure  parts  are  transported  upwards  in  the  body  while  the 
impure parts move downwards. The proper movement of pure and impure 
portions  of body  Fluids  primarily  occurs  through  the  transformative 
function  of the Spleen. 
The  initial  formation  of Fluids begins  in the Stomach where  food 
and  drink  are  digested.  Through  the  transformative  function  of the 
Spleen,  they  are  then  separated  into  pure  and  impure  portions.  The 
pure,  or  clear,  portion  goes  from  the  Spleen  up  to  the  Lungs,  which 
disperses  part of them  to  the skin and  sends  part of them  down  to  the 
Kidney.  The  impure  or  dirty  part,  transformed  by  the  Spleen,  is  sent 
down  to  the  Small  Intestine  where  it  is  again  separated  into  pure  and 
impure parts. The pure part is  sent to the Bladder while  the turbid  part 
goes  to  the  Large  Intestine. There some of the water  is  re-absorbed;  thus 
the  saying  that  the  Large  Intestine  promotes  the  formation  of Body 
Fluids.  The  Bladder  also  separates  the  fluids  it  receives  into  pure  and 
impure  portions.  The  pure  part  flows  upwards  to  the  surface  of the 
body where  it  forms  sweat,  while  the impure portion  flows  downwards 
and  is  transformed  into  urine. 
The  transportation  and  distribution  of Body  Fluid  is  mostly 
accomplished by the Spleen. The Lung disperses and descends downward 
to  the  Kidney,  which  governs  water  metabolism.  Further,  the  Triple 
Warmer  is  the  passage  through             moves.  The  Liver's  function 
of smoothing and  regulating  the flow  of Qi and  Blood  also  has  a part 
in transporting and distributing Body Fluids. Because the Heart controls 
the circulation of Blood,  and  Fluids are a component of this, the Heart 
also  has  a  role  in  their  distribution.  Through  the  interaction  of all  of 
these  Organs,  Body Fluids circulate  to  perform their various  functions. 
The  excretion  of waste  and  excessive  water  in  the  body  occurs 
according to  its  different physiological needs.  Some is  sent, through the 
water  regulating  function  of the  Lung,  to  the  body surface  where  it  is 
turned into sweat.  Some is  changed  into urine by the Kidney's function 
of separating  the  clear  from  the  turbid,  and  removed  by  the  Urinary 
Bladder's function of storing and excreting urine. Others are transformed 
into nasal mucus, saliva and tears and are removed from  the nose, mouth 
and  eyes  by  their  corresponding  Organs.  Further,  exhaled  air  by  the 
Lungs  takes  away  some  moisture. 
FUNCTIONS  OF  BODY FLUID 
Body  Fluids  have  two  functions.  One  is  to  moisten  and  partly 
nourish  the  skin,  hair,  muscles,  eyes,  nose,  mouth,  internal  Organs, 
marrow,  spinal  cord,  brain,  joints and  bones.  The other  is  to  seep  into 
the  blood  vessels  through  the  capillaries  to  become  a  component  of 
Blood  and  nourish  and  moisten  all  areas  of the  body. 
A  few  other  functions  occur  through  Body  Fluids.  When  Body 
Fluids are metabolized, some waste forms and, along with other poisonous 
substances in the body,  leaves  through the sweat and urine.      
79 
help  maintain  bodily  cleanliness.  Further,  when  the  body  gets  hot,  it 
sweats  and  releases  heat;  when  it  doesn't  sweat,  a  portion  of Fluids  is 
excreted through the urine with other impurities. Therefore, Body Fluids 
also  help  maintain body temperature  and  detoxification. 
THE  RELATIONSHIPS  OF  FLUID WITHIN  THE  BODY 
SPLEEN 
Of the  three  major  organs  involved with  Fluids,  the Spleen  is  the 
most important.  Because  it begins  the process  of Fluid  transformation, 
and  regulates  the direction of pure and  impure Fluid  transportation  in 
all  of its  stages  of production,  the  Spleen  is  intimately  involved  with 
water  metabolism  throughout  the  body.  This  reminds  us  that  the 
functions  of the  Chinese  organs  occur  throughout  every  cell  of the 
body,  not just in the "organ"  itself as  we  are  accustomed  to  thinking in 
the West. Thus, the Spleen is always treated in any type of Fluid pathology, 
commonly with  mushrooms  such  as  Fu  Ling  (Poria  cocos).  Note  that 
the  Spleen  in  Western  physiology  is  a  lymphatic  organ  also  involved 
with  lymphatic fluids. 
LUNGS 
The Lungs  regulate  the "water passages".  They disperse  part of the 
pure  Fluids  coming  up  from  the  Spleen  to  the  space  under  the  skin. 
Their descending action then sends the other pure portion down  to the 
Kidneys and Bladder. Through their dispersing and descending functions 
they thus  regulate  the  passage  of water  in  the  body. 
KIDNEYS 
Part of the pure Fluids that the Kidneys  receive  from  the Lungs are 
vaporized and sent back up to the Lungs to moisten them, thus preventing 
them  from  getting  too  dry.  Kidney  Yang  is  also  involved  in  the 
transformation of Fluids. First, it provides the necessary Heat needed by 
the Spleen to transform Body Fluids. This is why a Deficiency of Kidney 
Yang nearly always affects a Spleen Yang Deficiency, and Fluids accumulate 
as  a result.  Kidney Yang also aids the Small Intestine in separating Fluids 
into  their  pure  and  impure  parts,  and  it  provides  Qi  to  the  Bladder 
where it transforms Fluids into urine. Lastly,  Kidney Yang aids the Triple 
Warmer  in its  transformation  and  excretion  of fluids. 
TRIPLE  WARMER 
The  Triple  Warmer  aids  the  transformation,  transportation  and 
excretion  of Fluids  in  all  of its  stages  throughout the  body.  The  Upper 
Warmer is  likened  to  a "mist" since  it assists  the Spleen  in directing the 
~ 
So 
pure  fluids  upwards  and the  Lungs  in dispersing them to  the skin. The 
Middle Warmer  is  considered  a  "foam"  or a  "muddy pool"  because  it 
assists  the  Stomach  in  its  digestive  and  churning  functions  and  in 
directing  the  impure  part  downwards.  The  Lower  Warmer  is  compared 
to  a "drainage ditch" since here  it aids  the  Kidneys,  Bladder and Small 
Intestine  in  their  function  of transforming,  separating  and  excreting 
Fluids.  In  TCM  the Triple  Warmer  does  not  refer  to  a  specific  Organ 
but rather  a coordinating  function  between  all  the Internal  Organs. 
QJ AND BODY FLUIDS 
The  relationship  between  Q!  and  Fluids  is  similar  to  that  of Q! 
and  Blood.  Q! produces  Body Fluids,  and  they in turn help  to  nourish 
and moisten the Organs that regulate Q!. Fluids are primarily developed 
through  the Spleen  and  Stomach,  so  when  Q! is  sufficient,  the Spleen 
and Stomach function normally and Body Fluids are abundant. Likewise, 
when  Q!  is  Deficient,  the  Spleen  and  Stomach  are weakened  and  Body 
Fluids become insufficient. Body Fluids are also the carrier ofQ!. Thus, 
any loss of Fluids may damage Q!. Excessive vomiting, profuse sweating 
or prolonged  diarrhea  can  cause  a severe  loss  of Q!. 
Further,  it  is  Q!  that  transforms,  transports  and  excretes  Fluids. 
Without this motivating force,  Fluids accumulate and eventually stagnate 
in  the body,  causing  a variety of diseases.  Q! also  holds  Fluids  in  their 
proper place, just as  it holds Blood in the vessels. When Q! is  Deficient, 
Fluids may leak,  resulting in symptoms such as  profuse or spontaneous 
sweating  (Lung  Q!  Deficiency),  chronic  vaginal  discharge  (Spleen  and 
Kidney  Q!  Deficiency)  and  polyuria  or urinary  incontinence  (Kidney 
Q!  Deficiency). 
BLOOD AND BODY FLUIDS 
Blood  and  Body  Fluids  are  both  liquids  with  the  functions  of 
nourishing and moisturizing, although Blood is stronger, or more potent, 
in these  functions.  They both belong to Yin,  and  both are derived  from 
Grain  Q!.  Fluids  enter  the  blood  vessels  and  become  a  part  of Blood, 
while  Blood  extravasates  out of the blood vessels  and turns into Fluids. 
Further, Blood and Fluids  mutually nourish and supplement each 
other.  The  clearest  part  of Fluids  enters  into  the  process  which  creates 
Blood  and  is  transformed  into  it,  thus  replenishing  it.  This  is  why  a 
long term loss of Fluids can cause a Deficiency of Blood, as  in excessive 
use  of saunas or hot tubs,  or chronic spontaneous sweating.  Fluids also 
thin  Blood  so  it doesn't coagulate  or stagnate. 
On  the  other  hand,  Blood  supplements  and  nourishes  Fluids.  If 
Blood becomes Deficient or if there is excessive or chronic loss of blood, 
as  in hemorrhage or chronic menorrhagia,  Fluids  can become depleted, 
leading  to  Dryness  and  further Blood  Deficiency.  This  is  why sweating 
and bleeding methods should never be  used  together. Thus,  if a patient 
is  bleeding  or  has  severe  Deficiency  of Blood,  sweating  should  not be 
induced.  This  is  also  why  people  with  Blood  Deficiency do  not  sweat 
easily. Therefore,  if a patient sweats  easily and profusely,  bloodletting as 
a TCM  therapy is  contraindicated. 
PHLEGM 
Phlegm,  or Mucus,  is  an  important concept in Chinese Medicine, 
and  refers  to  a  pathological  condition,  rather  than  the  necessary 
lubrication  needed  for  joints,  Organs  and  so  on.  When  Body  Fluids 
collect and  congest,  they can  change  into  Phlegm.  This  initially occurs 
because the Spleen fails  to transform and  transport Fluids, but may also 
involve the Lungs  and Kidneys  if they fail  to disperse and  lower Fluids, 
or transform  and  excrete  Fluids,  respectively. 
Phlegm is diagnosed with signs of a greasy or slippery tongue coating 
and a slippery or wiry pulse. There are  two  types  of Phlegm, substantial 
and non-substantial. Substantial Phlegm is in the form of mucus secreted 
from  the  mucus  membranes  of the  sinuses,  lungs,  bronchioles  and 
reproductive organs. Non-substantial Phlegm can collect in the channels, 
joints and under the skin, causing lumps, nodules, numbness and bone 
deformities. It can also appear in the head, Stomach or Lungs, or obstruct 
certain Organs, such as  the Bladder, Kidney or Gall-Bladder in which it 
forms stones. It is also responsible for a type of dementia called "invisible 
phlegm  masking  the orifices  of the Heart." 
While Dampness and Phlegm have similarities, they also  have some 
differences.  Phlegm  is  heavier  than  Dampness,  but  does  not  have  its 
dirty, sticky or downward flowing characteristics. It originates only from 
an Interior dysfunction, while Dampness can occur from  an Interior or 
Exterior dysfunction.  It primarily affects  the  middle and  upper part of 
the body, while  Dampness mostly collects in the lower part of the body. 
PATHOLOGIES  OF  FLUIDS 
The  formation,  distribution  and  excretion  of Body  Fluids  is  a 
complicated  process  requiring the coordination of many Organs. Thus, 
pathological  changes  in  any  of the  Organs  may  affect  the  normal 
metabolism of Fluids,  especially those of the Lung, Spleen and  Kidney, 
for  they are  the  key  Organs  in maintaining  the  normal  metabolism  of 
water. Any disturbances in the transportation, distribution and excretion 
of Fluids  may  cause  the stagnation  of water.  This  manifests  as  phlegm-
retention diseases  and edema.  On the other hand,  pathological changes 
~ 
82. 
of Fluid also affect the functions of the Organs. For example, insufficient 
Fluids in the  Lung  causes  dry cough, while excessive  Fluids  in the  Lung 
can  cause  congestion with  difficult  breathing  and  cough. 
An  excess  of Fluids  is  called  "Dampness",  and  is  the  same  as  the 
Damp Internal Pathological Influence. The most common characteristic 
is  a feeling  of heaviness  of the  body or head.  Fluid,  or Damp,  diseases 
include edema, phlegm-retention diseases, lymphatic problems and general 
fluid  and  cellular  metabolism  issues  which,  when  not  properly 
functioning,  can  also  give  rise  to  tumors,  cysts  and  cancers. 
A lack of Fluids  is  also  considered  a Fluid  imbalance (Deficiency), 
since  the  body  requires  a  certain  amount  of lubrication  for  normal 
function  of the  respiratory,  alimentary and  reproductive  systems.  Fluid 
is  necessary  for  proper  joint  lubrication  as  well  as  a  moistener  for  the 
intestines to  promote proper bowel  function.  For this, demulcent herbs, 
such  as  psyllium  seeds  and  husks,  flax  seeds  and  cannabis  seeds  are 
used. 
Phlegm, the other type of fluid  imbalance, can collect in the joints, 
skin, channels or Organs causing diverse  imbalances. It forms  when the 
Spleen,  Lungs  or  Kidneys  are  unable  to  perform  their  transforming, 
transporting or excreting functions  properly. The congested  Fluids then 
transform  into  Phlegm,  causing  further  bodily dysfunction. 
Fluid imbalances can be divided  into three categories:  a Deficiency 
of Fluids, edema,  and  Phlegm blockage.  Fluid  Deficiency usually relates 
to  a Deficiency ofYin or Blood, while edema or Phlegm  always  involve 
the Spleen, as  its Qi is  in charge of transforming and  transporting Body 
Fluids.  These  are  detailed  in  the  chapter on  Patterns  of Disharmonies. 
METHODS  TO  STRENGTHEN  FLUIDS 
To  nourish  Deficient  Fluids,  one  essentially  tonifies  Yin.  Include 
more  Yin  nourishing  foods  in  the  diet,  such  as  glutinous  sweet  rice, 
okra  and  pork.  Fish  liver  oils  are  also  beneficial.  Soups  and  stews  that 
include small amounts of cooked Rehmannia glutinosa (Shu  Di Huang), 
ophiopogon,  lycium  berries  and  American  ginseng  are  also  beneficial. 
For  breakfast  make  sweet  rice  congee  using  1 cup  sweet  glutinous 
rice,  two  quarts  of water,  3  grams  each  of  prepared  rehmannia, 
ophiopogon  and  lycum  berries  and  6  to  10  black  jujube  dates.  To  aid 
digestion  add  a  dash  of cardamon  and  ginger.  Cook  slowly  over  low 
heat  or in  a crock  pot  for  6 to  8 hours. 
The most important activity to  nourish Yin and Fluids is  sleep and 
rest.  Yin  is  especially  increased  with  rest  after  eating.  Avoid  excessive 
activity,  work,  sex  and  most  aerobic  exercises.  Swimming,  walking  and 
stretching  exercises,  such  as  Yoga,  are  beneficial. 
ESSENCE  (':JING") 
As previously described, Essence is a highly refined substance, called 
]ing.  It  is  the  very  foundation  of life  and  the  source  of organic 
development. As such, it is  considered a precious substance to be valued 
and guarded. While more  than simply part of the Fluid element of the 
body,  Essence  is  a  highly  refined  and  distilled  subst!lnce  that  is  Fluid. 
Even  though  it  is  both  nutritive  and  supportive,  its  place  of origin  is 
within  the  complex  realm  of the  endocrine  system  that  the  Chinese 
broadly classify as  the Kidneys. 
Essence  encompasses  the  processes  of reproduction, development, 
growth,  sexual  potency,  conception,  pregnancy  and  ultimate  physical 
decay  of the  organism.  It is  the  basic  constitutional  strength,  vitality 
and  resistance  of the  body.  As  part  of growth  from  childhood,  it  is 
responsible  for  the growth  of bones,  teeth,  hair,  brain  and  sexuality. 
In maturity, it controls reproductive function,  fertility,  conception 
and  pregnancy.  As  Essence  declines  with  age,  there  is  a  natural  decline 
of sexuality, fertility,  hair growth and coloring, skin smoothness and so 
forth.  Thus,  improper  bone  formation,  retarded  growth  (mental  or 
physical),  delayed  sexual  maturation,  premature  aging,  sterility  or 
impotence are  symptoms  of Essence  Deficiency. 
Traditionally the  natural  flow  of Essence  in women  is  as  follows: 
At  age  7  Essence  is  abundant,  influencing hair growth  and  adult  teeth 
to  replace  the baby ones. At  14,  the "Dew of Heaven", or menstruation, 
arrives  and conception is  possible. At 21,  Kidney Essence  peaks, growth 
is  at its  utmost and  the wisdom  teeth  appear.  At 28,  the  tendons, bones 
and  muscles  are  their strongest while  the hair grows  its  longest.  At  35, 
Essence  begins  to  decline,  with  the  skin  wrinkling,  hair  falling,  and 
teeth  loosening.  At  42,  the  face  darkens  and  the  hair turns  gray.  At  49, 
the  "Dew of Heaven"  dries,  resulting  in  menopause. 
The Flow of Essence  in Women 
Age  7  Essence  is  abundant,  causes  hair growth  and 
Age  14 
Age  21 
Age  28 
Age  35 
Age  42 
Age  49 
replacement  of baby teeth. 
Menstruation  begins,  conception  is  possible 
Kidney  Essence  peaks,  growth  is  fully  realized  and 
wisdom  teeth  appear. 
Tendons,  bones  and  muscles  are  the  strongest  and  the 
hair  is  the  longest. 
Beginning  of the  decline  of Essence,  skin  begins  to 
wrinkle,  hair  falls  and  the  teeth  loosen. 
The  face  darkens,  the  hair turns gray. 
Menopause 
In  men  the  traditional  flow  of Essence  is  as  follows:  At  age  8 
Essence  is  abundant,  influencing  hair  growth  and  the  formation  of 
permanent  teeth.  At  16  the  "Dew  of Heaven",  sperm,  arrives  and 
conception  is  possible.  At  24,  Kidney  Essence  peaks,  growth  is  at  its 
utmost  and  the  wisdom  teeth  appear.  At  32,  the  tendons,  bones  and 
muscles  are  at their strongest. At 40,  Essence  begins  to  decline with  the 
skin wrinkling, hair falling and teeth getting loose. At 48, the face darkens 
and  hair  turns  gray.  At  56,  the "Dew of Heaven"  dries  up,  resulting  in 
infertility.  At  64,  the hair and  teeth  are  gone. 
The  Flow of Essence  in Men 
Age  8  Essence  is  abundant,  hair grows,  permanent  teeth 
Age  16 
Age  24 
Age  32 
Age  40 
Age  48 
Age  56 
Age  64 
develop 
Sperm  develops  and  conception  is  possible 
Kidney Essence  peaks,  wisdom  teeth  appear,  growth 
is  at  its  maximum 
The  tendons,  bones  and  muscles  are  at  their  strongest 
Beginning of the  decline  of Essence,  skin wrinkles, 
hair  falls  and  teeth  become  loose 
Face  darkens  and  hair  turns gray 
Infertility 
Hair and  teeth  fall  out 
Essence  has  two  sources,  Pre-Heaven  Essence  and  Post-Heaven 
Essence.  Pre-Heaven Essence  is  a result of the combined potential of the 
mother,  father  and  grandparents  in  the  conceived  child.  It determines 
our unique  growth  patterns  and  reproductive  capacity.  This  Essence  in 
the  form  of Qi,  rather than Fluid,  is  called  Original Qi, Prenatal Qi or 
Inborn  Qi.  Because  it  is  inherited  from  the  parents,  it  is  considered 
fixed  in  quantity  and  quality,  although  it  can  be  affected  and 
supplemented  through  Post-Heaven  Essence.  It  represents  the 
constitutional  potential for  strength, vitality and  resistance  throughout 
a person's  life. 
A  litter  of eight  pups  or  kittens  produces  some  that  are  innately 
more  alert  and  curious,  more  interested  in  food,  stronger  and  faster  to 
grow and  mature than others. These are blessed with greater Pre-Heaven 
Essence than the weaker members. Similarly, we  must admit that certain 
of us  are  more prone to  unstable health  than others.  In this way,  we  are 
each  limited  to  some  degree  by the  Pre-Heaven  Essence  bestowed  upon 
us  at  birth.  Inevitably,  our  limitations  tend  to  become  more  evident 
with  age. 
Post-Heaven  Essence,  on the other hand,  represents  what  happens 
to  us  after  birth.  It  is  affected  by  what  we  derive  from  air,  food  and 
water.  Post-Heaven  Essence  is  also  adversely  drained  and  affected  by 
physical and emotional stress.  Essence derived  from  outer nourishment 
assumes  forms  of Grain Qi, Food  Qi or Central Qi. While Post-Heaven 
Essence is replenishable daily, Pre-Heaven Essence represents even subtler 
energetic  resources  that are  not  normally  renewable  on  a  regular  daily 
basis except, perhaps, through regular and prolonged periods of focused 
breathing practices and meditation called "Qi Gong". Therefore in order 
to  not dissipate  our reserves  of Pre-Heaven  Essence,  it  is  wise  for  us  to 
eat and drink pure, wholesome foods  and water  and attend  to our basic 
physical and psychological requirements, including proper sleep, exercise 
and  recreation.  In  this  way  we  optimize  the  quality  and  length  of our 
lives.  Herbs  can  contribute  greatly  to  compensate  for  a  lack  of Pre-
Heaven  Essence. 
While  Essence  is  a  part  of Qi,  there  are  significant  differences. 
First,  compared  to  Qi,  Essence  at  best  can  be  replenished  very  slowly. 
Further,  Essence  represents  an  inherited  constitutional  potential  that 
resides  in  the  greater  definition  of the  TCM  Kidney,  while  Qi  is  all-
pervasive  throughout the entire body-mind. Since another meaning for 
'']ing" is reproductive semen, the various hormonal secretions throughout 
the body become a material  expression of Essence  and are  more  fluidic 
in comparison  to  Qi, which  is  more  purely energetic. 
The potential of Essence is determined by observing overall patterns 
of health and disease from early childhood to the present. If a condition 
stems  from  birth  or early childhood,  or reflects  an  inherited  tendency 
also manifested in the parents and grandparents, it is considered a problem 
of Essence.  In general,  such  conditions  are  seldom  cured  and  require  a 
great  amount  of diligence  to  maintain  stability.  Such  diligence  is 
manifested  not only in a healthy diet and lifestyle, but also  through  the 
regular  integration  of appropriate  tonic  herbs  taken  alone,  in  formula 
or regularly combined with  food  throughout life. 
Further,  the condition of the Kidneys  reflects  the  state of Essence 
in the body. Any imbalance of their functions  may  indicate an Essence 
dysfunction. Likewise, if the Kidneys become weakened or depleted  from 
excessive  working,  excessive  sex,  poor diet  and/  or lack  of proper sleep, 
Essence  also  becomes  depleted. 
PATHOLOGIES  OF  ESSENCE 
Because  Essence  is  comprised of the fixed  Pre-Heaven  Essence and 
supplemental  Post-Heaven  Essence,  it  only  manifests  in  imbalance  as 
~ 
86 
Deficiency.  Deficient Essence  includes  any disease  or imbalance that is 
inheritable,  as  well  as  symptoms  of improper  growth,  problems  with 
development  and  maturation  or  reproduction  problems.  These  are 
detailed  in  the chapter on Patterns  of Disharmonies. 
METHODS TO STRENGTHEN  ESSENCE 
If we  understand  Essence  from  only a physical  perspective, we  are 
limiting  it  to  only  having  a  Pre-heaven  influence.  Since  Essence  is  a 
combination  of both  Pre-heaven  and  Post-heaven  influences,  we  can 
understand  ways  by  which  Essence  can  be  supported  and  possibly 
enhanced. To  achieve this, we  must assume  Essence  to be  both physical 
as  well  as  spiritual. 
If we  only limit Essence  to  a  physical  model,  we  must  admit  that 
there  are  individuals  born with  severe  physical  handicaps who  are  able 
to  rise  beyond  their inborn  Essence  Deficiency to  achieve  greatness  for 
themselves  and others. We  also see  each  day how individuals  born with 
healthy  Essence  tend  to  dissipate  it  through  self-abuse  and  lack  of 
sufficient nurturing support from others; they end up broken and dejected 
with  crippling  psycho-physical  imbalances  stemming  from  damaged 
Essence. 
In traditional society, Essence is supported and strengthened through 
practices of devotion and honor. Further, the honor and respect we give 
to  others  ultimately  returns  to  ourselves  a  hundredfold  while  any 
disrespect  or dishonor to others, especially those to whom we  are  close, 
returns to injure our spiritual Essence. The road to self respect for ourself 
or  others  begins  with  tolerance  and  forgiveness.  Practically  speaking, 
death  or extreme  alienation  may  make  forgiveness  difficult to  achieve, 
except  through  letting go  of old  hurts  and  grievances  within  our own 
hearts. 
Until  we  are  capable  of letting  go,  and  to  the  extent  that  we  are 
unable to release the negative imprint of past abuses, our Essence will be 
unable to  emanate forth  and manifest throughout our life  as  it should. 
One process  of doing this  is  through adopting and forming  new bonds 
with  others who we  see  as  worthy role  models  and  a source of spiritual 
nourishment.  This  can  be  dangerous,  if somehow  the  object  of our 
newly found  identification and devotion proves to be unworthy, so that 
the  result  is  a further  insult and  injury of our Essence.  Because  of this, 
many feel  safer  to  find  or create  an  object  of worship  in the  form  of a 
chosen deity or religion. This is why for many people apocalyptic rebirth 
or "born again"  experiences  can allow one to  contact Essential  reserves 
to  affect  dramatic  positive  psycho-physiological  changes. 
For  those  of us  who  are  capable  of detaching  and  withdrawing 
from normal life for awhile, it is  possible to find and reestablish contact 
with our inner Essence. This can be accomplished through a prolonged 
period  of spiritual  retreat,  for  instance,  in  a  monastic  setting  or  in 
nature through  the  Native American vision  quest. 
The  thing that  is  seldom  stated  is  that processe.s  of forgiveness  of 
self and  others,  letting  go,  spiritual  renewal  and  retreat  are  recurring 
processes  which  we  may  have  to  undergo  regularly  until  all  trace  of 
negative  attachments  that  impair  the  full  blossoming  of Essence  are 
completely eradicated. 
2 
Essence  can  also  be  strengthened  through  prolonged  and  regular 
practice of Qi Gong.  (A  few  specific Qi Gong exercises  are  given  in the 
Appendix,  Accessory  Healing  Therapies  for  the  Herbalist.)  Further,  as 
Post-Heaven  Essence  nourishes  and  supplements  Pre-Heaven  Essence,  a 
balanced  diet  rich  in whole  unrefined  grains,  legumes,  vegetables,  hard 
leafy greens,  seaweed's  and  small  amounts of organ  meat  and  fruit  also 
contributes  to  building  Essence  in the  body. 
SHEN  (MIND AND SPIRIT) 
Shen  refers  to  the  overall  "Spirit"  and  the  mental  faculties  of an 
individual. As  Spirit, it encompasses  a wide  range of mental, emotional 
and spiritual aspects.  Mentally, it relates  to one's capacity to  form  ideas. 
Emotionally,  Shen  is  the  spark  of interest  and  enthusiasm  that  is 
infectiously  communicated  to  others,  signaling  innate  vitality  and 
flourishing life.  Spiritually, it is  the dynamic faith,  vitality and  force  of 
the human  personality that seemingly  is  able  to  surmount all  obstacles 
and  make  things  happen. 
Shen resides  in the Heart, and  as  one might imagine, encompasses 
more than physical heart functions.  Folk wisdom of all countries attaches 
great emotional significance to the Heart as  the seat of the emotions.  In 
popular  jargon  we  have  terms  such  as  "heartfelt  gratitude"  or  "loving 
heart",  so  that  the  heart  itself is  drawn  as  a  symbol  of goodness  and 
love. On the negative side we  hear countless lovesick songs singing about 
a "broken heart",  "cold  heartedness"  and  so  on. This connection seems 
ignored  by  medical  doctors  who  quote  statistics  of heart  disease  as  the 
number one killer in the Western world, as  they reap  heaps of scientific 
"kudos"  and  billions  of dollars  for  complex  heart  bypass  surgery  and 
transplants.  Fortunately, the Heart as  described  in TCM as  the home of 
Shen  can  be  neither  bypassed  nor  transplanted.  In  the  psycho-spiritual 
aspect  of the  Traditional  Chinese  Heart  may  lie  the  real  cause  for  so 
much  heart disease  in Western  countries. 
~ 
88 
Statistics aside,  how many of us  have known individuals who seem 
to  eat  all  the  wrong  foods,  even  test  with  elevated  cholesterol  and 
triglyceride  levels  and  yet  outlive  others  who  suffer  unexpected  heart 
attacks and strokes with no previous indications? If there is an epidemic 
of Heart  disease  in  the  West,  perhaps  we  should  look  to  the  spiritual 
impoverishment of Western society as  the cause rather than mechanical 
models of blocked arteries and defective valves. All we  know is  the many 
sad-hearted people who die of sudden heart attack and who have blocked 
arteries or a defective heart valve. What we  do not know, and thankfully 
may  never  know,  is  how  many  people  with  partially  impaired  arteries 
and  defective  heart  valves  continue  to  live  a  life  of profound  spiritual 
life  fulfillment  because  they have  abundant Shen! 
As the Heart rules the Mind, Shen influences our capacity to think 
clearly, behave appropriately, discriminate, be responsive, speak coherently 
and  experience  happiness  and  profound  joy.  The  spiritual  aspects  of 
Shen  influence  that  of all  the  organs,  especially  the Yin,  receptive  and 
transformative  Organs.  It differentiates  into  specific  functions  and 
qualities as  follows:  Spirit (Shen)  resides  in the Heart,  the Ethereal Soul 
(Hun)  in  the  Liver,  the  Corporeal  Soul  (Po)  in  the  Lungs,  the  Will 
Power (Zhi)  in the Kidneys  and Thought (Yi)  in the Spleen. Thus, Shen 
is  the  spiritual  "power"  behind  all  of the organs. 
As  a Fundamental Substance or quality of human existence,  Shen 
has  a material  quality that  is  very  much a part of the  body.  The origin 
of Shen  is  similar to Jing in that it is  first  transmitted  to the fetus  from 
the  parents.  In  this,  we  might  consider  how  the  state  of mind  of the 
parents at the moment of conception and of the mother through gestation 
and  pregnancy  have  a  profound  influence  on  the  developing  Shen  of 
the  fetus. 
Regardless of the amount of Shen one is born with, it is  after birth 
that Shen  can  be  diminished or obliterated  if nourishment of love  and 
compassion  represented  by  Heart Q! and  Blood are  not continued. The 
Fire Gate ofVitality (ming men)  in the Kidneys  also  influences  this  as  it 
manifests  the  level  of will  and  determination  that  assists  the  Heart  in 
housing the emotions and mind.  If either Heart Blood or Q! or the Fire 
Gate  of Vitality are  deficient,  then Shen  becomes  depleted. 
When Shen is.weak, Spirit and the mental capacities decline. There 
may  be  muddled  thinking,  forgetfulness,  insomnia,  lack  of vitality, 
depression,  lack  of interest  in  life,  unhappiness,  confused  speech  or 
excessive  dreaming.  In  the  extreme,  a  Shen  disharmony  can  result  in 
irrational  behavior,  unconsciousness,  incoherent  speech,  hysteria, 
delirium, inappropriate responses to people or the environment, or violent 
e:4kZ 
Bg 
madness.  Disharmonies  of Shen can  also  occur  from  excessive  Heat in 
the  body.  In  this  case  it  causes  "reckless  movement"  with  any  of the 
above  symptoms  resulting. 
In  diagnosis  of disease,  the  appearance  of Shen  is  an  important 
factor  and  is  one  of the  first  signs  noted  in  examination  of a  patient 
along with tongue and  pulse.  No  matter how  ill  a person  is,  if the eyes 
glitter  and  sparkle,  there  is  luster  in  the  face,  the  tongue  looks  bright 
and  flourishing,  or the  personality is  in  "good  spirits"  or has  vitality, 
then  Shen  is  present  and  recovery  is  easier  and  more  certain.  On  the 
other  hand,  no  matter  how  simple  the  illness,  if the  eyes  lack  life  or 
sparkle,  the  face  is  dull  and  cloudy or the  person  lacks  interest  in  life, 
recovery  may be  difficult and  the  prognosis  poor. 
Sometimes  during  the  last  stage  of a  severe  or  terminal  illness  a 
person  suddenly  becomes  alert,  more  positive  and  vital.  It  is  termed 
"false  Shen"  because  it is  the  last  desperate  spark  of spirit  manifesting 
before  the life  force  separates  from  the  body. 
PATHOLOGIES  OF SHEN 
Because Shen is so closely linked to the Heart, it is not distinguished 
by  pathologies  of its  own.  Instead,  symptoms  are  differentiated  as  the 
Heart  pathology  categories  of Deficient  Heart  Blood,  Heart  Fire  and 
Cold or Hot Mucus obstructing the Heart Orifices. However, one must 
keep  in  mind  that  Shen  problems  are  spiritual  problems  and  a  true 
Chinese doctor must eventually develop the skills to address such spiritual 
issues  on their own terms. This is  done through shamanistic rituals, life 
counseling  (compassionately  listening  and  responding  with  the  right 
word  at the right  time),  prayer,  affirmation, meditational  practices that 
are  given  to  the  patient  and  recommendations  to  play  more,  change 
jobs, take a holiday and whatever else is  needed to nourish the spirit and 
Heart.  For physical  herbal  prescriptions,  refer  to  those  Heart categories 
for  complete symptomology. 
METHODSTOSTRENGTHENSHEN 
Shen  is  fostered  by  tonifying  Heart  Blood  and  Qi,  strengthening 
the  Kidney's  Life  Gate  Fire,  and  keeping  Heat,  Coldness  and  Fluids  in 
balance in the body.  Other methods include counseling,  play,  holidays 
(our Western  term, vacation,  means  to vacate,  while  a holiday is  a holy 
day),  prayer,  meditation,  laughter  therapy,  living  a  fulfilling  life  path, 
being surrounded  by loved  ones  as  well  as  periods  of solitude. 
~ 
90 
THE  THREE TREASURES:  Q!, ESSENCE AND  SHEN 
Qi,  Essence  and  Shen are  known  as  the "Three Treasures"  because 
they  are  the  fundamental  spiritual  basis  of a  human  being.  They  are 
part of the  entire constitution and  determine its  physical  and  spiritual 
strength,  manifesting  as  vitality,  resistance,  mental  clarity,  stability, 
expression,  happiness,  self-confidence  and  life  outlook. Shen  relates  to 
the Heart, Essence to the Kidneys and Qi is  produced by the Spleen and 
Stomach and  relates  to  the  Lungs. 
Essence,  Qi and  Shen are  each  different states  of condensation  of 
Qi. Essence is  the most coarse and dense, Qi is  more refined and rarefied 
while  Shen  is  the  most  subtle  and  immaterial.  Thus,  these  substances 
represent the continuum between the psychological and spiritual, matter 
and  energy,  the  physical  and  mental,  the  material  and  immaterial  and 
so  on.  Of the  three,  Essence  is  the  foundation  for  Qi  and  Shen.  If 
inherited  Essence  is  strong  and  well  supported  in  life,  so  will  be  the 
other two  and  the life will  be  strong, both physically and mentally.  Pre-
Heaven  Essence  is  the  foundation  of Qi  and  Shen  while  Post-Heaven 
Essence  nourishes  them. 
Essence and Qi are the material foundation ofShen and determine 
the  state  of mind  and  spirit.  A  healthy  mind  and  spirit  are  dependent 
on  Essence,  both  inherited  and  created  after  birth,  and  Qi  produced 
from  food  and  fluids  by  the Stomach  and  Spleen.  On the other hand, 
strong Shen is  necessary to direct the Essence and make it effective in its 
functions.  If Shen  is  weak,  the  person  lacks  will  power and  motivation 
and  feels  constantly tired.  Both Essence  and Shen have  a common root 
in Qi. 
The  Three  Treasures  are  often  expressed  in  Chinese  Medicine  as 
Heaven,  Person  and  Earth,  corresponding  to  Shen,  Qi  and  Essence 
respectively,  and  their corresponding organs  of Heart, Stomach/Spleen 
and  Kidneys.  They are  as  follows: 
SUBSTANCE 
Shen 
Qi 
Essence 
ORGAN 
Heart 
Stomach/Spleen 
Kidneys 
CORRESPONDENCE 
Heaven 
Person 
Earth 
In  practice,  these  three  fundamental  substances  are  assessed 
according to their general and relative state. Essence indicates the inherited 
constitution and its current state, Qi denotes the state of energy produced 
on a regular basis and Shen represents the state of the person's emotional, 
mental  and  spiritual well-being. 
91 
Essence can, in large part, be determined from  the patient's health 
and  life  history  and  the  parents'  and  grandparents'  health  history. 
However,  this  may  only  inform  us  as  to  a  potential  that  is  waiting  to 
find  a  hospitable  environment  and  circumstance  to  become  manifest. 
As we have seen, it is possible to suppress one's Essence through repression 
and inhibition. Q! is  determined,  to  a great extent, by lifestyle  and  diet 
since  childhood,  and  by  the amount of exercise  or  physical  play,  since 
this  is  important for  Q!  circulation.  Shen  is  observed  by  the degree  of 
the  personality's  expressiveness  and  in  the  sparkle  of the  eyes  which 
denotes vitality and life.  On the other hand, lack of Shen is  observed by 
the  lack  of expression  and  the  appearance  of dullness  in  the  eyes, 
sometimes  seen  as  a  covering  of mist  or  cloud.  To  some  extent,  the 
Three Treasures also  have  characteristic feelings  and  appearances on the 
pulse  and  tongue. 
FLVE 
THE ElGHT PRlNClPLES 
One  of the  most  important  and  characteristic  aspects  of TCM  is  its 
clinical  practicality.  This  is  best  exemplified  in  the  classification  of 
symptom patterns along with herbs and other medicinal substances and 
formulas.  The  Eight  Principles  describe  this  system  as  follows: 
1.  External  Acute diseases 
2.  Hot  Overly active  metabolism 
3.  Excess  Sthenic 
4.  Yang  Hyper-metabolic (sthenic) 
5.  Internal  Mostly Chronic diseases 
6.  Cold  Low  metabolism 
7.  Deficient 
8.  Yin 
Asthenic 
Hypo-metabolic (asthenic) 
TCM  classifies  herbs  as  Hot  or  Cold  in  terms  of their  energies, 
External  or  Internal  in  terms  of the  depth  of their  penetration, 
Eliminating or TonifYing  and the summation of the above  as  Yang  and 
Yin.  This is what makes TCM highly promising and effective in treating 
diseases  which  may  not  be  amenable  to  other  therapeutic  modalities. 
Because  of this,  it  is  possible  to  form  a  treatment  strategy  based  on 
direct observation  and  diagnosis. 
There  are  essentially  two  approaches  to  diagnosis  and  treatment. 
One is  based  on treating the named  disease, while the second  approach 
treats according to pattern identification. This gives  rise to the principle 
of"one disease,  many .formulas,  one .formula,  many diseases". What this means 
is  that a specific named disease can only be treated according to a holistic 
differential  diagnqsis,  which  may  require  a  decision  between  several 
formulas  based  on  the  accompanying  patterns  of the  disease.  It  also 
means  that  a single  herbal  formula  can  be  suitable  for  treating  several 
diseases.  To  achieve  this  objective, TCM  utilizes  ten  types  of diagnostic 
strategies.  These  are: 
~ 
93 
1.  Eight  Principles {Ba  gang  bian zheng) 
2.  Symptom Sign  Diagnosis {Zang  fu  bian zheng) 
3.  Six Stages  based  upon  the Shang Han Lun  (Liu  jing bian zheng) 
4.  Four Stages  of Heat (Wei  q ying xue  bian zheng) 
5.  Three  Heater  Discrimination (San  jiao  bian zheng) 
6.  Disease  Discrimination (Bing yin  bian zheng) . 
7.  Q!  and  Blood  Pattern  Discrimination (Q!  xue  bian  zheng) 
8.  Three  Humor Diagnosis  Oin  ye  bian zheng) 
9.  Five  Element  Discrimination (Wu  xing bian  zheng) 
10.  Meridian  and  Connecting Vessel  Discrimination Oing  luo bian 
zheng) 
Most of these diagnostic strategies will be  separately discussed, but 
they are  not exclusive  of each  other and  in  practice  tend  to  overlap.  As 
Bob Flaws so aptly views  it
1
,  each diagnostic approach is like a diagnostic 
"tool" that an experienced TCM practitioner may use according to which 
is  better  suited  to  understand  the  patient's  condition.  They  can  then 
arrive at the most appropriate diagnosis and therapeutic approach. Usually 
the Eight Principles form  the primary understanding of the underlying 
imbalance  and  provide  an  effective  holistic  approach  to  treatment. 
Further, they provide the necessary overview, while Organ or Symptom 
Sign pattern diagnosis allows us  to get even closer to  the direct causes of 
a specific  disease. 
The Eight Principles were first elucidated by Zhang)ie Ben during 
the 17th century.  It has  since become the most fundamental  process  for 
TCM diagnostic evaluation. Actually it is  mainly the first Six Principles, 
excluding Yin-Yang,  which  are  determined  through  the use  of the  Four 
Methods  of Diagnosis:  Interrogation,  Observation,  Palpation  and 
Audition.  The  remaining  two  Yin  and  Yang  principles  represent  a 
summary of the  previous six. 
In Western medicine some corresponding diseases can be associated 
with  each  of the Eight  Principles  as  follows: 
External:  acute  conditions  including colds,  influenza,  fevers, 
rashes,  acute  arthritic conditions and  injuries. 
Internal:  chronic conditions such  as  constipation, gastritis, 
ulcers,  urinary infections, cholecystitis,  low  energy,  weakness, 
diabetes,  hypoglycemia,  cancer,  epilepsy,  gynecological 
conditions,  infertility,  impotence. 
Excess:  obesity,  constipation,  hypertension,  high  fever,  severe 
infections,  purulent discharges,  manic  behavior. 
~ 
94 
Deficiency:  tiredness,  weakness,  weak  digestion,  low 
hydrochloric  acid,  hypo- thyroidism,  hypo-adrenalism,  anemia 
and  wasting diseases  such  as  TB  and AIDS. 
Hot:  high  fever,  mild  chills,  thirst,  flushed  complexion, 
sensitivity to  heat  and  hot weather,  severe  inflammatory 
conditions,  infections,  hepatitis and yellowish  discharges  from 
any  mucus  membrane or orifice. 
Cold:  severe  chills,  lack  of thirst,  pale  complexion,  sensitivity to 
coldness  or cold  weather,  low  hypothalamus  function,  weak 
digestion,  hypoglycemia,  lowered  immunity,  anemia,  all  hypo-
conditions  and  clear or whitish  discharges  from  any  mucus 
membrane  or orifice. 
Yang:  Generally,  Yang  represents  a composite of any of the 
symptoms  or conditions  that are  External,  Excess  or Hot.  In 
addition,  more  fundamental  endocrine imbalances  associated 
with  hypertension,  hyper-adrenalism,  hyper-thyroidism  and  an 
overbearing  aggressive  behavior are  also  considered Yang 
conditions. 
Yin:  Generally, Yin  encompasses  a composite of the  symptoms 
or conditions  that are  Internal,  Deficient or Cold.  In  addition, 
endocrine  imbalances  associated  with  hypo-thyroidism,  hypo-
adrenalism,  hypo-glycemia,  a  pale  complexion,  fluid  retention, 
timidity and  a soft spoken voice  are  also  categorized  as  Yin 
conditions. 
Thus,  Yin  and  Yang,  as  part  of the  Eight  Principles,  represent  a 
composite of the previous External-Internal, Hot-Cold, Excess-Deficient 
determinations.  For  instance,  an  individual  whose  symptoms  may  be 
Hot,  Internal  and  Excess  would  be  considered  to  have  more  of a Yang 
condition  because  Internal  is  the  only Yin  indication.  Another  whose 
condition  is  Excess,  Internal  and  Cold  is  Yin  because  the  only  Yang 
manifestation is Excess. This is important in determining the appropriate 
herbal  treatment. 
EXTERNAL-INTERNAL 
External-Internal refers  to  the location of a disease or symptoms. It 
is  differentiated  as  follows. 
~ 
95 
External  Diseases 
External  conditions tend  to be acute and  located on the surface of 
the  body.  These  include  colds,  flu,  fevers,  skin  diseases  and  rheumatic 
conditions.  Generally,  these  are  subclassified  as  Wind-Cold  or Wind-
Heat. 
The  pathogenesis  of External  diseases  begins  with  an  invasion  by 
one or more of the Six Pernicious Influences: Wind, Cold, Heat, Dampness, 
Dryness  and  Summer  Heat  (see  Chapter  8  for  a  discussion  of these). 
The effects of these can penetrate the upper respiratory passages including 
the nasal  passages,  the mouth and throat,  the bronchioles and lungs, as 
well  as  the  skin  and  hair.  When  this  occurs,  all  physiological  aspects 
associated with the Lungs can be affected.  Besides  the upper respiratory 
passages,  the skin, body hair and the External immune system (Wei  Qi), 
which  are  all  governed  by  the  Lungs,  can  be  damaged.  The  resultant 
acute fever,  cold or flu is  an attempt by the body to throw off toxins and 
overcome  negative  pathological  invasions. 
The  most  definitive  signs  for  External  Wind-Heat  or Wind-Cold 
are  chills  followed  by fever,  normal tongue fur  and  a floating  pulse.  In 
addition  there  may  be  symptoms  of headache,  nasal  congestion,  dilute 
clear or whitish discharge, white and thin tongue coating and a floating 
pulse. The difference  between Wind-Cold and Wind-Heat conditions is 
that  chills  are  more  pronounced  in  Wind-Cold  disease,  and  fever  is 
more  predominant in Wind-Heat conditions. 
External  Wind-Cold  or  External  Wind-Heat  also  refer  to  various 
imbalances  and  diseases  of the  upper  respiratory tract  including colds, 
influenza, rhinitis and other respiratory allergies. Rheumatic conditions 
are also classified as  External Damp-Wind-Cold or External Damp-Wind-
Heat.  Wind  is  a  pathology  that  commonly  accompanies  External 
conditions. External Wind can refer to the proliferation of various bacteria 
and  viruses.  The  fact  that  the  Chinese  character  for  Wind  is  a  small 
insect  suggests  that  perhaps  they  suspected  the  existence  of external 
pathogens  such  as  germs  and viruses. 
External  can  also  refer  to  certain  rheumatic  disorders  and  skin 
conditions.  These  can  be  treated  with  herbs  and  formulas  from  the 
categories  of Relieving  Cold  Wind  Dampness  or  Relieving  Hot Wind 
Dampness.  In  these  cases  the  Wind-relieving  properties  alleviate  pain 
because of their antispasmodic, analgesic effects. The method of treatment 
for  External  disease  is  diaphoresis (sweating).  For this, one would  select 
herbs  and  formulas  from  the  categories  of Cool  Surface  Relieving  or 
relaxing diaphoretics, or Warm Surface Relieving or warming stimulating 
diaphoretics. 
External  Wind  Cold  includes  symptoms  of chills,  fear  of cold, 
avoidance  of cold  drinks,  mild  fever,  headache,  aching-stiffness,  nasal 
congestion, allergies, colds and coughs with clear or white-colored sputum. 
The  pulse  feels  floating,  beating  more  on the  surface  than  usual,  tense 
and  slow  (around  60  beats  per  minute  or less).  The  tongue  has  a  thin 
white  coat. 
For  External  Wind  Cold,  external  spicy  warm  diaphoretic  herbs 
are  used  such as  ephedra (Ephedra sinica), fresh  ginger (Zingiberis off.), 
asarum (Asarum heterotropoides), cinnamon twigs (Cinnamomum cassia) 
or Western  herbs  such  as  sassafras  (Sassafras  albidum),  onions,  garlic 
(Allium  sativum)  and  angelica  (Angelica  archangelica). 
Formulas 
External  Cold  Excess  Condition:  Ephedra  Combination (Ma 
huang  tang). 
External  Cold  Condition in  an  individual who  is  neither too 
Excess  or Deficient:  Pueraria  Combination (Ge  gen  tang). 
External,  Cold  and  Deficient Condition: Cinnamon 
Combination (Gui  zhi  tang). 
Another  external,  spicy,  warm  formula:  Schizonepeta  and 
Ledebouriella  Combination  Oing  fang  bai  du  san)  which  is  especially 
useful  for  acute skin diseases  such as  boils, urticaria, eczema, dermatitis 
and  conjunctivitis. 
Formulas  used  in Ayurvedic  Medicine  include Trikatu, consisting 
of equal  parts  of powdered  black  pepper  (Piper  nigrum),  pippali  long 
pepper (Piper longum) and  ginger (Zingiberis  officinalis). Sito Paladi is 
also  used.  It consists  of powders  of cinnamon bark (1  part), cardamom 
(2  parts),  black  pepper (4  parts),  black  bamboo  tabasheer  (8  parts)  and 
raw  brown  sugar  (16  parts). 
Western herbalism uses a formula called Composition Powder, which 
consists  of bayberry  bark (4  parts),  white  pine  bark (2  parts),  ginger  (2 
parts),  cayenne  pepper (1/2  part) and  cloves  (1/2  part). 
External Wind Heat has more inflammatory or feverish symptoms 
including  high  fever,  sore  throat, eruptive skin  rashes  and  thirst with a 
craving  for  cool  drinks.  These  conditions  can  also  be  indicative  of 
influenza,  colds,  upper  respiratory  problems,  hot  eruptive  rashes  and 
acute  inflamed  joint  pains.  The  pulse  is  floating  but fast  (80  or  more 
beats  per  minute),  which  indicates  Heat.  The  tongue  will  have  a  thin 
coat,  slightly yellow  and  dry. 
Chinese  herbs  for  External  Wind  Heat  include  cool,  spicy 
diaphoretic  herbs  such  as  chrysanthemum  flowers  (Chrysanthemum 
~ 
97 
morifolium), Bo He mint (Mentha haplocalyx), bupleurum (Bupleurum 
falcatum),  burdock  seed  (Arctium  lappa)  or Western  diaphoretic  herbs 
such as  mint (Mentha piperita), lemon balm (Melissa officinalis), feverfew 
(Chrysanthemum parthenium), elder flowers (Sambucus canadensis) and 
catnip  (Nepeta  cataria). 
Formulas 
Wind-Heat conditions:  Lonicera  and  Forsythia  Combination 
(Yin  qiao  san)  is  used  to  disperse Wind  Heat.  It clears  acute 
inflammatory symptoms  and  relieves  toxicity.  It is  indicated  for 
symptoms  of fever  with  slight or no  chills,  headache,  thirst, 
cough,  sore  throat.  The  pulse  is  floating  and  rapid  and  the 
tongue  has  a thin, white  or yellow  coat. Yin  Q!ao  is  commonly 
indicated  for  the  treatment of influenza, colds,  coughs,  acute 
bronchitis,  upper respiratory tract  infection,  measles  and  other 
eruptive  skin  diseases,  epidemic  parotitis (mumps),  acute 
endometritis,  and  early stage  encephalitis  or meningitis. 
Wind Heat:  Morus  and  Chrysanthemum Combination (Sang 
ju  yin)  is  an  External  cooling diaphoretic  formula  which  has 
similar indications  to Yin  Q!ao. 
In Ayurvedic  Medicine sweet  basil  (Ocimum basilicum)  tea  is 
used,  while  in Western  herbalism  elder  flowers  (Sambucus 
nigra),  mint (Mentha  piperita), yarrow (Achillea  millifolia)  and 
boneset tea  (Eupatorium  perfoliatum)  are  given. 
Internal  Diseases 
Internal  syndromes  describe  conditions  affecting  the vital  energy, 
Blood, Internal Organs and bone marrow. These conditions can be  Hot, 
Cold, Excess or Deficient. In general,  Internal tends  to represent a more 
chronic  pattern while  External  is  acute. 
TCM  teaches  that  Internal  diseases  can  be  caused  by  the  Seven 
Emotions: Joy,  Sadness, Anger, Grief, Melancholy, Fright and  Fear. There 
is  a  physiological  relationship  between  the  emotions  and  the  immune 
system  which  is  of tremendous  importance.  Negative  emotions  tend  to 
make  us  vulnerable  to  chronic  disease  and  vice  versa.  Other  factors 
which  cause  Internal  diseases  include  improper  diet,  trauma,  and  bites 
by animals  or insects. 
Internal  Wind  refers  to  diseases  that  affect  the  nervous  and 
circulatory systems with joint or muscle spasms, spasmodic pains, tremors, 
epilepsy,  coma  and  apoplexy.  As  with  all  Differential  Diagnostic 
treatments,  a  unique  treatment  approach  may  be  necessary  based  on 
individual  combinations  and  variations 
Formula 
Big  Pearl  for  Internal Wind  (Da  cling  feng  zhu)  for  Internal 
Wind with  prostration,  clonic convulsions caused  by Yin 
Deficiency. 
Internal  Heat  includes  symptoms  of constipation,  acute  abdominal 
pains,  abdomen  sensitive  to  deep  palpation,  internal  inflammation, 
nervousness  and  restlessness.  The  pulse  is  deeper  and  more  rapid.  The 
tongue  is  scarlet, with a dry,  yellow coat.  Some  pathological conditions 
include cholecystitis, hepatitis, urethritis, cystitis and nephritis. Alterative, 
heat  clearing,  antibacterial  and  antiviral  herbs  with  a  bitter  flavor  are 
used. 
Formulas 
White Tiger Decoction (Bai  hu tang)  for  symptoms of high 
fever,  aversion  to  heat,  severe  headache  caused  by fever,  red 
complexion, deep,  rapid  and  possibly full  pulse,  scarlet  tongue 
with  a dry yellow  coat.  It  is  used  for  children's  fevers, 
encephalitis  8, epidemic  meningitis. 
Coptis and  Scute  Combination (Huang lian  jie  du  tang)  is 
used  as  a general  detoxifying  formula.  It is  employed  for 
infections  and  inflammations,  high  fever,  irritability,  boils, 
dryness  of the  mouth and  throat,  insomnia,  spitting of blood, 
nose  bleeds  caused  by Excess  Heat,  and  cancer. 
Anemone Combination (Bai  tou weng  tang)  clears  Heat, 
relieves  toxicity and  is  used  for  bacterial  and  amoebic  dysentery. 
In  Ayurvedic  Medicine,  neem  (Azadirachta  indica)  and  guduchi 
(Tinospora  cordifolia)  powders  can  be  used.  In  Western  herbalism,  a 
combination  of echinacea  (Echinacea  spp.),  golden  seal  (Hydrastis 
canadensis),  chaparral  (Larrea  divaricata)  and  garlic  (Allium  sativum) 
are  used,  either as  a powder  or alcoholic  extract. 
Internal  Cold  manifests  symptoms  of Coldness  with  a  decided 
preference  for  warmth,  warm  food  and  drinks,  pale  complexion,  loose 
stool,  pale  urine,  clear  mucus  discharges,  low  vitality,  apathy and  slow 
speech. The pulse is  deep and slow (around 60 or less  beats per minute). 
The  tongue  is  pale  with  a white  coat.  Herbs  for  Internal  Cold  include 
ginger  (Zingiberis  officinalis),  cayenne  (Capsicum  frutescens),  black 
~ 
99 
pepper  (Piper  nigrum),  prepared  aconite  (Aconitum  praeparatum), 
cinnamon (Cinnamomum cassia), cloves (Caryophylus aromaticus), deer 
antler  (Cornu  cervi),  epimedium  (E.  grandiflora),  eucommia  bark  (E. 
ulmoides),  and  dipsacus  (D.  asperi,  which  is  used  to  help  relieve  back 
pain) and cistanches  (Rou  cong rong,  which  further  helps  lubricate the 
intestines  and  promotes  peristalsis). 
Formulas 
Aconite,  Ginger and Licorice Combination (Si  ni  tang)  which 
is  used  for  Internal  Coldness,  to  restore  the Yang  (vital  function) 
and  revive  an  individual  from  collapse,  shock or heart  failure. 
Regulate the Middle Pill (Li  zhong tang  or Ren  shen  tang) 
dispels  Internal  Coldness  as  it improves  digestion  and  raises 
metabolism. 
Jade Screen  Powder (Yu  ping  feng  san)  is  used  to warm  the 
interior and  tonify Q!  to  strengthen  the  External  immune 
system.  It is  used  for  individuals who  are weak  and  tend  toward 
frequent  colds  and  flu. 
Internal Deficiency includes symptoms of fatigue,  shortness of breath, 
involuntary  sweating,  dizziness,  poor  memory,  timidity,  soft  spoken 
voice, lack of appetite, loose stools, pallor and palpitations. The pulse is 
deep, slow,  thin and faint.  The tongue appears  pale with scalloped edges 
and  a  thin white  coat.  Deficiency symptoms  involve  Deficiency of Q!, 
Blood, Yin  or Yang. 
100 
Formulas 
For Q! Deficiency:  Four Major Ingredients (Si  jun  zi  tang)  for 
improving digestion,  tonifying  Q!  of the Spleen  and  Stomach; 
Ginseng and Astragalus  Combination ( Bu  zhong yi  qi  tang), 
which  is  considered  the supreme  tonic  for  Q!  tonification  and 
for  counteracting fatigue,  with  some  detoxifying  properties. 
For Blood  Deficiency:  Dang Gui  Four Combination (Si  wu 
tang),  which  is  the  major  formula  used  to  tonify Blood. 
For Q! and Blood  Deficiency:  Eight Precious Herbs (Ba  zhen 
tang);  or Ginseng and Dang Gui Ten  Combination (Shi  quan 
da  bu  tang)  which  is  an  important tonic  for  Q!,  Blood  and Yang 
Deficiencies. 
In Ayurvedic  medicine  Chyavanprash Compound is  used  to 
tonify Q! and  Blood.  It is  comprised  of tonic  herbs  such  as 
shatavari  (Asparagus  racemosa),  ashwagandha  (Withania 
somnifera)  and  shilajit (mineral  pitch). 
For Yin Deficiency:  Rehmannia Six (Liu  wei  di  huang tang); 
Sweet Wormwood  and Tortoise Shell Formula (Q!ng  hao  bie 
jia  tang);  or Anemarrhena, Phellodendron and Rehmannia 
Six (Zhi  bai  di  huang  tang). 
For Yang  Deficiency:  Rehmannia Eight (Ba  wei  di  huang 
tang);  or Replenishing the Right Pills (You  gui  wan). 
Internal Deficiency Causing Parasites: Mume Formula (Wu 
mei  wan),  which  is  warming  and  tonifying  to  the  Internal 
Organs  and  helps  to  overcome  parasites. 
Internal  Excess  may  exhibit  symptoms  of edema  (Excess  Dampness), 
obesity,  fullness  of the  abdomen,  stagnation  of Q!,  Blood,  Fluids 
(lymphatic)  and  Food.  The  pulse  is  deep  and  full  and  the  tongue  is 
enlarged with a thick coat.  Excess  commonly transforms to  Heat, which 
produces  symptoms  of constipation,  red  complexion,  bad  breath, 
abdominal  pain,  yellow  coated  tongue  and  a  bounding,  rapid  and/or 
full  pulse. 
Formulas 
Major Rhubarb Combination (Da  cheng  qi  tang),  which  is  a 
strong  purgative  formula;  or Minor Rhubarb Combination 
(Xiao  cheng qi  tang)  which  is  a  milder  purgative. 
In Ayurvedic medicine, a classic formula for all  excesses  is Triphala, 
which consists of equal  parts Beleric, Emblic and Chebulic Myrobalans. 
This  is  an  especially valuable  formula  because  of its  ability  to  detoxify 
and  eliminate  all  Excesses  without  causing  further  weakness  and 
Deficiencies. In Western herbalism laxative formulas are employed which 
combine one or more  herbs  such  as  rhubarb  root (Rheum  palmatum), 
cascara bark (Cascara sagrada), buckthorne (Rhamnus cathartica), senna 
(Cassia  acutifolia),.  with  cholagogues  such  as  barberry  bark  (Berberis 
sp.), dandelion root (Taraxacum off.), antispasmodics such as  wild yam 
root  (Dioscorea  villosa)  with  warming  carminatives  such  as  ginger 
(Zingiberis)  to  prevent  intestinal  spasm. 
HalfExternai-Halflnternal refers to conditions that are a mixture 
of External-Internal, Hot-Cold and  Excess-Deficiency.  This condition is 
~ 
IOI 
characteristic of the Xiao Yang Stage of disease (Lesser Yang) (see Chapter 
6: Six Stages of Disease) which requires harmonizing formulas with opposite 
properties.  Most often these  include formulas with  bupleurum because 
this  herb, while  classified  and  used  to  relieve  External  Heat,  also  helps 
regulate and release Qi stagnation. Most, if not all, Bupleurum formulas 
combine treating both Internal and External, Hot and Cold, Excess  and 
Deficient  symptoms.  Consequently,  there  are  many  formulas  in  this 
category. 
Formulas 
Minor Bupieurum  Combination (Xiao  chai  hu  tang),  which 
has  both External  and  Internal, warm  and  cool,  tonifying  and 
detoxifying  herbs;  Major  Bupleurum Combination  (Da  chai 
hu tang)  is  a purgative  formula  that harmonizes  Internal and 
External,  Cold and  Hot and  Excess  and  Deficiency 
simultaneously even  though  its  primary emphasis  is  to  purge 
and  eliminate  Liver  stagnation.  For some who  are  prone  to Yin 
Deficiency,  bupleurum can  bring up inappropriate  feelings  of 
anger. 
HOT-COLD 
Besides  the attack of External  climatic Heat or Cold, this category 
refers  to  the  body's  innate  metabolism.  Low  metabolism  accompanied 
by  symptoms  of Coldness,  pale  complexion,  lethargy,  weak  digestion, 
low  immunity and  hypo-conditions  such  as  hypo-thyroidism  or hypo-
adrenalism represents Cold and  is  a part ofYin. High metabolism with 
symptoms of Heat and inflammation, ruddy complexion, an aggressive 
manner,  a  loud  voice  and  hyper-conditions  such  as  hypertension 
represents  Heat and  is  a  part ofYang. 
Cold  can  be  caused  either  by  an  Excess  of Cold  and  Yin  or  a 
Deficiency of Heat,  or Yang.  Heat can be  caused  by either an  Excess  of 
Heat, or Yang, or a Deficiency of cooling or calming elements, all  under 
the category ofYin. 
Cold 
Coldness  represents  a waning of organic metabolic  function while 
Heat  is  a  catabolic  increase.  When  there  is  a  lack  of protective  Yang, 
there  will  be  symptoms  of intolerance  to  cold,  cold  extremities,  cold-
phobia and  preference  for  warm  climates, warm  food  and drinks.  Lack 
ofYang will also cause symptoms of pale complexion, impotence, frigidity, 
lack  of appetite,  a  weakened  immune  system,  slowness  of speech  and 
102. 
slow movements. The tongue will appear pale with a white coat, possibly 
with  scalloped  edges.  The pulse  is  slow (60  beats  per  minute or slower). 
For  Excess  Cold  one  would  use  Internal  Warming  herbs  and 
stimulants  such  as  cinnamon  bark  (Cassia  cinnamomum),  dry  ginger 
(Zingiberis  officinalis),  prepared  aconite  (Aconitum  praeparatum), 
cayenne pepper (Capsicum frutescens), Ayurvedic Trikatu or the Western 
use  of cayenne  and  ginger  contained  in  Composition  powder.  All  of 
these relieve Coldness and stimulate Yang.  Excess Yin also includes edema 
and Dampness and may be treated with diuretics and/or Internal warming 
herbs  as  well  as  aerobic  exercise. 
Formulas 
Aconite,  Ginger and Licorice Combination (Si  ni  tang); 
Ginseng and Ginger Combination (Li  zhong  tang)  or Aconite, 
Ginseng and Ginger Combination (Fu  zi  li  zhong tang), 
prepared  aconite  (Fu  Zi)  and  cinnamon bark (Rou  Gui)  is  added 
to  any  formula  to  make  it warm. 
For Western  and  Ayurvedic  herbs  refer  to  Internal  Cold. 
Heat 
Heat  can  be  a  sign  of Excess  with  stagnation,  or Yin  Deficiency. 
Excess  symptoms  are  fuller  while  Deficient  Heat  arises  from  a  state  of 
auto-consumption.  Excess  Heat  symptoms  are  accompanied  by  a 
preference for  cool weather together with  cool  foods  and drinks,  thirst, 
Dryness, constipation, darker more condensed urine, possibly high fever 
and  restlessness.  The  pulse  will  be  fast  (80  or  more  beats  per  minute), 
the  tongue  is  red  with  a yellow  coat. 
Yin  Deficiency  presents  with  signs  of wasting  Heat  symptoms, 
termed  "false Yang",  caused  by  an  overstressed  psycho-physical  system. 
These  include emaciation  and weakness with malar flush,  night sweats, 
five  palm  Heat,  restlessness  with  little energy or energy in spurts,  a red 
tongue  with  no  coat  and  a fast  but empty pulse. 
Eight  Principles  delineates  four  types  of Heat: 
External H e ~ t  with  high  fever,  mild chills, sweat,  thirst,  headache, 
sore  throat,  yellow  sputum,  floating  and  rapid  pulse,  normal  to 
thin coated  tongue,  or dry with  a slightly yellow  coat. 
Internal  Heat with  high  fever,  lack  of chills,  thirst,  constipation, 
dark  urine,  abhorrence  of heat  and  preference  for  cold  (weather, 
drinks  and  food),  irritability,  sweat,  rapid  pulse,  the  tongue  is  red 
~ 
IOJ 
with  a yellow  coat. 
Excess  Heat with  high  fever,  flushed  complexion, excessive  thirst, 
constipation,  scanty and  dark  urine,  bitter  mouth  taste,  psychosis, 
irritability, strong smelling breath, delirium, pulse is  rapid and full, 
the  tongue  is  red  with  a yellow  dry coat. 
Deficient Heat or Yin  Deficiency with  low  afternoon  fever,  night 
sweats, flushed complexion, insomnia, feverish  feeling in the hands, 
feet  and  chest,  irritability.  The  pulse  is  rapid  and  thin  and  the 
tongue  is  red  with  little or  no coat. 
Treatment 
External Heat:  Use  herbs  and  formulas  described  in  the  External 
Wind  Heat  category,  such  as  Lonicera  and  Forsythia  combination 
(Yin  qiao  san),  and  Western  herbs  such  as  boneset  (Eupatorium 
perfoliatum) and  red  clover  blossoms (Trifolium  pratense). 
Internal  Heat  and  Excess  Heat:  One  would  use  purgatives, 
cholagogues,  alteratives  and  Heat  clearing  herbs  such  as  gentian  root 
(Gentian  scabrae),  coptis  (Coptis  chinensis),  scutellaria  (Scutellaria 
baicalensis),  dandelion  (Taraxacum  officinalis),  isatis  (Isatis  tinctoria), 
honeysuckle flowers (Lonicera japonica) and forsythia  flowers (Forsythia 
suspensa).  If there is  constipation, purgative herbs such as  rhubarb root 
(Rheum palmatum) and the mineral mirabilitum (Sodium sulphate) are 
employed. In Western herbalism, Heat-clearing herbs are called alteratives 
and include red  clover (Trifolium pratense), dandelion root (Taraxacum 
off.),  echinacea  (Echinacea  species),  golden  seal  root  (Hydrastis 
canadensis),  gentian  root  (Gentian  lutea)  and  burdock  root  (Arctium 
lappa). 
Formulas 
Gypsum Combination (Shi  gao  tang);  Gentiana combination 
(Long dan xie  gan  tang);  Forsythia and Rhubarb Combination 
(Liang  ge  san),  used  to  clear  Heat  from  the  Upper  and  Middle 
Warmers while  promoting bowel  movement;  and  Coptis and 
Scute Combination (Huang lian  jie  du  tang). 
Deficient  Heat:  Characteristic  of Yin  Deficiency,  the  principle  is  to 
tonify Yin  and clear the Deficient Heat.  Q!lite often these  people show 
a greater than average  resistance to antibiotic therapy, which  makes  their 
infections  particularly troublesome  to  treat.  Not only is  plenty of sleep 
and rest imperative, but they require more neutral to cool-natured tonics, 
either  alone  or in  judicious  combination  with  Heat-clearing  herbs  for 
effective  treatment.  In  this  case  you  want  to  tonify  the  Yin  with 
appropriate Yin tonics, such as  Chinese ophiopogon root (Ophiopogon 
japonicus),  lycium  berries  (Lycium  chinensis),  unprepared  Rehmannia 
glutinosa (Sheng Di Huang) and asparagus root (Tian Men Dong). Milder 
Qi  tonics  with  Yin  nourishing  properties  can  also  be  used,  such  as 
polygonatum  (solomon's  seal  root). 
In Western  herbalism  nutritive  demulcent  or emollient  herbs  are 
employed  such  as  marshmallow  root  (Althea  officinalis),  alfalfa  syrup 
in a base ofblackstrap molasses and honey, evening primrose oil, slippery 
elm bark (Ulmus fulva),  Iceland moss (Chondrus crispus), usnea (Usnea 
barbata) or comfrey root (Symphytum officinalis). Ayurvedic  herbs and 
formulas,  such  as  Shilajit  (a  type  of mineral-rich  pitch  secreted  from 
certain  rocks  in the Himalayan  mountains), Chyavanprash- a complex 
formula  of over 40  herbs with at  least 50% Amla (Emblic myrobalans), 
and Shatavari (Asparagus racemosa) are specifically used to clear Deficient 
Heat. 
Formula  Anemarrhena,  Phellodendron  and  Rehmannia 
Combination  (Zhi  bai  di  huang tang). 
SUMMARY OF  HOT AND COLD SYNDROMES 
Cold  Hot 
Preference  Prefers  warmth  Prefers  coolness 
Thirst  Less  thirst  More  thirst 
Complexion  Pale  Ruddy or flushed 
Extremities  Cold  Hot 
Stool  Loose  Dry or Constipated 
Urination  Clear,  long  Deep  colored,  scanty 
Vitality  Low  High, Anxious 
Tongue  Pale,  white  coat  Red,  yellow  coat 
Pulse  Slower  than 60  80  or more  beats  per 
beats  per  minute  minute 
Difficulties in  Determining Cold and  Heat Syndromes 
As  with  all  conditions,  it  is  not  uncommon  for  there  to  be  a 
combination  of both  pathologic  Cold  and  Heat  simultaneously.  It is 
logically impossible  for  Cold  and  Heat  to  be  in the  same  physical  area 
of the body.  In  fac't,  a noticeable presence  of either Cold  or Heat likely 
indicates  the  presence  of the  opposite  in  another  bodily  area.  With 
combined  Hot and  Cold  syndromes,  treat  that which  is  most severe  as 
the  primary condition. 
estfJ 
105 
This  situation  of mixed  symptoms  is  commonly  seen  in  clinical 
practice.  In  such  cases,  it  is  best  to  combine  the  appropriate  formulas 
and  herbs  to  treat  the specific symptoms  involved. 
Heat  in  the  Upper  Warmer  and  Cold  in  the  Lower  Warmer: 
Symptoms may include conjunctivitis, sore throat, toothache, headache, 
feverish  feelings  in  the  head  and  chest,  sour  and  putrid vomitus,  with 
cold  spasmodic  pains  in  the  stomach,  waist  and  legs  with  loose  stool 
and clear urine. Depending on the nature and severity of the symptoms, 
either emphasize clearing Heat in the Upper Warmer, or tonifying Yang 
Deficiency and  digestion  in  the  Lower Warmer. 
Cold  in  the  Upper  Warmer  and  Heat  in  the  Lower  Warmer: 
Symptoms  include  pale  face  and lips,  clear or white  runny nasal  mucus 
or  phlegm  in  the  Lungs,  Bladder  or  vaginal  infections,  bleeding  or 
hemorrhoids.  In  this  case,  clear  Heat  from  the  Lower  Warmer,  vitalize 
and  build  Blood  and  Q! and  clear  Dampness  from  the  Upper Warmer 
with warming  Phlegm-dissolving  herbs. 
Cold  in  the  Middle Warmer  with  Heat  in  the  Lower  Warmer: 
Symptoms  include  cold  stomach  pains,  clear,  watery  vomitus,  hiccup 
with dry stool or constipation, frequent passing of dark or blood-tinged 
urine,  leukorrhea  and  painful  genitals.  Here  we  may  have  a  condition 
where  Heat  congestion  in  the  Lower  Warmer  causes  Cold  congestion 
and indigestion in the Middle Warmer (Stomach). The treatment principle 
is  to clear Heat from  the lower abdomen and at the same time warm the 
digestion. 
External Cold and Internal Heat: Symptoms include: Minor chills, 
sore,  swollen  throat,  thick yellowish  phlegm,  floating  pulse with  Cold 
cramping abdominal  pains,  loose  stools,  early  morning diarrhea,  clear, 
long  urine  and  white  and  greasy  tongue  coat.  With  External  Cold  and 
Internal  Heat we  need  to Warm  the Exterior and  clear  Internal  Heat. 
External Heat and Internal Cold: Symptoms include: clear, copious 
or  scanty  and  frequent  urination,  loose  stools  or  diarrhea,  sluggish 
digestion,  flush,  red  skin  eruptions or sore  throat.  Clear  External  Heat 
and use mildly supportive herbs  for  the Interior.  Only after all  External 
symptoms  have  been  resolved  can  we  move  aggressively  to  warm  the 
Interior. 
DEFICIENCY AND  EXCESS 
Deficiency and Excess tell about the patient's strength and weakness. 
An individual who  is  Deficient tends  to  have  a lowered  immune system 
and sensitivity to  External pathogenic factors.  For these,  the Deficiency 
assumes a chronic predisposition with hyper-sensitivity to stress, climate 
~ 
xo6 
and  foods  as  the  primary acute  manifestation.  Further,  patients whose 
symptoms emanate from  a pattern of Deficiency generally take a longer 
time  to  recover. 
On the other hand, Excess  patients may develop dangerously acute 
symptomatic  reactions  to  stress,  climate  and  foods.  Considering  that 
such  acute  External  reactions  constitute  an  attempt  on  the  part  of the 
body to eliminate the toxic Excess,  too much elimination all at once can 
overload and cause vital eliminative systems to malfunction, such as  the 
Liver  and  Kidneys.  On  a  more  long-term  chronic  level,  the  Heart  is 
overworked  which  can  lead  to  heart  failure.  In  general,  Excess  patterns 
are  easier  to  treat  because  Excess  is  easily  eliminated  through  fasting, 
vegetable  diet  and  detoxifying  herbs. 
Many of the  formulas  and  treatments  have  already been  discussed 
in  previous  sections  of Internal  Excess  and  Internal  Deficiency. 
Deficiency 
A state of Deficiency can include a lack of Q!,  Blood, Yin, Yang  or 
Essence.  Tonic  herbs  and  formulas  are  indicated  for  each  of these 
deficiencies.  Many  have  been  previously  presented  in  the  section  on 
Internal  Deficiency. 
Formulas 
Q!  Deficiency:  Four Major Herbs (Si  jun zi  tang). 
Blood  Deficiency:  Dang Gui Four (Si  wu  tang). 
Q!  and Blood  Deficiency:  Eight Precious Herbs 
Combination (Ba  zhen  Tang). 
Q!,  Blood  and Yin  Deficiency:  Ginseng and Dang Gui Ten 
Combination (Shi  quan  da  bu  tang). 
Collapsed Q!,  and Blood  Deficiency:  Ginseng and Astragalus 
Combination (Bu  zhong yi  qi  tang). 
Yang  Deficiency: Vitality Combination (Zhen  wu  tang)  and 
Rehmannia Eight Combination (Ba  wei  di  huang tang)  for 
Spleen  and  Kidney Yang  Deficiency. 
Yin  Deficiency:  Rehmannia Six (Liu  wei  di  huang  tang), 
Anemarrhena,  Phellodendron and Rehmannia Combination 
(Zhi  bai  di  huang  tang)  and  Sweet Wormwood  and Tortoise 
Shell  Combination (Q!ng  hao  bie  jia  tang). 
Ayurvedic  herbs  used  include  shatavari  (Asparagus  racemosa)  for 
Blood,  Yin  and  hormonal  Deficiencies,  ashwagandha  (Withania 
somnifera)  for  Q! and Yang  Deficiency,  shilajit for Yin  Deficiency and 
Chyavanprash  for  general  Deficiency of all  systems. 
ed 
107 
Western  herbs  include bitter tonics  taken  before  meals  to  improve 
appetite and digestion, and herbal preparations made with a base of raw 
sugar,  blackstrap  molasses,  barley malt and  honey.  A Qi and Yin  tonic 
syrup is  made with a combination of equal parts Iceland moss (Cetraria 
islandica) and Irish moss (Chondrus crispus). Slippery elm gruel (Ulmus 
fulva)  is  made  by combining  slippery  elm  bark  powder,  grated  ginger 
root and  honey (or barley malt syrup) with cow's or goat's  milk. This is 
a rehabilitation food that is served as a warm porridge. American ginseng 
(Panax  quinquefolium),  is  generally  considered  a Yin  tonic,  but it  also 
has  some  Blood  and  Qi tonic  properties.  It can  be  decocted  and  made 
into a syrup using barley malt, maple or rice syrup. The powder can also 
be combined with honey or barley malt syrup and taken  in teaspoonful 
doses.  A Yin  and  Blood  tonic is  Comfrey Mucilage  made with  comfrey 
root (Symphytum  officinalis),  honey and glycerine. 
Excess 
Excess  represents toxic stagnation which can  include stagnation of 
Qi,  Blood,  Fluids,  Cold  and  food.  Consider  herbs  and  formulas  that 
remove  stagnation,  detoxify,  eliminate  and  clear  Heat  (alteratives, 
cholagogues,  purgatives),  as  well  as  herbs  and  formulas  that  promote 
the circulation ofQi (carminatives and digestives) and Blood Regulation 
(  emmenagogues ). 
Toxicity  is  anything  that  the  body-mind  is  unable  to  use  or is  no 
longer  needed.  There  can  be  physical  toxins  from  food,  air  and  water, 
and  mental  toxins  that  are  generated  hormonally  and  through  other 
subtle  internal  secretions  as  a result of psychological  stress. 
The  Five  Stagnations  described  above  are  listed  according  to  their 
accumulation  in the Triple Warmer or "three jiaos". The Triple warmer 
is  an  Organ  function  representing  the  coordination  and  functional 
activities  of the  three  major  areas  of the  body.  The  Upper  Warmer  is 
located  from  the top of the head  to the sternum, the Middle Warmer is 
situated  from  base  of the  sternum to  the  navel,  and  the  Lower Warmer 
includes  the area  from  the  navel  down. 
Five Stagnations 
1.  Q! Stagnation 
In  general,  Q!  stagnation  is  characterized  by  pains  that  move  or 
come  and  go,  while  the  pulse  is  similar  to  Blood  Stagnation.  It can  be 
"difficult"  or "choppy"  (thready,  slow  and  short,  entering  and  exiting 
with difficulty), "knotted" (slower than 60 BPM with occasional irregular 
pauses), "accelerated" or rapid (faster than 80 BPM with irregular pauses). 
a)  Upper Warmer:  Emotional  and  mental  symptoms,  depression, 
~ 
108 
hysteria,  headaches,  dizziness,  vertigo,  chest  pains  that change  location 
or recur  irregularly. 
b)  Middle Warmer:  Belching,  gas,  tight  stomach,  full  feeling  in 
the  abdomen  and  pains  that  move  or come and  go. 
c)  Lower  Warmer:  Stiffness,  heaviness,  tightness  in  the  lower 
abdomen  and  lower  extremities,  pains  that move  or come  and go. 
Formulas:  Bupleurum and Peony Combination Oia  wei  xiao yao  san) 
and Bupleurum and Chih shih Formula (Si  ni san or Frigid Extremities 
Powder). 
2.  Blood Stagnation 
The pulse can feel  "difficult" or "choppy", "knotted", "accelerated" 
or  rapid.  The  tongue  appears  purplish  with  purple  maculae  especially 
on  the  sides  of the  tongue. There  are  sharp,  intractable  pains  anywhere 
in  the  body,  perhaps  as  a  consequence  of a  trauma  or  operation. 
Degenerated  spinal  disks  and  scar  tissue  are  also  considered  Blood 
Stagnation. Older people can have liver spots on the skin or varicosities. 
a)  Upper  Warmer:  Discoloration,  venous  protrusions,  blueness, 
heaviness of the head and arms. Other symptoms include a heavy feeling 
in the head,  neck  and  shoulders, pains, angina, congestive heart failure, 
TB,  lung  congestion,  breast  lumps or bleeding in the lungs  called  "dry 
blood". 
b)  Middle Warmer:  Lumps  and tight,  sharply painful areas  in the 
abdomen. 
c)  Lower Warmer: the lower abdomen may have  noticeable lumps, 
often  associated  in  women  with  gynecological  problems  such  as  cysts 
and  fibroids. 
Formulas 
Dang Gui Four (Si  wu  tang)  and  Cinnamon and Poria 
Combination (Gui  zhi  fu  ling  tang). 
In  Ayurvedic  medicine  a  useful  preparation  given  for  Blood 
stagnation  is  Guggul  (Commiphora  mukul).  It is  prepared  from  the 
resin  of a  species  of myrrh  and  is  particularly  indicated  for  increased 
bodily stiffness,  arthritis  and  rheumatic  complaints.  In Ayurveda  these 
are  associated  with  symptoms  of aging  and  described  as  a tendency for 
the body to            toxins calledAma. Today Ama is generally equated 
with  the  accumulation  of cholesterol  and  high  blood  lipids  which 
gradually  impair circulation. 
 
109 
3.  Fluid Stagnation 
The tongue is  swollen, there is generalized edema, especially on the 
face,  leukorrhea, enlarged glands or nodules and the pulse feels  slippery, 
or rolling. Fluid stagnation is often associated with Q! deficiency or low 
energy. 
a) Upper Warmer: Edema, Dampness of the head, chest, sinus and 
nasal  drainage,  cough  with  phlegm,  exceptionally  wet  tongue  with 
scalloped  edges,  pericarditis,  pleurisy, Fluid stagnation in the brain and 
breast  lumps. 
b) Middle Warmer: swollen abdomen (pot belly), watery or gurgling 
sounds  in the abdomen and  ascites. 
c)  Lower Warmer:  Edema,  pitting,  Dampness  in  the  lower  pelvic 
area  (such  as  leukorrhea,  and  enlarged  buttocks),  fibroids  and  cysts. 
Cancer  is  also  thought  to  be  in  part due  to  Fluid  stagnation. 
Formulas 
For Removing Phlegm Stagnation: Citrus and Pinellia 
Combination  (Er  chen  tang or Two  Cured  Decoction). 
For Removing Damp Stagnation:  Poria  Five  Herbs formula 
(Wu  ling san). 
4.  Cold Stagnation 
Symptoms include generalized feeling of coldness, cold extremities, 
cold  phobia,  the  complexion  and  tongue  are  pale  and  the pulse  is  slow 
(less  than 60  BPM). 
a)  Upper Warmer: coldness of the head, arms, chest and back, pale 
complexion. 
b)  Middle Warmer:  cold  digestion,  bloating and  anorexia. 
c)  Lower Warmer: coldness of the extremities, impotence, frigidity, 
diarrhea,  gas  and  bloating. 
Formulas 
Aconite, Ginger and Licorice Combination (Si  ni  tang)  and 
Aconite, Ginseng and Ginger Combination (Fu  zi  li  zhong 
tang). 
5.  Food Stagnation 
Generally  Phlegm  and  food  stagnate  in  the  Middle  or  Lower 
Warmers. The abdomen and pulse feel  large and full, the pulse is slippery 
or gliding, and the tongue is  greasy, swollen,  perhaps with a thick yellow 
or white  coat. 
110 
a)  Middle  Warmer:  greasy  coated  tongue,  epigastric  spasms  and 
abdominal  fullness. 
Formulas 
For Removing Middle Warmer Food Stagnation:  Citrus and 
Crataegus Formula (Preserve  Harmony Pill  or Bao  he wan). 
For Removing Lower Warmer bowel  stagnation with 
constipation: Major Rhubarb Combination (Da  cheng qi 
tang);  Minor Rhubarb Combination (Xiao  cheng qi  tang);  and 
Rhubarb and Mirabilitum Combination (Tiao wei  cheng qi 
tang,  or Stomach  Regulating  Purgative  Decoction). 
In  addition,  detoxifying  formulas  without specific  laxative  effects 
such  as  Coptis and  Scute  Combination (Huang  lian  jie  du  tang)  can 
also  be  considered. 
In  Ayurveda  medicine,  Triphala  is  used  to  clear  stagnation  of the 
Middle and Lower Warmers. It is  the most commonly used and valuable 
of all  traditional Ayurvedic  preparations. It consists of three fruits with 
mildly  cleansing  and  strengthening properties.  Each  fruit  is  capable  of 
eliminating  an  Excess  of each  of the  three  corresponding  Humours 
(Vata,  Pitta  and  Kapha).  Beleric  myrobalan  eliminates  excess  Water, 
benefiting the heart, circulation and lungs; Chebulic myrobalan eliminates 
excess Air which benefits the intestines, lungs and nervous system; Emblic 
myrobalan (amla)  regulates  Fire and is  the second highest known source 
of natural  vitamin  C  next  to  acerola  berries. 
A  further  unique  aspect  of this  important  substance  is  that  the 
vitamin C in amla does  not dissipate either under high heat or reasonable 
aging. This is  because it is  bound up with certain tannins.  Besides being 
detoxifying,  especially  to  the liver,  amla  is  also  highly nutritious. With 
each  of the three substances in Triphala assigned  to balance each  of the 
Three  Humours,  Triphala  itself  is  considered  balancing  to  all  three 
humours  and  safe  to  take  year-round  for  eliminating all  excesses  while 
imparting strength to the entire gastrointestinal tract. It is  the safest and 
best  mild  purgative to  take  on a regular basis  and will  cause  no laxative 
dependency. 
Western  herbs  include  detoxifying  and  alterative  herbs  such  as 
burdock  root  (Arctium  lappa),  dandelion  root  (Taraxacum  off.), 
sarsaparilla (Smilax off.), chaparral (Larrea divaricata); purgative or laxative 
herbs  such  as  rhubarb  root  (Rheum  palmatum),  buckthorne  bark 
(Rhamnus cathartica), cascara  bark (Cascara sagrada);  Blood moving or 
emmenagogue herbs such as wild ginger (Asarum canadense),  blue cohosh 
(Caulophyllum  thalictroides),  motherwort (Leonurus cardiaca);  and Qi 
III 
regulating carminative herbs such as  green citrus peel (Citrus reticulata) 
and  ginger  root (Zingiberis  off.). 
Overall:  Qj Stagnation 
This  is  called  the "mother of all  stagnations".  It is  usually caused 
by  a  disharmony  of the  Seven  Emotions  {see  Chapter 8  for  a  detailed 
discussion  of these).  · 
Organ  Vice  Virtue 
Liver  anger,  frustration  benevolence,  forgiveness, 
esteem,  respect 
Heart  over  excitement  (over  achieving)  compassion,  care  for  one's 
self 
Lung  grief,  sadness  conscientiousness, 
correctness, 
feeling  good  about  one's  self 
Spleen  obsession,  over  thinking  empathy,  centeredness 
Kidney  fear,  paranoia,  worry  courage,  wisdom 
In ancient times,  part of a physician's job was  to  help change vices 
into virtues. This was called "culturing the virtue", and healing occurred 
when the vices were changed to their corresponding virtues. Taoism,  the 
underlying  philosophy  of Traditional  Chinese  Medicine,  also  focused 
on changing personalities. The Seven  Emotions- fear,  anxiety,  pleasure, 
anger,  sympathy,  fright  and  sadness - were  all  considered  the  main  part 
of Chinese medicine until the early 1800's.  During the Han dynasty the 
Five  Elements  were  used  to  transform  the  emotions,  and  the  famous 
clinician, Sun  Szu  Miao,  used  one  Emotion  to  overcome  another. 
Formulas 
For treating stagnation diseases  affecting all  three "jiaos" 
(Triple Warmer)  caused  by the Seven  Emotions:  Citrus and 
Perilla Combination (Fen  xin  qi  yin). 
For Removing all  Five  Stagnations: Stagnation Relieving Pills 
{Yue  qu  wan). 
YINANDYANG 
Yin and Yang are a summation of the Eight Principles. They include 
Yang  Excess,  Yang  Deficiency,  Yin  Excess  and  Yin  Deficiency  and  are 
defined  and  treated  as  follows. 
112 
Yang Excess: This the same as  Excess  Heat with symptoms of high fever, 
restlessness,  red complexion, loud voice, aggressive actions, strong odors, 
yellow  discharges,  rapid  pulse  and  hypertension,  for  instance.  Herbs 
that  detoxify,  drain  Fire  and  Heat  and  promote  bowel  movements  are 
most useful here. These can include the formulas and herbs given earlier 
under the categories  Internal  Heat and  External  Heat. 
Yang Deficiency: This manifests symptoms of lethargy, coldness, edema, 
poor  digestion,  lower  back  pain,  the  type  of constipation  caused  by 
weak  peristaltic  motion, and  lack  of libido.  Here  there  is  a lack  of heat 
and activity to perform adequate functions in the body. This is  the same 
as  the  category  of Internal  Cold.  Refer  to  that  section  for  herbs  and 
formulas. 
Yin Excess: This  is  the same as  Internal Dampness described  under the 
Pernicious Influences. These imbalances  include symptoms of excessive 
fluid  retention,  lethargy,  a  plump  or  swollen  appearance  and  overall 
signs  of Dampness,  and  yet  these  people  may  have  adequate  energy. 
Spicy,  warm-natured  herbs,  such  as  ginger  (Gan Jiang)  and  cinnamon 
(Rou Gui), and diuretics, such as  Fu  Ling mushrooms, can help promote 
the elimination  of excess  water  in  such cases. 
Yin  Deficiency:  This  is  the  same  as  the  category  Deficient  Heat 
mentioned earlier. These diseases  involve emaciation and weakness with 
wasting  Heat  symptoms,  termed  "false  Yang".  Such  individuals  are 
nutritionally  depleted  to  the  point  that  they  begin  to  manifest  false 
Heat  symptoms,  but  in  the  context  of Deficiency  rather  than  Excess. 
For  instance,  an  individual  who  is  emaciated,  runs  on  nervous  energy, 
talks fast but peters out quickly, sleeps poorly, and has little stamina and 
low  resistance  is  experiencing  Empty Yin,  or Yin  Deficiency.  Refer  to 
that category  for  herbs  and  formulas  to  treat  this  condition. 
COMBINATIONS  OF PATTERNS 
Obviously there can be combinations of more than one imbalance. 
Some  examples  of these would  be: 
External-Excess-Heat:.  Skin  eruptions,  rashes,  boils,  eczema,  strong  body 
odor,  possibly  heavy  or  no  sweating,  restless  sleep,  anxiety,  mucus  is 
yellowish,  or even  red  tinged  with  blood,  breathing is  loud  and  strong, 
pulse  is  floating,  rapid,  full  and/or  tense,  urination  is  scanty,  darker 
colored,  tends  to  be  constipated or have  diarrhea.  If they have  a fever  it 
tends  to  be  high.  This  is  "Yang within Yang". 
~ 
IIJ 
Therapeutic principle:  clear External Heat, eliminate toxins, dry upper and 
lower  Damp  Heat.  The  herbal  properties  should  be  cool  or  cold, 
emphasizing the  use  of cooling diaphoretics,  antispasmodics,  diuretics, 
nervines, expectorants, antipyretics, alteratives, febrifuges,  purgatives and 
astringents. 
Formulas 
Lonicera  and  Forsythia  combination (Yin  qiao  san). 
Western  herbalism  gives  detoxifying  and  eliminative diaphoretic 
Heat clearing  herbs. 
External-Excess-Cold:  Cold, stiff, slow moving, lowered immunity, aversion 
to Cold, Wind and Damp, lack of sweating, lower fevers  with a tendency 
towards chills, complexion is pale, puffy and swollen, tends to drowsiness 
and  sleepiness,  mucus  is  clear or cloudy white,  breathing is  strong  and 
labored,  tendency  towards  frequent  urination  which  is  light  colored, 
stool  is  normal to loose,  the pulse is  floating and full  and  the tongue is 
pale,  scalloped,  moist with  a white  coat. 
Therapeutic  Principle:  Release  Cold  Exterior  and  dry  Damp,  employing 
herbs  that  have  diuretic,  warming,  stimulant,  expectorant,  carminative 
and  astringent  properties. 
Formulas 
Ephedra  Decoction (Ma  Huang tang)  and  Minor Blue  Dragon 
Combination (Xiao  qing  long tang)  for  acute  upper  respiratory 
conditions. 
Ayurvedic  and Western  compounds  previously  described  can  also 
be  used.  These  include Trikatu  Formula,  Sito  Paladi  and  Composition 
Powder. 
External-Deficient-Heat: A frailer individual, who is  thin, restless, anxious, 
frequent mood changes, low immunity, aversion to heat and wind, thirst, 
spontaneous  perspiration,  night  sweats,  low  grade  fever,  restless  sleep, 
acute  or  chronic  recurring  sore  throats,  urination  is  thin,  yellowish, 
possible  recurring  bladder  infections,  stool  is  watery,  slightly yellowish 
or  dry  and  constipated,  the  pulse  is  floating,  fast,  thin,  weak  and  the 
tongue is  reddish body with a thin or shiny coat. This is  a Yin Deficient 
condition. 
Therapeutic Principle:  Clear External Deficient Heat, strengthen immunity 
and  moisten  Dryness.  Use  herbal  formulas  that  are  cool,  nourishing, 
nutritive  tonics. 
Formulas 
Decoction of Polygonatum Rhizome Oia  jian wei  zhu  tang). 
Ayurvedic medicine uses Shatavari (asparagus racemosa) combined 
with ghee, while Western  herbalism gives  Comfrey mucilage (described 
earlier). 
External-Deficient-Cold:  Cold,  aversion  to  wind,  frail,  anemic,  pale 
complexion,  thin,  insecure,  sad  and  depressed,  low  immunity,  clear  or 
whitish  mucus,  no  thirst,  acute  conditions  that  may  arise  quickly  but 
with  mild  or subnormal  fevers  and  chills,  shallow breath,  urination  is 
clear, copious and frequent,  stool is  loose,  tending to sleep a lot.  Pulse is 
floating,  slow  and  thin and  the  tongue  is  pale,  moist,  scalloped  with  a 
thin, white  coat. 
Therapeutic Principle:  Warm Coldness, tonify Qi and the immune system. 
Use  warming  surface  relieving  diaphoretics,  warming  stimulants  and 
tonics. 
Formulas 
Jade Screen  (Yu  ping  feng  san);  Cinnamon Combination (Gui 
zhi  tang)  for  acute  upper  respiratory conditions;  Minor 
Bupleurum Combination (Xiao  chai  hu tang);  and  Bupleurum 
and Cinnamon Combination (Gui  zhi  chai  hu  tang). 
Ayurvedic  medicine  gives  Sito  Paladi  or  Chyavanprash,  while 
Western  herbalism  uses  a  tea  of slippery  elm,  marshmallow  root, 
cinnamon,  ginger  and  honey,  or garlic  tea  with  honey. 
lntemal-Cold-Deficienry:  A  frail  individual  with  Coldness,  timidity,  low 
energy  characterized  by  symptoms  of  hypo-thyroidism  or  hypo-
adrenalism,  pale complexion, anemic, lack of thirst, recurring colds and 
flu,  sleeps easily,  thin, clear mucus discharges, lack of thirst, lips are pale 
and  wet,  breathing  is  shallow  and  weak,  low  libido,  aching  lower  back 
and  joints, menstruation is  pale, very light, late or irregular, urination is 
frequent  and  copious, possibly with  nighttime urination, stool  tends  to 
be light and loose, pulse is  hollow, slow and weak, tongue is pale, scalloped 
and  wet,  with  a  thin  white  coat.  This  is  "Yin  within  Yin",  or  a  Cold 
condition. 
115 
Therapeutic principle: Warm Internal Cold and tonifY Q! and the immune 
system  using warming  diaphoretics,  Q!  and Yang  tonics  and  diuretics. 
Formulas 
Aconite,  Ginseng and  Ginger (Fu  zi  li  zhong  tang);  Aconite, 
Ginseng and  Licorice  (Si  ni  tang);  Ginseng and  Ginger 
combination (Li  zhong tang);  and  Rehmannia  Eight  (Ba  wei  di 
huang  tang). 
In  Ayurvedic  medicine  Chyavanprash  is  given,  a  complex 
preparation comprised of 50% amla  fruits  and approximately 48  herbs, 
prepared  with  honey,  raw  sugar  and  ghee.  It can  be  taken  as  a paste  in 
warm  milk.  Trikatu  is  also  used  for  Coldness  and  to  warm  digestion, 
while  Sito Paladi  is  used  for  colds  and  flu. 
Western  herbalism  gives  alfalfa  prepared  into a  syrup  with  honey 
and  molasses  (a  similar  product  is  sold  in  Homeopathic  pharmacies, 
called  "Alfalco").  Further,  Composition  Powder  is  given  for  acute 
problems,  and  a  paste  of freshly  mashed  garlic  cloves  and  honey  or 
barley malt  syrup can  be  given  in  teaspoon  doses  several  times  daily as 
needed. 
Internal-Cold-Excess:  Presents  symptoms  of Coldness,  pale  complexion, 
flacidity,  severe edema, slower moving, melancholic, alternating moods, 
aversion  to  cold and dampness,  poor digestion with  a tendency towards 
gas  and bloating, a tendency towards  clear or white mucus and allergies, 
cold extremities, short menstrual cycle,  slow bleeding perhaps with dull 
pains, urination is  copious, light colored, possible nighttime urination, 
stool  is  loose,  pulse  is  deeper,  slow  and  slippery  or  gliding.  This  is 
Excess  Cold  Dampness  that can lead  to Yang  Deficiency. 
Therapeutic principle: Warm Internal Cold, warm digestion, clear Dampness, 
tonifY Yang  with  the  herbal  properties of Internal warming  stimulants, 
carminatives, diuretics  and Yang  and  Q!  tonics. 
Formulas 
Aconite,  Ginger and  Licorice  Combination  (Si  ni  tang); 
Vitality Combination (Zhen wu  tang);  and Ginseng and 
Ginger  Combination (Li  zhong tang)  possibly with  prepared 
aconite  (Fu  Zi)  and  cinnamon bark (Rou  Gui). 
Ayurvedic medicine uses  Chyavanprash, Trikatu  or Hingashtak, 
while Western  herbalism  might  prescribe  a tea  of prickly ash,  angelica, 
lovage,  elecampane,  ginger,  cinnamon and  parsley root. 
~ 
n6 
Internal-Heat-Excess:  Tendency  towards  constipation,  with  a  possible 
tendency to have blood in the stool, urine, vomit, nasal secretions, strong 
body odors, aversion to heat, irritable and aggressive temperament, active, 
energetic, restless with a tendency towards insomnia, loud, commanding 
voice,  strong appetite, thirst, heavy coarse breathing, a tendency towards 
infections  and  inflammations,  strong  sexual  drive,  eyes  may  be  yellow 
or  reddish  colored,  lips  dry  and  cracked,  heavy  menses,  possibly  early 
and long lasting, urination is dark colored, stool is  either hard and solid 
or possibly constipated, or hot, yellowish diarrhea. This is  a "Yang Heat" 
condition. 
Therapeutic  Principle:  Clear  Internal  Excess  Heat,  eliminate  toxins  and 
cool  the  Blood  and  Liver.  Use  herbal  formulas  which  are  cooling 
alteratives,  cholagogues  and  purgatives. 
Formulas 
Coptis and Scute Combination (Huang Iian  jie  du  tang); 
White Tiger Decoction (Bai  hu  tang);  Major Rhubarb 
Combination (Da  cheng qi  tang);  Minor Rhubarb 
Combination (Xiao  cheng qi  tang);  Rhubarb and Mirabilitum 
Combination (Tiao  wei  cheng  qi  tang). 
Ayurvedic  herbalism  uses  Triphala,  Guggul  or Castor oil,  while 
Western  herbalism  gives  blood  purifying  formulas  such  as  equal  parts 
dandelion root, sarsaparilla root, burdock root, barberry root, red clover, 
sassafras  bark,  prickly  ash  bark,  and  a  half part  each  of lobelia  and 
gmger. 
Internal-Heat-Deficienry:  Symptoms of Coldness, paleness and Deficiency, 
low  immunity,  thin  constitution,  restlessness,  lack  of stamina,  Heat 
sensations  but with  an  overall  tendency  to  feel  cold  with  a consequent 
aversion to heat, cold and wind, thirst, night sweats, restless sleep, dryness, 
weak  digestion,  low  grade  infections,  burning  sensation  in  the  palms, 
soles of the feet  or chest,  menstruation is  light but short, some pain but 
irregular,  pulse  is  rapid,  thready  and  weak,  tongue  is  red  with  a  thin 
body,  lack  of coat and  is  shiny.  This  is  a Yin  Deficient condition. 
Therapeutic principle:  Clear Deficient Heat, nourish and moisten Yin using 
herbal  properties  of Yin  tonics,  demulcents,  alteratives,  nervines  and 
nutritive  tonics. 
Formulas 
Rehmannia Six (Liu  wei  di  huang wan);  Sweet Wormwood and 
Tortoise Shell  Formula (Qing hao  bie  jia  tang);  and 
Anemarrhena, Phellodendron and Rehmannia Combination 
(Zhi  bai  di  huang tang). 
Ayurvedic  herbalism  gives  Shatavari  (Asparagus  racemosa) 
combined with ghee, while Western  herbalism  uses  Comfrey mucilage. 
PATTERNS  THAT  CHANGE 
The various syndromes can transform into each other. For example, 
either External-Internal, Hot-Cold, Excess-Deficient can change into each 
other  depending  upon  the  stage  of the  disease.  When  an  Internal 
syndrome changes to an External one, it is considered a positive direction 
because  the  Internal  toxins  of the  body are  being eliminated  from  the 
deeper layers.  However,  an External  disease changing to an Internal one 
is  a  negative  direction  reflecting  a worsening  of the  overall  condition. 
Thus,  it is  important to  treat  the current condition  accurately. 
SUMMARY OF FORMULAS  FOR THE EIGHT PRINCIPLES 
External-Excess-Heat 
External-Excess-Cold 
External-Deficient-Heat 
External-Deficient-Cold 
Internal-Deficient-Cold 
Internal-Excess-Cold 
Internal-Excess-Heat 
~ 
n8 
Lonicera  and  Forsythia 
Ephedra  Decoction 
Minor  Blue  Dragon 
Decoction  of Polygonatum  Rhizome 
Cinnamon  Combination 
Jade Screen 
Minor  Bupleurum 
Bupleurum and  Cinnamon 
Aconite,  Ginseng  and  Ginger 
Aconite,  Ginseng  and  Licorice 
Ginseng  and  Ginger 
Rehmannia  Eight 
Aconite,  Ginger and  Licorice 
Vitality Combination 
Ginseng  and  Ginger 
Coptis  and  scute 
White Tiger 
Major  Rhubarb 
Internal-Deficient-Heat 
Half ExternalfHalf Internal 
with  Coldness 
with  Excess 
with stagnation 
Yin  Deficiency 
Yang  Deficiency 
Root and Branch 
Minor  Rhubarb 
Rhubarb  and  Mirabilitum 
Anemarrhena  and  Phellodendron 
and  Rehmannia  Six 
Rehmannia  Six 
Sweet Wormwood  and  Tortoise  Shell 
Minor  Bupleurum 
Cinnamon and  Bupleurum 
Minor  Blue  Dragon 
Major  Bupleurum 
Bupleurum  and  Peony 
Bupleurum  and  Chih  Shih 
Bupleurum  and  Citrus 
Rehmannia  Six 
Turtle Shell  Formula 
Restore  the  Left  (Zuo gui  yin) 
Ginseng and  Ophiopogon 
Rehmannia  Eight 
Vitality Combination 
Restore  the  Right  (You  gui  wan  or You  gui  yin) 
Ginger,  Licorice,  Aconite  and  Ginseng 
Dragon  Bone,  Oyster shell,  Ginseng and 
Aconite 
There  often  exists  a  combination  of acute  and  chronic  symptoms 
simultaneously. This is  exemplified by the concept of Root and Branch. 
The  Branch  represents  the  more  superficial  acute  symptoms  while  the 
Root is  the  underlying  Excess  or Deficiency.  Acute  External  conditions 
should be  treated  before treating Internal Deficiencies. An example is  an 
individual  with  Internal  Deficiency  who  develops  acute  symptoms  of 
cold,  fever  or flu.  The cold,  fever  or flu  would  be  considered  the outer 
Branch  symptoms  while  the Internal  Deficiency is  the  Root. 
Generally,  the  principle  of treatment  is  to  treat  the  outer  Branch 
symptoms  either  before  or  at  least  simultaneously  with  the  Internal 
Deficiency.  For this we  can use  Cinnamon Twig Combination (Gui zhi 
tang)  or Jade Screen (Yu  ping feng  san),  which  contains  the tonic herbs 
astragalus  and  atractylodes  alba,  along  with  the  surface  relieving 
Ledebouriella  (Fang  Feng). 
On the other hand, a surface skin rash can be the Branch oflnternal 
Excess  Heat  of the  Liver  with  Lower  Bowel  stagnation.  For  this,  use  a 
ed 
119 
formula  that  combines  both  purgative  properties  through  the  use  of 
rhubarb  root and  Heat clearing  herbs  such  as  phellodendron, gardenia 
bud,  coptis  and/or scutellaria.  Such  a  Damp  Heat  rash  on  the  surface 
will  clear up with Internal clearing herbs.  If,  however,  it is  an acute rash 
suddenly  erupting  such  as  measles,  the  strategy  is  to  quickly  get  it  to 
erupt and  ripen  using warm  surface  relieving  diapho.retics. 
Other  applications  of the  Root  and  Branch  treatment  principle 
involve  the specific disease  syndromes that may include more than one 
Organ  system.  For  instance  PM$  can  be  caused  by  Blood  stagnation 
which is the Branch, while the underlying root may be Liver Q! stagnation. 
Applying  the  principle  of Root and  Branch,  one would  use  herbs  and 
formulas  to  relieve  Blood  stagnation  while  at  the  same  time  using 
formulas  to  relieve  Liver  Q! Stagnation. 
120 
SlX 
THE SiX STAGES of DiSEASE & 
THE FOUR LEVELS  of DiSEASE 
THE SIX STAGES  OF DISEASE 
CAUSED  BY  EXTERNAL COLD 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
"" 
The  theory  of Six  Stages  was  developed  during  the  Han  Dynasty  by 
Chang  Chung-Ching  (AD  142-220).  They  were  first  described  in  his 
Shang  Han  Lun,  (Treatise  On The Treatment  of Acute  Diseases  Caused 
by  Cold),  a  highly  revered  work  regarded  as  one  of the  first  clinical 
manuals  on  the  practice  of Chinese  herbalism.  Each  stage  with  its 
characteristic symptoms describes the progress and treatment of diseases 
caused  by Cold, from  the initial invasion at the three Yang stages  to  the 
subsequent degenerative  consequences  of the  three Yin  stages. 
Over  millennia,  the application of the  principles  and  formulas  of 
the Shang Han Lun has expanded to include a wide range of conditions. 
As  a  result,  the  107  formulas  comprise the  basic  set  that represents  the 
foundation ofboth Traditional Chinese and Japanese-Chinese herbalism 
called  "Kampo". 
It is  especially  poignant  to  realize  that  this  important  work  was 
written  as  a  result  of Chang's  tragic  experience  of losing  three-quarters 
of his family from a  plague.  During that time, he observed the ineffective 
treatment of many of the  herb  doctors  of the time, with  their inability 
to  effectively respond to the changing character of acute disease. A study 
of the principles of the Six Stages  allows  us  to respond  appropriately to 
the often sudden changes associated with External diseases such as colds, 
coughs, allergies, influenza and communicable diseases caused by External 
Cold.  At  a later  period,  the  Four  Levels  of Disease  caused  by  Heat was 
formed  to  better  understand and  treat  more complicated viral  diseases. 
The  Six  Stages  are  as  follows: 
Yang Stages 
Tai  Yang  (Greater Yang) 
Shao Yang  (Lesser  Yang) 
Yang  Ming  (Sunlight Yang) 
Yin Stages 
Tai  Yin  (Greater Yin) 
Shao Yin  (Lesser Yin) 
Jue Yin  (Absolute Yin) 
Ill 
The original purpose of the Six Stages was  to develop  an approach 
to treating External diseases  that tended  to progress from  an acute Yang 
stage  to  a  more degenerative  and  chronic Yin  stage. 
Still another practical application of the Six Stages is in acupuncture. 
For  instance,  the  Small  intestine  meridian,  which  runs  upward  along 
the the arm to the side of the head,  is  called  the Upper Tai Yang,  while 
the  Bladder  meridian,  which  runs  from  the  inner  canthus  of the  eye 
down  the  back  to  the  end  of the  small  toes,  is  called  the  Lower  Tai 
Yang. However, in practice, one seldom uses points on the corresponding 
meridians to actually treat related Organ disharmonies, so the association 
of the  Organ  meridians  with  the  Six  stages  in  acupuncture  is  more 
nominal  than  practical. 
Furthermore, the order of the Six Stages tends to be more theoretical 
than  actual.  Usually  febrile  diseases  begin  with  the Tai  Yang  stage  and 
most  commonly  pass  to  the  Yang  Ming  and  more  rarely  through  the 
Shao  Yang  stage.  This  demonstrates  that  diseases  may  not  necessarily 
follow  the  sequence  described  in  the  Six  Stages.  In  fact,  a  disease  can 
arise in any one of the stages and proceed to any of the others. However, 
it is  considered  more dangerous  if an  acute febrile  disease  progresses  to 
a  deeper  Yin  stage,  while  it  is  a  sign  of improvement  if a  Yin  stage 
disease  moves  to  a more superficial Yang  stage.  This  retracing describes 
what  many Western  herbalists  and  homeopaths  regard  as  the  "healing 
.. '' 
CClSlS  • 
Today  it  is  more  common  to  apply  the  diagnostic  principles, 
treatment  strategies  and  formulas  of the  Six  Stages  to  the  treatment of 
febrile,  acute  diseases.  Chronic and  degenerative  diseases,  on  the  other 
hand,  are  approached  by  other  strategies  such  as  the  Three  Humors, 
Eight  Principles  and  Symptoms Sign  or Zang  Fu  diagnosis. 
THE THREE YANG  STAGES 
TAl YANG  STAGE  (Greater Yang) 
This stage  occurs when  an  External  disease  first  attacks  the body's 
defenses.  Symptoms  are  the  result  of a  superficial  attack  of External 
Wind,  Cold,  Heat and/or Dampness.  They include general  body-aches, 
with  body stiffness,  sweating,  fever  with chills and  possible  headaches 
with  accompanying  neck  and  shoulder  stiffness  characteristic  of the 
early stages  of cold  and  flu. 
Early  symptoms  are  often  described  as  shivers  "up  and  down  the 
spine;"  this  describes  the  Bladder  meridian  that  parallels  the  spinal 
column on the  back,  and  the  Small  Intestine  meridian  that goes  along 
the  outer  arms  to  the  upper back  and  shoulders.  Such  vulnerability  to 
Ill 
External  Evils  will  not occur  if one  is  not already  in  a weakened  state, 
and  one's  pores  (ruled  by  the Wei  Qi  that controls  their  opening  and 
closing) are not able to sufficiently ward off Cold and Damp conditions. 
If we  give  purgatives during this stage, we  weaken  the body from within 
and allow the invading External Pathogens to penetrate deeper. Therefore, 
diaphoretic,  or sweating,  therapy  is  indicated. 
Treatment for  Tai Yang Stage  imbalances 
Principle:  To  induce  diaphoresis  and  to  eliminate  External 
symptoms.  Use  herbs  with  a  spicy-acrid,  light  and  diaphoretic  nature. 
They are generally not boiled; they should be infused in a covered pot to 
retain  their volatile  oils.  Precaution:  Do not sweat  to  exhaustion. 
Formulas 
Generally,  formulas  are  taken  from  one or a combination of 
three  'formula  families'  as  follows: 
Ephedra Decoction (Ma  huang tang) 
Actions:  This  formula  is  a warm  stimulating diaphoretic which 
dispels  External Wind-Cold.  It is  also  anti-asthmatic and  used 
for  individuals with  fever,  colds,  asthma and  upper respiratory 
problems with  Excess  conformation. 
Cinnamon Twig  Combination (Gui  zhi  tang) 
Actions:  This  formula  is  a warming  diaphoretic and  tonic, 
regulating  the constructive or nutritive energy (Ying)  and  the 
immune  system  (Wei).  It is  for  more  Deficient type  individuals 
with Tai  Yang  imbalances. 
Pueraria Combination (Ge  gen  tang) 
Actions:  As  a diaphoretic,  it treats  External Wind-Cold-Damp 
and  is  antispasmodic,  relieving  stiffness  and  pain  of the 
shoulders  and  neck.  While  Ephedra  Decoction  is  for  Excess,  and 
Cinnamon Twig  Combination is  for  a Deficient condition, 
Pueraria  combination  is  for  an  individual with  average 
constitution with  Tai  Yang  imbalance.  It is  also  indicated  for 
shoulder and  neck  stiffness without a cold  or fever. 
Shao Yang Stage  (Lesser Yang) 
This stage  is  characterized  by diseases  that have  symptoms of both 
External  and  Internal,  Excess  and  Deficiency,  Heat  and  Cold.  Such 
symptoms  are  characteristic of diseases  like  malaria  and  typhoid  fevers 
that show alternating heat and chills, and a cyclic recurrence of symptoms. 
Symptoms may tend to be lingering, there may be thirst but no desire to 
drink,  diminished  appetite  or  lack  of appetite,  nausea  and  vomiting, 
~ 
12J 
feeling  of fullness  and  discomfort in the chest,  aching body and  limbs, 
bitter taste in the mouth, dizziness, restlessness, irritability and insomnia. 
The  tongue body may  be  normal  to  red,  the coat  thick,  greasy-white  or 
grey.  The pulse  is  bowstring  or tense. 
This state is a deeper penetration of an External Pathogenic Influence 
where  it  penetrates  to  the  level  of the Gall  Bladder and Triple Warmer 
meridians.  As  the  second  stage,  Shao Yang  may differentiate  itself by  a 
tendency towards the Tai Yang or the Yang Ming stages, with the prevailing 
characteristic of lingering vacillation  or alternation of symptoms being 
the  most  predominant  characterisic;  whichever  stage  it  overlaps  will 
display signs  of that other stage  as  well. 
Reflecting  this,  Shao  Yang  formulas  have  been  adopted  for  the 
treatment  of acute  diseases  that  tend  to  linger  and  recur  such  as 
intermittent  fever,  malaria,  bronchitis,  asthma  and  more  chronic 
conditions.  Because  Shao  Yang  formulas  treat  opposite  complexes 
simultaneously,  they  are  considered  harmonizing  formulas.  The  most 
widely  used  Shao Yang  formula  is: 
Minor Bupleurum (Xiao  chai  hu  tang) 
Actions: This  formula  treats  the  Lesser  Yang  (Xiao  Yang) 
channel,  the Gall  Bladder and Triple Warmer,  harmonizes  and 
regulates  the  Liver  and  Spleen  functions,  and  addresses 
combined  symptoms ofYin-Yang  or External  and  Internal 
simultaneously. 
Other formulas  include: 
Major Bupleurum (Da  chai  hu tang) 
Actions:  It treats  Lesser  Yang  (Xiao  Yang)  channel,  the  Gall 
Bladder,  Excess  conditions,  is  laxative  and  purges  Internal  Heat. 
Bupleurum and Cinnamon Combination (Chai  hu gui  zhi 
tang) 
Actions:  It is  antipyretic,  treats  upper respiratory problems,  is 
carminative, hepatic,  is  neuromuscular for  intercostal  neuralgia, 
headache,  arthralgia,  nephritis  and  pyelitis  and  is  a nervine 
tonic.  This  is  a combination of both Minor Bupleurum 
Combination and  Cinnamon Combination which  makes  it 
particularly useful  when  there  is  more  Coldness  and  Deficiency. 
Bupleurum and Chih shih formula  (Si  ni  san  or Frigid 
Extremities  Powder) 
Actions:  It regulates  the  Liver  and  Spleen  and  eliminates 
Internal  Heat.  This  formula  is  specific  for  a combination of 
stagnation  of Heat in  the  Liver  with  Coldness  in the fingers  and 
toes. 
Bupleurum and Dang Gui Formula (Xiao  yao  san  or 
Rambling  Powder) 
Actions:  This  formula  harmonizes  Liver  and Spleen,  Regulates 
Qi,  tonifies  Blood,  is  anti-depressive,  promotes  digestion,  and 
clears  Heat.  This  formula  is  harmonizing,  relieving  Liver 
stagnation  and  treating  symptoms of moodiness  and  depression. 
It is  particularly useful  for  PMS  and  physical  and  emotional 
symptoms  associated  with  menopause. 
Bupleurum Formula (Yi  gan  san) 
Actions:  This  is  an  antispasmodic formula,  calming Liver Wind 
and  tonifying  Liver  Blood  and  Qi. This  is  used  for  treating 
excitability,  nervousness  and  anger caused  by Liver  stagnation. 
Yang  Ming Stage  (Sunlight Yang) 
This  stage  includes  the  Stomach  and  Large  Intestine  meridians. 
The primary indications are high fever without chills. If there are minor 
chills present, it signifies the struggle of the body attempting to overcome 
an External Pathogenic Influence. Other primary characteristics are high 
fever with a preference for cold drinks and food, tendency to less clothing 
irrespective  of weather  conditions,  extreme  thirst  and  excessive 
perspiration. The tongue body is  red  while  the coat is  yellow.  The pulse 
is rapid and overflowing. In Eight Principles this would also be classified 
as  Internal  Hot Excess. 
Yang  Ming  is  further  subdivided  into  Yang  Ming  Stage  Channel 
Evil  and Yang  Ming Stage  Organ Evil, which  is  considered  more severe. 
Yang  Ming  Stage  Organ  Evil  has  accompanying  constipation  as  a 
definitive  symptom.  Both  stages  require  the  use  of bitter,  cold  and 
purgative  herbs  and  formulas.  Yang  Ming  stage  is  also  associated  in 
Japanese  Kampo  with  the  Five  Stagnations,  which  further  extends  the 
principle  to  include a variety of acute  and  chronic imbalances. 
1.  Abdominal swelling with constipation: Use  rhubarb formulas  such 
as:  Major Rhubarb Combination (Da  cheng  qi  tang). 
Actions:  This formula  is  used  to  purge  Heat from  the Stomach 
and  Intestines  and  relieve  constipation. 
Minor Rhubarb Combination (Xiao  cheng  qi  tang) 
Actions:  A less  drastic  purge  than  Major  Rhubarb 
Combination,  it  removes  Heat from  the Stomach  and  Intestines. 
~ 
125 
2.  High fever with thirst: This is  a Yang  Ming stage imbalance with the 
Heat  originating  in  the  Stomach.  For  this  Q!  level  Heat  stagnation, 
gypsum  formulas  are  indicated  such  as: 
White Tiger Decoction (Bai  hu  tang) 
Actions:  It eliminates  Heat  in  the Q!  (secondary defense)  system 
and  the Yang  Ming channel  and  promotes  the  secretion  of Body 
Fluids. White Tiger  Decoction with  6 grams  of ginseng  added  is 
used  to  support the  righteous  Q!  by  counteracting  the  cold 
energy of gypsum. 
3.  Heat stagnating in the chest with irritability: 
Gardenia and Prepared Soybean  Decoction (Zhi  zi  dou  chi 
tang) 
Actions: This  is  anti-inflammatory,  clears  Heat,  relieves  fever 
and  irritability,  is  a mild  sedative,  relieves  insomnia and 
restlessness  and  a  full  sensation  in the  chest. 
4.  Heat caused  by stagnation of Blood: This  may  include  a variety of 
gynecological symptoms such as fibroids, ovarian cysts and endometriosis. 
Formulas  for  stagnant Blood  include  purgative  formulas  such  as: 
Rhubarb and Moutan Combination (Da  huang  mu clan  pi 
tang) 
Actions:  A laxative,  it clears  stagnant Heat in  the  Intestines, 
reduces  swelling  and  disperses  lumps.  This  is  used  for  lower 
abdominal stagnant Blood  and  gynecological  problems 
especially associated  with  the lower  left  abdomen  (this  is  a 
Kampo  indication  that seems  to  suggest  Blood  Stagnation 
affecting  the descending  colon  and  the left  ovary). 
Persica and Rhubarb Combination (Tao  ho  cheng  chi  tang) 
Actions: This  dispels  Heat and  Blood  stagnation  in  the  Lower 
Warmer.  In  contrast to  the  previous,  this  formula  is  especially 
appropriate  for  problems  in  the  lower  right  abdomen (a  Kampo 
indication  associated  with  Blood  stagnation  affecting  the 
ascending colon  and  the  right ovary). 
Cinnamon and Poria Combination (Gui  zhi  fu  ling wan) 
Actions:  It promotes  blood  and  lymphatic circulation,  thus 
removing  stagnant Blood, and  softens  and  resolves  hard  lumps 
such  as  cysts  and  fibroids.  This  formula  generally improves 
female  health  and  is  commonly used  for  Blood  stagnation with 
symptoms  of fibroids,  infertility and  painful  menstruation. 
~ 
12.6 
Clematis and Stephania Combination (Shu  jing huo xue  tang) 
Actions:  It opens circulation of the channels and  collaterals, 
stimulates  blood  circulation,  removes  Blood  stagnation,  is 
antirheumatic,  removes  Damp  stagnation  and  is  for  stagnant 
Blood  causing  arthritic  and  rheumatic  pain. 
5.  Stagnant Excess Water with irregular urination: Use  diuretics  such as 
Poria Five  Herbs formula  (Wu  ling san). 
Actions: It is diuretic, clears edema, diaphoretic, digestive and strengthens 
the Spleen. 
THE THREE YIN  STAGES 
The Three Yin Stages represent deeper stages of penetration of Cold 
with  Internal  weakness  and  Deficiency.  Because  of this  they  require 
internal  warming  and  tonic  formulas.  Many of these,  such  as  Ginseng 
and Ginger Combination, Vitality Combination and Aconite, Ginger 
and Licorice Combination are  useful  for  all  three  stages. 
Tai  Yin  Stage  (Greater Yin) 
Tai  Yin  refers  to  the  Channels  of the  Spleen  (Lower  Tai  Yin)  and 
Lungs  (Upper Tai  Yin).  Upper Tai  Yin  Lung  symptoms  include  cough, 
asthma,  hemoptysis, sore throat, chest fullness  and pain along the Lung 
channel  including the shoulder and  the  anterior aspect  of the arm. 
Spleen Deficiency includes Deficiency of Qi and Yang with Spleen 
Dampness.  Symptoms  include  belching,  vomiting,  epigastric  pain, 
abdominal  distension,  loose  stool,  jaundice,  fatigue  and  coldness.  The 
tongue body is  pale and  possibly swollen  with scalloped  edges  and very 
wet.  The  pulse will  be  slow,  weak  or soft and  slippery. 
Overall,  the  predominant  symptomology  is  associated  with 
Dampness  caused  by  Spleen  Yang  and  Qi  Deficiency.  This  Dampness 
can be  in  the Lungs  causing congestion, asthma, bronchitis, or it can be 
reflected  in  any  mucus  membrane.  This  can  include  other  symptoms 
such  as  vaginal  discharge,  cloudy urine  and  weeping  eczema. 
Originally, one of the causes leading to the Tai Yin  stage imbalance 
was  the  over-use  of bitter,  cold-natured  herbs  for  treating  the  External 
Yang  stages  of disease.  An excess  of bitter, cold-natured  herbs can  injure 
the Spleen  and  Stomach, subsequently damaging the normal fire  of the 
digestive  organs.  Internal  warming  therapy  is  indicated  to  help  restore 
the  normal  Spleen Yang  and  Qi. 
Formula 
Ginseng and Ginger Combination (Li  zhong wan  or Regulate 
the  Middle  Pill). 
Actions:  It is  tonic,  warming and  tonif}ring  to  Spleen  and 
Stomach Yang,  strengthens the digestion  and  raises  digestive 
metabolism. 
Shao Yin Stage  (Lesser Yin) 
The Shao Yin stage is a still deeper stage of imbalance corresponding 
to  the Kidney and  Heart Organ Channels. The Kidneys  are  considered 
the root, or deepest source, ofYin and Yang  in the body.  Since Kidneys 
include  both  Kidney  Yin  Deficiency  (Hot  pattern)  and  Kidney  Yang 
Deficiency (Cold  pattern), Shao Yin  stage  imbalances  have  both a Cold 
and  Hot pattern with  completely different  treament strategies. 
Shao  Yin  Cold  Pattern:  This  includes  symptoms  of Coldness,  chills, 
aversion  to  cold,  fatigue  and  lethargy,  loose  stools,  aversion  to  cold 
drinks  and  foods  and  preference  for  warm  substances,  lack  of thirst, 
abundant  pale  urine.  The  tongue  is  pale  and  the  pulse  is  deep  and 
thready. 
Formula 
Aconite, Ginger  and  Licorice Combination (Si  ni  tang) 
Actions:  It is  for Yang  exhaustion of the Lesser Yin  (Xiao  Yin) 
stage  and Yang  Deficiency caused  by excessive  perspiration. 
Shao Yin  Heat  Pattern:  This  has  classic  symptoms  of Yin  Deficiency 
with sensations of heat,  fever,  insomnia, dry mouth, thirst,  scanty,  dark 
urine,  red  tongue with  little or no coat and  a thin,  rapid  pulse. 
Formulas 
Coptis  and  Gelatin Combination (Huang lian  e jiao  tang) 
Actions:  It purges  Fire  and  nourishes  the Yin. 
Anemarrhena,  Phellodendron with  Rehmannia  Combination 
(Zhi  bai  di  huang wan) 
Actions:  To  nourish  the Yin  of the  Kidney and  reduce  Deficient 
Fire. 
Jue Yin Stage  (Absolute Yin) 
The  last  Yin  stage  is  indicated  by  thirst,  difficult  urination,  and 
physical collapse. It is associated with the Pericardium and Liver.  Internal 
warming  herbs  and  tonics,  such  as  those  previously described,  are  used 
as  appropriate. There  are  two  forms: 
a}  With  parasite  infection: 
Lower  Warmer  Deficiency  and  Coldness  impairs  the  digestive 
function  and  causes  roundworms  to  travel  upwards  to  warmer  parts  of 
the  digestive  tract. 
Mume Formula (Wu  mei  wan} 
Actions:  It is  a warming  stimulant and  tonic for  the  Internal 
Organs,  tonifies  Qi,  is  anthelmintic and  removes  parasites. 
b)  With  coldness,  headache  and  dry  mouth: 
Evodia Combination (Wu  zhu yu  tang) 
Actions:  It warms  the  Liver  and Stomach  and  is  anti-emetic. 
STAGE 
Tai  Yang 
Greater Yang 
Shao  Yang  Stage 
Lesser Yang 
Sunlight Yang 
(Yang  Ming) 
SUMMARY OF THE SIX STAGES 
SYMPTOMS 
Fever with  chills,  general  body 
aches  &  stiffness,  headaches 
sweating  or  lack  of sweating, 
pulse  is  felt  more  on  the surface 
and  the  tongue  has  a normal 
appearing  thin, white  coat. 
Variously  combined  symptoms 
of Hot  and  Cold,  External  & 
Internal,  Excess  and  Deficiency. 
Reflects  a deeper  penetration 
of the  disease  with  more  lingering 
and  recurring  symptoms, 
aching extremities,  dizziness, 
restlessness,  irritability,  insomnia, 
bitter  taste  in  the  mouth, 
chest  discomfort,  thirst or lack 
of thirst.  Pulse  is  bowstring or 
tense  and  the tongue  may  be 
either  normal  or  redder  with  a 
thicker greasy white  coat. 
Fever  without  chills,  preference 
for  cool  drinks, extreme  thirst, 
excessive  perspiration.  The  pulse 
is  rapid  and  full  and  the  tongue 
is  red  with  a yellow  coat. 
TREATMENT 
Diaphoretic  formulas  such  as: 
Ephedra  Decoction 
(Ma  huang  tang) 
Cinnamon Twig Combination 
(Gui  zhi  tang) 
Pueraria Combination 
(Ge  gen  tang). 
Bupleurum  formulas  are  used 
such  as:  Minor Bupleurum 
(Xiao  chai  hu  tang) 
Major Bupleurum 
(Da  chai  hu  tang), 
Bupleurum  and  Cinnamon 
Combination (Chai  hu 
gui  zhi  tang),  Bupleurum 
and  Chih Shih (Si  ni  san) 
Bupleurum and  Dang Gui 
(Xiao  yao  san),  Bupleurum 
Formula (Yi  gan  san). 
High  fever,  thirst, 
abdominal  discomfort  use 
White Tiger  Decoction 
(Bai  hu  tang);  for  abdominal 
swelling  use  Major Rhubarb 
Combination (Da  cheng qi 
tang)  or  Minor  Rhubarb 
Combination (Xiao  cheng qi 
tang);  for  Blood Stagnation  use 
STAGE 
Greater Yin  Stage 
Shao Yin  Stage 
(Lesser Yin) 
SYMPTOMS 
Affects  the Spleen  and  Lung  channels. 
Overall  symptoms  are  Qi Deficiency 
and  Dampness.  Symptoms  range 
from  Upper Warmer  symptoms  of 
cough,  asthma,  hemoptysis,  sore  throat, 
chest fullness;  to  Middle Warmer 
symptoms  of belching, vomiting, 
abdominal  pain,  loose stool, 
jaundice, fatigue  and  coldness; 
to  Lower Warmer symptoms  of cloudy 
urine,  vaginal  discharge  and  weeping 
eczema.  Pulse  is  slow,  weak,  soft or 
slippery. The tongue is  pale  with 
scalloped  edges. 
Affects  the Heart  and  Kidney  organ 
meridians.  There  are  two  patterns: 
Shao Yin  Cold  pattern  shows  a marked 
aversion  to  cold, chills,  cold  drinks  and 
foods,  loose  stools,  lack  of thirst, 
abundant pale urine. The tongue  is  pale 
and  the  pulse  is  deep  and  thready.  Shao 
Yin  Heat  Pattern exhibits symptoms 
ofYin Deficiency with  Heat,  fever, 
insomnia,  restless  sleep,  dry  mouth, 
thirst,  scanty and  dark  urine,  rapid 
pulse,  red  tongue with  little or  no  coat. 
TREATMENT 
Rhubarb  and  Moutan 
Combination (Da  huang  mu 
dan  pi  tang),  Persica  and 
Rhubarb Combination (Tao  he 
cheng  qi  tang),  Cinnamon and 
Poria  Combination (Gui  zhi  fu 
ling wan),  Clematis and 
Stephania Combination (Shu 
jing  huo  xue  tang);  for  stagnant 
fluids  and  irregular urination 
use  Poria  Five  Herbs  Formula 
(Wu  ling san). 
Ginseng  and  Ginger 
Combination (Li  zhong 
wan  or  Regulate  the 
Middle  Pill). 
For  Shao Yin  Cold  use  Aconite, 
Ginger  and  Licorice Combination 
Si  ni  tang).  For Shao Yin  Heat 
use  Coptis and  Gelatin Comb. 
(Huang lian  e jiao  tang) 
or Anemarrhcna,  Phcllodendron 
with Rehmannia Six 
(Zhi  bai  di  huang wan). 
THE  FOUR STAGES  OF  DISEASE 
Caused by External Heat 
While the theory of Six  Stages  is  based  on diagnosing  and  treating 
diseases  caused by External  Cold,  the  Four Stages,  evolving  through  the 
Ming (1368-1644  A.D.)  to  the Qing dynasties  (1644-1911  A.D.),  was  first 
expounded  by Ye  Tian  Shi  (1667-1746}  in  his  book,  Discussion  qf '\:%rm 
~ 
IJO 
Diseases.  It describes the treatment of virulent diseases caused by External 
Wind Heat. As such it provides a more relevant diagnostic and treatment 
protocol  for  the  treatment of infectious  and  feverish  diseases. 
The  Four Stages  are  as  follows: 
1.  Wei  Fen:  This  is  the  superficial  defensive  energy 
corresponding  to  the  immune system. 
2.  Q!  Fen:  This  includes  the secondary defense  system  involving 
the  Lungs,  Spleen,  Large  Intestines,  Stomach  and  Gall  Bladder. 
3.  Ying  Fen:  This  is  the  nutrient system,  which  also  relates  to 
the  central  nervous  system. 
4.  Xue  Fen:  This  involves  the  invasion  of Heat  into  the  Blood 
and Vital  Essence. 
The  characteristics  and  herbal  treatment  for  each  of the  Four 
Stages  is  as  follows: 
Wei  Fen  Stage  (Wei  Qi Stage  Heat) 
Generally  this  stage  represents  the  early  stages  of febrile  and 
infectious diseases with symptoms of fever,  chills, sore throat, slight fear 
of wind  and  cold,  red-tipped  tongue  and  floating  and  rapid  pulse.  In 
the  Eight  Principles  this  corresponds  to  External  Excess  Wind  Heat 
syndrome,  so  it is  of a Yang  character. 
Formulas 
Lonicera  and  Forsythia  Combination (Yin  qiao  san) 
Actions:  It is  diaphoretic,  disperses  External Wind-Heat,  is 
alterative,  antibiotic  and  antiviral,  clears  Internal  Heat  and 
relieves  toxicity. 
Morus  and  Chrysanthemum  Combination (Sang  ju  yin) 
Actions:  It is  a cooling diaphoretic,  dispels  Wind-Heat,  is 
antitussive  and  relieves  cough. 
Q!  Fen  Stage  (Qi Stage  Heat) 
This  is  similar to  the Yang  Ming stage  of disease.  It is  deeper than 
Wei  Fen  and its symptoms include high fever,  profuse sweating, extreme 
thirst, flushed  face,  scanty urine, constipation, yellow-coated tongue and 
slippery,  rapid  or full  pulse.  There  is  a strong desire  for  cool  water. 
Formulas 
Ginseng and  Gypsum  Combination (Bai  hu  jia  ren  shen  tang) 
Actions:  To  eliminate  Heat in  the  Qi (secondary defense)  system 
and  the Yang  Ming channel  and  to  promote  the secretion  of 
Body Fluids. 
IJI 
Ephedra, Apricot, Gypsum and Licorice Decoction (Ma  xing 
shi  gan  tang) 
Actions:  Clears  External  conditions and  is  anti-asthmatic. 
Ying Fen Stage (Ying  Stage  Heat) 
The last two stages of the Four Stages represent acute stages that are 
not  often  seen  clinically,  and  are  generally  better  referred  to  Western 
medical  treatment  whenever  possible.  Another  consideration  is  that 
formulas  for  these  two  stages  typically  rely  on  the  use  of rhinoceros 
horn,  which  is  ecologically  unacceptable  at  present.  Alternatively, 
practitioners  may  substitute  the  indicated  amount  of rhinoceros  horn 
with  double  or even  triple  the  amount  of water  buffalo  horn  or cow's 
horn. 
Symptoms  of Ying  Fen  include  high  fever,  restlessness,  insomnia, 
delirium,  loss  of consciousness  and/or coma. 
Formula 
Clear the Nutritive Level  Decoction (Qing ying  tang) 
Actions:  Clears  Heat  from  the  Nutritive Ying  level  and 
nourishes Yin  and  Vital  Essence. 
Xue  Fen Stage (Blood  Stage  Heat) 
This  stage  involves  severe  damage  to  the  Vital  Essence  and  Blood,  so 
that  in addition  to  severe  high  fever  and  coma,  there  are  symptoms  of 
bleeding  such  as  epistaxis  and  hematuria.  The  tongue  has  a  deep  red 
color verging on cyanotic  (blue),  and  the  pulse  is  feeble  and  rapid. 
Formula 
Rhinoceros  and Rehmannia Combination (Xi  jiao  di  huang 
tang) 
Actions: Treats  severe  fevers  and  Heat  in  the  Blood  system  and 
removes  Blood  stagnation. 
Following  is  a  chart  outlining  the  most  predominant  symptoms 
associated  with  each  of the  Four Stages  of Heat: 
STAGE  SYMPTOMS 
Wei  Level  High  fever  and  slight  chills,  sweating, 
thirst,  headache,  sore  throat,  yellow 
phlegm;  floating  and  rapid  pulse; 
pink  tongue  with  a slightly yellow  coat. 
Q!  Level  High  fever,  lack  of chills,  irritability, 
~ 
IJ2 
CONDITION 
Heat  stroke,  Summer  Heat, 
External  Heat  attacking  the  body. 
This  stage  corresponds  to  Eight 
Principles' External Heat category. 
The External Pathogenic Factor has 
excessive  perspiration,  excessive  thirst, 
constipation,  abdominal  pain,  red  face, 
fear  of heat,  cough,  yellow phlegm, 
dark  urine;  full  and  bounding pulse; 
the  tongue  is  red  with  a yellow coat. 
Ying  Level  Late  afternoon and  tidal  fever,  insomnia, 
irritability,  delirium,  skin  blotches;  the 
pulse  is  rapid  and  thin;  the  tongue  is  dry 
and  scarlet. 
Xue  Level  High  fever,  delirium,  coma,  insomnia, 
(Blood  level)  signs  of bleeding such  as  vomiting  blood, 
nose  bleed,  blood  in  the  stool,  bruising 
under  the skin;  the  pulse  is  rapid  and 
thin,  the  tongue  is  dark  red  with  prickles 
or  a brown  burnt coat. 
penetrated  the surface and 
manifests  as  a high  fever  and 
inflammation affecting the internal 
Organs. This  stage  corresponds  to 
the Eight Principles'  Internal 
Heat category.  · 
Deeper penetration of Heat  that 
affects  the  Mind  and  Spirit.  This 
stage  correspond  to  the  Eight 
Principles' Yin  Deficient  Heat. 
Heat  has  penetrated  to  the  deepest 
level  where  it drives  out  the  Blood 
causing  hemorrhage,  affects  the 
Spirit, with tremors and spasms and 
so  gives  rise  to  Liver Wind.  This 
also  corresponds  to  a deeper  stage 
of Yin  and  Blood  Deficiency. 
~ 
IJJ 
SEVEN 
THE ORGANS 
The Organs are  a central concept to Chinese Medicine, as  they perform 
the essential  functions  of the body, including assimilating, eliminating, 
storing,  circulating,  preserving,  and  transforming.  When  each  of these 
processes  is  functioning  properly,  the  body  is  in  balance  and  health. 
When they aren't, there is  disharmony, and thus imbalance and disease. 
The concepts of harmony and balance are at the core of Chinese medicine 
and  represent  a  theoretical  concept  which  goes  beyond  the  body  to 
include the emotions,  mind,  family,  society,  nature and  the  universe. 
The  theory  of the  Organs  developed  from  several  sources,  but 
primarily through observation and experience. Because of spiritual beliefs, 
bodies  were  generally  not  dissected  in  ancient  times;  rather,  intuition 
and  keen  observation  were  applied  to  directly  perceive  energetic 
imbalances in the body through the four diagnoses of looking, listening, 
smelling  and  palpating.  Further,  long-term  medical  experiences 
contributed  information;  for  example,  herbs  used  to  strengthen  the 
Essence  of the  Kidneys  were  found  to  also  accelerate  healing  of the 
bones.  Given  this  historical  development  of the  Oriental  medical 
understanding  of the  body,  it  is  quite  remarkable  that  they  arrived  at 
many similar conclusions about the actions of the  Organs  as  we  know 
them  in Western  medicine. 
The understanding of the Oriental Organ functions is  much broader 
and  encompasses  much  more  than  the  organic  functions  we  define  in 
Western  medicine.  In fact,  Chinese medicine  acknowledges  two  Organs 
which have no precise physical counterpart in the body:  the Pericardium 
(the sac of fluid  surrounding the Heart),  and  the Triple Warmer (which 
describes  the  relationship  of all  physiological  processes  in  the  upper, 
middle  and  lower  parts  of the  body).  Thus,  to  step  into  a  broader 
understanding of the Chinese Organ processes, it is better to temporarily 
lay  aside Western  concepts  of internal organs. 
In  Chinese  Medicine,  the  Organs  encompass  a  broad  range  of 
functions  that include spiritual,  mental  and  emotional  aspects,  as  well 
~ 
IJ4 
as  their  physical  functions.  Further,  each  has  its  correspondences  in 
environment, climate, color, sense organ, tissue and more. In fact,  many 
of the  Organs'  operations  occur  on a  cellular  level,  such  as  Spleen  Qi 
corresponding to the function of the mitochondria in the cells, or Kidney 
Yang  relating  to  ATP  in  the  body.
1 
Thus,  the Chinese Organs  function 
on a level  throughout the entire body and are not limited to the visceral 
organ  itself. 
The Chinese Organs are divided into Yin, Yang  and Extraordinary 
Organs.  The  Yin  Organs,  or  the  "five  viscera"  or  solid  Organs,  are 
considered  more  important than  the Yang  Organs.  They are  vital  since 
they  perform  the  important  functions  of producing,  transforming, 
regulating and storing the Fundamental Properties ofQi, Blood, Fluids, 
Jing and  Shen. The Yin  Organs include the Heart, Pericardium, Spleen, 
Lungs,  Kidneys  and  Liver. 
The Yang  Organs, or the "six bowels"  or hollow Organs,  function 
to  receive,  break  down  and  absorb  the  parts  of food  and  fluid  to  be 
transformed  into Fundamental Substances, and  to  transport and excrete 
waste  products.  In relation  to  the Yin  Organs, they are more external  in 
the  body and  not  as  vital,  since  they  transform  substances  but do  not 
retain them. The Yang Organs include the Small Intestine, Triple Warmer, 
Stomach,  Large  Intestine,  Urinary Bladder and  Gall  Bladder. 
The Yin  and Yang  Organs are  paired  together,  as  stated  previously 
in the Five Elements Chapter. This forms an interior-exterior relationship 
in  the  body called  the  "Husband-Wife"  Law  that also  extends  to  their 
respective  meridians.  They are  as  follows: 
Yin  Organ 
Heart 
Lung 
Spleen 
Liver 
Kidney 
Pericardium 
Yang  Organ 
Small  Intestine 
Large  Intestine 
Stomach 
Gall  Bladder 
Urinary Bladder 
Triple Warmer 
The  six  "extraordinary"  Organs  in  the  body are  considered  to  be 
miscellaneous,  or "curious", because  their  functions  are  different  from 
those of the six bowels, or Yang Organs. They include the Brain, Uterus, 
Marrow (or Medulla),  Bones,  Blood Vessels  and  Gall  Bladder.  The Gall 
Bladder is both an extraordinary Organ as  well  as  a Yang one because its 
Yang  function  of breaking  down  impure  food  is  also  supplemented  by 
its  curious  one  of being  the  only Yang  Organ  which  contains  a  pure 
substance,  bile. 
~ 
IJ5 
Patterns  of disharmony for  any  of the  Organs  are  determined  by 
the relationships  between  Qi,  Blood,  Fluids,  Pernicious  Influences  and 
the Organs.These  patterns,  along with  their signs  and  descriptions,  are 
thoroughly discussed  in the chapter on Differential Diagnosis. 
THE YIN  ORGANS  (ZANG) 
HEART 
Ancient Chinese medical texts, particularly the Su wen of the Yellow 
Emperor's Classic,  compared  a person  to  a social  organization. Thus,  a 
societal  role was  assigned  to each Organ. The Heart is  the Emperor, the 
embodiment of Heaven on Earth. Here peace, order and rulership radiate 
from  the center,  commanding all  the Organs.  As  such,  the  Heart  has  a 
dual function:  to govern Blood and to house the Spirit, or Mind (Shen). 
Governs  Blood 
The Heart regulates the circulation of Blood throughout the vessels, 
Organs  and  body  tissues.  It  is  also  the  location  where  Grain  Qi  is 
transformed  into Blood.  Heart Qi is  the driving force  of the heart beat; 
when  it  is  functioning  properly,  the  Blood  flows  smoothly  and  the 
pulse  is  even.  Heart Qi also  keeps  normal strength,  rate  and  rhythm  of 
the heart beat. When Heart Qi or Blood are Deficient, blood circulation 
is  poor  and  the  hands  and  feet  become  cold,  for  instance.  A  healthy 
Heart  also  helps  determine  a  strong  constitution,  along  with  Kidney 
Essence,  by giving vigor  and  strength. 
Controls  the  Blood  l-essels 
The  Blood  vessels  are  the  ducts  through  which  Blood  flows, 
propelled by Heart Qi. They show the condition of Heart Qi and Blood: 
when  both are  strong, the vessels  are in good condition and  the pulse is 
full  and  regular;  if either  are  weak,  the  pulse  can  be  weak,  irregular  or 
thin. 
Houses  the  Spirit/ Mind (Shen) 
The  Spirit/Mind  complex  is  called  Shen  in  TCM.  The  Shen  are 
the messengers of Heaven and are innumerable in number, like drops of 
water in the ocean. The Shen  radiate enthusiasm, exuberance, creativity, 
social  communication  and  interaction.  The  emperor  (Heart)  radiates 
the  Shen  throughout  the  body.  Blood  is  the  commonality here,  as  the 
Heart's  ability  to  house  the  Shen  depends  on  adequate  nourishment 
from  the  Blood.  Further,  the  emperor  rules  the  body,  through  the 
circulation of the  Blood  throughout the  organism  and  maintenance of 
its  conduits,  the  blood  vessels.  The  Spirit/Mind  complex  incorporates 
many  characteristics  and  functions:  mental  functions,  memory, 
~ 
IJ6 
consciousness,  spirit,  thinking  and  sleep.  While  seemingly  diverse  and 
unrelated,  these  functions  are  all  encompassed  in  Shen,  and  can  be 
divided  into  two  categories,  mental  and  spiritual.  Thus  the  Mind  and 
mental faculties  reside in the Heart. The ability to think sharply, a clear 
and  balanced  consciousness,  intellectual  power,  competent  long  term 
memory  and  good  sleep  are  all  signs  of strong  and  abundant  Heart 
Blood.  If the  Western  mind  considers  that  adequate  blood  flow  and 
quantity are  necessary to  nourish the brain for  these  thinking processes 
to  occur,  then  perhaps  these  relationships with  the Heart can  be  better 
understood. 
The  connection  between  Blood  and  the  Mind  is  very  important. 
Blood  is  the  root  of the  Mind:  it embraces  and  anchors  it.  When  it is 
sufficient,  mental  faculties  are  strong and  the person  is  happy,  peaceful 
and  joyful. When  it is  Deficient,  mental  faculties  are weak,  resulting  in 
symptoms such as  mental restlessness and disturbance, insanity, abnormal 
behavior, excessive dreaming,                sleep or insomnia, anxiety 
and depression. On the other hand, long term dwelling on unhappiness, 
sadness  and  emotional  problems  can  cause  a Deficiency of Blood  and 
induce  palpitations,  memory  problems  and  unclear  thinking. 
The Spirit encompasses  the entire  mental,  emotional and  spiritual 
complex.  Shen  is  the vital  force  of life,  the  passion  for  living.  It is  the 
organizing principle of all elements and Organ complexes. It incorporates 
the ability to love ourselves and others, to have trust, to be self-confident 
and  to  have  direction and purpose in life.  It also  includes our ability to 
feel,  to  intuit, to be in touch with our Spirit, our Divine Light. When we 
are  out of touch with  our Spirit, our inner direction and guidance,  our 
joy  of life,  or  we  lack  trust,  self-confidence,  or  love,  we  can  become 
restless,  agitated,  anxious, worried  and  sleep  poorly. These  qualities  can 
be seen  in the eyes:  if they sparkle and shine, the Spirit is  strong;  if they 
are  dull  and  lifeless,  the Spirit is  clouded. 
The metaphors, "open your heart", "wearing her heart on her sleeve", 
"He is  lion-hearted", "follow a path with heart", "heartfelt", "heartbreak" 
or "my heart feels  broken" all  reflect states of Shen which we commonly 
experience  and  acknowledge.  They can  physiologically  affect  the  body 
by  stagnating circulation or depleting Blood, creating cold  extremities, 
a  pale  and  lusterless  complexion,  tightness  in  the  chest  and  a  lack  of 
emotional warmth.· On the other hand, hyper-excitability, hyperactivity, 
excessive  laughter,  extreme  talking  or inordinate  partying  and  looking 
for  thrills  without balance  for  other  life  activities  can  lead  to  hysteria, 
nervous breakdowns,                 behavior, unfocused life direction, 
anxiety, abnormal behavior, mental restlessness, palpitations and pressure 
in  the  chest  region. 
ed 
IJ7 
The state of the Heart also influences our ability to form meaningful 
relationships  or to  be  able  to  relate  well  to  others.  On the  other  hand, 
relationship  problems  can  weaken  the  Heart  and  Mind,  especially  if 
they occur for a long time. The primary relationship is first with ourselves, 
our  inner  Spirit.  Thus,  spiritual  practices  are  important  for  nurturing 
the  Heart.  The  virtues  of Shen  include  being  joyful,· blissful,  grateful, 
happy, empathic, sympathetic, compassionate, loving, kind and merciful, 
while its vices include being overly excited and over-stimulated, dejected, 
dissatisfied, self-pitying, thoughtless, ungrateful, bored, tedious, apathetic 
and  indifferent. 
Because  of the  tremendous  impact of Shen  on health,  it  is  always 
the  first  aspect  to  be  taken  into  account  when  healing  the  body: 
harmonizing the Spirit is  the highest goal.  In  ancient times as  now,  the 
highest  level  physician  is  able  to  heal  through  observation  of and 
counseling with the Spirit; middle level  physicians need  to ask questions 
and  use  physical  therapies  to  heal,  whereas  lower  level  physicians  must 
touch  the  body  to  diagnose  and  treat  the  person.  Our  growing 
understanding today of the mutual impact and  interrelationship of the 
mind  and  body is  giving  us  the experiential  foundation  to  understand 
and  follow  what  the Chinese have  done for  thousands  of years. 
Opens  into  the  Tongue 
Branches  from  the  Heart  meridian  ascend  and  connect with  the 
tongue;  thus,  conditions  of the  Heart  can  be  seen  by  observing  the 
tongue.  When  Heart  Blood  and  Q!  are  abundant,  the  tongue  will  be 
pale-red  and  bright  and  have  a  normal  shape;  when  insufficient,  the 
tongue  will  be  pale  and  white  with  a  thin  shape;  when  stagnated,  the 
tongue will  be dark  purple and  show echymosis;  when  there  is  Heat in 
the  Heart,  there  can  be  red  and  painful  tongue  ulcers.  The  area  of the 
tongue specifically correlating to the Heart is  the tip. When there is  too 
much Heat in the Heart, the tip is  red.  Injuries to Heart Q! can cause an 
indentation  to  the  tip of the  tongue. 
When  the  Heart  doesn't  function  normally  to  control  the  Mind, 
then speech abnormalities can occur, such as  stuttering, tongue rigidity, 
delirium or aphasia. The  Heart also  influences  talking and  laughter,  so 
a  Heart  disharmony  can  result  in  excessive  or  inappropriate  laughter, 
fast  talking  or  talking  incessantly,  while  lack  of desire  to  talk  shows 
Deficient  Heart  Q!.  On the  other hand,  professions  requiring  a  lot of 
talking,  such  as  sales  and  teaching,  can  injure  the  Heart  Q!  over  time. 
Thus,  it is  said  that the  Heart controls  speech. 
Manifests  in  the  Face 
The face  is  rich in blood vessels, which are controlled by the Heart; 
shen  is  reflected  in  the  face  through  its  color  and  luster.  When  the 
Heart  functions  well,  Blood  is  plentiful  and  the  face  will  be  a  normal 
color with  sheen  and  moisture.  When  Heart  Blood  is  insufficient,  the 
face  will  be  pale  and  lusterless.  If Heart Blood  is  stagnant,  the  face  will 
be  purple. 
Sweat  is  the  Fluid of the  Heart 
Sweat  is  one  of the  Body  Fluids,  and  Blood  and  Body  Fluids 
mutually interchange. Thus, when Blood is  too thick, Body Fluids enter 
to  thin it down.  On the other hand, someone who is Deficient in Blood 
should not be allowed to sweat excessively as  this this will further deplete 
the  Blood.  This  can  cause  palpitations  and  continuous violent  beating 
of the  heart.  Deficient  Heart  Yang  can  cause  spontaneous  sweating, 
while  Deficient  Heart Yin  can  cause  night  time  sweating.  Because  the 
Heart governs Blood, and Blood mutually interchanges with Body Fluids, 
including sweat,  the Heart,  being  part of the  Fire  element,  is  related  to 
sweat. 
The  Heart  Loathes  Heat 
Again  being  the Yin  Organ  of the Fire  Element,  Heat is  the  most 
injurious Pernicious Influence to the Heart. Although TCM says Exterior 
Heat cannot invade the Heart itself,  it also  invades  the Pericardium, the 
extension and protector of the Heart. When this happens, coma, delirium 
or aphasia  can  occur. 
Dreams 
When  Heart Blood  is  plentiful,  the  Mind  is  rooted,  and  it  is  easy 
to  fall  asleep  and  sleep  soundly. When  Deficient,  the  Mind "wanders", 
causing inability to fall  asleep, restless sleep or insomnia, dream-disturbed 
sleep  or excessive  dreaming.  Dreams  are,  thus,  generally  related  to  the 
Heart. 
Emotion: joy 
Joy  is  the  emotion  of the  Heart,  as  has  already  been  discussed 
under  the topic of the  Mind.  Both  lack of joy and  excessive  joy (in the 
sense  of over-exci'tement)  can  injure  the  Heart  and,  likewise,  a  Heart 
disharmony can  cause  joylessness  or elation. 
PERICARDIUM 
As  Emperor,  the  Heart  needs  to  be  protected  and  gaurded.  It also 
needs  a way  to  communicate  its  authority to  the  rest  of the  organism. 
~ 
139 
this  is  the  role  of the  Pericardium,  or  Heart  Protector.  Physically,  the 
Pericardium  is  the  sac,  or  outer  shield,  sourrounding  the  Heart.  Its 
function  is  to  both  protect  and  maintain  the  Heart,  and  to  form  the 
system of connections through which the Heart may relate to the rest of 
the body. 
As  the  Heart  Protector,  it guards  against  the  invasion  of External 
Pernicious  Influences  into  the  inner sanctum  of t h ~  Heart.  The  main 
attacking  Influence  here  is  Heat.  When  pathogenic  Heat  attacks  the 
Pericardium it results  in  high  fever,  coma and  red  tongue. 
LUNGS 
The  Lungs  hold the office of Minister or Chancellor in the body. 
It  is  physically  closest  to  the  Heart,  and  the  heartbeat  is  dependent 
upon  respiration  from  the  lungs.  Thus,  the  Lungs  hold  a  privileged 
place. The Lungs control vital energy in the body.  They extract Qi from 
the air during respiration and transfer it through the respiratory passages 
to the Blood, with which it is  then circulated  throughout the body. The 
Lungs  also  have  direct  contact  with  the  outer  environment  through 
breathing,  and  because  they are  considered  to  be  directly  related  to  the 
skin.  Because  of this,  they  are  the  most  prone  to  External  Pernicious 
Influences,  and  thus  they  are  often  called  a  delicate  Organ  or  the 
"princess"  of the  Organs.  The  Lungs  are  also  the  uppermost Organ  in 
the body and consequently are often termed a "lid" on the other Organs. 
Rule .Qj 
Through  respiration  the  Lungs  inhale  pure  air,  circulate  it 
throughout the body and then expel dirty air. This keeps the metabolism 
in the body functioning smoothly. The Lungs also assist in the formation 
of Qi. The essence offood and drink is  sent by the Spleen to  the Lungs, 
where  it combines with  inhaled air  to  form  Natural  Air  Qi.  The  Lungs 
then  spread  it  throughout  the  body  by  way  of the  Heart  channels  to 
nourish  all  tissues  and  promote  normal  physiological  activities.  When 
there is an imbalance of this function, cough, shortness of breath, asthma 
or chest  distention  may  result. 
Control  Channels  and Blood  ~ s s e l s 
Through  their  function  of circulating  and  disseminating  Qi,  the 
Lungs have a broad role in maintaining vessel  health. Qi is  the motivator 
of movement,  and  thus  is  related  to  Blood  flow.  Further,  Nutritive  Qi 
flows  with Blood in blood vessels  and channels.  Because  the Lungs  rule 
Qi,  they direct circulation of Qi in blood vessels  and channels, creating 
warmth  throughout the  body. 
Control Dispersing and Descending 
The Lungs disperse or spread Defensive Qi, food essence and Body 
Fluids  all  over  the  body  to  the  space  between  the  skin  and  muscles. 
Through  this  function,  likened  to  a  mist,  the  Lungs  nourish  the  body 
and  warm  and  moisten  the  muscles,  skin  and  hair.  They  also  control 
equal distribution of Defensive Q! and control the normal opening and 
closing  of the  pores.  When  impaired,  a  person  is  easily  susceptible  to 
invasion  of Pernicious  Influences,  and  thus colds  and  flu.  Further, the 
pores become blocked when  the condition is  one of Excess,  resulting in 
no sweating; or they become over-relaxed  from a condition of Deficiency, 
allowing  sweating  to  occur  spontaneously.  In  addition,  if the  Lung 
function  of dispersing  Body  Fluids  is  impaired,  they collect  under  the 
skin  and  edema  arises,  especially of the  face. 
The  Lungs,  being  the  uppermost  Organ  in  the  body,  have  a 
descending  function.  If impaired,  cough,  shortness  of breath,  asthma, 
and a stuffy sensation in the chest appear.  If they affect its paired Organ, 
the Large  Intestine, constipation can occur from  lack  of Q!  moving the 
stool  downward.  Other  than  helping  to  circulate  Q!,  they  are  also 
associated with water metabolism by causing water in the Upper Warmer 
to  descend  into  the  Kidney  and  Bladder.  This  keeps  urination  smooth 
and  water  metabolism  normal.  If  this  function  becomes  disturbed, 
dysuria,  edema  and  phlegm-retention  diseases  result. 
This  association  with  water  metabolism  can  be  better  understood 
by likening it to a finger on a straw full  of water.  If the finger is withdrawn, 
the water runs out uncontrolled. Thus, pregnant women or those whose 
Lung  Q!  is  Deficient often  have  urine  leakage  after  jumping, coughing 
or sneezing. On the other hand, if this function is  impaired, the "finger" 
may not withdraw appropriately, causing urinary retention or scantiness. 
Thus, through this function it is said the Lungs regulate the water passages. 
The  dispersing  and  descending  functions  are  mutually 
interdependent:  if  one  is  impaired,  the  other  is  affected.  Their 
coordination  keeps  breathing  even  and  circulation  good.  If impaired, 
stuffiness of the chest, difficulty breathing, cough and asthma can appear. 
Control Skin  and Hair 
Because  the  Lungs  connect  to  the  exterior  of the  body  and  they 
function  to disperse Q! and  Fluids to the body surface, they control the 
skin and body hair. The distribution of Fluids to the skin and  hair keep 
them  moist  and  nourished.  If functioning  properly,  the  skin will  have 
luster,  the  hair will  be  glossy  and  the  opening and  closing  of the  pores 
and  sweating  will  be  normal.  If impaired,  skin  and  hair  will  be  dry, 
rough, and even  flaky,  and  the hair will  look withered and dry.  Further, 
estiJ 
141 
the  pores  will  not  open  or  close  properly,  causing  lowered  immunity, 
lack  of sweating  or  spontaneous  sweating.  In  the  latter  case,  some 
Defensive  Qi is  actually lost with  the sweat. 
Open  to  the  Nose 
The nose is  the doorway to the Lungs, and it also is  in contact with 
the external environment. Its functions of             and sense of smell 
are  dependent  on  Lung  Qi.  If it's  Qi is  strong,  nasal  breathing will  be 
clear and open and sense  of smell  normal.  If impaired,  the  nose will  be 
blocked  and  there will  be  loss  of sense  of smell,  watery  nasal  discharge 
and  sneezing.  If there  is  Heat  in  the  Lungs,  there  may  be  nosebleeds 
with  the alae  nasi  flapping  rapidly. 
House  the  Corporeal Soul (Po) 
The  Po  are  seven  "spiritual  entities,"  one  for  each  of the  bodily 
orifices. They are the most exterior and material of outwardly observable 
of all  spiritual  aspects  and  lack  self awareness.  They  have  no  existence 
independent of the body,  but are linked  to its seven  orifices. The Po  are 
closely connected  to  the  Lungs  and  respiration.  In  Greek,  spirit  means 
"breath" and soul means "wind or vital breath". In Sanskrit,prana means 
"vital  life  force"  and  is  intimately  linked  with  breathing  and  air.  In 
Latin, spirit means  "to breathe" and "breath, air,  life,  soul", resulting in 
our terms  "inspire"  and  "inspiration". Thus  the  Po,  or Corporeal Soul, 
is  a manifestation of the breath of life  and the vital  energy of the body, 
Qi, and it is  the material and physical manifestation of a human being's 
soul. 
The Corporeal Soul, closely linked to Essence, is related to sensation 
and feelings  and is  most active during the day.  It takes Qi into the body 
by  breathing  and  then  sends  it  to  the  Organs  and  channels.  Even  in  a 
coma, the Po  keep the body alive through automatic regulation of bodily 
rhythms, respiration, metabolism and general homeostatis. even though 
consciousness  (Shen)  isn't  present.  During gestation,  Po  controls  Hun, 
and  at  birth,  Hun  becomes  independent.  At  death,  Hun  returns  to 
Heaven  while  Po  dissolves  the  physical  body  and  returns  to  the  earth. 
Death  is  deliverance  from  the constraint of Po,  the  physical  body,  and 
thus  is  considered  the great  liberation. 
The  Po  are  tied  to  Time  and  Space  and  experience  things  in  the 
moment. They are  said  to  experience  pain  but  not suffering,  as  pain is 
in the moment while suffering is one's response to it. When our awareness 
is  in the  present, we  experience  each  moment as  unique and  complete. 
This  is  the virtue of the  Lungs.  When we  hold  onto things  of the  past, 
we  experience  sadness  and  ultimately grief. 
Sadness  and  grief,  the  emotions  of  the  Lungs,  suggest  loss  of 
something  or  somebody  we  were  not  yet  ready  to  let  go.  While  an 
important  and  necessary  emotion,  prolonged  grief injures  the  Lungs, 
resulting  in  a  suppressed  immune  system  and  leading  to  colds,  flu, 
pneumonia  and  asthma.  The  breath  is  directly  affected  by  emotions, 
and through them, the Lungs are also affected. When we  are sad,  crying, 
angry,  joyful,  excited  or fearful,  our breathing changes. 
Po  is  connected  to  the  ability to  receive  and  let  go,  and  deals  with 
what  is  "mine"  and  what  isn't.  Thus,  it  is  involved  with  the  intake  of 
life-giving  energies  and  the  discharge  of  toxic  ones.  Attachment, 
possessiveness,  unchecked  desires,  miserliness,  hoarding,  selfishness, 
defensive pride, stoicism, greed, envy,  defensiveness, self-pity and extreme 
sensitivity or lack of sensitivity all come under this category, as  a type of 
mental  or  emotional  constipation  (the  metaphor  for  the  Lungs' 
connection with  the  Large  Intestine).  Often  these  behaviors  arise  from 
feeling  a lack of worthiness, deprivation or from  unfulfilled needs. Thus, 
the  person  overcompensates  and  holds  on to  fill  the inner void. 
On the other hand, generosity, charity, giving, openness, receptivity, 
surrendering, non-attachment, sensitivity and thinking of others all reflect 
a healthy  flow  of outward  energy and  a strong  sense  of worthiness  and 
self-fulfillment. When we  feel we  have what we need on all  levels -physical, 
emotional, mental and spiritual- we  are open to  receiving and giving, or 
letting  go  without  attachment or sense  of loss. 
The  virtues  of Po  include  being  reverent,  conscientious,  ethical, 
upright, honest, careful, prudent, sensible, honorable, modest, respectful, 
correct,  righteous  and cautious, while  its  vices  are being excessively sad, 
sorrowful,  grieving,  unethical,  immoral,  corrupt and  wicked. 
Loathe  Cold 
Because  of the  direct  connection  of the  Lungs  with  the  external 
environment and their function of regulating the pores and disseminating 
Defensive  Qi,  they  are  extremely  susceptible  to  attack  by  Pernicious 
Influences,  especially Cold. 
Govern  the  Voice 
The  throat  is  said  to  be  the  door  of the  Lungs  and  home  of the 
vocal  cords.  Further,  Lung  Qi  provides  strength,  clarity  and  tone  of 
voice. When  healthy,  the voice  is  clear and strong; if impaired, the voice 
may  be  low,  weak  or  muffled  by  mucus.  Thus,  many  common  throat 
disorders  are  treated  by  attending to  the  Lungs. 
Emotion 
The  emotions of the  Lungs  are  grief and  sadness.  An  excessive 
~ 
143 
expression of these emotions injures Lung Q! and leads to Lung ailments 
such  as  asthma,  pneumonia,  flu  and  lowered  immunity to  colds. 
SPLEEN 
The  Spleen,  along  with  the  Stomach,  is  the  primary  Organ  for 
digestion  in  the  body.  It  is  the  crucial  link  between  taking  food  and 
drink into the body and transforming them into Blood and Q!, truly an 
alchemical  process.  Thus,  it  rules  transformation  and  transportation, 
which  can  be  loosely  translated  as  metabolism  and  absorption.  The 
Spleen,  together  with  the  Stomach,  are  the  officials  in  charge  of the 
storehouses  and  granaries  and  thus  are  considered  the  root  of Post-
Heaven  Q!,  or  the  source  of all  Q!  produced  by  the  body after  birth. 
Thus, it is of central importance in the health of the body. While Kidney 
Jing  is  the  hand  of cards we  are  dealt  in  this  life,  the Spleen  represents 
how we  play  that hand  of cards. 
Rules  Transformation  and Transportation 
The  Spleen  receives  the  partially digested  food  from  the  Stomach 
and  transforms  it  into  Grain  Q!.  It then  transports  it  upwards  to  the 
Lungs  where  it is  mixed  with  Air Q!.  This  mixture  travels  to  the  Heart 
where  it is  transformed  into  Blood.  Further,  the  pure  part absorbed  by 
the Spleen is  transported to all  parts of the body so  that all  the Organs, 
limbs, bones, hair and tendons are nourished. Thus, it is  said the Spleen 
provides  the  material  basis  for  the  acquired  constitution  and  that  it 
functions  as  the root ofQ! and Blood in the body. To  tonify Blood and 
Q! in the body,  therefore, we  tonify the Spleen.  If the transforming and 
transporting functions  are  normal,  then digestion,  appetite, absorption 
and  bowel  movements  will  be  good.  If imbalanced,  there  may  be  poor 
appetite,  indigestion, abdominal distention  or pain,  anorexia,  lassitude 
and  loose  stools. 
The Spleen  also  functions  to  separate,  move  and  transform  water 
in  the  body.  It  is  in  charge  of separating  the  usable  and  the  unusable 
from  the  fluids  ingested.  It then  "raises"  or distributes  the  pure  to  the 
Lungs,  and  the dirty to  the Intestines where  it is  further  separated. This 
function  occurs  at  the  same  time  it  is  transforming,  transporting  and 
distributing  nutrients. Thus,  these  functions  influence  each  other,  and 
an  imbalance  in  one will  affect  the  other.  If the  Spleen's  transforming 
function  occurs  improperly,  however,  the  Fluids  can  congeal  to  form 
Phlegm  or cause  edema.  Thus,  whenever  there  is  Dampness  or  Phlegm 
in  the  body,  the Spleen  is  at cause  and  is  treated. 
~ 
144 
Controls  Blood 
Not only is  the Spleen  the  root of Blood  in the body,  it is  also  in 
charge of keeping the Blood flowing in the vessels.  The particular aspect 
of Q!  that  commands  Blood  in  this  way  is  Spleen  Qi.  When  weak, 
Blood  can  escape  its  pathways,  leading  to  hemorrhages,  vomiting  of 
blood,  blood  in the  stool,  blood  under  the  skin,  menorrhagia,  uterine 
bleeding  and  possibly chronic bleeding. 
Rules  the Muscles,  Flesh  and Limbs 
When  the  Spleen  functions  properly  to  distribute  food  essence 
throughout  the  body,  the  muscle  tone  is  good,  the  muscles  are  strong 
and  the  limbs  have  strength  to  move.  If the  Spleen  doesn't  function 
well,  the  muscles become thin or atrophy, the arms and legs  get slack or 
weak  and  the  person  feels  tired. 
Opens  to  the Mouth  and Manifests  in  the  Lips 
Digestion  begins  in  the  mouth;  thus  the  Spleen  has  a  functional 
relationship with the mouth and lips. If the Spleen is strong and vigorous 
there  is  good  appetite,  the  mouth  is  able  to  distinguish  the  five  tastes, 
and  the  lips  are  red  and  moist.  A  dysfunction  of the  Spleen  leads  to 
poor appetite, the inability to distinguish tastes or a sticky, sweet taste in 
the  mouth  and  pale,  dry  lips. 
Controls  Raising of  Qj 
The tendency of Spleen Q! is  to ascend. It not only sends Grain Q! 
up to the Lungs, it also lifts and holds the Organs in place.  If Spleen Q! 
is  Deficient,  chronic  diarrhea  along  with  prolapse  of various  Organs, 
such as  Bladder, Stomach,  Uterus,  Kidney and  the anus, can  occur. The 
Spleen  also  functions  to  raise  the clear Yang  to  the  head.  If Dampness 
obstructs  the Spleen,  the clear Yang  can't ascend,  resulting  in fuzziness 
and  heaviness  of the  head. 
Loathes  Dampness 
The  Spleen  likes  dryness  but  loathes  Dampness.  If  there  is  a 
dysfunction  of the  Spleen's  ability  to  transform  and  transport  Fluids, 
Dampness  can  collect  causing  urinary  problems,  vaginal  discharges, 
abdominal  distension  and  Phlegm.  On  the  other  hand,  excessive 
Dampness  in  the body can  impair the  function  of the Spleen. 
Emotion:  Worry 
Worry,  brooding,  obsession,  sympathy  and  nostalgia  are  the 
emotional qualities of the Spleen. Indulgence in or prolonged experience 
of any  of these  emotions  leads  to  poor digestion,  gas,  bloating,  ulcers, 
decreased appetite and stagnation ofQ!. Worry is often due to unexpressed 
ed 
145 
needs, while  "venting your Spleen"  is  stating them.  Nostalgia can be  an 
escape  from  the  present  and  a  compensation  for  what  is  missing  in 
one's  life  now,  which  can  include  lack  of emotional  nourishment or a 
need  for  identity. 
Sympathy can over-extend our energy reserves  from caring too much 
for  others' problems,  resulting in low energy and the· inability to  digest 
what we  need  in  our own  lives.  This  can  occur  initially from  a lack  of 
self-assertion, sense of self or insecurity. When we  feel  at home in ourselves 
and  live  in  the  present,  we  can  "digest"  life's  experiences  and  then  are 
centered  in ourselves. 
Houses  Thought  (Yl) 
Yi  is  not a spiritual entity, but a quality of mind, a central channel 
of expression.  It  has  been  roughly  translated  as  Idea  or Thought. Yi  is 
the intellectual function of the body complex which includes absorbing 
and remembering information, focusing,  memorization, concentration, 
studying, thinking and organizing ideas. The virtues of the Spleen embody 
being  bright,  brilliant,  intelligent,  sharp,  quick,  clever,  smart,  alert, 
attentive, able and capable; its vices comprise being melancholic, witless, 
dense,  dull,  blunt,  absent-minded,  forgetful,  oblivious  and  distracted. 
Yet  Yi  is  more  than  that.  It is  also  purpose,  intention,  engagement  and 
reliability.  In our lives it can mean we are either moving in an appropriate 
direction with purpose, or we  are  changing and wavering along the way. 
If Spleen  Q!  is  strong,  study,  memorization,  thinking  and 
concentrating occur with ease.  If impaired, thinking can be fuzzy,  memory 
dull  and  concentration  poor.  On  the  other  hand,  extreme  studying, 
concentrating,  thinking  and  mental work  for  prolonged  periods,  all  of 
which  generally  involve  excessive  sitting,  causes  Fluid  metabolism  to 
slow and  Fluids  to collect in the lymph,  resulting  in swollen  abdomens 
and  heavier  hips.  Q!Iite  often  the  propensity  to  think  excessively  is 
actually  an  escape  from  feeling  our bodies  and  emotions,  especially  if 
we don't know how to resolve uncomfortable issues. Being lost in thought, 
absent-minded,  preoccupied  or  forgetful  can  also  indicate  one  is  self-
absorbed. 
Energy is  required  for  concentration and  thinking, and in Western 
terms  it  might  indicate  having  adequate  blood  sugar  to  nourish  the 
brain.  Both  energy  and  blood  sugar  levels  are  determined  by  Spleen 
functions.  When  blood  sugar  is  depleted  from  excessive  thinking,  it 
impairs the Spleen and sets  up food  cravings. This can be  interpreted as 
the Spleen's signal to refuel  and the body's desire for  stimulation. These 
are generally satisfied by snacking on sugar, chips and other nutritionally 
deficient foods, which further depletes the Spleen and, coupled with the 
~ 
146 
usual  lack of exercise  from  mental  preoccupation, causes weight gain. A 
vicious  self-perpetuating  cycle  occurs,  and  over  time  makes  it  more 
difficult  to  concentrate,  think and  focus. 
In  the original  Five  Element system,  the Earth element was  in  the 
center  of the  circle  surrounded  by  all  the  other elements.  Earth  is  the 
ground,  the  pivotal  center,  the  source  of life  for  all  others.  Thus,  the 
Spleen  has  a  similar  place  in  the  psyche.  Ultimately,  it  represents  our 
connection to the outside world, or Earth itself.  Being in harmony with 
ourselves  is  being at  home with  ourselves,  unobsessed,  integrated and at 
ease. 
When  we  are  not  self-fulfilled  or  integrated,  we  can  become  self-
absorbed,  consumed  with  nostalgia,  obsessed  or worried.  All  of these 
stress  the  Stomach  and  Spleen,  resulting  in  gastric  ulcers  and  poor 
digestion.  Often  such  concerns  are  over  those on whom we  depend  for 
nourishment.  When  we  are  obsessed  with  others  or  frequently  crave 
sympathy and support or approval, we  aren't nourishing ourselves. Instead 
the  "I  need"  becomes  foremost  in  our  thoughts,  and  really  reflects  a 
lack  of proper  nourishment,  Blood  and  Q!. 
Feeling  nourished  is  important  on  all  levels  for  proper  Spleen 
functioning.  Metaphorically, nourishment means  being able  to  take the 
world  into ourselves, being able to assimilate our experiences and having 
adequate emotional, mental and spiritual as well  as  physical nourishment 
for all levels of our being. When we cannot "stomach," digest, or assimilate 
what  happens  in  our  lives,  we  often  escape  through  nostalgia  and 
reminiscing about past 'better' times.  This is  a way of compensating for 
a present  lack  of nourishment in  our lives. 
Further, feeling under-nourished on any level of being can actually 
reflect low self esteem. Insecurity and lack of self assertion result, creating 
more  malnourishment  because  we  can't  act  to  get  our  needs  met.  We 
then  get  anxious  and  turn  to  sweets  to  feed  the emptiness  within.  This 
only  perpetuates  the  issue.  The  solution  is  to  listen  to  one's  body  and 
emotions  and  act  on  them.  This  is  coming  home,  to  center,  to  the 
earthy part of ourselves and  nourishing it. When we  balance and  center 
within, we  are  connected  without. 
LIVER 
The  Liver  is  the  General  for  the  body,  able  to  conceive  plans 
(strategies),  put them into action and  call  the troops back for  rest when 
needed.  This  requires  vision,  regulation  and  the  ability  to  exert  one's 
volition. Thus, the Liver's  main function  is  to regulate the smooth flow 
and  proper  direction  of Q!  and  Blood  throughout  the  body.  It  also 
~ 
147 
stores  the  Blood  and  regulates  the  amount of Blood  circulated  by  the 
Heart. 
Smoothes  and Regulates  the  Flow  of  Qj and Blood 
Just as  a tree spreads out freely  in all directions, so does the Liver (a 
part of the Wood Element) promote unrestrained and regular movement 
of Q! and Blood throughout the body. In its ideal state .Q! flows, disperses 
and circulates  freely,  easily,  softly and  gently. When imbalanced  its  flow 
is  irregular,  goes  in  a  wrong  direction,  or  gets  "stuck".  This  creates 
stagnation,  pains which  come  and  go  or change  location,  rebellious  Q! 
and  similar symptoms. 
There  are  three  aspects  to  this  function:  regulating  the  smooth 
flow  of Q!  and  Blood  in  regard  to  digestion,  the  emotions,  and  the 
secretion  of bile.  Keeping  Q!  and  Blood  moving  normally  is  essential 
for  normal bodily movements  and  nourishment.  If impeded,  pain  and 
distention  in the flanks,  the breasts  and  the lower  abdomen  result,  and 
moveable lumps without pain occur in the breasts  and  lower  abdomen. 
Further,  Q!  is  the  driving  force  of Blood.  If flowing  irregularly  or 
improperly,  Blood  becomes  stagnant  and  leads  to  sharp  pain  in  the 
breast  and  hypochondria,  fixed  masses  in  the  abdomen  and  breasts, 
with  localized  pain  and  irregular  menstruation,  dysmenorrhea  and 
amenorrhea. 
The Liver function of ensuring the smooth and  regular flow of Q! 
helps  the Stomach  to ripen and  rot food  and  the Spleen  to  extract food 
essence.  If imbalanced,  Stomach  Q!  may  ascend  rather  than  descend, 
causing belching, sour regurgitation, nausea and vomiting, and the Spleen 
Q!  may  descend  rather  than  ascend,  resulting  in  chronic  diarrhea  and 
abdominal distension. Further, the proper discharge of bile is controlled 
by  the  regular  flow  of Liver  Q!. This  is  necessary  for  good  digestion of 
foods  and fluids.  If obstructed, a bitter taste  in the mouth, vomiting of 
yellow fluid, belching, distention of the flanks, loss of appetite or jaundice 
may  result. 
The Liver harmonizes the emotions with the Mind by maintaining 
a  happy  state,  sensitivity,  ability  to  reason,  an  even  disposition  and  a 
sense  of being  at  ease.  If Liver  Q!  is  obstructed,  it  directly  affects  the 
emotions,  causing  emotional  swings,  irritability,  frustration,  and 
depression.  It  also  causes  distention  in  the  breasts,  a  sensation  of 
oppression in the chest, hypochondriac pain, belching, sighing, dullness, 
feeling  of a  "lump"  in  the  throat  and  PMS  symptoms.  On  the  other 
hand, tension, stress,  constantly going without rest,  repressed  anger and 
prolonged  frustration  in  life  can  lead  to  Stagnant  Liver  Q!. 
Furthermore,  the  Liver's  function  of regulating  the  smooth  flow 
ofQi and Blood also acts  to remove stagnant Qi from  the Triple Warmer 
and to  dredge the water passages.  Impairment of this  function  may lead 
to  edema. 
Stores  Blood 
The  Liver  stores  Blood  and  regulates  its  smooth  flow,  just  as  a 
General  deploys  his  forces  and gathers  them back to  rest.  There are  two 
aspects  to  this:  Blood  volume  and  menstruation. When  the body rests, 
most Blood returns to the Liver to be stored and replenishes the person's 
energy.  When the body is  active,  Blood  is  moved  freely  outward  by  the 
Liver  to  the  necessary  locations and  in the  needed  amounts to nourish 
and  moisten the muscles  and tissues.  If impaired,  lack  of Blood occurs, 
leading to improper nourishment where needed, causing dry eyes, blurred 
vision  and  fatigue.  This  function  also  directly  affects  our resistance  to 
invading  External  factors,  as  proper  distribution  of Blood  to  the  skin 
and  muscles  aids  the  body's  ability  to  resist  attacking  Pernicious 
Influences.  If impaired, the necessary nourishment of skin and muscles 
fails  to  occur,  and  the  body  becomes  more  susceptible  to  External 
mvas10ns. 
The  storage  and  regulation  of the  smooth  flow  of Blood  directly 
affects  healthy menstruation.  If this  Liver  function  is  flowing  properly, 
menstruation  is  normal.  If impaired,  irregular  menses,  amenorrhea  or 
dysmenorrhea  may  result.  Additionally,  if there  is  Heat  in  the  Blood, 
excessive menstruation may occur. This function is extremely important 
in women's health. Most gynecological problems are due to a malfunction 
of Liver Qi or Blood.  Liver Qi stagnation can lead  to  Blood stagnation, 
causing dysmenorrhea, clotting and PMS, whereas Deficient Liver Blood 
can  lead  to  scanty menstruation  or amenorrhea. 
Overall,  there is  an  interconnecting relationship between  the Liver 
and  Blood.  If the  Liver  function  is  abnormal,  it may  affect  the  Blood, 
much like a dirty container spoiling its contents. If the Blood is abnormal, 
however,  it may  also  affect  the  Liver  function. 
Controls  Tendons  and Ligaments 
Liver  Blood  moistens  and  nourishes  the  tendons  and  ligaments. 
This ensures smooth movement of the joints and good muscle action. If 
Liver  Blood  is  insufficient, malnutrition of the tendons results,  causing 
numbness  of the extremities,  sluggishness  of joint movements,  spasms, 
muscle  cramps,  difficulty in bending or stretching,  tetany and  tremors 
of the  hands  and  feet. 
~ 
149 
Manifests  in  the  Nails 
The finger  and toe  nails  are  the "excretion" of the  Liver,  and  thus 
show its state and condition. If there is  Damp Heat or congestion in the 
Liver,  the  nails  are  yellowish  with  ridges.  If there  is  Deficiency of Liver 
Blood,  the  nails  are  brittle,  soft,  thin,  pale,  dry and  break easily.  When 
Liver  Blood  is  plentiful,  the  nails  are  hard,  pink and  moist. 
Opens  to  the  Eyes 
The  Liver  "opens"  to  the eyes,  the sense  organ  connected  with  it. 
Strong  Liver  Blood  moistens  and  nourishes  the  eyes  to  provide  good 
vision. If it is Deficient, dryness, blurred vision, night blindness, myopia, 
color blindness and  floaters  result.  If there is  Heat in the Liver,  the eyes 
may be bloodshot, red  or swollen and feel  painful or burning. If there is 
Internal  Liver  Wind,  the  eyeballs  may  turn  upwards  and  move 
involuntarily.  In  addition,  as  tears  are  the  Fluid  of the  eyes,  excessive 
tearing  or lack  of tears  both show an  imbalance of the  Liver. 
While the Liver is  the main Organ connected with the eyes,  others 
help determine  their state.  Shen, or Spirit, is  reflected  in the brightness 
of the eyes  while  Kidney Essence  helps  nourish  them.  Heart Fire  leads 
to painful red  eyes and Kidney Yin Deficiency can cause failing eyesight 
and  dryness  of the eyes. 
Houses  the  Ethereal  Soul (Hun) 
Hun  are  three  in  number  representing  Heaven,  Earth  and  Man, 
the  number  for  humanity.  Thus,  the  Hun  make  us  human,  unique. 
Hun are  the Soul aspect and Yang  in nature.  Hun and  Po  are  intimately 
linked; Po  are  the physical aspect of the Soul and are  inextricably linked 
with  it, while  Hun are  the ethereal  aspect  of the Soul.  Po  develop  with 
the body, whereas  Hun enter the physical body upon birth. At death, Po 
dissolve  with  the  body,  returning  to  the  earth,  while  Hun  return  to 
Heaven, the world of subtle and non-material energies.  Hun are also the 
Soul counterpart ofShen, the Spirit, or the individualized expression of 
the  Shen.  Hun actually  reside  in  the  Blood,  another  close  relationship 
between  Shen and  Hun. 
The  Hun are  rooted  and  nourished  by  Liver Yin  and  Blood. They 
are  most active  at  night during sleep  and  help  determine  the quality of 
sleep experienced. If Hun are not rooted in the Liver due to a Deficiency 
of Liver  Blood or Yin,  then they wander,  resulting in  insomnia, dream-
disturbed  sleep,  a  feeling  of floating  before  sleep  or  a  vague  fear  of 
falling  asleep  at  night. 
Hun  are  responsible  for  balancing  and  harmonizing  the  Seven 
Emotions. Just as  the Liver  regulates  Qi,  it regulates  the  Emotions  in a 
general way. What Emotion is  expereinced is  not important, but the free 
circulation of it is, and the harmonization of the Emotions thus prevents 
them from being blocked or repressed. Further, if the Liver is imbalanced 
between Yin Blood and Yang Qi, the Seven Emotions become imbalanced 
and  cause  illness. 
The  Hun  pertain  to  the  giving  of images:  intuition,  inspiration, 
psychic  abilities,  creativity,  speculation,  imagination  and  vision.  The 
opening  to  the  Liver  and  Hun,  the  eyes,  is  the  "window of the Soul," 
giving  us  the  vision  to  foresee  and  plan.  Hun  are  that  quality  of the 
psyche  which  offers  the  capacity  to  plan  our lives  and  find  a  sense  of 
direction and purpose. When Liver Blood is Deficient, we can experience 
a lack  of direction  in  life  and  an  inability to  plan  or envision  what  to 
do. 
The  Hun are  also  linked  to  self-awareness  and  its  interaction with 
the environment. It expresses as  socially appropriate actions or awkward 
social  behavior,  and  accounts  for  healthy boundaries  between  self and 
others.  Assertiveness  is  needed  to  state  our  boundaries,  whereas  a 
challenging  of our boundaries  can  provoke  anger,  the  emotion  of the 
Liver.  Repeated  over-stepping of our boundaries over time by others can 
lead to frustration, resentment or even rage.  The opposite can happen as 
well:  an  inability to  get  angry or defend yourself when  appropriate can 
indicate  a  Deficient  Liver.  Furthermore,  our  ability  to  respect  other's 
boundaries  is  reflective  of a healthy and  flexible  Liver. 
The  virtues  of Hun  embody  being  courageous,  brave,  fearless, 
decisive,  resolute,  indomitable, expressing righteous  anger,  benevolence 
and  human  kindness.  It requires  a  higher  vision  to  see  both  sides  of a 
question  and  move  beyond self-awareness  and  self-preservation  in favor 
of another person or the greater good. Their expression supports a healthy 
and  supple  Liver.  The  vices  of Hun  include  being  excessively  angry, 
impatient, agitated, annoyed, frustrated, timid, cowardly, conceited, self-
centered,  and  boastful.  They  harm  the  Liver  by  creating  Liver  Qi 
Stagnation,  Liver  Fire  or consuming Liver Yin. 
Hun  provides  resoluteness,  creativity,  an  indomitable  spirit  and 
drive, life direction and growth. It is the motivation to grow and express 
one's  true  self,  and  it  helps  integrate  all  aspects  of our  being  and 
personality  regardless  of the  obstacles.  Like  a  tree,  a  healthy  Hun  can 
grow  around  obstacles  to  achieve  its  vision  and  plan. 
When our growth, inspiration, spiritual achievements, drive or plans 
are  blocked  or thwarted  in  any way,  be  it from  lack of self direction  or 
from  outside  influences  hindering  us,  we  become  frustrated,  annoyed, 
irritable,  angry and  eventually depressed.  This  can  also  occur when  we 
do not express or assert our true inner self, feelings and needs. Resentment, 
guilt  and  depression  arise  when  our  expression  is  blocked.  Often  we 
turn to stimulants such as  chocolate, coffee, colas, sugar, alcohol, smoking 
or drugs  to  escape  the frustration  and  depression. 
In  modern  times  we  now  turn  to  anti-depressants  to  enable  us  to 
handle  our stressful  and  often  non-fulfilling  lives  with  better  "spirits". 
Instead,  they  help  us  further  disconnect  from  our  true  feelings,  and 
thus our power and energy to  live  our true purpose of being. They only 
help  us  fit  the  mold  of expectations  we  live  with  rather  than deal  with 
the real  issues:  suppressed anger,  lack of expression, not living one's true 
purpose  in  life  or  not  listening  to  our deep  instincts  or  intuition  and 
acting on them. 
So,  often these  are  the  real  reasons  behind women's  gynecological 
issues,  PMS,  and cancers of the breast, ovaries and uterus. Stagnation of 
Liver Qi has a major influence on these issues, and suppression of anger 
and  self expression  stagnate  Liver  Qi.  For  men  it can  take  the  form  of 
headaches,  heart  trouble,  prostate  cancer  and  explosive  aggressive 
personalities.  Shouting,  the  sound  of the  Liver,  can  represent  the  need 
to  express  and  assert  oneself. 
Chronic fatigue  can also be a suppression of this energy. The Liver 
is intimately linked with our overall sense of well being. When imbalanced, 
not only our emotions become depressed, but so does our energy. Often 
it is  a  signal  that we  are  ignoring our growth:  what  true  purpose,  goal, 
direction  or  mission  in  life  is  being  suppressed?  The  more  this  Hun 
expression  is  repressed,  the  more our energy becomes  stagnant and  less 
available  to us,  resulting in fatigue  and  feeling  poorly most of the time. 
Learning  to  give  expression  to  one's  Hun  is  extremely  important 
to the health of the body. Using tools such as  counseling, group therapy, 
exercise,  listening  to  one's  inner guidance  and  direction,  sharing one's 
true  feelings  with  family  and  community,  creative  expression  and  rites 
of passage  such  as  vision  questing  are  all  healthy outlets  for  one's  true 
inner feelings. They free the body's energy and give direction and purpose 
to  one's  life. 
Loathes  Wind 
Climatic Wind  can  stir  up  Internal Wind  in  the  body and  affect 
the Liver and  its  regulating and harmonizing functions.  This Wind can 
be  likened  to  the  nervous  system.  It  is  not  uncommon  for  Liver 
disharmonies  of headaches  and  stiffness  of the  neck  to  appear  after 
being exposed  for  a while  to windy weather. 
Emotion: Anger 
When  our  boundaries  are  crossed  or an  improper  action  occurs, 
our appropriate reaction is  righteous anger. On the other hand, Stagnant 
Liver Qi, Liver  Fire,  or Deficient Liver  Blood or Yin  can lead to Heat in 
the Liver.  The emotional result is  anger.  Inappropriate anger,  frequently 
feeling angry and a propensity to frustration and irritability reflect Liver 
imbalances. 
Connected  to  the  left  side,  hypochondria,  lower  abdomen  and 
external genitals 
Although  physiologically  situated  on  the  right  side,  the  Liver  is 
related  to  the  left  side  of the  body.  This  is  because  in  the original  Five 
Element System, when the Spleen was  placed  in the middle of the other 
Elements,  the  Liver  was  placed  on  the  left  side  of the  cycle.  Thus,  any 
left-sided symptoms, such as  pains on the left side of the head, abdomen 
and  tongue,  especially  reflect  the  Liver,  while  the  right side  reflects  the 
Lungs. 
The  Liver  meridians  cross  through  the  hypochondria,  lower 
abdomen,  groin and  external  genitals. Thus, symptoms or diseases  that 
arise in these areas, such as  masses, tumors and lumps, should be treated 
with  an  overall  analysis  of signs  of the  Liver. 
KIDNEYS 
The  Kidneys  are  the  only double  organ  in  the  body and  here  are 
found Jing, Yin, Yang,  and Ming Men or "Life Gate Fire."  The Kidneys 
are  the  original  basis  for  life,  like  the  foundation  of a  house  because 
they  store Jing,  Pre-Heaven  Essence.  This  refined  aspect  represents  our 
essential  "inherited"  constitutional  strength  and  forms  the  material 
foundation  for  Yin  and  Yang.  Thus,  the  Kidneys  are  considered  to  be 
the  root  of Yin  and Yang  for  the entire  body.  Kidney Yin  provides  the 
material  foundation  for  Kidney Yang,  while  Kidney Yang  provides  the 
Heat and movement for Kidney Yin.  Because they have the same source, 
they are  interdependent;  a depletion  of one creates  a Deficiency in the 
other.  Thus, when  strengthening  Kidney Yin,  one also  tonifies  Kidney 
Yang  and  vice  versa.  Further,  the  Kidneys  are  the  source  of Water  and 
Fire  in  the  body  because  of Essence  being  part  of the Water  Element; 
Fire  is  included  hecause  the  Kidneys  house  the  Life  Gate  Fire  (Ming 
Men)  of the body. 
Store  Essence  and Gm;em  Birth,  Growth,  Development and Reproduction 
Pre-Heaven  Essence  is  inherited  from  both parents  at  the  time of 
conception and determines the constitutional strength and  resistance of 
the body.  Essence  transforms  into Source Q!, which  forms  the material 
basis on which the human body grows,  develops  and  reproduces.  It also 
includes  the  Original Yin  and  Original  Yang  energies,  and  thus  is  the 
source  ofYin and Yang  in  the  body. 
Essence  encompasses  the  processes  of reproduction, development, 
growth, sexual potency, conception, pregnancy, menopause and ultimate 
physical  decay  of the  organism.  It is  the  basic  constitutional  strength, 
vitality and resistance of the body. As  part of growth from childhood, it 
is  responsible  for  the growth  of bones,  teeth,  hair,  brain  and  sexuality. 
In maturity,  it controls reproductive  function,  fertility,  conception and 
pregnancy.  As  Essence  declines  with  age,  there  is  a  natural  decline  of 
sexuality,  fertility,  hair  growth  and  coloring,  skin  smoothness  and  so 
forth.  Thus,  improper  bone  formation,  retarded  growth  (mental  or 
physical), delayed sexual maturation, premature aging, infertility, sterility 
or impotence are  symptoms of Essence  Deficiency. 
Pre-Heaven Essence  can never be  increased but is  supplemented by 
Post-Heaven Essence derived from  the Grain Q! produced by the Spleen 
and enhanced by the prolonged practice ofQ! Gong. Post-Heaven Essence 
is  transported to the Organs to provide for their physiological activities. 
When  plentiful,  the  excess  is  stored  in  the  Kidneys  for  future  needs. 
When insufficient, the Kidneys  draw on their stored  Essence to provide 
for  the  Organs'  needs.  If this  continues,  they  even  take  the  inherited 
Jing, causing a depletion of Essence in the body. Thus, the Yin and Yang 
of each of the Organs depend on the Yin  and Yang of the Kidneys, and 
in the treatment of prolonged diseases and deficiencies,  the Kidneys are 
always  treated  regardless  of the Organs  involved. 
Rule  U'ater 
The  Kidneys  regulate  water  circulation  and  help  maintain  Fluid 
balance  in  the  body.  They are  the  foundation  of water  metabolism  in 
the body, furthered by the Spleen's function of transforming and raising 
pure Fluids and  the Lungs'  function  of circulating and  lowering Fluids 
to  the  Lower  Warmer.  The  Kidneys  also  receive  Fluids  from  the  Lungs, 
extract some to be excreted  and some to be vaporized, which they return 
to  moisten  the Lungs. 
The  Kidneys  regulate  water  through  their Yang  aspect.  It acts  as  a 
gate,  opening to excrete waste  Fluids, and closing to retain  needed water 
by any of the Organs. When functioning  normally,  it results  in normal 
urination.  When  the  gate  is  closing  more  than  opening,  scanty  dark 
urine and edema occur. When opening more  than closing,  profuse and 
frequent  pale  urination  result.  Further,  the  Kidneys  provide  the  Q!  to 
~ 
154 
the Bladder to store and transform urine. They also  provide Yang  to the 
Intestines  to  separate  the  pure  fluids  from  the dirty ones.  The Kidneys 
further supply Yang  to  the Spleen  to  assist  its  function of transforming 
and  transporting  Body  Fluids. 
Control and Promote  Reception  of  Qj 
While the Lungs  rule respiration, the Kidneys aid  in inhalation by 
receiving the  inhaled  air and  holding it down. This enables Natural Air 
Qi  to  penetrate  the  body  deeply.  If the  Kidneys  are  Deficient,  they 
cannot hold the Qi down and it "rebels", causing breathlessness, chronic 
asthma, panting or difficult breathing. The involvement of the Kidneys 
in any of these conditions can be concluded by determining if inhaling 
is  more  difficult or causes  more  problems  than exhaling. 
Rule the  Bones and Produce MaTTO'll) 
Both these aspects are derived from  Essence which produces marrow 
that, in turn, creates and supports the bones. Marrow in Chinese Medicine 
encompasses bones, bone marrow,  the brain and spinal cord. Marrow in 
the  bones  nourishes  them  and  determines  their strength,  development 
and  repair.  If insufficient  in  children  it  results  in  soft,  maldeveloped 
and weak bones or late closure and softness of the fontanel.  In adults, it 
can  produce weak  legs  and  knees,  brittle bones or stiffness of the spine. 
In  the  brain,  Marrow  nourishes  mental  vigor  and  power, 
concentration, thinking, sight and memory, especially short term. Thus, 
the  Kidneys  represent  the  power  behind  the  senses.  If depleted,  poor 
memory  and  concentration,  dizziness,  dull  thinking  and  poor  sight 
occur. The teeth are considered the surplus of the bones, so they are also 
nourished by the Kidneys.  Disorders such as  slowly growing teeth, loose 
or early  loss  of teeth  and  unhealthy teeth  in general  signal  insufficient 
Kidney Jing. 
Manifest  in  the  Hair 
Because  Essence  can  turn  into  Blood,  and  Blood  nourishes  the 
hair,  the  condition  of the  Kidneys  reflects  in  the  hair  of the  body, 
especially  head  hair.  When Jing  is  sufficient,  the  head  hair  is  moist, 
glossy,  thick,  plentiful  and  retains  its  original  color.  When  Blood  or 
Essence are            then withered, thin, prematurely grey and frequent 
loss  of hair or baldness  occur. 
Open  to  the  Ears 
The  opening  of the  Kidneys  is  through  the  ears,  since  their  Qi 
goes through them. Thus, their condition reflects the state of the Kidneys. 
 
155 
If Deficient, hearing  problems,  including deafness,  frequent  or chronic 
earaches  and  tinnitus,  may occur. 
Control the  Lower Orifices 
The lower orifices include the urethra, anus and spermatic duct in 
men.  Kidney Qi regulates  the Fluids in the Lower Warmer, and controls 
the  opening  and  closing  of these  orifices.  If malfunctioning,  urinary 
incontinence,  diarrhea,  spontaneous  defecation  while  eating,  or 
spermatorrhea may occur. 
Emotion:  Fear 
Fear,  fright  and paranoia all  reflect a Kidney imbalance.  Excessive 
or prolonged  exposure  to  any  situations  creating  fear  or  fright  injures 
the Kidneys.  On the other hand, depleted  Kidneys  can  cause  one to  be 
more easily  frightened,  paranoid  or fearful. 
The  Gate  of Vitality  (Ming Men) 
The Gate ofVitality was originally considered to be the right Kidney, 
which  provided  the Yang  functions  in the body,  while  the left was  both 
Yin  and Yang.  Later,  and  continuing  to  today,  it was  considered  to  lie 
between  the two  Kidneys with  the function  of replenishing the Yang  of 
the  Kidneys.  It  is  considered  to  be  the  root  of Original  Qi,  which  is 
Essence  in its  Qi form,  and the seat of Fire  in the body which provides 
the necessary Heat to all the internal Organs to perform their functional 
activities.  This  has  a  special  influence  on  warming  the  Stomach  and 
Spleen  to  aid  digestion,  warming  the  Lower  Warmer  and  Bladder  to 
promote transformation and excretion of Fluids, and warming the sexual 
function  and  Uterus  to  aid  fertility,  puberty,  menstruation  and  sexual 
performance.  If impaired,  poor  digestion,  diarrhea,  tiredness,  feeling 
cold, cold limbs, Dampness, edema, impotence, infertility, lowered sexual 
drive  and  leukorrhea  can occur. 
House  Will Power (Zhi) 
Zhi  is  not  a  spirit  but  a  quality.  Like  the  Kidney  functions,  Zhi 
gives  support to  all  the  five  psychic energies of the other Organs. Since 
Shen  keep  all  these  psychic  energies  in  balance,  Shen  and  Zhi  are  in 
constant communication with each other. Zhi is  the source ofWill, the 
motivating  force  to  get  things  done  and  to  accomplish  it.  It  creates 
power,  skill  and  ability.  It is  resolve  and  determination,  the  deep  inner 
power and endurance of a person. Zhi gives  purpose to life and sustains 
the  person  to  achieve  those  purposes.  The  combination  of Zhi  and 
Shen  here  creates  a  magnetic  personality,  full  of charisma,  vigor  and 
sexual vitality. Thus, if the Kidneys  are strong, so will  be our will  power, 
and our Mind will stay focused and accomplish the goals it sets. However, 
if the Kidneys are weak, Will power will be lacking and the Mind will  be 
easily  swayed  and  discouraged. 
When  one  has  purpose  (Yi)  then  one  has  Zhi.  To  hold  firm  to  a 
purpose  and  give  it  continuity indicates  Will  (Zhi).The  virtues  of Zhi 
include being strong in will power and being resolute, determined, firm, 
enduring and wise.  The vices  are  being  excessively  afraid,  apprehensive, 
scared,  paranoid,  suspicious,  distrustful,  anxious,  insecure,  fearsome, 
worried, concerned, stubborn, and obstinate. Strong resolution and Will 
need  vigor and stamina to carry out the  intended choices.  It enables  us 
to stand our ground or advance in the face  of any fear or apprehension. 
If weak,  we  are  easily bullied  and  overwhelmed. 
The  emotions  and  vices  of the  Kidneys  can  all  get  in  the  way  of 
our  Will  and  determination  to  succeed  on  a  particular  path  or  at  a 
particular  goal.  When we  resolve  to  accomplish  something despite  the 
obstacles,  however,  we  are  summoning our vital  energy and  the  best of 
our Kidneys.  This gives  strength of character and  power of personality. 
If we are held back by our fears,  suspicions and distrust, we feel  inadequate 
and  inferior. 
On the  other hand,  fear  often  results  from  a  sense  of inadequacy 
and  inferiority.  This  indicates  a  lack  of self-trust.  It  is  these  types  of 
feelings  and a lack ofWill which can lead  to a victim complex in which 
everything  that  happens  is  due  to  someone  else  or  some  outside 
circumstance rather than to our own lack of determination or following 
through  on our choices. When we  feel  inadequate,  we  can  panic or get 
paranoid. Procrastination and avoidance are further signs of a weakened 
Will, and can occur from  fear,  paranoia, suspicion or mistrust blocking 
us.  On  the  other  hand,  audacity,  foolhardiness  and  acting  superior  to 
others can signal an unchecked Will. Often these behaviors are aggressive 
cover-ups  for  a true  inner feeling  of inadequacy or inferiority. 
The  Kidney  connection  to  fear  is  seen  very  tangibly  in  the  body: 
when  we  are  afraid,  we  often  feel  the  urgent  need  to  urinate  or cannot 
hold our urine at  those times.  Fear and Anger are  opposite sides of the 
same  coin,  which  demonstrates  the  connection  between  the  Kidneys 
and Liver. When fear is experienced, the weakened Kidneys cannot nourish 
the  Liver  and  anger  often  results.  On  the  other  hand,  anger  can  be  a 
cover-up  for  underlying  fears  not acknowledged  or expressed. 
The Kidneys are the channel of life and death. The ultimate fear  is 
the fear  of death.  Facing one's  mortality and looking past it to discover 
and  accept your destiny is  the transformation of fear  into Wisdom,  the 
Kidney's  greatest virtue. 
Kidneys  Loathe  Dryness 
Being  an  Organ  that  rules  Water  metabolism,  the  Kidneys  loathe 
being  dry.  Kidney Yin  can  be  damaged  by  prolonged  exposure  to  dry 
weather, Internal Dryness caused by profuse and continued loss of Fluids 
from  sweating or diarrhea, Deficient Stomach Yin,  or tobacco smoking. 
YANG  ORGANS  (FU) 
While  the  Yin  Organs  store,  the  Yang  Organs  transport.  Overall, 
the  Yang  Organs  have  the  functions  of excreting,  digesting,  receiving, 
rotting,  ripening,  transforming,  transporting  and  waste  management. 
With all  Organs, except  the Gall  Bladder,  this  has  to  do with  the direct 
interaction  with  food,  drink  and  their  waste  products.  These  Organs 
include  the  Small  Intestine,  Triple  Warmer,  Stomach,  Large  Intestine, 
Gall  Bladder and  Urinary Bladder. 
The Stomach  is  the most important of the Yang  Organs, as  it is  in 
charge of the digestion. Along with the Spleen, it is  known as  the "Root 
of Post  Heaven  Qi" because  the essence  of the digested  food  and  fluids 
ultimately becomes the Qi and Blood of the body. Thus, proper digestion 
is  essential  for  the  production  of Qi  and  Blood  and  the  subsequent 
nourishment of all  the  Organs  in  the  body. 
SMALL  INTESTINE 
The  Small  Intestine  is  like  an  officer  who  receives  and  then 
transforms  food  and  drink.  It  receives  the  partially  decomposed  food 
from  the Stomach  and  further  digests  and  absorbs  it  by separating  the 
pure part from  the waste.  The useful  part is  sent to the Spleen, which in 
turn  transports  and  distributes  it  all  over  the  body.  The  waste  is  sent 
into  the  Large  Intestine  where  it  is  further  separated  into  pure  and 
impure  portions  before  being  excreted  as  waste.  The  impure waters  are 
sent  to  the  Urinary  Bladder  to  be  excreted  from  the  body.  When 
functioning  normally,  this  occurs  with  smooth  urination  and  normal 
elimination  of feces.  When  in  disharmony,  water  is  mixed  with  waste, 
leading  to  dysuria,  loose  stools,  constipation,  diarrhea,  intestinal 
rumblings  and  abdominal  distension  and  pain. 
Psychologically, the Small Intestine receives  things, eliminates those 
that are  not relevant  and  makes  those  that are  thrive.  Thus  it is  said  to 
influence mental clarity and  judgment, demonstrating its  link with  the 
Heart and Mind. It also aids in decision making by giving the powers of 
discernment and clarity. This is  different than the Gall Bladder's role in 
decision  making, as  the Small  Intestine gives  the ability to discriminate 
and  differentiate  what  is  relevant  from  what  isn't  (separating  the  pure 
from the impure), while the Gall Bladder lends the initiative and courage 
to  make  the  decisions. 
TRIPLE WARMER 
The Triple Warmer, also known as the Three Heater or Triple Burner, 
is  an  "Organ"  unique  to  Chinese  Medicine.  It is  best  understood  as  a 
large  bowel  containing all  the Internal Organs, a functional  passageway 
uniting  all  the  organs  into  a  complete  system  and  harmonious whole. 
All  the  physiological  functions  of the  Triple  Warmer  encompass  the 
sum  total  of activities  of the Yin  and Yang  Organs  in the  body. 
The  Triple  Warmer  includes  three  Warmers:  the  Upper  Warmer 
embracing the body cavity above the diaphragm which houses the Heart, 
Lungs, Pericardium, throat and head; the Middle Warmer which extends 
from  the  diaphragm  to  the  umbilicus  and  houses  the Spleen,  Stomach 
and  Gall  Bladder;  and  the  Lower  Warmer  which  comprises  the  lower 
abdominal area below the umbilicus housing the Liver,  Kidney, Urinary 
Bladder, Intestines and Uterus. The Liver is included in the Lower Warmer 
because  of its  close  relationship  with  the  Kidney  rather  than  its 
physiological placement in the body. Pathologically, diseases of the Upper, 
Middle or Lower Warmer involve a dysfunction of the Organs contained 
within  that Warmer. 
The functions of the Triple Warmer control all the transformations 
of Qi in the body, ensuring their coordination and unity. It orchestrates 
the  production  of all  types  of post-natal  Qi and  their  free  circualtion 
from  the  deepest  to  the  most  superficial  levels.  The  Upper  Warmer 
directs respiration and disperses Natural Air Qi to all the Organs, tissues, 
and skin. Thus, it is  likened to a "mist" which diffuses Fluids throughout 
the  body.  The  Middle  Warmer  transforms  and  transports  foods  and 
fluids  and  sends  the extracted  nourishment throughout  the  body.  It  is 
equated  to  a  "foam"  or  "bubbling  cauldron",  referring  to  digestive 
churning and fomentations. The Lower Warmer is  a "swamp", gutter or 
drainage  ditch,  where  the  clear  is  separated  from  the  turbid,  the  clear 
being  transported  upwards  and  the  turbid  being  sent  downwards  and 
discharged  from  the body. 
The Triple Warmer  is  the  passage  through which  water,  food  and 
Fluids  are               it is  the communication channel and controller 
of the entire circulation of Body Fluids. These functions result from the 
combined  functions  of the  Lung,  Spleen,  Kidney,  Stomach,  Intestines 
and  Bladder.  According  to  the  Chinese,  Fire  controls Water,  implying 
that  the  Fire  Element,  or  Triple  Warmer,  controls  the  water  passages 
functionally  encompassed  by the above  Organs. 
 
159 
STOMACH 
The Stomach, along with the Spleen, is  in charge of the storehouses 
and grainaries in the body. It is  in charge of receiving  ingested food  and 
drink and then "ripening" and "rotting" it through its digestive process. 
It then sends the pure portion to the Spleen  for  its  metabolic processes, 
and  the  impure  part  to  the Small  Intestine for  further  digestion.  Thus, 
Stomach Q! descends while Spleen  Q! ascends when  it directs Grain Q! 
to  the  Lungs  and  Heart.  The  Stomach  hates  to  be  hot or dry and  likes 
moisture,  the opposite of the Spleen. 
Diet  is  the  main  cause  of Stomach  disorders.  Foods  which  are 
heating,  drying,  greasy,  spicy,  or cold  upset  the  Stomach.  Poor  eating 
habits,  such  as  working,  driving  or  standing  while  eating,  eating  at 
irregular times or over- or under-eating also disrupt the Stomach functions. 
Excessive worry or thinking either stagnates  or depletes Stomach Q!.  A 
disturbance of Stomach  functions  results  in  poor appetite,  indigestion, 
food  retention,  and  distension  and  pain  in  the  epigastric  region.  If 
Stomach  Q!  does  not  properly descend,  belching,  burping,  hiccuping, 
nausea  or vomiting occur. 
LARGE  INTESTINE 
The main function of the Large  Intestine is  to receive  the contents 
of the Small  Intestine, absorb  excessive  water  from  it and  discharge  the 
waste  from  the  body through  the  anus.  Thus,  the Large  Intestine  is  the 
officer in charge of passing and removing things.  Dysfunctions  have  to 
do with disturbances  in bowel  movements, including the substance and 
amount of feces  and  the  times  of defecation.  The  Large  Intestine  also 
represents  our ability to  let  go  of things,  either material  or emotional. 
Disturbances  of the  Large  Intestine  can  occur  from  External  as 
well  as  Internal causes.  It is  possible for the Large Intestine to be directly 
invaded  by Exterior Cold  by  passing  through  the  exterior layers  of the 
body.  This  occurs  from  prolonged  exposure  to  cold  weather  or 
environments and from lack of proper clothing. Sitting on concrete can 
also  cause  Cold  to  enter. 
Internally,  excessive  consumption of cold  damp  foods  and  drinks 
such  as  iced  drinks,  ice  cream,  popscicles,  raw  vegetables  and  certain 
fruits  causes  Coldness in  the  Large  Intestine, while  prolonged eating of 
greasy, fatty and spicy foods  produces Dampness and Heat. Just as sadness, 
grief and worry affect  the Lungs,  they also  can affect the Large Intestine 
and  cause  Q!  stagnation. 
GALL  BLADDER 
The  Gall  Bladder  is  unique  among  the  Yang  Organs  in  that  it 
stores  a clean  Fluid, bile,  rather than deal  directly with  food,  drink and 
their waste  products. It also doesn't open directly to the exterior through 
the mouth, rectum or urethra. Thus the Gall  Bladder is  also  considered 
an extraordinary Organ. Bile is  a bitter fluid produced by the surplus of 
Liver  Qi  and  stored  in  the  Gall  Bladder.  It  is  sent  downwards  to  the 
Small  Intestine to aid with digestion.  Liver Qi ensures  the smooth flow 
of bile  when  it  is  functioning  normally.  If Liver  Qi  is  Stagnant,  bile 
does  not  flow  smoothly,  resulting  in  poor  digestion  and  absorption, 
loss  of appetite,  diarrhea,  nausea  and  belching. 
The  Gall  Bladder  is  the  officer  in charge  of making  decisions,  of 
being exact,  just and  decisive.  Since bile is  a pure substance,  it is  said  to 
give the ability to judge clearly and purely. This capacity to make decisions 
links well  to the Liver's capacity to plan one's life. The Gall Bladder also 
gives  initiative  to  make  the  decisions  and  the  bravery,  determination 
and  courage  to  carry  them  out.  Thus,  timidity,  indecisiveness,  lack  of 
drive or initiative to make decisions and being easily discouraged reflect 
a Gall  Bladder disharmony. 
URINARY  BLADDER 
The  function  of the  Bladder  is  to  receive,  store  and  excrete  urine. 
Through  water  metabolism,  Fluids  are  dissipated  all  over  the  body  to 
moisten it and then accumulate in the Kidneys. There urine is produced 
out of the  final  portions  of turbid  Fluids  sent  from  the  Lungs,  Small 
Intestine and  Large  Intestine. It is  then sent down  to the Bladder where 
it is  stored  until excreted.  This function  requires  Qi and Heat provided 
by  Kidney  Yang,  and  is  referred  to  as  the  Bladder's  function  of Qi 
transformation.  Thus,  dysfunctions  of the  Bladder  involve  urinary 
problems. On an emotional level, the Bladder relates to jealousy, suspicion 
and  holding grudges.  It also  reacts  to  anger  over  time, which  can cause 
bladder  infections  as  a result of being "pissed  off'. 
ElGHT 
CAUSES OF  DiSEASE 
Traditional  Chinese  Medicine  regards  balance  as  the  basis  of health. 
This  includes  balance  between  all  aspects  of life,  including  work  and 
rest,  emotions,  diet,  sexual  activity and  external  factors  associated  with 
climate and weather. Apart from hereditary factors, sustaining a condition 
of imbalance  is  the cause  of disease. 
In TCM, there are several definitive causes of disease. These include 
environmental,  emotional  and  lifestyle  factors.  Environmental  causes 
are External, while stress-related emotional factors  are  Internal causes of 
disease.  Further,  causes  that  are  neither  External  nor  Internal  include 
diet,  lifestyle  and  miscellaneous  issues  such  as  parasites. 
It  is  obvious  that  besides  those  diseases  stemming  from  innate 
hereditary factors, External environmental causes or Internal stress-related 
emotional  issues  both  cause  lowered  resistance  and  impaired  immune 
function.  Today,  however,  dietary  indiscretions,  such  as  the  excessive 
intake of refined,  processed  and denatured  foods  and drinks consumed 
by the vast majority play a significant role in compromising the immune 
system  and depressing organic  processes  that eventually lead  to  disease. 
EXTERNAL CAUSES  OF  DISEASE 
The  External  causes  of disease  are  attributed  to  the Six  Pernicious 
Influences.  These  are  environmental  factors  which,  when  we  are  over-
exposed  to  them, can  invade  the  body and  cause  disease. 
PERNICIOUS  INFLUENCES 
The  body  is  a  dynamic  balance  of Yin  and  Yang  and  its  various 
subcategories, including the solid (Zang) and hollow (Fu) Organs. When 
this balance is  upset, the body may not be able to adjust to environmental 
changes.  Likewise,  when  normal environmental forces  become excessive 
or occur unseasonably,  and  one's  innate vital  energy  is  weak,  the  body 
reacts adversely to external climatic and environmental conditions. This 
is described as  the Six External Pernicious Influences, or adverse climatic 
factors,  invading  the  body  and  causing  disease.  These  are:  1)  Wind,  2) 
Cold,  3)  Heat,  4)  Dryness,  5)  Dampness  and  6)  Summer  Heat. 
The easiest way to understand the Pernicious Influences is  to think 
of how their counterparts in weather manifest. For instance, wind moves 
things, changes direction, is fickle and alternates intensity. Water is damp 
and heavy, sinks to a lower level and slows things down. Coldness contracts 
and  stops  activity or movement.  Heat circulates,  activates  and  expands. 
Summer Heat is scorching hot, rising and dispersing. Dryness evaporates 
moisture.  The correspondence  between  these weather  patterns  and how 
they  manifest  in  the body is  metaphorical, yet  it demonstrates  how the 
microcosm  reflects  the  macrocosm. 
Since the Pernicious Influences relate to the seasons, diseases caused 
by  Wind  relate  to  Spring,  the  Wood  element  and  its  two  associated 
Organs, Liver and Gall Bladder. Thus TCM theory states that all Internal 
Wind  emanates  from  the  Liver  and  Gall  Bladder.  Heat  and  Summer-
Heat relate to Summer and are associated with the Fire Element involving 
the  Heart  and  circulation;  and  the  Earth  Element  involving  digestion, 
assimilation  includes  the  Stomach  and  the  Spleen.  Traditional  theory 
describes  Fire  as  originating  in  the  Heart.  Dampness  relates  to  both 
humidity and Winter weather, which stresses  the Earth-Spleen function 
of assimilation  and  digestion.  Dryness,  associated  with  Autumn,  can 
injure the Metal-Lung function.  Finally,  Cold  is  associated  with Winter 
and  can  injure  the  Water-Kidney-Adrenals,  which  are  the  root  of Yin 
and Yang  for  the entire body. The Six Pernicious Influences relate to  the 
presence  of these  Influences  in  the  dwelling  and  work  place  as  well  as 
outdoor climate. 
The Six  Pernicious  Influences  invade  the  body either singly  or in 
combinations.  A few  examples  of these  include  Wind-Cold  type  of 
rhinitis,  Damp-Heat  symptoms  of itching  and  oozing  skin  rashes,  or 
even  a  Wind-Cold-Damp  arthralgia.  Further,  if the  Six  Pernicious 
Influences do not remain in balance, it is  possible for them to transform 
and  change.  For  instance,  pathogenic  Cold  can  transform  into  Heat 
after  entering  the  body,  Heat  can  change  to  Cold,  and  Summer  Heat 
can  consume Body Fluids  (Yin)  and  transform  into Dryness. 
The Six  Pernicious Influences usually invade the body through the 
skin,  mouth,  or nose,  while Wind  frequently  invades  through  the  back 
of the  neck.  Such  illnesses  are  called  External  Pernicious  Influences. 
They usually come on suddenly, with no warning, and accompany sudden 
acute  illnesses.  They are  characterized  by aversion  toward  the particular 
Influence  (such  as  fear  of heat  or  cold,  dislike  of wind  or dampness), 
fever,  chills,  body aches  and  general  tiredness. 
When the Internal Organs are imbalanced, or there are pathological 
changes  caused  by  bacteria,  chemicals  or  other  factors  in  the  body, 
syndromes similar to Wind, Cold, Heat, Dampness, Dryness and Summer 
Heat  may  occur.  Because  their  characteristics  are  similar,  they  are 
distinguished  from  the  six  External  Influences  and  named  Internal 
Pernicious Influences. In this case, the body manifests similar signs and 
symptoms  to  those  of the  External  Influences  with  an  important 
difference:  the illness  does  not usually come on suddenly nor are  there 
normally fever  or chills.  They are  often  related  to  chronic  diseases.  All 
Pernicious Influences, however, reflect their climatic conditions and are 
treated  accordingly. 
While the six Pernicious Influences can be the direct cause of disease, 
a  Deficiency of Qi,  Blood,  Yang  or Yin  can  often  be  the  predisposing 
underlying  cause.  This,  according  to  the  theory  of Root  and  Branch, 
designates  the  Pernicious  Influence  as  the  Branch  and  the  underlying 
Deficiency  as  the  Root.  For  example,  when  there  is  Blood  or  Yin 
Deficiency in the body (root),  it can stir up Wind (branch); Qi or Yang 
Deficiency  (root)  makes  the  body  more  susceptible  to  Cold  (branch); 
Yin  Deficiency or Stagnation (root)  can  lead  to  Heat (branch);  and Yin 
or Blood Deficiency (root) can result in Dryness (branch). Treatment of 
a Pernicious Influence must focus first on clearing the presenting branch 
symptom, if possible, and second on the underlying root cause. Formulas 
usually reflect this by using appropriate tonic herbs in smaller amounts 
than  the  primary herbs  included  for  branch  symptoms. 
The following descriptions include the specific signs and symptoms 
of how each Influence manifests. Both External and  Internal aspects are 
discussed.  Three or more signs  under a given  category need  to  manifest 
to indicate the presence of that Influence. When two or more Pernicious 
Influences appear  together,  all  the  Influences  involved  are  treated. 
WIND 
Wind tends to rise, disperse, move upward and outward, and because 
of its  movement,  is  considered  a  Yang  evil.  Thus,  pathogenic  Wind 
usually attacks the upper and outer Yang  parts of the body first,  such as 
the head and face,  and the skin and muscle,  resulting in such symptoms 
as  headache,  dizziness,  spasms,  rigidity of the muscles  and  deviation of 
the eye and mouth. It also brings on sudden colds with headache, stuffy 
nose,  chills  and  fever.  At other times  it causes  a stiff or rigid  neck  and 
shoulders.  Often people will  remember being exposed  to  a draft before 
these  symtoms  began. 
The essence  ofWind is  movement and change.  It tends  to  migrate 
to various parts of the body, come and go, change direction and location, 
alternate  in intensity of symptoms or periodically disappear  altogether. 
Diseases  ofWind usually occur rapidly and are capricious, variable and 
tend to wander. Symptoms of pathogenic Internal Wind are characterized 
by  vibration  and  involuntary movement,  such  as  tremors,  convulsions 
and vertigo. These signs can be observed in nature by watching the wind 
in trees  and leaves,  on water or with clouds. 
Wind, a mechanism  that involves a complex neurological  reaction 
and  the  proliferation  of Pathogenic  Influences,  is  the  most commonly 
involved  of the Six  Influences.  As  such,  it combines readily with other 
Influences to form combinations such as Wind-Cold, Wind-Heat, Wind-
Dryness  and  Wind-Damp.  While  it  is  associated  with  the  season  of 
spring,  Wind  can  occur  during  any  season.  External  Wind  symptoms 
occur as  a result of the Excess  of pathogenic Wind. The resulting chills 
and fever  reflect the conflict between External Influences and the body's 
innate integrity, or what is  called Righteous Q!. Exposure to high winds, 
living in windy environments and insufficient clothing are precipitating 
causes  for  an  External Wind  Influence. 
Internal  Wind  is  usually  caused  by  a  functional  derangement  of 
the Liver, yet it can arise from  a Deficiency of Blood or Liver or Kidney 
Yin,  or from  a  persistently high  fever  which  consumes  Body Fluids.  In 
fact,  any Deficiency can injure the nervous system and give rise to Interior 
Wind.  It can  also  be  caused  by  excessive  eating  of hot-natured,  spicy, 
greasy,  fatty  and  fried  foods,  excessive  activity,  "burning  the  candle  at 
both ends",  insufficient rest  and  stress. 
Qualities ofWind: 
comes  and  goes,  quickly and  abruptly 
signs  change  locations 
.  .  . 
vanous  s1gns  appear  m  successiOn 
tendency  toward  movement and  change 
itching 
spasms 
moving  pains 
twitching 
skin  eruptions  that change  locations;  urticaria 
Pulse:  External:  floating;  Internal:  bowstring,  tense 
Tongue:  External:  thin white  coat,  may  appear  normal 
Internal:  trembles,  deviated  to  the side,  can  appear normal 
External Wind: Wind-Cold Symptoms 
slight fever 
aversion  to wind  and  cold 
body aches 
headache 
stronger chills 
cough,  stuffed  nose 
sudden  onset 
itchy or slight  sore  throat 
Pulse:  floating  and  tense 
Tongue:  thin, white  coating 
Formula 
Schizonepeta and  Ledebouriella Combination Oing  fang  bai  du 
san) 
Actions: 
a)  Warming Diaphoretic, clears Wind Cold 
b)  Antipyretic,  anti-inflammatory,  lowers  fevers  and  clears  Heat 
c)  Diuretic,  clears  Dampness 
External Wind: Wind-Heat Symptoms: 
high  fever,  sudden onset 
slight chills 
headache 
slight aversion  to  cold 
fear  of wind 
sweating 
swollen  sore  throat 
cough with  yellow  sputum 
stuffed  nose 
Pulse:  floating  and  rapid 
Tongue:  pale  red  tongue  tip;  white or yellow  tinged  coating 
Formulas 
1.  Lonicera and Forsythia Combination (Yin  qiao  san) 
Actions: 
a)  Diaphoretic, disperses  External Wind-Heat 
b)  Alterative,  antibiotic and  antiviral,  clears  Internal  Heat 
and  relieves  toxicity 
2.  Morus and Chrysanthemum Combination (Sang  ju  yin) 
Actions: 
a)  Cooling diaphoretic 
b)  Dispels Wind  Heat 
c)  Antitussive,  relieves  cough 
Internal Wind Symptoms: 
convulsions 
upward  turning of eyeballs 
rigidity and  pain of neck  and  head 
numbness  of limbs 
paralysis 
~ 
166 
dizziness 
tremors 
apoplexy 
vertigo 
hemiplegia 
tetany 
muscle spasms,  twitching 
deviation  of eyes  and  mouth 
urticaria,  itching skin  eruptions  that change locations 
Pulse:  bowstring,  tense 
Tongue:  trembles,  deviated  to side,  can  appear  normal 
Formulas 
1.  Bupleurum Formula (Yi  gan  san) 
Actions: 
a)  Antispasmodic,  Calms  Liver Wind 
b)  Tonifies  Liver  Blood  and  Q! 
2.  Gastrodia and Uncaria Combination 
(Tian  ma gou  teng yin) 
Actions: 
a)  anti-hypertensive 
b)  clears  Heat 
3.  Antelope Horn and Uncaria Combination (Ling yang 
gou  teng  tang) 
Actions:  a)  antispasmodic and  anti-hypertensive,  calms 
endogenous  Liver Wind. 
b)  eliminates  Heat 
COLD 
Cold, a Yin  phenomenon, causes feelings of coldness and a slowing 
of circulation and  all  metabolic  functions.  There  is  a tendency towards 
cold  extremities,  to wear  more  clothes  regardless  of the weather,  and in 
general,  to  contract  and  hunch  over  to  minimize  body  surface  and 
maintain inner warmth. Upon examination, the body, or parts of it, feel 
cold  to  the touch and  have  a generally  pale  appearance, which  in some 
cases can also be an indication of Deficient Blood. Any bodily secretions 
are  clear or white in color, such as  clear or white mucus, sputum, vomit, 
urine,  diarrhea  or vaginal  discharges.  Cold  is  aggravated  during colder 
climates and  the season ofWinter. It can, however,  become an issue any 
time  of year  with  exposure  to  Cold. 
Just  as  water  turns  to  ice  when  exposed  to  coldness,  Cold  in  the 
body constricts, contracts and congeals. This causes physical obstructions, 
blocking  the  flow  of Qi  and  Blood  in  the  body  and  often  causing 
various kinds of pain, contraction, spasm, cramps and stiffness. Usually 
when symptoms favorably respond to the application of Heat, the cause 
of the  symptom  is  Cold. When  Cold  stays  in  the  skin  and  muscles,  it 
contracts the pores and stagnates the immune system's defensive energy 
(Wei  Qi).  When  this  occurs,  External  Cold  invades,  resulting  in  fever, 
strong chills,  a lack of sweating,  body aches  and  an aversion  to  cold.  If 
Cold  remains  in  the  muscles  and  channels,  numbness,  rigidity  and 
coldness  can  occur. 
Being Yin  in nature,  Cold in excess  can  injure the body's Yang  Qi 
and cause symptoms of Deficient Yang.  External Cold comes on quickly 
and impairs the defensive Yang of the body, for which teas  and formulas 
containing  warm  spicy  herbs  such  as  cinnamon  twigs  (Ramulus 
cinnamomi)  fresh  ginger  and  black  or  red  peppers  are  specifically 
indicated. When this occurs, chills are more pronounced than fever  and 
there is  little,  if any,  sweating.  Cold  Evil  can also  invade  and  injure the 
Yang-function  of the  Organs.  For  example,  Cold  Evil  can  attack  the 
Intestines  and  Stomach,  causing  a  stomach  ache  and  watery  diarrhea 
containing undigested  food  or vomiting of water. 
Cold  can  also  arise  Internally  from  an  overall  lowering  of 
metabolism  or insufficiency of Yang.  Internal  Cold  is  usually  chronic 
and is characterized by coldness, slowness and hypo-activity of the Organs 
and  metabolism.  Yang  then  may  be  unable  to  warm  and  nourish  the 
limbs,  digest  food  or  assimilate  and  transport  Fluids  and  nutrients. 
Internal  Cold  is  most  often  related  to  the  Kidney/  Adrenals  since  they 
are the root of the body's Yin and Yang,  and the throne of the Life  Gate 
Fire  (Ming Men).  If there  is  Internal  Coldness,  the  body becomes  more 
susceptible  to  External  Cold  invading  the  body. 
Causes  of Cold  include  improper  dressing  for  the  season  or 
environment,  including  seasonal  changes;  living  in  cold  places;  excess 
eating  of foods  and  drinks  with  a  cold  temperature,  cold  energy  or 
eliminating nature, such as  raw  foods,  fruits,  juices, ice cream,  popsicles 
and  iced  drinks;  inactivity;  and  lack  of exercise. 
Qualities of Cold: 
feeling  of coldness 
fear  of cold 
pale,  frigid  appearance 
desire  for  more  clothes, warm  foods,  drinks  and  climate 
hypo-functioning of organs  and  slowed  metabolism 
tendency toward  stagnation and  contraction 
clear or white  discharges  and  secretions 
sleeps  curled  up,  hunched  body  posture 
lack  of circulation of Qi and  Blood 
~ 
r68 
listlessness,  slowness 
little odor of body or discharges 
Pulse:  slow,  deep 
Tongue:  pale,  moist 
External Cold Symptoms: 
slight or low  grade  fever 
strong chills 
lack  of sweating 
no  thirst 
headache 
sudden  onset 
fear  of cold  and  feeling  of coldness 
body aches 
desire  for  lots  of clothes  or covers 
nasal  obstruction 
Pulse:  floating  and  tense 
Tongue: white  coating 
Formulas 
1.  EPHEDRA DECOCTION (Mahuang tang) 
Actions: 
a)  Warm  stimulating diaphoretic 
b)  Dispels  External Wind  Cold 
c)  Anti-asthmatic 
d)  For  a strong body type 
2.  CINNAMON COMBINATION (Gui  zhi  tang) 
Actions: 
a)  Warming diaphoretic 
b)  Tonic,  regulating  the constructive  or nutrient energy 
(Ying)  and  the Wei  (immune system) 
c)  For a weaker  body type 
3.  PUERARIA COMBINATION (Ge  gen  tang) 
Actions: 
a)  Diaphoretic,  treats  External Wind, Cold  and  Dampness 
b)  Antispasmodic,  relieves  stiffness  and  pain  of the  shoulders 
and  neck 
c)  For an  a v e r c ~ g e  body type 
Internal Cold Symptoms: 
feeling  of coldness 
aversion  to cold 
cold  limbs 
listlessness 
sleeps  alot 
underactivity 
frigid  appearance 
watery  stools  or stools  containing undigested  food 
craving warm  food  and  drinks 
desire  for  more  clothes  and  covers 
pale complexion 
pain in  the  joints and  flesh 
lack  of circulation of Q! and  Blood 
clear or white  discharges  (urine, vaginal,  mucus,  sputum) 
Pulse:  slow  (slower  than 60  BPM),  deep 
Tongue:  pale,  wet;  white  creamy  coating 
Formulas 
1.  Aconite,  Ginger and  Licorice Combination (Si  ni tang) 
Actions: 
a)  Internal warming Yang  stimulant 
2.  Ephedra  and Asarum  Combination  (Ma  huang fu  zi  xi 
xin  tang) 
Actions: 
a)  Stimulating and warming diaphoretic; warms  and  disperses 
the surface. 
b)  Internally warming 
HEAT (OR FIRE) 
Heat  and  Fire  are Yang  phenomena,  and  differ  only according  to 
degree,  with  Fire  being  the  more  severe.  Furthermore, Heat  refers  to  an 
External Pernicious Influence while Fire designates an Internal Pernicious 
Influence. Non-pathogenic heat emanates from the Life Gate (Ming Men) 
of the  Kidney-Adrenals,  and  when  in  its  proper  place,  it  is  regarded  as 
the  "Clear  Yang,"  which  is  the  normal  Yang  energy  that  imbues  all 
Internal  Organs with  vital warmth, Q!  and  movement.  It is  also  a part 
of the  External  immune  system  or  Wei  Q!.  Its  nature  is  to  rise  and 
circulate, imparting immunological and digestive function, vital warmth 
and movement throughout the body. The innate vitality and warmth of 
each  Organ  is  designated  as  "Ministerial  Fire". 
Internal  Heat  as  part  of Yang  Q!  is  not  to  be  confused  with  the 
Pernicious  Influence  that  occurs  as  a  result  of External  Heat  strongly 
reacting with  our innate Yang.  Thus,  Heat is  aggravated  in hot or warm 
climates and during summer, though it appears year round. Being Yang, 
its qualities are  hot, reactive and associated with stagnation. In this way, 
stagnation caused by Coldness can change to Heat, but when the body's 
resources  are vanquished,  it can change back  to  Coldness again. 
The Heat Pernicious  Influence causes  a person  to  feel  hot,  to wear 
fewer  clothes  and  covers,  to  crave  cold  foods  and  drinks  and  to  be 
restless and re-active, even to the point of aggressiveness. There is  usually 
thirst,  possible  burning  sensations,  strong  odors,  and  sticky  or  thick 
excretions  and  secretions  that are  yellow,  red  or blood-tinged.  Heat can 
dry  out  Bodily  Fluids  over  time  and  cause  Dryness,  such  as  unusual 
thirst, dry stools, dryness of the throat and mouth or scanty urination. 
Heat  tends  to  burn  and  scorch,  causing  symptoms  such  as  high 
fever,  flushed  face  and  constipation. Just as  a physical  fire  flares  up and 
rises,  so  does  Heat  in  the  body.  With  the  ascension  of toxic,  Unclear 
Yang,  Heat  symptoms  often  appear  on  the  head  and  face,  resulting  in 
painful, swollen and bleeding gums, swollen,  red and painful eyes  and a 
red  neck  and  face.  Fire  also  tends  to  cause  boils,  sores  and  red  skin 
eruptions with  local  redness,  swelling,  heat,  pain  and  even  suppuration 
and  ulceration.  In  general,  Heat  signs  are  often  associated  with 
inflammation or fever. 
Pathogenic  Heat  may  accelerate  the  flow  of blood  and  force  it  to 
go  astray,  causing  various  bleeding  symptoms  such  as  nosebleed, 
hemorrhage, ecchymosis, and blood in the urine, stool, vomit or mucus 
from  the  lungs.  Fire  can  also  stir  up  Liver  Wind,  causing  a  reckless 
movement  in  the  Blood  that can affect  the Spirit, or Shen.  This  results 
in emotional upset and insomnia in mild cases or mania and restlessness, 
unconsciousness,  confused  speech  or delirium  in severe  cases. 
External  Heat  invades  directly,  or  is  the  product  of any  of the 
other  invading  Pernicious  Influences  transforming  into  Heat.  Internal 
Fire  arises  from  dysfunction  of the Internal Organs,  an  Excess  of Yang 
or Deficiency ofYin in the body, or from  extreme emotional swings.  It 
usually appears as  Liver,  Stomach or Heart Fire.  Over a long  time  Heat 
can  consume  the Body Fluids,  or Yin,  and  cause  Deficiency Heat signs 
such as  night sweats,  insomnia, malar flush  and a burning sensation in 
the  palms,  soles  and  over  the  heart.  Heat can  be  caused  by overactivity, 
living  in  or  being  exposed  to  hot  environments,  fried  foods,  alcohol, 
coffee,  and  hot-natured  foods  such  as  red  meats,  and  many recreational 
drugs. 
Qualities of l:leat: 
dislike  or fear  of heat 
ruddy,  hot appearance 
thirst 
craves  cold 
fast  active 
irritability 
restlessness 
prefers  cool  climate 
blood  in any  discharges 
strong body odors 
tendency to  rise,  expand 
desire  for  fewer  clothes,  covers 
yellow,  red  excretions  and secretions  that are  sticky and  hot feeling 
Pulse:  rapid 
Tongue:  red 
External Heat Symptoms: 
sudden onset,  acute 
sweating 
high  fever 
slight chills 
flushed  red  face 
red  eyes 
headache 
dark  or red  urine 
sore,  swollen  throat 
desire  for  cold 
irritability 
red  skin  eruptions,  rashes 
aversion  to  heat 
nervous,  fidgeting  or restless 
dry mouth 
scanty urination 
cough with yellow  mucus 
wants  few  clothes,  covers 
few  body aches 
great  thirst with  a desire  for  cold  drinks 
boils,  carbuncles 
constipation or diarrhea with  foul-smelling  yellow  stools 
Pulse:  rapid,  full,  floating 
Tongue:  red;  dry or sticky yellow  coating 
In severe cases  there may be: 
loss  of consciousness 
delirium 
reckless  behavior 
epistaxis 
hematemesis 
confused  speech 
hematuria 
coma 
Formula 
Lonicera and Forsythia Combination (Yin  qiao  san) 
Actions: 
a)  Diaphoretic, disperses  External Wind-Heat 
b)  Alterative,  antibiotic and  antiviral,  clears  internal  heat  and 
relieves  toxicity 
~ 
Internal Heat Symptoms: 
quick,  agitated  movement 
delirium 
red  eyes  and  face 
irritability 
thirst 
talkative,  extroverted  manner 
hot  body or limbs 
desire  for  cold  foods  and drinks 
constipation 
dark urine;  can  be  scanty 
Pulse:  rapid 
Tongue:  red;  yellow  coat 
Formulas 
1.  Coptis and Scutellaria Combination (Huang lian  jie  du 
tang) 
Actions: 
a)  Detoxifies,  anti-inflammatory,  alterative,  antibiotic 
2.  Coptis, Scute and Pueraria Combination (Ge  gen  huang 
qin  huang  lian  tang) 
Actions: 
a)  Clears  both  External  and  Internal acute  inflammations 
b)  Relieves  muscle  aches  of the  neck 
3.  White Tiger Decoction (Bai  hu  tang) 
Actions: 
a)  To  eliminate  Heat  in  the  Q! (secondary defense)  system 
and  the Yang  Ming  channel 
b)  To  promote  the  secretion  of Body  Fluids 
Deficiency Heat Symptoms: 
             flushed  cheeks,  nose 
msomma 
night  sweats 
irritability 
sore  or dry throat (not extreme  pain) 
low  grade  fever 
fidgeting,  restlessness 
dry cough with  a little  sputum 
scanty,  reddish  urine 
feverish  sensation  in  the  palms,  soles  and  heart area 
Pulse:  thready,  rapid 
Tongue:  red;  denuded  or with  little coating 
 
173 
Formula 
Anemarrhena,  Phellodendron and Rehmannia 
Combination (Zhi  bai  di  huang wan):  Rehmannia Six 
Combination(Liu wei  di  huang wan)  with  6-9  grams  each  of 
Anemarrhena  (Zhi  Mu)  and  Phellodendron (Huang  Bai). 
Action: 
a)  Tonify Yin  and  clear  Deficiency Heat 
Liver Fire Symptoms: 
headache,  migraine 
red  eyes 
bitter  taste  in the  mouth 
burning pain in the costal  region 
yellow  urine 
flushed  face 
irritability 
dry throat 
constipation 
restlessness 
Pulse:  rapid 
Tongue:  red;  sides  may  be  redder,  yellow  coat 
Formula 
Dang Gui, Gentiana and Aloe  (Dang gui  long hui wan) 
Action: 
a)  Purges  Fire  from  the  Liver  and  Gallbladder 
Stomach Fire Symptoms: 
burning epigastric  pain 
acid  regurgitation 
foul  breath 
ulcers 
constipation 
stomach  distress 
painful or bleeding gums 
thirst with  desire  for  cold  drinks 
hunger  not alleviated  by eating  large  amounts of food 
Pulse:  rapid,  slippery 
Tongue:  red;  creamy,  yellow  coat,  especially in central  region 
Formula 
Clear the Stomach Powder  (Qing wei  san) 
Action: 
a)  Clears  Heat  from  the Stomach. 
Heart Fire Symptoms: 
tongue  and  mouth  ulcers 
msomma 
painful,  burning urination 
fidgeting 
thirst 
~ 
174 
restlessness 
Pulse:  rapid 
Tongue:  red  tip;  yellow  coating 
Formula 
Coptis and Rhubarb Combination (San  huang xie  xin  tang) 
Actions: 
a)  Clears  Heart Fire 
b)  Allays  nervousness 
DRYNESS 
Since Autumn is characterized by low humidity, diseases aggravated 
by the Dry Pernicious Influence can occur. External Dryness characterized 
by dehydration can be caused  by either Heat or internally by Deficiency 
of Blood  or Yin.  Dryness  caused  by  dehydration  and  Heat  causes  hot 
feelings  and a flushed,  red  appearance. Warm-Dryness usually occurs  in 
the heat of late summer and early Autumn. Cool-Dryness usually occurs 
during late Autumn with  the onset of pathogenic Cold of approaching 
Winter.  Dryness  is  a Yang  phenomenon. 
Dryness  usually  invades  through  the  mouth  and  nose,  afflicting 
the  Defensive  Qi  and  the  Lungs.  If the  Lungs,  considered  a  sensitive 
organ,  are  lacking  sufficient Yin  moisture,  they  become  vulnerable  to 
the  attack  of Dryness.  When  this  occurs  there  may  be  dryness  of the 
mouth, nose and throat, dry cough with little phlegm, asthma and chest 
discomfort. When Dryness invades it impairs body fluids, causing dryness 
in  the  mouth,  nose  and  throat with  thirst,  dry skin and  constipation. 
Dryness  can  also  arise  internally.  This  is  usually  caused  by  a 
Deficiency of Blood or Yin,  the exhaustion of Essence,  a loss  of blood, 
excessive  vomiting,  diarrhea or bleeding,  chronic diseases  or those with 
a  long  disease  course,  or  the  consumption  of body  fluid  from  febrile 
diseases.  Excessive consumption of spicy, hot-natured foods, over-exposure 
to  dry weather, and  not drinking enough fluid  can also lead  to Dryness. 
Qualities of Dryness: 
dry,  rough,  chapped  or cracked  skin 
dry throat,  nose,  mouth,  lips 
dry cough  with little  phlegm 
dry,  lifeless  hair 
unusual  thirst,  dehydration 
dry stools 
Pulse:  thready,  hesitant 
Tongue:  dry with  no  saliva 
~ 
175 
External Dryness: Cold-Dryness Symptoms: 
fever 
headache 
aversion  to cold 
dry skin 
no sweating 
dry mouth and  throat 
cough with  scanty or no sputum 
Pulse:  thready,  hesitant 
Tongue:  dry with  a white,  thin and  dry coat 
Formula 
Apricot Seed and Perilla Formula (Xing  su  san) 
Actions: 
a)  Diaphoretic 
b)  Clears Wind-Cold 
c)  Soothes  the  Lung  and  relieves  cough 
External Dryness:  Heat-Dryness Symptoms: 
fever 
mild  chills 
headache 
thirst 
anxiety 
a decreased  amount of sweat 
sore,  swollen  throat 
dry skin,  nose  and  throat 
dry cough  or cough with  scanty,  sticky bloody sputum 
Pulse:  thin  (Dryness  from  Blood  or Yin  Deficiency),  or  minute,  choppy-
rapid  (Dryness  caused  by  Heat) 
Tongue:  red  tipped  or red-edged 
Formula 
Eriobotrya and Ophiopogon Combination (Q!ng zao  jiu 
fei  tang) 
Actions: 
a)  Moistens  the  Lung  and  treats  Dryness 
b)  Tonifies  Q! 
c)  Lubricates,  cools  and  nourishes  Essence  of the  Lung 
Internal Dryness Symptoms: 
excessive  thirst 
dry,  rough  skin 
constipation 
dry,  lifeless  hair 
Pulse:  thready,  hesitant 
Tongue:  dry with  no  saliva 
Formula 
Ophiopogon and Trichosanthes  Combination 
(Mai  men dong yin si) 
Actions: 
a)  Expectorant 
b)  Tonifies  the Yin  of the Lung 
DAMPNESS 
Dampness,  a Yin  phenomenon, is  like  heavy rains,  snow or a large 
body of water.  It  is  wet,  heavy  and  slow  and  causes  a sinking  sensation 
with  bodily  heaviness.  Therefore,  people  with  Dampness  usually  feel 
sluggish,  heavy,  dull  and  stagnant.  As  a  result,  they  have  an  expressed 
dislike for damp environments and seasons. Symptoms of Cold Dampness 
are  aggravated  in  the colder climates  and  seasons  such  as  winter,  while 
Hot  Dampness  (usually  termed  Damp  Heat)  is  aggravated  in  seasons 
and  climates  associated  with  high  levels  of humidity.  Similar  to  the 
previous Pernicious Influences that are aggravated by exposure, Dampness 
can show an aggravation with any inordinate exposure to damp conditions 
during  any season  or climate or in  any environment. 
In the body,  Dampness appears with excretions and secretions that 
are  turbid,  sluggish,  sinking,  viscous  and  stagnant  as  well  as  copious, 
slimy,  cloudy or sticky.  These  may be  found  as  eye  secretions,  diarrhea 
or  mucus  in  the  stool  with  pus  and  blood,  turbid  urine,  excessive 
leukorrhea and oozing, purulent skin eruptions. As  Dampness sinks, its 
symptoms are  often found  in the lower part of the body.  Its heaviness is 
often felt as  lassitude, a sluggish, stuffy and heavy sensation of the body, 
or  a heavy  head,  as  if a tight  band surrounds  it. 
There  can  also  be  edema,  abdominal distention and chest  fullness 
which,  if unattended, can lead  to congestive heart failure and symptoms 
that obstruct the flow ofQ! such as  nausea, vomiting and/or palpitations. 
If there  is  Dampness  in  the  joints,  they  feel  heavy,  ache,  are  stiff or 
continually painful or sore, as in arthralgia or arthritis. Damp conditions 
require time and patience to treat as  well  as  a corresponding Dampness-
removing  diet  in  order  to  have  any  lasting  effect.  This  necessitates  the 
elimination  of 'sodden'  foods  such  as  high  fat,  oils,  sugar,  dairy  and 
flour products, and a simple diet is  recommended based on low or non-
fat  foods  including whole  grains,  beans  and  vegetables. 
The  Damp  Pernicious  Influence obstructs the activities  of Q! and 
impairs  Yang.  When  pathogenic  Dampness  attacks,  it  leads  to  an 
imbalance of the transforming, ascending and descending  functions  of 
Yin  and Yang.  For examples:  retention of Dampness in the epigastrium 
can  lead  to  distress  in  the  chest;  Dampness  blocking  the  Spleen  and 
Stomach  can  cause  anorexia,  epigastric  distress,  nausea,  vomiting  and 
loose  stool;  Spleen  Yang  may  be  disturbed  resulting  in  retention  of 
Dampness  in  the  body  evidenced  by  diarrhea,  edema  and  difficult 
urination. 
Besides External Dampness, Internal Dampness .is also a possibility. 
This  is  caused  by  a  dysfunction  of the  Spleen's  transporting  and 
transforming  functions,  with  impairment  of Fluid  metabolism  and 
resultant  fluid  retention.  Both  External  and  Internal  Dampness  can 
influence each other and are interdependent. External Dampness is more 
immediately  the  result  of environmental  and  dietary  stresses,  but  can 
become chronic and eventually develop into Internal  Dampness.  Either 
of them frequently appear with Cold or Heat, which  is  differentiated as 
Damp Cold or Damp  Heat. 
External  Damp  Evil  is  aggravated  by  exposure  to  damp  weather 
and damp environments. As  stated,  Internal Dampness  is  aggravated  by 
the excess  use of sodden foods  such  as  dairy,  flour products, pasta, oils, 
fruits,  raw  foods,  juices,  tofu,  soy  milk,  cold  foods  and  drinks,  dairy, 
greasy  foods,  coffee,  alcohol  and  sugar. 
Over time, Internal Dampness can collect and stagnate, condensing 
into Phlegm. This can stress the Yang functions of the Spleen and Kidneys 
and  accumulate in the  mucus  membranes  of the body,  causing diseases 
associated with Damp congestion in the Lungs and reproductive organs 
as  a result of impaired movement ofWater and Fluids (lymph) throughout 
the  body. 
Phlegm,  being  heavier  than  common metabolic  Dampness,  is  less 
Fluidic  and  easily  causes  obstruction  in  the  form  of lumps,  nodules, 
cysts  or tumors. Obstruction of Phlegm  in the  Lungs  results  in chronic 
cough  with  heavy  expectoration;  in  the  Heart  it  results  in  disturbed 
Spirit (Shen)  with  muddled thoughts, stupor, coma,  erratic behavior or 
madness. Phlegm obstruction in the Meridians causes numbness, paralysis 
as  well  as  soft  mobile  nodules,  cysts  and  tumors. 
There  are  still  further  complications  that  can  arise  as  a  result  of 
Dampness.  It  is  usually  associated  with  Deficient  Spleen  Yang  and 
eventually Deficient Kidney Yang.  If Dampness overwhelms the Spleen's 
transporting  and  transforming  power,  the  original  nutritive  Q!  of the 
Spleen  becomes  weakened,  and  it  blocks  the  ascendancy  of the  Clear 
Yang  of the  Kidney.  Then  turbid  Dampness  accumulates  in  the  Lower 
Warmer and  changes  to  Heat, which  eventually burns  out and  depletes 
the Yin. 
External Cold Damp diseases with mucus can be treated with warm 
spicy  acrid  herbs  such  as  fresh  ginger,  cinnamon  twigs  and  various 
peppers.  External  Hot  Damp  conditions  are  treated  with  cool  spicy 
herbs such as  mint, basil, coriander and chrysanthemum flowers.  Internal 
Cold  Damp  conditions  are  treated  with  Warm  or  Hot  Internal  spicy 
substances  such  as  cinnamon  bark,  prepared  aconite,  cloves  and  dried 
ginger.  Internal Warm  Dampness conditions are  treated with herbs that 
relieve  Damp  Heat  and  generally  have  cholagogue  properties,  such  as 
gentian  root,  Chinese  scutellaria  root,  coptis  or Western  herbs  such  as 
barberry root  and  golden  seal. 
In  general,  chronic  diseases  caused  by  Dampness  are  among  the 
most difficult diseases to cure because of their stubborn congested nature. 
Qualities of Dampness: 
wet 
VISCOUS 
turbid 
heaviness 
sluggish 
lingering 
pus 
oozing 
tends  to  sink,  obstruct 
sweetish  taste  in  mouth 
turbid  urine 
damp,  oozing skin  eruptions 
aching in the  limbs  or entire body 
loose  stool  or stool with  mucus,  pus  and  blood 
copious  discharges  which  are  cloudy,  turbid  or sticky 
no desire  to  drink,  even  if there  is  thirst 
Pulse:  slippery 
Tongue:  wet,  slimy,  greasy  coating 
External  Dampness Symptoms: 
fever  not  relieved  by sweating 
heavy vaginal  discharge 
cloudy urine 
constricted  feeling  in  the chest 
aversion  to  cold 
oozing skin  eruptions 
heavy diarrhea 
no desire  to drink 
fullness  of chest or abdomen 
dribbling or incomplete urination or defecation 
heaviness  and  soreness  of body and  head 
excretions  and  secretions  that are  copious,  turbid,  cloudy or sticky 
Pulse:  soft,  floating 
Tongue:  slippery coating 
~ 
179 
Formula 
Magnolia and Hoelen Combination (Wei  ling tang) 
Actions: 
a)  Eliminates  Dampness of the Spleen  (relieves  bloating) 
b)  Carminative;  restores  the function  of the Stomach  and 
assists  digestion. 
Dampness in the Joints (Bi  Syndrome) Symptoms: 
arthralgia  or arthritis with  fixed  pain 
heaviness  or achiness  in the  joints or limbs 
numbness  of the muscles  and  skin 
Formula 
Clematis and Stephania Combination (Shu  jing huo xue 
tang)  (Decoction  to  Dredge  the  Meridians  &  Vitalize  Blood) 
Actions: 
a)  Opens  circulation  of the channels and  collaterals, 
stimulates  blood circulation,  removes  Blood  stagnation. 
b)  Antirheumatic,  removes  Damp  stagnation. 
Internal Dampness Symptoms: 
heavy-headedness 
poor appetite 
diarrhea  or loose  stool 
abdominal edema 
abdominal  distention 
lassitude 
turbid  urine 
nausea 
indigestion 
edema 
vomiting 
heavy  vaginal  discharge 
feeling  of oppression  in the  chest 
Pulse:  soft,  thready;  can  be  slippery 
Tongue:  creamy coating 
Formula 
Citrus and Pinellia Combination (Er chen  tang) 
Actions: 
a)  Removes  Dampness,  resolves  Phlegm 
b)  Regulates  Spleen  and  Stomach 
Phlegm Symptoms: 
lumps 
nodules 
tumors 
delirium 
~ 
r8o 
numbness  in  limbs 
thick greasy  secretions 
tremors 
tends  to  obstruct 
Pulse:  slippery 
Tongue:  greasy,  thick coating 
Phlegm in Lungs Symptoms: 
asthma 
cough with  heavy expectoration  of mucus 
Formula 
Minor Blue  Dragon Combination (Xiao  qing  long  tang) 
Actions: 
a)  Dries  Damp and  dispels  Phlegm 
b)  Regulates  Qi and  harmonizes  the  middle warmer 
(Stomach  and Spleen). 
Phlegm in Heart Symptoms: 
chaotic or erratic behavior 
rattle  in  throat 
muddled  thought 
madness 
stupor 
coma 
Formula 
Bamboo and Poria Combination (Wen  clan  tang) 
(Gall  Bladder Warming  Decoction) 
Actions: 
a)  It  is  expectorant;  eliminates white,  frothy  mucus 
b)  Sedative  for  restlessness,  insomnia,  anxiety and  nausea 
Phlegm  in Meridians Symptoms: 
numbness 
paralysis 
soft,  mobile  tumors,  nodules or swellings 
Formula 
Cinnamon and Poria Combination (Gui  zhi  fu  ling wan) 
Actions: 
a)  Promotes  Blood  and  lymphatic circulation,  thus  removing 
stagnant  Blood. 
b)  Softens  and  resolves  hard  lumps  such  as  cysts  and  fibroids. 
SUMMER HEAT 
Summer  heat  is  another  form  of Fire,  but  is  more  extreme  and 
occurs in the summer. It is  purely an  External Pernicious Influence and 
results  from  exposure  to  extreme  Heat.  In  the West  it is  known  as  heat 
stroke.  Summer Heat is Yang  in  nature and  is  scorching  hot.  It is  acute 
and tends to rise and disperse. As heat stroke it causes high fever,  dizziness 
and  nausea.  With  overexposure  to  Summer  Heat,  it  causes  profuse 
perspiration  and  then  exhausts  Qi  and  Body  Fluids.  It  is  usually 
accompanied by Dampness since it can be caused by hot-humid climates 
or Heat  reacting  to  the  body's  Damp-Heat  environment.  In  this  case, 
both the  Heat and  Dampness  must be  treated. 
Summer Heat Symptoms: 
dizziness 
nausea 
extreme  thirst 
lassitude 
sudden  fainting 
heavy  sweating 
exhaustion 
coma 
sudden, very  high  fever 
upset,  flushed  face 
shortness  of breath 
loss  of consciousness 
delirium 
depletion  of fluids 
Pulse:  full  and  rapid,  or weak  and  rapid 
Tongue:  thin, white  and  creamy coating 
Formula 
Lotus Stem and Ginseng Combination (Qing shu yi  qi 
tang) 
Actions: 
a)  Clears  Summer-Heat and  nourishes  the Qi 
b)  Demulcent and cooling;  replenishes  Body Fluids 
Summer Heat With Dampness Symptoms: 
lassitude  of the limbs 
chest distress 
poor appetite 
feeling  of suffocation 
low-grade  fever  rising  in  the afternoon 
nausea,  vomiting 
sticky,  loose  stool 
general  lassitude 
Pulse:  thready 
Tongue:  creamy coating 
~ 
r81 
Formula 
Agastache  Formula  (Huo xiang zheng qi  san) 
Actions: 
a)  Diuretic,  carminative, clears  Damp  turbidity from  the 
Spleen  and Stomach;  for  Summer Heat with  Dampness 
b)  Diaphoretic for  External  conditions 
THE  SEVEN  EMOTIONS 
In contrast to contemporary Western scientific medicine, Traditional 
Chinese Medicine has for millennia recognized an implicit link between 
the emotions and  physical  health.  Besides  generally affecting hormonal 
secretions, the emotions can promote or impair the secretion of various 
neural-transmitter hormones. These include acetylcholine which regulates 
brain  functions  like  memory  and  intellectual  abilities;  catecholamines 
which  are  involved  with  mood,  attention  ability  and  the  control  of 
bodily  movements;  and  serotonin which  is  produced  from  tryptophan 
and  helps  to  regulate  mood,  carbohydrate  metabolism,  hypothalmic 
releasing hormones, (implicated in alcoholism and obsessive-compulsive 
disorders),  and endorphins that regulate our susceptibility and  response 
to  pain  and  pleasure. 
Through  a  variety  of psychological  therapeutic  modalities,  some 
people have experienced complete remission from life-threatening chronic 
diseases  such  as  AIDS,  cancer  and various  other  autoimmune  diseases. 
More is  being learned  regarding the relationship of various nutrients to 
the  emotions.  One example  is  how a deficiency of niacin  (vitamin  B3) 
can  be  coincidental with  chronic violent  behavior and  schizophrenia. 
Increasingly,  anti-depressant  drugs  are  prescribed  for  chronic 
depression and other psychological disorders. The problem is that seldom 
is  the  underlying  physiological  or  psychological  cause  adequately 
addressed,  and  there  may be  long  term  side  effects  that  have  not as  yet 
been  recognized. 
Be  that  as  it  may,  emotional  stress  continues  to  be  the  primary 
cause of disease, and true healing can only occur when the individual is 
guided to make those changes necessary to achieve body-mind wholeness. 
This  is  a place where  philosophy plays  an  important role,  since the lack 
of inherent values .is  often  at  the  root of many personal  problems. 
An  essential  aspect  of a  healer's  work  is  to  assist  their  patients 
through  various  life  and  emotional  changes.  This  can  include  offering 
guidance  and  direction  to  terminate  an  unsatisfying  job,  changing  a 
stressful  relationship  that may be  abusive and  psychologically harmful, 
encouraging appropriate self-assertion of true inner needs that will assist 
~ 
183 
further emotional growth,  and  reminding the patient to  make  time  for 
inspiration  and  spiritual  achievements.  There  may  be  an  underlying 
problem  of lack  of direction,  not  living  a  life  of personal  fulfillment 
and allowing outside influences to hinder people from  their true goals. 
Patients  need  to  learn  safe  methods  to  release  their  frustrations  and 
anger,  to  process grief or loss,  to achieve a balance of work and play and 
to value  their inner guidance and  intuition.  · 
Antidepressants can help some of us move from being dysfunctional 
to functional humans by chemically lessening the intensity of our feelings. 
They  can  also  inhibit  us  from  processing  the  underlying  emotional 
cause, which  may be both nutritional as  well  as  emotional, and  there  is 
a  danger  that  imbalances  will  be  suppressed  to  a  deeper  stage  of 
disharmony. 
Through  the  various  theoretical  systems,  Traditional  Chinese 
Medicine  is  able  to  offer  nutritional,  herbal  and  physio-therapeutic 
methods  such  as  'tui-na'  massage  and  acupuncture  as  well  as  psycho-
spiritual  counseling  to  assist  in  the  healing  process.  Specifically,  since 
ancient times,  there has  been a correlation of interactive effects  between 
the  Seven  Emotions,  the  Five  Elements  and  the  twelve  corresponding 
Zang  Fu  (Yin-Yang)  organs. 
Each  Organ  has  its  corresponding  emotion.  For  instance,  the 
Chinese  "Heart"  corresponds  to  the  physiological  heart  anatomically, 
including its  relation  to  the blood  and vessels.  At  the  same  time, TCM 
describes  the Heart as  the 'house of the Spirit' and relates  it to the body-
mind, thoughts and dreams, as  well  as  the emotions of joy and  sadness. 
From  this  perspective  many  colloquial  phrases  such  as  "broken 
heartedness"  demonstrate  the  relationship  of the  Heart with  joy or the 
lack  of it.  Similarly,  other  common  sayings  such  as  "having  a  lot  of 
gall",  "unable  to  stomach  a  situation",  "red  with  anger"  "liverish", 
"sickeningly sweet" and so forth, demonstrate renewed  mind-body validity. 
Emotions  in and of themselves  are  not negative;  in fact,  emotions 
are  a necessary response  to  life.  It is  when  a feeling  is  either suppressed 
or inappropriately indulged or vented that it becomes potentially injurious 
to  its  corresponding  Organ. When  this  happens,  immunity  is  lowered 
and  disease,  degeneration  and  general  debility  occur.  As  an  example, 
individuals who succumb to prolonged grief after the death of someone 
to whom  they had  close  emotional  ties  often  become  more  susceptible 
to  pneumonia,  asthma,  heart  disease  and  other  debilitating  or  fatal 
ailments. 
On the other hand, when an Organ is  out of balance, there may be 
a  noticeable  imbalance  in  its  corresponding  emotion.  For  instance,  if 
the Kidneys  are  Deficient, fear  or paranoia may  result, or if the Liver  is 
~ 
184 
congested,  anger,  irritability and  frustration  can  arise.  Thus,  the  Seven 
Emotions  can  be  both  the  cause  as  well  as  an  indication  of a  specific 
Organ  imbalance. 
The Seven Emotions are:  joy, anger, sadness, pensiveness, grief, fear 
and  fright  (shock).  Sometimes  sadness  is  coupled with grief and worry 
and  is  then  considered  one  of the  Seven  Emotions.  Others  consider 
worry to be  part of pensiveness. Each of these emotions has a particular 
affect  on  Qi  and  the  other  Substances.  They  each  correspond  to  a 
particular Organ  as  follows: 
JOY 
Of the  Seven  Emotions,  joy  associated  as  the  very  essence  of a 
positive state, seems the most quizzical. When one joyfully over-celebrates 
with the over- indulgence usually associated with that, it can damage the 
Heart and  its  vessels.  In  fact  either a complete absence of,  or an  Excess 
of joy  in  the  sense  of over-celebrating,  besides  injuring  the  Heart  can 
cause Spirit or Shen disturbances. This manifests symptoms of insomnia, 
muddled  thinking,  inappropriate  crying  or  laughter  and  in  extreme 
cases, fits,  hysteria and insanity. When Heart Qi is  imbalanced, one may 
tend towards inappropriate giddiness, laughter or oversensitivity. Constant 
mental  stimulation  or excessive  excitement,  no  matter  how wonderful, 
can  excessively  stimulate  the  Heart  and,  in  time,  lead  to  Heart  Fire  or 
Deficient  Heart Yin. 
ANGER 
Anger includes resentment, frustration, irritability, rage, indignation, 
bitterness and animosity. Excess  anger injures the Liver.  Likewise, a Liver 
imbalance can cause one to get angry or be prone to irrational outbursts 
of anger more easily, often without apparent cause or provocation. Anger 
causes Qi to ascend, resulting in Liver Fire or Yang Rising, Stagnation of 
Liver Qi or Blood,  or Deficient Liver Yin.  It then appears  in symptoms 
such as  headaches, tinnitus, dizziness, blurred vision, mental confusion, 
red  face,  vomiting of blood and  diarrhea.  Long term  repressed  anger or 
resentment  eventually  causes  depression.  This  in  turn  suppresses  and 
stagnates  Qi  and  leads  to  such  conditions  as  hypochondriac  pain,  a 
lump  or  plum-pit  feeling  in  the  throat,  PMS,  tension  and  irritability, 
swollen breasts before periods, irregular or painful periods, and digestive 
upsets  such  as  nausea,  poor appetite  and  epigastric  pain. 
SADNESS 
Sadness  affects  both the  Lungs  and  the  Heart,  since  they both  lie 
in the Upper Warmer. Sadness depletes Qi, leading to Lung Qi or Heart 
Qi_  Deficiency. This results in symptoms such as breathlessness, depression 
or crying, amenorrhea, shortness of breath, fatigue, and lowered  resistance 
to colds and flus.  In time, Lung or Heart Qi_  Deficiency can cause Heart 
Blood  or Yin  Deficiency or Lung Yin  Deficiency with  such  symptoms 
as  palpitations,  dizziness,  insomnia,  anxiety and  night sweats. 
PENSIVENESS 
Pensiveness  refers  to  excessive  thinking,  studying or mental  work. 
It is often referred to as concentration. Dwelling too much on a particular 
topic  weakens  the  Spleen,  causing  Stagnation  of Qi_.  This  disrupts  the 
Spleen's  function  of transforming  and  transporting  food  and  fluids, 
resulting  in  tiredness,  loss  of appetite,  Dampness,  weak  digestion, 
abdominal  distension  and  loose  stools.  Eventually,  immunity  and 
resistance  are  depressed  from  the  body's  lack  of physical  nourishment. 
This  is  frequently  seen  in  students  and  workaholics,  especially  if the 
lifestyle  includes  irregular  meals  or eating on the run or while working 
or studying. 
Worry is  often  attributed  to  the  Spleen,  as  it  also  depletes  Spleen 
Qi_.  Further,  it affects  Lung Qi_,  resulting  in  anxiety,  breathlessness  and 
stiffness  of the  neck  and  shoulders. 
GRIEF 
Grief is  associated with the Lungs and weakens Lung Qi_,  leading to 
shortness of breath, mucus, sweating, tiredness, cough and susceptibility 
to  colds,  flu,  respiratory  allergies,  asthma,  emphysema  and  other  lung 
complaints.  Individuals  who  experience  difficulty  breathing  are 
appropriately predisposed to fits of anxiety. It is not uncommon following 
the sudden loss  of a family  member to  later develop  bronchitis, asthma 
or pneumonia.  Grief can  also  damage  the Heart and  Pericardium. 
FEAR 
Fear depletes Kidney Qi_  and makes Qi_ descend (it is not uncommon 
to  feel  an  uncontrollable  urge  to  void  when  a  fearful  situation  arises). 
Bedwetting, frequent urination or urinary incontinence can be the result 
or  symptoms  of Kidney  Deficiency.  Fear  can  also  cause  Kidney  Yin 
Deficiency with symptoms of night sweats, palpitations and a dry mouth 
and  throat.  Constantly living  in a  fearful  situation  eventually weakens 
the Kidneys, while  individuals with weak  Kidneys  and  adrenals  tend  to 
feel  insecure,  paranoid,  easily  frightened  and generally more  fearful. 
FRIGHT 
Fright is  different than fear  in that it is  sudden and unexpected. It 
is  shocking and alarming, causing Q! to scatter. Fright injures the Heart, 
which  deprives  the  Shen  of its  residence  and  produces  palpitations, 
breathlessness and insomnia. It also affects the Kidneys, leading to urinary 
incontinence,  night sweating,  dizziness  or tinnitus.  Extreme  shock can 
leave  one with  chronic Kidney-Adrenal  fatigue. 
NEITHER  INTERNAL  NOR EXTERNAL CAUSES 
OF  DISEASE 
Causes  of disease  which  are  neither External  nor Internal  include 
diet, lifestyle habits, and miscellaneous causes including weak constitution, 
malnutrition, food  poisoning, infected wounds, trauma, bites and stings, 
parasites  and  toxins. 
DIET 
Considered  as  neither  an  External  nor  Internal  cause  of disease, 
diet is  increasingly significant as  a factor  in disease.  Most of the variety 
of foods  eaten  today  were  not  available  even  a  century  or  two  ago. 
People  in  China  ate  a  basic  diet  of grains,  legumes,  vegetables  and  a 
small portion of meat and fruit a few  times a week as  they were seasonally 
available.  Therefore,  foods  were  locally grown and only available within 
their season, and diet played a key role in helping to maintain homeostasis 
according  to  geographic  location,  climate and  lifestyle. 
Today  our diets  are  high  in  refined  and  processed  foods.  Food  is 
brought  in  from  all  over  the  world  and  available  any  time  of the year. 
For example, what was  once appropriate in hot climates for their cooling 
moistening energy,  bananas  are  now available  year  round  even  in  cold 
and damp northern climates. Over time this aggravates Dampness within 
the  body,  especially in  damp  climatic environments. 
Furthermore,  today  most  foods  are  adulterated  with  chemicals  in 
the form  of preservatives,  flavoring,  coloring, emulsifiers  and  so  forth. 
From  their  being  cultivated  with  the  use  of artificial  fertilizers  and 
chemical  insecticides  as  well  as  the  impact  of air  and  water  pollution, 
there are residual chemicals in the food chain. Additionally, commercial 
meat contains hormones, and many animals are raised in confined prison-
like conditions so  that the quality of meat is  less  than optimum. Finally, 
with  the  pollution  of coastal  seas,  fish  harvested  from  them  show 
dangerously high levels of heavy metals. As a result of all of this occurring 
over  such  a short time span,  animal  and  human evolution  is  unable  to 
catch  up,  and  many  are  suffering  from  acute  and  chronic  immune 
deficiency disorders. 
Every  time we  eat we  are  creating,  and  contributing to,  an  energy 
in  our  bodies.  According  to  TCM  these  energies  can  be  delineated  as 
cooling, warming, moistening, drying, eliminating, building, Yin or Yang. 
These  energies  appear  in  combinations  with  each  o ~ h e r  in  the  body, 
even when they seem  contradictory, such as  Dampness and  Dryness co-
existing  in  a  situation  of edema  with  dry  skin.  However,  over  time  a 
predominance of one or two  of these  energies  appears  in the body and 
creates conditions associated with that energy.  For instance, Heat building 
up  in  the  body  over  time  results  in  Heat  signs  such  as  strong  body 
odors, yellow or red  tinged discharges, irritability, restlessness, thirst and 
so  on. 
When we eat a predominance of foods which have a heating energy, 
this  contributes  to  preexisting  Heat  in  the  body  and  can  cause  an 
imbalance  that eventually gives  rise  to  disease.  The same would  be  true 
of an  imbalance  of cold  or  dry  foods  and  so  on  (see  the  chapter  on 
Whole  Nutrition).  Ideally  we  should  eat  a  diet  comprised  of all  the 
energies  in  balance  with  each  other,  and  when  we  do  this  our  desires 
and  cravings  are  more  in accord  with  our true  needs. 
For instance, If we have a constitutional predisposition to Dampness 
we  would  naturally crave  more  drying  foods;  a  Hot or  high  metabolic 
constitution would  naturally be  attracted  to  more  cooling foods;  and  a 
Cold  constitution  would  naturally want  more  warming  foods.  We  see 
this  in  small  children  whose  innate  warmer  metabolism  necessitates  a 
need  for  more  cooling  fruits.  An  imbalanced  diet,  therefore,  creates 
extreme  cravings  which  lead  to  disease. 
Excessive  consumption  of foods  which  are  cooling  and/or 
moistening,  such  as  juices,  fruit,  salads,  cold  or  iced  drinks,  raw  and 
cold  foods,  tofu,  soy  milk,  ice  cream,  frozen  yogurt  and  popsicles,  for 
instance,  create  Cold  and  Dampness  in  the  body  and  injure  Spleen 
Yang.  While raw  foods  and  juices are considered  the epitome of healthy 
food  by many, they cause Coldness and Dampness in the Spleen, weaken 
the  digestive  process  and  eventually  cause  poor appetite,  mucus,  loose 
stools,  diarrhea,  low  energy,  amenorrhea  and  a  runny  nose  leading  to 
frequent  colds. 
Excessive  intake  of sweets  and  sugar  causes  over-stimulation  and 
empty Heat  in  the Stomach with  symptoms  of poor focus  and  general 
anxiety.  Eating lots of flour products creates  Dampness and congestion. 
Both block the Spleen function and injure its ability to transform Fluids. 
This  results  in  mucus  in  the  lungs  or  stools,  vaginal  discharge  and 
abdominal  distention  and  fullness,  for  example. 
~ 
x88 
Excessive  intake  of fried  or greasy  foods  such  as  deep-fried  foods, 
milk,  cheese,  butter,  avocados,  nuts  and  nut  butter,  chips  and  fried 
foods  produce  Dampness  and  obstruct the Spleen  function.  This leads 
to  Phlegm,  which  causes  symptoms  such  as  sinusitis,  nasal  discharge, 
heavy and  fuzzy  feeling  in the  head,  dull  headaches  and  so  forth. 
Excessive  consumption  of hot,  spicy  and  oily foods  such  as  nuts 
and  nut  butters,  avocados,  cheese,  chips,  fried  foods,  curry,  alcohol, 
beef,  lamb  or hot spices,  causes  Heat  signs,  especially  in  the  Liver  and 
Stomach.  Excessive  intake  of caffeinated  foods  and  drinks,  including 
coffee,  black  tea,  cocoa,  colas  and  chocolate,  causes  Damp  Heat  in the 
Liver,  depletes  the  Kidneys  and  forms  acids  (another  form  of Heat) 
which collect in many places in the body such as  the joints, as  in arthritis. 
Smoking  tobacco  is  drying  and  causes  Deficient  Lung Yin  with  initial 
symptoms  of cough  and  eventually  other  more  serious  Lung  diseases 
such  as  cancer. 
Not only what we  eat,  but how we  eat can  cause  imbalances.  Over-
eating  causes  a  blockage  which  obstructs  the  Spleen  and  Stomach 
functions  and  leads  to  congestion  and  Stagnation  of Q!.  Under-eating 
leads to Deficient Q! and Blood. Furthermore, eating quickly, distractedly 
or when  in an emotionally distraught state or while reading, studying or 
working can impair the digestion and eventually cause Q! Stagnation or 
Spleen  Q!  Deficiency. 
LIFESTYLE 
There  are  many lifestyle  habits which  can cause  disease.  These can 
be  generally grouped  under either sexual  or physical  causes. 
Sexual Activity 
Known as  the 'affairs of the bedroom' to the Chinese, sexual activity 
in excess  is  deleterious to health because it causes  a depletion of Kidney 
Jing and/or Pre-Heaven  Essence.  This  is  especially true  if one is  already 
depleted  in Jing  Essence  or  as  one  ages.  Depletion  of Essence  causes 
symptoms  of Kidney Yin  and Yang  Deficiency (Ming Men  or Life  Gate 
Fire). The result is  low back pain, dizziness, low energy, premature aging 
signs,  teeth  problems,  tinnitus  or loss  of hearing  and  eyesight. 
Such  excessive  sexual  activity  specifically refers  to  ejaculation  and 
orgasm,  so  that  ahy  reasonable  sexual  stimulation without  ejaculation 
actually promotes youthful vigor.  Because of this, there are a number of 
ancient  treatises  on  the  practice  of Taoist  sexual  yoga  for  health  and 
longevity. 
Lack  of sexual  desire,  on  the  other  hand,  is  a  sign  of Deficient 
Kidney  Yang.  This  includes  symptoms  of impotence,  premature 
~ 
189 
ejaculation  and  frigidity.  An  excessive  sexual  drive  can  indicate  either 
Excess Yang or Deficient Kidney Yin.  If Kidney Yin is severely Deficient 
with Empty Fire, it is possible to have vivid sexual dreams with nocturnal 
emissions  in men and  orgasms  in women. 
Physical Activity 
Physical activity encompasses both inactivity and excessive activity. 
Inactivity 
Before  the  advent  of motor  vehicles,  walking  was  inseparably 
integrated  into daily life.  For  most people,  day  to  day life encompassed 
a  healthy  amount  of exercise  just  accomplishing  routine  affairs  and 
chores. Today with motor vehicles, elevators, escalators, electric machines, 
elaborate  communication  systems  and  conveniences  of all  types  and 
forms,  our daily routine movement is  minimized, often to  the point of 
severe underactivity. Aerobic exercise in moderation is beneficial, but an 
excess  can  further  contribute  to  the  frantic  mood  of modern  lifestyles. 
Inactivity  causes  Qi  and  Blood  to  stagnate  and  leads  to  a 
degeneration  of Yang  Qi  with  the  accumulation  of Dampness.  It  can 
also  be  a diagnostic sign  of Deficient Qi or Deficient Yang. 
Various  postures  and  movements  can  benefit  or  injure  specific 
internal organs. Sitting is  associated with  the Spleen  and in moderation 
is beneficial, while excessive sitting is  deleterious (often causing enlarged 
hips  due  to  lymph  congestion  from  Deficient  Spleen  Qi).  The  same 
goes  for standing, which in Excess  can injure the Kidneys (which is  why 
people with Deficient Kidney Qi often experience lower back ache when 
they stand  for  a  prolonged  period).  Walking  in  moderation,  especially 
out of doors,  helps  the  Liver  to  spread  and  harmonize,  while  excessive 
walking  for  a person's  ability can  deplete  the  Liver. 
Over-activity 
Overactivity  has  taken  on  new  meaning  in  our  fast-paced 
information-seeking  global  society.  What  would  have  taken  years 
previously, we  can  now  accomplish  in  days  or even  hours. While  there 
are  many  benefits,  it  also  creates  "burn-out",  or Yin  Deficiency.  Stress 
from over-exertion is  recognized as  a major cause of hypertension, heart 
disease  and  other debilitating ailments. 
Under  normal  circumstances  the Qi  used  up  in  daily  activities  is 
easily replenished  by proper diet and rest.  Even  when working  hard  for 
a week,  such as  a student studying for  exams  or a consultant preparing 
for  a special  presentation at work,  depleted  Qi can  be  restored within a 
few  days.  However,  if this  intense  activity  is  continued,  working  long 
and  hard  for  hours,  months or even  years  without adequate  rest,  it will 
~ 
190 
result in the body's inability to sufficiently replenish Qi, and it is  forced 
to then draw on its Essence reserves. This ultimately creates Yin Deficiency. 
Over-exertion can occur in three ways: mental, physical and through 
over-exercising.  Mental over-work includes working long hours, often in 
a confined space, with unreasonable deadlines under conditions of stress. 
Furthermore, this often results  in skipped, late or irregular meals which 
further  contributes  to  Qi  and  Yin  Deficiency.  Physical  over-exertion 
causes  depletion  of energy  which  leads  to  Blood  and  Yin  Deficiency. 
Over-exercising depletes  Qi,  Blood  and Yin  and  ultimately Jing. 
Among  the  most beneficial  forms  of exercise  are Taoist  Qi Gong, 
Tai Qi or Yoga, which combine slower meditative stretching movements 
with  the  breath. 
OTHER  LIFESTYLE  HABITS 
There are  other lifestyle habits which can adversely affect the body. 
Frequently  staying  up  too  late  and  getting  insufficient  sleep  leads  to 
chronic  Qi  and Yin  Deficiency.  The  body conforms  to  a  specific  cycle 
of biorhythm  which  makes  certain  activities  optimal  for  the  different 
cycles  of each  day.  Following  is  the  Chinese  biorhythm  chart  with 
corresponding appropriate activities: 
Time  Organ 
llAMtolPM  Heart 
1PMto3PM  Small  Intestine 
3PMto5PM  Bladder 
5PMto7PM  Kidney-Adrenals 
7PMto9PM  Pericardium 
9 PM  to  11  PM  Triple Warmer 
llPMtolAM  Gall  Bladder 
1AMto3AM  Liver 
3AMto5AM  Lungs 
5AMto7AM  Large  Intestine 
7AMto9AM  Stomach 
9AMtollAM  Spleen-Pancreas 
According  tq  this  biorhythm chart there  are  certain activities  that 
are  appropriate for  different periods throughout each day.  For example, 
defecation  naturally  occurs  during  Large  Intestine  time  in  the  early 
morning  hours  between  SAM  and  7  AM.  Eating  a  nutritious  breakfast 
during Stomach-Spleen time between 7  AM and  HAM in the morning is 
best  for  digestion.  Going  to  bed  by  llPM creates  the  most  regenerative 
sleep  since  it is  during Wood  time,  11-3  AM,  that  the  Liver  cleans  and 
replenishes  the  Blood. 
Similarly,  organic  imbalances  and  weaknesses  are  likely  to  appear 
at certain times,  making the above chart useful as  a diagnostic tool.  For 
instance, it is  common for  people with Deficient Kidney Q! to get tired 
in the late afternoon, 3 - 7 PM,  during Water time.  Further, people with 
lung  ailments  often  wake  up  between  3  - 5  AM  and  have  breathing 
difficulties  or can't go  back  to  sleep. 
As  another  example  of lifestyle  issues,  childbirth  and  the 
responsibilities  that follow  can  be very depleting of a woman's  Essence 
and  Kidney  Q!.  This  is  why  taking  tonic  herbs  such  as  ginseng  and 
Dang Gui can  be  very beneficial  after  childbirth. 
MISCELLANEOUS  CAUSES 
Malnutrition 
Malnutrition  is  an  obvious  cause  of disease.  It  exists  not only in 
Third World  countries,  but  in  slums,  ghettoes  and  impoverished  areas 
of wealthy countries  as  well.  It also  occurs  in  those who  think they are 
supposedly eating adequately, since so many foods such as desserts, sodas, 
chips,  white  bread  and  flour  products,  canned  foods,  and  refined  and 
processed  foods,  are  full  of empty calories  and  lack  adequate  nutrition. 
Others, attracted to an overly rigid diet, often in their quest for superior 
health, can also develop insidious nutritional deficiencies that often do 
not appear until years  later, at which time the injury to the metabolism 
is too severe to completely restore. Similarly, women who display anorexic 
or  bulimic  tendencies  in  their  quest  to  remain  physically  thin  and 
attractive are at high risk for injuring their digestive and immune systems. 
wtak Constitution 
Each  person  is  born  with  unique  constitutional  needs,  strengths 
and  deficiencies.  This  is  determined  by  our  ancestors,  especially  our 
parents'  health at  the time of birth.  If the parents' health is  poor, if the 
mother  drinks  alcohol  or  smokes  during  pregnancy,  or if the  mother 
conceives  when  she  is  too  old,  the child  is  at  risk  of being born with  a 
poor constitution. This inherited constitution accounts  for  the relevant 
tolerance  to  dietary  and  emotional  stress  of certain  individuals  while 
others who,  despite a careful  diet and lifestyle,  seem  to  be  plagued with 
frail  health.  Genetic  ancestry  is  probably  important  for  many 
considerations, especially for some with certain dietary requirements. It 
is  known  that  many  of African  and  Southeastern  Asian  ancestry  may 
lack  an  essential  enzyme  for  the  digestion  of milk and  dairy  products. 
Dairy,  on  the  other  hand,  has  been  an  important  article  of diet  for 
those  with  a  Northern  European  background,  and  while  too  much  is 
not  necessarily  advised,  a little will  do  no harm whatsoever. 
Similarly,  it  may  be  that  certain  dietary  regimes  such  as  strict 
vegetarianism may be inappropriate for some individuals while for others 
it  might be  beneficial.  Ultimately,  one  must  judge  for  one's  self which 
diet  is  best,  but be  wary  of fanatical,  moralistic  rigidity that ultimately 
does violence and harm to ourselves by keeping us away from the essential 
foods  and  nutrients our individual body requires. 
Other  Causes 
Other causes  of illness  include burns,  traumas,  parasites,  poisons, 
bites  and  stings.  These  are  sudden  and  are  usually  easily  identifiable 
conditions. They are  treated within the context ofTCM Organ patterns. 
Some  examples  include  various  parasites  and  intestinal  worms  which 
are  typically  prevalent  in  tropical,  humid  climates.  The  excessive 
consumption  of greasy  and  sweet  foods  causes  Dampness  which  can 
make one more prone to all  parasites, so that it may be necessary to take 
measures  to  alleviate  the  Internal  Dampness. 
Traumas  not only have  an  immediate  effect  on the  body,  but can 
become  the cause  of later disease.  For instance,  previous sports  injuries 
that  were  mistreated,  perhaps  with  the  application  of ice,  elbow  pain 
from  excessive  playing of tennis,  or a previous  fall  or injury can,  upon 
exposure  to  a Cold  Damp  climate,  cause  Cold  and  Damp  obstruction. 
The  injured  area,  with  its  resulting pain and  contraction of movement, 
can  then  generate  a predisposition  to  rheumatic  pains. 
~ 
193 
~ 
194 
NlNE 
THE  FOUR  METHODS 
OF  DlAGNOSlS 
Traditional  Chinese  Medicine  outlines  four  methods  of diagnosis: 
interrogation, observation, audition and palpation. Only after evaluating 
these various essential parameters is a tentative diagnosis made. Scudder, 
the great Western Eclectic physician, once said, "Diagnosis means cure". 
This  idea  is  particularly applicable  in  the  Four  Methods  of Diagnosis 
since  the  purpose  is  not only to  identify  the  disease  itself,  but also  its 
mechanism and causes- whether the disease is  External acute or Internal 
chronic,  Hot or Cold, Excess  (sthenic) or Deficient (asthenic)  and  Dry 
or  Damp,  all  of which  is  encompassed  by Yin  and Yang  (these  are  all 
discussed  in  detail  in Chapter 4).  Even  the  reaction  to  the  first  herbal 
treatment is also considered an important and often essential diagnostic 
parameter. 
Contrast this with current Western allopathic diagnosis that seems 
content with  identifying  by  name  a  particular  pathological  condition 
such  as  a  staphylococcus  infection.  While  it  may  suggest  the  use  of a 
particular antibiotic, it does  not indicate either the underlying cause of 
the disease  or its  relationship  to  other predisposing imbalances,  and  it 
most certainly does not offer a clue as  to a treatment that will ultimately 
heal  and  restore  balance.  By  first  identifying such an  infection as  Heat 
in  TCM,  the  traditional  practitioner  immediately  knows  to  prescribe 
cool  natured  herbs  and  substances  to  counter it. 
The  location,  along  with  other  aspects  concerning  the  nature  of 
the  particular  Heat  pattern,  is  also  considered.  In  general,  though  not 
always,  if it is  on the skin,  it is  an  acute External Heat manifestation; if 
the  overall  appearance  seems  robust or strong it would  be Excess  Heat; 
or  if the  patient  appears  frail  with  a  history of recurring  symptoms  it 
would  be  considered  Deficient  Heat,  requiring  an  altogether  different 
approach  to  treatment. 
INTERROGATION 
Interrogation  includes  the  patient's  description  of his  primary 
complaint and any other secondary complaints. It also includes specific 
estiJ 
195 
areas  of inquiry  by  the  doctor.  Since  the  Ming  Dynasty,  it  has  been 
customary to follow the method of ten questions when making a diagnosis. 
This  includes:  1.  chills  and  fever;  2.  perspiration;  3.  headache,  chest, 
abdominal  or  other  pains  anywhere  in  the  body;  4.  urination  and 
defecation;  5.  appetite;  6.  mental  state;  7.  hearing;  8 thirst;  9.  history of 
old diseases  and  causes  of the new illness;  10.  if a woman,  menstruation, 
leukorrhea,  number of children,  childbirth, miscarriages  and  abortions. 
Chills and  fever 
Chills  and  fever  help  determine  whether  it  is  an  acute  External 
symptom pattern or chronic Internal one.  External complexes are  always 
accompanied by chills, while with an Internal condition the patient may 
be  prone to  general  coldness  but not chills. 
Colds, influenza, headache, stiff neck, body aches, fevers with chills 
and  an  aversion  to  Cold  and  Wind  are  all  External  symptoms.  These 
need  to be further understood as  being either of the Wind-Cold or Wind-
Heat type. With Wind-Cold the chills are  more severe  than the fever  and 
there  are  other  indications  of Coldness  such  as  pale  appearance  and  a 
slower  pulse  (60  or  less  beats  per  minute).  With  Wind-Heat  chills  are 
milder while the fever  is  stronger,  and  there are  other strong indications 
of Heat such  as  a flushed  appearance  and  a rapid  pulse  (closer  to  80  or 
more  beats  per  minute).  The  Wind-Cold  and  Wind-Heat  diseases  are 
divided  into  six  stages,  each  having  several  formulas  appropriate  for  its 
treatment. These  are  detailed  in chapter 6. 
Perspiration 
Spontaneous  perspiration  is  generally an  indication of a Deficient 
condition. Fever with perspiration is  a sign of either External Wind-Heat 
or Heat invading  the Qi level. 
Wind  Heat:  use  Lonicera  and  Forsythia  Combination (Yin  qiao  san) 
Wind Cold:  use  Cinnamon Combination (Gui  zhi  tang) 
Qi level  fever:  use  White Tiger  Decoction (Bai  hu  tang) 
Perspiration  accompanying  an  Internal  symptom  complex  could 
represent  Yang  Deficiency  when  one  perspires  upon  awakening  or 
spontaneously,  or  Yin  Deficiency  if perspiration  occurs  during  sleep. 
Cold  extremities,  small  pulse  and  a  pale  complexion  with  incessant 
predisposition  to  sweating  can  be  a sign  of exhaustion. 
Yang  Deficiency:  Tonify Yang  with  Rehmannia  Eight  Formula  (Ba 
wei  di  huang wan). 
Yin  Deficiency:  Tonify Yin  with  Rehmannia  Six Formula  (Liu  wei 
di  huang wan). 
~ 
196 
Perspiration  Caused  by  Exhaustion:  Use  a ginseng  or Q!  tonic 
formula  such  as  Ginseng and Ginger Combination (Li  zhong wan) 
or Four Major Herbs (Si  jun zi  tang). 
Headaches,  Chest, Abdominal or Other Aches  and Pains 
Headaches 
External  Cold:  Incessant  headaches  with  fever  and  cold,  use 
Cinnamon Combination (Gui  zhi  tang). 
Blood  Deficiency:  Headaches  that come  and  go with  dizziness 
indicates  Dang Gui  Four Combination (Si  wu  tang). 
Greater Yang  (Tai  Yang)  type:  Headaches  that occur  at  the neck  and 
the  back  of the  head  is  treated  wth  Ephedra Combination (Ma 
huang  tang). 
Lesser Yang  (Shao Yang)  type:  Bilious  headaches  located  at  the 
temples  or sides  of the  head  are  treated  with  Bupleurum and 
Cinnamon Combination (Chai  hu  gui  zhi  tang)  or Bupleurum 
and Dang Gui Formula (Xiao  yao  san  or Rambling  Powder). 
Sunlight Yang  (Yang  Ming)  type:  Headaches  that are  located  at  the 
forehead  to  the eyebrow  ridge  are  caused  by the Stomach  and  are 
treated  with  Minor Rhubarb Combination (Xiao  cheng qi  tang). 
Lesser  Yin  (Shao Yin)  type:  Headaches  acompanied with  vomiting, 
cold  extremities  and  a deep  pulse  are  treated  with  Evodia 
Combination (Wu  zhu  yu  tang). 
Deficient  Oi:  Severely  painful  headaches  which  occur in  the 
morning,  late  afternoon  or come  and  go  are  caused  by weakness  and 
are  treated  with  tonics  such  as  Ginseng and Dang Gui Ten 
Combination (Shi  chuan  da  bu wan). 
Excess  Heat:  A severe,  continuous  headache  may  be  caused  by toxic 
accumulation  and  is  treated  with  detoxifying  herbal  formulas  such 
as  Coptis and Scutellaria Combination (Huang  lian  jie  du  tang)  or 
Major Bupleurum Combination (Da  chai  hu  tang). 
Chest  discomfort  and pains 
Excess:  For  a feeling  of fullness  in  the  chest with  la bored  breathing 
use  Five  Peels  Decoction (Wu  pi  san). 
Deficient  Q!:  For a feeling  of emptiness  with  shallow  breathing use 
Rehmannia Eight Combination (Ba  wei  di  huang wan). 
Blood  Stagnation:  Sharp  chest  pains  are  treated  with  Decoction for 
Removing  Blood Stasis  in the Chest (Xue  fu  zhu yu  tang). 
Asthma  or emphysema:  For  a stuffy feeling  in  the chest with  pain 
and  shortness  of breath  one can  consider Ephedra and Ginkgo 
Combination (Ding chuan  tang). 
ed 
197 
Abdominal Pains 
Excess:  For  abdominal  pains  with  tenderness  upon  palpation  one 
can  consider Major Bupleurum Combination (Da  chai  hu  tang); 
for  abdominal  pains  accompanied  with  constipation,  a hard, 
distended  abdomen  and  an  aversion  to  warm  weather  use  Major 
Rhubarb Combination (Da  cheng qi  tang),  Minor Rhubarb 
Combination (Xiao  cheng  qi  tang),  Rhubarb and Moutan 
Combination (Da  huang  mu  clan  pi  tang)  or Major Bupleurum 
Combination (Da  chai  hu  tang). 
Deficiency:  For  abdominal  pains  alleviated  with  pressure  and 
warmth  one  can  use  Ginseng and Ginger Combination (Li  zhong 
wan);  for  abdominal  pains  associated  with  malnourishment use 
Minor Cinnamon and Paeonia Combination (Xiao  jian  zhong 
tang),  or Ginseng and Ginger Combination (Li  zhong  tang)  when 
there  is  Q!  Deficiency and  weakness. 
Sta&nation  of Blood.  Dampness  or Oi:  For  masses  or lumps  in  the 
abdomen  use  Cinnamon Twig  and  Poria Combination (Gui  zhi  fu 
ling  tang). 
General Pain 
In  general,  pains  that  move  or come  and  go  are  caused  by  Wind, 
intractable pains are caused by Damp stagnation, while Deficiency pains 
are  dull  and  aching. 
Wind-Damp-Cold:  For  pains  especially  in  the  lower  back  and  legs 
use  Du huo and  Loranthes Combination (Du  huo  ji  sheng  tang) 
or for  generalized  pains  use  Clematis and Stephania Combination 
(Shu  jing huo xue  tang). 
Wind-Damp-Heat:  For  rheumatic  pains  in  the  bodily extremities  use 
White Tiger and Cinnamon Twig  Decoction (Bai  hu  jia  gui  zhi 
tang). 
Blood  Stagnation:  Sharp,  stabbing pains  use  Du Huo and 
Loranthes Combination (Du  huo  ji  sheng  tang)  and  add  persica 
seed  (Tao  Ren),  carthamus  (Hong  Hua) and  cyperus  (Xiang  Fu)  to 
this  formula. 
Shoulder and neck  stiffness  and pain 
For  those  with  a  stronger  conformation,  Pueraria  Combination 
(Ge gen  tang)  is  generally effective. 
joint and lower back pain 
Kidney Deficiency: Joint and  lower  back  pains  with  aching weakness 
and  fatigue is treated  with  Du huo and Loranthes Combination 
(Du  huo  ji  sheng  tang)  and/or Rehmannia Eight Combination (Ba 
wei  di  huang wan). 
Sta&nant  Blood: Joint  and  lower  back  pains  that  are  sharp  and  fixed 
are  treated  with  Fantastically  Effective  Pill  to  Invigorate  the 
Collaterals  (Huo luo  xia  ling  clan)  or Cinnamon Twig  and  Poria 
Combination (Gui  zhi  ful  ling  wan). 
Arthritic and  Rheumatic  Pains:  May  be  treated  with  Dang Gui, 
Dipsacus  and  Tienchi  Combination (Shu  jin  san)  or Clematis  and 
Stephania  Combination (Shu  jing  huo  xue  tang). 
A single herb that is  often taken by the elderly for aching lower back 
pains,  hypertension  and  heart  disease  and  to  strengthen  the  bones  and 
sinews  is  Loran thus parasiticus (Sang Ji Sheng)  or Mulberry mistletoe.  It 
works  for  diseases  associated  with  aging  by  replenishing  the  Liver  and 
Kidney Qi. 
Defecation 
Yan&  Sta&nation  and  Excess:  Constipation  in  one with  a  normal 
appetite or a feeling  of abdominal  fullness  with  discomfort  and  pain 
indicates  Major  Rhubarb  Combination (Da  cheng qi  tang)  or 
Minor Rhubarb  Combination (Xiao  cheng  qi  tang). 
Deficiency:  A thinner  patient with  less  appetite  and  constipation 
without  either  abdominal  fullness  or pain  indicates  Blood 
Replenishing  Decoction  Oi  chuan  jian). 
Dryness  of Blood  and  Internal  Heat:  Chronic constipation  in  older 
individuals  indicates  Blood  Replenishing  Decoction Oi  chuan  jian) 
with  the  addition  of Scutellaria  and  cannabis  seed  (or  flax  seed). 
Spleen  Oi  or Yan&  Deficiency with  Dampness:  Loose  bowels 
indicates  the  use  of a ginseng  tonic  formula  such  as  Four  Major 
Herbs  (Si  jun  zi  tang)  or Ginseng  and  Ginger  Combination (Li 
zhong wan). 
lndi&estion  and  improper  diet:  Diarrhea with  abdominal  pain  and 
strong  smelling  stools  may  indicate  the  use  of a carminative Qi 
regulating  formula  or a  formula  to  remove  food  stagnation  such  as 
Citrus  and  Crataegus  Combination  (Bao  he  wan). 
Dysentery:  For  tenesmus,  an  urgent  need  to  defecate  but often with 
no  result,  one  might  consider Spleen Warming  Decoction (Wen  pi 
tang). 
Internal  Cold:  Persistent  watery  diarrhea  may  indicate a  formula 
such  as  Ginger,  Licorice and  Aconite Combination (Si  ni  tang). 
Gastroenteritis  or cholera:  persistent  diarrhea with  nausea  and 
vomiting can  i"ndicate  Mume  formula  (Wu  mei  wan)  or Citrus  and 
Crataegus  Combination (Bao  he wan). 
~ 
199 
Urination 
Urination  six  times  daily  is  average;  more  is  a  sign  of Deficiency 
while less  is  a sign of Excess. The darker the urine the more concentrated 
it is,  which  indicates  a  Heat condition. 
Deficiency of Kidney Yang:  Pale  or  light  urine is  an  indication  of a 
Cold  condition and  one would  consider Rehmannia Eight 
Combination (Ba  wei  di  huang wan). 
Diabetes:  Frequent  urination with  thirst are  signs  of diabetes.  One 
might consider Rehmannia Six Combination (Liu  wei  di  huang 
wan). 
Deficiency of either Yin  Essence.  Yang  or Oi:  For  incontinence of 
urine,  in older individuals,  or enuresis  (night  time  urination)  in 
adults  or children  use  Mantis Egg-case  Powder (Sang  piao  xiao  san), 
one of the primary formulas  to  consider  for  urinary frequency 
associated  with  Deficiency. 
Cystitis  (bladder  infection).  nephritis  (kidney  infection)  or urinary 
stones:  Dark yellow  urine with  hematuresis  (blood) and  pain during 
urination  is  a sign  of serious  urinary disturbance  and  one should 
consider either Gentiana Combination (Long  dan  xie  gan  tang)  or 
Polyporus Combination (Zhu  ling  tang). 
Appetite 
More superficial digestive or appetite problems relate to the Stomach 
symptom complex while deeper,  chronic problems with metabolism and 
assimilation  relate  to  the  Spleen  complex.  Excessive  appetite  is  an 
indication of excessive Stomach Heat while lack of appetite with digestive 
weakness  is  a sign of a Deficient Spleen or Cold Stomach. Stomach Heat 
is  caused  by  overeating  fatty,  spicy  and  hot  foods.  There  may  also  be 
symptoms  of thirst,  foul  breath,  preference  for  cold  drinks  and  foods 
and  in extreme  cases,  nausea. 
200 
Oi Deficiency:  Lack  of appetite  is  treated  with  Six Major Herb 
Formula (Liu  jun zi  tang). 
Cold Stomach:  This  is  caused  by  a Deficiency ofYang possibly as  a 
result  of overeating cold,  raw  foods.  Cold  Stomach  pains  are  usually 
relieved  by  the  application  of warmth  or ginger  tea.  Treatment for 
Cold  Stomach  is  Ginseng and Ginger Combination (Li  zhong 
wan)  or Cinnamon, Ginseng and Ginger Combination (Gui  zhi  li 
zhong wan). 
Morning sickness:  Nausea  and vomiting during the early  stages  of 
pregnancy is  an  indication  of morning sickness.  It can  be  treated 
with  Saussurea and Cardamon Combination with Six  Noble 
Ingredients (Xiang  sha  liu  jun zi  tang). 
Hearing 
Sudden hearing loss  is an Excess condition, while gradual diminution 
of hearing  is  a sign  of Deficiency. 
Tinnitus  (ear  ringing):  That  sounds  like  blowing  or wind  indicates  a 
Wind  Heat  condition.  Consider  using  Magnetite and Cinnabar 
Sedative  (Ci  zhu wan).  Tinnitus  that  is  more  like  a humming or 
cicada  sound  indicates  Liver  or  Kidney  imbalance.  Use  a variation  of 
Magnetite and  Cinnabar Sedative (Ci  zhu wan)  that  adds  lycii 
berries,  ligustrum,  cuscuta  and  prepared  rehmannia. 
Ear  ache:  Possibly  with  pus  is  an  indication  of Damp  Heat.  One 
might  use  Gentiana Combination (Long  clan  xie  gan  tang). 
Thirst 
Thirst with  a desire  to  drink cold  fluids  is  a sign  of Internal  Heat. 
Thirst with a desire  for Warm drinks is  a sign oflnternal Cold. Excessive 
thirst  is  a sign  ofYin Deficiency. Thirst with  no desire  to drink is  a sign 
of Damp  Heat.  Excessive  thirst  with  normal  urination,  an  individual 
who  urinates  twice  as  much  as  is  the  fluid  that  is  taken  in,  or a  person 
who urinates as  much as  is  taken represent three different types of diabetes. 
Thirst with  Internal  Heat:  Consider White Tiger  Decoction  (Bai  hu 
tang). 
Thirst with  Internal  Cold:  Consider  Rehmannia Eight 
Combination (Ba  wei  di  huang wan). 
Thirst  caused  by Yin  Deficiency:  One can  consider Anemarrhena, 
Phellodendron with  Rehmannia Combination (Zhi  bai  di  huang 
wan)  or  Rehmannia Six Combination (Liu  wei  di  huang wan). 
Mental  condition 
For  depression  and  moodiness:  Use  Bupleurum and Peony 
Combination  Oia  wei  xiao  yao  wan)  or Cinnabar Combination 
(Zhu  sha  an  shen  wan). 
For  Heart  and  Kidneys  or Yin  Deficiency:  For  insomnia, 
forgetfulness  and  mental  exhaustion  consider Ginseng and 
Zizyphus Combination (Tian  wang  bu  xin  tang  - This  is  sometimes 
called  the  "scholar's  formula")  or Mantis Egg-case  Powder  (Sang 
piao  xiao  san)  with  zizyphus  seeds  and  schizandra. 
For  anemia  with  Spleen  Deficiency:  Consider  Ginseng and  Longan 
Combination ·(Gui  pi  tang). 
For  mental  off-centeredness  and  forgetfulness  associated  with 
hypoglycemia:  Consider Minor Cinnamon and  Paeonia 
Combination (Xiao  jian  zhong  tang). 
For  insomnia with  a tendency to  awaken  early or in  the  middle  of 
the  night:  Consider Zizyphus  Combination (Suan  zao  ren  tang). 
~ 
2.01 
For  insomnia with  extreme  nervousness  and  emotional  instability: 
Use  Bupleurum and  Dragon  Bone Combination (Chai  hu  jia  long 
gu  mu  li  tang). 
Menstruation 
The amount and color of the menstrual  blood a ~  well  as  its  regular-
ity or irregularity is  indicative of the condition and treatment. Pains that 
occur during ovulation represent stagnation and  are  treated  with emme-
nagogue  herbs  such  as  Dang Gui  (Angelica  sinensis),  lovage  (ligusticum 
species),  motherwort  (Leonurus  cardiaca),  Chinese  red  sage  root (Salvia 
milthiorrhiza),  red  peony  root  (Paeonia  rubra),  safflower  (Carthamus 
tinctorii)  and  calendula (Calendula  officinalis)  flowers. 
Hot Blood:  Women  with  frequent  periods  and  extreme  blood  flow 
can  be  treated  with  Gentiana Combination (Long  dan  xie  gan 
tang). 
Blood  Deficiency:  Women  with  scanty  menstruation  and  irregular 
or missed  menstruation  can  be  treated  with  Dang Gui Four (Si  wu 
tang). 
Blood  Stagnation: Women  who  exhibit  a lot of clots  are  treated  with 
Cinnamon Twig  and Poria  Combination (Gui  zhi  fu  ling wan). 
OBSERVATION 
A skilled TCM doctor is  often able  to diagnose  a patient as  soon as 
they walk into their presence. This is  not so difficult to understand since 
our imbalances  reflect themselves  in every aspect of our expression  and 
manner. 
We  can  presume an underlying  Deficiency when  an  individual  pre-
sents themselves as  soft spoken, shy or somewhat timorous with a greater 
tendency towards  negative states and a generally lifeless  manner, which is 
especially noticed  in their eyes.  A  pale  complexion  is  usually an  indica-
tion of Blood  Deficiency; it may also  indicate Q!  Deficiency if there are 
complaints or indications of Deficient Q! as  well.  In Chinese medicine, 
Deficiency issues  of men  usually,  but not always,  involve Q!,  while with 
women,  because  of menstruation  and  childbirth,  Blood  Deficiency  is 
more likely.  Since,  according  to  the Classics,  Blood  is  the  mother of Q! 
and  Q!  the  commander of Blood,  it  is  not uncommon  for  both  Blood 
and  Q!  to be  simultaneously Deficient. 
Yang  Deficiency will  have  a similar presentation, but the individual 
may be more densely clothed,  suggesting Coldness.  Upon  interrogation, 
they  would  also  express  a  lack  of motivation  and  drive  and  lack  of li-
bido. Yin  Deficiency manifests  similarly to  Excess  Yang  but arises  more 
out  of an  overall  Deficient  state.  Yin  Deficient  individuals  tend  to  be 
202 
thinner, the complexion may be  red  but more in blotches on the surface 
of the  skin,  especially  the  nose  and  face,  the  voice  may  be  loud  but 
hollow sounding and while they may issue  forth with a burst of enthusi-
asm,  they have a tendency to not complete what they begin and therefore 
drift  about as  if somewhat  lost,  making  them  appear  to  be  unfocused. 
As  a contrast,  Excess  individuals are generally of a stocky build, not 
at  all  shy  in  manner or speech,  more strongly opinionated with a cheer-
ful  disposition,  a deeper  ruddy complexion,  and  bright clear  and  lively 
eyes.  We  would  not  consider  this  individual  to  be  either  Excess  Qi  or 
Blood,  because  any  imbalance  other  than  Deficiency of these  two  para-
digms would be described as Stagnation with specific corresponding symp-
toms. 
An  individual could, however,  present as  Excess Yin  or Yang.  Excess 
Yin  is  characterized  by  edema,  or a  more  phlegmatic  appearance,  while 
with  Excess  Yang  there  is  more  of an  aggressive  manner  and  a  certain 
overbearing aspect to their presentation. While there is  often a combina-
tion  of both Yin  and  Yang  Excess  together  in  the  same  individual, Yin 
Excess  tends to a somewhat paler complexion, while Yang  is  definitely of 
a more  ruddy complexion. 
Qi Stagnation  is  often  accompanied  by  a  moody or depressed  atti-
tude with a tendency towards fullness  and pains in the chest, and gas  and 
bloating  after  meals.  Blood Stagnation  on the other hand  presents with 
a more  deeply  scarlet or purplish  appearance  and  fixed,  stabbing  pains. 
When  treating  any  Deficiency, we  must use  tonification  therapy.  It 
there  is  Qi Deficiency, integrate herbs such  as  ginseng, astragalus,  jujube 
dates  and  honey-baked  licorice  in  the  preparations.  Sugar  is  also  a  Qi 
tonic  and  preparations  made  with  whole,  unrefined  cane  sugar,  maple 
syrup,  blackstrap  molasses,  barley  malt  and  rice  syrup  would  give  Qi 
tonic  properties. 
For Blood Deficiency use herbs such as  Dang Gui (Angelica sinensis), 
lycii  berries (Gou Qi Zi), prepared Rehmannia glutinosa (Shu Di Huang) 
or Polygonum multiflorum (He Shou Wou) and Blood nourishing herbs 
and  iron-rich  foods  such  as  various  dark colored  berries,  grapes  and  red 
meat. 
For Yang Deficiency, use  Internal warming stimulants such as cinna-
mon  bark  (Rou  gui)  and/or  prepared  aconite  root  (Fu  Zi),  and  other 
spicy  acrid  herbs  including  cloves  and  peppers.  For Yin  Deficiency,  we 
use Yin  tonics which  may include a number of Blood tonics (because of 
the  close  relationship  of Blood  and  Yin),  such  as  prepared  rehmannia 
(Shu  Di Huang) and lycii berries (Gou Qi Zi) along with Yin tonics such 
as  ophiopogon  (Mai  Men  Dong),  American  ginseng  (Panax 
~ 
103 
quinquefolium),  tortoise  shell  (Bie  Jia),  black  donkey  skin  gelatin  (E 
jiao),  demulcent  herbs  such  as  marshmallow  root  (Althea  officinalis), 
comfrey root (Symphytum  officinale),  slippery elm  bark (Uimus  fulva), 
Iceland  moss  (Cetraria  islandica)  and  Irish  moss  (Chondrus  crispus), 
and  foods  such  as  okra,  pork and  turtle soup. 
When treating Excess,  use more therapeutically aetive herbs and for-
mulas  with  reducing  or  detoxifying  therapies.  These  may  include 
purgatives,  cholagogues  (herbs that stimulate the liver  to discharge bile), 
alteratives  (Heat clearing  herbs),  diuretics  or diaphoretics. 
In  general,  often  behind  every  Excess  there  is  a  latent  Deficiency 
and  behind  every  Deficiency there  may be  a  latent  Excess.  Always  treat 
what is  most apparent first.  Following the principle of treating the branch 
symptoms  before  the  root  will  allow  us  to  eventually  access  any  latent 
imbalances  as  they may appear. 
2.04 
Skin:  A puffy appearance of the  skin  indicates edema  and 
Dampness.  Dry or rough  skin  can  indicate Blood  Deficiency and  is 
treated with  Blood  tonics  such  as  Polygonum  multiflorum (He Shou 
Wou)  in  the compound called  "Shou Wou  Chih" sold  in  most 
Chinese pharmacies.  Skin  that feels  moist  to  the  touch  is  an 
indication  of Dampness. 
Hair:  Dry,  lusterless  hair that breaks  easily  represents  a general 
Deficiency,  especially of Blood  and Yin. 
Mucus secretions:  The  Chinese mother formula  for  all  types  of 
Excess  mucus  is  the  formula  Two  Cured Decoction (Er  chen  tang -
also  found  in  pill  form),  which  can  be  appropriately  modified  for 
Cold  or Hot conditions. Thick yellow  or greenish  phlegm  indicates 
Heat and  is  treated  with  cooling,  alterative  herbs  such  as  echinacea 
(Echinacea  spp.),  golden  seal  (Hydrastis  canadensis),  chaparral 
(Larrea  divaricata),  coptis  (Huang  Lian),  honeysuckle  Oin Yin  Hua), 
forsythia  fruit  (Lian  Qiao), gentian  (Long  Dan Cao)  and  poke 
(Phytolacca  spp.). 
Thin,  clear  mucus  secretions  usually  indicates  Coldness,  Dampness 
and  Deficiency and  is  treated  with  Internal warming  herbs  and 
formulas  such  as  garlic,  cayenne  pepper and  raw  ginger or the 
Ayurvedic Trikatu  formula.  This  consists  of equal  parts  pippali  long 
pepper,  black  pepper and ginger  powders  mixed  with  honey.  One 
half to  one  teaspoon  is  taken  as  a single  dose.  Two  parts  anise  seed 
powder  could  be  substituted  for  pippali  to  make  it milder  for 
children. 
A large  amount of mucus  secretion  is  described  as  Excess  Dampness 
if it  is  purulent white.  Yellowish  or blood  tinged  exudate  is  classified 
as  Damp  Heat,  for  which  one would  use  Gentiana Combination 
(Long  dan  xie  gan  tang)  or formulas  containing cholagogue herbs 
such  as  dandelion  root (Taraxacum  officinale),  barberry (Berberis 
vulgaris)  or oregon  grape  (Mahonia repens),  golden  seal  (Hydrastis 
canadensis),  fringetree  bark (Chionanthus virginicus),  gentian  root 
(Long  dan  cao),  yellow  dock  root (Rumex  crispus),  as  is  found  in  the 
Planetary formula,  HerbaDerm  Complex.  Dry phlegm  that is 
difficult to  expectorate  requires  expectorants  such  as  platycodon  Qie 
Geng),  ophiopogon (Mai  Men  Dong),  yerba  santa (Eriodictyon  spp.) 
and  balm  of gilead  (Grindelia  spp.). 
Blood  (coughing,  vomiting,  menses):  Thin,  light colored-blood 
indicates  Deficiency while  dark  red,  clotted  blood  is  Excess.  Blood 
Stagnation  manifests  in  women  as  more  pain and  clots  immediately 
before  and  during  menstruation.  Pain  that occurs  more  after 
menstruation  indicates  a  Deficiency. 
Stool:  Loose  stools  represent  Dampness  and  Spleen  Deficiency. 
Hard,  constipated  stools  represent  Heat. 
Urine:  Cloudy urine  represents  Dampness  and  possibly  Heat.  Dark 
yellow,  concentrated  urine,  possibly with  blood,  indicates  Heat. 
Clear  urine  may indicate  Q!  and Yang  Deficiency with  Coldness  and 
weakness.  Brown-colored  urine can  indicate a chronic condition 
such  as  diabetes.  An  excessive  volume of urine also  can  indicate 
diabetes  while  a small  volume  can  be  edema. 
Herbs  used  to  clear  Excess  Heat  and  Dampness  include cooling or 
neutral  diuretics  such  as  cleavers  (Galium  aparine),  uva  ursi 
(Arctostaphylos  uva  urse)  and  horsetail  (Equisetum  spp.)  in Western 
herbalism.  Chinese  formulas  include the  mushrooms  poria  (Fu 
Ling)  and  polyporus  (Zhu  Ling)  and  dianthus  (Q!i  Mai)  herb.  Herbs 
that clear  Damp  Heat are  cholagogues  such  as  gentian  root (Long 
Dan  Cao),  barberry (Berberis  vulgaris),  oregon  grape  (Mahonia 
repens),  and  golden  seal  (Hydrastis  canadensis).  Chinese  formulas  to 
consider  for  Damp  Heat conditions include Gentiana 
Combination (Long dan  xie  gan  tang)  and  Dianthus Combination 
(Ba  zheng san). 
TONGUE DIAGNOSIS 
This  is  one of the most important methods of diagnosis and, along 
with  pulse diagnosis,  warrants  a  more extensive presentation. 
205 
HlT.shtory  I'  d  f  d'  .. fi  d  .  .  .  f 
e ear 1est  recor  o  tongue  1agnos1s  1s  oun  on mscnpt10ns  o 
bones and tortoise shells  unearthed from  the ruins of the Yuan  dynasty, 
the  first  dynasty of the  Bronze Age.  A thousand years  later,  around 400 
to 300 B. C., descriptions of tongue diagnosis were  recorded in the Yellow 
Emperor's Classic oflnternal Medicine (Huang Ti Neijing). Tongue diag-
nosis  evolved  further  from  the  Han  to  the  Tang  millennia  (200  BC  to 
907 BC) and continues to evolve with extensive research during the present 
day  in China. 
Not too long ago, one of the first Western medical diagnostic proce-
dures  was  when  the  doctor  asked  us  to  open  the  mouth  so  he  could 
examine  the  tongue.  Thus,  tongue  diagnosis  represents  an  effective  and 
low-tech  method of diagnosis when combined with other diagnostic pa-
rameters of observation. It is  unfortunate that for  many simple, non-life-
threatening  conditions,  such  an  economic  and  artful  procedure  is  sel-
dom utilized  in contemporary Western  clinics. 
Following is  a table that compares traditional TCM diagnosis of the 
tongue with  that of contemporary Western  medicine.  (Note  that  a nor-
mal tongue appears as  pink, slightly moist, neither too thick or thin and 
with  a slight white  coat.) 
Table  1.  Comparative Clinical  Significance of Tongue Appearances  in 
TCM  and Western  Medicine 
1 
Tongue Feature 
COLORPale 
Red 
Cardinal red 
Purplish 
Tongue Feature 
Bluish 
InTCM 
Deficiency of Qi and  Blood 
Heat evil  invades  Ying  level
2 
; 
Heat  in  the  Pericardium  meridian, 
Zang  Fu  or  the  extremities. 
Heat  evil  invades Ying  and  Blood 
levels;  Heat affecting  Pericardium; 
Heat Fire  flushing  up. 
Extreme  Heat;  Stagnant  Blood; 
Heat  in  Heart Meridian;  insidious 
pathogenic  factors  in  Lung;  Heat 
phlegm  in  Upper Warmer;  Excess 
Heat  both  Interior  and  Exterior. 
InTCM 
Internal  accumulation  of 
Damp-Phlegm;  Heat  in  Blood  level; 
Cold  Liver  and  Kidney. 
In Western  Medicine 
Anemia,  malnutrition 
Toxemia/pyemia caused  by 
infection;  acute  or  suppurative 
infectious  disease;  high  fever; 
severe  pneumonia;  hyperemia; 
tongue vessel  dilation. 
High  fever;  septicemia  and 
other serious  disease  conditions. 
Severe  infection;  respiratory/ 
circulatory disorder;  thrombosis 
or  microcirculatory bleeding; 
sublingual  vein  stasis; 
pigmentation  disease. 
In Western Medicine 
Respiratory/circulatory failure; 
anoxia;  cyanotic  Heart disease. 
BODY 
Contracted 
Swollen 
Stiff/ swollen 
Double Tongue  (rare) 
Protruding 
With  Thorns 
(Strawberry) 
Fissured 
Smooth 
Ulcerated 
Denuded 
Crooked 
Trembling 
Flaccid 
Hyperactive 
TONGUE  COATING 
COLOR 
White 
Heart-Blood  Deficiency;  Internal  Heat  Tongue  atrophy;  severe 
consuming  the  muscles.  infection;  late stage  disease; 
extreme weakness  and 
Cold  Dampness;  Heat  Dampness; 
Phlegm  overflow;  Heart  Fire. 
Excessive  Heart  Fire;  Heat  in 
Heart and  Spleen. 
emaciation. 
Edema;  lingual  inflammation 
and  congestion;  macroglossia. 
Tongue  severely  swollen. 
Phlegm-Wind,  Phlegm-Fire  in  the  Tumor;  sublingual  gland  cyst  or 
Heart and  Spleen.  inflammation. 
Phlegm-Heat  in  the  Heart;  Down's  syndrome;  toxemia; 
epidemic Toxin  attacking the Heart;  high  fever. 
Deficiency of Original  Q!. 
Heat-Toxin;  Excess  symptom 
complex;  Blood  Stagnation. 
Heat damage  to  Stomach  Fluid; 
Yin  and  Blood  Deficiency. 
Over-sweating  or overuse  of 
purgatives;  consumption  ofYin; 
Stomach  Q!  exhaustion. 
Heat  in  the  upper  warmer 
Yin  Deficiency. 
Liver Wind. 
Internal  movement of Liver Wind. 
Blood  Deficiency or Yin  damage. 
Excess  or Weakness;  Heat  in 
the Spleen  and  Heart. 
Normal  or Exterior  symptom-
complex;  febrile  diseases,  Cold  Evil 
in  the Tai Yang  Stage 
3 
or  Heat  Evil 
in  Wei  level.  (In  Deficiency,  Cold 
High  or scarlet fever;  severe 
pneumonia. 
High  fever;  dehydration; 
malnutrition;  tongue 
inflammation. 
Malnutrition,  macrocytic 
anemia;  atrophy of filiform  and 
fungiform  papillae. 
Stomatitis;  ulcerative  stomatitis 
Malnutrition;  geographic 
tongue,  allergic  or exudative 
constitution. Some  filiform 
papillae  atrophy,  some 
proliferate. 
Stroke;  similar injury to,  or 
stimulation of,  nerves  of the 
tongue. 
Can  be  a sign  of either weakness 
or  Excess,  depending on  the 
other  signs.  It  is  often  associated 
with  hyperthyroidism, general 
poor health  and  neurosis. 
Weakness,  fatigue,  low  thyroid, 
hypoglycemia,  etc. 
Depending on other signs  it can 
indicate  anemia  and  exhaustion, 
or  the  aftermath  of  cerebral 
vascular accidents or  stroke. 
Normal.  Initial  stage  of febrile 
disease;  chronic mild  disease, 
or  convalescence. 
207 
and  Interior  symptoms  complex 
can  also  be  seen.) 
Yellow  Interior,  Excess,  and  Heat  symptom- Bacterial  infectious  disorder; 
complex,  Excess  Heat  diseases;  constipation. 
Excess  Heat  affecting  the  gastro-
intestinal  tract or Stomach 
(Bright Yang  level);  Heat 
Evil  between  Ying  and  Wei  levels. 
Gray  Interior  symptom-<:omplex;  febrile  Severe  disease;  long  term  digestive 
disease  in  three Yin  Stages;  (Cold,  disorder;  dehydration;  acidosis; 
or with  a pseudo-Heat  appearance);  or  result  of smoking. 
Heat  Evil  invading Blood  level; 
epidemic disease  (Excess  Heat). 
Black  Interior  symptom-<:omplex;  Heat  Disease  conditions  more  severe 
CHARACTER 
Thin 
Thick 
Moist 
Dry 
Creamy/Greasy 
Evil  invading  Blood  level.  than  in  gray  coating;  fungal 
infections. 
Normal  or  Exterior  symptom-
complex  in  febrile  disease. 
Interior symptom-<:omplex; 
Excess  Evil  such  as  Heat,  Cold, 
or Phlegm. 
Normal,  or  mild  disease  that  has 
not  injured  Body  Fluid. 
Heat  Evil  consuming Body  Fluid. 
Dampness  and  Turbid  Qj  in 
Stomach,  Spleen  or  Lung. 
Mild  pathogenic  factors. 
Stronger  pathogenic  factors, 
influencing digestive  or 
respiratory  tract;  filiform 
papillae  proliferation. 
Normal  saliva  secretion. 
High  fever;  dehydration; open-
mouth  breathing;  decreased 
saliva  secretion. 
Poor digestion;  poor  oral 
cleaning ability or  habit. 
In  TCM  tongue  and  pulse  diagnosis,  there  are  always  signs  of pri-
mary consideration and signs which  are  only considered when there is  a 
corresponding indication  in  a designated  area.  What  is  of primary con-
sideration involves the overall description of the shape, tongue body and 
coat of the  tongue.  Further,  if specific  signs  or indications  are  particu-
larly  noticeable  at  certain  areas,  these  may  be  correlated  with  specific 
internal viscera. 
While  there  is  some  disagreement  concerning  the  significance  of 
signs observed on certain tongue areas, there is  enough empirically based 
agreement  that most TCM  physicians  place considerable importance on 
them.  In general  the tongue tip corresponds  to  the Heart; the intermedi-
ate horizontal zone between the middle and the tip represents the Lungs; 
the  root  or back  of the  tongue  to  the  Kidney;  the center of the  tongue 
indicates the Spleen and Stomach; while the side edges correspond  to the 
Liver and Gall Bladder.  Following another TCM model,  the front  of the 
~ 
208 
tongue corresponds to the Organs of the Upper Warmer, the middle area 
to  the Middle Warmer Organs and the root or back of the tongue to the 
Lower Warmer  Organs. 
Tongue Inspection 
We  divide  our  inspection  of the  tongue  into  three  main  areas:  ap-
pearance of the tongue,  the tongue body and the coat.  From  the appear-
ance  and  body of the  tongue we  learn  of the  relative  state  of Yin,  Yang, 
Xu  (Depletion  or Deficiency)  or Shi  (Repletion  or Excess).  Overall  the 
tongue  is  under  the  domain  of the  Heart  because  it  reflects  the  overall 
circulatory condition.  However,  the tissue  of the tongue is  comprised of 
the  same  continuous tissue  of the stomach so  that the  tongue  also  indi-
cates  the  condition  of the  Stomach.  The  coat  on  the  tongue  represents 
the vaporized  waste  of the Stomach  Qi. 
Since  the condition of the coat is  more transient depending on the 
External  Influences (Wind,  Cold,  Damp,  Heat,  Dryness,  Summer Heat) 
and  on food,  it is  only of secondary importance, while  the tongue body 
which  reflects  the  underlying  state  of vitality is  of primary importance. 
As  a  result,  no  matter  what  the  condition  of the  coat,  the  disease  is 
relatively easy to cure if the tongue body appears  healthy.  However,  since 
the  tongue  body  reflects  a  deeper  imbalance,  if it  appears  imbalanced 
treatment will  be  longer  and  more  difficult. 
Tongue Appearance 
1.  Thin and  shriveled - This  generally indicates  Deficiency.  If it is 
pale then there is poor circulation with weakness of the Heart and Spleen. 
If it is  dry,  then  it is  Yin  Deficient and  is  difficult to  treat. 
2.  Swollen - The  tongue  may  be  enlarged  or have  noticeable  scal-
lops on its  edges  outlining tooth indentations. This  indicates Dampness 
and  edema caused  by  Excess  Yin  or Deficient Spleen. 
3.  Stiff tongue- This may be deflected to one side of the mouth or 
the other.  This  indicates  apoplexy (stroke)  and  Internal Wind. 
4.  Protruding  - A tendency to frequently extrude the tongue from 
the mouth indicates Internal Heat affecting the Heart and Spleen Organ 
meridians. 
5.  Trembling  - If the  tongue  is  trembling  excessively,  this  is  an 
indication of          Liver  Wind,  possibly associated  with  epilepsy or 
Parkinson's  disease.  If there  is  an  associated  tendency  to  refrain  from 
speech,  this  can  be  a symptom of Heart and Spleen Qi  Deficiency. 
Inspecting  the  Tongue  Body:  Color of the  tongue 
A normal,  healthy tongue  is  pinkish and  moist.  If it is  lighter  than 
ed 
2.09 
normal it is considered a pale tongue, darker than normal is a red  tongue. 
A more  intensely dark  red  tongue  is  called  a cardinal  red  tongue  and  is 
an  indication of fire.  A bluish-purple tongue  is  an  indication of stagna-
tion  of either Cold or Heat. 
A.  The  pale  tongue 
A plump and  tender  pale  tongue  is  most commonly seen  and  indi-
cates Cold-Dampness with Deficient Yang  (poor circulation and low me-
tabolism). A thin and small bodied pale tongue indicates a Deficiency of 
Qi and  Blood. 
These  indications  are  further  elucidated  in  terms  of its  overall  ap-
pearance or character. A so called "withered" pale, white tongue indicates 
that the visceral  Qi and  Blood  are  not adequately supplying  the  tongue 
with  nourishment.  Usually  this  is  accompanied  with  colorless  lips  and 
gums.  A withered,  white  and  moist  tongue  is  an  indication  of anemia, 
physical weakness  or Deficiency ofYang with stagnated Cold-Dampness. 
Tooth prints, or scalloped edges, on the tongue are generally consid-
ered  to  be  an  indication  of edema  caused  by  Deficient  Spleen  Qi  and 
accumulated Dampness. It is a hypotensive state and is treated with Fluid-
dispersing diuretics  and warming Spleen  and  Kidney Yang  Qi tonics. 
B.  Red  and  Cardinal  Red  Tongues 
Pink  is  the  normal  color  of the  tongue.  A  tongue  that  is  red  pro-
gressing  to  deep  cardinal  red  is  an  indication  of pathological  Heat  and 
febrile  disease.  There  are  two  types: 
1.  Excess  Heat Type 
There  may  be  a  high  fever,  even  delirium,  but  the  Heat  has  not 
accumulated  to  the  degree  that  it  has  injured  the  normal  Qi.  One may 
perceive  that  in  this  type  the  tongue  substance  appears  relatively  fresh. 
Sometimes there are  red  thorns which can  increase in size  and  protrude. 
The surface of the tongue is  dry and fissured,  the tongue coating may be 
white  and  dry,  coarse yellow  or charred  black,  indicating that Evil  Heat 
has  penetrated  between  the Qi and Ying  level  or has  already entered  the 
nutritive Ying  level.  This  is  an  Excess  Evil  where,  even  though  the Yin 
essence  has  sustained  injury,  it  is  not of primary concern.  At  this  stage, 
one should use anti-inflammatory, Heat clearing herbs that also cool the 
Ying. 
2.  Yin  Deficient Type 
This  type  is  seen  in  chronic wasting conditions or the  late stages  of 
acute febrile  diseases. At  this stage,  the Qi has  become Deficient and  the 
210 
Evil  is  also  somewhat weak.  Tidal  fever  occurs with  an elevation  of tem-
perature  in  the  afternoon.  The  complexion  is  red  with  a  sensation  of 
Heat in  the  chest,  palms  and  soles.  The  tongue  body is  cardinal  red  but 
relatively  dark,  not  fresh.  There  is  little  or  no  coating  and  the  tongue 
surface  is  dry  and  lacking  moisture.  Sometimes  only  the  sides  of the 
tongue and  tip  are cardinal  red.  This  is  an  indication ofYin Deficiency, 
and Yin  nourishing herbs  should be used  to control the exuberant Yang. 
A  more  advanced  situation  is  when  the  Stomach  and  Kidney Yin 
dry  up.  Here  the  Fluids  are  severely  injured  and  the  tongue  surface  is 
dark red,  not fresh,  and  is  shiny, like a mirror. It is  usually thin, withered 
and shriveled. This can be seen  in  patients with diagnosed TB,  advanced 
stages  of AIDS  or any autoconsumptive condition. 
C.  Cyanic  or Purple Tongue body 
There are two  types of cyanic or purplish tongues. While both are an 
indication of stagnation  of Blood  and  Qi,  the blue calor is  more a sign 
of Cold stagnation while the purplish calor is  a sign of Heat stagnation. 
In view of the fact  that TCM  theory describes  how a stagnation of Cold 
can  change into Heat and vice  versa, we  see  a close  relationship between 
the blue  and  purplish  colors  on the  tongue. 
Tongue  Coat 
A.  The White Tongue  Coat 
The  white  tongue  coat can  be  differentiated  into four  types: 
1.  External  Cold Type 
This is  seen  in early-stage Wind-Cold disease. The coat is white,  thin 
and  moist  and  the  tongue  body is  paler  than  normal. This  is  an  indica-
tion  of Cold  invading  and  the  patient  should  be  given  warming  dia-
phoretic  therapy. 
2.  External  Heat Type 
In  early  stage Wind-Heat  disease  the  coating  can  also  be  white  but 
somewhat thinner, dry and smooth. The tongue substance is  red, indicat-
ing  a  not  so  serious  invasion  causing  a  Heat  reaction.  The  patient  is 
treated  with  cooling diaphoretics. 
3.  Stagnant               type 
The white  coat  is  thick  and  filthy.  It cannot be  scraped  off and  its 
surface  is  Damp  and  smooth  with  a  lot  of saliva  on  it.  This  usually 
indicates  Cold,  Dampness  with  phlegm  and  food  stagnation. Warming 
therapy is used  to dry the Dampness and to help expectorate the Phlegm. 
211 
4.  Excess  Heat Type 
The white  coating  is  dry and  fissured.  It appears  like  white  powder 
spread  out over  the entire tongue surface.  It indicates the penetration of 
Evil  Heat.  It is  a Yang  Ming  stage  Heat  where  there  is  Dampness  and 
Heat  together.  The  patient  should  be  given  Heat  clearing  herbs,  Damp 
dispelling  diuretics  and  laxatives  if there  is  constipation. 
Individuals  with  a  thin emaciated  appearance,  constipation,  a  thin 
rapid  pulse and only a faint  thin whitish-yellow coating would  manifest 
Heat from  the  perspective  of Yin  Deficiency. 
B.  The Yellow Tongue Coat 
A yellow coat indicates Heat, be it from  Interior,  Exterior, or Excess 
conditions.  It can  also  represent  Heat  in  the  gastrointestinal  tract  or 
Stomach (Bright Yang  level),  or Heat  Evil  between  Ying  and Wei  levels. 
1.  Exterior Type: 
A pale yellow coating that is  thin and white on the central surface of 
the  tongue  signifies  that  the  disease  is  about to  turn from  Cold  to  Hot 
and  from  the  Exterior  to  the  Interior. 
2.  Damp  Heat in the  Middle  Burner with  stagnation  of Qi: 
The  tongue  coating  is  light  yellow  but  thick  and  indicates  Damp 
Heat and  Qi stagnation  in the Middle Warmer. 
3.  Damp  Heat type: 
The coating looks creamy, yellow and sticky with  saliva.  It may also 
appear  dirty  yellow,  indicating  long-standing  retention  of Damp  Heat, 
usually in the Stomach and Intestines.  Herbs which clear Dampness and 
Heat are  used. 
4.  Heat injuring Fluids: 
If the  coating  is  dry  and  yellow,  it  reflects  the  presence  of Heat 
which has  injured  the Body Fluids. Herbs which clear Heat and moisten 
Fluids  are  used. 
C.  Black Tongue Coat 
A  grayish  or  grayish-black  coating  represents  a  potentially  serious 
disease.  There are  three  basic  types  of black  tongue  coats: 
1.  High  Fever, Yin-Wasting  type 
A  Cold  or  Warm  disease  that  is  prolonged  can  penetrate  to  the 
Interior  of the  body where  it  transforms  into  Fire.  The  coat  may  first 
turn from white  to yellow and finally to black.  As  the fever  progresses  it 
~ 
212 
can  look  thorny,  charred  and  cracked  (fissured). 
2.  Deficient Yang  and  Cold Yin  Type 
The  tongue  substance  is  pale  and  the  coating  is  thin,  black  and 
moist.  It is  not as  black  as  the one with extreme  fever.  The  tongue  itself 
looks  tender,  slippery  and  moist.  It represents  Deficient Yang  with  ex-
treme  Cold. 
3.  Renal  Depletion Type 
The  tongue  coat  is  black  and  dry but  not  charred.  The  tongue  body  is 
relatively emaciated.  It indicates  an  exhausted  Kidney but without fever, 
and  hence  termed  a  Deficient  Yin/insufficient  Kidney  Water  type  of 
person. 
AUDITION  AND  SMELLING 
The  fourth  method  of diagnosis  involves  listening  to  the  sounds 
and  smelling  the  odors  of the  patient's  body.  This  includes  the  voice, 
breathing,  coughing,  sighing,  vomiting,  hiccups  and  rumbling abdomi-
nal  sounds.  It also  includes  an  awareness  of general  body odor,  mouth 
and breath odors and any malodorous smell of various bodily discharges 
and  excretions. 
Voice: A strong, clear voice  indicates  a more Yang  condition while a soft 
low  voice  is  Yin.  If the  voice  is  loud  and  hollow  sounding  it  indicates 
External  Excess  with  Internal  Deficiency.  If it  has  a  sing-song  quality 
with noticeable rising and lowering of pitch it indicates Spleen imbalance. 
If it has a groaning or gravely quality it indicates depletion of the Kidney-
adrenals.  An overbearing or shouting sound  indicates  Liver Yang  Excess. 
A weepy,  sighing quality is  Lung imbalance. An individual whose speech 
appears  as  if they  are  laughing  indicates  a  Heart  imbalance. 
Breath:  Loud, rapid, deep breathing indicates Excess or Yang. Soft, shallow 
breath suggests  Deficiency or Yin.  Breathing with the sound of mucus or 
Phlegm  indicates  upper  respiratory  congestion,  possibly  bronchitis  or 
asthma. 
Cough:  One may have a dry or non-productive cough or a wet-productive 
cough. 
1)  Wet  cough:  This  indicates  External  Damp Wind  and  is  treated 
with  Minor  Blue  Dragon  Combination  (Xiao  qing  long  tang)  if the 
mucus  is  thinner.  If  it  is  thicker  then  use  Minor  Bupleurum 
Combination (Xiao  chai  hu  tang)  for  more  Deficient  type  i n d i v i ~ 
213 
or Major Bupleurum Combination (Da  chai  hu  tang)  for  more Excess 
types. 
An  Ayurvedic  formula  for  the whitish  or thin mucus  type  is  called 
Si to Paladi Churna. Western  herbs include warming expectorants such as 
angelica root (Angelica archangelica) or lovage root (Ligusticum levisticum), 
osha  (Ligusticum  porteri),  ginger  root  (Zingiber  offincinale),  hyssop 
(Hyssopus  officinalis),  wild  ginger  (Asarum  canadensis),  yerba  santa 
(Eriodictyon  spp.)  and  elecampane  (lnula  helinium).  The  same  type  of 
Western  herbs  are  also  used  for  wet  cough  with  Deficiency,  especially 
elecampane root.  For accompanying Excess conditions, especially of Heat, 
one  would  use  coltsfoot  (Tussilago  farfara)  leaves  and  pleurisy  root 
(Asclepias  tuberosa).  Lobelia  (Lobelia  inflata)  is  indicated  for  all  types 
because it possesses expectorant, antispasmodic and stimulant properties. 
2)  Dry cough:  This  indicates  Lung  Yin  Deficiency  and  is  treated 
with Ophiopogon Decoction (Mai  men  dong tang). 
Western  herbalism  would  employ  demulcent  expectorants  such  as 
mullein leaf (Verbascum  thapsus), chickweed (Stellaria media), American 
ginseng  (Panax  quinquefolium),  marshmallow  root  (Althea  officinalis), 
slippery  elm  (Ulmus  fulva)  and  comfrey  leaf  or  root  (Symphytum 
officinalis). Herbs that specifically help to inhibit the cough reflex include 
apricot seed  (Xing Ren), wild  cherry bark (Prunus virginiana) and loquat 
leaves  (Eriobotrya  japonica). 
3)  Yang  cough:  Individuals  who  have  a  cough  with  a  more Yang 
constitution  would  use  Minor  Blue  Dragon  (Xiao  qing  long  tang)  or 
Minor  Bupleurum  Combination  (Xiao  chai  hu  tang).  Western  herbs 
include  Western  coltsfoot  (Tussilago  farfara),  pleurisy  root  (Asclepias 
tuberosa), marshmallow root (Althea officinalis), mullein leaf(Verbascum 
thapsus), comfrey leaf(Symphytum officinalis), wild cherry bark (Prunus 
virginiana)  and  slippery elm  (Ulmus  fulva). 
4)  Yin  cough:  Individuals  who  have  a  cough  with  a  more  Yin 
constitution would use  Ephedra and Asarum Combination (Ma huang 
fu  zi xi xin tang). Western herbs would contain a combination of ephedra 
(Ephedra species), wild ginger (Asarum canadensis), elecampane root (lnula 
helinium), fresh  ginger (Zingiber officinale), honey and wild  cherry bark 
(Prunus  virginiana). 
Vomiting: Loud vomiting represents an Excess, Yang conformation while 
weak vomiting is  a  more Yin  conformation. 
Abdominal  rumbling  sounds:  Rumbling  sounds  in  the  abdomen 
indicates Coldness and  Fluid  in  the gastrointestinal  tract. 
2.14 
Body odors: A fragrant body odor suggests Spleen imbalance; a scorched 
or burnt odor is  Heart; a rancid odor is  Liver;  a putrid (stale water)  odor 
is  the  Kidneys;  and  a metallic odor is  Lungs.  All  of these correspond  to 
the  Five  Elements.  In  general  a  strong  body  or  breath  odor  is  Excess 
while  a faint  or unnoticeable  odor is  more  Deficient. 
PALPATION 
Palpation  is  a  diagnostic  method  used  by  the  physician  involving 
palpating  or  touching  specific  areas.  The  most  important  method  in-
cluded  is  pulse  diagnosis,  along with  back  and  abdominal  palpation  of 
specific  areas. 
Pulse  diagnosis 
In  ancient  times,  the  pulse was  taken  at  nine  different  areas  on or 
near  seven  major  arteries.  The  three  acupunture  points  on  the  head  at 
the  level  of Heaven  were  Extra-point  Taiyang  and  Triple  warmer  21  on 
the temporal  artery corresponding to  the sides  of the head,  the ears  and 
eyes  respectively,  and one on the facial  artery, Stomach 3,  corresponding 
to the teeth and mouth.  The three at the wrist corresponding to the level 
of Human  are  Lung  9 on the  radial  artery corresponding to  the  Lungs, 
and  Large  Intestine  4,  posteriorly between  the  index  finger  and  thumb. 
The  third  corresponding  to  the  chest  was  on  Heart  7  located  on  the 
ulnar artery corresponding to  the  Heart.  The  three  at  the Earth  level  are 
pulses on Liver 3 and  Liver  10 on the Dorsal artery corresponding to the 
Liver;  pulses  on  Stomach  42  and  Spleen  11  also  on  the  Dorsal  artery 
corresponding to  the Spleen, and pulse on Kidney 3 on the Tibial artery 
corresponding to  the  Kidneys. 
Sometime around the 6th century AD  it became improper to touch 
women on various  parts of the body.  For this reason, the Nan ]ing  (  Clas-
sic of Difficulties) first described studying the entire body with all the 12 
major organs by solely reading the pulse of the radial artery of the wrist. 
Since  that time,  the pulse has  been  regarded  as  the  most definitive  indi-
cation of one's state of health and a directly palpable manifestation of a 
person's  energy,  capable of revealing past,  present and future conditions 
as  well  as  internal  psycho-physiological  states.  Unlike  other  diagnostic 
criteria,  the  pulse  i ~  very  reactive  and  reflects  the  most  current  state  of 
the  individual.  As  such,  its  use  in  traditional  diagnosis  is  synonymous 
with  the  high  degree  of skill  and  sensitivity  required  to  be  a  traditional 
physician. 
For  the  Chinese  people,  pulse  taking  is  so  ingrained  amongst  the 
people  that  upon  first  contact  with  a  physician,  the  patient  automati-
215 
cally  holds  out  his/her  arm  for  a  pulse  reading.  It is  expected  that  a 
qualified  physician,  without  any  further  questioning,  would  be  able  to 
tell  the  patient something  that is  relevant  to  their  condition.  Failing  to 
do this, patients would have no faith  in the doctor's qualifications.  Nev-
ertheless, despite its  high regard  in traditional cultures, in modern TCM 
the pulse  is  taken  as  being  of secondary importance,.with  interrogation 
being  primary. 
An  old common saying concerning the  difficulty of learning pulse 
diagnosis  is:  "In  the  mind  quite  certain,  under  the  finger  unsure".  The 
idea  is  to  unite  the knowledge  of pulse taking with  the actual  process  of 
feeling.  It may  be  of some  consolation  to  most beginners  or less  experi-
enced  practitioners  that  despite  the  fact  that  pulse  diagnosis  is  such  a 
distinctive aspect ofTCM diagnosis,  it is  generally considered to be only 
about 40%  reliable  as  a sole  diagnostic  method by most TCM  practitio-
ners. It is  the experienced masters who are able to offer physiological and 
lifestyle  guidance  based  strictly  on their  pulse  reading.  Then,  of course, 
inadvertent observation  of the  patient's complexion, voice,  manner,  de-
gree  of warmth or coldness of the hand may also  provide a great deal  of 
information  that  is  used  to  corroborate the  findings  on the  pulse. 
As  mentioned  in  the  section  on  tongue  diagnosis,  pulse  diagnosis 
provides  areas  of primary consideration  based  on  the  overall  quality of 
the  pulse  and  secondary  consideration  based  on  specific  qualities  that 
may be  noticeable  in  specific  areas. 
The Triple Warmer is still the model for corroborating Internal Organs 
to  various  locations  on  the  wrist.  The  Upper Warmer  with  all  its  corre-
sponding  Organs  includes  the  Heart  and  Lungs  and  is  located  on  the 
radial  artery  pulses  at  the  base  of the  wrist.  The  Middle Warmer  corre-
sponds  to  the  Spleen,  Stomach,  Liver  and  Gall  Bladder  and  is  directly 
over  the  thenar  prominence  of the  wrist  in  the  middle  position.  The 
Lower Warmer Organs include the Kidneys,  Bladder, Pericardium, Triple 
Warmer or Colon depending upon which system one uses,  and is  further 
up the wrist  proximally behind  the  thenar  prominence. 
Method of  pulse  taking: 
Three fingers  are placed on three different positions called cun,guan 
and chi,  respectively. At the base of the wrist with the index finger closest 
to  the  hand  in  the  cun  position,  is  the  Upper  Warmer,  including  the 
Heart  on  the  left  and  the  Lungs  on  the  right wrist.  The  middle  fingers 
over  the  thenar prominence in  the guan  position  is  the  Middle Warmer 
with  the  Liver-Gall  Bladder  on  the  left  and  the  Spleen-Stomach  on  the 
right wrist. The ring finger higher and just proximal to the thenar promi-
nence  is  the  chi  position,  and  is  the  Lower  Warmer  with  the  Kidney-
~ 
2.16 
Bladder  on  the  left  and  the  Triple  Warmer-Pericardium  on  the  right 
wrist.  This  last  chi  position on both wrists  is  usually interpreted  as  Kid-
ney Yin  on the left  and  Kidney Yang  on the  right. 
Ideally the pulses  are studied in the early morning. The practitioner 
should  take  about  15  minutes  to  study  each  wrist.  The  patient's  wrist 
should  be  at  a horizontal  level  to  the  heart.  The breath of the  practitio-
ner  and  the  patient should  be  as  still  as  possible. 
This  latter  recommendation  has  two  functions.  Traditionally, with-
out  a  second  hand  on  a  watch,  the  speed  of the  pulse  could  only  be 
measured by counting the number of beats per normal respiration of the 
patient.  Less  than  four  beats  per  complete  respiration  indicates  a  slow 
pulse,  while  more  than  five  indicates  a  fast  pulse.  Another  reason  for 
stilling the  mind is  that pulse diagnosis is  a subtle intuitive art requiring 
an  empty,  open and receptive mental state. The fact  is  that the best pulse 
diagnosticians  combine a balance  of rational  observation  with  intuitive 
thought  processes. 
Most  individuals  are  able  to  discern  six  relatively  easily  verifiable 
qualities which form  the basis for pulse study.  Following are the six basic 
pulse qualities: 
1.  Weak or empty pulse: An  empty pulse may feel  rather big but soft or 
empty upon slightly stronger  pressure.  This  type  of pulse signifies  Defi-
cient  Qi.  A  weak  pulse  can  also  feel  thin  or  thready  which  signifies 
Deficient  Blood. 
2.  Full pulse: This pulse feels  full,  big,  rather hard and  long.  If the pulse 
~ 
117 
is  full  and  rapid,  it  represent  Excess  Heat,  if it  is  full  and  slow,  it  indi-
cates  Excess  Cold. 
3.  Slow=cold:  Less  than  four  beats  per  complete  respiration  of the  pa-
tient  or less  than  60  beats  a  minute,  a  slow  and  empty  pulse  indicates 
Empty-Cold  from  Deficient Yang,  while  a slow  and  full  pulse  indicates 
Full-Cold  from  Excess  Yin. 
4.  Fast= Heat: More  than  5 beats  per  respiration  of the patient or 80  or 
more  beats  per  minute,  surface  or  floating  indicates  Exterior  or  acute 
disease  or in rarer cases,  it will  appear as  floating  for  Internal  Deficient 
conditions such  as  anemia,  cancer  or Yin-wasting  diseases.  This  pulse  is 
felt  with  a light  pressure  of the fingers,  just  resting  on the  artery. 
5.  Deep  pulse: This  pulse  requires  a deeper  pressure  to  discern.  It must 
be felt  with a heavy pressure of the fingers  close to the bone. A deep  and 
weak  pulse  indicates  Deficiency of Q!  and  Yang;  a  deep  and  full  pulse 
indicates  stagnation of Q! or Blood  in the  Interior,  or Internal Cold  or 
Heat. 
6.  Floating or superficial  pulse:  This  is  opposite  of the  one  previous. 
The  pulse  is  felt  with  a  light  pressure  of the  fingers  just  resting  on  the 
artery.  A floating  pulse  indicates  a surface  condition  or in  chronic  dis-
ease,  an  exhaustion  of the  Internal  (Yin)  Organs.  A  floating  and  fast 
pulse indicates surface Heat while a floating,  slow pulse indicates surface 
Cold. Most often a floating pulse indicates a superficial acute condition 
such  as  a cold,  cough or flu. 
Treatment:  If the  pulse  feels  weak  and  Deficient,  one  would  not  use 
eliminative  or  strong  Heat  clearing  herbs  but  rather,  would  emphasize 
the  use  of tonics.  If it  feels  strong  and  full,  one  would  prescribe  some 
type  of clearing  or  eliminative  strategy.  If it  feels  slow  which  signifies 
Cold,  one would  prescribe warming  and  stimulating herbs;  if fast,  cool-
ing  and  sedating  remedies.  If it is  floating,  one would  use  some  type  of 
surface-relieving  diaphoretic  herbs.  If the  pulse  feels  floating  and  slow 
one  would  prescribe warming  and  stimulating diaphoretics  such  as  cay-
enne  pepper or ginger,  for  instance.  If it  is  floating  and  fast,  one  might 
give  relaxing  diaphoretics  such  as  lemon  balm  or  catnip  to  relieve  the 
External  condition.  If it is  floating  at  the superficial  level  but empty at 
the  deep  level,  it indicates Yin  Deficiency and  would  require Yin-nutri-
tive  tonics.  If the  pulse  is  deep,  one  would  treat  Internal  Organ  condi-
tions.  If deep  and  weak,  it  is  a  Deficiency  of Q!  and  Yang  and  would 
require  tonics.  If it  is  deep  and  full,  it  indicates  stagnation  of Q!  and 
Blood,  and  one  would  use  emmenagogue  herbs  and  foods  that  would 
promote  Blood  circulation, or carminative herbs  to promote Q! circula-
tion. 
Summary of the various  pulse qualities 
The  6 categories  of pulse  types  can  be  further  subdivided  into spe-
cific  quality types  comprising 28  different  pulse  types  altogether: 
Floating pulse  category 
Floating- Is  felt  on the surface of the body. It is  felt  by slightly pressing 
down,  and  the pulse disappears when pressed  deeper.  It is  an indication 
of an  External  condition.  Learn  this  pulse  by  studying  the  pulse  of an 
individual  with  a cold  or flu. 
Flooding- Floating with great strength on the surface. It enters strongly 
and  exits  gradually.  It indicates  acute  hypertension.  Learn  to  recognize 
this pulse by studying the pulse of an individual with acute hypertension 
or  anger. 
Big  pulse  - A  large  pulse  without  the  excessive  force  of the  flooding 
pulse.  It  can  represent  either  Excess  Heat  or extreme  Deficiency  (espe-
cially  in  the  aged). 
Leekstalk - Floating  and  big  on  the  surface  but  hollow  upon  depres-
sion.  This  indicates  blood  loss  and  Spleen  Yang  Deficiency.  Learn  this 
pulse  by studying someone who has experienced  recent acute blood loss. 
Soft  - The  pulse  feels  floating,  soft  and  thready  and  indicates  Defi-
ciency and  weakness. 
Leathery - The pulse feels  like striking a stick against a soft drum head. 
It represents chronic loss of blood and sperm. Feel  this pulse in a woman 
who  has  recently  experienced  excessive  and  prolonged  bleeding  either 
from  menorrhagia  or childbirth. 
Bowstring  pulse - This  pulse  is  in  the category of External  or floating 
and  feels  tense  and  taut  like  the  string  of a guitar.  It  is  associated  with 
nervous  tension,  Liver Wind  and  depression.  The  best way  to  learn  this 
pulse  is  to  find  someone who is  extremely nervous and agitated  and feel 
the  pulse  at  the  middle position  of their left wrist. 
l.I9 
Deep pulse  category 
Sinking  - This  pulse  is  only  felt  by  heavy  palpation.  It represents  an 
Internal Yin  condition or Q! stagnation. 
Deep  pulse - One must depress  deeper  than  average  to  find  the  pulse, 
nearly  to  the  bone.  It represents  Coldness.  Feel  this  pulse  on  a  thin, 
timid,  cold  and  pale  individual.  It will  be  very  similar  to  the  following 
latent  pulse but easier  to  find. 
Latent or hidden pulse - The pulse is  difficult to find.  One must push 
aside  the  ligaments  and  reach  to  the  bone.  This  represents  Internal  col-
lapse  or extreme  pain. 
Prison  or  taut  pulse  - It feels  deep,  full,  big  and  long.  It represents 
Excess  Yin with severe Fluid accumulation. Feel  this pulse on an edemic, 
obese  individual. 
Slow pulse  category 
Slow pulse- The pulse is  60 beats or less  per minute, or only 3 beats for 
one  complete  respiration  of the  patient.  It represents  Yang  Deficiency 
with  Internal  Coldness. 
Leisurely or  relaxed  pulse - The  pulse  is  close  to  60  beats  per  minute, 
or  4  beats  for  one  complete  respiration  of the  patient.  It is  mostly  a 
quality  of slowness.  It may  be  normal,  or  it  could  also  indicate  Damp-
ness  depending on other qualities. 
Choppy or  astringent  pulse - This  is  in  the  category  of a slow,  small 
pulse.  It  feels  rough  and  astringent.  It is  described  like  a knife  scraping 
against  bamboo.  It indicates  blood  loss,  Deficient  Q!  or  stagnant  Q! 
and  Blood.  Learn  to  differentiate  this  pulse  by  feeling  someone's  pulse 
who  has  recently experienced  traumatic  blood  loss. 
Knotted  pulse -The pulse is  slow with occasional  interruption. It indi-
cates  Blood,  Q!  or  Fluid  Stagnation.  Learn  to  differentiate  this  pulse 
between  the uneven or replacement pulse with regular interruptions and 
the accelerated  pulse  that is  rapid  with  irregular stops. 
Uneven  or  replacement  pulse  - This  is  a  slower  pulse  with  regular 
interruptions.  It indicates  more  serious  degeneration  or feebleness. 
llO 
Rapid pulse  category 
Fast  pulse - 80  beats  or more  per  minute,  or 6 beats  or more  for  each 
complete  respiration  of the  patient.  It represents  Heat,  fever  and/or in-
flammation.  Learn  to  recognize  this  pulse  by  studying  the  pulse  of an 
individual who  has  a high  fever. 
Agitated  pulse  - This  pulse  is  faster  than  the  previous,  faster  than  80 
beats  per  minute,  or  7-8  beats  for  each  complete  respiration  of the  pa-
tient.  This  is  a condition  ofYang and Yin  collapse. 
Accelerated pulse - This is  a rapid pulse with occasional irregular inter-
ruptions.  It represents  Yang  Stagnation  with  Stagnation  of Qi,  Blood, 
Phlegm  or Food. 
Tight  pulse - The  pulse  feels  tense,  like  a rope.  The difference  between 
this  and  the  Bowstring  pulse  is  that the Tight  pulse  can  move  from  left 
to  right while  the bowstring pulse can't. It indicates Coldness and severe 
pain. Learn to recognize this pulse by studying the pulse of an individual 
who  is  experiencing  severe  pain. 
Deficient pulse  category 
Deficient  pulse - Weak  and  Deficient  at  both  the  superficial  and  the 
deep  levels.  It is  difficult to find.  It indicates Deficiency of Qi, Blood or 
Yang. 
Scattered pulse - The  pulse  feels  confused  and  floating,  lacking a clear 
point  of entry or exit  and  easily  disappearing  under  palpation.  It is  an 
indication  of dissolving  of Original  Qi.  It  is  associated  with  an  indi-
vidual  who  is  near  death. 
Diminutive  or feeble  pulse  - The  diameter  of the  artery  is  extremely 
thin and  thready.  It is  differentiated  from  the  thready pulse  in  that it is 
nearly  imperceptible.  It  indicates  a  serious  Yang,  Qi  and  Blood  Defi-
Ciency. 
Weak  pulse  - This  pulse  is  small,  deep  and  weak.  It represents  pro-
longed  illness causing Qi, Blood and Yang  Deficiency. Feel  this pulse on 
an  individual  who  is  thin,  highly  sensitive,  has  multiple  allergies  and 
easily gets  sick. 
Thready or small pulse - Extremely thin and thready, like a silk thread. 
It represents  Blood  and Qi Deficiency with frequent  urination. Feel  this 
~ 
lll 
pulse on an  individual who  is  pale,  hypersensitive,  shy,  and  soft spoken 
with  chronic  fatigue. 
Excess pulse  category 
Short pulse -The pulse feels  strong in the middle position and weaker, 
if it  can  be  felt  at  all,  in  the  first  and  third  positions.  It represents  an 
Excess  condition.  Feel  this  pulse  in  a  forceful,  heavj'  set  and  aggressive 
individual. 
Long  pulse  - This  pulse  is  so  strong  that  it  extends  beyond  the  three 
positions.  It indicates  severe  Excess  Heat.  Feel  this  pulse  in  a  strong, 
heavy  set,  loud  voiced,  constipated  individual. 
Slippery  or  Damp  pulse  - This  pulse  feels  smooth  and  gliding.  The 
Chinese liken  it to  feeling  pearls  in a porcelain basin. It is  an  important 
pulse for diagnosing Dampness, mucus and edema. The best way to learn 
to  recognize  this  pulse  is  to  find  someone  who  obviously  has  edema,  a 
lot  of mucus  or a  pregnant  woman.  Especially  notice  this  pulse  in  the 
deeper  middle  position of the  right wrist. 
Ayurvedic Pulse  Diagnosis 
Ayurvedic  medicine correlates the pulse with Tridosha, or the Three 
Humours. The pulse on the wrist closest to the hand, taken  by the index 
finger  of the  physician,  corresponds  to  the  Vata-air,  or  nerve  oriented 
humour; the  middle position  is  taken with  the  middle finger  and  corre-
sponds  to  the  Pitta-fire,  or digestive  and  circulatory  humour; while  the 
third  position,  taken  with  the  ring  finger,  corresponds  to  the  Kapha-
fluid  or bodily substance  humour. 
The  individual  qualities  of the  pulse  are  described  as  different  ani-
mals. A Vata,  or air predominant pulse, is  compared with  the movement 
of a snake  or leech.  Usually  this  pulse  feels  faster  and  indicates  indiges-
tion,  nervous  problems,  and  fever,  for  instance.  In  Chinese  medicine  it 
might be  classified  as  Yin  Deficient. A Pitta,  or fire  predominant pulse, 
is  described as  resembling the jerky movement of a frog,  sparrow or crow. 
Since these  represent a jerky or jumpy movement,  it can  indicate insom-
nia,  diarrhea,  vertigo,  hypertension,  Heat  of the  skin,  palms,  soles  and 
burning eyes.  A Kapha,  or water  predominant pulse,  is  described  as  the 
movement of a swan,  cock or peacock. This  is  generally a slow pulse and 
indicates  the presence of phlegm coughs,  a melancholic disposition and 
other  Damp conditions. 
western  Pulse  Diagnosis: 
Western  medical diagnosis also  recognizes various  pulse  indications 
that  correlate  with  disease  factors.  For  instance,  a  fast  pulse  indicates 
fever  or inflammation;  a  slow  pulse  indicates  inaction  or a weak  diges-
tion;  and  a  small  or  weak  pulse  indicates  general  debility  and  possible 
anemia.  There  are  literally  dozens  of other  pulse  indications  that  once 
were  part of the  medical  doctor's  training and are  seldom  used  today in 
modern clinical  practice,  except  for  the speed  of the  pulse. 
~ 
llJ 
TEN 
PATTERNS  OF 
DISHARMONY 
Q!,  BLOOD,  FLUIDS,  ESSENCE, 
YINANDYANG 
When determining how to treat illnesses  in TCM, the practitioner looks 
at  all  the  signs  and  symptoms  experienced  by  the  person  and  then 
identifies  their  corresponding  patterns.  The  patterns  are  then  treated 
rather than the disease itself, using acupuncture, herbs and other therapies. 
These  patterns may or may not correspond to specific Western  diseases. 
For example,  a stuffy nose,  sneezing,  coughing, fever  and  chills  fits  the 
Western definition of a cold.  However,  in TCM, this same illness can be 
identified by different patterns, depending on the specific traits of each 
symptom. For instance, if the coughing involves yellow mucus,  the fever 
is  high  and  chills  slight,  the  resulting  pattern  is  Invasion  of the  Lungs 
by Wind Heat.  If the coughing involves  clear watery mucus,  the fever  is 
slight but the chills are pronounced, then the pattern is  Invasion of the 
Lungs  by Wind  Cold.  The  acupuncture  and  herbal  treatment  for  each 
condition is  thus different.  Therefore,  rather  than  treating  diseases  per 
se,  TCM  further  refines  the  symptoms  being  presented  to  identify  a 
specific  pattern,  so  more accurate  treatment can  then  be  given. 
For  example,  a  patient  presenting  with  recurring  headaches  may 
think  nothing  of their  experience  of stomach  upset.  The  stomach 
discomfort  comes  and  goes,  but  the  headaches  are  more  bothersome, 
and  so  this  is  what  she  wants  corrected.  In  TCM,  the  symptoms  of 
headache  and  stomach  upset  are  connected  and  form  a  pattern  that, 
when treated, eliminates the stomach problem along with the headaches. 
Another person might complain of headaches, yet when questioned 
reveal  he  is  also  periodically  dizzy,  has  frequent  low  back  pain  and 
sometimes  sweats  at  night.  Again,  all  symptoms  taken  together  form  a 
pattern,  and  in  this  case,  it  is  a  different  one  from  the  first  type  of 
headache. A different approach is  then taken with this type of headache 
than  with  the  first,  and  the  symptoms  experienced  other  than  the 
headache clear  up with  the  appropriate  treatment. 
The patterns of disharmony are  determined by matching the signs 
and  symptoms  presented  with  those  of the  Pernicious  Influences,  Q!, 
Blood, Yin,  Yang  and  the  Organs.  Each  of these  has  its  own  particular 
qualities  which  define  it  according  to  its  functions.  Perhaps  the  easiest 
way  to  learn  these  patterns  is  to  first  learn  the  individual  functions  of 
each  of these  aspects  in  the  body.  Then  it  is  possible  to  "overlay"  or 
combine  them  in  all  the  various  ways  possible.  Breaking  it down  into 
the  various  components  and  their  functions  makes  it  much  easier  to 
understand and recognize how they all  inter-relate and combine together. 
Let's  look  at  a  few  examples.  Weakness  and  tiredness  indicate  a 
Deficiency of Q!, while  frequent  copious  urination  and  low  back  pain 
indicate  the  Kidneys  are  involved.  Put together,  it forms  the  pattern of 
Deficient  Kidney  Q!.  As  another  example,  a  sensation  of heaviness  in 
the  body,  sluggishness  and  a  discharge  which  is  copious  and  cloudy 
indicate  the  presence  of Dampness.  Frequently  feeling  cold,  copious 
discharge  and  loose  stools  signal  there  is  also  Cold  in  the  body.  These 
two  categories combined with the further symptoms of lack of appetite, 
sweetish  taste  in  the  mouth, stuffiness  in  the chest and epigastrium, all 
aspects signaling the involvement of the Spleen. This defines the pattern 
of Cold-Damp  invading  the  Spleen. 
When  determining  which  categories  are  involved  in  a  given 
condition, there need to be  three or more symptoms from a category for 
it to  be  indicated. Several  symptoms  appear in more than one category, 
so  more  signs  need  to  be  present  from  that same  category  to  signal  its 
involvement. For instance, a headache is one sign of an External Pernicious 
Influence  pattern and  one sign  of the Excess  Liver Yang  pattern.  If it is 
an  External  Pernicious  Influence invading,  there will  also  be chills and 
fever,  sudden onset and a floating pulse.  If it is  Excess  Liver Yang,  there 
will  also  be  signs of dizziness,  red  face  and  eyes,  thirst,  dream-disturbed 
sleep  and/or a full,  wiry  and  rapid  pulse. 
The following patterns are first described individually according to 
Pernicious  Influences,  Q!,  Blood, Yin,  Yang,  and  Organs,  and  are  then 
combined  to  form  the traditional  patterns of disharmony,  described  in 
the  next  chapter,  Differential  Diagnosis.  The  herb  formulas  listed  are 
not  the only possi'bilities,  but represent  the most common  ones  used. 
Q!  DISHARMONIES 
Several  pathologies  of Q!  exist  and  involve  either  insufficient  Q! 
(Deficiency conditions) or stagnant Q! (Excess  conditions), in which Q! 
is  either  flowing  improperly  or  is  impeded.  Q!  may  be  Deficient  or 
~ 
ll5 
Stagnant  throughout  the  body,  but  usually  is  associated  with  specific 
organs. While we  may speak of Q! as  being in Excess  or Deficiency, this 
is only apparent as  a result of its inability to transform or evolve through 
a  given  circumstance.  Thus,  excess  Q!  is  really  a  manifestation  of 
Stagnation,  while  Deficient  Q!  represents  an  inability  to  adequately 
respond  to  specific  conditions. 
Q!  changes  form  according  to  its  locality  and  its  function.  A 
derangement of Q! will  thus appear differently according to where  it is 
found  and what its  function  is.  However,  the  overall  characteristics  of 
Q!  remain  the  same.  The  following  are  the  various  pathologies  of Qi 
found  in the body. 
Dificient Qj 
When Qi is  Deficient, it generally appears as  tiredness or weakness 
in  the  body.  Because  Qi  is  lacking,  it  is  unable  to  perform  any  of its 
functions. This may apply to any of the different types of Qi, including 
that  of the  Organs.  For  instance,  if defensive  Q!  is  insufficient,  the 
person may be prone to frequent colds and flu and spontaneous sweating. 
If Spleen  Qi  is  Deficient,  the  uterus  or  bladder  may  prolapse  or  the 
appetite may be  poor and  digestion sluggish.  A Deficiency of the Qi of 
the  Kidneys  may  cause  them  to  be  unable  to  regulate  water,  causing 
edema,  frequent  urination  or resulting  in incontinence. 
The following signs of Qi Deficiency include several of the possible 
ways  in  which  this  may  manifest.  Some  of these  signs  may  be  from 
different  causes;  for  example,  loose  stools  can  be  from  Dampness.  The 
overall  differentiating  symptoms  for  Qi  Deficiency,  however,  is  that 
there will  be  accompanying  tiredness  and weakness  as  well. 
~ 
u6 
Symptoms: 
general  weakness,  lethargy 
low,  soft voice 
tiredness,  listlessness 
dislike  of talking or speaking 
spontaneous sweating 
frequent  colds  and  flu 
daytime  sweating 
frequent  urination 
shallow respiration 
palpitations 
pale  bright face  that is  puffY  or bloated 
weak  cough 
prolonged  menses  with  a very  light  flow 
weakness  of limbs 
amenorrhea 
excessive  bleeding with  light  blood 
dislike  of movement 
shortness  of breath 
spermatorrhea 
loose  stools 
Pulse:  empty,  frail,  weak 
Tongue:  pale  body 
Herbal Categories and Formulas: Tonify Qi herbs 
Four Major Herbs Decoction (Si  jun zi  tang) 
Six  Major Herbs (Liu  jun zi  tang) 
Sinking or Collapsed .Qj 
Another  form  of Qi  Deficiency,  the  weakened  Qi  in  this  case  is 
unable  to  perform  its  holding  function,  resulting  in  a  prolapse  of the 
organs.  This  function  mostly applies  to  the Qi of the Spleen. 
Symptoms: 
prolapse of uterus,  bladder,  stomach,  kidneys,  anus 
bearing down  sensation  in  abdomen 
piles  or certain  types  of hemorrhoids 
extreme  chronic diarrhea 
urinary frequency,  urgency  or incontinence 
Herbal Categories and Formulas: Tonify Qi and  regulate  Qi herbs 
Ginseng and Astragalus Combination (Bu  zhong yi  qi  tang) 
Stagnant .Qj 
If the  flow  of Qi  is  impeded  in  any  way,  it  becomes  stuck  or 
stagnant.  This  can  be  likened  to  a  traffic  jam  on  the  freeway.  In  this 
case, Qi does not flow smoothly or evenly. It can then lead to impairment 
of any  of the  Organs.  When  Qi  is  stagnant  in  the  limbs  or  in  the 
meridians of the body, aches and pains may result. Tonification is contra-
indicated  in  this  case;  it would  be  adding  more cars  to  the  traffic  jam. 
Instead,  Qi  moving  or regulating  therapy is  required. 
Stagnant  Qi  is  an  Excess  condition.  When  Qi  is  Stagnant  it  can 
lead to other types of Stagnation such as  Blood, Fluids or food Stagnation. 
Likewise,  poor circulation can  result  in Qi condensing and stagnating, 
resulting  in  lumps,  physical  masses  or  tumors.  In  a  Qi  Stagnation 
condition,  the  person  is  usually not tired  as  in Qi Deficiency,  but may 
be  "stuck",  frustrated  or easily  irritated. 
Symptoms: 
distention  in  the  ribs  and  abdomen 
fluctuating  emotions  or  mental  state;  depression;  moodiness 
distention,  soreness  and  pain which  change  in  severity  and 
location 
soft palpable  lumps 
frequent  sighing 
a sensation  of tightness  around  ribs  or chest 
lump  in  the  throat 
irregular  menses 
swelling  of breasts  during menses 
Pulse:  wiry or  tight 
Tongue:  dark,  or purplish  tinge  to  tongue  body 
Herbal Categories and Formulas: Regulate  Q! herbs 
Bupleurum and  Peony Combination (Xiao  yao  wan) 
Disperse Vital  Energy in the Liver Powder (Chai  hu  su  gan  san) 
Rebellious Qj 
An Excess condition, rebellious Q! is another form ofQ! Stagnation. 
In this case, Q! flows  in the wrong direction. For instance, if the normal 
downward  flow  of Stomach Qi is  disrupted and it goes  upward  instead, 
nausea, vomiting, belching or hiccuping may result. The following signs 
may  indicate  rebellious  Qi;  however,  some  may  be  from  other  causes. 
For  instance,  nausea  may  also  be  due  to  food  Stagnation  or  Damp 
Stagnation  in  the  epigastrium.  If so,  other signs  of food  Stagnation  or 
Dampness will  be  present. 
Symptoms: 
hiccuping 
belching 
nausea 
vomiting 
some  forms  of coughing 
some  forms  of asthma 
Herbal Categories and Formulas:  Regulate  Q!  Herbs 
Inula Flower and  Hematite Decoction (Xuan  fu  dai  zhe  tang) 
BLOOD DISHARMONIES 
There  are  three  basic  categories  of Blood  pathologies.  These  are 
Blood  Deficiency,  Blood  Heat and Blood Stagnation.  In the first,  there 
is  insufficient  Blood  to  nourish  and  moisten  the  body.  This  usually 
occurs  with  the  Organs  with  which  it  has  special  relationships  and 
includes,  among many other things,  anemia and circulatory problems. 
In  the second,  too much  Heat  in the body,  usually in the  Liver,  causes 
Heat  in  the  Blood  and  pushes  it  out of the  vessels.  Varicose  veins  or 
hemorrhage  can  result.  Extravasated  blood  with  congealment  in  the 
capillaries, abdomen or pelvis can cause a variety of symptoms including 
~ 
nB 
edema,  obesity,  menstrual  pains  and  bluish  or  purplish  discoloration 
on  the  surface  of the  skin  or  tongue.  Stagnation  occurs  from  Blood 
moving  improperly  due  to  Coldness,  Heat  or  Stagnation  of Q!. 
Circulatory problems,  pelvic  pains and  menstrual  problems can  occur. 
Blood  tonic  herbs  are  used  to  treat  Deficient  Blood  and  anemic 
syndromes.  Usually these also  have  some Blood invigorating properties 
as  well.  For  Heat in the Blood,  herbs  that clear  Heat out of the Blood, 
hemostatic  herbs,  or herbs  that stop  bleeding are  given.  When  there  is 
Blood  Stagnation,  Blood  moving,  Blood  invigorating  or  Blood  tonic 
herbs are used. Blood moving herbs and formulas can be either warm or 
cool and are classified as  emmenagogues (any substance that specifically 
is  used  to  promote  menstruation}  in Western  herbalism.  More  broadly 
useful, Chinese herbalism classifies these emmenagogue herbs as  "herbs 
that invigorate  or regulate  Blood". 
Dificient Blood 
A Deficiency of Blood occurs when the entire body or a particular 
Organ or other body part is insufficiently nourished by Blood. This can 
be  caused  by a loss  of blood,  insufficient Spleen  Q!  to  produce  Blood, 
or  congealed  Blood  which  prevents  new  Blood  from  forming.  Since 
Blood  is  part  of Yin,  a  long  term  Deficiency  of Blood  gives  rise  to 
dryness, causing dry skin and hair. The Organs most likely to be affected 
by  Deficient Blood  include  the  Heart, Spleen  and  Liver. 
Symptoms: 
dizziness 
scanty menses  or  amenorrhea 
thin,  emaciated  body 
spots  in  the visual  field;  impaired  vision 
numb  limbs 
weak  tremors  in  the  limbs 
dry  skin,  hair or eyes 
lusterless,  pale  face  and  lips 
depression 
tiredness 
poor  m ~ m o r y 
msomma 
Pulse:  thin,  fine  or  choppy 
Tongue:  pale,  thin  body 
Herbal Categories and Formulas: Tonify  Blood  herbs 
Dang Gui Four (Si  wu  tang) 
Blood Stagnation 
Blood Stagnation is one of the most important diagnostic conditions 
in  Chinese  Medicine  because  it  is  frequently  the  cause  of intractable 
pain syndromes anywhere in the body. Stagnant Blood results  in a fixed 
stabbing pain, whereas  stagnant Qi tends  to move and  change locations 
and  intensity  of sensation.  Blood  invigorating  or  Q!  regulating  herbs 
are used separately or together for  these conditions. Other symptoms of 
Blood  Stagnation  can  include  traumatic  swelling,  difficult  pregnancy 
and  impairment  of ovarian  function.  Patients  may  have  a  ruddy 
complexion,  blotchy skin,  increase in skin capillaries,  coarseness  of the 
skin  and  peri-oral  and/or peri-orbital  bluish discoloration. 
The causes  for  Stagnant Blood  conditions can  include: 
1)  heredity 
2)  childbirth,  abortion,  miscarriage  and  menopause 
3)  gynecological  diseases 
4)  fevers 
5)  IDJunes 
6)  circulatory disorders  (stagnant Qi) 
7)  Liver  disorders  (Liver  stores  the Blood) 
8)  Spleen  disorders  (Spleen  maintains  Blood  in  the vessels) 
9)  chronic inflammation and  infections 
10)  excessive  lipids 
11)  hormone  imbalance 
12)  trauma or injuries  such  as  bruises,  sprains and  swelling 
13)  Deficiency of Qi 
14)  Heat in the  Blood 
15)  Internal  Coldness 
16)  Blood  Deficiency 
Blood Stagnation is  a condition of toxicity which can include lower 
abdominal  pains  as  well  as  itchy  scalp,  shoulder  stiffness,  dizziness, 
feelings  of chills in the waist,  numbness, and dry mouth. There may be 
a feeling  of abdominal fullness,  even when  there  isn't any,  especially in 
women before menses. Portions of the body can feel  feverish, an outbreak 
of goose  bumps, dryness,  red  spots  and varicosities  appear on the  skin; 
the tongue may exhibit a purplish cast especially noticeable on the sides, 
and  there  may be  a tendency to  bleed. 
Acute  lower  abdominal  pain  is  a  primary  symptom  of Blood 
Stagnation.  To  determine  this,  have  the  patient  lie  on  his  or her  back 
with  legs  flexed,  then  rather gently at  first,  palpate  the  lower  abdomen 
below the umbilicus,  especially the left and  right sides  (over  the ovaries 
l.JO 
in women).  If there  is  severe  Blood Stagnation,  the  patient will  usually 
feel  pain  upon  palpation.  Milder  Stagnation  may  result  in  lumps  or 
swelling  in  the  area. 
Two  rhubarb-containing  formulas  (rhubarb  is  a  laxative-
astringent)  are  frequently  indicated  for  Blood  Stagnation  and  are  of 
particular interest because their indications are predominantly for either 
right  or  left  sided  pelvic  pains.  Symptoms  of Blood  Stagnation  that 
occur  at  the  lower  left quadrant of the  pelvis  could  represent  intestinal 
blockage, fibroids or cysts for which Persica and Rhubarb Combination 
(Tao  he  cheng  qi  tang)  is  used.  Similar  conditions  involving  ileocaecal 
valve,  appendicitis,  and  cysts  and  fibroids  respond  better  to  Rhubarb 
and Moutan Combination (Da huang mu dan pi tang).  Both formulas 
are commonly indicated and quite often are effective for endometriosis, 
regardless  of whether or not there  is  normal  or loose bowels. 
Symptoms: 
fixed,  stabbing or boring pain 
lumps 
hard,  relatively  immobile  masses 
recurring,  frequent  hemorrhages 
clots  of a dark,  purple  tinge 
dark  colored  blood 
a dark  complexion 
purple  lips,  nails 
tremors 
swelling  of the  Organs 
Pulse:  choppy,  wiry  or  firm 
Tongue:  dark  purple  tongue  material  with  red  spots 
Herbal Categories  and Herbs:  Regulate  and  vitalize  Blood  herbs 
Persica and Rhubarb Combination (Tao  he  cheng qi  tang) 
Rhubarb and Moutan Combination (Da  huang mu  clan  pi  tang) 
Cinnamon and Poria Combination (Gui  zhi  fu  ling wan) 
Heat  in  the  Blood 
Heat in the Blood  may be  from  Excess  or Deficiency.  If Excess,  it 
is  often  caused  by  a  Heat  Pernicious  Influence  that  has  invaded  deep 
inside the body and agitated the Blood, making it "reckless". Too much 
Heat  in  the  B l o o ~  pushes  it  out  of its  pathways  and  causes  bleeding, 
somewhat  like  a  boiling volcano  erupting.  Thus  its  major  symptom  is 
bleeding. The blood will  be  fresh  red  or dark colored, with a heavy loss 
of blood.  Stagnation  of Blood  can  also  cause  Heat  in  the  Blood  and 
consequent  bleeding.  The  Blood  in  this  case  will  be  very  dark  colored 
with  clots. 
~ 
2JI 
Another cause  of Heat in the Blood  may be  from Yin  Deficiency, 
in which  case  the bleeding  is  scanty and bright-red  in color.  Note  that 
bleeding can  also  be  caused  by the  Q! unable  to  hold  the  Blood  in its 
pathways.  This  is  not caused  by Heat in the Blood,  but because  the Q! 
is weak and cannot perform its holding function. The blood will be pale 
in this case,  with  prolonged  bleeding and  heavy  loss .of blood. 
Symptoms: 
blood  in  the  sputum,  stools,  urine, or vomiting of blood 
coughing up  blood 
bloody nose 
excess1ve  menses 
red  skin  eruptions 
Pulse:  rapid 
Tongue:  scarlet  red 
Note:  Other Heat  signs  may  be  present  such  as  thirst, 
irritability,  feeling  of heat,  dry  mouth  and,  in  extreme  cases, 
delirium 
Herbal Categories and Formulas:  Clear  heat  from  the  Blood  herbs 
Rhinoceros  and Rehmannia Combination (Xi  jiao  di  huang  tang) 
FLUID  DISHARMONIES 
The  categories  of Fluid  imbalances  include  Deficiency  of Fluids, 
Edema,  and  the Phlegm  patterns. A Deficiency of Fluids  can  cause Yin 
Deficiency, and Yin Deficiency can cause a lack of Fluids. It may also be 
caused by heavy or prolonged diarrhea, vomiting, sweating and bleeding. 
A  Fluid  Deficiency  mostly  affects  the  Lungs,  Stomach,  Kidneys  and 
Large  Intestine. 
Edema  is  caused  by  Spleen  Q!  Deficiency  and  may  also  involve 
Lung  or  Kidney  Q!  deficiency,  since  all  three  are  involved  in  the 
transformation,  transportation  and  excretion  of Fluids.  Edema  from 
Lung  Q!  Deficiency  mostly  appears  in  the  Upper  Warmer,  while  that 
from  the Spleen occurs  in the Middle Warmer and from the Kidneys  in 
the Lower Warmer. 
Substantial  Phlegm  occurs  mainly  in  the  Lungs.  Non-substantial 
Phlegm  can  appear  in the channels,  joints and  under the skin,  causing 
lumps,  nodules,  numbness and  bone deformities.  It can  also  appear  in 
the  head,  Stomach  or  Lungs,  or  obstruct  certain  Organs,  such  as  the 
orifices of the Heart, the Kidneys or Gall-Bladder where it forms stones. 
It can also  appear with Wind,  Heat,  Cold  Damp and  Q! Stagnation. 
2J2 
Deficiency of Fluids Symptoms: 
dry,  rough,  chapped  or cracked  skin 
dry  throat,  nose,  mouth,  lips 
dry cough with  little  phlegm 
dry stools 
dehydration 
unusual  thirst 
Pulse:  thready,  hesitant 
Tongue:  dry with  no  saliva 
Herbal Categories and  Formulas: Moisten  Dryness,  Blood  and 
Yin  tonic  herbs  and  formulas,  some  herbs  that clear  Heat from  the 
Blood,  demulcents,  emollients 
Apricot Seed  and  Perilla  Formula (Xing  su  san) 
Lily Bulb Decoction  to Consolidate the Lungs (Bai  he gu  jin 
tang) 
Ophiopogon and Trichosanthes Combination 
(Mai  men  dong yin  si) 
Scrophularia  and Ophiopogon Combination (Zeng ye  tang) 
Edema Symptoms: 
edema  of hands  and  face  (usually  from  Lung  Qi Deficiency) 
edema  of the  abdomen  (usually  from  Spleen  Qi  Deficiency) 
edema  of the  legs  and  ankles  (usually from  Kidney  Qi 
Deficiency) 
Phlegm Symptoms: 
Phlegm 
lumps 
nodules 
thick greasy  secretions 
tumors 
delirium 
numbness  in  limbs 
Pulse:  slippery 
Tongue:  greasy,  thick  coating 
Phlegm in Lungs  Symptoms: 
asthma 
cough with  heavy  expectoration  of mucus 
Phlegm  Misting the Heart Symptoms: 
chaotic  or erratic  behavior 
madness 
muddled  thought 
stupor 
coma 
rattle  in  throat 
schizophrenia 
manic-depression 
epilepsy 
~ 
233 
~ 
234 
Phlegm in Kidneys or Gall-Bladder Symptoms: 
stones  in  Kidneys  or Gall-Bladder 
Phlegm in Meridians Symptoms: 
numbness 
paralysis 
soft,  mobile  tumors,  nodules or swellings. 
Phlegm Under the Skin Symptoms: 
lumps  under  the skin 
nerve-ganglia  swellings 
lymph  node swelling 
swollen  thyroid 
some  fibroids  and  lipomas 
Phlegm in the Joints Symptoms: 
bone deformities with  arthritis  and  rheumatoid  arthritis 
heaviness  or achiness  in  the joints or limbs. 
numbness  of the  muscles  and  skin 
Wind-Phlegm Symptoms: 
dizziness 
nausea 
vomiting 
aphasia 
coughing of phlegm 
rattling  sound  in throat 
numbness  of limbs 
Phlegm-Heat Symptoms: 
red  face 
restlessness 
yellow-sticky  phlegm 
dry mouth and  lips 
Pulse:  rapid  and  slippery 
Tongue:  red  body with  sticky-yellow coat 
Phlegm-Cold Symptoms: 
white-watery  phlegm 
nausea 
cold  feeling  in limbs  and  back 
Pulse:  deep,  slippery,  slow 
Tongue:  pale  body,  white-wet  coat 
Q!  Phlegm Symptoms: 
(often  called  "plum-stone" or "plum-pit" syndrome) 
stuffiness  of chest  and  diaphragm 
difficulty in swallowing 
feeling  of a lump in the  throat which  comes  and  goes,  especially 
with  emotional  swings 
Phlegm-Fluids Symptoms: 
This  is  very  similar  to  Dampness  and  is  very watery  and  thin.  It 
can  be  heard  splashing  in  the body,  found  usually  in  the 
Stomach,  Intestines,  hypochondrium, limbs  or above  the 
diaphragm. 
Phlegm-Fluids  In Stomach  and Intestines Symptoms: 
abdominal  fullness  and  distention 
vomiting  of watery  fluids 
no  desire  to  drink 
splashing  sound  in  the  stomach 
feeling  of fullness  of the  chest 
loose  stools 
loss  of weight 
Pulse:  deep,  slippery 
Tongue:  swollen  with  sticky coating 
Phlegm-Fluids  in Hypochondrium Symptoms: 
hypochondriac  pain,  worse  when  coughing  and  breathing 
feeling  of distention  of hypochondrium 
shortness  of breath 
Pulse:  deep,  wiry 
Tongue:  sticky  coating 
Phlegm-Fluids  in the Limbs Symptoms: 
heaviness  of the  body 
pain  in  the  muscles 
no  sweating 
no  desire  to  drink 
cough  with  abundant-white  sputum 
Pulse:  wiry  or tight 
Tongue:  sticky,  white  coat 
Phlegm-Fluids  above  Diaphragm Symptoms: 
cough 
asthma 
edema 
dizziness 
copious white  sputum 
Pulse:  wiry 
Tongue:  thick,  white  coat 
Herbal Categories and  Formulas:  Herbs  that  remove  Dampness, 
diuretics,  warming  stimulants  for  Cold  Dampness,  Qi and Yang 
tonics  for  Dampness  caused  by  Deficiency,  herbs  that remove 
Damp  Heat  for  Hot Dampness  are  employed. 
Citrus and  Pinellia  Combination (Er chen  tang)  and  variations 
Bamboo and  Poria  Combination (Wen  clan  tang) 
Poria  Five  Herbs (Wu  ling  san) 
~ 
235 
ESSENCE  DISHARMONIES 
Pathologies of Essence result from either injured Pre-Heaven Essence 
resulting in a weak inherited constitution, or from damaged Post-Heaven 
Essence occurring from  improper diet or lifestyle activities. The natural 
decline of old age  also shows signs of Essence Deficiency. The inherited 
Pre-Heaven  Essence  problems  represent  inherited. deficiencies  and 
tendencies  that can,  at  best,  only be  managed.  However,  we  can  greatly 
influence what  happens  to  our Post-Heaven  Essence. 
The injury of Post-Heaven  Essence  may begin  during fetal  growth 
or afterwards if impure air, food  or water combines with overly stressful, 
imbalanced living to  injure the depth of our being.  Problems that result 
from  fetal  injury  may  be  caused  by  impure  foods,  alcohol,  tobacco, 
recreational  drugs  and  certain  prescription  drugs  taken  by  the  mother 
during  gestation.  Consider  the  health  effects  on  babies  who  are  born 
addicted to drugs, such as  heroin or cocaine, or the significantly higher 
cancer risks we have seen in women whose mothers took the prescription 
drug thalidomide, widely prescribed by medical doctors during the sixties. 
Are  we  to  assume  that  the  only  damage  caused  by  these  drugs  taken 
during fetal  development is  the increased risk of birth defects, or might 
we  also  suspect  a  correlation  with  the  many  individuals  who  suffer  a 
lifetime  with  a  compromised  immune  system,  battling  fatigue  and 
multiple susceptibilities  to  environmental  and  food  allergies? 
Essence  can  also  be  depleted  by an improper diet,  excessive  abuse 
of alcohol,  tobacco,  sugar  and  other drugs,  excessive  sex,  "burning  the 
candle  at  both  ends",  overwork,  stress  and  insufficient  rest  or  sleep. 
These  injuries  from  longer,  more  protracted  abuse  and  stress  may,  with 
great  persistence  and  difficulty,  improve  over  time.  However,  they 
necessitate  changes  in  diet  and  lifestyle  and,  in  such  instances,  herbal 
and  other  natural  therapies  may  offer  a  safer,  less  invasive  means  of 
management,  avoiding  the  long  term  risks  and  side  effects  caused  by 
most synthetic drugs. 
Another option is  to  use  herbs  to  optimize and  minimize drugs, 
such as  using herbs  to increase blood circulation to  optimize the effects 
of chemotherapy,  or  Fu  Zheng  employing  immune-potentiating  herbs 
to  protect the immune system  to  minimize the  negative effects  of drug 
treatment.  This  approach  offers  the  potential  to  greatly  decrease  risks, 
especially if the use  of the herbs can bring about an ultimate reduction 
in the  required  drug dosage. 
Because  Essence  is  a  part of Yin  and Yang,  symptoms  of Essence 
Deficiency often present with a Deficiency of Kidney Yin and/or Kidney 
Yang.  If there  is  a  lack  of Kidney  Yin,  there  also  may  be  premature 
ejaculation,  insufficient  vaginal  secretions,  tinnitus,  dizziness  or other 
Kidney Yin  Deficiency signs,  since  the Yin  is  not  holding  the Yang.  If 
there  is  an  accompanying  Deficiency  of Kidney  Yang,  there  may  be 
impotence,  coldness  or  other  Kidney Yang  Deficiency  signs,  since  the 
Yang  is  not holding the Yin. 
Essence  Deficiency - in Children - Symptoms: 
improper or  poor  bone  development 
late  or  incomplete  fontanel  closure 
mental  dullness  or  retardation 
premature  aging 
slow  physical  development 
Essence  Deficiency - in Adults - Symptoms: 
premature  aging 
senility 
bad  or  loose  teeth 
poor  memory or concentration 
brittle  or softening  of bones 
weakness  of knees  and  legs 
falling  of hair 
premature  graying  of hair 
low  libido  or  impotence 
habitual  miscarriage  or  infertility 
constantly  prone  to  colds,  flu  or  other External  diseases 
wasting  of flesh 
Pulse:  floating  and  empty;  sometimes  deep  and  nearly  non-
existent  in  the  rear  position 
Tongue:  red  and  peeled 
Herbal Categories and  Formulas:  Qi,  Blood  and Yin  tonics 
Minor Cinnamon and  Paeonia Combination (Xiao  jian  zhong 
tang) 
Achyranthes  and  Rehmannia Combination (Restore  the  Left  Pill  -
Zuo  gui  wan) 
YIN  DISHARMONIES 
The two  major Yin disharmonies are  Excess Yin and Deficient Yin, 
with a rarely seen pattern of collapse ofYin. Yin includes all  the substance 
and  Fluids  in  the body.  It  cools,  moistens,  nourishes  and  gives  form  to 
all  the bodily processes.  Excess Yin occurs when too much Coldness and 
Dampness  collect' in  the  body,  while  Deficiency  arises  from  a  lack  of 
cooling  moisture,  giving  rise  to  superficial  Heat signs. 
Excess  Yin 
Excess  Yin  is  a  Full  Yin  state.  Its  signs  are  similar  to  those  of the 
Cold and Damp Heat Pernicious Influences. When Yin becomes Excess, 
~ 
2J7 
there  is  a  condition  of surplus  Fluids  that  have  built  up  in  the  body. 
They may collect  throughout  the body,  giving  a  general  appearance  of 
swelling  and  heaviness,  or they may accumulate  in  a  particular  area  of 
the body, as  in the abdomen causing nausea and vomiting, or the Lungs, 
resulting in cough with copious mucus. Because Yin is cooling in nature, 
and  since  the  excessive  occurrence  of Yin  causes  t h ~  Yang  fires  to  be 
extinguished,  an  Excess  of Yin  frequently gives  rise  to  Cold  symptoms 
similar to Yang  Deficiency. 
Yin  Excess  arises  from  over-exposure  to  cold  or  hot  damp 
environments and climates, the Stagnation and obstruction of pathogenic 
Cold inside so that Yang  is  unable to balance Yin,  Dampness stagnating 
and  turning  to  Heat,  and  underactivity.  It especially  occurs  with  over-
eating,  and  the  excessive  consumption  of cold,  damp  foods,  such  as 
salads,  fruits,  juices,  raw  foods,  iced  drinks and frozen  items  such as  ice 
cream and  frozen  yogurt,  refined  foods,  flour products, and hot greasy 
foods  such as  fried  red  meats. 
Symptoms: 
lack  of thirst 
forceful  but slow  movements 
dampness 
epigastric  pain  aggravated  with  pressure 
loose  stools 
clear  or turbid  and  abundant  urination 
feelings  of heaviness,  pressure  or oppression 
abdominal  distention 
nausea 
edema 
heavy  vaginal  discharge 
poor appetite 
pain  is  worse  with  pressure,  but relieved  by warmth 
Pulse:  full,  slippery,  tight  or wiry,  but strong 
Tongue:  Pale  with  white,  wet  and/or creamy  thick coat 
Herbal Categories and Formulas:  Dampness  removing  herbs 
(diuretics) 
Poria  Five  Herb Combination (Wu  ling  san) 
Five  Peel  Powder (Wu  pi  yin) 
Deficient  Yin 
When Yin is  Deficient the cooling, moistening and nurturing aspects 
of the body are lacking. This gives rise to Dryness and Heat accompanied 
by weakness  and  lack of strength and  resistance.  Because Yin  is  lacking, 
it cannot control Yang, so the Heat of the Yang becomes more apparent. 
Water cannot control Fire so it gets out of hand. Heat signs arising from 
~ 
2J8 
this  are  called  empty-Heat,  or  false  Heat,  because  they  are  not  from  a 
true Excess Yang  condition. The  result is  signs of Heat, but without the 
strength  ofYang. 
For  instance,  there  may  be  fever,  but  it would  only appear  in  the 
afternoon;  the  sensation  of Heat  in  the  body only occurs  in  the  palms 
and  soles  and  chest  region;  the  person  may  talk  rapidly,  but  cannot 
sustain it, or the Heat spurts come and go, with an apparent underlying 
weakness  and  Deficiency.  Because Yin  is  abundant at night, signs ofYin 
Deficiency  especially  appear  then,  such  as  night sweats,  dry throat  and 
insomnia,  or  at  its  opposite  time  of greatest  decrease,  the  afternoon, 
such  as  low-grade  afternoon  fever. 
While  there  are  general  symptoms  categorizing  Deficient Yin,  the 
symptoms change according to the Organs involved, such as  the Kidneys, 
Heart,  Liver  and  Lungs.  Because  the  Kidneys  are  the  root  of Yin  and 
Yang  in  the  body,  anything  that  depletes  the  Kidneys  can  cause  their 
Yin  to  be  Deficient,  and  then  the Yin  throughout  the  rest  of the  body 
tends to  become Deficient. When Kidney Yin  is  depleted, low grade sore 
throats,  dizziness,  night  sweating  or poor memory might  occur. When 
the Heart Yin is  Deficient, insomnia and mental agitation or restlessness 
result.  Liver Yin  Deficiency creates irritability and headaches. A Deficiency 
of Lung Yin  produces  dry cough  and  malar flush. 
Yin  can  become  Deficient  by  "burning  the  candle  at  both  ends", 
over-working,  lack  of sleep,  over-exercising,  overindulgence  in  sex,  Yang 
becoming  so  excessive  it  consumes  the Yin,  long-term  chronic  diseases, 
internal  injury  due  to  the  seven  emotions,  and  the  over-eating  of dry 
and  hot-natured  foods.  Yin  is  strengthened  primarily  by  rest  and  Yin 
tonic  herbs. 
Symptoms: 
night  sweats 
burning,  feverish  or  hot sensation  in  the  palms,  soles  and chest 
fever  or  feeling  of heat,  especially in  the  afternoon 
malar  flush 
superficially  red  or flushed  nose 
emaciation 
dry or chronically sore  throat,  especially at  night 
thirst 
weakness  and  fragility,  but  fast  movements 
agitated  manner;  jumpy;  anxious 
mental  restlessness 
scanty dark  urine 
dry cough 
dry  stools 
dry mouth  at  night 
nocturnal  emissions 
~ 
239 
pain  relieved  by  pressure  and  cold 
Pulse:  thready,  thin and  rapid,  or floating-empty  and  rapid 
Tongue:  red  with  no coat,  or a thin  shiny  tongue  body (called  a 
mirror or peeled  tongue) 
Herbal Categories and Formulas: Tonify Yin  herbs 
Rehmannia Six  Formula (Liu  wei  di  huang wan)  · 
Achyranthes and Rehmannia Combination (Restore  the  Left  Pill -
Zuo gui  wan) 
Collapse  of Yin 
When Yin becomes extremely depleted, it collapses. At its  extreme, 
death can occur because  the Yin  at  that point cannot control the Yang 
and  they separate.  This  is  seen  only in extreme  cases. 
Symptoms: 
abundant sweating 
hot limbs 
dry mouth  with  desire  for  cold  liquids  in  small  amounts 
constipation 
retention  of urine 
skin  hot to  the  touch 
Pulse:  rapid,  floating  and  empty 
Tongue:  red,  dry  and  peeled  (no  coat) 
Herbal Categories and Formulas: Yin  tonics,  lubricating  herbs, 
Heat clearing  herbs 
Big  Pearl  for  Internal Wind (Da  cling  feng  zhu) 
Sweet Wormwood  and Tortoise Shell Formula (Q!ng  hao  hie  jia 
tang) 
Anemarrhena,  Phellodendron and Rehmannia Combination 
(Zhi  bai  di  huang wan) 
Rhinoceros and Rehmannia Combination (Xi  jiao di  huang  tang) 
YANG  DISHARMONIES 
There  are  two  basic  Yang  disharmonies:  an  Excess  of Yang  and  a 
Deficiency ofYang. The condition of false Yang is  not a Yang disharmony, 
but arises  from  a Yin  Deficiency,  and  so  is  included  under Deficiency 
ofYin. Because Yang is Heat and activity, an excess ofYang is characterized 
by excessive  Heat  signs  and  hyperactivity,  and  a  Deficiency of Yang  is 
distinguished  by a lack of Heat, or Coldness, and hypoactivity.  A third 
disharmony ofYang,  Collapse ofYang,  is  rarely seen.  This occurs  from 
an extreme  depletion ofYang to  the point where  it collapses. 
Excess  Ytzng 
Excess Yang is  a Full Yang state, and its signs are similar to those of 
the  Heat  Pernicious  Influence.  Because  Yang  is  associated  with  Heat, 
activity  and  dryness,  the  symptoms  are  exemplified  by  any  of these 
qualities.  There are general  symptoms which designate  Excess Yang,  yet 
they  become  more  specific  depending  on  the  Organ  involved.  For 
instance, migraines often arise from Excess Liver Yang, or manic behavior 
and  extreme  restlessness  result  from  Excess  Heart Yang.  When  there  is 
Excess Yang, the body is  in a hyperfunctional state. Over time the presence 
of excessive  Yang  "burns  off'  the  Fluids  in  the  body,  resulting  in  a 
condition of Deficient Yin. 
Excess  Yang  is  most  often  due  to  the  Heat  Pernicious  Influence, 
either  External  or  Internal.  It can  also  be  caused  by  internal  damage 
from  the Seven  Emotions, the Stagnation of Q! or Blood, over-exposure 
to hot climates or environments, indigestion, and the overconsumption 
of hot-natured  and  fried  greasy  foods,  coffee,  alcohol  and  red  meat. 
Symptoms: 
high  fever 
thirst 
red  face 
aversion  to  heat 
restlessness 
delirium 
burning sensations 
constipation 
red  eyes 
scanty dark  urine 
large  loss  of blood  which  is  bright-red 
irritability 
yellow discharges 
sticky,  thick and  hot-feeling excretions 
pain which  is  intensified  by  pressure and  relieved  by cold 
Pulse:  rapid,  full  and strong 
Tongue:  red  with  dry,  rough  and yellowish  thick  tongue  fur 
Herbal Categories and Formulas: Clear Heat Herbs 
Major Rhubarb Combination (Da  cheng qi  tang) 
Deficient  Ytzng 
Deficiency  of Yang  is  an  Empty-Cold  condition  marked  by 
Deficiency and Coldness.  In  this  case  the Yang  energy is  insufficient to 
warm the body or internal organs, or lacks activity to function normally 
in the organism. When Yang  is  insufficient, Fluids  collect and congest, 
resulting in edema and puffiness;  Q! and  Blood  tend  to  stagnate; and a 
general hypoactivity of the organic processes occurs. This pattern differs 
from  Excess Yin in that Deficient Yang also includes signs of Coldness. 
A  Deficiency  of Yang  is  mostly  related  to  Spleen-Yang,  Kidney-
Yang,  Heart-Yang  or  Lung-Q!.  The  root  of Yin  and  Yang  in  the  body 
"resides"  in  the  Kidneys,  so  if they  become  weakened  from  excessive 
standing, sex,  activity or overwork, the depleted Kidney-Yang affects the 
Yang  of the  rest  of the body,  creating  Deficient Spleen  or Heart Yang, 
for instance. When Spleen Yang is  Deficient, it fails  to warm the muscles 
and  to  properly  metabolize  food,  resulting  in  Coldness  and  Deficient 
Q! and  Blood. 
Yang  Deficiency  can  occur  from  congenital  defects  of improper 
care after birth. Yet, it becomes Deficient from lack of activity or exercise, 
excessive  sex,  over-exposure  to  cold  environments  and  climates,  and 
excessive  consumption  of cold,  raw  foods  and  juices, ·sweets,  alcohol, 
coffee, iced drinks and frozen foods such as  ice cream and frozen yogurt. 
Symptoms: 
pale,  frigid  appearance 
fear  of cold 
chilliness 
cold  limbs 
lassitude with  no  desire  to  move 
frail,  weak  and  slow  pulse 
fatigue 
edema  in  various  parts  of the  body 
abdominal  pain  relieved  by warmth  and  pressure 
loose stools 
copious  or scanty,  frequent  and  clear  urination 
night  time  urination 
clear  to  white  colored  discharges  and  excretions 
faint  odors,  if any at  all 
infertility 
impotence  or frigidity 
premature ejaculation 
watery  stools  with  undigested  food 
pain  relieved  by  pressure  and  warmth 
Pulse:  slow,  deep,  feeble,  weak,  empty 
Tongue:  pale,  swollen,  moist;  possibly white  or wet  tongue 
coating 
Herbal Categories and Formulas: TonifY Yang  herbs 
Rehmannia Eight Combination (Ba  wei  di  huang wan) 
Replenishing the Right (You  gui  wan) 
Collapse  of Ytzng 
When Yang becomes extremely depleted, it collapses. At its extreme, 
death can occur because  the Yang  at  that point cannot control the Yin 
and  they separate.  This  is  seen  only in extreme cases. 
Symptoms: 
chilliness 
cold  limbs 
no  thirst 
loose  stools  or incontinence 
profuse and  frequent  urination or incontinence 
weak  breathing 
profuse sweating  with  an  oily sweat 
Pulse:  deep,  minute 
Tongue:  pale,  wet  and  swollen 
Herbal Categories and  Formulas: Internal Warming Stimulants, 
Q!  and Yang  tonics 
Aconite, Ginger and Licorice  Combination (Si  ni  tang) 
ELEVEN 
DIFFERENTIAL  DIAGNOSIS 
THE  ORGANS 
ZANG ·Fu SYMPTOM  SIGN  DIAGNOSIS 
The  Patterns  of Organ  Disharmonies  are  the  next  step  in  Differential 
Diagnosis. The most important Yin Organ systems are called the "Zang" 
and  the  lesser  important Yang  Organ  systems  are  the  "Fu".  Especially 
useful  for  chronic disease,  Zang-Fu  symptom sign diagnosis  is  the most 
important diagnostic method of evaluating disease imbalance in clinical 
practice because it gives detailed information for treatment. For instance, 
diagnosing a general  Deficient Yang condition is  not specific enough to 
render  adequate  treatment  without  further  knowing  if it  is  Deficient 
Yang  of the  Kidneys,  Spleen  or Heart. 
In  many cases  there  is  a correspondence  between Western  medical 
diagnosis and TCM. Because, however, the correspondence between TCM 
Organ patterns and organ diseases ofWestern medicine is more functional 
than organ specific, a  condition of Stagnant Liver Q! in TCM symptom-
sign  diagnosis  for  example,  may not test  positive in a standard Western 
medical  blood  test.  The  opposite  is  true,  however,  in  that  a  specific 
disease  will  appear  as  some  pattern  of imbalance  in  TCM.  Therefore, 
these  patterns  may  present  specific  diseases  as  we  know  them  in  the 
West,  but  are  regarded  and  treated  as  imbalances.  This  enables  the 
practitioner and  patient  to  consider other possibilities  so  that even  so-
called  "incurable"  diseases  can  be  treated. 
The  best  way  to  identify  a  pattern  is  to  also  understand  how  it 
arises  and  develops.  This can vary individually,  as  can  the  number and 
type of symptoms that occur. The more severe an Organ imbalance,  the 
more  and  greater  severity of signs  and  sympto01s.  On the  other  hand, 
one may only need  two  to  three symptoms  to  signal  a particular Organ 
involvement, and these may be milder in manifestation. Whether few  or 
many, the signs that arise distinguish the Organ or Organs involved and 
these  are  subsequently treated. 
The  Patterns  of Organ  Disharmonies  can  be  best  understood  by 
overlapping  the  signs  of the  Eight  Principles - External,  Internal,  Hot, 
Cold, Excess,  Deficiency and Yin and Yang- with those of the Pernicious 
Influences,  Qi,  Blood,  Fluids  and  Essence  and  the  functions  of the 
Organs  to  form  the various  patterns  found  in  TCM.  These  encompass 
those found  in clinical  practice throughout centuries of experience and 
observation.  Certain Organs are  more prone to particular patterns than 
others, and therefore specific combinations, such as  Excess Spleen Yang, 
are  not  described  as  such  but are  seen  as  Excess  Stomach  Heat  instead. 
Further, patterns frequently appear together, often from cause and effect 
relationships.  For  instance,  a  Deficiency  of Kidney  Yin  can  lead  to 
Deficient Lung Yin  concurrently, or Excess  Liver Yang  can  cause  Excess 
Heart Yang  at  the  same  time. 
Many factors contribute to the development of Organ disharmonies, 
encompassing  dietary,  environmental,  lifestyle,  emotional,  mental  and 
hereditary issues.  These are  discussed  in detail  in the chapter on Causes 
of Disease.  In describing these,  along with the individual and combined 
patterns,  the  most  common  ones  seen  in  clinic  practice  are  the  ones 
included.  The  key  symptoms  of each  Organ  disharmony  are  in  bold 
type. 
Note  that only the  major  formula  used  for  each  category is  given. 
Usually  several  formulas  are  appropriate  and  useful  for  each  pattern, 
however, and  these can be determined in Volume 11.  Further, each of the 
formulas  listed  below,  a full  description  of the  formula  and a listing  of 
the  herbs  of which  it  is  comprised  are  also  given  in Volume  11. 
Under each  pattern,  therapies  are  mentioned which  are  useful  for 
healing that pattern. Several  of the therapies are detailed in the appendix 
Accessory Healing Therapies for the Herbalist, such as  harimakit, cupping, 
moxibustion  and  nasal  wash.  Refer  there  for  complete  details  and 
instructions to perform them.  Note: the major symptoms in each category 
are  in  bold. 
YIN  ORGANS 
HEART 
The primary functions of the Heart are to control Blood and blood 
vessels and to rule the Mind (Shen). Therefore, most Heart disharmonies 
involve  these aspects. The different categories  for  Heart Patterns include 
Deficiency  of Heart  Blood,  Yin,  Qi  or  Yang,  Heart  Fire,  Congealed 
Heart  Blood  and  Mucus  obstructing  the  Heart  Orifices.  Climatic 
influences  which  cause  Heart  imbalances  are  Fire  and  Heat,  although 
these do not invade the Heart directly, but instead affect the Pericardium. 
~ 
245 
Emotions  such  as  sadness,  anger  or  excessive  joy  can  cause  Heart  Qi 
Deficiency and  Heart  Fire. 
Causes for  Heart  Disharmonies 
Pathogenic  Influences:  Heat  is  the  main  Pernicious  Influence 
which can invade the Heart, and even then, not directly. Strictly speaking, 
Exterior pathogens do not attack the Heart itself,  rather they invade the 
Pericardium  instead.  The  Pericardium  acts  as  a  protector for  the  Heart 
and  thus  is  the  one  assaulted.  This  pattern  is  called  Invasion  of the 
Pericardium by Heat and is  characterized by acute and rapid invasion of 
External  Heat  at  the  Nutritive  Qi  level  with  symptoms  of extreme 
temperature,  delirium  and,  in  severe  cases  coma. 
Emotions: The  Heart is  especially affected  by the emotions of joy, 
sadness  and  anger.  When  a  person  is  excessively  excited  or  frequently 
laughs  inappropriately,  it  is  described  as  excessive  joy.  Over  time,  such 
excesses  can create Deficient Heart Qi.  Because the Lungs  and Heart are 
in close proximity as  part of the "Upper Warmer", they are both affected 
by  sadness,  the  emotion  of the  Lungs.  This  initially  causes  Deficient 
Lung  Qi,  and  can  eventually  lead  to  Deficient  Heart  Qi.  Prolonged 
sadness can also cause Qi Stagnation which changes  to Heart Fire. Anger 
causes  Liver Fire  to  rise,  which, through the Five  Element connection of 
the  Liver  as  the  mother  of the  Heart,  is  indirectly  transferred  to  the 
Heart,  causing  Heart Fire. 
Diet:  Fatty,  fried  and  excessively spicy foods  cause Stagnation and 
Heat  in  the  Heart,  while  excessive  consumption  of Lamb  can  cause 
Heart Fire. On the other hand, someone who has Deficient Heart Blood 
or Yang  would  benefit  from  lamb. 
Lifestyle Habits:  The Heart represents  the inner self.  When we  are 
in  a  state  of pure  being  and  inner  tranquility,  there  is  a  purity  and 
goodness in the Heart. Only when we attempt to extend beyond ourselves, 
either  through  excessive  desire,  ambition  or  fear,  do  we  threaten  the 
we!l-being of the Heart.. Therefore, excessive laughter, celebrating, going 
out,  staying  up  late,  reading,  and  studying injure  the  Heart. The  Heart 
benefits  from  rest,  aerobic  exercise,  sufficient  sleep,  laughter,  following 
one's  heart's  desires,  meditation  and  contemplation,  music,  dance  and 
spiritual  pursuits. 
Heart  Blood Deficiency 
When  Heart Blood  is  Deficient,  the  Mind suffers  and  specifically 
affects thought, memory and sleep. Further, Heart Qi becomes Deficient, 
causing  palpitations,  usually  in  the  evenings  and  at  rest,  and  with  a 
feeling  of anxiety or uneasiness  in  the  chest. 
~ 
246 
Heart Blood  Deficiency arises  from  Deficient Spleen Qi unable to 
produce  Blood,  long-term  anxiety  and  worry which  disturb  the  Mind 
and  suppress  the  Heart  function  of governing  Blood,  a  severe  loss  of 
blood such as  hemorrhaging during childbirth, and excessive  long-term 
studying. 
Symptoms: 
palpitations 
insomnia, with  difficulty falling  asleep  but  then  sleeping  well 
forgetfulness  and  poor  memory,  especially  long  term 
dizziness 
excessive  dreaming 
dream-disturbed  sleep 
anxiety 
easily  startled 
dull  pale  complexion 
pale  lips 
Pulse:  fine  or choppy 
Tongue:  pale,  thin,  slightly dry 
Herbal Therapy:  Dang Gui  Four Combination (Si  wu  tang)  for 
Heart  Blood  Deficiency;  For  Heart  Q!  and  Blood  Deficiency use 
Ginseng and  Longan  Combination (Gui  pi  tang). 
Food  Therapy:  Eat  a balanced  diet  including  lamb,  Dang  Gui  and 
ginger  soup,  bone  marrow  soup,  milk,  black  and  aduki  beans, 
congee;  eat  all  cooked  foods;  do  not skip  meals. 
Other Therapies:  Contemplation and  meditation,  following  one's 
heart's  desires,  rest,  breathing  exercises,  harimaki  and  moxibustion 
over  the  lower  abdomen.  Avoid  saunas  and  hot  tubs. 
Exercise:  Light  aerobic  and  stretching exercises  including Yoga,  Tai 
Chi  and  Q!  Gong. 
Heart  Yin  Deficiency 
Heart  Yin  Deficiency  includes  Heart  Blood  Deficiency.  Its  signs 
include  those  of Heart  Blood  Deficiency along with  empty-Heat  signs 
such  as  malar  flush,  mental  restlessness  and  night  sweats.  Heart  Yin 
Deficiency  is  caused  by  or  occurs  with  Kidney  Yin  Deficiency  since 
Kidney Water  cannot  then  rise  to  nourish  the  Heart  and  prevent  the 
flaring  up  of empty-Heat.  It  is  more  common  in  middle-aged  or  old 
people while Heart Blood Deficiency is  more common in young people, 
especially women. 
As  with  Yin  Deficiency  in  general,  doing  too  much,  keeping  too 
busy,  staying up too late and getting up early cause Deficient Heart Yin. 
It is  also  caused  by excessive  study, working,  talking,  long term anxiety 
or worry and  attack  by Exterior Heat consuming Fluids. 
Symptoms: 
palpitations 
mental  restlessness 
feeling  of heat,  especially  in  the evening 
malar  flush 
insomnia with  difficulty falling  asleep  and  waking  frequently 
dream-disturbed  sleep 
easily  startled 
forgetfulness  and  poor  memory,  especially  long  term 
anxiety 
uneasiness,  agitation,  fidgetness 
low-grade  fever 
night  sweating 
dry  mouth  and  throat heat  in  the  palms  and  soles  and  chest 
Pulse:  floating,  empty and  rapid,  or thin (fine)  and  rapid 
Tongue:  red  with  no coat;  tip  redder  and  swollen  with  red 
points;  deep  midline crack reaching  the tip 
Herbal Therapy:  Emperor of Heaven's Tonic Pill for  the Mind 
(Tian wang  bu xin  dan) 
Food Therapy: Avoid  spicy  and  heating  foods.  If digestion  is  good, 
fruit  is  beneficial,  especially berries  and  purple grapes.  If digestion 
is  not good,  eat all  cooked  foods.  Sufficient protein  at each  meal  is 
important.  Do not skip  meals.  Include black and  aduki  beans,  soya, 
tofu  and  milk  in the diet. 
Other Therapies: Oil massage,  breathing exercises,  rest,  cupping 
over  the upper back  to  relieve  Stagnation and  Deficient  Heat, 
harimaki;  counseling to  relieve  emotional  issues,  such  as  anxiety, 
worry and  lack  of joy.  Limit  mental  and  sexual  activity and  reading 
until  the Yin  is  restored.  Being  asleep  by 9 - 9:30  PM  is  very 
beneficial. Avoid  saunas  and  hot tubs. 
Exercise:  Aerobic  exercise  is  contraindicated. While  it is  useful  for 
Excess  conditions,  it will  increase Yin  Deficiency.  Instead  one 
should emphasize  more  stretching exercise  that  invites  the mind  to 
participate  in the circulation  of Q!  and  Blood,  such  as  Yoga,  Tai 
Chi, Q! Gong.  Other forms  that one can  employ are  stretching, 
walking  and  swimming. 
Heart Qj Deficienry 
This pattern includes general Qi Deficiency signs along with Heart 
symptoms.  It can be caused  by long-term  chronic  illness,  after acute  or 
chronic  hemorrhage,  and  excessive  sadness.  This  pattern  often  appears 
with  Deficient Lung Qi because the Heart and  Lungs  are  linked  in the 
Upper Warmer  and  the Sea  of Qi in  the chest 
Symptoms: 
palpitations 
fatigue 
lethargy shortness  of breath  on  exertion 
sweating 
pallor 
Pulse:  empty;  in  severe  cases  superficially strong but empty 
underneath 
Tongue:  pale,  or  normal  color;  midline  crack  to  tip with 
swelling  on  each  side  in  more  severe  cases 
Herbal Therapy: Stephania and Ginseng Combination (Mu  fang 
chi  tang)  and/  or Baked  Licorice Combination (Zhi  gan  cao  tang) 
Food Therapy:  Eat  all  cooked  foods  and  warm  or room 
temperature  drinks. Whole grains,  protein,  legumes  (especially aduki 
beans),  lots  of vegetables  and  congee  are  important.  Make  sure you 
eat  three  meals,  or more  as  needed,  per day.  Avoid  raw  and  cold 
foods  and  juices.  Do not skip  meals. 
Other Therapies:  Moxibustion,  especially on the  lower  abdomen 
and  on  the back  over  the  kidneys;  ginger  fomentations  on both 
locations;  getting  plenty of rest,  going  to  bed  by 9 - 10  P.M.;  not 
over-extending yourself;  journal work  to  get  in  touch  with  the 
causes  of any sadness  or lack  of joy;  breathing exercises;  harimaki. 
Avoid  excessive  work  and  sexual  activity. Working on and  resolving 
any emotional  issues  involved  is  very  important.  If using saunas  or 
hot tubs,  be  sure  to  rinse  in cool  water  afterwards  to  push  the  heat 
back  in  the  body;  otherwise  it dissipates  and  can  cause Yang 
Deficiency over  time. 
Exercise:  Exercise  is  important since  it helps  give  energy;  however, 
do  not overdo  or  push  yourself.  Do  light walking,  swimming, 
dancing, Yoga,  Tai  Chi,  Q! Gong or bicycling. 
Deficient Heart  Ytzng 
This  pattern  has  similar signs  to  Deficient Heart Qi,  though  they 
are  usually  more  ~ e v e r e  and  occur  with  symptoms  of Coldness.  It  is 
from similar causes to Heart Qi Deficiency, or can be from a Deficiency 
of Kidney  Yang  since  that  is  the  body's  source  of Yang.  In  fact,  this 
imbalance often  appears  concurrent with  Deficient Kidney Yang. 
Symptoms: 
palpitations 
feeling  of cold 
cold  limbs, especially  hands 
shortness  of breath  on exertion 
tiredness 
lethargy 
sweating 
feeling  of stuffiness  or discomfort  in  heart  region 
bright-pale  face 
Pulse:  deep  and  weak,  or knotted 
Tongue:  pale,  wet,  swollen 
Herbal Therapy:  Cinnamon and Dragon Bone Combination 
(Gui  zhi  long gu  mu  li  tang) 
Food Therapy:  All  cooked  foods  and warm  drinks  are  essential. 
Lamb  and  beef are  beneficial  as  are  spicy  foods.  Avoid  cold, 
refrigerated,  raw  and  iced  drinks  and  foods,  including salads.  Do 
not skip  meals. 
Other Therapies: The same  as  for  Deficient Heart  Q!. 
Exercise: The  same  as  for  Deficient  Heart  Q!. 
Collapse  of Heart  Ytmg 
Yang can become so Deficient that it suddenly "collapses," causing 
profuse sweating,  extreme cold  in the limbs or entire body,  purple lips 
and minute or even imperceptible pulse. This is  a more extreme form of 
Yang  Deficiency and could lead to Yin and Yang separating, resulting in 
death.  The  extreme  Coldness  causes  loss  of control  of sweating  and 
severe  Blood  Stagnation. 
Coma may occur because the loss of Heart Qi means the Mind has 
no  "residence".  The  tongue  is  short  from  either  the  Yang  Qi  being 
unable  to  move  the  tongue  muscle,  or  Internal  Cold  contracting  the 
tongue  muscle.  This  pattern  is  caused  from  long  term  Heart  Yang 
Deficiency and collapse of Kidney Yang. This is an acute Heart condition 
that results  after years  of debilitating stressful work and sexual excess.  It 
can  also  be  precipitated  after  a  chronic,  long term  illness. 
Symptoms: 
cold  limbs 
cyanosis  of lips 
profuse  sweating 
shortness  of breath 
palpitations 
weak  and  shallow  breathing 
coma  m severe  cases 
Pulse:  minute,  knotted,  hidden 
Tongue:  very  pale  or bluish-purple;  short 
Herbal  Therapy:  Aconite,  Ginger and Licorice  Combination (Si 
ni  tang)  or Restore  and Revive  the Yang  Decoction (Hui yang  jiu 
ji  tang) 
Heart  Blood Stagnation 
This  serious  condition  occurs  from  other  Heart  patterns,  usually 
Heart Qi, Yang  or Blood  Deficiency or  from  Heart  Fire,  making  it an 
Excess/Deficiency  pattern.  If Blood  is  Deficient,  it  becomes  Stagnant. 
Likewise,  a Deficiency of Qi or Yang  also stagnates the Blood.  If there is 
Heart  Fire,  the  Heat  congeals  the  Blood  in  the  chest.  This  pattern  is 
caused  by long term  emotional issues  such as  anxiety,  grief,  resentment 
or held-in  anger,  or from  Heart Yang  Deficiency. 
Symptoms: 
pain  in  the  heart  region  which  may  radiate  to  inner aspect  of 
left  arm  or shoulder 
cyanosis  of lips 
palpitations 
stuffiness,  feeling  of oppression  or  constriction  in  the  chest 
cyanosis  of nails 
cold  hands 
Pulse:  knotted 
Tongue:  purple 
Herbal Therapy: Warm and Activate the Circulation of the 
Heart Pills  (Guan  xin  su  he  wan) 
Food Therapy: Same  as  for  Deficient Heart Blood 
Other Therapies: Same  as  for  Deficient  Heart Blood 
Exercise:  Only gentle  movement,  such  as  walking 
Heart  Fire 
An  Excess  pat'tern,  it  is  different  than  Heart Yin  Deficiency,  as  it 
manifests  true Heat signs such as  thirst, dark urine and full  rapid pulse. 
The bitter taste  in the mouth is  different from  that of Liver  Fire  in that 
Heart  Fire  only  appears  in  the  morning  and  is  related  to  quality  of 
sleep.  The  tongue  ulcers  are  red  with  a  raised  red  rim  and  are  painful, 
whereas  ulcers  with  a white  rim  can  be  due  to  Empty-Heat. 
Mental  restlessness  and  agitation are  caused  by Excess  Heat.  Dark, 
condensed urine with or without blood is  the result of Heart Fire being 
transmitted  to  the  Small  Intestine  and  from  there  to  the  Bladder  (to 
which  the  Small  Intestine  is  related  in  the  Greater  Yang).  Chronic  Q! 
Stagnation  with  mental  depression  can  cause  Heart  Fire,  as  can  long 
term  anxiety,  constant worrying  and  Liver-Fire. 
Symptoms: 
mouth and  tongue  ulcers 
thirst 
palpitations 
mental  restlessness 
feeling  agitated 
feelings  of heat 
insomnia with  feverish  sensation 
red  or flushed  face 
hot,  dark  urine  or  blood  in  urine 
bitter  taste  in  mouth  in  morning 
Pulse:  rapid  and  full  or  rapid  and  irregular 
Tongue:  red,  redder  tip  and  swollen  with  red  points,  yellow 
coat;  there  may  be  a midline  crack  reaching  to  the  tip 
Herbal Therapy:  Decoction of the  Four Ingredients and Three 
Yellow  Herbs (San  huang  si  wu  tang) 
Food Therapy:  Fasting  on fruit  or vegetable  juices;  including  fruits 
(especially watermelon),  salads  and  juices  in  the  diet;  limit  meat 
intake to 24  oz.  per  day  maximum,  although  it's  better  to  avoid 
meat  altogether,  especially red,  for  several  weeks.  Use  legumes 
instead  for  protein,  including  tofu  and  mung beans.  Include  plenty 
of fresh  vegetables  and  greens  in  the diet.  Avoid  iced  or refrigerated 
drinks  as  they can  perpetuate  the  problem  by  aggravating  a Heat 
reaction.  Avoid  hot and greasy  foods,  caffeine,  alcohol,  nuts, 
avocados  and  cheese. 
Other Therapies:  Meditation;  breathing  exercises;  cupping over  the 
upper back. 
Exercise:  Martial  arts  are  beneficial  as  they  help  focus  restless  and 
excessive  energy. 
Cold Mucus  Obstructing  the  Heart  Orifices 
This is an extreme pattern where the Mind, blocked by Cold Phlegm, 
causes  disharmonies  of Shen  (Spirit).  Because  Cold  contracts  and 
stagnates,  irrational  behaviors  are  more  introverted.  Autism  and 
retardation in children as  well  as  strokes, paralysis and aphasia in adults 
can be the result of Cold Mucus Obstructing. Excessive consumption of 
greasy,  cold  and  raw  foods  can  cause  Phlegm  to  form.  This,  combined 
with severe long term emotional problems, produces this pattern. Further, 
Spleen Q! Deficiency contributes by not transforming Dampness which 
then  accumulates  into Phlegm. 
Symptoms: 
mental  confusion 
rattling sound in throat 
lethargic stupor 
abnormal,  inward,  restrained  and  foolish  behavior 
muttering  to  oneself 
staring at walls 
vomiting 
aphasia 
unconsciousness  or sudden  blackouts 
Pulse:  slippery,  possibly slow 
Tongue:  thick,  sticky,  slippery coat; white  coating;  midline 
crack  reaching  to  the  tip with  prickles  in it;  swollen  tongue 
body 
Herbal Therapy:  Bamboo and  Poria Combination (Wen  dan 
tang) 
Food Therapy:  Avoid  dairy,  wheat,  flour  products,  desserts,  greasy 
and  fried  foods,  chocolate, caffeinated  foods  and  drinks,  alcohol, 
processed  foods,  especially those with  additives,  sodas,  cold  and 
iced  drinks  and  foods,  raw  foods,  fruit  and  vegetable  juices,  salads. 
Eat  rice,  millet and barley,  black  bean  soup with  onions and  garlic, 
protein  and  vegetables. 
Other Therapies:  Professional  psychotherapy;  cupping over  the 
upper back;  moxibustion  over  the lower  abdomen  and  upper  and 
lower  back;  harimaki;  avoid  cold  damp environments. 
Exercise: Whatever  can  be  safely  undertaken;  movement would  be 
beneficial  such  as  walking,  especially in  the woods. 
Hot Mucus  Obstructing the  Heart  Orifices 
When  the  Mind  is  blocked  by  Heated  Phlegm,  it  results  in 
disharmonies  of Shen.  Because  Heat  expands  and  activates,  irrational 
behaviors are  more extroverted  and violent.  It is  a combination of Fire, 
Heart Disharmonies and Deficient Spleen Q! unable to transform Fluids. 
This  pattern  is  caused  by  excessive  consumption  of hot-greasy  foods 
and/  or  severe  emotional  problems  leading  to  Q!  Stagnation  and  then 
Fire.  It can  also  be  caused  by  overexposure  to  External  Heat.  It can 
manifest as  symptoms  of manic-depression,  extreme  mental  instability, 
agitation and  brain  injury. 
Symptoms: 
mental  restlessness 
incoherent speech 
mental  confusion 
rash  behavior 
tendency  to  hit or scold  people 
uncontrolled  laughter or crying 
shouting 
muttering  to  oneself 
mental depression and dullness 
dream  disturbed  sleep 
palpitations 
bitter  taste  in  the  mouth  in  the  mornings 
msomma 
easily  startled 
agitation 
aphasia  in  severe  cases 
coma  m severe  cases 
Pulse:  full,  rapid  and  slippery;  or full,  rapid  and  wiry 
Tongue:  red,  yellow sticky coat;  midline crack with  yellow 
prickles  in it;  tip  may  be  redder  and  swollen  with  red  points 
Herbal Therapy:  Bamboo and  Poria Combination (Wen  dan 
tang) with Scutellaria, Coptis and  Platycodon (Variation  ofWen 
dan  tang) 
Food Therapy: Avoid  hot,  spicy,  greasy  and  fried  foods,  meat, 
processed  foods  especially with  additives  in them,  alcohol,  tobacco, 
coffee  and  other caffeinated  foods  and  drinks,  sodas  and  juices.  Eat 
lots  of vegetables,  tofu,  black  beans,  greens,  rice,  barley,  legumes. 
Other Therapies:  Psychotherapy;  meditation  and  relaxation 
techniques;  breathing exercises;  cupping over  the upper back. 
Exercise:  In Yoga  pranayam, various  breathing exercises  are 
described  as  Heating or Cooling and  are  described  in the appendix, 
Healing Therapies  for  the  Herbalist.  Perform  Shitali  or Sitkari. 
Combined Pattern 
Heart and Lungs 
Both  Organs  are  located  in  the  chest  and  are  part  of the  Upper 
Warmer.  The  Heart controls  the  circulation  of Blood, while  the  Lungs 
control the circulation of Q!. They are, therefore, closely inter-dependent 
because  of the  close  relationship  of Q!  and  Blood.  A  Deficiency  of 
154 
Lung Q! can adversely affect Blood circulation, manifesting as shortness 
of breath,  palpitations, a stuffy feeling  in the chest,  cyanosis  of the lips 
and  a purplish tongue;  Deficient Heart Q! stagnates  Blood  and may in 
turn affect  the Lung's dispersing and descending function, also causing 
shortness of breath with cough, asthmatic breathing, and a stuffy feeling 
in the  chest. 
Heart and  Lung  Q!  Deficiency Symptoms: 
shortness  of breath 
palpitations 
stuffy feeling  in chest 
purple  lips  and  tongue 
cough 
tiredness 
sweating 
Pulse:  empty 
Tongue:  pale  or  normal-colored 
Herbal Therapy:  Stephania and Ginseng Combination (Mu  fang 
chi  tang) 
Food Therapy:  Refer  to  this  category under  Heart Q!  Deficiency 
and  Lung  Q!  Deficiency. 
Other Therapies:  Refer  to  this  category under  Heart Q!  Deficiency 
and  Lung  Q!  Deficiency. 
Exercise:  Four  Purifications,  Eight Brocades  especially  number one, 
two  and  six. 
Heart  and Spleen 
While the Heart controls Blood circulation, the Spleen is  the source 
of Blood  production  and  keeps  it  flowing  within  the  vessels.  If the 
Spleen  functions  properly in  providing sufficient  nutrients  for  growth 
and  development,  transporting  and  distributing  them  properly,  then 
the Blood of the Heart will be plentiful. In turn, Heart Blood circulates 
and  provides  the  Spleen  with  nutrients  to  better  help  it  perform  its 
functions. 
In Five  Elements, the Heart is  the Mother of the Spleen. If there is 
Deficient Heart Blood or Q!, it will result in mental anxiety causing the 
transforming  and  transporting  functions  of the  Spleen  to  become 
disrupted. The result will be improper distribution of nutrients for growth 
and  development  with  an  inability  of the  Spleen  to  keep  the  Blood 
flowing  within  the vessels.  Finally,  a combination of Heart and Spleen 
~ 
2.55 
symptoms  and  signs  such  as  palpitation,  insomnia,  anorexia,  lassitude 
and  pallor  will  result  in  the  TCM  condition  known  as  Deficiency  of 
Heart Blood and Spleen Qi or Blood. To  treat it, formulas to invigorate 
the Spleen and nourish the Heart are used, such as Ginseng and Longan 
Combination (Gui  pi  tang). 
Heart Blood  and Spleen Q!  or Blood  Deficiency Symptoms: 
palpitat!ons 
msomma 
anorexia 
lassitude 
fatigue 
pale-dull  face 
bleeding 
poor  memory 
Pulse:  fine  or choppy 
Tongue:  pale 
Herbal Therapy:  Ginseng and Longan  Combination (Gui  pi 
tang) 
Food  Therapy:  Refer  to  this  category  under  Heart Blood  and  Q! 
Deficiency and  Spleen  Q!  Deficiency. 
Other Therapies:  Refer  to  this  category under  Heart Blood  and  Q! 
Deficiency and  Spleen  Q!  Deficiency. 
Exercise:  Refer  to  this  category under Heart  Blood  Deficiency, 
Heart Q! Deficiency and  Spleen  Q!  Deficiency. 
Heart and Liver 
The  Heart  controls  Blood  circulation  while  the  Liver  stores  the 
Blood. Only when Heart Blood is  plentiful does the Liver have Blood to 
store.  When  Liver  Blood  is  Deficient,  Heart  Blood  is  certain  to  be 
Deficient  also.  Thus,  signs  of Heart  Blood  Deficiency  almost  always 
occur along with  Liver  Blood  Deficiency.  Herbs such as  Dang Gui and 
white  peony are  used  to  nourish  the Blood  of the Liver  and  the Heart. 
Both  the  Heart  and  Liver  are  involved  in  mental  activities  and  mood: 
the Heart because  it rules  the  Mind, the Liver  because it is  in charge of 
the smooth and regular flow  of Qi to  all  parts of the body.  Further, the 
Liver  is  the Mother of the Heart.  Liver  imbalances  frequently affect  the 
Heart and vice versa.  When there  is  Heart Yin  Deficiency with signs  of 
insomnia,  frequent  dreaming and anxiety,  there are  often Liver signs  of 
fidgetiness,  restlessness  and  anger.  Likewise,  Liver  Yang  symptoms  of 
dizziness,  fidgetiness,  irritability  and  a  sensation  of distension  in  the 
head  can lead  to Heart signs  of palpitation and  insomnia. 
Heart and Liver  Blood  Deficiency Symptoms: 
blurred vision 
scanty  periods 
poor  memory 
dizziness 
palpitations 
insomnia 
anxiety 
pale-dull  complexion 
pale  lips 
Pulse:  choppy or fine 
Tongue:  pale 
Herbal Therapy:  Ginseng and Zizyphus Combination (Emperor 
of Heaven's Tonic  Pill  for  the  Mind) (Tian  wang  bu xin  dan) 
Food  Therapy:  Refer  to this  category under Heart  Blood 
Deficiency and  Liver  Blood  Deficiency. 
Other Therapies:  Refer  to  this category under Heart Blood 
Deficiency and  Liver  Blood  Deficiency. 
Exercise:  Refer  to  this category under Heart Blood  Deficiency and 
Liver  Blood  Deficiency. 
Heart  and Kidneys 
The  Heart  and  Kidneys  have  an  interdependent  and  mutually 
sustaining relationship. One is  Fire, the other Water.  Kidney Yin ascends 
to the  Heart to  nourish  its Yin  and protect it from  the Yang becoming 
Excessive,  while Yang  descends  into the Kidneys  to nourish  their Yang. 
When Heart Yang is  Deficient, it can't warm that of the Kidneys, resulting 
in excessive  water which can lead  to  possible  heart attacks,  palpitations 
and  edema.  This  is  called  Heart  trouble  caused  by  retention  of water, 
and occurs  from  a  Deficiency of Heart and  Kidney Yang. 
Heart and Kidney Yang  Deficiency Symptoms: 
palpitations 
feeling  of cold 
cold  limbs,  especially  hands  and  knees 
feeling  of cold  and  soreness  in  the  back 
edema,  especially of the  legs 
shortness  of breath  on exertion 
tiredness 
lethargy 
bright-pale  face 
Pulse:  deep  and weak,  or  knotted 
Tongue:  pale,  wet,  swollen 
Herbal Therapy: Warm and Activate  the Circulation of the 
Heart Pills (Guan  xin  su  he wan) 
Food Therapy:  Refer  to  this  category  under  Heart Yang  Deficiency 
and  Kidney Yang  Deficiency. 
Other Therapies:  Refer  to  this  category under Heart Yang 
Deficiency and  Kidney Yang  Deficiency. 
Exercise:  Refer  to this  category  under Heart Yang  Deficiency and 
Kidney Yang  Deficiency. 
Heart  and Kidney  not  Harmonized  (Heart  and Kidney  Yin  Defi-
cienry) 
When  Kidney Yin  is  Deficient and  cannot  nourish  the  Heart,  or 
Deficient Kidney Yang cannot distill the Yin of the Kidney,  Heart Yang 
becomes  excessive  resulting  in  mental  restlessness,  insomnia,  dream-
disturbed sleep  and seminal emission. This incoordination between  the 
Heart  and  the  Kidneys  can  be  caused  by  prolonged  overwork  or 
overactivity,  excessive  sexual  activity,  long  term  chronic  illnesses  and 
emotional  shocks  or  protracted  emotional  problems  such  as  anxiety, 
sadness,  depression  or chronic Heart Yin  Deficiency. 
Heart and Kidney not Harmonized Symptoms: 
palpitat!ons 
msomma 
night  sweating 
poor  memory 
dizziness 
tinnitus 
deafness 
soreness  of lower  back 
nocturnal  emission with  dreams 
fever  or feeling  of heat  in  the  afternoon 
scanty-dark  urine 
Pulse:  floating,  empty and  rapid 
Tongue:  red-peeling with  redder  tip and midline crack 
Herbal Therapy:  Coptis and Cinnamon Formula Oiao  tai  wan) 
Food  Therapy:  Refer  to  this  category  under  Heart Yin  Deficiency 
and  Kidney Yin  Deficiency. 
Other Therapies:  Refer  to  this  category under  Heart Yin 
Deficiency  and  Kidney Yin  Deficiency. 
Exercise:  Refer  to  this  category  under  Heart Yin  Deficiency and 
Kidney Yin  Deficiency. 
LUNGS 
The Lungs rule Q!,  have a dispersing and descending function and 
are  directly  connected  to  the  exterior  environment.  This  makes  them 
vulnerable  to  External  invasion  of Pernicious  Influences.  Because  of 
this,  patterns  of Lung  disharmony include  External  as  well  as  Internal 
conditions. 
Causes for  Lung Disharmonies 
Pathogenic  Influences:  The  Lungs  are  the  only  Internal  Organ 
that  has  direct  contact with  the outer environment through  breathing, 
controlling the skin  and  influencing Defensive Q!.  Being_vulnerable to 
External  Pernicious  Influences,  they  are  regarded  as  the  "sensitive",  or 
the "princess", of the Organs. Any of the External Pernicious Influences 
can  invade  - Wind,  Heat,  Summer  Heat,  Cold,  Damp,  and  Dryness  -
although Wind
2 
generally combines with any of the other factors.  Thus, 
exposure  to  any  of these  Influences,  or  to  environments  in  homes  or 
work places where these are present, can cause any of the external patterns 
of disharmony. 
Emotions: Grief, worry and sadness in excess can have a profoundly 
debilitating affect on the Lungs, being a precipitating cause of conditions 
such  as  asthma,  emphysema,  bronchitis,  frequent  colds  and  flu  or 
pneumoma. 
Diet:  Diet  is  very  important  to  Lung  health,  as  it  is  to  all  the 
Organs.  Excessive  consumption  of cold,  raw  and  damp  foods,  such  as 
salads,  fruits,  juices,  dairy, wheat,  iced  or refrigerated  drinks and  foods, 
causes  Dampness
3 
in  the  Spleen  which  is  often  "stored"  in  the  Lungs. 
This  is  why  Lung  Dampness,  manifested  as  certain  types  of bronchitis 
and  asthma,  can  often  be  healed  by  moving  to  a  dry  environment, 
eliminating foods  such as  dairy and various fruit juices like orange juice 
from  the diet and  taking herbs that eliminate Spleen Dampness such as 
Citrus and Pinellia Combination (Er  chen  tang). 
~ 
259 
Lifestyle Habits: Exercise stimulates Fire in the body and is essential 
in  moving  the  lymphatic  system  and  drying  Dampness.  Those  whose 
work  or inclination  involves  lack  of physical  activity will  be  especially 
susceptible  to  Damp accumulation  caused  by  injury to  the Spleen  and 
Lungs.  Coldness  ultimately  tends  to  inhibit circulation, which  further 
slows the lymphatic system and leads to Dampness. Sudden exposure to 
Cold, Heat and Damp may not give  the body sufficient time to  prepare 
for  the  climatic  changes  and  eventually  can  compromise  the  immune 
system.  Finally,  mucus-forming foods  such as  dairy and  flour products, 
denatured  foods  such  as  white  sugar  and  Damp-natured  foods  such  as 
citrus and fruit juices can weaken the body and cause External invasion. 
External  Patterns 
Invasion  of the  Lungs  by  Wind-Cold 
This pattern is one ofWind and Cold Pernicious Influences invading 
and obstructing the Lungs. The descending function is disrupted, causing 
cough  and  a  runny  or  stuffed  nose,  and  the  dispersing  function  is 
impaired, resulting in sneezing. When Wind-Chill attacks the Defensive 
Q!, the pores try to stay closed in the "battle" against the attack, resulting 
in  lack  of perspiration,  fever,  chills,  body  aches  and  aversion  to  cold. 
However,  in this  case  the chills  are  stronger from  the  Cold  invasion. 
This pattern occurs from over-exposure to a cold and possibly windy 
environment, air conditioning, drafts or refrigerated store-rooms. Further, 
it  can  occur  if there  is  a  weakness  of the  Defensive,  or "Wei",  energy, 
thus  allowing  the  External  Influences  to  more  easily  and  frequently 
invade the body.  Finally, the nature of External  acute conditions is  that 
they can change quickly, and can move back and forth from Wind Heat 
to Wind Cold,  or vice  versa. 
Symptoms: 
aversion  to  cold 
sneezing 
slight  fever  strong chills 
body aches 
cough  with  thin, watery sputum 
lack  of sweating 
itchy  throat 
stuffY  or runny nose  with  clear-watery  mucus 
occipital  headache 
Pulse:  floating,  tight 
Tongue:  thin white  coat 
Herbal Therapy:  Trikatu\ ginger  tea,  garlic,  Nine Herbs with 
Notopterygii  Decoction Oiu  wei  qiang  huo  tang),  Ephedra 
Combination (Ma  huang  tang)  for  Excess  conformation or when 
~ 
260 
there  is  no  sweating,  Pueraria Combination (Ge  gen  tang)  for 
middle strength  constitutions or when  there  is  accompanying  tight 
neck  and  shoulders, Cinnamon Combination (Gui  zhi  tang)  for 
Deficient  types  or when  there  is  sweating. 
Food Therapy:  Eat  all  cooked  foods,  keeping  them simple,  such  as 
soups  of grains  or black  beans with  garlic  and  onions, vegetables 
and  a little chicken.  Avoid  all  else  until  healed. 
Other Therapies: Avoid  exposure  to air conditioning, drafts,  cold 
and  windy environments;  dress  warmly to conserve  the body's  heat 
and  immune  potential.  One of the places  that is  most exposed  is 
the  neck  and  shoulders  so  that in cold,  windy environments,  a 
warm  scarf is  good  protection. Again,  to support the immune 
system  which  emanates  from  the  power  of the  Kidneys,  a  Harimaki 
will  be  gratefully appreciated  in cold  environments.  In  addition, 
therapies  such  as  cupping and  moxibustion  over  the upper back, 
chest,  kidneys  and  lower  abdomen  is  useful;  breathing exercises; 
morning saline  nasal  wash;  ginger  fomentation,  onion poultice or 
mustard  plaster over  the chest  are  traditional  methods  that can  be 
employed  with  great  benefit. 
Exercise:  Bed  rest 
Invasion  of Lungs  by  Wind-Heat 
Similar  to  invasion  of the  Lungs  by Wind-Chill,  in  this  case  the 
Wind  enters  with  HeatS,  such  as  high  fever,  sweating  and  aversion  to 
heat  as  part of the  symptom  complex.  It can  be  caused  by exposure  to 
climatic  Heat  and  possibly  Wind,  overly  heated  environments  in  the 
home and work  place,  or Wind-Cold  conditions changing to  Heat. 
Symptoms: 
fever 
aversion  to  cold 
sore  throat 
slight chills 
stuffy or  runny nose with  yellow  mucus 
perspiration 
thirst 
constipation 
dark  urine 
swollen  tonsils 
body  aches 
headache 
cough  with  yellow  mucus 
Pulse:  floating  and  rapid 
Tongue:  red  on the  sides  or  tip with  a white  or yellow  coat 
~ 
261 
Herbal Therapy:  Lonicera and  Forsythia Combination (Yin  qiao 
san) 
Food Therapy:  Keep  the  diet  simple,  perhaps  fasting  on fruit  or 
vegetable  juices or soups,  such  as  rice  and  black  or mung beans. 
Avoid  all  else  until  healed. 
Other Therapies:  Avoid  exposure  to overly  heated  and  perhaps 
windy environments  and  climates;  do cupping over  the  upper  back, 
breathing exercises  as  appropriate. 
Exercise:  Bed  rest 
Cold Dampness              the  Lungs 
This pattern can occur from an External Damp Pernicious Influence 
attacking the body, or from any External Influence invading and mixing 
with  a  preexisting  chronic  disharmony of Deficient Spleen  or  Kidney 
Q!.  The  result  is  an  accumulation  of Dampness,  causing  Phlegm  and 
obstruction  of the  Lung  functions.  In  this  case,  the  Dampness  is 
accompanied  by  Cold  and  thus,  Cold  signs.  It is  caused  by  lowered 
immunity,  Deficient Spleen Q!  or Yang  and  possibly  Deficient Kidney 
Q!,  and  a diet  high  in cold,  raw  foods  and  drinks. 
Symptoms: 
cough  with  profuse white  sputum 
wheezing  or asthma with  copious white  sputum 
chest  and  flank  stuffiness,  distension  and  soreness 
difficulty in breathing,  especially when  lying  down 
white-pasty  complexion 
shortness  of breath  or breathlessness 
Pulse:  slippery and  weak-floating  or fine 
Tongue:  thick,  greasy white  coat 
Herbal Therapy:  Citrus and Pinellia Combination (Er  chen  tang) 
Food Therapy:  Only eat  and  drink  cooked  warm  foods  and  fluids, 
keeping  them  simple,  such  as  soups.  Some  spicy tasting  things can 
be  helpful,  such  as  ginger  tea  or horseradish.  Avoid  all  else  until 
healed.  When  over  the  acute  stage,  eat  a diet of only cooked  foods 
and warm  drinks,  avoiding  cold  raw  and  damp  foods,  such  as  dairy 
and  flour  products,  salads,  fruits,  fruit  and  vegetable  juices 
(especially orange
6 
juice),  refined  foods  such  as  white  sugar,  and 
refrigerated  or iced  foods  and  drinks .. 
Other Therapies:  Onion and/or ginger  poultices  over  the chest; 
cupping on chest  or over  upper back;  moxibustion  in  the same 
areas;  nasal  wash;  keep  warmly dressed,  with  a  neck  scarf and  a 
harimaki,  and  avoid  exposure  to cold,  damp and windy 
environments. 
Exercise:  Bed  rest 
Phlegm  Heat  Obstructing  the  Lungs 
This  is  similar  to  Cold  Damp  Obstructing  the  Lungs,  but  it  is 
accompanied by Heat instead.  It can be caused by an External Damp or 
Wind-Heat  Pernicious  Influence attacking the body and  mixing with a 
preexisting chronic disharmony of Deficient Spleen Q!.  It results  in an 
accumulation of Dampness and Heat, causing Phlegm and obstruction 
of the  Lung  functions.  It  is  caused  by  lowered  immunity,  Deficient 
Spleen Q! and a diet high in hot, greasy, spicy, fried  foods, meat, alcohol 
and  tobacco. 
Symptoms: 
cough with  profuse yellow or green sputum 
which  is  foul-smelling 
shortness  of breath 
wheezing  or asthma  with  copious yellow or green  sputum 
chest  and  flank  stuffiness,  distension  and  soreness 
difficulty in  breathing,  especially when  lying down 
shortness  of breath  or breathlessness 
Pulse:  slippery,  rapid or slippery,  rapid-floating 
Tongue:  thick, greasy yellow coat 
Herbal Therapy:  Ma  Huang and Apricot Seed  Combination (Ma 
xing  shi  gan  tang)  and  Citrus and Pincllia Combination (Er  chen 
tang)  with  scutellaria,  gardenia,  apricot seed  and  platycodon. 
Food Therapy: Simple soups  or vegetable  juice fast  until  healed. 
When  over  the acute  stage,  avoid:  alcohol,  red  meat,  tobacco,  spicy, 
greasy  and  fried  foods  and  dairy. 
Other Therapies:  Cupping over  the chest  or upper back;  nasal 
wash;  breathing.exercises  as  appropriate. 
Exercise:  Bed  rest 
Internal Patterns 
Deficient Lung Qj 
When  Lung  Q!  is  Deficient,  there  is  tiredness,  weakness,  cough, 
sweating  and  a  propensity  to  catching  colds  and  flu,  because  the  Q! 
cannot  adequately  perform  its  protecting,  dispersing  or  descending 
functions.  It occurs  from  a  prolonged  External  Pernicious  Influence 
remaining in the Lungs and injuring the Q!, excessive use of antibiotics 
which  locks  Cold  in  the  Lungs  and  injures  the  Q!  and  its  functions, 
from hereditary weakness, especially if one of the parents or grandparents 
had  tuberculosis,  from  excessive  stooping  or  leaning  over  desks  and 
tables  to work,  or a  diet  high  in cold  raw  foods  and  drinks. 
Symptoms: 
shortness  of breath 
weak  voice 
bright-white  complexion 
cough  watery  sputum 
exhausted  appearance  and  Spirit 
low voice  and  lack  of desire  to  talk 
weak  respiration 
daytime  sweats 
lowered  resistance  to  colds  and  flu 
tiredness 
Pulse:  empty 
Tongue:  pale  or  normal  colored 
Herbal Therapy:  Four Major ingredients (Si  jun zi  tang)  with 
astragalus  root. 
Food Therapy:  Eat  all  cooked  foods  and warm  drinks,  plenty of 
grains,  especially rice,  sufficient  protein  at  each  meal,  black  bean 
soup with  ginseng,  garlic  and  onions,  cooked  vegetables  and  greens; 
avoid  cold,  raw  foods  and  drinks,  salads,  fruit,  juices,  alcohol, 
caffeine. 
Other Therapies:  Avoid  excessive  stooping or leaning over  tables  or 
desks;  rest;  dress  warmly  according  to the season,  especially with  a 
scarf around  the  neck;  avoid  over-exertion  in work  or sexual 
activity;  get  plenty of rest,  going  to  bed  early such  as  9 - 9:30  at 
night;  moxibustion,  especially over  the  lower  abdomen;  harimaki; 
breathing  exercises;  nasal  wash;  working  on emotional  issues  such  as 
sadness, _grief and worry. 
Exercise:  Light  to  moderate exercise  within  the  body's  limits; do 
not over  exercise  or do strong aerobics;  walking,  swimming,  cycling, 
Yoga,  Tai  Chi,  Q!  Gong are  beneficial. 
Deficient Lung  Yin 
Fluids can become depleted in the Lungs from invasion of Exterior 
Heat and  Dryness which  remains  so  long that it injures  the Yin.  Other 
causes are from Yin Deficiency of the Kidneys or Stomach which affects 
the  Lungs,  long-term  Lung  Qi  Deficiency  and  from  excessive  and 
prolonged  tobacco  smoking.  Characteristically,  there  will  be  Dry  and 
Empty Heat signs  along with  Lung symptoms. 
Symptoms: 
unproductive dry cough  with  little  or no  phlegm, 
or blood-tinged  phlegm 
feeling  of heat  in  the afternoon 
dry mouth and  throat 
emaciated  appearance 
malar  flush 
night  sweats 
~ u r n i n ~  sensation  in  palms,  soles  and  chest 
msomma 
Pulse:  floating,  empty and  rapid 
Tongue:  red,  peeled,  dry;  possible cracks  in  the  Lung  area 
Herbal Therapy:  Eriobotrya and Ophiopogon Combination 
(Q!ng  zao  jiu  fei  tang) 
Food Therapy:  Avoid  hot,  spicy,  fried  and  greasy  foods.  Eat grains, 
protein, vegetables  and  greens  and,  if digestion  is  good,  some  fruit 
(especially  pears)  and  juices.  Include asparagus,  duck,  black  beans. 
and  milk  in the diet. 
Other Therapies:  Oil  massage;  breathing exercises;  harimaki;  rest; 
cupping over  upper back;  breathing exercises;  meditation, 
contemplation  and  prayer.  Limit  mental  and  sexual  activity  until 
the Yin  is  restored.  Avoid  saunas  and  hot tubs. 
Exercise:  Rest  is  extremely  important in replenishing Yin,  both 
during the day and  at  night;  going  to  bed  early,  by 9 - 9:30  PM,  is 
very  beneficial.  Avoid  aerobic  exercise  or any  activity causing 
sweating,  but do Yoga,  Tai  Chi,  Q! Gong and  other stretches,  and 
light walking  and  swimming. 
Combined Patterns 
Lungs and Liver 
The Lungs  rule Qi while the Liver  stores  and regulates  Blood. The 
Lungs  are  dependent  on  Liver  Qi  for  the  smooth  movement  of Qi, 
while  the  Liver  relies  on  Lung  Qi to  regulate  Blood.  A  dysfunction  of 
the Lungs in dispersing and descending Qi causes  Dryness  and  Heat to 
go  downward,  which  can  stagnate  Liver  Qi or cause  Heat  in  the  Liver. 
On the other hand,  if Liver  Qi stagnates  in  the chest,  it can impair the 
flow  of Lung-Qi  or turn into fire  and burn the Yin  of the Lungs. 
Lung Q!  Deficiency and Liver Q!  Stagnation Symptoms: 
coug_h 
movmg  pams 
distension  and  fullness  in  the  sternocostal  or  hypochondriac 
regions 
dizziness 
headache 
depression 
listlessness 
Pulse:  empty and  tight 
Tongue:  pale  or  normal  colored 
Herbal Therapy:  Bupleurum and Dang Gui Formula (Xiao  yao 
san  or Rambling Powder)  with  9 grams  of codonopsis  and  6 grams 
of apricot  seed. 
Food Therapy:  Refer  to  this  category under  Lung  Qi Deficiency 
and  Liver  Qi Stagnation. 
Other Therapies:  Refer  to  this  category under Lung  Qi Deficiency 
and  Liver  Qi Stagnation. 
Exercise:  Four Purifications breathing practices,  meditation  and 
Eight  Brocades  Qi Gong practice. 
Liver Q!  Stagnation Invading the Lungs  Symptoms: 
cough 
breathlessness  or difficulty breathing . 
asthma 
distension  and  fullness  in  the sternocostal  region 
Pulse:  tight,  wiry 
Tongue:  normal  colored 
Herbal Therapy:  Minor Bupleurum Combination (Xiao  chai  hu 
tang) 
Food Therapy: The  same  as  for  Lung Q! Deficiency and  Liver  Q! 
Stagnation. 
Other Therapies:  The  same  as  for  Lung Q!  Deficiency and  Liver 
Q! Stagnation. 
Exercise:  The  same  as  for  Lung Q!  Deficiency and  Liver  Q! 
Stagnation. 
Liver  Fire Invading the Lungs Symptoms: 
breathlessness 
asthma 
stuffiness  and  pain  of hypochondrium  and  chest 
headache 
irritability 
cough  with  painful  breathing 
coughing up of blood  or yellow-tinged  sputum 
scanty dark  urine  . 
constipation 
dizziness 
Pulse:  wiry and  slippery 
Tongue:  red,  especially on sides;  swollen  in  Lung  area;  yellow 
coat 
Herbal Therapy:  Morus and Lycium Formula (Xie  bai  san) with 
Major Bupleurum Combination (Da chai  hu tang) 
Food  Therapy:  Refer  to  this  category  under  Liver  Fire  rising  and 
Lung  Q!  Deficiency. 
Other Therapies:  Refer  to  this  category under Liver  Fire  rising  and 
Lung Q! Deficiency. 
Exercise:  Four Purifications  and Shitali  Pranayam exercise  and  the 
Eight  Brocades,  especially exercise  number 5. 
Lungs and Kidnrys 
The  Lungs  and  Kidneys  coordinate  to  promote  movement  of 
respiration. The Lungs  rule Q! and respiration, perform the function of 
respiration  and  send  Q!  down  to  the  Kidneys.  Kidney Yang  holds  the 
Q!  down  and  thus  controls  and  promotes  inspiration.  Therefore,  a 
Deficiency of Lung  Q!  causes  painful  and  difficult breathing, while  a 
Deficiency of Kidney Yang causes Lung Q! to not be received and results 
in difficulty of inhaling. 
The Lungs also send Fluids down to the Kidneys, which evaporates 
some  of it  and  sends  that  vapor  back  up  to  the  Lungs  to  keep  them 
moist.  A  dysfunction  of either Organ can  impair  Fluid  metabolism  in 
the  body,  leading  to  either  urinary  incontinence  or  retention,  or  a 
Deficiency of Lung Yin  from  lack  of moisture  returning to  the Lungs. 
Lung Qi and Kidney  Ytmg  Deficieng 
This  is  the  same  as  the  pattern  of Kidneys  Failing  to  Receive  Q! 
under  the  Kidneys.  Refer  to  that pattern  for  more details. 
Lung  and Kidney Yin  Deficiency Symptoms: 
dry cough  which  is  worse  in  the evening 
feeling  of heat  in  the  afternoon 
night sweating 
hoarse  voice 
malar  flush 
tidal  fever 
lassitude  of loins  and  legs 
soreness  of lower  back 
thin  body 
breathlessness  on exertion 
nocturnal  emissions 
heat  in  palms,  soles  and  chest 
Pulse:  empty and  floating 
Tongue:  red  and peeled with  two  transverse  cracks  in  Lung  area 
Herbal Therapy:  Ophiopogon Combination (Mai  men  dong 
tang)  or Rehmannia Six Combination (Liu  wei  di  huang  wan) 
with  schizandra,  apricot seed  and American  ginseng. 
Food Therapy:  Refer  to  this  category  under  Lung  Q!  Deficiency 
and  Kidney Yang  Deficiency. 
Other Therapies:  Refer  to this  category under  Lung  Q!  Deficiency 
and  Kidney Yang  Deficiency. 
Exercise:  Refer  to  this category under  Lung  Q!  Deficiency and 
Kidney Yang  Deficiency. 
Lungs and Spleen 
This  is  described  under the Spleen Combined  patterns. 
~ 
l.68 
SPLEEN 
The major functions of the Spleen are to transform food and fluids 
into  Q!  and  Blood  and  to  rule  Blood.  Thus,  disorders  of the  Spleen 
usually  involve  metabolic  conditions  such  as  low  energy,  digestive 
disorders,  Dampness  and  menstrual  irregularities. 
Causes for  Spleen  Disharmonies: 
Pathogenic  Influences: The External  Pernicious  Influence which 
can  invade  the  Spleen  is  Dampness.  This  can  occur  from  excessive 
exposure to damp, humid and foggy areas and climates, living or working 
in damp  environments, wearing wet  clothing, sitting on damp  surfaces 
and  being  in water  for  prolonged  periods.  When  it invades,  Dampness 
causes lack of appetite, nausea, abdominal distension. feeling of heaviness. 
slippery pulse  and  a thick white  tongue  coating. 
Emotions: Yi,  the intellectual function of the psyche, includes the 
ability  to  absorb  and  remember  information,  focusing,  memorization, 
concentration, studying,  thinking and organizing ideas. Thus, excessive 
thinking,  studying,  concentrating and  memorizing weaken  the Spleen. 
When the Spleen  is  imbalanced it often appears in our emotions. These 
include  worry,  brooding,  pensiveness,  obsession  and  nostalgia.  Over 
thinking  and  obsessively  dwelling  on  certain  ideas  and  thoughts  all 
reflect an imbalanced Yi.  Further, being uncentered in ourselves reflects 
a  Spleen  disharmony.  Being  overly  emotionally  dependent  or 
sympathetically overly sensitive to others are  also  possible symptoms of 
Spleen imbalance. All  of these  tend  to weaken  the Spleen and affect our 
digestive  function. 
Diet:  Diet  is  central  to  Spleen  imbalances  since  it  is  the  major 
Organ  involved  with  transforming  food  and  fluids.  The Spleen  prefers 
to be warm  and dry and loathes being wet and cold. This includes foods 
and their inherent warming and cooling energies. Thus, foods which are 
damp  and/or cold,  such  as  raw  foods,  salads,  juices,  fruits,  refrigerated 
foods  and  drinks,  frozen  foods  such  as  ice  cream  and  iced  drinks  all 
impair  the  digestive  capacity.  Further,  the  excessive  intake  of sugar 
ultimately creates  Heat  in  the Stomach  and  Depletes  Spleen  Q!.  Warm 
and/  or dry foods,  such as  whole grains, chicken, lamb, legumes, cooked 
vegetables, greens, ginger and pepper warm the Spleen and aid the digestive 
process. 
Lifestyle Habits:  Eating on the run, while standing up, driving or 
doing business,  mental work  or excessive  reading all weaken  the Spleen 
and  its  digestive  function.  Skipping meals,  overeating,  undereating and 
excessive  dieting  damage  the  Spleen  and  can  incapacitate  the  body's 
ability to  digest  and  extract  food  essence  to  build  Blood  and  Q! 
~ 
169 
Deficient  Spleen Qj 
This is  a very commonly seen  pattern of imbalance.  Modern diets 
are  rich in sugars,  fats,  iced  drinks,  fast  foods  and cold raw  foods.  This, 
along  with  irregular  eating  habits  such  as  inconsistent  meals,  eating 
standing up or on the run,  eating while  reading  or discussing  business 
over  meals,  eating  too  little  or  too  much  food,  or  eating  a  protein-
deficient  diet,  all  contribute  to  Deficient Spleen  Q!.  Extensive  mental 
activity in work and study further causes Spleen Q! Deficiency. Excessive 
exposure  to  dampness,  either  in the  environment  or in  one's  home  or 
work place, can create Dampness in the Spleen, obstructing its functions. 
Further,  any  long-term  illness  tends  to  weaken  the  Spleen,  causing 
Deficient Spleen Q!. When Spleen Q! is  Deficient,  it cannot transform 
food  and  fluids  to  create  Q!  and  Blood,  and  this  ultimately  causes  a 
Deficiency of Blood  and  Q!  in the body. 
Symptoms: 
no  appetite 
fatigue 
loose  stools 
slight  abdominal  pain  and  distension  relieved  by  pressure 
gas  and  bloating 
poor digestion 
fatigue  and  lethargy 
sallow  complexion 
weakness  of the  limbs 
Pulse:  empty 
Tongue:  pale  or  normal-colored  with  thin white  moss;  possible 
swollen  sides  with  tooth  marks  and  transverse  cracks 
Herbal Therapy:  Four Major Herbs (Si  jun zi  tang);  Six Major 
Herbs (Liu  jun zi  tang) 
Food Therapy:  Eat  only cooked  foods,  including  rice,  millet,  meat 
(especially beef),  winter squash,  vegetables,  greens,  aduki  beans, 
congee  and warm  or  room  temperature drinks  such  as  warm  milk 
with  ginger,  cinnamon or cardamom and  honey.  Avoid  cold,  raw 
vegetables  and  fruits,  juices,  iced  drinks,  ice  cream  and  frozen 
yogurt,  salads,  uncooked  foods  and  the  excessive  use  of sugar and 
other sweeteners. 
Other Therapies:  Moxibustion  over  the  lower  abdomen  and 
Kidneys;  meditation;  getting  in  touch  with  emotional  needs  and 
finding ways  other than  "pleasure"  foods  to  satisfy  them;  focusing 
on the  present;  rest;  breathing exercises. 
Exercise:  Very  light  aerobic  exercise,  Yoga,  Tai  Chi,  Q!  Gong, 
~ m m i n g ,  walking  and  light  Bicycling  avoid  strenuous  exercise. 
270 
Deficient  Spleen  Yang 
Deficient  Spleen  Yang  is  a  more  extensive  and  serious  disorder 
than  Spleen  Q!  Deficiency.  Along  with  signs  of Deficiency  of Spleen 
Q!, it includes symptoms of Coldness. In fact, the metabolism can become 
so  cold and slow  that undigested  food  passes  into the stools.  Further, a 
Yang  Deficiency  usually  impairs  the  circulation  of Fluids,  resulting  in 
such symptoms as edema, leukorrhea and mucus in the lungs. The causes 
are  the  same  as  Spleen  Q!  Deficiency,  along  with  excessive  intake  of 
cold, raw foods and drinks and overexposure to cold damp environments 
and  climates. 
Symptoms: 
chilliness 
cold  limbs 
fatigue 
loose  stools 
undigested  food  in  the stools 
lack  of appetite 
gas  and  bloatedness 
abdominal  pain  and  distension  relieved  by  pressure  and  warmth 
sallow  or bright-white complexion 
weakness  of the  four  limbs 
edema 
Pulse:  weak,  slow,  deep 
Tongue:  pale,  swollen,  wet 
Herbal Therapy: Vitality Combination (Zhen wu  tang) 
Food Therapy:  Beef,  lamb,  all  cooked  foods  and  absolutely  nothing 
raw  or cold  in  energy  or  temperature,  rice,  millet,  barley,  whole 
grains, winter squash,  cooked  vegetables,  greens  and  plenty of 
protein. 
Other Therapies:  Moxibustion  over  the  navel,  lower  abdomen  and 
Kidneys;  finding  constructive ways  to  meet  one's emotional  needs; 
singing;  breathing exercises,  rest. 
Exercise:  Light walking,  swimming,  bicycling and  dancing; Yoga, 
Tai  Chi,  Qi Gong,  Four  Purifications  and  Ujjayi  pranayam.  Eight 
Brocades  with  special  emphasis  on exercises  numbers  2,  3 and  7. 
Sinking Spleen Qj 
When Spleen Q! becomes Deficient, it may not be able to perform 
its  function  of raising  Q!,  including holding the Organs  in  place.  It is 
produced  by  any  of the  causes  of Spleen  Q!  Deficiency  along  with 
excessive  and  prolonged  standing. 
Symptoms: 
bearing down  sensation 
prolapse of stomach, vagina,  urinary bladder,  uterus,  anus 
frequency  and  urgency of urination or urinary incontinence . 
hemorrhoids  . 
hemorrhage 
possibly varicose veins 
extreme chronic diarrhea 
other Spleen  Qi Deficiency signs 
Pulse: weak 
Tongue:  pale 
Herbal Therapy: Ginseng and Astragalus  Combination (Bu 
zhong yi  qi  tang) 
Food Therapy:  Same  as  Deficient Spleen  Qi 
Other Therapies: Same  as  Deficient Spleen  Qi 
Exercise:  Four  Purifications  plus  Ujjayi  pranayam,  also  Eight 
Brocades  with  special  emphasis on exercises  numbers  I,  3,  5 and  7. 
Spleen  Unable  to  Control Blood 
In this form of Spleen Q! Deficiency, the Q! is  unable to hold the 
Blood  in  the  vessels.  This  causes  extravasation  including  bleeding, 
hemorrhaging and bruising. It is  provoked by any of the factors  causing 
Spleen Q! Deficiency. 
Symptoms: 
bleeding 
purpura 
subcutaneous  hemorrhaging 
blood  spots  under the  skin 
blood  in the  urine or stools 
bloody nose 
excessive  menses 
uterine bleeding 
sallow complexion 
shortness  of breath 
Pulse:  fine 
Tongue:  pale 
Herbal Therapy:  Ginseng and Longan Combination (Gui  pi 
tang) 
Food Therapy: The same  as  Deficient Spleen  Qi. 
Other Therapies: The same  as  Deficient Spleen  Qi 
Exercise:  The same  as  Deficient Spleen  Q!. 
Cold Damp Invading the  Spleen 
The Spleen  loathes  Dampness.  Long term  exposure  to  cold  damp 
environments or climates,  or Deficient Spleen Qi or Yang  not properly 
metabolizing Fluids  often  cause  an  Excess  of Dampness  in the Spleen. 
Thus,  this  can  be an acute pattern from  invasion of External Cold and 
Damp,  or a  chronic  Internal  one.  If acute  it will  appear  suddenly and 
possibly with a low fever;  if chronic it will develop over a long period of 
time. 
When Dampness obstructs the Spleen, it often collects in the chest 
and epigastrium, causing a  feeling  of stuffiness or heaviness there or in 
the head. Tastes  become difficult to distinguish or are flat and sweetish. 
Further, vaginal  discharge  becomes excessive,  resulting  in  leukorrhea. 
Symptoms: 
stuffiness  of chest  or epigastrium 
feeling  of heaviness 
leukorrhea 
lack  of appetite 
no  thirst  or  desire  to  drink 
lack  of sensation  of taste,  or flat  sweetish  taste  in  mouth 
skin  eruptions  containing fluid 
watery stools 
nausea 
Pulse:  slippery,  slow 
Tongue:  thick,  greasy white  coat 
Herbal Therapy:  Ginseng,  Poria and Atractylodes  Powder (Shen 
ling  bai  zhu san)  and  Sausurrea and Cardamon Combination 
(Xiang  sha  liu  jun zi  tang) 
Food Therapy: The  same  as  Deficient Spleen Yang. 
Other Therapies: The same  as  Deficient Spleen Yang. 
Exercise:  The same  as  Deficient Spleen Yang. 
Damp Heat  Invading  the  Spleen 
Dampness can also  appear with  Heat and  invade  the Spleen as  an 
External  Pernicious  Influence,  such  as  inordinate exposure  to  hot and 
humid weather.  However,  prolonged and excessive  intake of hot, greasy, 
fatty,  fried  or contaminated foods  and  abundant intake of alcohol  can 
also  cause  this  pattern. 
Symptoms: 
loose  stools  with  offensive  odor 
~ 
173 
low-grade  fever  constant  throughout  the day 
stuffiness  of epigastrium  and  lower  abdomen  with  some  pain 
no  appetite 
feeling  of heaviness 
thirst without desire  to  drink,  or desire  to  drink only in  small 
SipS 
nausea 
vomiting 
abdominal  pain 
burning sensation  of anus 
scanty and  dark-colored  urine 
headache 
Pulse:  slippery,  rapid 
Tongue:  sticky,  greasy,  yellow coat 
Herbal Therapy:  Capillaris and Poria Five  Herbs Formula (Yin 
chen wu  ling san). 
Food Therapy: Avoid  greasy,  fatty  or fried  foods  and  alcohol;  eat 
grains,  legumes, vegetables  and  greens. 
Other Therapies:  Breathing exercises,  especially Shitali  or Sitkari 
pranayam;  cupping over  the entire back. 
Exercise:  Bed  rest. 
Combined Patterns 
Spleen  and Lungs 
The Spleen transforms food and fluids and transports the resulting 
Grain Q! to  the Lungs, where it is  combined with Air  Q!  to  form True 
Q!.  Thus, both Organs are  crucial to the production of Q! in the body. 
Furthermore, the Lungs control Q! and have a dispersing and descending 
function.  If impaired, or if there is not enough deep breathing or exercise 
to  bring in sufficient Air Q!,  the Spleen  is  affected  and  can't function 
well  in  transporting,  distributing  and  transforming  nutrients  or  in 
performing Fluid  metabolism. 
On  the  other  hand,  an  impairment  of Spleen  function  or  a  diet 
high  in cold  raw  foods  leads  to  Deficient  Q!  of the  Lungs  and  creates 
Dampness  in  the Lungs with  symptoms of cough, excessive  mucus  and 
asthma. That is why one major way  to treat Lung Dampness is  to warm, 
strengthen  and  dry the Spleen. 
174 
Deficient Lung and Spleen Q! Symptoms: 
no appetite 
fatigue 
breathlessness 
loose  stools 
weak  voice 
bright-white complexion 
slight spontaneous  sweating 
Pulse:  empty 
Tongue:  pale 
Herbal Therapy:  Six Major Herbs (Liu  jun zi  tang)  with  astragalus 
Food Therapy:  Refer  to  this category under  Deficient Lung  ~  and 
Deficient Spleen  ~ -
Other Therapies:  Refer  to  this  category  under Deficient Lung  ~ 
and  Deficient Spleen  ~ -
Exercise:  Refer  to  this  category under  Deficient  Lung ~  and 
Deficient Spleen  ~ -
Spleen  and Liver 
The  Spleen  metabolizes  and  distributes  nutrients  and  promotes 
water  metabolism, while the  Liver ensures  the smooth and regular flow 
of energy  and  Blood.  When  this  Liver  function  is  normal,  the  Spleen 
can  raise  Q! in the body and properly send  nutrients upward while  the 
Stomach  digests  and  sends  food  downwards.  This  ensures  a  plentiful 
supply of food  essence,  which is  carried  continuously to  the Liver. 
However,  if any  of these  functions  are  disrupted,  the  Liver  may  affect 
the  functions  of the  Spleen,  resulting  in  two  possible  patterns:  Spleen 
Q! Deficiency and  Liver  Blood  Deficiency or Incoordination  Between 
the Liver and the Spleen.  In the former, when Spleen Q! is  Deficient, it 
cannot  produce  Blood  and  its  Deficiency  directly  affects  the  Liver's 
function of storing the Blood, resulting in Deficient Blood signs. In the 
latter,  Dampness obstructs  the Spleen,  usually from  excessive  intake  of 
fried,  fatty  and  greasy  foods  and  drinks,  which  eventually  leads  to 
Stagnation of Liver  Q!. 
Spleen Q!  Deficiency and Liver Blood  Deficiency Symptoms: 
dizziness 
loose stools 
blurred vision 
numbness  or tingling of limbs 
no  appetite 
tiredness 
sallow complexion 
Pulse:  choppy 
Tongue:  pale,  paler on sides;  in  severe  cases  sides  could  have 
slight orange color 
~ 
275 
Herbal Therapy:  Dang Gui Four (Si  wu  tang)  with  Four Major 
Herbs (Si  jun zi  tang),  or Eight Precious  Herbs (Ba  zhen wan). 
Food Therapy:  Refer  to  this  category under Deficient Spleen  Q! 
and  Deficient Liver  Blood. 
Other Therapies: Refer  to  this category under De.ficient  Spleen  Q! 
and  Deficient  Liver  Blood. 
Exercise:  Walking,  Four Purifications  Pranayam;  Eight  Brocades 
with  a special  emphasis on exercises  number 2 and  3;  Q! Gong. 
Liver  Invading the Spleen Symptoms: 
(Incoordination  Between  the  Liver  and  the Spleen) 
stuffiness  and  fullness  of epigastrium 
hypochondriac  pain 
nausea 
no appetite 
loose  stools 
feeling  of heaviness 
thirst  but desire  to  only drink  in  small  sips 
sallow complexion 
Pulse:  slippery and  wiry 
Tongue:  thick,  sticky,  yellow coat 
Herbal Therapy:  Bupleurum and  Peony Combination (Xiao  yao 
san)  and  Four Major Herbs (Si  jun zi  tang) 
Food Therapy:  Refer  to  this  category under Deficient Spleen  Q! 
and  Liver  Q! Stagnation. 
Other Therapies:  Refer  to  this  category  under Deficient Spleen  Q! 
and  Liver  Q! Stagnation. 
Exercise:  Four  Purifications  and Shitali  pranayam;  Eight  Brocades 
with  emphasis  on exercise  number 5;  Q!  Gong. 
Spleen  and Kidneys 
The Spleen is  the material foundation for the acquired constitution, 
while  the Kidney provides  the inherited  constitution.  Kidney Yang  can 
be  likened  to  the  pilot  light  of the  stove  while  Spleen  Yang  and  the 
Stomach are the burners under the pot. A Deficiency of the Yang  of the 
Kidney will also contribute to a depletion of Spleen Yang and vice versa. 
If Kidney Yang  is  insufficient to warm  the Yang  of the Spleen,  or when 
a  long-term  Deficiency of Spleen  Yang  produces  Dampness which  can 
eventually injure the Kidney Yang,  this  pattern results.  It can also  occur 
from  prolonged  intake  of cold,  raw  and  damp  foods,  excessive  sexual 
activity and  old age. 
Spleen and Kidney Yang  Deficiency Symptoms: 
chronic  diarrhea 
chilliness 
feeling  of cold  in the back 
watery  stools  with  undigested  food 
diarrhea at dawn 
borborygmus 
cold  and  painful  sensation  in the abdomen 
edema 
coldness  of body and  limbs 
abundant-dear  or scanty-clear  urination 
poor  appetite 
mental  listlessness 
abdominal  distention 
gas  and  bloating 
physical  weakness 
difficulty breathing or breathlessness 
lack  of desire  to  talk 
desire  to  lie  down 
Pulse:  weak,  deep,  slow 
Tongue:  pale,  swollen,  wet 
Herbal Therapy: Vitality Combination (Zhen wu  tang). 
Food Therapy:  Refer  to  this  category under  Deficient Spleen Yang 
and  Deficient  Kidney Yang. 
Other Therapies:  Refer  to  this category  under  Deficient Spleen 
Yang  and  Deficient Kidney Yang. 
Exercise:  Four  Purifications  and  Ujjayi  pranayam;  Eight Brocades 
with  a  special  emphasis  on exercise  number  7;  Q! Gong. 
Spleen  and Heart 
This  is  described  under the Heart combined  patterns. 
LIVER 
The  main  functions  of the  Liver  are  to  ensure  the  smooth  and 
regular  flow  of Q!  and  Blood  and  to  store  Blood.  Any dysfunctions  of 
either  of these  functions  has  ramifications  which  can  affect  the  entire 
body or any of its Organs. Disharmonies include Stagnation of Liver Q! 
or Blood,  Excessive  Heat,  called  Fire,  in  the  Liver,  Liver  Wind,  Damp 
Heat  in  the Liver,  Cold  in  the Liver  Meridian, and  Deficiency of Liver 
Blood  or Yin. 
Causes for  Liver Disharmonies: 
Pathogenic  Influences:  The  two  External  Pernicious  Influences 
which  affect  the  Liver  are  Wind  and  Dampness.  Although  Wind  does 
not invade  the  Liver  directly,  it can  aggravate  an  existing  condition  of 
Interior Wind in the Liver. When it does,  it causes  Liver Q! to  stagnate, 
which  can  further  result  in  Blood  Stagnation.  It can  also  cause  skin 
rashes  and  hives  which  appear and  move  quickly. 
Emotions: Anger, frustration, resentment, irritability, mood swings 
and  depression  indicate,  and  can cause,  Liver  imbalances  such  as  Liver 
Fire  Rising or Q! Stagnation. Therefore,  it is  important to  discover  the 
underlying cause for these feelings  and find outlets which are constructive 
and  beneficial. 
Diet: Many foods  lead  to a build-up of Heat and congestion in the 
Liver,  causing  the  Liver  patterns which  have  far-reaching  effects  in  the 
body.  These  include  excessive  consumption  of fried  and  fatty  foods, 
nuts  and  nut  butters,  avocados,  cheese  and  dairy,  chips  of all  kinds, 
turkey  and  red  meats,  alcohol,  hot  and  spicy  foods,  caffeinated  foods 
and drinks including coffee, black tea, cocoa, colas and chocolate, drugs 
and  stimulants.  The  foods  which  decongest  and  aid  the  liver  include 
vegetables,  bitter  foods  and  dark  leafy  greens  such  as  kale,  collards, 
dandelion,  mustard,  beet  and  mustard  greens.  Lemons  also  clear  Heat 
and congestion  from  the  Liver.  A good  morning liver  cleanse is  a fresh 
squeezed lemon in water with  1 or 2 teaspoons of olive oil and a couple 
of "00"  sized  capsules  of cayenne  pepper.  This  is  followed  with  fennel 
seed  tea. 
Lifestyle Habits:  Excessive activity, sex,  exercise, regularly going to 
bed late at night (after  11  PM), working at jobs one doesn't like, repressing 
and  stuffing  emotions  and  not  getting  enough  physical  activity  all 
imbalance  the  Liver.  To  rebalance  the  liver,  go  to  bed  by  11  PM  at  the 
latest,  express  and  release  emotions  in  a constructive way  and  do  some 
movement  through  walking,  dancing  or  another  physical  activity. 
Creativity  is  an  important  release  for  pent  up  Liver  energy,  as  is  self-
expression  in constructive and  creative ways. 
Stagnation  of Liver Qj 
This  is  not only the most common  Liver  pattern,  but also  one  of 
the  most common disharmonies  in  the body.  When  Liver  Q! does  not 
flow  smoothly or regularly,  it  becomes  Stagnant,  and  Excess  and  Heat 
result.  This  affects  not  only  the  Liver,  but  the  other  Organs  and  the 
Seven  Emotions as well.  Liver Q! Stagnation can result from  suppressed 
or overly  expressed  anger,  resentment  and  frustration,  from  a diet  rich 
in  stimulants,  drugs,  fatty  and  oily  foods,  recreational  drugs,  alcohol, 
~ 
278 
coffee,  black tea  and  from  overwork without sufficient rest.  Since there 
are so  many ways  this pattern can appear, it is  divided into categories of 
related  symptoms.  As  with  all  patterns,  it is  not  necessary  for  all  these 
symptoms  to  appear to  indicate  this  disharmony. Three  or more of the 
signs  indicate  its  involvement. 
It is very important when administering herbal therapy that tonics 
are  not given for  this condition, as  it only creates Stagnation and Excess 
and  so  worsens  the  condition  (like  adding  more  cars  to  a  bad  traffic 
jam).  In  fact,  it  is  for  this  reason  that an important therapeutic  herbal 
strategy is  to first give moving herbs from the category of Regulating Qi 
and Blood along with clearing Heat herbs before or while giving tonics. 
Symptoms: 
1)  overall 
distension  of hypochondrium and  chest 
hypochondriac pain 
sighing 
hiccuping 
2) emotions 
depression 
moodiness  and  mood swings 
frustration 
inappropriate anger 
a lump or plum-pit feeling  in the  throat 
unhappiness 
feeling  of difficulty in swallowing 
3) gynecological 
PMS  tension  and  irritability 
swollen  breasts  before  periods 
irregular periods;  painful  periods 
4)  digestion 
nausea 
vomiting 
sour belching 
abdominal  pain 
poor appetite 
epigastric  pain 
diarrhea or alternating diarrhea and  constipation 
churning feeling  in  the stomach 
feeling  of pulsation  in epigastrium 
abdominal  distension 
borborygmi 
5)  in the meridians 
lumps in the neck,  breast, groin  or flank 
Pulse: wiry 
Tongue:  body color may  be  normal 
Herbal Therapy:  Bupleurum and Dang Gui Formula (Xiao  yao 
san or Rambling Powder}:  Bupleurum and Peony Formula Oia wei 
xiao yao  san) 
Food Therapy: Avoid  fried  and  fatty  foods,  nuts  and  nut butters, 
avocados,  cheese  and  dairy,  chips  of all  kinds,  turkey and  red  meats, 
alcohol,  hot and  spicy foods,  caffeinated  foods  and  drinks 
including coffee,  black  tea,  cocoa,  colas  and  chocolate,  drugs  and 
stimulants.  Eat  plenty of grains,  legumes, vegetables  and  dark  leafy 
greens,  such  as  kale,  collards,  dandelion,  mustard,  beet  and  mustard 
greens.  Lemon  juice  also  helps  decongest  the  liver. 
Other Therapies: Work with  the emotions of anger,  frustration, 
resentment,  irritability,  mood  swings  and  depression  by finding 
constructive outlets  to express  and  release  them.  Above  all,  do  not 
repress  or stuff your emotions,  as  this  is  what  helped  create  these 
physical  symptoms  in the  first  place.  Avoid  excessive  activity,  sex 
and  exercise.  Regularity of habits  helps  to  regulate  Liver  Q!.  Go to 
bed  by  11  PM  at  the latest,  and  if there  is  accompanying  Kidney 
Yin  Deficiency, go  to bed  by  9 - 9:30  PM. 
Find work  and  jobs which  you  enjoy and  are  fulfilling. 
Alternate work with  rest  and  play,  as  over-working  can  cause  this 
pattern.  Developing and  expressing  creativity is  very important,  as 
this  opens  the  Liver  Q!  and  helps  it  flow.  Self-expression  does  this 
as  well.  Do cupping over  the  back,  breathing exercises,  singing and 
wear  a  harimaki.  Gall  Bladder  and  Liver  flushes,  GLA  oils,  flax 
seed,  evening  primrose,  borage,  black currant seed  oils  are  also 
appropriate. 
Exercise:  In  our modern  lives,  we  have  little  need  for  natural 
exercise.  This  greatly contributes  to  energy being  unused  and 
unexpressed,  which  leads  to  its  Stagnation.  As  a substitute, we  go  to 
gyms  or have  exercise  equipment and video  tapes  at  home,  yet  it 
does  not compare to  the  amount of walking,  lifting and  carrying 
which  was  a  normal  part of life  before  motor vehicles.  Thus,  daily 
active  movement  is  essential  to  a healthy Liver  and  the  body overall. 
Further,  one of the best  expressions  of frustration,  anger  and 
resentment rather than "stuffing"  them, which  only turns  them 
inward  to harm the  body,  is  to  apply them  in constructive 
movement.  Anger  is  energy,  so  cleaning up  the  kitchen  or 
unloading old  drawers  or closets,  giving  expression  to  creative 
endeavors  or running around  the  block  all  help  to  express  and 
release  this  energy  in healthy ways.  Movement  through walking 
(especially in  the woods),  dancing,  Tai  Chi,  Q!  Gong, Yoga  or 
regular  exercise  helps  keep  Liver  Q!  healthy. 
Stagnation  of Liver Blood 
When  Liver  Q!  stagnates,  it  can  also  cause  Stagnant  Blood. 
Symptoms of Blood Stagnation are  fixed,  usually sharp, stabbing pains 
(especially  in  the  chest).  These  can  be  aggravated  by,  as  well  as  caused 
from,  long-standing  emotional  problems  and  are  a  consequence  of 
prolonged  Liver  Q! Stagnation. 
Symptoms: 
dark  and  clotted  menstrual  blood 
irregular  menses 
painful  menses 
vomiting of blood 
epistaxis 
abdominal  pain 
"masses"  in  the  abdomen,  such  as  fibroids 
Pulse:  Wiry 
Tongue:  purple with  purplish spots,  especially on  the sides 
Herbal Therapy:  Disperse Vital  Energy in the Liver Powder 
(Chai  hu  su  gan  san);  Bupleurum and  Dang Gui Formula (Xiao 
yao  san  or  Rambling  Powder) 
Food Therapy:  Refer  to  this  category under Liver  Q!  Stagnation. 
Other Therapies:  Refer  to  this  category  under  Liver  Q! Stagnation; 
moxibustion  or castor  oil  packs  over  the abdomen 
Exercise:  Four Purifications  and  Ujjayi  pranayam;  Eight Brocades, 
especially exercises  numbers  2,  3,  4 and  5. 
Liver Fire  Blazing Upwards 
This  is  an  Excess  Heat  condition  of the  Liver  precipitated  by 
prolonged repressed or overly expressed anger, resentment or frustration 
or by Stagnant Liver Q! generating Fire.  It can also  arise  from  excessive 
intake of alcohol, drugs, caffeinated foods and drinks, hot foods such as 
lamb and  beef and  fried  and  greasy  foods. 
When  Heat  accumulates  in  the  Liver,  it  has  a  tendency  to  rise, 
causing  symptoms  in  the  head,  face  and  eyes.  Further,  Heat  consumes 
Fluids, resulting in Dryness  signs.  It can  also drive  the Blood out of its 
pathways,  producing  bleeding  through  various  bodily  orifices  (much 
like  earth  "fluids",  lava,  are  pushed  out of a volcano  when  heated). 
Symptoms: 
red  face  and  eyes 
irritability 
propensity to  outbursts  of anger 
deafness,  tinnitus  or sudden  ringing  in the  ears 
dizziness 
dry mouth 
~ p l i t t i n ~  headaches  and  migraines 
msomma 
dark  scanty urine 
thirst 
bitter taste 
tight  neck  and  shoulders 
dream-disturbed  sleep 
constipation with  dry stools 
nose  bleeds 
vomiting of blood 
coughing up  of blood 
Pulse:  full,  wiry and  rapid 
Tongue:  red  body with  redder sides,  dry,  yellow coat 
Herbal Therapy:  Major Bupleurum Combination (Da  chai  hu 
tang) 
Food Therapy: Avoid  excessive  intake of alcohol,  drugs,  caffeinated 
foods  and  drinks  including coffee,  black  tea,  cocoa,  colas  and 
chocolate,  hot foods  such  as  lamb and  beef and  fried  and greasy 
foods,  chips of all  kinds,  nuts  and  nut butters,  avocados,  cheese  and 
dairy,  turkey and  red  meats,  hot and  spicy  foods,  drugs  and 
stimulants.  The  foods  which decongest  and  aid  the  Liver  include 
vegetables,  bitter foods,  dark  leafy greens,  such  as  kale,  collards, 
dandelion,  mustard,  beet and  mustard  greens,  lemon, watermelon, 
cucumber and  mung beans.  Drink dandelion  and  chicory tea. 
Other Therapies: It is  extremely important in  this  pattern  to  find 
constructive and  beneficial ways  to express  and  release  the  pent up 
anger,  frustration,  irritability and  resentment so  it is  not taken  out 
on oneself or others  in any forms  of abuse.  Find  work which  is 
satisfying and enjoyable.  Discover creative  outlets  and  actively 
pursue them.  Regularly do cupping over  the  back,  breathing 
exercises  and  meditation  or contemplation. 
Exercise:  Movement and  exercise  of all  types  can  be  a valuable 
release  of energy  for  this  pattern  and  a  constructive outlet for 
repressed anger,  frustration  and  resentment.  Further,  meditation, 
contemplation  and  prayer  help  to  subdue  Fire. 
Liver  Wind Agitating Internally 
Internal  Wind  is  characterized  by  either  movement  or  lack  of 
movement, such as spasms, tics, tremors, numbness, dizziness, convulsions 
or  paralysis.  It  can  arise  from  three  different  causes:  extreme  Heat, 
Deficiency of Liver  Blood  and  Deficiency of Liver Yin  with  Liver Yang 
nsmg. 
Extreme  Heat  Generating  Wind 
During  acute  febrile  diseases  it  is  possible  for  Exterior  Heat  to 
invade and  penetrate deeply into the Blood  level.  This  can  then stir up 
the Wind, causing an Excess  type of Internal Wind. It is  more common 
in children during measles,  encephalitis and  meningitis. 
Symptoms: 
high  temperature 
convulsions 
rigidity of the  neck 
tremor of limbs 
tetany 
coma  m severe  cases 
Pulse:  full,  rapid  and  wiry 
Tongue:  stiff,  deep  red,  thick yellow  coat 
Herbal Therapy:  Gastrodia and Uncaria Combination (Tian  ma 
gou  teng yin) 
Food Therapy:  Only very simple  and  bland  foods  should  be  eaten 
during  this  period,  such  as  rice  cereal  and  soups.  In  some cases 
fasting  on  fruit  or vegetable  juices  might be  appropriate.  Avoid  all 
else,  including  iced  and  refrigerated  drinks,  as  these  can  create  more 
heat. 
Other Therapies: Seek  appropriate medical attention. 
Exercise:  Bed  rest. 
Deficient Liver Blood Generating  Wind 
When Liver Blood is  Deficient, the Blood vessels  become "empty" 
and are then " f i l l e ~ "  with Wind. Blood then fails  to nourish the sinews, 
tendons  and  muscles.  It occurs  from  chronic Blood  Deficiency. 
Symptoms: 
shaking of head 
tremors  of limbs 
tics 
numbness  of limbs 
Pulse:  choppy 
Tongue:  pale  and  deviated 
Herbal Therapy:  Dang Gui Four (Si  wu  tang) with  gastrodia 
Food Therapy:  Refer  to this  category  under Defic;ient  Liver  Blood. 
Other Therapies:  Refer  to  this  category under Deficient  Liver 
Blood;  meditation,  contemplation and  prayer  help  calm Wind; 
moxibustion  over  the lower  abdomen  and  kidneys;  regular  oil 
massage. 
Exercise:  Aerobic  and  strenuous  exercise  stir  up  more Wind  and  so 
should  be  avoided.  Gentle  movement and  stretches  are  beneficial, 
such  as  Yoga,  Tai  Chi and  Q! Gong. 
Deficienry  of Liver Yin  with  Liver Ytzng  Rising and Generating  Wind 
Prolonged Yin  Deficiency causes  Liver  Yang  to  rise  upwards.  It is 
sometimes termed Arrogant Liver Yang,  and combines both Excess  and 
Empty  (Deficient  Yin)  Fire.  Thus,  signs  of both  are  present.  Because 
Liver  Yang  can  generate  Wind,  Wind  stroke  may  occur.  It  can  occur 
from  excessive  exercise,  physical  exertion  or sexual  activity over  a  long 
period  of time,  from  Blood  Deficiency,  particularly  in  women  with 
chronic  menorrhagia,  and  from  prolonged  anger,  resentment  and 
frustration. 
Symptoms: 
sudden  unconsciousness 
convulsions 
deviation  of eye  and  mouth 
hemiplegia  aphasia  or difficult speech 
dizziness 
Pulse:  rapid,  floating  and  empty or wiry  and  fine 
Tongue:  red  and  peeled,  deviated 
Herbal Therapy:  Rehmannia Six Combination (Liu  wei  di  huang 
wan)  with  lycii  berries  and  chrysanthemum (or Q!  ju  di  huang wan) 
Food Therapy:  Eat  a simple diet of grains,  legumes,  cooked 
vegetables  and greens.  Avoid  foods  which  are  cold  and  raw,  fried 
and greasy,  caffeinated  drinks  including coffee,  black  tea,  cocoa, 
colas  and .chocolate,  nuts  and  nut butters,  avocados,  cheese  and 
dairy,  chips  of all  kinds,  turkey  and  red  meats,  alcohol,  hot and 
spicy  foods,  drugs  and  stimulants. The  foods  which  decongest  and 
aid  the  Liver  include vegetables,  bitter  foods,  dark  leafy greens,  such 
as  kale,  collards,  dandelion,  mustard,  beet  and  mustard  greens. 
Lemons  also  clear  Heat  and  congestion  from  the  Liver. 
Other Therapies:  Rest  is  extremely  important, as  is  avoiding 
excessive  exercise,  physical  exertion  and  sex.  Over-doing· anything 
will  only perpetuate  this  pattern.  Meditation,  contemplation and 
prayer  help  replenish Yin.  Be  sure  to  appropriately express  and 
release  any  repressed  anger,  frustration  and  resentment,  and  allow 
creative  expression.  Limit mental  activity until  the Yin  is  restored. 
Being  asleep  by  9 - 9:30  PM  is  very  beneficial.  Avoid  saunas  and  hot 
tubs. 
Exercise:  Gentle stretches  are  beneficial,  such  as  Yoga,  Tai  Chi and 
Q!  Gong,  but avoid  strenuous  exercise  and  exertion. 
Damp  Heat  in  the  Liver 
This pattern arises  from  excessive Heat in the Liver and Dampness 
due to Spleen Deficiency. When Damp Heat accumulates it disrupts the 
flow  of Q!,  causing  Q!  Stagnation  symptoms.  Since  Dampness  has  a 
tendency to  flow  downwards,  it  frequently  settles  in the  Lower  Burner, 
causing  urinary  bladder  infections  and  vaginal  discharge,  itching  and 
infection.  This  is  commonly caused  by poor diet impairing  the Spleen 
function,  such as  prolonged and excessive  intake of cold and raw foods, 
plus excessive consumption of hot and greasy foods,  refined sugar, coffee 
and alcohol.  Irregular diet  and  lifestyle  habits can also  contribute. Any 
causes  of Liver  Q!  Stagnation,  such  as  anger,  plus  overexposure  to  hot 
and damp climates  and environments  also  cause  this  pattern. 
Symptoms: 
fever 
fullness  of chest  and  hypochondrium 
nausea 
jaundice 
vomiting 
loss  of appetite 
abdominal  distention 
bitter taste  scanty 
dark  urine,  possibly with  burning upon  urination 
vaginal  discharge  and  itching  pain, 
redness. and  swelling  of the  scrotum 
Pulse:  slippery,  rapid  and  wiry 
Tongue:  red  body with  sticky yellow coat 
Herbal Therapy:  Gentiana Combination (Long  dan xie  gan  tang) 
and  Capillaris Formula (Yin  chen  hao  tang) 
Food Therapy:  Follow  a balanced  diet of grains,  legumes,  cooked 
vegetables,  greens, winter squash  and warm  or room  temperature 
drinks.  Eat all  cooked  foods.  Avoid  cold  and  raw  foods  and  drinks, 
consumption of hot and  greasy  foods,  dairy,  nuts  and  nut butters, 
chips  of all  kinds,  caffeinated  foods  and  drinks,  red  meat,  fruits, 
juices,  iced  drinks,  ice  cream  and  popsicles,  salads,  uncooked  foods 
and  the excessive  use  of sugar and  other sweeteners.  Avoid  eating an 
irregular diet  and  at  irregular  times. 
Other Therapies: Same  as  Liver Q! Stagnation. 
Exercise:  Same  as  Liver  Q! Stagnation,  so  long as  the exercise  does 
not overexert  the body. 
Stagnation  of Cold in  the  Liver Meridian 
This pattern occurs when External Cold invades the Liver Meridian. 
Because  this  meridian  encircles  the groin,  pain and  contraction  of the 
scrotum occur. 
Symptoms: 
hypogastric  pain  referring  to  the  scrotum  and  testes, 
relieved  by warmth 
straining of testes  or contraction of the scrotum 
in women  there  may  be  shrinking of the vagina 
Pulse:  deep,  slow,  wiry 
Tongue:  pale,  wet,  white  coat 
Herbal Therapy:  Evodia Combination (Wu  zhu yu  tang) 
Food Therapy: All  cooked  foods  and  absolutely  nothing raw  or 
cold  in energy  or temperature,  rice,  millet and  other grains, 
legumes,  winter squash,  cooked  vegetables,  greens. 
Other Therapies:  Moxibustion  over  the  navel,  lower abdomen  and 
kidneys;  cupping over  the back;  breathing exercises;  singing; 
harimaki;  find  constructive ways  to  meet  one's  emotional  and 
creative  needs. 
Exercise:  Light walking,  swimming,  bicycling and  dancing; Yoga, 
Tai  Chi, Q! Gong. 
Deficienry of Liver Blood 
Since the Liver stores Blood, any Deficiency of Blood often appears 
in  the  Liver  also.  This will  affect  areas  the  Liver  relates  to,  such· as  the 
tendons,  eyes,  nails  and  menstruation.  It  arises  from  the  causes  of 
Deficient Blood, such as  poor diet, Deficient Spleen Qi so Blood cannot 
be produced, hemorrhaging, and a  Deficiency of Kidney Qi or Essence, 
~ 
186 
Symptoms: 
blurred vision 
dull-pale  complexion 
scanty periods 
numbness  of limbs 
pale  lips 
muscular weakness 
muscle  spasms 
cramps 
withered  and  brittle  nails 
            or black  spots  in  the  eyes 
msomma 
Pulse:  choppy or fine 
Tongue:  pale  body,  especially  on the  sides,  dry 
Herbal Therapy:  Dang Gui Four (Si  wu  tang) 
Food Therapy:  Lamb,  clang  gui  and  ginger  soup, bone soups,  milk, 
black  and  aduki  beans,  congee,  all  cooked  foods;  do not skip  meals. 
Other Therapies: Contemplation, meditation  and  prayer; 
moxibustion  over  the lower  abdomen  and  Kidneys;  harimaki; 
breathing exercises;  rest;  oil  massage;  working  on emotional  issues 
such  as  discovering what one is  lacking emotionally, creatively and 
physically and  finding  beneficial ways  to meet  those  needs.  Avoid 
saunas  and  hot tubs,  over-working  and  over-doing,  physical  exertion 
and  too  much  movement.  Excessive  sexual  activity and  late  nights. 
Exercise:  Light  aerobic  and  stretching exercises  including Yoga,  Tai 
Chi and  Q! Gong. 
Deficient Liver Yin 
This is  an empty Fire  pattern arising out of Deficient Liver  Blood 
or  Deficient  Kidney  Yin.  It  has  similar  symptoms  to  Deficient  Liver 
Blood  with  the  additional  signs  of Dryness  and  Yin  Deficient  Heat. 
Excessive activity,  overwork,  "burning the candle at both ends" without 
sufficient rest, and poor and irregular diet lead to this imbalance. Many 
menopausal symptoms  fit  this category. 
Symptoms: 
dry eyes 
dry  throat 
night sweats 
scanty  menstruation 
muddled  vision 
sallow complexion 
?ream-d.isturbed  sleep 
msomma 
numbness 
blurred vision 
amenorrhea 
dizziness 
malar  flush 
afternoon  fever 
hot  palms,  soles  and  chest 
nervousness 
depression  nervous  tension 
Pulse:  wiry,  rapid  and  thin or floating  and  empty 
Tongue:  red,  especially  on  the  sides,  and  peeled 
Herbal Therapy:  Rehmannia Six Combination with  Lycii  berries 
and  Chrysanthemum (Q!  ju  di  huang wan)  or Ming mu di huang 
wan  patent  medicine. 
Food Therapy:  Eat  plenty of grains,  legumes,  a little  meat,  cooked 
vegetables,  greens,  milk  and  black  and  aduki  beans.  Avoid  spicy, 
greasy  and  fried  foods,  caffeinated  foods  and  drinks  including 
coffee,  black  tea,  cocoa,  colas  and  chocolate,  nuts  and  nut butters, 
chips  of all  kinds,  avocados,  dairy (except warm  milk with 
cardamom  and  honey),  alcohol,  drugs,  chips  of all  kinds,  turkey 
and  red  meats  and  stimulants.  The  foods  which  decongest  and  aid 
the  Liver  include vegetables,  bitter  foods,  dark  leafY  greens,  such  as 
kale,  collards,  dandelion,  beet  and  mustard  greens.  Lemons  also 
clear  Heat  and  congestion  from  the  Liver. 
Other Therapies:  Rest  is  extremely  important in  nourishing Yin,  as 
is  meditation,  contemplation  and  prayer.  Avoid  excessive  mental 
and  sexual  activity,  overwork  and  "burning the  candle  at  both 
ends".  Get  regular  oil  massage.  Go  to  bed  by  9- 9:30PM.  Do 
cupping over  the  back.  Avoid  saunas  and  hot  tubs. 
Exercise:  Stretching  and  light  movement  are  beneficial,  such  as 
Yoga,  Tai  Chi, Q!  Gong,  swimming  and  walking.  Avoid  strenuous 
exercise  or over-exertion. 
Arrogant Liver  Yang 
Also  termed Liver Yang Rising,  this  is  a combined Excess  Heat and 
Deficient Yin  pattern.  in  terms  of Five  Elements, Water  is  insufficient 
to nourish Wood  and  so  Liver Yang  rises.  This  pattern appears without 
true  Heat  because  of the  presence  of Deficiency.  Usually  Liver  Yin 
Deficiency  appears  with  Kidney Yin  Deficiency,  although  it  may  also 
appear with a Kidney Yang  Deficiency.  Because  Kidney Yang  shares  the 
same root as  Kidney Yin,  a  Deficiency of one suggests  to  some degree  a 
Deficiency  of the  other.  Thus,  a  Kidney  Yang  Deficiency  eventually 
creates  a Yin  Deficiency and  possible  Liver Yang  rising. 
~ 
288 
Symptoms: 
headache  in  vertex,  temples,  eyes  or lateral  side  of head 
irritability 
dizziness 
tinnitus 
deafness 
tight  neck  and  shoulders 
dry  mouth and  throat 
!rritabil!ty 
msomma 
shouting  in anger 
Pulse:  wiry 
Tongue:  red,  especially on  the  sides 
Herbal Therapy:  Rehmannia Six Combination with Lycii  berries 
and Chrysanthemum (Q!  ju  di  huang wan),  or Ming mu di 
huang wan  (patent  medicine)  and  Major Bupleurum 
Combination (Da  chai  hu  tang). 
Food Therapy:  Refer  to  this  category under Deficient  Liver Yin. 
Other Therapies:  Refer  to  this category under Deficient Liver Yin. 
Exercise:  Refer  to  this  category  under Deficient Liver Yin. 
Combined  Patterns 
Liver and Spleen:  Explained previously  under Spleen. 
Liver and Lung.t:  Explained previously  under Lung.t. 
Liver and Kidneys 
The Liver stores Blood while the Kidneys store Essence.  Liver Blood 
depends  on Essence  for  nourishment, while  Essence  depends on Blood 
for replenishment.  Both have a common source: Grain Qi derived  from 
the Spleen.  A  long term  Liver  Blood  Deficiency can cause depletion  of 
Kidney Yin.  In  terms  of Five  Elements,  the  Kidneys  nourish  the  Liver. 
Thus, any depletion of the Kidneys affects the Liver.  Usually this appears 
as a Liver and Kidney Yin Deficiency, or Yin Deficiency with Liver Yang 
Rising.  However,  if Kidney Yang is  depleted,  Kidney Yin will  tend  to be 
Deficient and then affect  Liver Yin.  Furthermore, prolonged emotional 
problems due  to  anger,  frustration  and  depression  cause  this  pattern. 
Liver  and  Kidney Yin  Deficiency Symptoms: 
dry eyes 
dry  throat 
night  sweating 
scanty  menstruation 
~ 
2.89 
sallow  complexion 
?ull           or vertex  headache 
msomma 
dream-disturbed  sleep 
dizziness 
malar  flush 
numbness  of limbs 
blurred  vision 
propensity to  outbursts  of anger 
soreness  of lower  back 
tinnitus 
feeling  of heat  in  palms,  soles  and  chest 
difficult-dry stools 
nocturnal  emissions 
amenorrhea 
delayed  menstrual  cycle 
infertility in  women 
Pulse:  wiry,  rapid  and  thin or floating  and  empty 
Tongue:  red,  peeled  and  cracked 
Herbal Therapy:  Rehmannia Six Combination (Liu  wei  di  huang 
wan)  and  Rehmannia Six Combination with Lycii  berries and 
Chrysanthemum (Q!  ju di  huang wan)  or Ming mu di huang 
wan  patent medicine. 
Food Therapy:  Refer  to  this  category under  Deficient  Liver Yin 
and  Deficient Kidney Yin. 
Other Therapies:  Refer  to  this  category under Deficient Liver Yin 
and  Deficient Kidney Yin. 
Exercise:  Refer  to  this  category  under Deficient  Liver Yin  and 
Deficient  Kidney Yin. 
KIDNEYS 
The  main  functions  of the  Kidneys  are  to  store  Essence,  govern 
birth, growth and  reproduction  and to  rule water.  Because  the  Kidneys 
store Jing, which the body can never have in excess,  Kidney disharmonies 
are most always  from  Deficiency rather than Excess.  Furthermore, since 
the Kidneys  are  the root ofYin and Yang  and Source  Qi for  the entire 
body, disharmonies of the Kidneys are rarely isolated but usually involve 
other Organs. Likewise, chronic illnesses of other Organs usually include 
some impairment of the Kidneys, either of Kidney Yin or Kidney Yang. 
Central  to  the  treatment of the  Kidneys  is  the  recognition  of the 
interdependence of Kidney Yin  and Kidney Yang,  since they arise  from 
the same source,  Essence.  A  depletion of one signals,  to a lesser  degree, 
a  depletion  of the  other  and  vice  versa.  Thus,  both  must  be  treated 
together for  best  results. 
 
Causes for  Kidney  Disharmonies 
Hereditary Weakness: Because the fetus  is determined by the Essence 
of both  parents,  if Essence  is  weak  in any way,  especially at the  moment 
of conception, the person can inherit a weakened  constitution prone to 
many  ailments  or  congenital  diseases.  This  can  appear  as  poor  bone 
development,  mental  retardation and childhood asthma or diabetes,  for 
instance. 
Emotions:  The  emotions  of the  Kidneys  are  fear,  anxiety,  shock, 
apprehension, paranoia, panic, suspicion and distrust. These can ultimately 
lead  to  a  feeling  of inadequacy,  inferiority,  lack  of self-trust,  a  victim 
complex, procrastination and avoidance, injuring the Will which resides 
in the Kidneys.  Fear, anxiety, insecurity and shock all weaken Kidney Q!, 
causing  frequent  urination  and  bed  wetting,  especially  in  children. 
Ultimately the  Q!  rises  and  can  lead  to  Empty Fire  of the Kidneys. 
Diet:  Diet  is  very  important  to  Kidney  health.  Adequate  whole 
grains,  protein,  especially  beans,  cooked  vegetables  and  greens  support 
the  Kidneys.  Considering  that  Kidney Yang  is  the  "pilot  light"  of the 
body, the excessive intake of cold and raw foods, juices, fruits, iced drinks 
and foods  such as  ice cream or frozen yogurt create Cold in the Kidneys 
and injure the Yang. When the pilot light cannot stay lit, it cannot warm 
the Yang of the other Organs such as  the Spleen and Heart, causing poor 
digestion,  diarrhea  and  slowed  circulation.  Further,  alcohol,  coffee  and 
other caffeinated drinks or foods and tobacco smoking all seriously deplete 
the  Kidneys  and  thus,  the Yin,  Yang  and  Essence  of the body. 
Lifestyle Habits: The Kidneys are among the Organs most affected 
by  stress  and  excessive  activity  of any  sort.  Stress  depletes  the  Yin  and 
Essence,  thus  lowering  immunity and  causing insomnia,  poor memory 
and  sexual  difficulties.  Excessive  mental,  physical  and  sexual  activity 
(orgasm),  inadequate sleep,  overworking,  staying up late  at  night,  eating 
on  the  run  or  late  at  night,  hurried  meals,  lack  of rest,  relaxation  and 
exercise  and  excessive  mental  work  all  compromise  Kidney  Yin  and 
Essence.  Further,  the  stress,  anxiety  and  worry  usually  accompanying 
overwork  additionally  deplete  Kidney  Yin  and  Essence.  Additionally, 
excessive  standing weakens  Kidney  Q!,  resulting  in weakness,  tiredness 
and pain in the lower back. Perhaps more than any other Organ syndrome, 
supportive lifestyle  habits  are  vitally important to preserving Kidney Q! 
and  promoting heaith  and  longevity. 
Long term  illness eventually affects  the Kidneys,  either Kidney Yin 
or  Kidney Yang.  Further,  with  age  there  is  a  natural  decline  of Kidney 
Essence.  Most  of the  signs  of old  age  are  due  to  a  waning  of Kidney 
Essence,  such  as  hearing  difficulties,  poor  eyesight,  brittle  and  fragile 
bones  and  declining  sexual  function. 
Kidney  ~ n g  Deficienry 
A depletion  of Kidney Yang  results  in signs  of Internal  Cold  and 
weakness.  This  has  far  reaching effects,  since  a Kidney Yang  Deficiency 
indicates  that  the  Life  Gate  Fire  is  also  Deficient,  and  thus  the 
fundamental  warmth  for  the  body  is  impaired.  Therefore,  the  Organs 
lack  warmth  and  cannot  fully  perform  their  funct.ions.  Additionally, 
Essence  cannot warm  the  sexual  function  and  uterus,  possibly causing 
infertility and lowered  libido. It further results  in insufficient Qi to give 
strength to the bones. In severe cases,  the Yang  fails  to transform Fluids, 
which  accumulate to  form  edema and to cause water  retention  in other 
Organs,  particularly the  Heart and  Lungs.  When  this  occurs  there  will 
be  accompanying  signs  of breathlessness  on  exertion,  cough,  asthma 
and thin,  watery,  frothy·sputum (Lungs), or breathlessness, palpitations 
and  cold  hands  (Heart).  This  pattern  is  frequently  seen  with  Deficient 
Heart or Spleen Yang  or Lung Qi. 
Kidney Yang  Deficiency is  caused by overexposure to cold climates 
and  environments,  excessive  intake  of cold  and  raw  foods  and  drinks 
and Kidney depleting substances such as  alcohol, coffee, sugar; excessive 
sexual  activity,  especially  if one  is  exposed  to  cold  immediately  after 
sexual  intercourse,  chronic  Dampness and  old  age. 
Symptoms: 
cold  and sore  lower  back 
copious,  dear pale  urine 
cold  limbs 
fear  of cold 
weak  legs 
soreness  and weakness  of lower  back 
cold  knees 
lack  ofShen 
bright, white or darkish  face 
lassitude 
apathy 
edema  of the  legs 
loose  stools 
subdued,  quiet  manner 
impotence  or frigidity 
sterility or infertility 
premature ejaculation 
spermatorrhea 
nocturnal emissions without dreams 
chronic vaginal  discharge  or leukorrhea 
loose  teeth 
loss  of hearing or deafness 
night time  urination 
frequent  and  copious  urination 
dear urination 
weak  stream  urination 
dripping urine 
urinary  incontinence 
Pulse:  deep,  slow 
Tongue:  pale 
Herbal  Therapy:  Rehmannia  Eight Combination (Ba  wei  di 
huang wan)  and/or Eucommia  and  Rehmannia  Combination 
(Restore  the  Right - You  gui  wan);  Circuligo and  Epimedium 
Combination (Er xian  tang). 
Food  Therapy:  Eat a balanced  diet of all  cooked  foods  and  those 
with  a warm  energy such  as  whole grains,  legumes  (especially aduki 
beans),  meat (especially  lamb,  beef and  pork),  cooked  vegetables  and 
greens.  Drink walnut tea  or use  walnuts  in cooking. Asparagus, 
black  cherry juice,  raspberries  and  millet all  aid  Kidney Q!.  Avoid 
any intake of cold  and  raw  foods  and  drinks,  frozen  yogurt,  ice 
cream,  popsicles,  iced  and  refrigerated  drinks,  juices,  sodas,  coffee 
and  other caffeinated  foods  and  drinks,  sugar,  alcohol,  soy milk  and 
tofu. 
Other Therapies:  Avoid  excessive  sexual  activity,  exposure  to cold 
(especially over  the  lower  abdomen  and  back),  and  excessive  use  of 
hot  tubs  and saunas,  being sure  to dunk or thoroughly rinse  in cool 
water  after  they are  used.  Wear  a harimaki,  apply moxibustion  or 
ginger  fomentations  over  the lower  abdomen  and  Kidney  regions 
and  do breathing exercises. 
Exercise:  Get  plenty of physical  exercise  as  appropriate for  your 
body's  capability.  Do the  Four Purifications  and  Ujjayi  (in  the 
Winter)  and  the  Eight  Brocades,  especially exercise  numbers  7 and  8. 
Kidneys  Failing to  Receive Qj 
This pattern results  from a dysfunction of the Kidneys' capacity to 
receive  and  hold  Qi. When  the  Kidneys  cannot receive  and  hold  down 
Qi,  it  accumulates  above,  resulting  in  symptoms  such  as  difficulty  in 
breathing, especially on exertion, and sweating. It is  considered a type of 
Kidney Yang Deficiency and so includes signs of that pattern. It develops 
from prolonged chronic conditions, excessive physical exercise, particularly 
during  puberty,  e ~ c e s s i v e  lifting  and  standing  and  hereditary weakness 
of the  Lungs  and  Kidneys. 
Symptoms: 
shortness  of breath  on exertion 
sweating 
clear  urination 
difficulty in  inhaling 
~ 
293 
rapid  and  weak  breathing 
cough 
asthma 
cold  limbs,  especially  after  sweating 
swelling  of the  face 
thin  body 
mental  listlessness 
clear  urination  during asthma  attack 
soreness  of the  back 
Pulse:  weak,  tight,  deep 
Tongue:  pale 
Herbal Therapy:  Rehmannia Eight Combination (Ba  wei  di  huang 
wan)  with  Gecko 
Food Therapy:  The same  as  Deficient Kidney Yang. 
Other Therapies: The same  as  Deficient Kidney Yang. 
Exercise:  The same  as  Deficient  Kidney Yang. 
Kidney  Yin  Deficienry 
This  pattern is  characterized  by a Deficiency of Yin  and  Essence  of 
the  Kidneys.  Yin  Deficiency gives  rise  to  false  Heat  symptoms,  such  as 
night sweats,  thirst and  five  palm heat.  These  signs  are  from  a depletion 
of Fluids and  Essence.  There  may also  be  an  insufficiency of Marrow to 
fill  the  brain,  causing  memory  weakness  and  forgetfulness.  Deficient 
Kidney Yin  is  most  often  seen  with  Deficient  Heat,  Deficient Liver Yin 
or Deficient Lung Yin.  It occurs from  prolonged overwork,  "burning the 
candle  at  both  ends",  excessive  activity  or  sexual  involvement,  chronic 
long  term  illnesses,  consumption  of Body  Fluids  by  Heat  in  fevers, 
prolonged  blood  loss,  overdosage  of Kidney Yang  tonics,  smoking  and 
Kidney-depleting  foods  such  as  coffee,  alcohol,  sugar,  and  fruit  juices. 
294 
Symptoms: 
dry mouth at  night 
night  sweats 
thin, shriveled  constitution 
dry  throat  thirst 
dizziness 
vertigo 
heat  in  palms,  soles  and  chest 
malar  flush 
afternoon  heat  flushes 
tinnitus 
ache  in  bones 
poor  hearing or deafness 
weak  and  sore  back 
little  sperm 
premature ejaculation 
nocturnal  emission 
constipation 
dark,  scanty  urination 
forgetfulness  or  poor  memory 
Pulse:  floating,  empty and  rapid 
Tongue:  red  with  no  coat,  cracks 
Herbal Therapy:  Rehmannia Six combination (Liu  wei  di  huang 
wan);  Anemarrhena and Phellodendron Combination (Zhi  bai  di 
huang wan). 
Food Therapy:  Eat  plenty of whole grains  with  protein 
complement such  as  legumes  or meat,  cooked  vegetables  and  greens 
to  support the  Kidneys.  Pork,  duck,  milk  and  congee  are  especially 
beneficial.  Avoid  coffee  and  other caffeinated  foods  and  drinks, 
alcohol,  sugar  and  tobacco  smoking. 
Other Therapies: As  mentioned  above,  lifestyle  habits  are  very 
important in  preserving  Kidney health.  Prolonged  stress,  staying  up 
late,  sexual  activity,  mental work,  eating late  at night, overwork  and 
lack  of rest,  relaxation  and  exercise  all  compromise  Kidney Yin,  and 
thus  these  activities  should  be  moderated. Wear  a harimaki,  do 
breathing exercises  and  do cupping over  the back.  Avoid  saunas and 
hot tubs. 
Exercise:  Rest  is  one of the  best  and  most  important ways  to 
replenish Yin.  Since  over-exertion  depletes Yin,  exercise  should  be 
mild  and  gentle,  such  as  swimming, walking, Yoga,  Tai  Chi and  Q! 
Gong.  Aerobics  and  any exercise  which  causes  sweating  should  be 
avoided. 
Deficient  Kidney ]ing 
Deficient  Kidney Jing  usually  incorporates  Deficiency of Kidney 
Yin  and,  to  some extent,  Kidney Yang.  Its  signs  manifest in relation  to 
growth, development, reproduction, sexuality, bones, marrow, the brain, 
teeth,  memory and head  hair.  Its  depletion is caused by poor hereditary 
constitution  in children, old  age,  excessive  sexual  activity or any of the 
causes  of Kidney Yin  or Yang  Deficiency over a  prolonged  time. 
Symptoms 
In Children: 
poor bone  development 
softness  or late  closure  of the  fontanel 
mental  dullness  or retardation 
In Adults: 
weak  knees  and  legs 
falling  hair 
weakness  of sexual  activity 
premature  aging  or senility 
bad  or loose  teeth 
poor memory 
brittle bones 
softening  of the bones 
premature graying  of the  hair 
soreness  of the  back 
Pulse:  floating,  empty 
Tongue:  red  and  peeled 
Herbal Therapy:  Five Seeds of Creation (Wu  zi  wan) 
Food Therapy:  Refer  to  this  category under Deficient  Kidney Yin 
and  Kidney Yang. 
Other Therapies:  Refer  to  this  category under  Deficient Kidney 
Yin  and  Kidney Yang. 
Exercise:  Refer  to  this  category  under Deficient Kidney Yin  and 
Kidney Yang. 
Kidney  Yin  Deficient,  Empty  Fire  Blazing 
When Kidney Yin is  severely depleted, it leads to the signs of empty 
Fire  rising.  The rising  Deficiency Heat can disturb the Mind and cause 
mental restlessness or insomnia. There is also a depletion of Body Fluids, 
causing  Dryness,  and  a  possibility of Heat causing  the  Blood  to  move 
out  of the  vessels.  This  pattern  results  from  the  same  causes  of Yin 
Deficiency with  the addition of chronic  emotional  problems. 
Symptoms: 
malar  flush 
dry throat,  especially at  night 
mental  restlessness 
feeling  of heat in the  afternoon 
low grade  or afternoon  fever 
msomma 
mental  restlessness 
night  sweats 
scanty dark  urine 
blood  in  the  urine 
dry stools 
soreness  of the  lower  back 
nocturnal emissions with  dreams 
excessive  sexual  desire 
Pulse:  floating,  empty,  rapid 
Tongue:  red,  peeled,  cracked 
Herbal Therapy:  Anemarrhena,  Phellodendron with Rehmannia 
Combination (Zhi  bai  di  huang wan) 
Food Therapy:  Refer  to  this  category  under  Kidney Yin  Deficiency. 
Other Therapies:  Refer  to  this  category  under  Kidney Yin 
Deficiency. 
Exercise:  Refer  to  this  category  under  Kidney Yin  Deficiency. 
Combined Patterns 
Kidney  and Heart:  Described under Heart. 
Kidney  and Liver:  Described under Liver. 
Kidney  and Lung:  Described under Lung. 
Kidney  and Spleen:  Described under Spleen. 
YANGORGANS 
SMALL INTESTINE 
The Small Intestine functions to control receiving and transforming 
food  and  fluids  and  to  separate  fluids.  It then  sends  the waste  to  the 
Large  Intestine  and  the  impure  Fluids  to  the  Urinary  Bladder.  Thus, 
disorders of the Small Intestine result in digestive, intestinal and urinary 
symptoms.  Most  patterns  of disharmony  are  included  in  Yin  Organ 
imbalances. One pattern in particular, however, is especially distinguished 
for  itself,  Heat in  the Small  Intestine. 
Heat  in  the  Small Intestine 
When the Heat from the Heart interferes with the Fluid separating 
function of the Small Intestine, it then gets sent to the Urinary Bladder, 
where  it  is  improperly  processed  and  causes  Heat  in  the  Bladder.  It is 
caused  and  aggravated  by hot, spicy,  fatty and  greasy  foods  and  drinks, 
long  term  anxiety,  especially  over  life  direction  and  pressures,  and 
spreading oneself too  thin from  overworking. 
Symptoms: 
abdominal  pain 
tongue  ulcers 
scanty,  dark  and  painful  urination 
mental  restlessness 
pain  i!l  throat 
deafness 
heat  sensation  in  the  chest 
thirst 
Pulse:  rapid,  full 
Tongue:  red  with  redder  swollen  tip,  yellow coat 
Herbal Therapy:  Gentiana Combination (Long  dan xie  gan  tang) 
~ 
297 
TRIPLE WARMER 
There  are  no Triple Warmer  patterns  of disharmony because  it  is 
not a distinct Organ from  the other Organs in the body.  Instead, Triple 
Warmer  syndromes  are  involved  in  disharmonies  of the Yin  and  Yang 
Organs within  the  Upper,  Middle and  Lower Warmers.  Upper Warmer 
dysfunctions  generally  include  invasion  of an  Exterior  Pernicious 
Influence, such as Wind Cold or Wind Heat, which blocks the circulation 
of the Lung's Defensive Qi and causes sneezing, runny nose, sore throat, 
body  aches,  fever,  headaches,  earaches  and  so  on.  Middle  Warmer 
disharmonies occur from digestive disturbances and food  retention. Lower 
Warmer  imbalances  include  improper  transforming,  separating  and 
excreting  of fluids  and waste. 
STOMACH 
The Stomach is in charge of receiving and digesting food  and fluids. 
It  then  sends  the  pure  portion  to  the  Spleen  and  the  impure  to  the 
Small Intestine for further digestion. The patterns of disharmony include 
Deficiency and  Coldness, a  Deficiency ofYin,  Heat,  rebellious  Qi and 
Food Stagnation. Because Stomach Qi Deficiency and Stomach Coldness 
are so  similar to Spleen Qi Deficiency and Spleen Yang  Deficiency, they 
are  not included  here. 
Stomach  Yin  Deficiency 
The Stomach  is  the  origin  of Fluids  and  hates  to  be  Hot or Dry. 
When  there  are  insufficient Fluids  for  the stomach,  Dryness  and  Heat 
result.  However, as in all Yin Deficiency, it is  not a true Heat, but occurs 
as  a  result  of lack  of moisture  and  coolness.  Thus,  there  will  be  Yin 
Deficient signs such as  thirst,  feeling  of heat and no appetite, but there 
will  be  no desire  to  drink,  the feeling  of Heat will  occur mainly in  the 
afternoon and the appetite  is  low  instead  of high  as  with  true Stomach 
Heat.  Long  term  irregular eating  habits,  such  as  skipping meals,  eating 
on the run,  having late  night meals,  eating while reading or conducting 
business, working immediately after eating and a poor diet all cause this 
pattern. 
Symptoms: 
epigastric  pain 
dry mouth 
no  appetite 
fever  or feeling  of heat  in  the afternoon 
dry mouth and  throat 
thirst but with  no  desire  to  drink or only in  small  sips 
feeling  of fullness  after  eating 
constipation with  dry stools 
Pulse:  floating  and  empty 
Tongue:  red  and  peeled  in  the  center 
Herbal Therapy:  Ophiopogon Combination (Mai  men  dong 
tang) 
Stomach  Fire 
Stomach Fire signals a true Excess of Heat in the Stomach, creating 
symptoms such as  mouth ulcers,  bad breath, intense thirst and bleeding 
of the gums. In this case the excessive Heat burns off the Fluids, creating 
extreme thirst and constipation. Over time the Heat can cause obstruction 
to  Stomach  Qi,  resulting  in  vomiting,  sour  regurgitation  and  nausea. 
Excessive intake of hot, spicy, greasy and fried  foods along with alcohol, 
tobacco  and  sugar  cause  Stomach  Fire. 
Symptoms: 
burning sensation  in  the  epigastrium 
extreme  thirst,  especially  for  cold  drinks 
frontal  headaches 
craving  for  cold  drinks  and  foods 
gum  swelling,  pain  and  bleeding 
constant  and  ravenous  hunger 
constipation 
nausea 
vomiting 
sour  regurgitation 
feeling  of dryness  in  mouth 
Pulse:  full,  slippery,  rapid 
Tongue:  red  with  dry  thick  yellow  coating 
Herbal Therapy:  Clear the Stomach  Powder (Qinq wei  san) 
Rebellious  Stomach Qj 
When the Qi of the Stomach is  obstructed or interfered with from 
strong emotions such as  anxiety and worry, it "rebels", or ascends rather 
than  descends.  This  frequently  appears  with  other  patterns,  such  as 
Stomach  Fire  or  Cold  invading  the  Stomach.  It results  in  vomiting, 
nausea,  belching and  stomachache. 
Symptoms: 
hiccuping 
nausea 
vomiting 
belching 
stomach  ache 
distention 
Pulse:  tight  in  Stomach  position 
Tongue:  no  changes 
Herbal Therapy: Clove and Persimmon Calyx Combination (Shi 
di  tang) 
Food Stagnation 
This pattern occurs from food being improperly digested and thus, 
retained in the Stomach. It causes a blockage and feeling of fullness  and 
Stagnation.  Stomach  Qi  then  becomes  obstructed  and  ascends  rather 
than descends.  Insomnia can occur from  this because the ascending Qi 
disturbs  the  Mind.  Most  people  can  probably  remember  overeating  a 
holiday meal with the accompanying bloating, belching, pain and poor 
sleep  that  resulted.  Overeating,  eating  too  quickly  or  worrying  while 
eating all  cause  this  condition. 
Symptoms: 
epigastric  fullness 
sour  regurgitation 
no  appetite 
fullness  and  distention  of the epigastrium  relieved  by vomiting 
vomiting 
nausea 
foul  breath 
belching 
msomma 
Herbal Therapy:  Citrus and Crataegus Formula (Bao  he  wan) 
Cold Invading the  Stomach 
The Stomach is  one of three Organs which can be directly invaded 
by  Exterior  Cold  (along  with  the  Large  Intestine  and  Uterus).  It is  an 
acute condition caused by exposure to cold from  improper dressing and 
excessive  consumption of cold  foods  and  iced  drinks. 
Symptoms: 
sudden  pain in  the epigastrium 
vomiting of clear  fluid 
feeling  cold 
desire  for  warmth  and  warm  foods  and  liquids 
feeling  worse  after  swallowing  cold  fluids  which  are  quickly 
vomited 
Pulse:  deep,  slow  and  tight 
Tongue:  thick white  coat 
Herbal Therapy:  Agastache  Formula (Huo xiang zheng qi  san);  Tea 
of Ginger or a combination of ginger,  cinnamon and  anise  seed. 
~ 
JOO 
LARGE  INTESTINE 
The main function of the Large  Intestine is  to receive  the contents 
of the Small  Intestine,  absorb  excessive water from  it and  discharge the 
waste  from  the  body through  the  anus.  Dysfunctions  have  to  do with 
disturbances in bowel  movements, including the substance and amount 
of feces  and  the  times  of defecation. 
Damp Heat  in  the  Large  Intestine 
Excessive  intake  of spicy  and  greasy  foods  along  with  prolonged 
emotional  issues,  such as  anxiety and worry,  cause  Dampness and  Heat 
in  the  Large  Intestine.  This  interferes  with  its  function  of absorbing 
Fluids  and  excreting  stools,  causing  diarrhea  with  mucus  and  a  foul 
odor. 
Symptoms: 
abdominal  pain, worse  with  pressure  or heat 
diarrhea  with  mucus  and  blood  in  the  stools 
foul  odor of stools 
burning of anus 
scanty  dark  urine 
fever 
sweating which  doesn't decrease  with  the  fever 
thirst without desire  to  drink 
feeling  of heaviness  of body and  limbs 
stuffiness  of chest  and  epigastrium 
Pulse:  slippery and  rapid 
Tongue:  red  with  greasy  yellow coat 
Herbal Therapy:  Coptis, Scute and Pueraria Combination (Ge 
gen  huang qin  huang  lian  tang) 
Heat  in  the  Large  Intestine 
Different from  the  previous  pattern,  this .dysfunction  signals  true 
Heat in the Large  Intestine which  burns off Fluids and  causes  Dryness. 
It arises  from  excessive  intake  of spicy  and  hot-natured  foods  (such  as 
lamb)  and  fluids  (such  as  alcohol  and  coffee). 
Symptoms: 
dry stools 
burning sensation  in  anus  and  mouth 
constipation 
dry  tongue 
scanty dark  urine 
Pulse:  full  and  rapid 
Tongue:  thick yellow  and  dry  coat 
~ 
JOI 
Herbal Therapy:  Major  Bupleurum Combination (Da  chai  hu 
tang)  for  a stronger  patient; Cannabis Seed  Pills (Ma  zi  ren  wan  -
also  known  as  Apricot Seed  and  Linum)  used  as  a nutritive, 
demulcent  laxative  for  weaker,  more  Deficient patients. 
Cold Invading the  Large  Intestine 
Exterior  Cold  can  directly  invade  into  three  Organs:  The  Large 
Intestine, Uterus and Stomach. This is  an acute condition caused by the 
invasion  of Exterior Cold  directly into  the Large  Intestine, either from 
exposure to a cold  climate or environment, or from  improper clothing 
that  doesn't  protect  the  body  adequately.  The  Cold  interferes  with  the 
movement of Qi and  causes  it to stagnate,  resulting  in pain. 
Symptoms: 
sudden  abdominal  pain 
diarrhea  with  pain 
feeling  of cold 
cold  sensation  in  abdomen 
Pulse:  deep,  wiry 
Tongue:  thick white  coat 
Herbal Therapy: White Atractylodes  and White  Peony  Powder 
(Tong  xie  yao  fang);  Decoction  of Ginger  and  Garlic.  For  more 
severe  conditions add  3 to  9 gms  of prepared  aconite. 
Large  Intestine  Cold 
This  differs  from  the  previous  pattern  in  that  it  is  an  Interior 
Deficient Cold pattern, similar to Spleen Yang Deficiency. The excessive 
intake of cold and raw foods and fluids and prolonged exposure to cold 
weather without adequate clothing causes  this  pattern. 
Symptoms: 
loose  stools 
cold  limbs 
dull  abdominal  pain 
borborygmi 
pale  urine 
cold  limbs 
Pulse:  fine  and  deep 
Tongue:  pale 
Herbal Therapy:  Refer  to  this  category under  Cold  Invading  the 
Large  Intestine. 
~ 
J02. 
Collapse  of Large  Intestine 
A  Deficiency  of Spleen,  Stomach  and  Large  Intestine  Qi  causes 
this  pattern.  The  Large  Intestine  Qi  sinks,  causing  chronic  diarrhea, 
hemorrhoids  and  prolapsed  anus. 
Symptoms: 
chronic diarrhea 
prolapse  of anus 
hemorrhoids 
tiredness  after  bowel  movements 
cold  limbs 
mental  exhaustion 
desire  to  drink warm  liquids  and  have  the  abdomen  massaged 
no  appetite 
Pulse:  deep  and weak 
Tongue:  pale 
Herbal  Therapy:  Ginseng and Astragalus  Combination ( Bu 
zhong yi  qi  tang) 
THE  GALL  BLADDER 
The Gall  Bladder receives  bile  manufactured by the Liver,  stores it, 
and  then  secretes  it  into  the  Small  Intestine  to  aid  digestion.  It is  also 
connected  to  the  ability  to  make  decisions  and  the  courage  to  carry 
them  out.  The  Gall  Bladder  is  dependent  upon  smooth  Liver  Qi  to 
carry  out  its  functions,  and  like  the  Liver,  is  affected  by  similar 
disharmonies. Anger, frustration, resentment, the excessive consumption 
of fried  and  fatty  foods  and  over-exposure  to  hot  damp  climates 
imbalances  Gall  Bladder  functions. 
Damp  Heat  in  the  Gall Bladder 
Damp  Heat  arises  from  the  excessive  intake  of hot,  greasy  and 
fried  foods  and  from  prolonged  suppressed  anger,  resentment  and 
frustration.  The  Dampness  occurs  from  an  underlying  Spleen  Qi 
Deficiency unable to transform Fluids. Both can occur from over-exposure 
to  damp  and  humid  environments. 
Symptoms: 
hypochondriac  pain and  distension 
bitter  taste 
vomiting of bitter  fluid 
nausea 
jaundice or yellow  complexion 
poor digestion  and  absorption 
loss  of appetite 
diarrhea 
nausea 
~ 
JOJ 
belching 
inability to  digest  fats 
scanty and  dark yellow  urine 
fever 
thirst without  desire  to  drink 
Pulse:  slippery,  wiry 
Tongue:  thick sticky yellow  coat,  either on both sides  or  on  the 
right  side 
Herbal Therapy:  Capillaris Formula (Yin  chen  hao  tang)  or 
Gentiana Combination (Long  dan  xie  gan  tang) 
Deficiency  of Gall Bladder 
Since  the Yang  of the  Liver  and  Gall  Bladder  can  never  really  be 
Deficient,  this  describes  more  a  type  of personality  rather  than  a 
Deficiency  of Gall  Bladder Yang.  This  also  relates  to  the  Hun  and  its 
capacity to  give  direction  and  self-expression.  If the Liver  is  weak,  or if 
Blood  is  Deficient so  it cannot root the  Hun, the Gall  Bladder will  be 
timid and fearful.  Of course, life situations and family relationships can 
also  contribute to  forming  this  type  of character. 
Symptoms: 
timidity 
sighing 
lack  of courage  and  initiative 
nervousness 
propensity to  being  easily  startled 
dizziness 
blurred vision 
Pulse:  weak 
Tongue:  pale  or  normal 
Herbal Therapy:  Bamboo and  Poria  Combination (Wen  dan  tang 
- Gall  Bladder Warming  Decoction) 
URINARY BLADDER 
The  function  of the  Bladder  is  to  receive,  store  and  excrete  urine. 
This  capacity  relates  to  Kidney  Yang  providing  the  Qi  and  Heat  for 
Fluid  transformation,  the function  of the Small  Intestine in separating 
the  pure  Fluids  from  the  impure,  and  the  Lower  Warmer  and  its 
involvement  in  Water  metabolism.  Because  the  Kidneys  can  only  be 
Deficient,  any  Excess  patterns  pertaining  to  the  urinary  system  are 
attributed  to  the Bladder. 
~ 
304 
Causes of Bladder imbalances include prolonged exposure to damp 
and  hot  or  cold  environments  and  climates,  sitting  on  cold  or damp 
surfaces such as  concrete, excessive fear,  anxiety, insecurity, suspicion or 
jealousy or excessive  sexual  activity. 
Damp  Heat  in  the  Bladder 
This  is  an  Excess  Heat and  Dampness pattern which obstructs the 
smooth  flow  of Fluids  in  the  Lower  Burner  and  causes  burning  and 
other heat  sensations.  It is  due  to  excessive  exposure  to  external  damp 
heat or damp  cold,  or from  prolonged  suspicion or jealousy. 
Symptoms: 
burning on  urination 
dark yellow  and/or turbid  urine 
difficult urination (stopping  mid-stream) 
frequent  and  urgent  urination 
blood  in  the  urine 
sand  in  the  urine 
fever 
thirst 
Pulse:  rapid,  slippery 
Tongue:  red,  thick sticky yellow coat  on  root with  red  spots 
Herbal Therapy:  Polyporus Combination (Zhu  ling  tang)  or 
Gentiana Combination (Long dan xie  gan  tang). 
Damp  Cold in  the  Bladder 
This pattern is distinguished by the presence of Cold and Damp in 
the  Bladder.  The  Coldness  and  Dampness  obstruct  the Water  passages 
of the  Lower  Burner  and  interfere  with  the  Bladder  functions.  It  is 
caused by excessive exposure to cold and damp environments and climates, 
sitting on cold  and  damp  surfaces  and  injury of Kidney Yang. 
Symptoms: 
pale  and  turbid  urine 
feeling  of heaviness  in  hypogastrium  and  urethra 
difficult urination (stopping  mid-stream) 
frequent  and  urgent  urination 
Pulse:  slow,  slippery 
Tongu,e:  white  sticky coating on root 
Herbal Therapy:  Poria Five  Herbs formula (Wu  ling san) 
TWELVE 
ElCHT METHODS 
OF HERBAL TREATMENT 
Chinese  medicine  refers  to  Eight  Therapeutic  Methods  of Treatment: 
sweating,  vomiting,  purging,  harmonizing,  warming,  removing, 
supplementing and  reducing. 
SWEATING 
Sweating, or diaphoretic therapy, is used for External diseases. These 
are further differentiated into External Cold or External Heat with Wind, 
as  a  proliferating  disease  condition  often  combines  with  External 
conditions.  Thus,  sweating  is  used  to  treat  either Wind-Cold  or Wind-
Heat.  The  major  symptoms  for  External  Wind  Cold  are  chills,  fever, 
headache, aching stiffness, especially of the neck and shoulders, a white-
coated  tongue  and  a  floating  and  tense  pulse.  Diaphoretic  formulas 
include Ephedra Combination (Ma huang tang), Pueraria Combination 
(Ge  gen  tang)  and  Cinnamon Combination (Gui  zhi  tang). 
The symptoms for External Wind Heat are high fever,  chills, thirst, 
red  tongue  with  a  thin  yellow  coat  and  a  rapid  pulse.  The  formulas 
indicated  for  this  are  Lonicera and  Forsythia  Combination (Yin  qiao 
san)  or Morus  and  Chrysanthemum Combination (Sang  ju  yin). 
Contraindications: Do not use sweating therapy where there is  anemia, 
a severe loss of bodily fluids from vomiting and diarrhea, or a Deficiency 
of Blood  and/or Yin. 
VOMITING 
Vomiting (emetic) therapy is used for food  and narcotic poisoning, 
mucus  accumulation  causing  lung  congestion,  and  abdominal  pain. 
Currently in TCM, vomiting is  less  used  for mucus conditions than it is 
in  Ayurvedic  East  Indian  medicine.  Because  of the  possibility  of 
undesirable  reactions  to  vomiting  therapy,  other  less  drastic  methods 
are  used  to  eliminate  mucus  in TCM. 
~ 
J06 
Vomiting  is,  however,  the  most  important  method  in  TCM  for 
treating  food  and  narcotic  poisoning.  Chinese  herbal  medicine  uses 
Melon Pedicel  Formula to  induce vomiting, but more simply one can 
use  Syrup of Ipecac,  made  from  the South American  herb  commonly 
available  from  most  pharmacies. 
Another Western  emetic  herb  is  lobelia  inflata.  The  seeds  are  the 
most  effective,  but  currently  are  rarely  available  in  trade.  Either  the 
seeds  or the aerial  portions  of the whole  herb  can  be  rendered  into an 
acetic or vinegar extract.  Lobelia  has both antispasmodic and stimulant 
properties  and  is  sometimes  called  the  "thinking  herb"  because  it  is 
often effective when we are unable to envision a satisfactory final outcome 
for  a  particular  problem.  It  is  also  given  for  the  most  acute  stage  of 
asthma.  First  have  the  patient  drink  one  or  two  quarts  of strong 
peppermint tea.  Follow  this with  a teaspoon  of lobelia tincture.  Repeat 
the  lobelia  every  10  minutes  for  two  more  times.  At  this  point  the 
patient  should  vomit,  alleviating  the  asthma  and,  in  some  cases, 
completely curing it  from  a single  lobelia emetic  treatment. To  achieve 
such  results,  one  should  wait  until  the  asthma  reaches  its  most  acute 
stage  before  giving  the  lobelia  emetic. 
Contraindications: Vomiting should  never be  done to counteract 
caustic  poisons  such  as  swallowing  lye  or  various  other  petroleum  or 
chemical poisons. Rather, the approach should be to dilute the poisonous 
substance  with  a  protecting  demulcent  substance  such  as  licorice  tea, 
marshmallow  root  or  slippery  elm  gruel.  For  such  serious  poisoning, 
proper  medical  assistance  should  be  obtained  as  soon  as  possible. 
PURGATION 
Purgation is  indicated for elimination of toxins through the colon. 
Purgatives  are  used  for  Excess  conformation with  gastric  and  intestinal 
pains, constipation, dry stools and Stagnant blood in the lower abdomen 
with  possible  lower  abdominal  pain. 
The most commonly used  purgatives are rhubarb root, buckthorne, 
cascara  sagrada,  aloe  and  senna.  These  are  all  characteristically  bitter, 
cold  and  detoxifying.  Chinese  purgative  formulas  include  Major  and 
Minor  Rhubarb  Combination (Da  cheng  qi  tang  and  Xiao  cheng  qi 
tang)  and  Rhubarb and Moutan Combination (Da  huang mu dan pi 
tang). 
In  East  Indian  Ayurvedic  medicine  the  safest  and  most  mild 
purgative is Triphala, made from Terminalia emblica, T.  belerica and T. 
chebula. This formula is safe because it will not cause laxative dependency, 
and  it can  be  used  for  both  Excess  and  mildly Deficient individuals  to 
aid internal cleansing and detoxification, since it does  not aggravate any 
existing weaknesses  or deficiencies. 
Other purgatives are warm or hot in energy and have a more drastic 
action.  These are  used  for  Excess  conformation diseases  associated with 
Fluid  accumulation  under  the  heart,  sweating  and  asthma.  Purgatives 
are also  used  to  expel worms, often in combination '.'l'ith anthelmintics. 
Contraindications: These include all surface conformation diseases since 
purgatives  can  drive  the  External  disease  inward;  also  for  half-External 
and  half-Internal  conditions  (requiring  harmonizing  therapy  instead); 
and in individuals with loss of Fluids and associated constipation, delicate 
health  and/or  lack  of vitality.  They  should  not  be  used  during 
menstruation,  pregnancy or the  postpartum  period. 
HARMONIZING 
Harmonizing  therapy  is  used  for  lesser Yang  (Shao  Yang)  diseases 
involving  the  Liver  or  Gall  Bladder.  It  is  the  most  commonly  used 
herbal  therapy for  restoring general  balance.  It is  given  for  diseases  of a 
polarized,  half and  half conformation. 
Harmonizing therapy is indicated for Liver and Gall Bladder diseases 
such  as  hepatitis,  symptoms  of Liver  Q!  Stagnation  with  chest  and 
abdominal  discomfort,  nausea,  intermittent  fever  such  as  malaria, 
individuals who  are  prone to extreme mood swings  and  depression and 
premenstrual  syndrome  in  women.  It  is  also  indicated  for  lingering 
colds and fevers  where  the symptoms are mixed  External,  Internal, Hot, 
Cold,  Excess  and  Deficient. 
Some of the most commonly used  Harmonizing formulas are Minor 
Bupleurum  Combination  (Xiao  chai  hu  tang),  Bupleurum  and 
Cinnamon  Combination  (Chai  hu  gui  zhi  tang)  and  the  purgative, 
Major  Bupleurum  Combination (Da  chai  hu tang). 
Contraindications:  Harmonizing  therapy  is  contraindicated  for 
individuals  with  a clear  External,  Internal  or Excess  conformation. 
WARMING 
Warming  therapy uses  warm  stimulants  to  treat  Cold  conditions. 
It supplements and strengthens Yang Q!,  making it useful for helping to 
restore lost vitality.  It is  useful for Coldness, vomiting, abdominal pain, 
weak  pulse,  and  a general  Cold, weak  conformation. 
Coldness occurs in individuals with a loss ofYang, causing digestive 
weakness,  loose  stools,  clear  urine,  weakness  of body  and  spirit,  cold 
extremities,  poor  appetite,  abdominal  distention  and  stomach  pains. 
Biomedically, it is often associated with conditions such as  hypoglycemia, 
hypothyroid  and  hypoadrenalism. 
For this, Internal Warming stimulants such as  red  and black pepper, 
dried ginger,  cinnamon, cloves,  galangal  and  prepared  aconite are  used. 
For  general  coldness  and  hypofunction,  one can  use  Aconite,  Ginger, 
and  Licorice  Combination  (Si  ni  tang).  For  Cold,  Yang-Deficient 
digestion (Deficient Spleen Yang),  use Vitality Combination (Zhen wu 
tang)  or  Ginseng  and  Ginger  Combination  (Li  zhong  tang).  For 
Deficient Kidney-adrenals use Rehmannia Eight (Ba wei di huang wan). 
Contraindication:  Do  not  use  where  there  is  Internal  Excess  Heat  or 
Internal  Heat  with  External  chills;  in  individuals  with  Yin  Deficiency 
and  symptoms  of False  Yang;  where  there  are  signs  of spitting  up  of 
blood or blood  in  the stools;  and  during diarrhea with  fever. 
COOLING 
Cooling  is  a  method  of detoxification  used  to  remove  fever  and 
inflammation,  helping  the  body  to  overcome  negative  Pathogenic 
Influences  such  as  viruses  and  bacteria. 
In TCM,  four  stages  of heat  are  outlined: 
The  first  stage  is  called  the  Wei  Level,  which  corresponds  to  the 
External Wind Heat conformation of high fever,  mild chills, sore throat, 
headache,  thirst,  pink  tongue with  a yellow  coat,  and  a floating,  rapid 
pulse. Lonicera and Forsythia Combination (Yin qiao san) is  indicated 
for  this  stage. 
The  second  stage  is  at  the  Oi  Level.  Here  there  is  high  fever,  no 
chills, irritability, excess perspiration, great thirst, constipation, abdominal 
pain,  flushed  face,  abhorrence  of heat,  cough  with  yellow  phlegm  and 
dark,  concentrated  urine.  The  tongue  is  red  with  a yellow  coat and  the 
pulse  is  strong  and  full.  This  corresponds  to  the  Sunlight Yang  (Yang 
Ming)  stage  of disease.  Formulas  used  are  White Tiger  Combination 
(Bai  hu tang), Coptis and Scutellaria Combination {Huang lian huang 
qin tang),  Coptis and Rhubarb Combination (San  huang xie xin  tang 
- a  combination  of equal  parts  coptis,  scutellaria  and  rhubarb)  and 
Gentiana Combination (Long  clan  xie  gan  tang). 
The  third stage  of Heat is  at  the Ying  or Essence  Level.  This  stage 
corresponds  to Y i ~  Deficient or auto-consumptive  Heat.  There  may  be 
symptoms  of late  afternoon  and  evening  fever,  insomnia,  irritability, 
delirium and dry,  scarlet tongue with a rapid  and  thin pulse. It requires 
herbs  and  formulas  that  are  demulcent,  nutritive  and  cooling  such  as 
marshmallow  root,  Irish  moss  and  comfrey  root  in  Western  herbal 
medicine and raw rehmannia, lycii bark,  pseudostellaria root in Chinese 
~ 
J09 
herbal  medicine.  Anemarrhena,  Phellodendron  and  Rehmannia 
Combination (Zhi bai di huang wan) can be used  for this stage of Heat. 
The fourth  stage  is  Heat at the  Blood  or Xue  Level.  Symptoms  are 
high  fever,  delirium  or  unconsciousness,  coma,  insomnia,  signs  of 
bleeding  such  as  vomiting of blood,  nose  bleeding,  blood  in the  stool, 
easy  bruising  underneath  the  skin,  spasms  from  hc;at  and  exhaustion. 
The tongue is  dark red with  prickles and the pulse is  thready and rapid. 
This  is  the  deepest  level  of Heat  penetration  and  requires  herbs  that 
clear Heat and cool the Blood, such as  rhinoceros horn (for which three 
or  four  times  water  buffalo  horn  can  be  substituted),  raw  rehmannia 
and  scrophularia.  The  formula  that  is  used  is  Rhinoceros  Horn  and 
Rehmannia Combination (Xi Jiao di  huang tang). 
Contraindications: Cm>ling  therapy is  contraindicated  for  individuals 
with  delicate  health  who  have  cold  extremities,  loose  stools,  diarrhea, 
low  energy,  Blood  Deficiency and  anemia. 
TONIFICATION 
Tonification therapy is  indicated for individuals who are weak and 
are  in  need  of some  level  of nutritional  supplementation.  In  Chinese 
herbalism there are four kinds of Deficiencies: Qi, Blood, Yin and Yang. 
Qi Deficiency is  accompanied with such  symptoms as  low energy, 
weakness, prolapse, shallow breath, timidity and soft spoken voice.  Herbs 
such  as  ginseng,  astragalus  and  atractylodes  are  indicated.  The  basic 
formula for Qi Deficiency is  Four Major Herb Combination (Si  jun zi 
tang). 
Blood Deficiency is diagnosed in individuals with pale complexion, 
weakness,  dizziness,  thirst,  palpitations  and  scanty  or  stopped 
menstruation. Dang Gui Four (Si wu tang) is the base formula indicated. 
Yin Deficiency presents with a thin, emaciated appearance, possible 
night sweats, insomnia, dizziness, exhaustion, excessive palpitations, five 
burning spaces  (a  sensation  of heat  on the soles  of the  feet,  hands  and 
chest),  nocturnal  emissions  and  spitting  of blood.  Rehmannia  Six 
Combination  (Liu  wei  di  huang  wan)  is  commonly  used  for  Kidney 
and  Liver Yin  Deficiency. 
Yang Deficiency is  indicated by feelings of cold and chills, especially 
of the  lower  body,  knee  pains,  aching  lower  back  pain,  irregular bowel 
movements,  lower  abdominal  pains,  frequent  urination,  impotence, 
frigidity and diarrhea. Rehmannia Eight Combination (Ba wei di-huang 
wan)  is  commonly used. 
Since food  is considered the supreme tonic, appropriate tonic foods 
(rice or proteinaceous foods)  are most effective if they are  prepared with 
~ 
JIO 
corresponding tonic  herbs.  An  example of this  is  to  precook  the  herbs, 
such  as  ginseng,  astragalus,  clang  gui,  lycii  berries  and  jujube  dates, 
according  to  the  needs  of the  individual,  and  then  cooking rice  in the 
resultant  tea  or using  it  as  a stock  for  soup.  Cooking herbs  with  sweet 
glutinous  rice  is  called  Congee,  and  is  superior to  taking only the food 
or the  herbs  by  themselves. 
Contraindications: Tonification is contraindicated for individuals with 
an  Excess  conformation or Stagnation of Q!. 
REDUCING 
Reducing  therapy  is  used  to  remove  Stagnation  of Q!,  Blood  or 
Phlegm. Unlike purgation therapy, reducing therapy dissolves, or breaks 
up,  accumulations  such  as  cysts,  tumors,  abnormal  swellings,  obesity, 
ulcers,  blood  clots  and  extravasated  blood.  Unlike  purging,  reducing 
therapy tends  to be  slower and more gradual (over  a period of weeks  or 
months)  before  results  are  noticed.  Formulas  such  as  Cinnamon  and 
Poria  Combination  (Gui  zhi  fu  ling  tang)  and  the  patented  Yunnan 
Baiyao  are  used  for  Blood  Stagnation;  Stephania  and  Astragalus 
Combination (Fang ji huang qi tang) together with Siler and Platycodon 
(Fang  feng  tung  shen  san)  are  given  to  reduce  obesity;  and  Crataegus 
and  Citrus  Combination  (Bao  he  wan)  is  used  for  food  Stagnation; 
and Bupleurum and Chih Shih (Szu  ni tang) is given for Q! Stagnation. 
Contraindications:  Do  not  use  the  reducing  method  when  there  is 
weakness  of Q! with  abdominal  distention,  low  grade  fever,  thirst,  loss 
of appetite,  diarrhea,  weak  digestion,  and  gynecological  problems with 
loss  of blood  and  amenorrhea. 
COMBINING METHODS 
Because  contemporary diseases  are  often. quite  complex,  different 
combinations  of the  Eight  Methods are  often  used: 
Sweating  and  purging  are  used  when  chills,  fever,  headaches  and 
stiffness  are  associated  with  constipation.  The  rule  is  first  sweat,  then 
purge. 
Warming  and  removing  are  used  when  there  are  upper  or  lower 
body  chills  or  fever  following  infectious  diseases.  Warming  herbs  are 
combined with removing herbs to offset side effects and  prevent loss  of 
vitality. 
Attacking  and  supplementing  are  used  when  the  disease  exhibits 
signs  of  both  weakness  and  Excess  congestion.  If one  gives  only 
supplements the disease might not be uprooted; if one gives only purging, 
~ 
JII 
further prostration could occur. In these cases a combination of ginseng 
and similar tonics  can  be  given  along with  purgatives. 
Treatment  Principles 
1.  Supplement  weakness  before  purging  and  eliminating.  This  is 
done to  protect the  righteous  energy from  degenerating. 
2.  Treat  External  diseases  first  before  treating el(travasated  Blood. 
3.  Treat  the  outer  stem  before  treating  the  root.  Treat  External 
diseases  before  working  on  Internal  weaknesses.  Even  for  those  who 
experience weakness and Deficiency, cool natured, antibiotic herbs should 
be given to resolve inflammatory conditions either before or simultaneous 
with the use of appropriate tonics. About three days  to one week can be 
followed  in  this  approach.  If this  doesn't  work,  then  the  treatment 
principle should be rever.sed.  Some formulas, such as  Minor Bupleurum 
Combination,  can  treat  both  inside  and  outside  conformations  at  the 
same  time. 
4.  Always  treat  cautiously at  first  to  be  sure  that  the  condition  is 
one of either Excess  or Deficiency, Hot or Cold. If there is  any question, 
begin  treating as  if it were  a Deficient disease  so as  not to aggravate  the 
illness. 
5.  If during  the course  of treating  an  Internal  chronic  disease  the 
patient develops an acute condition, treatment for the chronic condition 
should  be  suspended  and  treatment  of the  acute  given  instead.  When 
the acute condition is  alleviated,  then resume  treatment of the chronic 
one. 
6.  Most often an  appropriate herbal treatment exhibits its  positive 
effects  within  three  days,  in  which  case  it  should  be  continued.  If no 
improvement is  noted,  it may,  however,  still be  the right treatment and 
so  should be  continued anyway.  A healing crisis syndrome can occur at 
this  point. If so,  treatment can be  temporarily suspended  or the dosage 
lowered for a time. A healing crisis is always accompanied by concomitant 
signs  of improvement.  It  is  also  characterized  by a  shortened  retracing 
of earlier disease  syndromes. 
7.  Because  conditions  change,  especially  in  acute  diseases,  it  is 
important to have  regular follow  up evaluations. This  may be  necessary 
during the two  or three days  of acute diseases  or once or twice  monthly 
during certain chronic conditions. A patient taking a Reducing formula 
should  be  reevaluated  weekly  or every other week. 
8.  It  is  often  a  part  of good  herbal  strategy  to  first  prescribe  a 
purgative  formula  such  as  one  of the  rhubarb  formulas  for  anywhere 
from  three  days  to  a week  before  or while  giving  the  primary formula 
that seems  indicated.  In  most cases  such  an  eliminative formula  can be 
~ 
JI2 
tolerated without any significant imbalance even by relatively Deficient 
individuals.  If this  is  followed,  the primary tonic formula will  be  more 
effective  than  if it  were  taken  immediately.  Alternatively,  a  balanced 
            formula,  such  as  the  Ayurvedic  Triphala,  is  very  balanced, 
safe and can be safely prescribed as a single dose each evening throughout 
the  primary course of treatment. 
9.  Often  patients  respond  more  effectively  when  more  than  one 
formula is  taken simultaneously. This can be prescribed by telling them 
to  take  the  more  tonic  formula  a  half hour  to  twenty  minutes  before 
eating  and  the  more  eliminative formula  after  meals.  This  is  especially 
effective  if one uses  pills  or extracts,  but can  be  done with teas  as  well. 
10.  Foods  and  drinks  of contrary  energies  and  properties  should 
be avoided during herbal therapy. For instance, foods with strong Cooling 
properties should  be  avoided  if one is  taking Warming tonic  herbs and 
formulas.  Conversely,  strong  heating  foods  such  as  sugar,  coffee  and 
alcohol  should  be  avoided  if one is  taking cooling herbs  and  formulas. 
Stimulating  foods  and  drinks  should  be  avoided  while  taking  sedative 
herbs, and greasy or oily foods  should be avoided while taking digestives. 
11.  Herbs  with  strong  moving  properties  such  as  Blood  or  Q! 
regulating  herbs  (strong  carminatives  or  emmenagogues)  are 
contraindicated  during  pregnancy.  Similarly,  highly toxic  herbs  should 
be  avoided  by  pregnant or nursing women.  There  is  only one molecule 
of difference  between  mother's  milk  and  blood. Anything  taken  by  the 
mother  should  be  safe  for  the  nursing  child.  Generally  this  is  true  if 
there  is  an  indication  that  either  individual  could  be  benefited  by  a 
particular herb or formula. Strong or toxic herbs are contraindicated for 
children,  the very weak  or aged. 
 
JIJ 
.. 
.. 
... 
,. 
'f-
THIRTEEN 
WHOLENUTRLTLON 
Like  herbs  and  disease,  every  type  of food  has  an  inherent  Cool  or 
Warm energy. The Cooling or Warming energy of food  affects  the body 
by  creating  more  Coldness  or  Heat  in  it.  While  Western  cultures  are 
accustomed  to  thinking  of nutrition  as  food  groups,  Eastern  cultures 
recognize  the energy of food  regardless  of the group  it is  in. 
Learning  the  energy  of food  is  important  in  order  to  regain  and 
maintain  the  body's  health.  If a  person  has  a  lot  of Heat  in  the  body 
and  continues  to  eat  warming  and  heating  foods,  then  the  body  will 
only create more Heat and its  associated  problems. The same  is  true for 
a  person  with  Coldness.  If he  eats  a  lot  of cooling  foods,  then  the 
Coldness leads  to  Deficient Yang  and Cold  Damp conditions. 
As  a result, even when a person is  taking herbs for  healing, if she is 
eating in a way that energetically opposes what the body needs and what 
the  herbs  are  intended  to  do,  then  the  herbal  treatment  will  either  be 
less  effective,  will  take  longer to heal  or will  have  no effect  at all.  Often 
we  know we have the right diagnosis and herbal treatment, yet the patient 
is  either  not  getting  better  or  is  progressing  too  slowly.  The  cause  for 
this  can  be  an  inappropriate diet which  is  sabotaging  our treatments. 
As  an example, one patient had low energy and frequent colds.  He 
was  given warming and building herbs and a balanced diet to eat. Yet,  in 
two  weeks  time  little  progress  was  made.  When  questioned  about  the 
diet,  he  admitted  to  consuming  fruit  and  juices,  believing  they  were 
healthy and important foods  to eat. Yet,  these same foods were continually 
causing  his  poor  digestion,  mucus,  lowered  immunity  and  tiredness. 
When he eliminated these foods,  within a week  he  felt  stronger and had 
better digestion  and  more  energy. 
Another  patient  had  skin  problems,  frequently  breaking  out  on 
her  face  and  shoulders.  Again  an  appropriate  energetic  diet  was  given 
along with heat clearing and detoxifying herbs. Within a few  weeks  she 
was  feeling  better and  her  face  had  cleared,  but she continued  to  break 
out on her back and shoulders. When questioned further, it was discovered 
~ 
314 
that she  still  ate  her weekly  dose  of chocolate chip cookies, white  sugar 
included.  When  these  were  stopped,  her skin  fully  cleared  up. 
Thus,  every  food  eaten  affects  the  body  in  some  way.  Food  can 
tonifYYang, Q!, Yin and Blood. Likewise it can cause Coldness, Dampness, 
Dryness,  Heat  and  Stagnation.  Because  most  people  eat  two  to  three 
times  a  day,  then  two  to  three  times  a  day  the  energy  of the  body  is 
being  affected  by  the  energy  of the  food  ingested.  ''You  are  what  you 
eat"  is  not such  a strange  adage  from  this  perspective. 
A BALANCED  DIET 
A balanced diet is one which uses foods energetically. It incorporates 
more  foods  with  a neutral  to  Cool and  neutral  to Warm energy,  a little 
less  food  with  Warm  or Cool  energies  and  sparing  use  of foods  with 
Hot and  Cold  energies.  If these  energies  are  placed  on a continuum, it 
is  easier  to  visualize  how  they affect  us. 
Hot  Warm  Neutral-Warm  Neutral-Cool  Cool  Cold 
When  eating  according  to  the  energy  of foods,  an  energetically 
balanced  diet  includes  grains,  beans,  mostly  cooked  vegetables,  white 
meat,  and small  amounts of fruit  and  red  meat,  if desired.  Most people 
eat  in an energetically imbalanced way,  eating large amounts of red  and 
white  meats,  few  vegetables  and  fruits  and  little or no grains  or beans. 
We  can  determine  ourselves  how  food  makes  us  feel  by  noticing 
the effects it has after eating it. These effects can be evident immediately, 
such  as  the spiciness  of hot peppers,  or it  may take  three days  or more, 
such  as  the  effects  of Cold-energied  ice  cream.  Most  foods  affect  us 
within  three  days  to  a  month.  An  excess  amount of one  type  of food 
builds  over  time  until  we  feel  the  effects  of that  food  more  readily. 
Ultimately,  we  become  so  sensitive  to  certain  foods  that  we  become 
"allergic"  to  them. 
Another  way  of looking  at  the  Warm-Cool  energy  of food  is  in 
terms  of acid-alkaline.  In  general,  foods  that  are  Cool  or Cold  tend  to 
make  the  body  more  alkaline.  Foods  that  are  Warm  or  Hot  tend  to 
make  the body acidic.
1 
The  taste  of .each  food  also  indicates  its  Warming,  Cooling  or 
neutral energy.  Foods which are bitter, like endive or spinach, tend to be 
cooling  and  eliminate  toxins.  Sour  foods  are  refreshing  and  cool,  like 
sauerkraut, and small amounts aid digestion. Spicy foods  are stimulating 
and  Heating.  They  move  Blood  and  Q!.  Salty  foods,  like  seaweed  and 
miso, are  Cool and softening because they hold Fluids in the body.  Full 
sweet  foods,  or  complex  carbohydrates  which  break  down  slowly,  are 
~ 
J15 
Warm  to  neutral  in energy.  These  complex  carbohydrates  help  nourish 
bones,  muscles  and  Blood. 
The  energy  of a  food  is  its  natural  inherent  energy  regardless  of 
how  it is  eaten  or prepared.  It can  be  modified  somewhat  by eating  it 
raw  (more  Cooling)  or  cooking  it  (more  Warming).  Overall,  adding 
heat,  pressure,  cooking time and  spices  makes  a  food  less  Cooling and 
more  Warming.  Adding  water,  refrigeration  or  freezing,  eating  it  raw 
and  unspiced  makes  food  less  Warming and  more  Cooling. 
Yet,  despite  preparations, a Cool food  can never be  warm  and vice 
versa.  For example,  a  pear which  has  a Cool energy,  can  be  baked  with 
walnuts  and  cinnamon to  make  it less  Cool in energy.  Likewise,  eating 
Warm-energied  shrimp  in  a  raw  state  gives  it  a  less  Warm  energy  since 
the  shrimp  isn't cooked. 
Empty-Full 
Along with Warming and Cooling energies, foods have a quality of 
being either empty or full.  Empty and full  refer to the effects that a food 
has on the body and not its nutritional contents. Like energy, empty-full 
is  on a continuum so  that a food  is  not absolutely empty or full,  but is 
slightly empty or strongly full.  This is  an important concept to grasp  in 
terms of food because it gives  us a broader and deeper understanding of 
how food  affects  the body. 
Relative  to  each  other,  fruit  and  juices  are  empty,  vegetables  are 
neutral  to  somewhat  empty,  meat  and  dairy  are  full  and  grains  and 
legumes are neutral. From this it appears that protein-rich foods  are full 
and  more water-containing foods  are  empty. 
meat  &  eggs 
full 
dairy  grains  &  legumes 
neutral 
vegetables 
neutral-empty 
fruit 
empty 
Prolonged eating of mostly empty foods  creates  elimination in the 
body.  This  can  affect  the  Q!,  Blood,  strength  and  working  capacity  of 
the Organs, and  it ultimately results  in some  sort of Deficiency.  People 
who  predominantly  eat  empty  foods  often  feel  tired,  unfocused  and 
depleted. 
For instance, fruit and juices are empty foods,  although they range 
from Warm to Cold in energy. They generally lower the body temperature 
and             by  creating  elimination.  Small  amounts  of fruit 
eliminates  toxins  and  moistens  Dryness.  Yet,  if eaten  too  frequently  or 
predominantly, they can create poor digestion, gas, bloating, loose stools, 
runny nose,  possible low back pains, Dampness, lowered  immunity and 
resistance  and  feelings  of being  ungrounded  and  unfocused. 
 
On the  other hand,  prolonged  eating of mostly  full  foods  creates 
Excess  in the  body.  This  usually leads  to  congestion  and  Stagnation  of 
Q!,  Blood  and  Organ  functions.  It ultimately  results  in  some  type  of 
E x c e s ~  condition,  either  Heat,  Dampness  or  both.  People  who 
predominantly eat  full  foods  often  feel  congested,  stuck,  explosive  and 
hypertensive. 
For example,  red  meat and  dairy are  full  foods,  although they are 
neutral  to Warming in energy.  Appropriate amounts  strengthen  Blood 
and  Qi and build strength and endurance.  However,  excessive  eating of 
red  meat  or  dairy,  particularly  if the  diet  is  lacking  in  vegetable  and 
fruit,  ultimately  creates  too  much  congestion,  resulting  in  a  red  neck 
and face,  irritability, a loud voice,  aggressive  behavior, constipation and 
toxicity in  the  Blood  and  Organs. 
Putting  the  concept  of empty-full  together  with  Warming  and 
Cooling energies  helps  us  look at food  in a different way.  For instance, 
some foods  may be Warm in energy but also empty. The spice, cayenne, 
is  Hot,  but it doesn't build or strengthen.  Instead,  it is  stimulating and 
dispersing  and  in  excess  can  cause  elimination.  On  the  other  hand, 
some  foods  may  be  Cool  in  energy  but  also  full,  such  as  barley.  It 
expands the intestines and so helps stop diarrhea. It also strengthens the 
Spleen  Qi.  Likewise,  American  ginseng  is  a  Cool  herb,  but  it  tonifies 
Yin  and  Qi. 
Thus, along with the energy of a food,  it is  important to look at its 
empty-full  effects.  Overall,  it is  a question of balance.  It is  best  to  eat  a 
diet comprised predominantly of foods with a neutral-Warm and neutral-
Cool  energy  and  neutral,  neutral-empty,  and  some  of the  full  quality. 
Eating  large  amounts  of the  more  extreme  foods,  those  that  are  Hot, 
Cold,  full  and/  or empty,  creates  imbalance and  disease. 
Grains,  Legumes,  Nuts&: Seeds 
ENERGY 
WARM 
sweet  rice 
black bean 
pine  nuts 
sesame  seed 
walnut 
chestnut 
NEUTRAL 
adzuki  bean 
kidney bean 
string bean 
nee 
yellow  soybean 
black  soybean 
sunflower seed 
almond 
peanut 
corn 
peas 
rye 
COOL 
barley 
wheat 
mungbean 
tofu 
buckwheat 
millet 
soybean 
~ 
JI7 
Grains,  legumes,  nuts  and  seeds  are  predominantly neutral-Warm 
and  neutral-Cool  in  energy.  They  are  neutral  in  quality.  Grains  give 
complex carbohydrates to the body, which break down slowly and provide 
long lasting energy and strength. Beans, nuts and seeds  provide a protein 
balance to grains,  and  should be  eaten  regularly by those who don't eat 
meat.  For those who do, they can be used as a periodic protein substitute 
to  alleviate  the  potential  of creating  too  much  congestion  and  toxins 
from  eating  meat  all  the  time.  Eating  too  many  nuts,  nut butters  and 
seeds,  however,  creates  Damp  Heat  in  the  Liver  and  Gall  Bladder  and 
leads  to  Stagnant Liver  Q!. 
Some people need more protein than others. Protein gives strength, 
endurance, immunity, resistance and Heat to the body.  But in excess,  it 
creates  toxins, congestion, irritability and Heat conditions. Each person 
needs to determine his/her own level and needs.  Qyite often vegetarians 
don't  eat  sufficient  protein  for  their  bodies  needs.  Eating  grains  and 
beans  together  creates  a  complete  protein,  yet  it  is  still  based  on  all 
carbohydrates.  For  many,  this  is  insufficient  and  their  bodies  actually 
need  animal  protein  to  regain  health  and  balance.  Don't  go  by  an 
intellectual idea or theory, but experiment with  how you  feel  when you 
don't eat enough or eat too much protein. Find what amount helps you 
feel  good, strong, energetic and flexible.  Bear in mind that your protein 
needs  change  from  day  to  day  and  week  to  week  according  to  what  is 
going  on in your life. 
Bread  is  not a substitute for  grains, as  floured  foods,  even  if whole 
grain,  cause  Dampness  and  Stagnation.  One  meal  with  bread  in  a 
sandwich is  fine,  but beyond that, whole grain cereals and pilafs should 
be  used  instead  of refined  or floured  grains. 
Vegetables 
ENERGY 
WARM  NEUTRAL 
omon  carrot 
garlic  celery 
winter  squash  beet 
mustard  leaf  potato 
kale  pumpkin 
sweet  potato 
yam 
shiitaki 
cabbage 
COOL  COLD 
cucumber  tomato 
eggplant  bemboo shoots 
lettuce  seaweed 
radish  snow  pea 
spinach 
button  mushroom 
alfalfa  sprouts 
summer squash 
celery 
asparagus 
broccoli 
Vegetables  range from slightly neutral-Warming to neutral-Cooling. 
They  are  neutral  to  empty  in  quality.  In  general,  compact  vegetables 
which  take  a long  time  to grow  and  mature and grow  into the Fall  and 
Wintet:  are  slightly  Cooling  in  energy.  Vegetables  which  grow  quickly, 
expand  easily,  have  a high  water  content  and  occur mostly  in  Summer 
are  more Cooling in energy.  Cooking vegetables  makes  them a little less 
Cool, but their inherent energy is still Cooling to the body.  Eating them 
raw  partakes  of their full  Cooling energy. 
Vegetables  are  an  important  addition  to  any  type  of diet;  in  fact, 
most people don't eat enough of them. They should comprise about 40-
50% of each meal, as  they neutralize the acid-forming potential of grains 
and  meat.  Greens  and  sea  vegetables  should be  included  in abundance. 
They aid in the digestion of grains, give important vitamins and minerals 
and  clear  Heat  from  the  Liver,  Heart  and  Blood.  Raw  vegetables  are 
Colder  in  energy  and  take  strong  Spleen  Qi  to  metabolize,  whereas 
slightly  cooked  ones  are  much  easier  to  digest,  so  more  nutrients  are 
assimilated  from  them. 
A  large  controversy  exists  around  raw  versus  cooked  foods.  Raw 
food  proponents  believe  that  cooking  vegetables  kills  their  live  vital 
energy and renders them useless  to health in the body.  Frankly, there are 
as  many sick  raw vegetarians  as  there are  meat eaters,  and  generally it is 
more  difficult  to  bring them  back  to  health. 
Raw and Cold food  in excess does several things: it thins the Blood, 
it  creates  Coldness  and  Dampness  and  it depletes  Spleen  Qi and Yang. 
Aches  and  pains,  stiffness,  anemia,  arthritis,  gas,  bloatedness,  lethargy 
and  other  problems  can  result.  Raw  foods  in  an  already  cold  diet  of 
fruits,  juices, salads and no meat, quell the metabolic ability of the body 
to  break  the  food  down  and  assimilate  it.  If  this  breakdown  and 
assimilation  cannot  occur,  or  happens  poorly,  then  the  vitality of raw 
foods  is  totally lost. 
In  addition,  the  body  needs  little  hydrochloric  acid  to  digest 
vegetables. When only eating vegetables, the body tends to produce small 
amounts  of hydrochloric  acid.  Over  time  this  situation  decreases  the 
digestive  ability of the body,  since other foods  need  more hydrochloric 
acid to break down. Overall, therefore, the body may be able to assimilate 
and  get  more out of cooked  rather  than  raw  vegetables. 
On  the  other  hand,  vegetables  should  never  be  over-cooked  or 
mushy.  Overcooking  destroys  important  nutrients.  Cooked  and  still 
slightly crunchy vegetables  are  less  Cold  and  digest  and  assimilate well. 
A  little  raw  food  is  beneficial,  and  meat  eaters  can  healthily  include 
salads,  fruits  and  juices  to  help  counteract their Warmer  diet. 
~ 
JI9 
Fruits & Juices 
ENERGY 
WARM  NEUTRAL  COOL  COLD 
cherry  fig  apple  banana 
coconut  grape  mango  grapefruit 
guava  olive  tangerine  persimmon 
peach  papaya  mandarin  orange  watermelon 
raspberry  pineapple  pear  cantaloupe 
date  plum  strawberry 
kumquat  apricot  loquat 
coconut meat  lemon 
orange 
Fruit and juice have a  neutral-Warm,  neutral-Cool or Cold energy. 
Their predominant emptiness creates elimination and  Dampness in the 
body.  In  excess  and  over  time,  however,  they  also  cause  Deficient  Qi, 
resistance  and  immunity,  resulting  in  loose  stools,  diarrhea,  frequent 
and  recurring  colds  and  flu,  poor  digestion,  mucus,  chronic  asthma 
and other lung problems, low back pain, sciatica, impotence, infertility, 
nasal  drip  and  other  such  problems.  Used  correctly,  meat  eaters  can 
benefit from these foods, especially for fasting purposes. In the Summer 
and  when  fruit  is  in season,  a little is  important for  all  of us,  yet  even 
then  if eaten  to  excess,  it can  cause  abnormal  Dampness  in  the  body, 
injuring Spleen Qi and  causing water  retention. Vegetarians  should  eat 
these foods  more sparingly, especially fruit juices, and bake or stew their 
fruit,  adding  cinnamon  and  walnuts  to  make  it  less  Cool.  Vegetable 
juices  are  less  empty than fruit  juices. 
Dairy 
WARM 
butter 
ENERGY 
NEUTRAL 
cow's  milk 
cheese 
yogurt 
Dairy products can add valuable protein to  the diet, especially for 
vegetarians. Yet  most dairy products are full  in quality and so  in excess, 
are  very  congesting  to  the  energy;  they  create  mucus,  thus          
Stagnation and poor digestion. Therefore, these highly concentrated foods 
should be eaten in moderation. For a body that is  Dry and underweight, 
a  little  milk  can  actually  moisten  and  build.  For  this,  use  raw  milk, 
 
J10 
warm  it up and  add  a little cinnamon or ginger.  It can then be followed 
by a half teaspoon of honey to  counteract the mucus producing aspects 
of milk. An alternative is goat's milk which is  less fatty and more similar 
to  human  milk. 
For those who have a lot of mucus  in general, are overweight, have 
Dampness,  are  prone to  cysts,  tumors or fibroids,  have  chronic coughs 
or  runny  noses,  or  experience  such  obvious  problems  as  asthma  or 
allergies,  dairy  will  only  aggravate  these  conditions.  Often  children's 
asthma, coughs, runny noses, diarrhea or constipation will disappear by 
simply eliminating dairy and  juices  from  the diet. 
Meat 
ENERGY 
WARM  NEUTRAL  COOL 
lamb  beef  clam 
chicken  duck  crab 
fresh  ham  eggs 
mussel  pork 
shrimp  carp 
anchovy  oyster 
goose 
tuna 
sardine 
herring 
whitefish 
Meat ranges  from  neutral-Warm to neutral-Cool in energy, yet it is 
full  in quality.  Meat is  a powerful  food-medicine  and  should be  treated 
as  such. It tonifies Q! and Yang.  Excessive  prolonged eating of red  meat 
eventually  results  in  toxins  and  Stagnation  with  their  accompanying 
problems. 
For people who have eaten a lot of meat, it may be best to eliminate 
meat from  the diet for  a while  until the body becomes balanced.  If you 
are  going  to  eat  meat,  it  should  be  organic,  always  cooked  and  eaten 
with  a  little  raw  ginger  root.  Ginger  aids  in  the  assimilation  and 
detoxification  of meat  in  the  body. 
The  issue  of whether  to  eat  meat  or  not  is  a  personal  one.  In 
general, vegetarians  need  to eat a more limited diet,  since without meat 
most  other  foods  are  cooling.  If a  balanced  diet  is  followed  consisting 
mainly  of grains,  beans,  cooked  vegetables,  some  dairy  items,  a  little 
fruit  in  season  and  an  adequate  protein  level,  then  balance  can  be 
maintained.  This  does  not allow  for  many empty foods  to  be  included 
~ 
Jl.I 
in the diet such  as  fruits,  salads,  juices  and  other raw  uncooked  foods. 
Warming  and  building  herbs  can  be  included  to  help  provide 
warmth, resistance  and  immunity.  Likewise,  for  those who  desire  to  eat 
meat,  some empty foods  can  be  incorporated  more abundantly to  help 
balance  the  fullness  of meat  and  create  elimination of possible  toxins. 
However,  as  meat  is  a  strong  food,  for  the  body  to.  stay  in  balance  it 
should always  be accompanied  by a large  quantity of cooked  and  some 
raw  vegetables  and  small  quantities  of fruit.  This  is  a  vast  reduction 
from the Western tradition of eating meat almost three times a day with 
little or no fruit or vetables included. If eaten this frequently and in this 
quantity, toxins, Stagnation and Heat result in hypertension, heart attacks, 
cancer, arthritis, strokes, constipation, aggressiveness, irritability, red face 
and  neck  and  rheumatism,  for  example. 
Extreme  Foods 
WARM 
coffee 
tobacco 
vmegar 
wme 
brown  sugar 
malt  &  maltose 
molasses 
ENERGY 
NEUTRAL 
honey 
white  sugar 
COOL 
beer 
COLD 
sugar  cane 
green  tea 
salt 
There are several other foods worth discussing here, including sugar, 
salt, alcohol, caffeine and tobacco. All of these are extreme foods.  Eating 
one usually sets  up a craving  for  the other and  creates  an  endless  cycle. 
For example, after eating sugar for  a while,  the body craves  salt and vice 
versa.  Yet  this  type  of "balance"  is  extreme,  like  the  seesaw  described 
earlier. 
Refined sugar cane is  an empty food.  It leeches important vitamins 
and minerals  from  the body,  such as  calcium.  It is  also well  known as  a 
leading cause for disease. It creates Stomach Heat and over time, Deficient 
Spleen  Q!  and  Dampness.  Heavy meat  eaters  often  crave  sugar because 
its emptiness offsets the fullness of meat. Sugar also causes salt cravings, 
and the heavy eating of salty foods  conversely causes sugar cravings,  the 
Warming and Cooling energies of each counterbalancing the other. Whole 
sugars  such  as  maple sugar,  honey,  barley and  rice  malts  and  raw  sugar 
cane are much better for the body, though they should be used sparingly 
as  they are  empty. 
~ 
Jll 
Salt  is  necessary  along  with  potassium  to  maintain  the  proper 
balance  of "Intra"  and  "Extra-cellular  fluid"  and  body  softness.  Too 
much  is  harmful.  Again  use  whole,  un-refined  salt  from  natural  rock 
salt  o ~  sea  salt  that has  a balance  of other minerals.  such  as  iodine,  for 
the thyroid  function.  If using sea  salt first  pan roast it  to evaporate the 
chlorine. 
Alcohol,  caffeine  and  tobacco  all  cause  Heat and  irritation in  the 
body. In meat eaters this creates excessive amounts of Heat. In vegetarians, 
alcohol, caffeine and tobacco can provide Heat which the body craves if 
provided with a very Cooling diet. This quite often makes  it much more 
difficult,  if not  impossible,  for  vegetarians  to  quit  smoking  cigarettes 
and  drinking  coffee  without  a  diet  change,  even  more  so  than  meat 
eaters.  In  addition,  alcohol,  because  of its  sugar  content,  creates  the 
same  problems  as  sugar  in the  body. 
Caffeine depletes  Kidney Qi, Yang, Yin  and  Essence.  It also  creates 
Damp  Heat  in  the  Liver  and  leads  to  Liver  Qi  Stagnation  with  its 
associated  problems  of digestion,  depression  and  gynecological  issues. 
In time this leads to Adrenal exhaustion. Drinking coffee to push through 
tiredness  ultimately  leads  to  an  exhaustion  which  is  very  difficult  to 
replenish.  It may  take  years  for  this  to  show  up,  and  then  it  occurs 
suddenly.  Those  who  drink  several  cups  of coffee  per  day  and  are 
frequently  tired  or  have  low  immunity,  or  those  who  drink  coffee  or 
black  tea  at  night and  have  no  problem  falling  asleep  (i.e.,  the caffeine 
no  longer keeps  them  awake),  are  near  to  adrenal  exhaustion. 
Tobacco  restricts  the  circulation  and  promotes excessive  coldness 
in  the  extremities.  It also  robs  the  cells  of their  much  needed  oxygen 
supply,  which  causes  a  weakening  of their  functions  throughout  the 
whole  body.  It then injures  the  Blood.  It further  causes  Deficient Lung 
Yin  which  can  lead  to  cancer. 
Water  is  worth  mentioning here  because  it,  too,  can  cause  disease 
in the body when taken improperly. Most meat eaters  tend  to drink lots 
of iced  water  to  eliminate  some  of the  fullness  and  acidity  they  feel 
inside. Yet  iced water  is  one of the largest contributors to  a Cold Damp 
Spleen  and  Stomach  Heat,  causing  gas,  bloatedness,  frontal  headaches, 
bleeding  gums,  bad  breath  or lethargy  after  eating.  Imagine  throwing 
iced  water  on a  fi.re  and  the  resulting  steam  and  eventual  dead  fire  if 
enough  is  used.  The  same  occurs  in  the  Stomach  where  the  digestive 
fires  are  very  much  needed.  Likewise,  excessive  drinking of carbonated 
water  causes  symptoms  of gas,  bloatedness,  hiccup,  poor  digestion, 
dizziness,  spaciness  and  lethargy. 
~ 
Jl.J 
Q!iantity is  another issue.  Eight glasses  of water  a day are  fine  for 
meat  eaters.  This  much  is  needed  to  flush  the Heat,  toxicity,  acids  and 
irritations of the meat from  the body.  However,  for  those who eat little 
or  no  meat  at  all,  too  much  water  causes  Dampness  in  the  digestive 
system,  quelling  the  fire  and  causing  the  Kidneys  to  constantly work 
unnecessarily.  If eating  little  or  no  meat,  four  glas.ses  a  day  of room 
temperature or hot water or herb tea is adequate. Cold water is aggravating 
to all  bodies, and even  more so  to vegetarians. This goes  for  cold  juices, 
too! 
Whole Foods 
It  is  important  here  to  distinguish  between  whole  healthy  foods 
and  disease  causing  foods.  Whole foods  are  those which  come  to  us  in 
their purest  form  from  nature with  the least  possible  interference.  This 
means  they are  preferably  organic  and  without chemicals,  additives  or 
preservatives.  They are  also  unrefined  and  in their whole  natural  state. 
Brown  rice,  maple  syrup,  and  earth  salt  are  examples  of whole  foods. 
Refined white rice, white sugar and table salt are examples of processed, 
disease-causing foods.  The following chart suggests  many healthy foods 
to eat  and  unhealthy foods  to  avoid. 
Whole Foods Chart 
HEALTHY FOODS 
whole  grains 
beans 
vegetables  (esp  organic) 
sea  vegetables 
seeds,  nuts 
greens 
small  amounts  of sea  salt 
a little  honey,  maple  syrup 
or grain  syrup  as  needed 
fruit  in  season,  baked  if needed 
salads  in  season 
a little  meat  as  needed  (optional) 
small  amounts  of dairy 
UNHEALTHY FOODS 
white  sugar 
white  flour 
white  bread 
"junk food' 
additives 
preservatives 
refined  salt 
artificial  colorings/ 
flavorings 
chemicals  in  foods 
soda 
deserts  containing white 
sugar 
tobacco 
caffeine 
Food  should  never  be  cooked  in  aluminum  pots  and  pans. 
Aluminum is  toxic and contaminates the food.  Gas or wood heat is  best 
for  cooking.  Electric  heat  is  fine  for  strong  bodies,  but  for  those with 
lowered  immunity  and  severe  or  degenerative  disease,  it  can  alter  the 
food  enough  to  interfere  with  the  healing  process.  Microwaves  ideally 
should  never  be  used,  as  they  rearrange  the  molecular  structure  of the 
food,  altering the electromagnetic field and making the food  something 
different than nature created. Food doesn't cook evenly and tastes strange 
to  some. 
SOUP 
Herbal  soups are  traditionally made in China on a weekly basis  to 
keep  the body and immunity strong and  to  prevent colds, flu  and other 
seasonal 'bugs.' Soups are similar to congee in that the herbs are cooked 
with  food.  However,  they  are  made  into  a  soup  form  and  not cooked 
down for hours.  Soups generally contain some form of meat, vegetables, 
grains and water along with the herbs. Typical herbs include codonopsis, 
jujube dates, peony, Fu  Ling, lycii berries, atractylodes, ginseng, astragalus, 
cornus,  dioscorea  and  Dong Q!iai. 
To  make  an herbal  soup,  place herbs,  or tea  made  from  the  herbs, 
meat  (if desired)  and water  in  large  pot.  Bring  to  boil,  then  lower  heat 
and  cook slowly  for  1 hour. Add  raw vegetables  during last  10  minutes, 
or sauteed  ones  (they maintain their own  flavor  and so taste better this 
way)  at  the  end.  Add  cooked  grain.  Cook  all  together  another  5-10 
minutes.  Serve  and  eat. 
CON  GEE 
Congee  is  a well-cooked  soupy grain or type of fortified  porridge. 
Because  it is  considered very easy  to  digest,  it is  a very therapeutic food 
which  is  perfect  during  convalescence  from  sickness,  for  treating  acute 
diseases,  strengthening  the  digestion  and  assimilation,  general  debility 
and  low vitality.  It also  helps those who cannot digest  carbohydrates or 
keep any food  down.  By combining herbs with foods such as rice, we are 
supporting  the  nutritional  needs  of  the  body  to  help  overcome 
imbalances.  There  are  further  benefits  in  combining  tonic  herbs  with 
foods.  By cooking them together, both seem  to be  better absorbed, with 
less  chance  of adverse  reactions  to  either.  Traditional  Chinese  families 
serve  it  to  the  whole  family  on  a  weekly  basis,  with  herbs  added  to 
enhance  the  i m m ~ n e  system  and  strengthen  digestion. 
The  tradition  of using  herbs  with  food  was  first  recorded  more 
than 2500 years ago  in China. During the first Tang and Sung dynasties, 
Chinese physicians  made extensive  use  of food  and  herb  combinations 
and  began  to  record  specific  therapeutic  recipes.  One  text,  compiled 
during the Sung dynasty, was called  The Peaceful Holy Benevolent Pmcriptions 
and consisted of a collection of 129  prescriptions. Most of these are still 
~ 
325 
commonly  prescribed  and  used,  including  Apricot  Porridge  for  the 
treatment of cough, Sour Jujube Seed Porridge for insomnia and Ginseng 
Porridge  for  Q!  deficiency. 
Grains  are  seeds  that  embody  the  entire  Yin-Yang  life  cycle  of a 
plant and tend to be more balanced than most foods. They are therefore 
especially  suitable  as  a  staple  for  regular  daily  consJ.Imption  as  well  as 
for  the  treatment  of disease.  A  congee  is  made  with  a  grain,  usually 
white rice, water and your personally chosen herbs. It has a long cooking 
time over low heat, which slowly and thoroughly breaks down the grain 
so  that it is  extremely easy to digest and assimilate.  Thus,  the body gets 
the most nutrients out of it as  possible, which is perfect for weak digestive 
power  that can't break down or assimilate  food  well. 
Ideally enamel, clay, glass or good quality stainless steel is used.  Do 
not  use  aluminum,  iron  or  metal  pots  other  than  stainless  steel.  The 
herbs chosen can vary from week  to week  to satisfY your current needs. 
Sometimes  herbal  tablets  are  broken  down  and  used  instead  of fresh 
herbs,  although  the fresh  ones are  best. 
Basic Sweet  Rice  Congee 
To  make  congee,  fill  a  large  pot  with  9  cups  water,  1 cup  grain 
(white rice is best),  1 ounce (28 grams) of whole herbs and  1 - 2 oz. meat, 
if desired. Cover pot and bring to a boil, then turn down heat to lowest 
possible  setting.  Cook  slowly  and  gently,  about  6-8  hours.  Congee  is 
done  when  soupy with  a  thick  porridge  consistency.  This  basic  sweet 
rice  congee  strengthens  the  stomach,  tonifies  Q!,  improves  digestion 
and acts  as  a tonic for diarrhea and symptoms of nausea and vomiting. 
White rice  is  used  because  it is  easier  to  digest. 
Nowadays,  special  stainless  steel  electric  rice  cookers  are  available 
from Oriental hardware stores which are wonderful for  making congees. 
Alternatively,  a  crock  pot could  be  used. 
Variations: 
1. Jujube  Date Congee 
The  most  common  addition  to  congee  is  about  15  to  30  jujube  dates. 
This  is  good  for  Q!  and  Blood  Deficiency. 
2.  Ginseng Congee for  Deficient Q! 
Add 3 to 6 grams Chinese ginseng or 15  to 30 grams Codonopsis pilosula. 
Sweeten  with  pure  brown  sugar  or  barley  malt  syrup  to  taste.  This  is 
ideal for individuals with Q! Deficiency who have symptoms of chronic 
fatigue,  weakness  and  general  debility.  It is  highly  tonif}ring,  in  that  it 
supports righteous energy and helps prevent senility and premature aging. 
~ 
Jl.6 
3.  Garlic Congee 
Boil  30  grams  of peeled  and  sliced  garlic  for  one  minute  and  then 
remove  the  garlic.  Add  one or two  cups  of brown  rice  and  continue to 
boil. After fifteen  to twenty minutes, add the sliced cooked garlic  to the 
rice.  This  can  be  taken  once  or  twice  daily  for  breakfast  or  supper. 
Because garlic is heating, it is not recommended for patients with chronic 
gastritis  or  peptic  ulcers.  Garlic  congee  can  be  used  for  consumption, 
dysentery,  chronic  bronchitis,  tuberculosis,  hypertension  and 
arteriosclerosis. 
4.  Codonopsis, Dang Gui, Astragalus,  Lycii  and Jujube Congee 
Another Qi and  Blood  tonic  can  be  made  by  cooking 9 grams  each  of 
astragalus  root,  codonopsis  root  and  lycii  berries  with  15  jujube  dates 
and  3 grams  Dang  Gui. 
5.  Amaranth Seed Congee 
The  Andean  amaranth  seed  makes  a  good  substitute  for  sweet  rice  in 
congee.  A  combination  of dried  apricots  and  amaranth  seeds  is 
particularly  tasty  with  a  higher  than  normal  protein  content  and 
therapeutically beneficial  for  the  lungs  and  gastrointestinal  tract. 
Other Possible  Formulas: 
Poor  digestion,  gas,  bloatedness,  lowered  energy  and  immunity: 
ginseng,  Dang  Gui,  codonopsis,  red  date  and  astragalus. 
Cough,  asthma,  mucus,  bronchitis:  apricot  kernel,  comfrey root. 
Fever,  detoxification,  diarrhea  and  dysentery:  mung beans  mixed 
with rice and cumin, turmeric and coriander browned in ghee;  it becomes 
an  Indian  Dahl  called  Kicharee,  or the  "Food  of the  Gods". 
Edema,  gout,  retention  of urine  or  frequent  urination  and  other 
kidney-bladder  problems:  aduki  bean,  cooked· Rehmannia (Di  Huang), 
Polygonum  multiflorum {He  Shou Wou)  and  Cornus (Shan  Zhu Yu). 
Coldness,  poor  circulation  and  as  a  blood  rejuvenative  after 
menstruation:  lamb,  Dang Gui  and ginger. 
Malnutrition, hypoglycemia, tiredness, diarrhea and weakness: beef, 
ginseng,  licorice  and  ginger. 
FOOD AND THE ORGANS 
Each Organ has an associated taste which, in small amounts, tonifies 
it and,  in  large  amounts,  depletes  or stagnates  its  energy.  This  taste  can 
be used both diagnostically and therapeutically. For instance, if someone 
craves  sour foods  a lot, such as  lemons, mustard or vinegar, it can point 
to Deficient or Stagnant Liver Qi. On the other hand, for someone who 
~ 
317 
has  Damp  Heat  in  the  Liver,  we  could  suggest  a  lemon  water  drink 
along with the herbal  formula  to  help  clear  the  Damp  Heat created  by 
their diets. 
The  bitter  taste  is  cooling,  drying,  detoxifying  and  anti-
inflammatory.  It stimulates  the secretion  of bile,  which  in  turn  sparks 
the digestive fires  and stimulates normal bowel              It also helps 
protect  the  body  against  parasites,  clears  Heat  from  the  Blood  and 
eliminates  cholesterol.  As  such,  this  taste  strengthens  the  Heart  and 
Small  Intestine.  Sweet  cravings  can  be  alleviated  through  ingestion  of 
something  bitter.  It also  dries  Dampness  and  secretions  in  the  body, 
such  as  diarrhea,  leukorrhea and  skin abscesses. 
The bitter taste is  generally lacking from Western  diets, although it 
is  frequently  ingested  in  Europe  in  the  form  of "bitters"  which  are 
drunk before  meals  to  stimulate and  aid  digestion.  Several  good  bitters 
products  are  now  available  and,  along  with  the  regular  daily  intake  of 
dark  leafy  greens,  provide  an  excellent  source  of the  bitter  taste  in  the 
diet. 
The  sweet  taste,  associated  with  the  Spleen,  refers  to  complex 
carbohydrates and protein. It is warming, nourishing, strengthening and 
builds  Q!  and  Blood.  It also  alleviates  sweet  cravings  which  are  too 
often  perpetuated  by  being  fed  the  simple  carbohydrates:  sugar,  fruit 
and juices. While unrefined sugar cane and fruits can provide important 
nutrients, and malt is  frequently added to formulas  to build a weakened 
and  underdeveloped  body,  in  excess  these  simple  carbohydrates  cause 
Stomach  Heat, a Cold  Damp Spleen  and  Deficient Spleen  and  Kidney 
Q!.  Instead,  getting  plenty  of whole  grains  with  an  adequate  protein 
complement  three  times  a  day  strengthens  the  Spleen  and  eliminates 
sweet  cravings. 
The  acrid,  pungent  or  spicy  taste  is  warm  to  hot  in  energy.  It 
stimulates  the circulation of Q!,  Blood  and  Fluids,  counteracting  poor 
digestion  and  circulation,  Coldness  and  Dampness.  It disperses  energy 
to  the  exterior  of the  body,  opening  pores  and  facilitating  sweating. 
Thus, it is  especially useful for  External Wind Cold conditions of colds, 
flu  and  mucus  congestion.  It also  stimulates  the  circulation  of Fluids, 
secretions and saliva. The acrid taste has a direct effect on the Lungs and 
Colon. Since  acrid  foods,  such  as  chili  peppers  and  cayenne seasoning, 
are  dispersing,  in excess  they can exhaust Deficient Q!  and  tighten  the 
tendons,  decreasing  flexibility.  Therefore,  they  should  be  us_ed  in 
moderation. 
The  salty  taste,  cold  in  energy,  stabilizes  and  regulates  the  Fluids 
and  softens  hardened  lymph  nodes,  tight  muscles,  constipation,  hard 
lumps  and  cysts.  Because  the  salty  taste  is  associated  with  the  Kidney-
Adrenals and Urinary Bladder, a salt craving often indicates  impending 
adrenal  exhaustion.  In small  amounts  it tonifies  the Kidneys,  and  so  a 
pinch  of salt  is  often  added  to  herbal  formulas  to  help  direct  their 
actions to the Kidneys. In excess, however, salt can cause water retention, 
high  blood  pressure  and  injure  the Blood.  Herbs  high  in mineral  salts 
do  not  create  these  complications  and  so  can  be  regularly  included  in 
the  diet  with  great  benefit.  These  include  all  seaweeds  and  pot  herbs 
such  as  nettles. 
The sour taste is Cooling, Drying and astringent. It dries Dampness 
and  tightens  the  tissues  and  muscles,  thus  toning  them.  It helps  stop 
excessive  perspiration, loss of Fluids and excess secretions of mucus and 
bleeding. It also stimulates digestion and metabolism and aids in breaking 
down  fats  through its  stimulation of bile,  thus aiding their absorption. 
The sour taste, associated with the Liver and Gallbladder, in small amounts 
eliminates Excess Heat and Dampness in the Liver, Gallbladder, Stomach 
and Small Intestine, while large amounts can toughen the flesh and coat 
the  mucus  linings  of the  stomach  and  intestines,  thus  causing  poor 
digestion  and  absorption. 
Food  Therapy 
When  treating  health  imbalances,  it  is  wise  to  adjust  the  diet 
accordingly  to  assist  your  treatment  plan.  As  mentioned  earlier,  an 
inappropriate diet can sabotage herbal treatments, causing them to appear 
ineffective when,  in  fact,  the diet  is  at fault.  A body that has  too  much 
Heat  can  be  balanced  by  eating  more  Cooling  foods  and  less  heating 
ones,  whereas  the  continued  eating  of Cooling  foods  and  drinks  only 
perpetuates  the  person's  condition,  and  vice  versa.  Because  all  people's 
bodies are  different, everyone requires different types of foods  to stay in 
balance, and even  this may vary from  season  to season and year to year. 
Therefore,  there  is  no such  thing as  one type  of diet  that is  healthy  for 
all people. Instead, each person should learn what his/her current bodily 
needs  are  and eat  the  right  foods  for  those  personal conditions. 
For instance, if experiencing Heat signs of constipation, irritability, 
frequent  sweating  and  always  feeling  warm,  then  eliminate  those  foods 
with  a  Hot  energy,  eat  a  few  with  a Warm  energy  and  focus  more  on 
neutral,  cool  and  ~ s m a l l  amount of Cold-energied  foods.  Likewise,  for 
someone  experiencing  Deficient  Qi  and  Coldness  with  symptoms  of 
frequent cold and flu, lowered immunity, runny nose, tiredness, weakness 
and  feelings  of chill  and  cold,  eliminate all  Cold  foods,  eat  some  Cool 
foods,  but  only  in  cooked  form,  and  focus  more  on  balanced,  Warm 
and  some  Hot energy  foods. 
If the plan is  to maintain existing good health or if one is  recovering 
from  an  illness,  then follow the balanced diet outlined at the beginning 
of  this  Chapter.  This  diet  incorporates  40-60%  whole  complex 
carbohydrates with adequate protein complement three meals  a day,  40-
50%  vegetables  including  dark  leafY  greens  and  seaweeds,  and  a  small 
portion of meat,  dairy and  fruits  as  appropriate  per ·person. 
Often  people  with  Deficient  Q!  and  Blood  do  not  get  enough 
food  per meal, skip meals or have inadequate protein in their diets.  It is 
not unusual  to  discover  a person  with  Deficient  Blood  and  Q!  to  skip 
breakfast or only eat a muffin or bagel,  have  a salad  for  lunch and then 
eat  dinner  late  at  night  because  they  are  working  or  studying  all  day. 
Often  just  getting  these  people  to  eat  an  adequate  diet  clears  up  the 
symptoms  without  even  giving  herbal  formulas.  If the  problem  has 
occurred for  too long,  however,  it is  often necessary to tonifY Spleen Q! 
and  Yang,  to  stimulate  the  appetite  and  digestion  to  strengthen  their 
metabolism. 
Following  is  a chart outlining energetic  diet  plans  for  the general 
conditions of Coldness, Heat, Dampness, Dryness, Deficiency and Excess. 
These  can  be  tailored  according  to  the  specific  symptomology  and 
differential  diagnosis  of each  person,  creating  a  personal  therapeutic 
diet  appropriate  to  accompany  the  herbal  treatment  program.  Then, 
specific foods are listed, giving their energy, tastes, Organs and meridians 
entered  and  their  therapeutic  effects.  Thus,  specific  foods  can  be 
emphasized  in the diet  to  enhance  the overall  healing  program. 
Name  Energy(faste 
Aduki  bean  neutral 
Almond  neutral;  sweet 
Apple  cool;  sweet 
Asparagus  cool;  sweet, 
bitter 
~ 
330 
Elements 
Heart 
Lungs, 
Spleen-Pancreas 
Spleen-Pancreas 
Lungs,  Kidneys 
Therapeutic  Conditions 
Edema,  beriberi,  mumps 
sweet,  sour  Sm.  Intestine 
jaundice, diarrhea, 
discharge  of blood  from 
anus,  reduces  weight. 
Avoid:  dryness  or emaciation. 
Relieves  cough,  resolves 
Phlegm,  lubricates  Lungs; 
tonifies  Q!  and  Blood. 
Lubricates,  clears  Heat, 
counteracts depression, 
moistens;  low  blood  sugar, 
indigestion,  morning 
sickness,  chronic enteritis. 
Clears  Heat,  dries  Dampness, 
lubricates  Dryness;  tonifies 
Banana 
Barley 
Beef 
Beet 
cold;  sweet 
cool;  sweet, 
salty 
neutral;  sweet 
neutral;  sweet 
Black  Pepper  neutral;  sweet 
Black Sesame  neutral;  sweet 
Seeds 
Yin;  cough,  mucus  discharge, 
swelling, various  kinds  of 
skin  eruptions, shortage of 
mother's  milk,  diabetes,  TB, 
wasting  Heat  disease  Avoid: 
Deficiency Cold  diarrhea; 
Wind  Cold  Cough. 
Spleen,  Stomach  Lubricates,  clears  Heat, 
counteracts  toxins; 
constipation,  lubricates 
Intestines,  bleeding  piles, 
hemorrhoids, alcoholism, 
tonifies Yin.  Avoid:  Cold 
Damp  conditions. 
Spleen, Stomach 
Spleen, Stomach, 
Large  Intestine 
Spleen 
Lungs,  Spleen, 
Stomach, 
Large  Intestine 
Kidneys,  Liver 
Regulates  Stomach,  promotes 
urination,  clears  Heat, 
lubricates  Dryness,  expands 
Intestines;  edema,  dysuria, 
indigestion,  burns, diarrhea. 
Tonifies  Q!,  Blood, and Yin; 
strengthens  tendons  and 
bones,  tonifies Stomach and 
Spleen;  emaciation, edema, 
diabetes,  weak  knees  and  low 
back  pain  with  emaciation; 
various  parts  are  good  for 
corresponding Organs. 
Tonifies  Q!  and  nourishes 
Blood,  Fluids;  opens 
Meridians;  rheumatic  pains, 
poor circulation, expels  Cold. 
Regulates  Q!,  warms  the  body, 
carminative,  removes  Blood 
Stagnation and  Coldness, 
dries  mucus;  vomiting of clear 
liquid,  diarrhea  from 
Coldness,  food  poisoning, 
locally on  toothache,  weak 
nerves.  Avoid:  Yin  Deficiency 
and  Internal  Heat 
Liver  and  Kidney tonic, 
lubricates  the Organs;  treats 
vertigo,  constipation, gray 
~ 
331 
hair,  weak  knees,  rheumatism, 
dry  skin,  shortage  of mother's 
milk;  black  sesame  seeds  are 
better  for  the  Kidney-Adrenals, 
and  the  yellow  for  the  Spleen-
Pancreas.  Avoid:  Spleen 
Dampness. and  watery  stools 
Black  Soya  neutral;  sweet  Spleen,  Kidneys  Promotes  Blood  circulation  and 
Bean  urination, de-toxifies,  nourishes 
Kidney  and  Liver  Blood,  expels 
Wind;  lower  back  and  knee  pains, 
infertility,  seminal  emission, 
blurred  vision,  difficult  urine, 
edema,  jaundice,  rheumatism, 
muscular  cramps,  lockjaw,  drug 
poisoning,  Wind  Bi. 
Buckwheat  cool;  sweet  Large  Intestine,  Clears  Heat,  lowers  Rebellious 
Stomach,  Spleen  Qi,  improves  appetite;  eliminates 
swelling  and  accumulations; 
boils,  chronic  diarrhea,  dysentery, 
skin  lesions  and  eruptions. 
Avoid:  vertigo,  indigestion  or 
Wind  or  Hot diseases. 
Butter  warm;  sweet  Spleen,  Stomach  Removes  Stagnant  Blood,  expels 
Coldness;  scabies,  skin 
eruptions,  body  odor. 
Cabbage  neutral;  sweet  Spleen, Stomach,  Promotes  urination, beneficial 
Large  Intestine  to  Kidneys  and  brain  after  long 
consumption; constipation, 
thirst due  to  intoxication,  ulcers, 
depression,  coughs  and  colds, 
hot  flashes.  Avoid;  Qi 
Deficiency, Spleen/Stomach 
Yang  Deficiency,  nausea. 
Carrot  neutral;  sweet  Lung,  Spleen  Diuretic  and  digestive;  improves 
eyes,  removes  swellings  and 
tumors,  indigestion,  cough, 
dysentery,  difficult  urination, 
skin  eruptions,  chronic diarrhea 
and  dysentery. 
Cayenne  hot;  pungent  Spleen,  Heart  Warms,  removes  Blood 
Stagnation,  disperses  congestion, 
expels  Cold;  poor  appetite,  cold 
abdominal  pains,  diarrhea, 
~ 
332 
vomiting.  Avoid:  Yin  Deficiency, 
Excess  Fire,  Cough,  eye  disease. 
Celery  cool;  bitter,  sweet  Stomach,  Liver,  Clears  Heat,  dries  Damp,  calms 
Kidney  Liver,  expels Wind,  promotes 
urine;  hypertension,  headache, 
dizziness,  discharge  of blood  in 
urine,  conjunctivitis, carbuncle. 
Avoid:  scabies. 
Cheese  neutral;  sour,  sweet  Liver,  Lungs,  Tonifies  Q!.  Blood, and Yin, 
Spleen  quenches  thirst;  Deficiency 
fever,  Dryness,  constipation, 
skin  eruptions,  itchy skin. 
Avoid:  weak  digestion  or  mucus 
conditions. 
Cherry  warm;  sweet  Heart, Spleen  Moves  Blood  in  lower  half of 
body,  expels  Cold  and Wind 
Damp;  rheumatism,  arthritis, 
lumbago,  paralysis,  numbness, 
frostbite. 
Chicken  warm;  sweet  Spleen, Stomach  Tonifies  Q!.  moves  Blood,  expels 
Cold,  tonifies Jing;  underweight, 
diarrhea,  edema,  poor appetite, 
vaginal  bleeding and  discharge, 
lack  of mother's  milk,  general 
weakness,  frequent  urination, 
weakness  after  childbirth, 
diarrhea,  dysentery,  diabetes, 
edema,  anorexia.  Avoid:  Excess 
conditions,  External  diseases. 
Clam  cold;  salty  Stomach  Clears  Heat,  lubricates  Dryness, 
tonifies Yin,  softens  hardness; 
diabetes,  edema,  scrofula, 
leukorrhea,  hemorrhoids, vaginal 
bleeding. 
Coconut  neutral;  sweet  Spleen,  Stomach  Tonifies  Q!  &  Blood, expels 
Meat  Wind;  malnutrition  in  children. 
Coconut  warm;  sweet  Spleen,  Stomach  Tonifies  Q!  &  Blood,  expels 
Milk  Cold,  moves  Blood;  diabetes, 
quenches  thirst. 
Corn  neutral;  sweet  Stomach, Spleen,  Regulates  digestive  Organs; weak 
Large  Intestine  Heart,  difficult  urination,  sexual 
~ 
333 
weakness. 
Crab  cold;  salty  Stomach  Clears  Heat,  moistens  Dryness, 
tonifies Yin,  moves  Blood; 
fractures,  poison  ivy,  burns. 
Avoid:  Wind  disease,  Spleen/ 
Stomach Yang  Deficiency;  do 
not over-consume  as  it  is 
considered  toxic. 
Cucumber  cool;  sweet  Stomach, Spleen,  Detoxifies,  clears  Heat,  promotes 
Large  Intestine  urination, quenches  thirst; sore 
throat,  pink eyes,  inflammation, 
burns. 
Date  (red)  warm;  sweet  Spleen, Stomach  Tonifies  Q!  and  Blood;  weak 
stomach,  palpitations, 
nervousness,  hysteria  from 
weakness. 
Duck  neutral;  sweet,  Lungs,  Kidneys  Tonifies  Q!,  Blood,  and Yin, 
salty  lubricates  Dryness;  treats 
swelling  and  edema,  hot 
sensations,  cough.  Avoid:  Spleen 
Deficiency,  Stagnant Q!, 
symptoms  of hemorrhage. 
Eggplant  cool;  sweet  Large  Intestine,  Clears  Heat,  removes  Stagnant 
Spleen, Stomach  Blood,  relieves  pain,  swelling; 
dysentery,  bleeding discharges 
from  anus,  urine  and  dysentery, 
boils,  skin  ulcers  and  mastitis, 
prevents  strokes.  Avoid:  women 
without Stagnant  Blood  in 
uterus  should  avoid  over-
consumption. 
Fig  neutral;  sweet  Large  Intestine  Detoxifies, Stomach  tonic;  heals 
swelling,  constipation, 
hemorrhoids,  sore  throat, 
diarrhea,  dysentery. 
Garlic  warm;  pungent  Lungs,  Stomach,  Warms,  expels  Cold,  promotes 
Spleen  Q!  and  Blood  circulation, 
destroys  worms  and  kills 
parasites,  anti-viral,  anti-
bacterial; arthritis,  Cold 
abdominal  pain,  edema, 
diarrhea,  dysentery,  whooping 
cough, TB,  pneumonia,  hepatitis. 
~ 
334 
Ginger 
{dried) 
hot;  pungent 
Gluten,  cool;  sweet 
Wheat {seitan) 
Goose  neutral;  sweet 
Grapes  neutral;  sweet, 
sour 
Herring  neutral;  sweet 
Honey  neutral;  sweet 
Kelp  cold;  salty 
Lungs,  Stomach, 
Spleen 
Avoid:  Yin  Deficiency with  False 
Fire  Rising;  canker  sores. 
Warms,  carminative, expels  Cold, 
moves  Blood,  benefits  digestion, 
relieves  cramps;  colds,  coughs, 
cold  limbs,  diarrhea, vomiting, 
nausea,  mucus,  rheumatism,  cold 
abdominal  pain.  Avoid:  Yin 
Deficiency,  Internal  Heat,  Hot 
Blood  hemorrhage. 
Stomach,  Spleen,  Tonifies Q!, clears 
Lungs,  Spleen 
Lungs,  Spleen, 
Kidneys 
Lungs,  Spleen 
Lungs,  Spleen, 
Large  Intestine 
Stomach,  Spleen 
Liver  Heat;  reduces  fever,  sedates 
hypertension,  quenches  thirst. 
Tonifies  Qi,  harmonies  Stomach; 
diarrhea,  diabetes.  Avoid:  Damp 
Heat  conditions. 
Red  variety  is  very  tonifying  to 
Qi  and  Blood, strengthens  bones 
and  tendons,  promotes  urine, 
harmonizes  stomach,  relieves 
anger  and  irritability;  Blood  and 
Qi Deficiency,  cough, 
palpitations,  night sweats, 
rheumatism,  difficult urination, 
edema. 
Tonifies  Deficiency,  moistens 
Dryness;  Deficiency fatigue. 
Avoid:  skin  eruptions  or when 
recovering  from  chronic diseases. 
Tonifies  Qi and  Blood,  lubricates 
Dryness,  relieves  pain;  Dry 
cough,  constipation,  stomach 
ache,  sil}mitis,  mouth cankers, 
b1,uns,  neurasthenia, 
hypertc:nsion,  TB;  heart  disease, 
liver  ~ r i e a s r ;  aconite poisoning. 
Clears  Heat,  moistens  Dryness, 
tonifies Yin,  softens  hardness; 
scrofula,  gaiter,  edema, 
leukorrhea,  orchitis. Avoid: 
Stomach &  Spleen Yang 
Deficiency and/or Dampness. 
~ 
335 
Kidney  Bean  neutral; sweet  Spleen,  Kidney  Tonifies Yin,  promotes 
urination, clears  Heat,  diuretic, 
reduces  swelling;  edema. 
Kudzu  cool;  sweet  Stomach,  Clears  Heat,  tonifies Yin; 
root  powder  Large  Intestine  quenches  thirst, Stomach & 
Intestinal  flu,  hangover, 
toothache,  Hot skin  eruptions. 
Lamb  hot;  sweet  Spleen,  Kidneys  Tonifies  Qi, warms  and  expels 
(mutton)  Coldness,  removes  Blood 
Stagnation;  indigestion,  fatigue, 
emaciation,  coldness,  lumbago, 
general  weakness,  underweight, 
abdominal  pain,  cold  sensations 
post  partum, sore  loins; 
strengthens  sexual  power  and 
penis  erection.  Avoid:  Cold 
External  diseases,  Internal  Heat. 
Lemon  cool; sour  Liver  Produces  Fluid,  considered  good 
for  pregnancy;  cough  with 
mucus  discharge,  diabetes, 
indigestion,  laryngitis,  reduces 
fat. 
Lettuce  cool;  sweet,  bitter  Large  Intestine  Clears  Heat,  dries  Damp, 
promotes  urination and  milk 
secretion,  calming,  inhibits 
bleeding.  Avoid:  eye  disease; 
over<onsumption can  cause 
dizziness  and  blurred vision. 
Lotus  root  cool;  sweet  Stomach, Spleen,  Cools  Blood,  tonifies Yin,  clears 
Heart  Heat,  strengthens appetite,  tones 
Spleen,  produces  muscles;  thirst, 
dryness,  weakness,  bleeding; 
cooked  root  is  used  for  anorexia, 
diarrhea  and  Lung  ailments. 
Loquat  neutral; sour,  Spleen,  Liver,  Lubricates  Dryness  and  Lungs, 
sweet  Lungs  quenches  thirst;  cough,  constipa-
tion,  laryngitis. 
Mango  cold; sweet,  sour  Stomach  Quenches  thirst, strengthens 
Stomach,  relieves  vomiting,  pro-
motes  urination; cough,  indiges-
tion,  bleeding  from  gums. 
Avoid:  common cold, 
~ 
indigestion, 
Milk  neutral;  sweet 
Millet  cool;  sweet,  salty 
Mung  Bean  cool;  sweet 
Mushroom  cool;  sweet 
(common 
button) 
Mustard  warm;  pungent 
greens 
Nori  cold;  sweet,  salty 
Lungs,  Stomach, 
Stomach, Spleen, 
Kidneys 
Stomach,  Heart 
Lungs, 
Large  Intestine, 
Stomach, Spleen 
Lungs 
Lungs 
during convalescence;  over-
consumption  can  cause  itching 
or skin  eruptions. 
Tonifies  Blood· and  Q!,  produces 
Fluids,  lubricates  Dryness  and 
Intestines,  tonifies  Deficiencies; 
indigestion  (take  scalded  and 
warm),  upset  stomach,  difficulty 
swallowing,  diabetes, 
constipation.  Avoid:  for  weak 
Spleen-Stomach  with  Dampness. 
Tonifies  Qi, clears  Heat,  benefits 
Kidneys  and  Middle Warmer, 
lubricates;  indigestion, 
counteracts  toxins,  diabetes, 
vomiting,  diarrhea,  indigestion. 
Avoid:  undigested  food  in stools, 
Spleen  &  Stomach Yang 
Deficiency. 
Promotes  urination,  clears  Heat, 
detoxifies,  relieves  hypertension, 
Summer  Heat;  diarrhea, 
dysentery,  diabetes,  boils,  edema, 
burns,  lead  and  drug poisoning; 
sprouts  are  good  for  alcoholism. 
Clears  Heat,  calms  Spirit, 
reduces  tumors;  edema,  mucus 
discharge,  vomiting,  diarrhea. 
Avoid:  Cold Stomach,  skin 
problems  or allergies. 
Carminative,  regulates  Qi, 
removes  Blood  Stagnation, 
expels  Cold, dries  mucus;  cough, 
mucus  discharge,  chest 
congestion.  Avoid:  skin 
eruptions,  eye  disease, 
hemorrhoids,  anal  hemorrhage, 
Heat conditions, bleeding, 
pink eye. 
Clears  Heat,  tonifies Yin,  softens 
hardness,  diuretic;  goiter, 
beriberi, edema,  dysuria, 
hypertension. 
~ 
337 
Olive 
Onion 
Oyster 
Papaya 
Peach 
Peanut 
Pea 
Pear 
~ 
neutral;  sweet, 
sour 
warm;  pungent 
Lungs,  Stomach  Moistens,  clears  lungs;  sore 
throat, coughing blood, 
alcoholism. 
Lungs,  Stomach  Tonifies  and  regulates  Qi, 
removes  Blood  Stagnation, 
expels  Cold, diaphoretic, 
counteracts  toxins,  diuretic, 
expectorant; external 
applications  for  trichomonas 
vaginitis  and  ulcers;  pneumonia, 
common cold,  headache, 
constipation,  cold  abdominal 
pain,  dysuria,  dysentery, 
mastitis,  nasal  congestion, 
facial  edema. 
neutral;  sweet,  salty  Kidney,  Liver  Tonifies  Blood  and Yin, 
hormone  tonic;  stress,  insomnia, 
nervousness.  Avoid:  skin  diseases. 
neutral;  sweet  Spleen,  Heart  Promotes  digestion,  destroys 
intestinal worms;  stomach  ache, 
dysentery,  difficult  bowel 
movements,  rheumatism, 
WindBi. 
warm;  sour,  sweet  Spleen  Promotes  Blood  circulation, 
removes  Blood  Stagnation, 
expels  Cold, lubricates;  dry 
cough,  hernial  pain,  excessive 
perspiration,  indigestion  Avoid: 
excess  can  produce  Internal 
Heat. 
neutral; sweet  Lung,  Spleen  Lubricates  Lungs,  good  for 
stomachache;  Dry  cough,  upset 
stomach,  promotes  mothers 
. 
milk.  Avoid:  Cold  Damp 
conditions, Qi Stagnation. 
neutral;  sweet  Stomach, Spleen  Lowers  rebellious  Qi, diuretic, 
induces  bowel  movements; 
spasms,  carbuncle,  counteracts 
skin  eruptions. 
cool;  sweet  Lungs,  Stomach  Clears  Heat,  produces  Fluids, 
lubricates  Dryness,  transforms 
Sputum;  Hot cough with  mucus, 
constipation, alcoholism, 
indigestion,  difficulty when 
swallowing,  difficult  urination, 
diabetes. 
Persimmon  cold;  sweet  Lung,  Heart,  Clears  Heat,  toni"fies  Yin, 
Large  Intestine  lubricates  Lungs,  quenches  thirst; 
cough,  canker  sore,  chronic 
bronchitis. Avoid:  Spleen/ 
Stomach Yang  Deficiency, 
diarrhea,  malaria. 
Pineapple  neutral;  sweet  Spleen  Qpenches  thirst,  promotes 
digestion,  relieves  diarrhea; 
anorexia,  edema,  thirst, 
sunstroke, oliguria.  Avoid:  Damp 
and/or Cold  conditions. 
Pinenut  warm;  sweet  Lung,  Liver,  Tonifies  Qi,  removes  Blood 
Large  Intestine  Stagnation, expels  Cold, 
moistens,  expels Wind; Wind  Bi 
(rheumatism),  vertigo,  dry 
cough,  constipation. 
Plantain  cold;  sweet  Large  &  Clears  Heat,  tonifies Yin,  expels 
(banana)  Small  Intestine  sputum,  sharpens  vision,  anuria, 
dysuria,  leukorrhea,  hematuria, 
pertussis,  jaundice, edema, 
dysentery,  epistaxis, 
conjunctivitis, eye  pain, skin 
ulcers.  Avoid:  spermatorrhea. 
Plum  neutral;  sweet,  Kidneys,  Liver  Clears  Liver,  clears  Heat, 
sour  moistens,  promotes  urination 
and  digestion;  Liver  disease, 
diabetes,  fatigue.  Avoid:  excess 
can  cause  bloating and  gas. 
Pork  neutral;  salty,  Kidney,  Stomach  Lubricates  Dryness,  tonifies Yin; 
sweet  Spleen  diabetes,  weakness,  emaciation, 
dry cough,  constipation Avoid: 
Hot sputum or Qi Stagnation. 
Potato  neutral;  sweet  Spleen, Stomach  Heals  inflammation,  tonifies  Qi 
and  the  Spleen;  lack  of energy, 
mumps,  burns. 
Pumpkin  neutral;  sweet  Spleen, Stomach  Dries  Dampness,  tonifies  Qi, 
induces  sweating;  bronchial 
asthma. 
~ 
339 
Radish  warm;  sweet,  Lungs,  Stomach  Detoxifies,  promotes  digestion, 
(seed)  pungent  eliminates  Hot  mucus  discharge, 
expels  Cold;  abdominal  swelling 
due  to  indigestion,  laryngitis 
due  to  continual  cough  with 
mucus  discharge,  vomiting  of 
blood,  nosebleed,  dysentery, 
headache,  bloating,  hoarseness, 
diabetes,  occipital  headache, 
epistaxis,. dysentery,  trichomas 
vaginitis.  Avoid:  Coldness  from 
Deficiency. 
Raspberry  neutral; sweet,  Liver,  Kidneys  Tonifies  Liver &  Kidneys,  checks 
sour  frequent  urination,  sharpens 
vision;  impotence,  dizziness, 
spermatorrhea,  polyuria, 
enuresis,  Deficiency fatigue, 
blurred vision.  Avoid:  painful  or 
difficult  urine. 
Rice,  brown  neutral;  sweet  Spleen, Stomach  Tonifies  Q! and  Spleen, 
harmonizes Stomach,  relieves 
depression,  quenches  thirst; 
diarrhea,  morning sickness, 
thirst. 
Rice,  white  slightly cool;  Spleen, Stomach  Similar to  brown  rice  but clears 
sweet  Heat  from  acidity. 
Rice,  sweet  warm,  sweet  Lungs  Tonifies  Q! and  assists  Yang, 
expels  Cold,  moves  Stagnant 
Blood;  diabetes,  polyuria, 
diarrhea,  excessive  sweating. 
Avoid:  Stomach/ Spleen  Q! 
Deficiency,  Damp  Heat  or Wind 
disease. 
Rye  neutral;  bitter  Heart  Dries  Dampness,  diuretic;  post 
partum  hemorrhage,  migraine; 
can  be  toxic. 
Salt  cold;  salty  Large  Intestine,  Detoxifies,  lubricates  Dryness, 
Small  Intestine,  causes vomiting,  cools  Blood; 
Stomach,  abdominal  swelling and  P.ain, 
Kidneys  difficult  bowel  movement, 
dysuria,  pyorrhea,  sore  throat, 
toothache,  corneal opacity,  skin 
eruptions, constipation, bleeding 
from  gums,  cataract. 
~ 
340 
Sardine  neutral;  sweet,  Spleen, Stomach  Moistens,  tonifies Yin,  warms 
salty  Middle  Burner,  strengthens 
tendons  and  bones,  activates 
Blood,  diuretic;;  digestant, 
urinary strain.  Avoid:  over-
consumption  can  cause  Fire  and 
Sputum. 
Seaweed  cold;  salty  Kidney,  Stomach  Lubricates  Dryness,  softens 
hardness  (lumps  and  tumors), 
tonifies Yin,  eliminates  mucus, 
promotes water  passage;  goiter, 
abdominal  swelling  and 
obstruction, edema  and  beriberi. 
Sesame  Oil  cool;  sweet  Stomach  Detoxifies,  lubricates  Dryness, 
promotes  bowel  movements, 
clears  Heat,  produces  muscles; 
dry constipation,  abdominal 
pain caused  by  indigestion, 
roundworms,  skin  eruptions, 
ulcers,  tinea,  scabies,  dry and 
cracked  skin.  Avoid:  diarrhea 
with  deficiency of Spleen  Q!. 
Shiitake  neutral;  sweet  Stomach,  Liver  Tonifies  Blood,  benefits  the 
mushroom  Stomach,  anti-inflammatory; 
cholesterol,  hypertension, 
common cold, chickenpox, 
cancer,  Kidney  problems, 
gallstones,  hemorrhoids,  lack  of 
vitamin  D,  softening of the 
bones,  cataract,  pyorrhea,  ulcers, 
neuralgia,  anemia,  measles. 
Shrimp  warm,  sweet  Spleen, Stomach  Tonifies  Q!  and Yang,  removes 
Blood Stagnation,  expels  Cold, 
eliminates Wind,  expels  Sputum, 
promotes lactation,  destroys 
worms.  Avoid:  Hot skin  diseases 
& while  recuperating  from 
chronic  illness. 
Soybean  cool;  sweet  Large  Intestine,  Clears  Heat,  sedates Yang, 
Spleen  strengthens  Spleen,  moistens 
Dryness;  diarrhea,  emaciation, 
skin  eruptions, hemorrhage 
from  trauma,  Q! Stagnation, 
cough  &/or heavy sensations  in 
the body. 
~ 
341 
Spinach  cool,  sweet  Large  Intestine,  Lubricates  Dryness,  arrests 
Small  Intestine  bleeding,  clears  Heat, 
homeostatic;  nosebleed, 
discharge  of blood  from  anus, 
thirst  in  diabetes,  constipation, 
alcoholism,  scurvy,  hemorrhoids. 
Avoid:  spermatorrhea. 
Squash  warm;  sweet  Stomach, Spleen  Tonifies  Q!  and  Blood,  assists 
(winter)  Yang,  heals  inflammation, 
relieves  pain,  moves  Blood, 
expels  Cold;  pulmonary abscess, 
roundworms.  Avoid:  Dampness 
&/or Q! Stagnation. 
Strawberry  warm;  sweet,  sour  Liver,  Kidneys  Removes  Blood Stagnation, 
expels  Cold;  polyuria, vertigo 
and  motion  sickness. 
String Bean  neutral;  sweet  Spleen,  Kidneys  Tonifies Yin,  Kidneys, 
strengthens Spleen;  polyuria, 
diarrhea,  diabetes, 
spermatorrhea,  leukorrhea. 
Avoid:  Q! Stagnation and 
constipation. 
Sweet  Potato  neutral; sweet  Spleen,  Kidneys  Tonifies  Q!  and  Spleen,  removes 
Blood Stagnation, expels 
Coldness,  produces  Fluid, 
induces  bowel  movements; 
jaundice,  emaciation, skin 
eruptions,  Stomach and  Kidney 
weakness,  premature ejaculation. 
Avoid:  Q!  and  Food  Stagnation. 
Swiss  Chard  cool;  sweet  Large  Intestine,  Clears  Heat,  detoxifies, 
Lungs,  Stomach  hemostatic;  delayed  eruptions of 
measles,  dysentery,  amenorrhea 
and  carbuncle. 
Tangerine  cool;  sour,  sweet  Lungs,  Kidneys,  Regulates  Q!,  clears  Heat, 
Lungs,  Stomach  quenches  thirst,  lubricates 
Lungs,  relieves  coughing;  chest 
congestion, vomiting,  hiccuping, 
stimulates  appetite,  diabetes. 
Avoid:  cough  and  sputum  from 
External Wind  & Cold. 
Tomato  cold;  sweet,  sour  Stomach,  Liver  Clears  Heat,  tonifies Yin, 
quenches  thirst,  promotes 
~ 
34l. 
Trout  hot;  sour 
Tuna  neutral;  sweet 
Liver, 
Gall  Bladder 
Stomach 
digestion;  thirst  and  anorexia. 
Assists Yang,  expels  Cold, 
regulates  Q!,  harmonizes  Middle 
Warmer, warms Stomach.  Avoid: 
over<onsumption can  cause 
scabies  and  skin  eruptions. 
Tonifies  Q! and  Blood, 
transforms  Damp;  beriberi, 
Damp  Bi. 
Vinegar  warm;  sour,  bitter  Stomach,  Liver  Disperses  coagulations,  removes 
Blood Stagnation,  detoxifies, 
arrests  bleeding, dries  Dampness, 
induces  perspiration, expels 
Cold,  hemostatic, vermifuge; 
post  partum  syncope,  genital 
itching, abdominal  swelling  and 
obstruction,  jaundice,  food 
poisoning.  Avoid:  Spleen/ 
Stomach Yang  Deficiency, 
muscular  atrophy,  rheumatism, 
tendon  trauma,  and  beginning 
of a common  cold. 
Walnut  warm;  sweet 
Water  cold;  sweet 
Chestnut 
Watercress  cool;  pungent 
Lungs,  Kidneys  Tonifies  Kidneys,  lubricates 
Intestines,  checks  seminal 
emission,  expels  Cold,  solidifies 
sperm, warms  Lungs,  calms; 
asthma,  cough,  lumbago, 
impotence,  spermatorrhea, 
frequent  urination, dry  stools, 
kidney  and  bladder stones, 
con6tipation. Avoid:  Yin 
Deficiency with  False  Fire  Rising. 
Lungs,  Stomach  Clears  Heat,  relieves  fever  and 
indigestion,  promotes  urination, 
disperses  accumulations; 
hypertension,  diabetes,  jaundice, 
conjunctivitis,  measles,  dysentery 
with  bloody stools,  smoker's 
sore  throat.  Avoid:  anemia, 
Coldness  or Blood  Deficiency. 
Lungs,  Stomach  Removes  Blood Stagnation, 
clears  Heat,  benefits water; 
jaundice,  edema,  urinary strain, 
leukorrhea,  mumps,  oliguria. 
~ 
343 
Watermelon  cold;  sweet 
Wheat  cool;  sweet 
Whitefish  neutral,  sweat 
Yam  neutral;  sweet 
~ 
344 
Stomach,  Heart, 
Bladder 
Spleen,  Heart, 
Kidney 
Lungs,  Stomach, 
Liver 
Lungs,  Spleen, 
Kidney 
Avoid:  Spleen/Stomach 
Deficiency or frequent  urination. 
Clears  Heat,  lubricates 
Intestines,  relieves  Summer  Heat, 
relieves  mental  depression, 
quenches  thirst,  diuretic; 
oliguria, sore  throat,  canker 
sores,  diminished  urination. 
Avoid:  Excess  Dampness, 
anemia,  frequent  urination or 
Coldness  in  the  Middle Warmer. 
Nourishes  Heart,  Calms Spirit, 
clears  Heat,  quenches  thirst. 
Tonifies Spleen,  relieves 
indigestion,  promotes water  flow. 
Tonifies Spleen,  Lungs,  Kidneys, 
benefits semen;  diarrhea, 
dysentery,  diabetes,  leukorrhea, 
spermatorrhea,  polyuria,  cough. 
Avoid:  Excess  diseases. 
FOURTEEN 
HERBAL PREPARATIONS 
& TREATMENTS 
METHODS  OF  PREPARING AND 
TAKING  CHINESE HERBS 
Chinese  herbs  are  taken  in  many  forms.  Some  of these  are  based  on 
what  is  most effective  for  optimum absorption while others are  simply 
based  on  convenience.  Chinese  herbs  are  taken  as  decoctions,  pills, 
alcoholic liquors, maceration, pastes, dried and liquid extracts and with 
food. 
Herb Teas 
Decoctions  and Infusions 
Teas  are  generally regarded  as  the most assimilable form  for  taking 
herbs. There is  a difference between Western and Chinese approaches to 
making  medicinal  herb  teas.  In Western  herbalism,  the  concern  is  the 
overall amount of either a single or compound herbal formula, which is 
usually about one ounce to a pint of water. In Chinese herbalism, however, 
there is a prescribed effective dose for each ingredient which is  combined 
with  little concern for  the total amount or weight. The average dose for 
most  Chinese  herbs  ranges  from  3 to  9 grams;  9-15  grams  is  indicated 
for  heavier  roots  and  barks  and  9  to  30  grams  for  dense  minerals  and 
shells.  For  more  toxic  substances  the dose  is  usually less  than  3 grams, 
depending on the degree of toxicity. This means that a compound Chinese 
herb  formula  may  have  a  considerably  higher  volume  of total  herb 
material  than  the  equivalent  Western  herbal  preparation.  If herbs  are 
used  fresh  rather  than  dried,  one  must  increase  by  half or  double  the 
amount to  compensate  for  the water  content of the  fresh  herbs. 
V e s s e l ~ - Used For  The  Preparation  Of Chinese  Herbs 
Teas  should  be  made  in  such  non-metallic  containers  as  glass, 
earthenware or enamel pots. Stainless steel is  all right to use  if the others 
are  not  available.  Whenever  possible,  spring  or  purified  water,  rather 
~ 
345 
than tap water,  should be  used.  Metal  cooking vessels  are  inappropriate 
because  they  can  react  with  the  biochemical  constituents  of the  herbs 
and  alter  their  properties. 
Decoctions:  The  Most  Common Method for Preparing  Chinese  Herb  Teas 
There  are  many  methods  of preparing  herbal  teas,  called  "tangs" 
(literally translated as  "soups" or decoctions) based upon the predilection 
of the herbalist.  One standard method is  to combine the ingredients of 
each  formula  in  3  to  4  cups  of water.  This  is  then  brought  to  boiling 
and allowed  to slowly simmer for  approximately 45  minutes to  an  hour 
or until the original volume of fluid has been reduced  to approximately 
2  cups.  One  cup  is  taken  morning  and  evening  for  chronic  or  three 
times  daily  for  acute  conditions.  Again  for  chronic  conditions,  the 
remaining  strained  herbs  of the  original  tea  can  be  reused  and  cooked 
again  the  next  day  using  two  cups  of water  cooked  down  to  one.  The 
reserved  two  cups  of the  first  preparation  is  then  combined  with  the 
second  to  make  a total  of three cups. 
Since length of cooking may extract even deeper constituents, there 
may  be  a  saturation  level  where  the  fluid  has  become  too  saturated  in 
one decoction.  To  effectively  extract  any  further,  the double  decoction 
method is often used. In this, one follows  the preceding double decoction 
method to arrive at a total of 3 cups of tea which are combined together. 
There are many other methods, including presoaking heavier roots, 
barks  and  substances  for  an  hour  or  two  before  bringing  to  a  boil, 
further decocting or reducing the herbs even  a third time, and so  forth. 
However, the methods described are the ones that will yield good results. 
Certain ingredients  require different cooking  times  and  processes. 
For  instance,  some  herbs,  especially  the  surface  relieving  diaphoretics 
whose  potency  is  dependent  upon  volatile  oils,  are  volatilized  and 
destroyed  in  a  lengthy  decoction  process.  They  are  added  last  to  be 
steeped  after the  heavier ingredients  have  been  extracted.  These  include 
herbs such as mint, chrysanthemum flowers,  fresh ginger and cinnamon 
twigs.  On  the  other  hand,  heavier  herbs,  especially  minerals  such  as 
dragon bone, oyster shell  and  iron,  require longer extraction,  up to  one 
or two hours of preparation. In the case of toxic herbs, such as unprepared 
aconite, it is important to slowly simmer them at least an hour in boiling 
water  to  neutralize  or lessen  their  toxicity.  This  is  even  recommended 
for  the  prepara,tion  of prepared  or previously  detoxified  herbs  such  as 
prepared  aconite  (Fu  Zi). 
In cooking a  formula  that combines  minerals  or toxic  herbs  with 
those that have volatile oils, one needs to first decoct the longer cooking 
herbs  first  and  then  add  those  ingredients  that  require  less  cooking 
time. 
Infusions 
An infusion is  used for herbs whose volatile oil content is important 
to their primary therapeutic application. This might include diaphoretic 
and  carminative  herbs.  To  prepare  an  infusion,  boiling water  is  poured 
over  the herbs  in  a pot which  is  then covered  with  a lid  to  prevent  the 
escape of volatile oils. The amount of time an herbal formula is allowed 
to  steep  is  anywhere  from  15  to  20  minutes  or  until  cool  enough  to 
drink. 
Dose  and  methods  for  taking  herb  teas:  Most  commonly  teas  are 
taken  warm.  Sometimes  to  enhance  diuretic  action,  diuretic  formulas 
can  be  taken  cool.  Normally  the  dose  for  adults  is  2  to  3  cups  daily 
while  for  children  the  dose  may  be  half or even  less  according  to  size 
and  age.  In acute conditions more frequent  small doses  throughout the 
day  is  more effective.  For long term chronic conditions, 2  to  3 cups of 
the tea  is  taken  as  a daily dose.  It is  good  to  schedule  periodic days  off 
from  taking  the  herbs.  A  good  general  principle  is  to  abstain  from 
taking herbs one regular day each week.  For convenience and long term 
usage,  herbs  can  be  taken  in  various  other  forms  such  as  dried  or 
alcoholic  fluid  extract,  pills,  capsules  or  powdered  herbs  mixed  with 
honey. 
Storage: Herbs should be stored in airtight jars or containers and protected 
from  direct  light  to  slow  oxidation.  Sometimes  it  is  unavoidable  that 
certain  herbs  are  prone  to  insect  infestation  and  should  be  discarded. 
However,  at  the  first  sign,  the  jarred  herbs  can  be  placed  in the  freezer 
overnight which will  kill  off any larvae. Adding a few  strongly aromatic 
leaves  of bay,  for  instance, will  also  help  prevent  infestation by insects. 
General Dosage  Guidelines 
Historically,  weights  varied  at  different  periods.  Since  the  Tang 
dynasty, one liang equaled 31.25  grams. This being an awkward  number, 
the  People's  Republic  of China  standardized  modern  equivalents  as 
follows: 
1 liang  =  30  grams 
1 chien =  3 grams 
1 fen  =  0.3  grams 
1 li  =  .03  grams 
~ 
347 
Most  average  strength  Chinese  herbs  are  6-9  grams  dosage.  Herbs 
that are  light  in  weight  or strong  are  3-6  grams.  Heavier  minerals  and 
herbs  are  precooked  and  range  from  9  to  30  grams.  If one  is  studying 
Japanese-Chinese herbalism  (Kanpo),  the average  dose  is  approximately 
one third  that of the Chinese. 
Dosage  was  originally  determined  according  to  the  patient's 
condition and tolerance. The following can be considered a guideline to 
proper dosing: 
1.  Strong  and  toxic  substances,  such  as  cinnabar,  should  be  prescribed 
in the smallest  possible  dose. 
2.  Heavy  roots  are  taken  in  higher dosage  than light flowers  or leaves. 
3.  Most  heavy  minerals  and  shells  are  used  in  still  higher dosage. 
4.  Tonics,  sedative,  tranquilizing  herbs  are  prescribed  in  higher  doses, 
while  sweating,  Q!  moving  (carminative),  Blood  moving,  Drying  and 
fragrant  herbs  are  prescribed  in  smaller doses. 
5.  A  single  herb  or  substance  is  generally  prescribed  in  higher  dosage 
than when it is  in a formula.  However, the primary herb(s)  in a formula 
is  always prescribed in a higher dose relative to the assistant and counter-
assistant  herbs. 
6.  Fresh  herbs  containing  more  water  need  to  be  taken  in  double  the 
indicated  dose. 
7.  The dose  for  a  more  serious  disease  should  be  as  high  as  the  patient 
can  tolerate. 
8.  For  children  under one year  the dose  is  1/10  that  of an  adult  dose; 
From 2-3 years  the dose is  1/4 the adult dose;  from 3-6 years  it is  1/3 the 
adult  dose;  from  10  years  to  adult  the  dose  is  approximately  1/2  the 
adult dose. 
HOW AND  WHEN  TO  TAKE  HERBS 
Tonics  are  generally  taken  before  meals.  Herbs  that  are  Cooling 
and  detoxifying  can  be  more  irritating  and  may  be  taken  after  meals. 
Purgatives and anthelmintics should be taken on an empty stomach for 
maximum effect. Sedative and tranquilizing herbs should always be taken 
before  rest  and  at  least  three  times  throughout  the day  to  support and 
strengthen  the  nervous  system  for  proper  rest  to  occur  in  the  evening. 
Pain-relieving herbs  can  be  taken  as  often  as  needed. 
Herbs  should  be  taken  Warm  for  Cold  conditions  and  Cool  for 
Hot conditions such as fevers.  Individuals who experience nausea should 
take  the  herbs  in  small  repeated  dosages  according  to  tolerance. 
Other methods for taking Chinese  herbs 
Besides  water  based  teas,  herbs  can  be  taken  as  powders,  pills, 
capsules,  syrups,  plasters,  liniments,  alcohol  based  herbal  wines  and 
extracts and combined with food.  Commercially manufactured Chinese 
herbal  formulas  made  both  here,  in  China,  Taiwan  and  Hong  Kong 
can  be  very  effective.  However,  one  must  realize  that  quality  control 
standards  in  China  are  not  as  stringent  as  in  the  West.  Further,  the 
Chinese  do  not share  our bias  for  or against  the  inclusion  of Western 
pharmaceutical drugs with their herbal products. The majority of patented 
Chinese  herb  products  are  relatively  safe  and  effective,  but  there  has 
been in recent times a good deal of publicity about certain imported so-
called  herbal  products  that contain Western  drugs. 
Western herb companies are now producing highly effective Chinese 
herbal  products  often  combined  with  herbs  from  the West  and  other 
parts of the world. Conforming more to prevailing marketing standards, 
these  are  worthy of their increasing  popularity. 
Another  problem  that many have  with  imported Chinese herbs  is 
that they are  not necessarily grown organically, are fumigated  or sprayed 
to  prevent  insect  damage  and  retain  an  appearance  of  freshness. 
Commonly the spray to retain color and freshness  is  sulfur-based, which 
can  cause  an  adverse  reaction  for  those  with  asthma.  Increasingly  the 
practitioner and consumer of Chinese herbs  is  being provided with the 
opportunity of at least  purchasing unsprayed  and  unfumigated  herbs. 
In general, begin with the minimum indicated  manufacturer's dose and 
increase  as  individual  tolerance will  allow. 
Following  the  principle of Five  Elements  and  based  on empirical 
experience,  certain  formulas  are  more  effective  when  combined  with 
certain ingredients.  For instance, a formula  intended for  the Kidneys  is 
more effective if it is taken with a pinch of salt or soya sauce. Circulatory, 
arthritic  or  rheumatic  formulas  are  better  if taken  with  a  teaspoon  of 
rice  wine  or alcohol,  which  helps  to  carry it into  the  circulation  more 
efficiently.  A Spleen  Q!  tonic  is  enhanced when  taken with  a teaspoon 
or so  of honey,  barley malt or a small  amount of rice. 
Herbs taken to cleanse the liver should not be taken as  an alcoholic 
extract.  If one desires  to  take  a tincture without the  alcohol,  most of it 
can  be  evaporateq  by  putting  the  appropriate  amount  of extract  in  a 
cup of boiling water  for  a few  minutes. 
Powders,  called  "san",  are  taken  by  simply  mixing  them  with  a 
little  warm  water.  Another  method  is  to  mix  the  herbal  powders  with 
honey to  form  either several  small  pills, called "wan",  or one large  pill 
mass.  The  average  dose  for  most  herbal  powders  is  approximately  6 
~ 
349 
grams at a time at least twice a day, more or less according to constitution, 
body size,  age  and  sensitivity. 
Alcoholic  extracts,  called  "chih",  are  usually  made  with  a  high 
potency alcohol such as  a particular type of Chinese rice wine. To  make 
these,  the whole  or powdered  herbs  are  allowed  to  macerate  in  the  rice 
wine or alcohol  for  anywhere  from  two  weeks  to  a ye,ar. 
Chinese  herbs  are  also  taken  as  nutritive  tonics  in  soup,  or in  a 
rice soup, called  "congee", using herbs  such  as  jujube dates,  astragalus 
root,  dioscorea,  lycii  berries,  ginseng  or  codonopsis  root.  These  are 
commonly cooked with glutinous sweet  rice using one part (by volume) 
rice to 7 to  10  parts water. This is  cooked slowly for  8 to  10  hours and  is 
taken  in  the  morning  or  at  various  times  throughout  the  day  as  an 
easily  digested  porridge.  Other  foods,  such  as  meat  and  various 
appropriate root vegetables,  can be  added. This  method is  least  likely to 
generate an adverse reaction and is  particularly good  for those who have 
poor digestion  or are wasting,  thin,  emaciated  and/or weak.  Today  it is 
most convenient to  use  a timed  "slow cooker"  or high  quality stainless 
steel  rice  cooker for  these  kinds  of preparations. 
A  popular  innovation  is  the  use  of concentrated  dried  extracts. 
These  are  made  through  a  special  closed  extraction  process  where  the 
herbs  are  decocted  in  an  enclosed  vessel  so  as  to  fully  capture  their 
volatile  components,  which  are  then  reintroduced  back  into  the  final 
dried powdered concentrate. Depending upon the quality of the original 
herbs, these extracts can produce equivalent results to whole bulk herbs. 
A  concentration  of approximately  5  parts  herb  makes  one  part  of the 
powdered  extract.  Many  of the  classic  formulas  are  available  in  this 
form as well as  single herbs to prepare individual formula combinations. 
The ready availability of these products in many Western countries makes 
them convenient for  practitioners and students with  limited  funds  and 
space  for storing a pharmacy of 250  to  300  herbs. They can be  ingested 
as  a powder or granule, mixed with water or placed into gelatin capsules. 
Dosage  for  most conditions  is  500  mg.  per 20  pounds of body weight. 
For  acute  conditions  more  should  be  taken  for  one  to  three  days  and 
then  tapered  off as  the symptoms  subside. 
Finally,  when  visiting  a traditional Chinese pharmacy,  one will  at 
first be  amazed  at  the wide variety of herbal products that are  available. 
Besides  those  mentioned,  one  can  find  a variety  of external  liniments, 
rubbing oils,  salves  and  various  plasters  that can  be  used  externally for 
injuries and  to  promote healing. 
~ 
350 
Fomentations  and Baths 
An  herbal fomentation, also known as  an herbal compress, is  made 
by moistening a flannel  or some other absorbent cloth in an  herbal  tea 
and  laying  on  the  body,  usually  as  warm  as  the  individual  can  bear. 
Herbal  baths are  made by boiling a pot of herb  tea  and pouring it into 
the bathwater and then soaking all or part of the body in it.  It is amazing 
how absorbent the skin  surface can be when something the body needs 
is  applied  onto  it.  Further,  there  is  some  protection  from  any  adverse 
reactions  since  the  skin  also  acts  as  a  natural  barrier  to  prevent  the 
undue  absorption  of an  herb.  This  makes  fomentations  particularly 
useful  for  the  highly sensitive  or babies  and  small  children. 
In  helping  restore  vitality  to  a  part  of the  body  that  has  been 
immobilized  or  weakened  by  a  disease,  the  hot  fomentation  can  be 
alternated  with  a shorter application  of cold water.  Heat serves  to  relax 
the body and open the pores, while cold stimulates the body and causes 
contraction. The  alternation  of hot and  cold will  revitalize  the area. 
Ginger  Fomentation:  A  ginger  fomentation  is  an  excellent  remedy  for 
sore  throats,  lower  back  pain,  lung  congestion  and  phlegm,  sprains, 
cramps,  pains, menstrual cramps, coldness, swellings,  colds, flu,  coughs, 
excessive mucus and strained muscles.  It is also very effective for drawing 
out blood  toxins  and stimulating the circulation.  Placed  over  the lower 
abdomen and perineum during childbirth, it helps  prevent tearing and 
stops  pain. 
It  can  also  be  placed  over  the  chest  for  congested  lungs,  cough, 
asthma and bronchitis (all  from Coldness); over the abdomen for pains, 
spasms,  poor digestion,  coldness,  bladder infections (from  Heat locked 
in by Cold, usually from deficient Kidney Yang)  and menstrual cramps; 
over  the lower back for  pain and ache,  lowered  immunity, Deficient Qi 
and  poor digestion;  and  over any other part of the body where  there  is 
congestion, Stagnation,  sprains,  swellings,  cramps,  pain or coldness. 
To  make  a ginger fomentation, first make an infusion out of fresh 
grated  ginger,  using about 2"  of the root to  1 Q!lart of water.  Next,  dip 
a small cloth (such as  washcloth) into the tea and  let soak for  5 minutes 
to absorb tea.  Using a pair of tongs, lift the cloth out of the tea.  Q!Iickly 
wring it out and  put it over the part of the body where a fomentation is 
desired.  Immediately  cover  the  cloth  with  a  towel.  Place  a  hot  water 
bottle or heating pad  over  the towel  and  cover everything with another 
towel  so  all  is  kept warm.  Leave  on at least  20  minutes. 
You  may want to put a fomentation  on more than once.  Have  the 
second cloth soaking in the tea while resting with the first one on. After 
351 
20  minutes  change  cloths  and  then  leave  the  second  compress  on  for 
another 20  minutes.  A ginger fomentation  can  be  applied  two  times  in 
one day,  or left  on overnight.  Be  sure  to  keep  it warm. 
Castor Oil Compress 
Castor  oil  compress  is  a  fabulous  way  to  rejuvenate  scarred  and 
failing  tissues  and  organs.  The  oil  is  very  close  to  natural  oils  in  the 
body and so  penetrates the cells easily, healing and rejuvenating them. It 
detoxifies,  heals cysts, growths, warts, treats epilepsy,  paralysis and other 
nervous  system  disorders,  stimulates  the  body's  deep  circulation  and 
heals  body  tissues  such  as  detoxifYing  and  healing  liver  disorders  or 
chronic bladder infections (place over the liver and bladder respectively 
for  these).  Apply  the  compress  over  the  affected  area,  be  it  the  liver, 
bladder,  kidneys,  cyst  or other growth. 
Repeated  applications  are  necessary  over  time  to  heal  these 
conditions. Often a pattern is followed  of applying the castor oil compress 
for 4 days in a row and then leaving it off for  3 days. This is  repeated  for 
several  weeks  to months or until  the condition  is  healed. 
Castor  oil  compress  is  made  a  little  differently  than  other 
fomentations.  In  a  pan,  soak  with  castor  oil  a  piece  of felt,  cloth  or 
cheesecloth  cut  to  fit  the desired  area.  Heat  in the oven  till  very warm 
but still  touchable.  Place  over  the desired  area,  cover with  plastic wrap, 
then  follow  the  above  directions  for  a  ginger  fomentation.  Generally, 
this  compress  is  left  on for  several  hours  or overnight. 
Plasters  and Poultices 
A plaster is the application of powdered herbs mixed with a binding 
agent,  such  as  a  little  water  and  flour,  and  spread  onto  a  cloth  and 
applied directly over an affected  area.  An herbal  poultice is  more bulky, 
consisting of an herbal mash that is wrapped up in a protective cloth or 
combined  in  a  thick  base  material  such  as  slippery elm  or  an  oil  and 
then placed  on the skin. It is  first placed  in the cloth or oil because  the 
herbs used  in a poultice are stronger and might burn or extremely irritate 
the  skin  if they  were  put  directly  on  it.  Mustard  and  garlic  are  two 
common examples. 
Poultices  and  plasters  are  both  good  for  muscle  spasms,  swelling, 
arthritis,  rheumatism,  tumors,  fevers,  mucus  congestion  in  the  chest, 
bronchitis and ·pneumonia. They can be used in treating enlarged glands 
and  organs  (neck,  breast,  groin,  kidney,  liver,  prostate)  and  various 
eruptions  (boils,  abscesses).  The  major  difference  is  that  a poultice can 
use  more  healing or vulnerary herbs  and  often  uses  cool  natured  herbs 
~ 
352. 
as  well,  while  a  plaster  more  typically  uses  herbal  essential  oils  and/or 
stimulant  herbs  such  as  cinnamon  bark,  cayenne  pepper  or  mustard 
seed  to  create  a warming counter-irritant effect. 
To  make  the  poultice,  first  choose  herbs  and  powder  them  in  a 
blender  or seed/coffee  grinder.  Add  a little bit of hot water,  herbal  tea, 
liniment or a tincture to powdered herbs and mix to form a thick paste. 
If all  herbs  are  not powdered, make them into tea  first and add some to 
the  rest  of the  powdered  herbs.  Spread  the  paste  on  a  thin  piece  of 
cheesecloth  and wrap  up until  the  paste  is  well  enclosed  in cloth.  Place 
on  the  skin  where  wanted  and  keep  warm  with  a  hot  water  bottle  or 
heating  pad.  Change  frequently  if needed.  Poultices  may  be  applied 
continuously and  over-night  as  needed.  Some  need  to  be  reapplied  and 
kept  on  for  several  days.  Usually,  however,  they  are  applied  from  20 
minutes  to  several  hours  or longer. 
Onion Poultice 
Onions  are  a  natural  antibiotic  and  so  aid  infections  and 
inflammations.  Made  into  a  poultice  and  placed  over  the  lungs,  they 
are  a  tremendous  aid  to  pneumonia,  lung  infection,  bronchial 
inflammation,  asthma  and  will  clear  the  lungs  of mucus  congestion 
and  coldness.  Slice  3  large  onions  {preferably  organic)  and  steam  or 
saute in a little water until slightly soft. Wrap in a cheesecloth and place 
over  the  desired  area,  covering  it with  a towel  and  a hot water bottle or 
heating  pad. 
Mustard  Plaster 
A  mustard  pack,  or  plaster,  is  a  well  known  folk  remedy.  It  is 
excellent  for  aches,  sprains,  spasms,  cold  areas  needing  circulation  and 
to  cause  mucus  expectoration.  It  is  made  with  1  tablespoon  mustard 
powder,  4  tablespoons  whole  wheat  flour  and  enough  water  to  form  a 
paste.  If the  skin  is  sensitive  or  if it  seems  too  strong,  use  an  equal 
amount  of egg  white  instead  of the  water  to  prevent  blistering.  After 
removing the plaster, the skin may be powdered with flour and the area 
wrapped  with  dry cotton. 
Mustard plasters are usually placed on the chest to draw out mucus 
congestion, dispel coldness, aid asthma, eliminate coughs, and heal colds 
and  flus.  It  can  also  be  placed  where  needed  to  treat  body  and  joint 
pains  and  treat watery,  oozing and chronic sores  or boils. 
Other plasters  are  made by mixing powdered  herbs  such  as  ginger, 
cinnamon or cayenne, with honey spread on a cloth with another cloth 
between  the  plaster  material  and  the  skin  to  protect  it  from  over-
stimulating the tissues.  Herbal plasters are also  purchased  in traditional 
Chinese  pharmacies  throughout the world. 
~ 
354 
APPENDIX 
ACCESSORY  HEALING  THERAPiES 
FOR THE  HERBALIST 
Q!1ite  often,  it  is  not  enough  to  just  take  herbs  internally.  Rather, 
additional  therapies  are  needed  as  important  supplementary  healing 
approaches. These help correct any internal imbalances which cause  the 
illness,  as  well  as  speed  up  the  healing  process.  Many of the  following 
therapies  have  been  used  around  the world  and  by various  cultures  for 
thousands of years. Some are shared by different cultures although located 
quite far apart, such as  cupping therapy. Others are unique to the culture 
itself, such as dermal hammer. Some therapies treat the subtle aspects of 
our  beings,  affecting  our  healing  process  through  the  emotions  and 
mind. While  some  therapies  have  direct effects  on the body,  others  are 
less  physically tangible. 
Moxibustion 
Moxibustion  is  a  method  of burning  herbs  on or above  the  skin, 
usually  at  specific  acupuncture  points.  The  heat  warms  and  circulates 
Q!,  Blood  and  Fluids  in  the  body,  and  is  useful  in  the  treatment  of 
disease  and  maintenance of health.  Q!Iite  often  pain  and disease  result 
from  Stagnation of Q!,  Blood  and  Fluids,  and  moxibustion  stimulates 
with  heat  to  alleviate  the  original  blockage  and  correct  the  flow. 
Moxibustion is wonderful for sprains, traumas and injuries. In addition, 
it  stimulates  and  supports  the  immunity  of the  body,  and  eliminates 
Cold  and  Damp,  thus  promoting normal  functioning  of the Organs. 
Although  it can  be  made  from  a variety Of herbs,  moxa  (short  for 
moxibustion)  is  generally  made  from  the  mugwort  plant  (Artemesia 
vulgaris).  This  herb,  while  its  heat  is  mild,  burns  easily  and  penetrates 
deeply  beneath  the  skin  into  the  body.  It comes  in  a variety  of forms, 
either as  the loose wool,  in cones  or as  sticks,  often called  moxa  cigars. 
It can  be  burned either directly on the body or over the surface.  Loose 
green  moxa  is  not. aged  as  long  as  yellow  moxa,  which  is  generally 7-14 
years old. (The yellow moxa burns hotter and is normally used for direct 
moxibustion. The better quality yellow moxa wool  burns cleaner,  faster 
and  at a lower  temperature.) 
Here we  will  only learn  how to  use  moxa  sticks  over  the surface of 
the body. This is a safe and universally useful method. The sticks may be 
~ 
355 
purchased  at  Oriental  medical  suppliers  and  are  not  expensive.  Moxa 
sticks  may  be  made  at  home  by  picking  and  drying  mugwort,  then 
grinding it into a fine  powder,  sifting and filtering  it  to  remove  coarse 
materials and then repeating this entire process  until a fine,  soft, wooly 
powder  results.  It is  then  tightly rolled  up in tissue  paper to  form  a 6" 
long  thick "cigar". 
To  use,  remove  the commercial  paper wrapper (not the white  inner 
paper) from  the stick and light one end.  Hold it about  1 inch from  the 
surface  of the  skin  over  the chosen  area,  the  distance  varying with  the 
tolerance  of the  person  and  the  amount  of heat  stimulation  desired. 
With this  method the stick  is  held  still  and  only moved  when  the heat 
level becomes intolerable. It is  not necessary to withstand the heat beyond 
tolerance levels or to become burned. Heating to the threshold level and 
then  moving  the stick  away  for  a moment is  sufficient. 
If several  points  or areas  are  to  be  warmed,  then  the stick  may be 
moved  to  the  next  place,  coming  back  to  the  original  point  later. 
Normally, the moxa stick is  burned a total of from  5 to  15  minutes over 
each  area,  or until  the skin  becomes  red  in  the vicinity of the  point. 
Another method is  to  use  a circular motion, with  the stick moving 
around and over the desired area. This spreads the focus of the heat over 
large  surface  areas,  and  is  especially  good  for  soft  tissue  injuries,  skin 
disorders  and  larger  areas  of pain.  A  third  method  is  called  "sparrow 
pecking"  - the  moxa  stick  is  rapidly  "pecked"  at  the  point  without 
touching the skin. This enables the heat to penetrate deeply when strong 
stimulation  is  desired.  A  point is  done when  it develops  a  red  or pink 
"flush." 
Whatever  the  method  being  used,  be  sure  to  periodically  tap  the 
ashes off the stick into a container, or they will  fall  on the person's skin 
and burn them. {The ashes may be kept in a jar and used  to stop bleeding, 
externally or internally).  Putting out the moxa stick is  just as  important 
as  learning to use  it.  If not safely extinguished,  it can easily continue to 
smolder  and  potentially  cause  a  fire.  Make  sure  the  stick  is  no  longer 
smoking before you  leave  it and  turn your attention  elsewhere. 
To extinguish moxa sticks, either twist them down into a container 
of rice  or sand, place them in a jar and screw the lid  on tight or wrap  a 
piece  of tin  foil  tightly  around  the lit end. With any  of these  methods 
you  will  not  lose  any of the  stick.  It  is  possible  to  cut  off the  burning 
end,  dousing  the  cut end  in water;  however,  much  of the  stick  is  then 
lost.  Often one can find  a small-holed  candle holder which just fits  the 
stick,  and  placing  the  lit  end  of the  moxa  down  inside  will  effectively 
put it out. A major caution here is  not to put the moxa stick out in dirt. 
Though this seems as if it will work, it doesn't. The moxa stick continues 
to  quietly burn,  potentially causing  a fire. 
The  usefulness  of moxa  is  endless.  When  used  over  the  following 
areas,_ it can  help  the conditions  indicated: 
~ l u n g  congestion, cough, cold, flu, allergies, asthma, bronchitis, 
mucus,  difficulty in breathing and  other Lung complaints. 
Upper abdomen: poor digestion, gas, poor appetite, nausea, vomiting, 
local spasms and cramps and food congestion. Caution: do not use over 
the right upper abdomen near the rib cage as  this is  the residence of the 
Liver,  an  organ  already  too  prone to  Heat. 
Middle abdomen:  poor digestion,  gas,  diarrhea,  local  cramps  and 
spasms,  weakness,  low  energy,  fatigue. 
Lower  abdomen:  gas,  diarrhea,  local  cramps  and  spasms,  bladder 
infections (without the appearance of Blood), low energy, body coldness, 
lowered immunity, menstrual cramps and difficulty, frequent urination, 
night  time  urination,  weakness,  leukorrhea  and  other discharges,  poor 
circulation and  prostate  difficulty. 
Upper  back:  this  will  treat  the  same  conditions  as  listed  under 
chest, only this  area  is  perhaps  not as  sensitive or vulnerable to treat on 
most  people.  To  strengthen  immunity,  especially  treating  the  spine 
between  the 7th cervical  and  first  thoracic vertebrae. 
Middle  back  (waist  level):  Kidney  and  Bladder  disorders,  frequent 
and  night time urination, low back pain,  bone and  disc  problems,  hair 
loss,  knee and other joint pains, lowered  immunity and resistance,  poor 
circulation, coldness, infertility, weakness,  low energy.  Heating this area 
will  raise  the resistance  and energy level  of the entire body,  thus aiding 
all  other bodily organs and systems.  It is  especially good  for vegetarians 
who  tend  to  have  more  Internal  Coldness  than others. 
Lower back: low back pain, menstrual difficulties, leukorrhea, bladder 
infections  and  diarrhea. 
Joints: local pain and swelling, arthritis, aches, soreness, local injuries, 
Coldness  and  congestion. 
Other body parts:  moxa is  useful  over other body parts where there 
is  tension,  soreness,  ache,  arthritis,  cramps  or  spasms  or  any  type  of 
blockage,  and where  healing  is  not occurring. 
Cautions:  A.  few  cautions  do  exist  in  using  moxa,  including  not 
over  the  Liver  as  indicated  above:  Do not burn the  person;  Do not use 
when a fever  exists;  Do not use over areas  of inflammation or infection; 
Do not use  over the lower back or abdomen of pregnant women; Avoid 
use  in  the vicinity of sensory organs  or mucus membranes; If an area  is 
numb or there  is  little feeling  or poor circulation,  take  special  care  not 
~ 
357 
to over-use on those areas because the person cannot feel  as well  in those 
places  and  burning could  easily  occur. 
If for  some  reason  the  person  does  get  burned,  then  a blister will 
form. Take care not to let small blisters break. The fluid will  be absorbed 
without infection.  Large  blisters  may break and  so  should be  dressed  to 
prevent  infection. 
Note: An interesting note here is  the use of moxibustion for  injuries. 
Western  medicine usually defines any injury as  inflammation and  thus 
promotes  the use  of ice over  the affected  area.  Seemingly heat would  be 
contraindicated in these situations. Yet,  from  the viewpoint of Chinese 
medicine  the  opposite  is  true.  While  ice  numbs  and  stops  the  heavy 
influx of inflammation and infection-fighting cells,  thus decreasing the 
pain,  the  long  term  results  are  blocked  energy  and  Blood  (caused  by 
Cold),  a slower  healing  process  and  a  longer  duration  of pain.  Ice  and 
coldness slow  down  circulation and  congeal  the  Blood,  just  as  ice  on a 
river  stops  the  flow  of water  on  the  top.  The  flow  of energy  is  then 
blocked,  also. 
With  the  application  of heat (the  sooner  the  better),  fresh  energy 
and  Blood  are  immediately  brought  to  the  location  for  healing  with 
continued  circulation.  The  heat  also  alleviates  the  pain  and  actually 
quickens  the  healing  process,  especially over  the long  run.  This  is  true 
of wounds,  too.  The only time  moxa  should  not be  used  in these  cases 
is  where  a  true  inflammation  occurs  (with  redness  and  swelling),  and 
this  will  be  indicated  by  extreme  redness  of the  skin  and  possible  pus 
formation.  For  injuries  such  as  broken  bones,  ice  can  be  used  first, 
alternating with  moxibustion. 
Other:  If moxibustion  is  not  available  and  heat  is  needed,  a  hot 
water  bottle,  stones,  bags  of sand  or  salt  heated  in  an  oven  or  on  a 
woodstove  are  good  alternatives. 
Cupping 
Cupping  is  a  folk  technique  which  has  been,  and  still  is,  widely 
used by people in Greece, Turkey, Poland, Czech Republic, Iraq, Germany, 
France,  South  America,  Japan,  Indonesia,  India  and  China.  It is  the 
treatment of disease by suction of the skin surface.  A vacuum  is  created 
in  small  jars which  are  then  attached  to  the  body surface.  The vacuum 
pulls  the  skin  into  a  mound  formation  in  the  cups,  pulling  inner 
congestion  and  Heat (both  Excess  and  Deficient)  in  the body upwards 
and  out.  After  the  cups  are  removed,  the  skin  will  appear  slightly 
discolored  or even  bruised.  This  may  take  several  days  to  clear,  but the 
painful  condition will  usually be  significantly  relieved. 
To  do  cupping,  you  will  need  several  jars  or  cups  with  even  and 
smooth  rims.  Good  cups  to  use  are  the  small  brandy  snifters,  votive 
candle  holders  or  baby  food  jars.  However,  wine  glasses  or  other  light 
weight  and  thin  glasses  may  also  be  used.  Specially made  bamboo cups 
or glass  or plastic cups  made  for  this  purpose  may also  be  purchased  at 
Chinese  medical  supply  stores.  You  will  also  need  some  cotton  balls, 
forceps  or other  metal  holder,  such  as  tweezers  or stick  for  the  cotton, 
or alternately a candle  and  some  rubbing alcohol  as  well  as  matches  or 
a cigarette  lighter. 
Have  the  person  and  all  your  tools  in  place  before  starting.  Then 
attach  the cotton ball  to  a stick or forceps  and  lightly dip it in  alcohol. 
Ignite  the  cotton  and  while  burning,  insert  it  into  the  cup.  Hold  the 
cup so  its  mouth opening is  down or the flame can burn your hand.  Be 
sure to hold the cotton in the body of the cup and not near the opening 
so  the lip of the cup doesn't get  hot.  If you  are  using a candle,  hold  the 
cup  over  the  flame  for  a  short  time,  then  quickly  place  on  the  skin  as 
above.  This  will  evacuate  some  of the  air,  causing  a  partial  vacuum 
within  the cup.  Often the vacuum can be  "seen" by a slight clouding in 
the cup. Withdraw cotton stick and  quickly place  mouth of cup firmly 
against  the skin  at the desired  location. Suction should  hold it in place. 
Check  by  lightly tugging  at  the cup. 
Another  method  is  to  hold  the  cup  downward,  close  to  the  area 
where  it  is  to  be  applied,  and  simply  pass  a  lighted  match  or cigarette 
lighter in the cup and quickly lower it down onto the skin. The Ayurvedic 
method  is  to  wrap  a  small  coin,  such  as  a  penny,  in  a  thin  piece  of 
cotton or gauze,  tying  it securely with a thread  or rubber band. Cut the 
remaining  fabric  about  1/2"  from  the  point  of tying,  creating  a  small 
wick.  Dip this end  into some oil  or alcohol, light with  a match and  put 
on the body where  the  cup  is  to  be  placed.  Then  immediately place  the 
cup over the ignited covered  coin. This will  automatically put the flame 
out  and  create  a  perfect  suction.  The  wrapped  coins  may  be  reused 
several  times,  dipping their wicks  in oil  again  before  each  use. 
Be  careful  not to  leave  the cotton stick in the cup too long, as  this 
will  cause  a  hot  cup  and  could  burn  the  person.  Conversely,  if the 
cotton  stick  is  not  left  in  long  enough,  suction will  not  occur and  the 
cup  will  fall  off w:hen  tugged  gently.  Practice  will  yield  desired  results, 
and  it is  easier  to  do  than  it  may  sound. 
As  an  alternative, a plastic or glass cupping set can be purchased. It 
contains a plunger which slides on top of the cup and sucks  out the air 
with  pumping  strokes.  This  method  is  very  quick,  easy  and  portable. 
For  purchasing,  see  the Appendix,  Sources  and  Resources. 
~ 
359 
To  remove  cups,  let  air  into  the  cup  by  holding  it  in  one  hand 
while the other hand presses the skin at the rim of the jar. You may need 
to gently slide your pressing finger down and under the rim in order to 
break  the seal.  The cup  should  then  pop  of£ 
Cups should be retained in place from 5 to  15  minutes, depending 
on the strength of suction. Especially in hot weather,. or when cupping 
over  shallow  flesh,  the  duration  of treatment  should  not be  too  long. 
Often I  have  seen  the  cups  pop  off for  no  apparent  reason.  Body hair 
can  break  the  suction,  so  it  may  be  necessary  to  shave  the  area  where 
they are to be applied. A characteristic dark discoloration usually occurs 
under the cups  to indicate where  the congestion and  pain was  centered. 
This  may  take  1 - 10  days  to  disappear.  I  have  also  seen  small  blisters 
appear which should be d1essed and treated to prevent infection. Because 
of this  it  is  a  good  idea  to  advise  the  patient  accordingly  before 
administering this therapy. 
Cupping is  done over areas where there is  swelling,  pain, congestion 
or Stagnation, either of Qi, Blood or Fluids. Thus, it is good  for edema, 
swellings, asthma, bronchitis, dull aches and pains, arthritis, abdominal 
pain,  stomachache,  indigestion,  headache,  low  back  pain,  painful 
menstruation,  coughs  from  excessive  mucus,  and  places  where  bodily 
movement  is  limited  and  painful. They  are  also  placed  over  the  upper 
and  middle  back  for  colds  and  flu. 
Cautions:  Cupping  should  not  be  done  during  high  fever, 
convulsions or cramps, or over allergic skin conditions, ulcerated  sores, 
or on  the  abdomen  or lower  backs  of pregnant women.  It will  also  be 
difficult  or impossible  to  apply  over  areas  with  irregular  body angles, 
where the muscles are thin, the skin is  not level or where there is  a lot of 
body hair. 
Scraping 
Scraping, called  "Gua Sha,"  has  a similar purpose to  cupping:  that 
is  to  create  a  counter-irritation  on  the  surface  of the  skin  to  relieve 
subcutaneous  Stagnation  and  inflammation. Various  tools  can  be  used 
ranging  from  a  special  round  piece  of Jade,  a  coin  or  the  edge  of a 
Chinese ceramic soup spoon. The method is  to simply apply oil on the 
skin and scrape vigorously over  affected  areas  of pain or spasm  such  as 
cervical whiplash,  shoulder, arm, or leg  spasm or even  over  areas  of the 
abdomen. The process can be sensitive, but for most it is bearable because 
relief is  immediate. There may be some minor bruising or reddening of 
the  skin  surface  which  usually  vanishes  in  a  few  days.  However,  the 
patient should be  advised  in advance  of this  likely  outcome. 
The main difference between cupping and scraping is  that cupping 
has  a more localized  benefit, whereas  scraping can cover a broader area 
and  can  even  be  used  along  meridians  to  open  the  flow  of Q!  and 
Blooct. 
Dermal Hammer 
A dermal  hammer is  an acupuncture tool which  has a long handle 
supporting  a  head  which  holds  a  cluster  of small  individual  needles. 
The needles  are  not sharp,  but dull,  and  they can  puncture  the skin  or 
not, depending on the use. Several needles striking the skin simultaneously 
cause  less  pain  and  stimulate  a  wider  surface  area  than  does  a  single 
needle. They are  more suitable for use on small children, those sensitive 
to  pain and  those who  desire  to  treat  themselves. 
Other names  for  dermal  hammers are  seven  star needle and plum-
blossom  needle,  both  having  a  different  number  and  arrangement  of 
needles. They may be purchased at Chinese medical supply stores. As  an 
alternative, you can make a similar, though less effective, device (because 
it  is  missing  the  springing action  of the  handle),  by bundling together 
about  10-30  toothpicks  and  binding  them with  a rubber band. 
The dermal  hammer is  rarely used  over a single point, but rather is 
applied  over  a broad  area,  tapping across  the skin  more  in  the  manner 
of pecking  than  puncturing.  Where  an  area  has  been  stimulated,  the 
skin  becomes  reddened  and  moist.  In general,  it should  not be  painful 
or cause  bleeding. 
Dermal hammers are  tapped over local areas of pain and congestion, 
over  numbness,  areas  of hair loss,  around sites  of wounds and localized 
diseases,  blocked  areas  of Stagnant  Q!  and  Blood,  aches,  spasms  and 
local  skin  diseases.  Tapping  may  be  administered  on the  meridian  and 
relevant  points  to  open  the  flow  of Q!  and  therapeutically benefit  the 
corresponding  internal  Organ.  With  this  approach  many  internal  and 
chronic  diseases  can  be  treated,  such  as  headache,  dizziness,  vertigo, 
insomnia,  menstrual  disorders,  hypertension  and  gastrointestinal 
disorders. Any acupuncture, acupressure or Shiatsu text will give diagrams 
of the  acupuncture  meridians  and  points. 
To  use,  hold  the dermal hammer by its  handle 1-2  inches from  the 
skin, then lightly and repeatedly tap over the desired area with a flexible 
movement of the wrist.  If you  know acupuncture points or meridians it 
may  be  done over  them,  but just  the  general  area  to  be  treated  will  do. 
The  tapping  should  be  done  continuously  for  5-10  minutes,  until  the 
skin becomes red and moist. Do not break the skin and cause bleeding. 
(If you do, the dermal hammer must be sterilized before using on someone 
else.)  Treatment  may be  repeated  several  times  a  day  for  many  days  or 
until  the  problem is  alleviated. 
If many areas of the body are to be treated or acupuncture meridians 
used,  then generally the tapping follows  a traditional sequence:  first do 
the  center  of the  body,  then  sides;  first  do  the  top  of the  body  then 
move  down  to  the  feet;  first  do  the  back,  then  front  This  sequence  is 
traditional, whether  using  needles,  moxa  or dermal  hammer. 
Sterilization:  Dermal  hammers  should be  sterilized  by cooking in 
a pressure cooker at 15  lbs.  pressure for 20 minutes before and after each 
use. 
Cautions:  Do not use  on anyone who  has  a blood-carried  disease, 
such as  hepatitis or AIDS.  Do not break the skin and cause bleeding.  If 
you  are  experimenting with  the  dermal  hammer  and  cause  the  skin  to 
bleed, be  sure to sterilize it before using it on someone else.  Do not use 
in  areas  where  there  are  ulcerations  or  traumatic  injuries,  or  during 
acute  infectious  disease  or acute  abdominal disorders. 
Magnet Therapy 
Magnet therapy,  a  method  of treating disease  with  magnets,  dates 
far back into antiquity: the Chinese, ancient Egyptians and Greeks utilized 
naturally occurring lodestone taken  internally as  a mineral  and applied 
externally to treat a wide variety of complaints. Today, permanent magnets 
of very high gauss strength are electronically manufactured using a variety 
of alloys. 
Being one of the most powerful  methods of alternative treatment, 
magnet  therapy  is  often  effective  in  relieving  inflammation  and  pain 
more quickly and efficiently than either herbal medicine or acupuncture. 
Properly speaking, magnet therapy warrants  a full  discussion of its  own 
beyond the scope of this work, to which we direct the reader to Michael's 
book, Biomagnetic Therapy and Herbal Medicine (see bibliography). However, 
since at least in principle, it is  the simplest and one of the safest methods 
of treatment,  making  a  powerful  adjunctive  treatment  modality  for 
herbalists,  the basic  theory and  method  of using  magnets  is  presented 
as  follows: 
Essentially magnet therapy consists of placing permanent magnets 
(as  opposed to magnets generated by an active electrical field) of selected 
strengths  and  sizes  over  affected  areas  of the  body to  treat disease.  The 
main considerations for  magnet therapy are:  1.  Determining what areas 
of the body require treatment, 2. Selecting the size and strength magnets, 
3.  Determining, if relevant,  the appropriate  North or South polarity of 
the  magnet  to  apply directly to  the  body. 
1)  Determining Areas  of the Body to  be Treated with Magnets: 
The  first  method  is  to  apply  magnets  directly  to  the  most  highly 
reactive or sensitive areas called "trigger points". Another approach uses 
acupuncture points both near and  distal  to the site of the affected  area. 
This  can  be  combined  with  the  use  of magnets  over  the  site  of vital 
Organs  that may be  involved  with  the  presenting condition. 
For  instance,  if the  problem  involves  a headache,  magnets  can  be 
applied to  the temples, forehead  or the base of the occiput. Usually, this 
alone is enough to relieve most headaches. However, if it is unresponsive 
or tends  to  be chronic, we  might select areas  over  the Liver,  Stomach or 
relevant  acupoints  along  the spine or meridians  involved. 
2)  Choosing the Appropriate Type, Size and Strength Magnet 
Magnets  come  in  various  types,  sizes  and  strengths.  Magnetic 
strength  is  classified  as  follows: 
Low  gauss 
Medium  gauss 
300-700 g 
1000-2500 g 
High gauss 
Super gauss 
3000-6000 g 
7000 - 12000  g 
Generally speaking, it is best to begin by applying low gauss magnets. 
Use  low strength  magnets on the sensitive, weak,  small children or very 
aged.  The inexperienced should only use  lower strength magnets on the 
head  or chest. 
There  are  large  bulky circular or bar magnets  that are  intended  to 
be  applied  to  the  affected  area  for  a  prescribed  period  of time  two  or 
three  times  a day  for  usually around  30  minutes.  This  method  is  most 
suitable  for  high  strength  magnets. 
Smaller acupoint magnets come with a self sticking adhesive. These 
are intended to be applied to specific trigger points, acupoints, or affected 
areas. 
Flexible  bipolar  magnets  are  flat  and  generally  much  wider  and 
cover  a larger  area.  They are  generally of lower  gauss  strength, but their 
bipolar  configuration  increases  their  therapeutic  effect  of helping  to 
increase  Blood  circulation  by  dilating  Blood  vessels.  Because  they are 
bipolar  and  do  not  necessitate  determining  the  use  of the  magnet's 
North or South polarity, they are simpler to use by the inexperienced or 
novtce. 
3)  Determining the correct application of the North and South 
Correctly  applying  the  North  or South  facing  magnet,  especially 
in  higher  strength  magnets,  is  essential  to  successful  treatment.  The 
North facing  side  of a magnet  is  Cooling and  anti-inflammatory.  It is 
used  for  acute  pain,  inflammation  and  to  disperse  Stagnations  of all 
kinds. The South facing  side is Warming and strengthening. It tends  to 
coalesce  the  energy  and  should  be  used  for  tonification  and  for  more 
chronic conditions. 
To check which side of a magnet is North or South, place a compass 
within the field  of the magnet.  If the North pointing end of the needle 
turns  towards  the  magnet,  that  is  the  North  side  and  should  be 
appropriately marked  for  facility of use. 
In general, one should begin with the North side first and if results 
are  unsatisfactory,  simply reverse  the  polarity to  South.  Since  there can 
be acute inflammatory episodes associated with chronic conditions, there 
are  many conditions for which a combined North and South bipolar is 
more effective than either used alone. Further, there are conditions where 
one might place a North facing  magnet over the acutely sensitive area of 
pain  and  inflammation  and  a  South  facing  magnet  over  a  depleted 
Organ, such  as  the lower  back  for  the  Kidneys  and  Adrenals. 
Contraindications for Magnet  Therap;r 
For  obvious  reasons,  magnets  should  not  be  used  on  individuals 
with  pacemakers,  metal  pins  or  metal  parts  in  the  body.  They  should 
also be avoided during pregnancy. Strong magnets can be very dangerous 
when  they  are  placed  near  each  other.  Care  and  proper  handling  is 
essential to prevent injury of fingers or other delicate bodily parts. Strong 
magnets are  usually a ceramic  ferrite  alloy that can  easily shatter,  so  the 
proper  method  of attaching  and  separating  them  should  be  to  slide 
them together and apart when needed.  Finally, magnets will demagnetize 
computer  hard  disks,  other  computer  disks,  credit  cards,  CD's  and 
magnetic  tapes,  so  care  should  be  taken  to  keep  these  away  from  all 
magnetic  products. 
Nasal Wash 
Nasal wash  is  a procedure of washing the nostrils out with water or 
an  herbal  solution.  This  can  be  done  to  wash  just  the  nostrils,  or  to 
additionally  wash  the  throat.  Doing  this  aids  sinus  congestion  and 
infections, stuffy nose, allergies, difficulty of breathing through the nose, 
sore  throats and especially recurring sinus  and  throat infections. It may 
be  done on a preventative basis  once a day  first  thing  in  the  morning, 
or several  times a  day  in  the  case  of an  infection.  This  is  traditioilally 
done by yogis  in  India to  help clear the  air passages  for  their breathing 
practices,  and  is  called  neti. 
1 
To  do a nasal wash you will  need  a water container that has a small 
spout,  such  as  some  watering  pots  have.  Alternatively,  a  bulb  syringe, 
squeeze  bottle,  eyedropper  or  turkey  baster  work  fine.  Fill  this  with 
about 2 cups water or herbal solution. Place the end of the spout in the 
right  nostril while  you  tilt your  head  to  the  left.  Now  slowly  pour the 
solution  into  the  nostril,  making  sure  it  comes  out  the  left  nostril, 
rather than the one it is  going in. You  may have  to  adjust your head  or 
tilt it more to make  sure this happens. Continue doing this  for half the 
solution.  Be  sure  to  locate  yourself over a sink for  this  therapy! 
Now  reverse  sides,  inserting  the  spout  into  the  left  nostril  while 
tilting your  head  to  the  right and  making sure  the solution  comes  out 
the  right nostril.  Use  up the rest  of the solution on this side.  At first  it 
may seem  difficult,  if not impossible,  for  the solution  to come out the 
opposite nostril. This is  because of the mucus blockage in the airways at 
the root of the  nose. With repeated  attempts,  however,  it will  come out 
the opposite side and create a wonderful clearing of your nasal passages. 
You  will  be  amazed  at  how well  you  can  breathe afterwards. 
Another method involves pouring the solution alternately through 
the  right  and  left  nostrils  and  having  it  run  down  the  throat  and  out 
the mouth. For this, the head needs to be tilted backwards so the solution 
doesn't go  out either nostril  but down  the  throat instead. This  method 
treats  the  throat  directly.  Often  recurring  and  chronic  sore  throats, 
tonsillitis  and  other  throat  infections  occur  because  the  bacteria  that 
causes  them stay in the passages between  the nose and the throat. These 
bacteria  cannot  be  reached  with  the  traditional  gargle  or  throat 
medication.  Using a nasal  wash  so  it  runs down  the  throat is  about the 
only (comfortable) way  to  reach  it. 
When first  doing nasal  wash,  there  may be  a burning sensation in 
your nose,  similar to  that of getting water up the nose while swimming. 
This  goes  away,  however,  and  the  process  gets  more  comfortable  with 
time  and  practice. 
Using  a warm  salt water  solution with  a  nasal  wash  is  effective  in 
preventing  and  clearing  up  infections  and  inflammations.  It  kills  the 
bacteria causing these, as  many people can confirm who have experienced 
a warm  salt water  gargle  heal  their sore  throats. Alternatively,  an  herbal 
tea  may  be  m a d ~  and  used  as  the  wash  instead.  Good  herbs  to  use 
include  antibiotic,  alterative  and  anti-inflammatory  herbs,  such  as 
echinacea,  chaparral,  red  clover,  dandelion  and  goldenseal  (which  is 
especially valuable since it tones the mucus membranes) and astringents 
such as  raspberry, calendula and squawvine. A small amount of demulcent 
may  be  added,  like  marshmallow  or  licorice,  to  soothe  inflamed  and 
irritated tissues. Make up your own customized solution and experiment 
to  find  your favorite  ones. 
Q!GONG 
Qi Gong  means  to work with one's Qi. It represents a broad body 
of study, knowledge and discipline where, like yoga, one combines breath 
and specific movements to open and  direct the flow of Qi to vital areas 
of the  body.  What is  known  as  Qi Gong  has,  according  to  Bob  Flaws
2
, 
"been  practiced  in  China since  not less  than  400  BC."  He  goes  on to 
state  that "during the  Han dynasty,  a scholar  named Wei  Bo Yan  wrote 
a book on what has  now come to be known as  Qi Gong." It was entitled 
Chan  Tong  .Qj  (Three  in  One)  and  discusses  the  relationship  between 
Taoism, the I-Ching and Qi Gong. This book establishes the relationship 
of Qi Gong  to  "Jing  Essence,  Qi and  Shen-spirit." 
The  next  most  famous  exponent  of Qi  Gong  was  the  Taoist 
acupuncturist  and  herbalist,  Hua Tuo  who  also  lived  during  the  Han 
dynasty.  He  developed  a  series  of Qi  Gong  exercises  based  on  the 
movements  of various  animals  such  as  the  tiger  and  the  crane. 
Down through the ages  and  up to  the  present,  literally thousands 
of forms  of Qi Gong are  practiced  by  the  Chinese  to  maintain  health 
and develop specific powers and capacities. Qi Gong is  similar to Tai Qi 
and other Chinese martial arts forms except that it has no use in fighting. 
Tai Qi, practiced as  a series of complex movements, is  regarded as  a very 
complete and  powerful  Qi Gong  practice  in itself. 
The following simple Qi Gong practice is excerpted with permission 
of the author from  Imperial Secrets  of Health  and Longevity
3
: 
Tbe  Rising Eagle 
The  following  is  a  very  simple  Don  Gong,  or  moving  Qi  Gong, 
exercise. It helps  to circulate the Qi, store the Qi and Jing Essence in the 
lower  Dan Tian,  and  rids  the  Lungs  of stale  air.  It is  a good  exercise  to 
do on waking  in the  morning as  per  Qian Long's  suggestion. 
Begin  by  standing  erect  with  feet  planted  shoulder  width  apart. 
The head and torso should be erect. The butt and hips should be allowed 
to release  and  slide forward,  thus straightening out the curve of the low 
back.  In  addition,  the  knees  should  be  slightly  bent  and  the  weight 
should be evenly distributed over the entire foot,  leaning neither on the 
heels  nor the balls  and  toes.  Relax  the  shoulders and  let  the arms _hang 
to  one's  side  with  the  fingers  gently  extended.  The  breath  should  be 
through the nose with  the  mouth gently shut. Breathe in by expanding 
the lower abdomen and breathe out by contracting the lower abdomen. 
As  one breathes, let the feeling of the mind, the feeling of consciousness, 
sink to the lower Dan Tian. This is  a spot 3-4  inches below the navel and 
a third of the way  into the body. One should try to keep  the mind fixed 
in this place or space and  do the following exercise  from  the lower  Dan 
Tian. 
As  one breathes  in,  let  the wrists  float  up to  the level  of the chest. 
Feel  as  if there were  a string attached  to  the wrists  picking  up the  arm 
from  that point. As  the wrists reach the level of the chest, begin exhaling 
and  let  the  hands  move  forward  until  the  arms  are  almost straight out 
in  front  of one.  Then  breathe  in  and  let  the  hands  and  arms  float  up 
over  one's  head.  Breathe out and  sink slowly into the knees  as  the arms 
move  out  to  the  sides  and  down.  Keeping  the  knees  bent,  the  hands 
move  down  and  across  the  legs,  left  hand  passing  over  right.  As  the 
hands  swing  apart again,  begin  to  breathe  in but do  not straighten  the 
legs.  One  should  remain  with  the  knees  bent  and  buttocks  tucked 
underneath  the hips. As  the hands  reach  the level  of the shoulders, one 
turns  the  palms  over  so  that they are  facing  downward.  Then  exhaling, 
the  hands  push  down  as  one  rises  from  the  bent  position.  Again  the 
wrists are drawn up towards  the level of the chest as  one breathes in, and 
the  entire  exercise  is  repeated. 
When  doing  this  exercise  there  a  number  of things  to  keep  in 
mind.  First,  the mind leads  the breath, the breath leads  the Q!,  and  it is 
the  Q!  that  leads  the  motion.  The Q!  goes  where  the  mind  and  breath 
lead  it.  That's why what we  call  moving Q! Gong today was  simply part 
of what was  called  Dao Yin,  or leading and  guiding. As  one moves,  feel 
as  though  the air is  as  thick as  water.  Try  to  move very slowly with one 
motion blending into the next. Try to accomplish each  movement with 
the  minimal  amount  of physical  strain  or  effort.  Let  the  entire  body 
remain  relaxed  yet  erect  as  if suspended  from  a string tied  to  the crown 
of the  head.  Repeat  this  exercise  9 times.  . 
Another more famous Q! Gong practice that has infinite variations 
is  known  as  The  Eight  Silk  Brocades  (Ba  Duan Jin)  as  follows: 
Supporting  the  Sky  with  the  Hands 
Preparation Pose:  Stand relaxed  and erect,  looking straight ahead while 
breathing gently through  the  nose: 
Slowly  raise  the  arms  upwards  and  sideways  until  the  fingers  of the 
hands  lock  over  the  head  as  if holding  up  the  sky.  At  the  same  time 
gradually  lift  the  heels  off the ground.  Lower  the  arms  and  heels  and 
return  to  the  starting  posture.  Repeat  several  times. 
Benefits:  it relaxes  the muscles  of the arms,  legs  and  torso and with the 
deep  breathing benefits  the Lungs,  abdomen  and  pelvis. 
Horse  Riding  Posture:  This  stance  is  assumed  after  the  preparation 
pose in several  of the Brocades.  It is  accomplished by spreading the feet 
apart,  slightly wider  than  the  shoulders,  bending the ·knees  so  they  are 
aligned  over  the  toes,  pushing  the  buttocks  forward  and  keeping  the 
spine erect. 
The Archer Drawing the  Bow Left and Right 
Preparation  pose: 
Step out to the left, bending the knees to assume the horse riding posture. 
Cross  the arms  in front of the chest,  right  arm  outside and  left  inside. 
Extend  the  thumb and  forefinger  of the left  hand with  the other three 
fingers  curled  while  moving  the  left  arm  out  to  the  left  with  the  eyes 
following.  Simultaneous  with  this,  clench  the  right  hand  gently  as  if 
pulling back  the string of a bow. 
Return  to  the starting posture. 
Repeat  the first  step  but to  the opposite side. 
Return  to  the starting  posture. 
Repeat several  times, breathing in with steps  1 and  3 and  out with steps 
2 and  4. 
Benefits: Benefits the Lungs, Heart and Liver. Promotes Blood circulation 
and  stretches  the shoulders  and  arms. 
Separating  Heaven  and Earth  by  Raising Arm  Upwards 
Preparation  pose: 
Raise  the  right  arm  over  the  head  with  the  palm  and  fingers  facing 
upwards  and  to  the  right.  The  fingers  should  be  together.  At  the  same 
time the left hand goes downward with the left hand and fingers  pointing 
downward  and  straight forward. 
Return  to  the  preparation pose. 
Repeat step one except to the opposite side and with the opposite hands. 
Return  to  the preparation  pose. 
Repeat  many times. 
Benefits: Opposite stretching of the arms affects the Liver, Gall Bladder, 
Spleen  and  Stomach and  helps  the  digestive  system. 
Twisting  and Looking Backward 
Preparation  pose:  Begin  with  the  hands gently touching the thighs. 
Turn head  slowly to the left, rolling the eyeballs  in the same direction as 
the  turn  and  looking backwards  as  much  as  possible. 
Return  to  the  preparation  pose. 
Repeat  in  the  opposite direction. 
Repeat several times breathing out with steps  1 and 3 and in with step 2. 
Benefits: Increases strength and flexibility of the neck muscles. Benefits 
the eyes  and  strengthens  the  nervous  system. 
Q]telling Heart  Fire  Rotating the  Head and Body 
Assume  the  horse  riding  posture  with  the  legs  wide  apart.  Place  the 
palms  of the  hands  on the  thighs,  thumbs  pointing outward: 
Bend  forward,  making  a circular  movement from  the waist  toward  the 
left.  At  the same  time  allow  the buttocks  to  move  to the  right. 
Return  to  the  preparatory horse  riding  posture. 
Repeat  step  one  in  the opposite direction. 
Return  to  the preparatory horse  riding  posture. 
Repeat several  times, breathing in with steps  1 and 3 and out with steps 
2 and  4. 
Benefits:  Good  for  relaxing  the entire  body and  clearing  the  mind. 
Raising the  Heels  Upward 
Stand  upright  in the  first  preparatory posture. 
1.  Slowly  raise  both  heels  off the floor,  keeping  both legs  straight. 
Slowly  lower  them  to  the ground. 
Repeat  seven  times  with a regular  slow breath. 
Benefits: A simple but powerful exercise said to be good for "100 diseases". 
It helps  the  spine and  all  the internal  Organs. 
Punching Forward the  Tiger 
Preparation  pose:  Stand  with  legs  shoulder width apart with  fists  and 
palms  upward  at waist  level.  Assume  the  horse  riding  posture: 
With  glaring  eyes,  slowly  punch  right  fist  forward,  right fist  down  and 
left  fist  lightly clenched  pointing upward  at waist  level. 
Return  to  preparation  posture. 
Repeat  step  one with  opposite arms  to the opposite side. 
Return  to  preparation  posture. 
Variations  of this  practice  are  to  punch  alternately  forward,  diagonally 
and  to  the sides. 
Benefits: This is  an active version of the yogic Lion pose and its essence 
is  in  releasing  anger  through  the  eyes.  This  helps  clear  the  Liver  and 
builds  energy and vitality. 
Bending  Over to  Hold the  Feet  with  Both  Hands 
Stand  in upright preparatory pose: 
Keep  the knees  straight but slightly bent as  the entire upper torso bends 
forward,  reaching  the  toes  or as  close  as  possible. 
Rise  to  upright position. 
Put  palms  of the  hands  on  the  lower  back  and  slowly  bend  backward 
without straining. 
Return  to  upright position. 
Repeat  many times  with  normal breath. 
Benefits: This exercise is  good to increase flexibility and strengthen the 
Kidneys.  It should  be  practiced  with  caution  by  those with  lower  back 
weakness. 
Breathing  Exercises 
The  Four  Purifications
4 
The  Four  Purifications  are  a  set  of breathing  exercises  which  are 
extremely  beneficial  to  the  body,  mind  and  spirit.  Consisting  of four 
different  breathing  techniques,  they  calm  the  body,  quiet  the  mind, 
energize and rejuvenate the entire body and mind, tone the Lungs, Blood, 
circulation, brain, Internal Organs, Heart and give strength to the whole 
body.  Interestingly,  in  Chinese  medicine  the  Lungs  are  considered 
responsible in part for giving  the body strength. The  Lungs  have always 
been associated with air and its essential and vital  life-giving properties. 
These  breathing exercises  further  purify the  nerve channels  in the 
body, clear and stimulate the digestive system and strengthen the nervous 
system.  Thus,  they  aid  such  ailments  as  nervousness,  insomnia, 
indigestion, lung and breathing problems,  poor circulation, low energy 
and  vitality,  fatigue,  lethargy  and  poor  memory.  As  such,  they  are 
invaluable for  helping the  body recover  from  many health  problems. 
For those who have  never done any breathing practices, these  four 
techniques  are  safe  to  do.  For  those  already  doing  their  own  form  of 
breathing practices,  these  are  a perfect  adjunct and  starting exercise:  Sit 
quietly with  your back straight,  either in a  chair with  your  feet  on  the 
floor or on the floor with  your  legs  crossed.  For  those who  desire,  you 
~ 
370 
may concentrate your attention on the space between the eyebrows while 
doing  these  exercises. 
The four breathing techniques are:  alternate nostril breathing, skull 
shining,  fire  wash  and  horse  mudra.  Do them  in the order given.  After 
practicing them for  a few  months, move on to the intermediate method 
described  at  the  end. 
Alternate Nostril Breathing (Nadis.bod.bana) 
Begin  by  gently exhaling all  air.  Then  close  the  right  nostril  with 
the thumb of the right  hand and  inhale slowly and deeply through the 
left  nostril. When  finished,  close  the left nostril with the  ring finger  of 
the right hand, releasing the thumb, and exhale slowly and fully through 
the  right  nostril.  Next,  immediately inhale through the  right  nostril  in 
a slow  and  steady  manner.  Finally, close  the  right nostril with  the  right 
thumb again, releasing the ring finger, and exhale through the left nostril. 
This completes one round. Begin with ten rounds and gradually increase 
to  forty. 
This  exercise  alone  is  extremely  beneficial  to  the  body.  It  is  very 
quieting  to  the  mind  and  strengthens  the  nervous  system.  It induces  a 
wonderfully calm state, releases nervous tension, anxiety, agitation, anger 
and  other  disruptive  emotions,  and  helps  you  sleep  better.  It  also 
oxygenates  the  system,  thus  aiding  in  the  circulation  of energy  and 
Blood in the body. This in turn stimulates the proper functioning of all 
the  internal  organs.  Continued  practice  of alternate  nostril  breathing 
will  strengthen  the Lungs  and  breath control. 
Skull Shining (  Kapala B.batt} 
Skull shining is  a series of forced  exhalations with the breath.  Begin 
by inhaling quickly and lightly through both nostrils. Then quickly and 
fully exhale all  the breath through both nostrils.  Emphasize  the exhale, 
letting  the  inhalation  come as  a  natural  reflex.  Repeat  this  pattern  for 
one  round  consisting  of thirty  exhalations.  After  each  round,  which 
should last no longer than one minute, rest and breathe naturally. Then 
repeat  the  round.  Begin  with  three  rounds  of thirty  exhalations  each 
and  gradually increase  to  ten  rounds of sixty exhalations  each. 
This  method  purifies  the head  area, which calms  the  thoughts and 
the  breath  and  aids  the  mind.  As  in  alternate  nostril  breathing,  skull 
shining helps release nervous tension, balance the emotions and circulate 
energy and  Blood  in the body.  It also  strengthens the Lungs  and breath 
control. 
Caution:  Persons  with  high  blood  pressure  or lung disease  should 
not  practice  skull  shining. 
371 
Fire  Wash  (Agnisara D!Jautt) 
This  exercise  is  performed  with  all  the  air  held  out of the  body. 
Begin  by  taking  a  normal  inhalation  and  exhalation,  letting  all  the  air 
out  from  the  body.  Then  lean  forward,  resting  your  hands  on  your 
knees  and  holding  the  breath  out,  pull  the  diaphragm  up  and  toward 
the  backbone  and  then  release  it  suddenly.  Repeat·  this  in-and-out 
movement rapidly,  as  long as  the breath can be held  out without strain, 
about thirty pulls. Then inhale gently. This makes one round. Start with 
three  rounds,  gradually  increasing  to  ten.  Begin  with  thirty  pulls  per 
breath and  work  up  to  sixty. 
This  method  strengthens  the  "navel  lock"  frequently  used  in 
breathing exercises and creates heat at the navel center (manipura chakra), 
which  purifies  the  nerve  channels,  stimulates  the  digestive  system, 
increases  gastric  fire,  strengthens  the  Lungs  and  alleviates  indigestion, 
abdominal  diseases  and  menstrual  disorders. 
Horse Mudra  (As!JviniMudra) 
This  fourth  exercise  is  an  internal  movement of the anal  sphincter 
muscle.  Begin  by  inhaling  a  complete  and  full  breath  and  hold  the 
breath  in.  Then  contract and  release  the  anal  sphincter muscle  rapidly 
and repeatedly. Hold the breath only so long as  the following exhalation 
can  be  slow  and  controlled.  Do  not  force  your  breath  or  length  of 
holding.  Begin  with  three  rounds  of thirty  pulls  each,  and  increase 
gradually  to  ten  rounds  of sixty  each.  The  horse  mudra  strengthens 
mula bandha, the anal  lock, which increases concentration, strengthens 
the reproductive  glands  and  stimulates  the gastric  fire. 
Intermediate Method 
After  performing the  Four  Purifications  regularly for  two  to  three 
months  and  when  feeling  comfortable with  them,  one  may  undertake 
the  intermediate  method.  In  the  intermediate  method,  the  Four 
Purifications are  done in such  a way  that there are  no "resting breaths" 
in between;  that is,  they are  done consecutively without a breath or rest 
in between. 
To  do  this,  do  ten  to  thirty rounds  of alternate  nostril  breathing. 
After  the  last  exhalation  through  the  left  nostril,  inhale  partially  and 
immediately begin skull shining. At the end of one series of skull shining 
exhalations,  inhale  slowly  and  completely,  then  exhale  all  air,  hold  the 
breath out and do  the fire  wash.  After  a round  of the fire  wash,  inbale 
completely,  hold  the  breath  and  do  the  horse  mudra.  This  entire series 
now  completes  one  round. 
~ 
372 
After  the  horse  mudra,  exhale  completely  and  immediately  begin 
again with  alternate nostril breathing, thus starting the next round.  Do 
five  rounds,  gradually  increasing  the  numbers  of alternate  nostril 
breathing  and  the  duration  of retention  in  each  of the  other  three 
techniques. 
Other  Yogic  Breathing Practices5 
It  is  important to  begin  with  the  Four  Purifications  and  perform 
them once or twice a day for  at least three months, because they are  safe 
and  prepare  the  body for  slightly more  advanced  practices.  Pranayama, 
or controlled  yogic  breathing,  can  exert  powerful  physical  and  mental 
effects  upon  the body-mind-spirit.  It  is  ideal  that they be  learned  from 
an  experienced  teacher,  for  if they  are  not  performed  with  a  positive 
attitude  or  are  done  irregularly  or  are  overly  forced,  they  can  cause 
brain,  heart  and/or  lung  damage.  It  is  important  that  if any  adverse 
reactions  occur  as  a  result  of wrong  pranayama,  they  are  stopped  and 
one  should  do  a  half shoulder  stand  or  lay  in  a  posture  with  the  feet 
moderately elevated  above  the  head.  In general,  individuals with  ulcers 
or  heart  or  lung  disease  should  not  practice  pranayama.  However,  if 
cautiously  undertaken,  certain  of these  simple  practices  are  powerfully 
effective, especially for cardio-pulmonary imbalances as described in the 
text. 
All  breathing practices should be done on an empty stomach. One 
should assume  a meditative  posture with  the spine,  neck and  head  in a 
relaxed,  straight  upright  posture.  This  can  be  done  cross-legged  on  the 
floor or sitting in a straight-backed chair. The eyes are closed and focused 
on the  space  between  them  on the forehead. 
Just  as  foods  and  herbs  are  classified  as  Heating  and  Cooling,  so 
also  are  various  physical  exercises  and  breathing  practices.  Yogic 
Pranayama  is  very  similar  to  Chinese  Qi  Gong  practices,  except  the 
latter  are  associated  with  specific  physical  postures  and  movements. 
Following are a few  simple Yogic  Pranayamas that can be utilized  in the 
treatment of the various  imbalances  described  in  the  text. 
l!iJio'i (The  Victorious  Breath) 
U j j a y ~  or the "Victorious  Breath", allows  one to  gain  control over 
prana.  It  is  heating  and  dissolves  phlegm.  However,  before  practicing 
ujjayi it  is  best  to  first  wash  the  mouth and gargle with warm  salt water 
to  loosen  the  phlegm  in  the  throat. 
It  is  done  by  closing  the  mouth  and  taking  short  inhaled  sips 
through  the  nose  with  the glottis  in  the  throat  somewhat  tightened.  A 
slight sound  is  automatically produced like  the sobbing of a child. This 
~ 
373 
is  done five  times in one inhale sequence. The breath is  then held in the 
chest  for  2  or 3  seconds  and  next,  blocking  the  right  nostril  with  the 
thumb, it is gently exhaled through the left (cooling) nostril. Immediately 
upon  exhalation  the  practice  is  repeated.  Begin  with  10  rounds  and 
gradually over  a period  of several  weeks  increase  to  as  many as  forty. 
Exhaling through the left  nostril  is  cooling and counterbalancing 
to the heating effect of the inhaled breath. However, one can also exhale 
through  both  nostrils,  which  is  balanced. 
S!Jitali and Srikan· (Jbe  Cooling Breath) 
Shitali  and  sitkari  are  both  cooling  practices  which  can  cool  and 
calm the mind. Shitali is  performed by folding the tongue with the sides 
upwards like a straw or tube. This is  slightly extended beyond the lips as 
one  takes  a  long  slow  inhale  while  making  a  faint  hissing  sound.  This 
air is  then swallowed  into the stomach and the breath is  held  for 4 or 5 
seconds before being slowly released  through both nostrils. One should 
begin  with  10  rounds  and  gradually increase  to  40  over  a few  weeks. 
Sitkari is similar and  is  for  those who are genetically unable to curl 
the tongue.  Here the tongue is  flattened  and  lightly touches  the back of 
the teeth. The breath is taken through slightly parted lips. It is interesting 
that for  many,  this  type  of breath  response  is  automatic whenever  they 
experience being overheated. 
Eight Kriyas  (Swasa  Yam) 
This is  a series  of the simplest and safest breathing practices which 
are especially useful  for  calming the mind. As  such, they are ideal  to do 
before  meditation.  Begin  with  the  head,  neck  and  spine  in  a  relaxed 
upright  position.  Take  unforced  slow,  deep  and  gently  relaxed  breaths. 
There  are  essentially  two  types  of breath:  a  shallow  chest  breath  used 
when  inhaling  through  the  nostrils,  and  a  stomach  breath  used  when 
inhaling through the mouth. For the chest breath, the chest fully expands 
with  the  abdomen  moving  inward,  while  for  the  Stomach  breath  the 
abdomen  pushes  out so  that the chest does  not fully  expand. 
The  Eight  Kriyas  can  be  done  after  pranayamas  or  prior  to 
meditation.  They  can  be  used  whenever  there  is  a  need  for  profound 
calming and  centering. 
Kriya  1:  Inhale gently,  deeply and slowly through both nostrils  into the 
chest,  pulling  the  abdomen  slightly  inwards.  Exhale  slowly  and  easily 
through both nostrils.  Repeat  five  times. 
~ 
374 
Kriya 2:  Repeat the above but this time exhale slowly and gently through 
a partial  opening in  the  mouth.  Repeat  five  times. 
Kriya  3:  Inhale  gently,  deeply and  slowly into  the stomach through  the 
mouth with slightly pursed lips. This time allow the abdomen to expand 
outwards.  Exhale  slowly  and  gently  through  both  nostrils,  gently 
contracting the abdomen  inwards  slightly.  Repeat  five  times. 
Kriya  4:  Close  the  right  nostril  with  the  thumb of the  right  hand  and 
inhale through the chest through the left nostril, contracting the abdomen 
inwards  slightly.  Release  the  thumb  and  close  the  left  nostril  with  the 
ring  finger  and  gently  exhale  through  the  right  nostril.  Repeat  five 
times. 
Kriya  5:  Close  the  left  nostril  with  the  ring  finger  and  inhale  into  the 
chest through the right nostril, pulling the abdomen in slightly.  Follow 
with closing the right nostril with the thumb and exhaling slowly through 
the  left  nostril.  Repeat  five  times. 
Kriya  6:  Now exhale and completely empty the lungs  slowly  and gently 
through  both  nostrils,  allowing  the  abdomen  to  suck  gently  inwards. 
The  following  inhalation  should  occur  as  a  normal,  and  not  a  deep, 
breath while  releasing  the abdomen.  Repeat  five  times. 
Kriya  7:  Inhale  into  the stomach slowly,  gently and  deeply  through the 
mouth  with  slightly  pursed  lips,  allowing  the  abdomen  to  push  out. 
Then  exhale  gently  through  the  mouth  while  the  abdomen  slightly 
contracts  inwards.  Repeat  five  times. 
Kriya  8:  Inhale deeply  into the chest through both nostrils  in five  slow 
sips,  while  pulling  the  abdomen  in  slightly  at  the  same  time.  Exhale 
slowly  and  gently through  the  mouth.  Repeat  five  times. 
Harimaki 
A harimaki is  a special type of underclothing traditionally worn as 
a  wide  band  around  the  waist  by  the Japanese.  It  is  worn  under  the 
clothes,  although  the  outer  sash  (called  "obi")  on  kimonos  serves  the 
same  purpose.  The  harimaki  protects  the vital  aspects  of the  body,  the 
places where  the Life  Gate  Fire  resides. This  includes the "hara," a place 
just  below  the  navel,  and  the  Kidneys  and  Adrenals,  at  waist  level  on 
either side  of the  spine. 
~ 
375 
Since  this  is  where  Yin,  Yang,  Essence,  Source  Qi,  and  the deeper 
immune  powers  of the  body  reside  and  emanate,  such  a  simple 
undergarment  can  be  very  helpful  in  maintaining  health.  When  these 
Organs are kept warm,  they are  better able to administer their functions 
and  protect the  body from  stress,  exhaustion  and  illnesses. 
The  harimaki  can  be  worn  continuously,  over  the  cold  winter 
months or occasionally as  needed. It should be considered  for  low back 
pain,  frequent  and/or  copious  urination,  night  time  urination,  poor 
circulation, Coldness, low energy and vitality, poor appetite and digestion, 
gas  and  bloating  with  coldness,  frequent  colds  and  flu,  frequent  hair 
loss, bone and disc problems, lowered immunity, a general state of debility 
and at the first  sign of susceptibility to  colds or flu.  It is  also  beneficial 
to wear  a harimaki while  pregnant. One Japanese woman was  surprised 
to learn that American women didn't wear harimakis during pregnancy. 
Harimakis  can  be  difficult  to  obtain  in  America.  They  are  easily 
made,  however,  and  may  even  be  substituted  by  a vest  that  covers  the 
waist  and lower  abdomen, or a scarf wrapped  around these  areas.  As  all 
of these  can  be  bulky,  however,  it  is  well  worth  the  small  effort  to 
purchase or make your own. 
To  make  your own  harimaki,  purchase enough  stretch  cotton (for 
summer) or stretch wool (for winter) material to fit snugly around your 
waist  and  hips  without  slipping.  Keep  in  mind  that  it  is  to  be  worn 
under your clothes next to the skin. The material should be wide enough 
that it covers your hips, navel and waist, about 12"  for  most people. It is 
possible  to  use  double  this  amount  and  then  fold  it  in  half for  extra 
warmth and protection.  Now sew  the two  ends together to form  a tube, 
perhaps sewing it a little tighter at the waistline (for women) to conform 
to your figure  better. This is  then slipped on your body and  pulled over 
your  hips  and waist  for  wearing. 
BlBLlOGRAPHY 
Herbals,  Chinese 
Bensky  and  Gamble.  Chinese  Herbal  Medicine  Materia  Medica,  Revised 
Edition.  Seattle:  Eastland  Press,  1993. 
Bensky and Gamble. Formulas and Strategies.  Seattle: Eastland Press,  1993. 
Chen and Chen. A  Comprehensive  Guide to  Chinese Herbal Medicine.  Long 
Beach, CA.: Oriental Healing Arts (Ohai),  1992. (Highly recommended) 
Cheung,  C.S.  Treatment  of Traditional  Chinese  Medicine.  San  Francisco: 
Traditional Chinese Medical  Publisher,  1980. 
Li  Shih-Chen. Chinese Medicinal Herbs.  San Francisco:  Georgetown  Press, 
1973. 
Lu  Fei  and Chen Song Yu,A Clinical Guide to  Chinese Herbs and Formulae. 
Edinburgh:  Churchill  Livingstone,  1993.  (Highly recommended.) 
Ni,  Maoshing.  Chinese  Herbology Made  Easy.  Los  Angeles:  The Shrine of 
the  Eternal  Breath  of Tao  and  College  of Tao  and  Traditional  Chinese 
Healing,  1986,  (117  Stonehaven Way,  Los  Angeles,  CA.  An  economical 
and  convenient  reference,  highly recommended.) 
Olshevsky,  Noy,  Zwang,  Burger.  The  Manual of Natural Healing  Therapy: 
A  Practical  Guide  to Alternative Medicine.  New York:  Citadel  Press,  1989. 
Pang,  T.Y.  A  Chinese  Herbal· An Introduction.  Honolulu:  Tai  Chi School 
of Philosophy and Art,  1982. (PO Box 27273, Honolulu, Hawaii, 96827). 
Reid,  Daniel  P.  Chinese  Herbal Medicine.  Boston:  Shambhala  Publishers, 
Inc.,  1987.  (A  beautiful  introductory herbal with  color plates.) 
Teeguarden,  Ron.  Chinese  Tonic  Herbs.  New  York:  Japan  Publications, 
1984. 
The  Revolutionary  Health  committee  of Hunan  Province.  A  Barefoot 
Doctor's Manual.  Seattle:  Cloudburst  Press,  1977. 
Yeung,  Him-Che, Handbook  of Chinese  Herbs  and Formulas,  Vol.  I  and  II, 
Los Angeles:  Him-Che Yeung,  1985. (Two outstanding references, Volume 
1 is  a Materia  Medica  and Volume 2  is  a  clinical  formulary.) 
Yanchi,  Liu, The·Essential  Book of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Vols. 
1 and  2,  Columbia University Press,  1988. 
~ 
377 
Traditional  Chinese Medicine  Theory 
Flaws,  Bob. How  To  Write A  TCM Herbal Formula.  Boulder:  Blue Poppy 
Press,  1993. 
Ou Ming. Manual of  Common-Used Prescriptions ofTCM. Joint Publishing 
(H.K.),  1989. 
Kanpo  (Japanese  Chinese Medicine) 
Bulletins of  the  Oriental Healing Arts Institute of USA  and The  International 
journal of  Oriental Medicine.  Long Beach: Oriental Healing Arts Institute, 
1945.  (Palo  Verde  Ave.  Suite  208,  Long  Beach,  California  90815.  An 
excellent  quarterly journal on Chinese Herbalism.) 
Hong-Yen  Hsu,  Chau-Shin  Hsu.  Commonly  Used  Chinese  Herb  Formulas 
With Illustrations.  Long Beach, California: Oriental Healing Arts Institute, 
1980. 
Hong-Yen  Hsu  &  Easer,  Douglas. Major  Chinese  Herbal  Formulas.  Long 
Beach,  California:  Oriental  Healing Arts  Institute,  1980. 
END NOTES 
Chapter 2 
1.  Chinese  Herbal,  T.Y.  Pang,  Tai  Chi School  of Philosophy and Art. 
Chapter  5 
1.  How to  Write a TCM Herbal Fonnula,  Bob Flaws, Blue Poppy Press,  Boulder, CO, 1993. 
2.  A somewhat  milder variation  of this  formula  is  made by substituting two  parts 
powdered  anise  seed  for  the pippali  long pepper. 
Chapter 6 
Tao  Te  Ching,  Lao  Tsu,  translated.  by Gia-Fu  Feng  and Jane  English,  Vintage  Books, 
Division  of Random  House,  NY,  1972. 
2  This perspective goes  beyond  many practitioners' conception of Essence according to 
Chinese medical  philosophy, which  limits it to a purely physical  conception based  upon 
the  more  recent  model  of materialistic  Chinese  Communist  medicine,  rather  than  the 
more ancient  traditional Taoist  model. What can be  learned  from  this  is  that as  we  delve 
into the deeper theoretical aspects of being, beyond the physical manifestion ofQ!, Blood, 
Fluid and so forth,  into the more subtler realms of Essence and Spirit (Shen), we  will  not 
be  afraid  to  make  the appropriate  jump  to  more  psychological  and  spiritual  concerns  as 
they most certainly affect all  aspects of psycho-physiological health. Without accomplish-
ing  this,  concepts  of Essence  and  Spirit are  practically devoid  of any  influence or mean-
ing,  since  for  the  most  part,  such  parameters  exist  beyond  the  realm  of direct  physical 
intervention with  herbs  or acupuncture alone. 
Chapter 7 
1.  A  fascinating  study with  photos  gives  deeper  detail  into  the  findings  and  compari-
sons of the Spleen between TCM and the Western understanding of mitocondria: "Traditonal 
Chinese Medicine  Digest", Vol.  11,  3 &  4,  1987,  The  People's  Medical  Publishing House, 
SHK  International  Services,  Ltd.,  22/F.,  151  Gloucester  Road,  Hong  Kong.  While  it  is 
important to approach Chinese Medicine on its own terms, a broader understanding of it 
can  be achieved  through  its  correspondences  to Western  medicine,  such  as  demonstrated 
in  this  article. 
Chapter 9 
1.  Modified  from:  Knowledge  of Tongue  Diagnosis:  Ana[ysis  of 1,000  Cases,  ].TCM  1:10, 
1961. 
2.  See  Chapter Six  for  a detailed  description  of the  Four  Levels  of Heat:  Wei,  Q!, Ying 
and  Xue. 
3.  See Chapter Six  for a detailed description of the Six Stages of Disease: Tai Yang, Shao 
Yang,  Yang  Ming,  Tai  Yin,  Shao Yin  and Jue Yin. 
Chapter  11 
1.  This is a traditional undergarment worn around the kidney area of the back and waist 
by  the Japanese  during  the  Winter.  It  is  used  to  prevent  sickness  and  keep  the  Kidneys 
warm.  See  the  chapter on  Healing Therapies  for  a  further  description  and  directions  for 
making  it. 
379 
2.  The Chinese  concept  of 'Wind'  implies  something  that  travels  or  changes.  In  some 
instances  it suggests  the  process  of infectious  diseases,  while  at  the same  time  it  suggests 
the  nervous  system's  ability  to  control  the  dilation  and  contraction  of the  pores  of the 
skin.  Internal Wind refers  to  the nervous system, especially the Central nervous system of 
the  brain. 
3.  According  to  Chinese  medical  theory,  Dampness  or  Phlegm  comes  from  weak  or 
incomplete digestion and assimilation, which refers  to Spleen Q!. Since the Lungs  require 
a significant amount of lubrication to offset  their constant drying influence from  air,  it 
is  reasonable  that  most of the  residual  Spleen  Dampness  would  first  go  to  the Lungs.  If 
there  is  too  much,  therefore,  the  Lungs  are  often  the first  place  to  be  adversely  affected. 
4.  'Trikatu'  is  a  traditional  Ayurvedic  preparation  easily  made  at  home  for  Coldness 
and  Dampness  There  are  many  variations,  but  all  are  based  on  the  idea  of combining 
three  spices,  usually  powdered  and  taken  with  honey.  The  standard  preparation  is  equal 
parts powdered  black  pepper,  pippli pepper (Chinese "bibo") and  dry ginger  in  a honey-
based paste. Anywhere from  a half to a full  teaspoon is  taken  two or three times daily.  For 
children,  Pippali  pepper can  be  substituted with  two  parts  anise  seed. 
5.  Heat of course  refers  to  bacterial  or viral  pathogens. 
6.  The inside  juice  part of the orange  is  both Cold  and  Damp while  the  outer  peel  is 
spicy and drying.  For this reason,  the Brahman sect in India are  taught from  a young age 
to always  eat a part of the peel of any fruit that is  peeled. In this case, warming and drying 
citrus  peel  is  an  antidote  for  the Cold  Dampness  of the  inner  fruit. 
Chapter  13 
1.  The acid-alkaline determination is  not the pH of the food  itself, but the residue ash 
which forms when  that food  is  oxidized. The macrobiotic delineation of foods  according 
to a Yang-Yin  continuum fairly well  matches  the acid-alkaline  differentiation.  Foods  cat· 
egorized  as  Yang  tend  to be acid-forming  and  those classified  as  Yin  tend  to  be  alkaline-
forming.rong or toxic  herbs  are contraindicated  for  children,  the very weak  or aged. 
Appendix 
1.  The  yogic  methods  of neti  are  described  in  the Ashtanga  Yoga  Primer  by  Baba  Hari 
Dass,  Sri  Rama  Publishing,  1981,  Santa Cruz, California. 
2.  Imperial Secrets  of Health  and Longevity  by Bob  Flaws,  1994,  published by  Blue  Poppy 
Press,  Boulder,  CO. 
3.  Ibid 
4.  The  Four  Purifications  are  thoroughly  described  and  illustrated,  along  with  many 
other valuable breathing and yogic  techniques,  in  the Ashtanga  Yoga  Primer by  Baba  Hari 
Dass,  Sri  Rama  Publishing,  1981,  Santa  Cruz, California. 
5.  The following yogic breathing practices and  kriyas  are described  in  the Ashtangd Yoga 
Primer by  Baba  Hari  Dass,  Sri  Rama  Publishing,  1981,  Santa Cruz, CA. 
SOURCES AND RESOURCES 
Books  on  Chinese  Medicine 
Lotus  Press 
P 0  Box 325 Dept. CM 
Twin Lakes, WI 53181  USA. 800 824 6396 
www.lctuspress.oom 
Publisher of books by Michael Tierra and other alternative health subjects. 
Redwing  Book Company 
44 Linden St.  Brookline, MA 02146 
Tel: 888-873-3947,617-738-4664  Fax: 617-738-4620 
Website: www.redwingbooks.oom 
The most complete catalog of Traditional Chinese Medicine books and 
books on healing. 
Herbal  Computer Programs 
The Formulary 
The best computer program to date in the English language on Chinese 
herbalism, based on Bensky's Formulas and Strategies. 
East West Healing Arts Center 
4174 Park Blvd., Ste.  201, Oakland, CA 94602 
Phone/fax: 510-531-4346  email: ewhac@emf.net 
IBIS-Interactive  BodyMind  Information System 
PO Box 308, Beaverton, OR 97075 
Phone 503-526-1972  Fax 503-6416541 
Planetary Herbology Computer Program 
based on the book by Michael Tierra. 
Program available for Dos, Windows 3.1 and 95 operating systems. 
Published by: Lotus Press, PO Box 325, Dept. CM, 
Twin Lakes, WI 53181USA.  800 824 6396 
Website: www.lctuspress.com 
Chinese  Herb  Suppliers 
Oriental Medical Supplies 
1950 Washington St.  Braintree, MA 02184 
Phone: 800-323-1839 Fax: 781-335-5779 
Website: www.omsmedical.com 
A leading supplier of Oriental and Acupuncture medical supplies. 
Botanical Therapy 
126 Surfside Ave.  Santa Cruz, CA 95060 
Phone: 800-447-2066; 408-423-5491 
email: westcliff@got.net 
Supplies Chinese and Western based herb formulas and other herb 
products. 
Brion  Herb Company 
9200 Jeronirno Rd.  lrvine, CA. 92618 
Phone: 800-333-4372 Fax: 714-587-1260  ernail: brionc@sunten.com. 
Great China Herb Company 
857 Washington St. San Francisco, CA, 94108. 
Phone: 415-982-2195 
Internatural  (retail) 
PO Box 489  Dept.  CM,  Twin Lakes,  Wi  53181  USA. 
Phone: 800-643-4221  www.intematural.com. 
Supplier of herbs and herbal products, books, biornagnetic products, 
educational videos, essential oils and natural health items. 
Lotus Light (wholesale) 
PO Box 1008,  Dept. CM, Silver Lake, WI.  53170 USA.  800-548-3824 
Wholesale catalog of more than 8000 items including herbs, herbal 
products, essential oils, books, videos, alternative health items. 
Lotus Brands,  Inc. 
PO Box 325,  Dept. CM, Twin Lakes, WI 53181  USA.  800-824-63% 
Source supplier of bulk herbs and spices, botanicals including Chinese Hems. 
Mayway Trading Corporation 
1338 Cypress St.  Oakland, CA.  94607 
Tel: 800-262-9929; 510-208-3113 Fax: 800-909-2828 
nuHerbs Co. 
3820 Pennirnan Ave. Oakland, CA.  94619 
Phone: 800-233-4307  Fax: 510-534-4384 ernail: hetbal@nuhetbs.com 
Finemost Corp.jQ.ualiHerb 
13839 Bentley PI.  Cerritos, CA.  90703 
Phone: 800-533-5907  Fax:  562-533-0625 
Spring Wind  Herb  Company 
2325 Fourth St., Suite 6,  Berkeley, CA 94710 
              
Tai  Sang Trading  Chinese Herb  Company 
1018 Stockton, San Francisco, CA 94108 
Phone: 415-981-5364  Fax: 415-981-2032 
Chinese herbal extracts in granules, capsules, tablets (traditional formulas, 
single herbs. 
Min Tong Herbs /Tashi  Enterprises 
5221 Central Ave. #5 
Richmond, CA 94804 
Phone:           Fax: 800-875-0798; 510-558-2006 
Concentrated dry extracts of traditional formulas, and individual herbs 
to compound and vary formulas. 
East West  Products 
PO Box 1210 
New York, NY 10025-1210 
              
This is a retail distributor of Michael Tierrais Planetary Herb Formulas 
and products. Catalogs available. 
For wholesale sales of Planetary Herb Products contact 
Threshold/Planetary Enterprises 
23 Janis Way, Scans Valley, California, 95066 
Phone:          408-438-1700  Fax: 408-438-7410 
East West  Herbal  Correspondence Course 
PO Box 712, Santa Cruz, Ca. 95061 
                        
          
A comprehensive 36 lesson course integrating Western, Chinese and 
AyUivedic herbalism written by Dr. Michael Tierra. The course includes 
theoretical principles, traditional diagnosis, traditional diet and food 
therapy, a comprehensive East-West Materia Medica, Formulary and 
clinical treatment manual. Each year there are seminars for students to 
attend for direct study. Students can learn at their own pace and submit 
assignments at the end of each lesson for evaluation. 
The  course  is  also  registered  for  herb  students  in  the  UK  for 
information and ongoing programs of study in the UK and abroad 
contact 
East West Herb Course UK,  C/0 David and Sarah Holland 
Hartfield Marsh Green, East Sussex TN7 4ET.  Great Britain. 
Phone: 011-44-1-342822312, Fax: 011-44-342826347. 
PlanetHerbs Online Supplies 
www.planet:herhi.com 
Offers online availability of Michael Tierra's Planetary Formulas and 
other hard to fmd herbal supplies and educational materials. 
American  Herbalists Guild 
PO Box 70, Roosevelt, UT 84066 
Phone: 435-722-8434, Fax: 435-722-8452 
email: ahgoffice@earthlink.net 
Website: www.healthy.net/herbalists 
A national organization for North American professional herbalists. 
Membership consists of professionals, associates, students and benefactors 
from all paths of herbalism. Members receive a quarterly newsletter and 
notification of herbal symposiums and other events around the country. 
GLOSSARY 
Terms  of Traditional  Chinese Medicine 
Aromatic Stomachic:  herbs which are aromatic and assist digestion by moving 
Dampness. 
Blood:  though broader in definition, it encompasses the physical blood in the 
body which moistens the tissues, muscles, skin and hair and nourishes 
cells and organs. 
Blood Deficiency: a lack of Blood with signs of anemia, dizziness, scanty menses 
or amenorrhea, thin emaciated body, spots in the visual field,  impaired 
vision, numb arms or legs, cby skin, hair or eyes,lusterless, pale face and 
lips, tiredness and poor memory. 
Calmative: calms the mind and netves; for netvous disorders. 
Cold: low metabolism. 
Cold, Coldness, Cold signs:  lowered metabolism with symptoms of Coldness, 
clear to white bodily secretions, chills, body aches, poor circulation, pale 
complexion, lethargy, no thirst or sweating, frigidity,  impotence, infertil-
ity, night time urination, frequent and copious urination, loose stools or 
diarrhea, undigested food in the stools, poor digestion, lack of appetite, 
achy pain in joints, slowness of speech, slow movements, low fever but 
severe chills, aversion to cold and craving for heat and hypo-conditions 
such as hypo-thyroidism, hypo-adrenalism and hypoglycemic. 
Cools Blood:  a function of herbs which clears Heat out of the Blood; symp-
toms include rashes, nosebleed, vomiting, spitting or coughing of blood, 
blood in the stool or urine, night fevers, delirium and hemorrhage. 
Damp, Dampness:  excessive Fluids in the body with symptoms of include 
feelings of heaviness, sluggishness, secretions that are turbid, sluggish, 
sinking, viscous, copious, slimy, cloudy or sticky, excessive leukorrhea, 
oozing, purulent skin eruptions, lassitude, edema, abdominal distention, 
chest fullness,  nausea, vomiting, loss of appetite, lack of thirst and achy, 
heavy, stiff and sore joints. 
Damp  Heat:  a  condition of Dampness and Heat with symptoms of thick, 
greasy yellow secretions and phlegm, jaundice, hepatitis, dysentery, uri-
nary difficulty or pain, furuncles and eczema. 
Deficiency: a lack of something, usually Qi, Blood, Yin, Yang or Essence. 
Deficiency:  a  condition  of weakness  of lack  of either Qi,  Blood,  Fluids, 
Yin,  Yang  or Essence. 
Deficient Heat: this is the same as Yin Deficiency. 
Deficient Yang: see Yang Deficiency. 
Deficient Yin: see Yin Deficiency. 
Diuretic: eliminates Excess Fluids. Diuretics in Chinese medicine also enhance 
proper fluid metabolism by increasing absorption of fluids into the deep 
tissues of the body. Thus, contradictory symptoms of edema and dry skin 
can be eliminated together with diuretics. 
Dryness: characterized by dehydration with symptoms of extreme thirst, dry 
skin, hair, mouth, lips; nose, throat, dry cough with little phlegm and 
constipation. 
Essence: a highly refmed fluid substance which provides the basis of reproduc-
tion, development, growth, sexual power, conception, pregnancy and de-
cay in the body. 
Excess: a condition of an accumulation of too much of something, either Yin, 
Yang, Heat, Cold or Fluids. 
Excess Cold: a condition of too much Coldness in the body; see Cold. 
Excess Heat: a condition of too much Heat in the body; see Heat. 
Excess Yang:  this is  the same as excess Heat with symptoms of high fever, 
restlessness, red complexion, loud voice, aggressive actions, strong odors, 
yellow discharges, rapid pulse and hypertension. 
Excess Yin: an imbalance of excessive fluids in the body with symptoms of 
ederna, excessive fluid retention, lethargy,  a plump or swollen appearance 
and overall signs of Dampness, and yet these people may have adequate 
enetgy. 
Exterior: see external. 
External: designates the location of an illness to be on the surface of the body; 
includes colds, flus, fevers, skin eruptions, sore throats and headaches. 
False Yang:  this is Deficient Heat, or Yin Deficiency, and results in emaciation 
and weakness with Heat symptoms; this type of Heat symptom occurs 
because the cooling moistening fluids (Yin) are lacking and so is termed, 
"false Heat.': 
Heat, Hot, Heat signs: hyper-metabolism with symptoms of fever with little 
chills, restlessness, constipation, thirst, dark yellow or scanty urine, crav-
ing for cold, aversion to heat and craving for cold, burning digestion, 
infections,  inflammations,  dryness, red face,  sweating, strong appe-
tite,  hemorrhaging and blood in vomit,  urine, stool, nose or mucus, 
strong  orders,  sticky  or  thick  yellow  bodily  excretions,  irritability, 
scanty dark yellow urination, swollen, red and painful eyes or gums 
-and red skin eruptions, and hyper-conditions such as hypertension. 
Hot: overly active metabolism. 
Interior:  see Internal. 
Internal:  designates the location of an illness to be inside the body; includes 
conditions affe(.tion the Qi, Blood,Fluids and Internal Organs. 
Jing: see FBsence. 
Meridians: the pathways along which Qi circulates to supply energy and nour-
ishment to the Organ'> and the surface of the body. 
Moves Blood: see regulates Blood. 
Nervine: strengthen'> the nerves; for conditions of nervousness, anxiety, insom-
nia, emotional instability, pain, cramps, spasms, tremors, stress, muscle 
tension and epilepsy. 
Organs:  the organs in TCM  are different than in Western medicine: Organs 
have energetic rather than physical fun(.tions; they are dynamic interre-
lated processes which occur throughout every level of the body. Yin or-
gans include the Heart, Lungs, Kidneys, Spleen and Liver; Yang organs 
include the Small Intestines, Large Intestines, Urinary Bladder, Stomach 
and Gallbladder. 
Q!: energy, life force; Qi circulates, protects, holds, transforms and warms. 
Q! Deficiency: a lack of Qi or energy with signs of low vitality, lethargy, weak-
ness, shortness of breath, slow metabolism, frequent colds and flu with 
slow recovery, low soft voice, spontaneous sweating, frequent urination, 
palpitations. 
Regulates Blood: smoothes the flow of Blood in the body; symptoms include 
bleeding, hemorrhaging, excessive menstruation, localized stabbing pain, 
abdominal masses, ulcers, abscesses and painful menstruation. 
Regulates Energy:  smoothes the flow of Qi in the body; symptoms include dull 
aching pain, abdominal distention and pain, belching, gas, acid regurgita-
tion, nausea, vomiting, stifling sensation in chest, pain in the sides, loss 
of appetite, depression, hernial pain, irregular menstruation, swollen, ten-
der breasts and wheezing. 
Sedative:  sedate, calm the mind and Spirit; for insomnia, anxiety, nervousness, 
irritability, fright and hysteria. 
Seven Emotions:  the Seven Emotions are a major cause of illness. They are: 
sadness, fright, fear, grief, anger, joy (overexcitability) and melancholy. 
Shen:  the overall Spirit and mental faculties of a person, including enthusiasm 
for life, charisma and capacity to behave appropriately, be responsive, 
speak coherently, think and form ideas and live a life of joy and spiritual 
fulfillment. 
Spirit: see Shen. 
Stomach Heat:  a condition of too much Heat in the Stomach with signs of bad 
breath, gum bleeding and swelling, mouth ulcers, frontal headaches, burning 
sensation in the stomach region and extreme thirst. 
TCM:  abbreviation for Traditional Chinese Medicine. 
Tonification, Tonify: nourishes, strengthens, builds and improves the condi-
tion of either Qi, Blood, Yin or Yang in the body. 
Wind: Wind causes movement with symptoms of spasms, twitches, dizziness, 
spasms, rigidity of the muscles, deviation of the eye and mouth, stiff or 
rigid neck and shoulders, tremors, convulsions, vertigo and sudden onset 
of colds, chills, fever, stuffy nose and headache. 
Yang:  the body's capacity to generate and maintain warmth and circulation. 
Yang Deficiency:  : a condition of Coldness due to lack of the heating quality of 
Yang; symptoms include lethargy, coldness, edema, poor digestion, lower 
back pain, the type of constipation caused by weak peristaltic motion and 
lack of libido. 
Yin:  the body's substance, including Blood and all other Fluids in the body; 
these nurture and moisten the Organs and tissues. 
Yin Deficiency: this is Deficient Heat and results in emaciation and weakness 
with Heat symptoms such as night sweats, insomnia, a burning sensation 
in the palms, soles and chest, malar flush, afternoon fever,  nervous ex-
haustion, dry throat, dry eyes, blurred vision, dizziness and nervous ten-
sion. 
Zang Fu: the theory of the Organs; the hollow Organs (Fu) which transport and 
the solid Organs (Zang) which store. 
GENERAL  iNDEX 
Accessory  healing  therapies  for  the 
herbalist  355 
Achillea  millifolia  98 
Aconitum  praeparatum  100,  103 
Acrid,  pungent or spicy  taste  54,  328 
Aduki  bean  330 
Alcoholic  extracts  350 
Allium  sativum  97 
Almond  330 
Althea officinalis  105,  214 
Angelica  archangelica  214 
Angelica  sinensis  202 
Apple  330 
Arctium  lappa  98,  104,  111 
Arctostaphylos  uva  urse  205 
Asarum  canadensis  111,  214 
Asclepias  tuberosa  214 
Asparagus  330 
Asparagus  racemosa  101,  105,  107, 
115,118 
Audition  and smelling 213 
Abdominal  rumbling  sounds  214 
Body odors  215 
Breath  213 
Cough  213 
Voice  213 
Vomiting  214 
Ayurvedic  pulse diagnosis  222 
Azadirachta  indica  99 
Balanced  diet  315 
Aluminum  324 
Congee  325 
Dairy  320 
Empty-full  316 
Extreme  foods  322 
Fruits  and  juices  320 
Gas  heat  324 
Grains,  legumes,  nuts  and  seeds 
317 
Meat  321 
Microwaves  325 
Raw  versus  cooked  foods  319 
Soup  325 
Vegetables  318 
Whole  foods  324 
Balanced  Earth  type  49 
Balanced  Fire  type  44 
Balanced  Metal  type  55 
Balanced Water  type  60 
Balanced Wood  type  40 
Banana  331 
Barley  331 
Beef  331 
Beet  331 
Berberis  sp  101 
Berberis  vulgaris  205 
Bin  Hu  Maixue  9 
Bitter taste  328 
Black  pepper  331 
Black Sesame  seeds  331 
Black Soya  bean  332 
Blood  74 
Blood  and  Body Fluids  81 
Formation of Blood  75 
Functions of Blood  75 
Origin  of Blood 75 
Relationships  of Blood  in  the 
Body 76 
Blood  and Essence  77 
Blood  and  Q! 77 
Heart 76 
Liver  76 
Spleen  76 
Methods  to Strengthen  Blood  78 
Pathologies  of Blood  77 
Blood  Disharmonies 228 
Blood Stagnation  230 
Deficient  Blood  229 
Heat  in the  Blood  231 
Breathing exercises  370 
Alternate  nostril  breathing  371 
Eight Kriyas  374 
Fire wash  372 
Horse  mudra  372 
Intermediate  method  372 
Other yogic  breathing  practices 
373 
Shitali  and  Sitkari (cooling breath) 
374 
Skull  shining  371 
The Four  Purifications  370 
Ujjayi  (victorious breath)  373 
~ 
389 
GENERAL  iNDEX 
Breathing  practices  74 
Buckwheat  332 
Bupleurum  falcatum  98 
Butter  332 
Cabbage  332 
Calendula officinalis  202 
Capsicum  frutescens  99,  103 
Carrot  332 
Carthamus  tinctorii  202 
Caryophylus  aromaticus  100 
Cascara  sagrada  101,  111 
Cassia  acutifolia  101 
Cassia  cinnamomum  103 
Castor  oil compress  352 
Caulophyllum thalictroides  111 
Causes  of Disease  162 
Neither  Internal  nor External 
causes  of disease 
Diet  187 
Lifestyle  189 
Miscellaneous  causes  192 
Other Lifestyle  habits  191 
Cayenne  332 
Celery  333 
Central Q!  67 
Cetraria  islandica  108 
Chang chung-ching  11,  121 
Cheese  333 
Cherry  333 
Chicken  333 
Chinese biorhythm chart  191 
Chinese  three  humours  66 
Chin  Kuei  Ytto  Loeh  11 
Chionanthus virginicus  205 
Chondrus crispus  105,  108 
Chrysanthemum  morifolium  97 
Chrysanthemum parthenium  98 
Cinnamomum cassia  100 
Citrus reticulata  112 
Clam  333 
Coconut meat milk 333 
Combining Methods  311 
Commiphora  mukul  109 
Congee  325 
Basic  sweet  rice  Congee  326 
~ 
390 
Coptis chinensis  104 
Corn  333 
Cornu  cervi  100 
Corporal Soul  (Po)  55 
Crab  334 
Cucumber  334 
Cupping  358 
Dairy 320 
Dang Gui  Four  202,  276,  284 
Date  334 
Deep  pulse category 
Deep  pulse  220 
Latent  or hidden  pulse  220 
Prison  or  taut  pulse  220 
Sinking  220 
Defensive Q!  70 
Deficiency and  Excess 
Deficiency  107 
Excess  108 
Deficient  Earth  type  50 
Deficient  Fire  type  44 
Deficient Metal  type  55 
Deficient  pulse category 321 
Deficient  pulse  221 
Diminutive or feeble  pulse 
Scattered  pulse  221 
Thready or small  pulse  221 
Weak  pulse  221 
Deficient Wood  type  40 
Dermal  Hammer  361 
Differential  Diagnosis  244 
Dioscorea villosa  101 
Duck  334 
Epimedium  granditlora  100 
Eucommia  ulmoides  100 
Echinacea  species  104 
Echinacea  spp  99 
Eggplant  334 
Eight  Methods  of Herbal Treatment 
306 
Cooling 309 
Combining Methods  311 
Harmonizing 308 
Purgation  307 
GENERAL  LNDEX 
Reducing  311 
Sweating 3-6 
Tonification  310 
Vomiting  306 
Warming  308 
Eight Principles  93 
Cold  95,  lOl 
Deficiency  95,  106,  107 
Excess  94,  106,  108 
External  94,  95,  96 
Hot  95,  lOl 
Internal  94,  95,  98 
Yang  95,  Ill, 113 
Yin  95,  Ill, 113 
Emblic  myrobalans  105 
Emotions (see  Seven  Emotions) 
Empty Yang  ll 
EmptyYin  ll 
Equisetum  spp.  105 
Eriobotrya  japonica  114 
Eriodictyon  spp.  105,  114 
Essence  Oing)  67,  84 
Flow  of Essence  in men  85 
Flow  of Essence  in women  84 
Methods  to  strengthen  Essence 
87 
Pathologies  of Essence  86 
Essence  Disharmonies 
Essence  Deficiency in adults  l37 
Essence  Deficiency in children 
137 
Post-Heaven  Essence  136 
Pre-Heaven  Essence  136 
Eupatorium  perfoliatum  98,  104 
Excess  Earth  type  50 
Excess  Fire  type  45 
Excess  Metal  type  56 
Excess  pulse category lll 
Long  pulse  lll 
Slippery or damp  pulse  lll 
Short pulse  lll 
Excess  Wood  type  39 
External  Causes of Disease 
Pernicious  Influences  161 
External-Internal 
External  Diseases  95 
External Wind-Cold  96 
External Wind-Heat  97 
Half External-Half Internal  101 
Internal Cold  99 
Internal  Deficiency  100 
Internal  Diseases  98 
Internal  Excess  iOI 
Internal Wind  98 
Extreme  foods  3ll 
Alcohol  3ll 
Caffeine  3ll 
Refined  sugar  3ll 
Salt  3ll 
Sugar  3ll 
Tobacco  3ll 
Water  313 
Fig  334 
Five  Elements l8 
Earth  45 
Fire  40 
Metal  51 
Shen and  Ko  cycle  30 
Water  57 
Wood  3l 
Five  Stagnations  108 
Blood  Stagnation  109 
Cold Stagnation  110 
Fluid  Stagnation  109 
Food  Stagnation  110 
Overall:  Qi Stagnation  Ill 
Qi Stagnation  108 
Floating pulse category 119 
Big  pulse  119 
Bowstring pulse  119 
Floating  119 
Flooding  119 
Leathery  119 
Leekstalk  119 
Soft  119 
Fluid  disharmonies l3l 
Deficiency of Fluids l3l 
Edema  l33 
Phlegm  in Kidneys  or Gall-
Bladder  134 
Phlegm  in  Lungs  133 
Phlegm  in  meridians  134 
Phlegm  in  the Joints  134 
Phlegm  misting the  Heart  133 
Phlegm  patterns  133 
~ 
391 
GENERAL  iNDEX 
Phlegm  under the  skin  234 
Phlegm-Cold  234 
Phlegm-Fluids  234 
Phlegm-Fluids  above  Diaphragm 
235 
Phlegm-Fluids  in  Hypochondrium 
235 
Phlegm-Fluids  in  Stomach  and 
Intestines  235 
Phlegm-Fluids  in  the  Limbs  235 
Phlegm-Heat  234 
Qi Phlegm  234 
Substantial  Phlegm  232 
Wind-Phlegm  234 
Fluids  78 
Blood  and  Body  fluids  81 
Fluids  Oinye)  78 
Formation  of Fluids  78 
Functions  of Body  Fluid  79 
Methods  to  strengthen  Fluids  82 
Pathologies  of Fluids  82 
Qi  and  Body Fluids  81 
Relationship  of Fluid within  the 
body 
Kidneys  80 
Lungs  80 
Phlegm  82 
Spleen  80 
Triple Warmer  80 
Fomentations and  baths  351 
Food  and  the  Organs  327 
Food  Qi  67 
Food  therapy  329 
Formation of Blood  75 
Forsythia  suspensa  104 
Four  Methods  of Diagnosis  195 
Appetite  200 
Audition  and  Smelling  213 
Chills  and  Fever  196 
Defecation  199 
Headaches,  Chest,  Abdominal  or 
other Aches  and  Pains  197 
Hearing  201 
Interrogation  195 
Menstruation  202 
Mental  Condition  201 
Observation 202 
Perspiration  196 
~  Diagnosis  215 
392 
Thirst  201 
Tongue  Diagnosis  205 
Urination 200 
Four Stages  of Disease  130 
Qi  Fen  stage  131 
Wei  Fen  Stage  131 
Xue  Fen  Stage  132 
Ying  Fen  Stage  132 
Full  Yang  21 
Full  Yin  20 
Functions of Blood  75 
Functions of Body  Fluid  79 
Functions  of Qi  71 
Fundamental Substances  65 
Galium aparine  205 
Gall  Bladder  35,  161,  303 
Damp  Heat  in  the  Gall  Bladder 
303 
Deficiency of Gall  Bladder  304 
Garlic  334 
Gathering Qi  68 
General  dosage  guidelines  347 
Gentian  lutea  104 
Gentian  scabrae  104 
Ginger  335 
Ginger  fomentation  351 
Gluten, wheat  335 
Goose  335 
Grain  Qi  67 
Grains,  legumes,  nuts  and  seeds  317 
Grapes  335 
Gu  Qi 69 
Harimaki  375 
Harmonizing  308 
Heart 40,  136,  245 
Combined  patterns  254 
Heart and  Kidneys  257 
Heart and  Kidneys  not 
harmonized  257 
Heart and  Liver  256 
Heart and  Lungs  254 
Heart and  Spleen  255 
Disharmonies  246 
Cold Mucus  obstructing  the 
Heart Orifices  252 
GENERAL  iNDEX 
Collapse of Heart Yang  250 
Deficient  Heart Yang  249 
Heart  Blood  Deficiency 246 
Heart Blood  Stagnation 251 
- Heart Fire  251 
Heart Qi Deficiency 248 
Heart Yin  Deficiency 247 
Hot Mucus  obstructing the 
Heart  Orifices 253 
Herb  teas  345 
Decoctions  346 
Dose  and  methods  for  taking 
herb  teas  347 
Infusions  347 
Vessels  used  for  the  preparation of 
Chinese  herbs  345 
Herbal  preparations  and  treatment 
345 
Herring  335 
Honey  335 
Hot-Cold 
Cold  102 
Deficient  Heat  104 
Difficulties  in  determining  Cold 
and  Heat Syndromes  105 
Heat  103 
Summary of Hot and  Cold 
syndromes  105 
How  and when  to  take  herbs  348 
Hua Tuo  6 
Huang bai  174 
Huangdi  Neijing 9 
Huayang Zangxiang  Yuezuan  11 
Hydrastis  canadensis  99,  104,  205 
Hyssopus  officinalis  214 
1-Ching  15 
Interaction  of the  Five  Elements  64 
Inula  helinium  214 
lsatis  tinctoria  104 
Jing (see  Essence)  67 
Kai  Bao  Pen  T'sao  9 
Kelp  335 
Kidney bean  336 
Kidneys  58,  153,  290 
Causes  for  Kidney disharmonies 
291 
Deficient Kidney.Jing  295 
Kidney Yang  Deficiency  292 
Kidney Yin  Deficiency  294 
Kidney Yin  Deficient,  empty Fire 
blazing  296 
Kidneys  failing  to  receive  Qi  293 
Kudzu  root  powder  336 
Lamb  336 
Large  Intestine  53,  160,  301 
Cold  Invading the  Large  Intestine 
302 
Collapse  of Large  Intestine  303 
Damp Heat  in the  Large  Intestine 
301 
Heat  in  the  Large  Intestine  301 
Large  Intestine Cold  302 
Larrea  divaricata  99,  111 
Lemon  336 
Leonurus  cardiaca  111,  202 
Lettuce  336 
Li  Shi  Zhen  9 
Lifestyle 
Other lifestyle  habits  191 
Over-activity  190 
Physical  activity  190 
Sexual  activity  189 
Ligusticum  levisticum  214 
Ligusticum  porteri  214 
Ligusticum  species  202 
Liver  33,  147,  277 
Arrogant  Liver Yang  288 
Combined  patterns 289 
Liver  and  Kidneys  289 
Damp Heat  in  the  Liver  285 
Deficiency of Liver  Blood  286 
Deficiency of Liver Yin  with  Liver 
Yang  rising and  generating 
Wind  284 
Deficient Liver  Blood  Generating 
Wind  283 
Deficient Liver Yin  287 
Disharmonies 278 
Extreme  heat generating Wind 
283 
~ 
393 
GENERAL  LNDEX 
Liver  Fire  blazing upwards  281 
Liver Wind  agitating  Internally 
283 
Stagnation of Cold  in the  Liver 
Meridian  286 
Stagnation  of Liver  Blood  281 
Stagnation  of Liver  Qi  278 
Lobelia  inflata  214 
Lonicera  japonica  104 
Loquat  336 
Loranthus  parasiticus  199 
Lotus  root  336 
Lungs  52,  140,  259 
Combined  patterns  266 
Lung  Qi  and  Kidney Yang 
Deficiency 268 
Lungs  and  Kidneys  267 
Lungs  and  Liver  266 
Disharmonies  259 
External  patterns  260 
Cold  Dampness  obstructing 
the  Lungs  262 
Invasion  of Lungs  by Wind-
Cold  260 
Invasion  of Lungs  by Wind-
Heat  261 
Phlegm  Heat obstructing the 
Lungs  263 
Internal  patterns  264 
Deficient  Lung  Qi  264 
Deficient  Lung Yin  265 
Lycium  chinensis  105 
Magnet  therapy  362 
Mahonia  repens  205 
Maijing  (Pulse  Classic)  7 
Mango  336 
Mao  Zedong  11 
Meat  321 
Melissa  officinalis  98 
Mentha  haplocalyx  98 
Mentha  piperita  98 
Methods  of preparing  and  taking 
Chinese  herbs  345 
Methods  to  build  and  strengthen Qi 
74 
Methods  to  strengthen  Blood  78 
~ 
394 
Methods  to  strengthen  Essence  87 
Methods  to  strengthen  Fluids  83 
Methods  to  strengthen  Shen  90 
Ming Men  68,  89,  153,  156 
Milk  337 
Millet  337 
Miscellaneous  causes  of disease 
Malnutrition  192 
Other causes  193 
Traumas  193 
Weak  constitution  192 
Moxibustion  355 
Mung bean  337 
Mushroom  337 
Mustard  greens  337 
Mustard  poultice  353 
Nasal  wash  364 
Natural Air  Qi  68 
Naturalist  School  16 
Neijing  9 
Nepeta  cataria  98 
Nori  337 
Nutritive  Qi  70 
Observation  202 
Blood  205 
Hair  204 
Mucus  secretions  204 
Skin  204 
Stool  205 
Urine  205 
Ocimum  basilicum  98 
Olive  338 
Onion  338 
Onion poultice  353 
Ophiopogon  japonicus  105 
Oracle of Changes  15 
Organs  134 
Six  "Extraordinary"  Organs  135 
Yang  Organs  158 
Yin  Organs  136 
Organs:  Zang  Fu  Symptom  Sign 
Diagnosis  244 
Origin of Blood  75 
GENERAL  LNDEX 
Original  Q!  65 
Other methods  for  taking chinese 
herbs  349 
Oyster  338 
Paeonia  rubra  202 
Palpation  215 
Panax  quinquefolium  108,  214 
Pancreas  46 
Papaya  338 
Pathologies  of Blood  77 
Pathologies  of Essence  86 
Pathologies  of Fluids  82 
Pathologies  of Q!  73 
Pathologies  of Shen  90 
Patterns  of Disharmony  224 
Pea  338 
Peaceful  Holy Benevolent  Prescrip-
tions  325 
Peach  338 
Peanut  338 
Pear  338 
Pectoral  Q!  68 
Pen  Tsao  Kan Mu  9 
Pericardium  40,  139 
Pernicious  Influences  162 
Cold  167 
Dampness  177 
Dryness  175 
Heat  170 
Summer  Heat  182 
Wind  164 
Persimmon  339 
Phlegm  82,  233 
Pineapple  339 
Pinenut  339 
Piper  longum  97 
Piper  nigrum  97,  100 
Plantain  339 
Plasters  and  poultices  352 
Plum  339 
Po  55,  142 
Pork  339 
Post-Heaven  Essence  67 
Potato  339 
Pre-Heaven  Essence  67 
Prunus virginiana  214 
Pulse  Diagnosis  215 
Ayurvedic  Pulse  Diagnosis 222 
Deep  pulse category 218 
Deficient  pulse category 221 
Excess  Pulse  category 
Floating  pulse category  218 
Method of pulse  taking  216 
Nan Jing (Classic  of Difficulties) 
215 
Rapid  pulse  category 221 
Slow  pulse category  220 
Summary of the various  pulse 
qualities  219 
Western  Pulse  Diagnosis 223 
Pumpkin  339 
Purgation  307 
Q!  66 
Classifications  68 
Defensive  Q! 
Grain  Q!  69 
Natural Air  Q!  69 
Nutritive  Q!  70 
Original Q!  68 
True  Q!  70 
Formation of 67 
Functions of 71 
Methods  to  build  and strengthen 
74 
Pathologies  73 
Q! and  Body Fluids  81 
Q!,  Blood,  Fluid,  Essence,  Shen  65 
Qi,  Blood,  Fluids,  Essence, Yin, Yang 
224 
Q! disharmonies 225 
Deficient Q!  226 
Rebellious  Q!  228 
Sinking or collapsed  Q!  227 
Stagnant Q!  227 
Q!,  Essence  and Shen  91 
Q! Gong (The  Rising  Eagle)  366 
Q!  meditation:  filling  the  Essence 
74 
Q!  tonic  soup  74 
Q!  tonifying congee  74 
Qjan fin  Shi Zhi 8 
395 
GENERAL  iNDEX 
Qjanjin  Yar.ifang  7 
Qjanjin  Yifang  7 
Qjjing Banmai Kao  9 
Radish  (seed)  340 
Rapid  pulse  category 221 
Accelerated  pulse  221 
Agitated  pulse  221 
Fast  pulse  221 
Tight pulse  221 
Raspberry  340 
Reducing  311 
Relationships  of Blood  within  the 
body 
Blood  and  Essence  77 
Blood  and  Qi  77 
Heart  76 
Liver  76 
Spleen  76 
Rhamnus  cathartica  101,  111 
Rheum  palmatum  101,  104,  111 
Rice 
Brown  340 
Sweet  340 
White  340 
Root  and  Branch  119 
Rou  cong  rong  100 
Rou  gui  103,  116 
Rumex  crispus  205 
Rye  340 
Salt  340 
Salty taste  59,  328 
Salvia  milthiorrhiza  202 
Sambucus  canadensis  98 
Sambucus  nigra  98 
Sardine  341 
Scraping  360 
Scutellaria  baicalensis  104 
Seaweed  341 
Sesame oil  341 
Seven  Emotions  183 
Anger  37,  153,  185 
Fear  60,  156,  186 
Fright  187 
Grief  186 
Joy  43,  139,  185 
Pensiveness  48,  186 
Sadness  143,  185 
Worry  145 
Shang  Han  Lun  8,  121 
Shen  (Mind  and  Spitit)  43,  136 
Methods  to  strengthen  Shen  90 
Pathologies  90 
Shen  Nong  Pen  Tsao jing  5 
Shen  Nong's  Herbal  5 
Sheng di  huang  105 
Shiitake  mushroom  341 
Shrimp  341 
Six  Stages  of Disease caused  by 
External  Cold  121 
Jue Yin  Stage  128 
Shao Yang  Stage  123 
Shao Yin  Stage  128 
Tai  Yang  Stage  122 
Tai  Yin  Stage  127 
Yang  Ming Stage  125 
Slow  pulse  category 220 
Choppy or astringent  pulse  220 
Knotted  pulse  220 
Leisurely  or relaxed  pulse  220 
Uneven  or replacement  pulse  220 
Slow  pulse  220 
Small  Intestine  40,  158,  297 
Heat  in  the  Small  Intestine  297 
Smilax off.  111 
Soup  325 
Sour  taste  36,  329 
Soybean  341 
Spinach  342 
Spleen  46,  144,  269 
Causes  for  Spleen  disharmonies 
269 
Cold  Damp  invading Spleen  273 
Combined  patterns  274 
Spleen  and  Kidneys  276 
Spleen  and  Liver  275 
Spleen  and  Lungs  274 
Damp  Heat  invading Spleen  273 
Deficient Spleen  Qi  270 
Deficient Spleen Yang  271 
Sinking Spleen  Qi  271 
GENERAL  iNDEX 
Unable  to  control  Blood  272 
Squash  342 
Stellaria  media  214 
Stomach  160,  298 
Cold  invading  the Stomach  300 
Food  Stagnation  300 
Rebellious  Stomach Qi  299 
Stomach  Fire  299 
Stomach Yin  Deficiency  298 
Strawberry  342 
String bean  342 
Sun Simiao  7 
Sweating  306 
Sweet  potato  342 
Sweet  taste  47,  328 
Swiss  chard  342 
Symphytum officinalis 
105,  108,  214 
Tangerine  342 
Tang Xin  Pen  Tsao  7 
Taoism  6 
Taraxacum  officinalis  101,  104,  111, 
205 
The  Eight  Principles  93 
The  Eight Silk  Brocades 
Archer drawing  the bow left  and 
right  368 
Bending  over  to  hold  the  feet  with 
both hands  370 
Punching  forward  the  tiger  369 
Q!lelling  heart  fire  rotating  the 
head  and  body  369 
Raising  the  heels  upward  369 
Separating  heaven  and  earth  by 
raising  arm  upwards  368 
Supporting the  sky with  the 
hands  367 
Twisting  and  looking  backwards 
369 
The  Five  Elements'  28 
The  Rising  Eagle  366 
The Three Treasures  91 
Thought (Yz)  49 
Three Yang  Stages 
Shao Yang  Stage  123 
Tai  Yang  Stage  122 
Yang  Ming Stage  125 
Three Yin Stages 
Jue Yin  Stage  128 
Shao Yin  Stage  128 
Tai Yin  Stage  127 
Tian  men dong  105 
Tinospora  cordifolia  99 
Tomato  342 
Tongue  Diagnosis  205 
Appearance  209 
Color of the  tongue  209 
Cyanic  or  purple tongue  body 
211 
Pale  210 
Protuding  209 
Red  and  Cardinal 210 
Stiff tongue  209 
Swollen  209 
Thin  and  shriveled  209 
Tongue  coat 211 
Black  212 
White 211 
Yellow212 
Trembling  209 
History 206 
Inspection  209 
Tonification Therapy  310 
Tridosha  66 
Trifolium  pratense  104 
Triple Warmer  40,  159,  298 
Trout  343 
True  Qi (Zhen Qi)  70 
Tuna  343 
Tussilago  farfara  214 
Ulmus  fulva  105,  108,  214 
Urinary  Bladder  58,  161,  304 
Damp Cold  in the Bladder  305 
Damp Heat  in the Bladder  305 
Usnea  barbata  105 
Vegetables  318 
Verbascum  thapsus  214 
Vinegar  343 
Vomiting  306 
Walnut  343 
Wang  Shuhe  7 
ed 
397 
GENERAL  LNDEX 
Warming Therapy 308 
Water  343 
Water,  Fire,  and  Air  66 
Watercress  343 
Watermelon  344 
Wti  Q!  70 
Western  pulse  diagnosis  223 
Wheat  344 
Whitefish  344 
Whole  Foods  324 
Whole  Nutrition  314 
Will  (Zhz)  60,  156 
Withania somnifera  101,  107 
Yam  344 
Yang  Deficient Water  type  66 
Yang  disharmonies 240 
Collapse  ofYang  243 
Deficient Yang  241 
Excess  Yang  241 
Yang  Organs  158 
Gall  Bladder  161,  303 
Large  Intestine  160,  301 
Small  Intestine  158,  297 
Stomach  160,  298 
Triple Warmer  159,  298 
Urinary Bladder  161,  304 
Yellow  tongue coat 212 
Yi  49,  146,  157 
Yin  and Yang  13 
Combinations  of Patterns  113 
External-Deficient-Cold  115 
External-Deficinet-Heat  114 
External-Excess-Cold  114 
External-Excess-Heat  113 
Internal-Cold-Deficiency  115 
Internal-Cold-Excess  116 
Internal-heat-deficinecy  117 
Patterns  that change  118 
Summary of formulas  for  the 
Eight  principles  118 
In Chinese anatomy and 
physiology 22 
In  herbal  healing 26 
In  relationship  to  seasons,  diet 
and  activities 24 
Laws  20 
Pathologies 27 
Qy.alities  17 
Theory  16 
Yang  Deficiency  113 
Yang  Excess  113 
Yin  Deficiency  113 
Yin  Excess  113 
Yin  Deficient Water  type  61 
Yin  Disharmonies 237 
Collapse ofYin  240 
Deficient Yin  238 
Excess  Yin  237 
Yin  Organs  136,  245, 
Heart  136,  245 
Kidneys  153,  290 
Liver  147,  277 
Lungs  140,  259 
Pericardium  139 
Spleen  144,  269 
Ying  Q!  70 
Yuan  Q!  68 
Yue  Xing  Pen  T'sao  7 
Zhen  Q!  70 
Zhi 60,  156 
Zhi mu  174 
Zhong  Q!  69 
Zingiber officinale  214 
Zingiberis off  112 
Zingiberis  officinalis  97,  99,  103, 
112 
iNDEX OF  CHINESE  HERBAL fORMULAS 
Achyranthes  and  Rehmannia  Combination (Zuo  gui  tang  Restore  the  Left) 
237,240 
Aconite,  Ginger  and  Licorice Combination (Si  ni  tang)  44,  100,  103,  110,  116, 
128,  170,  198,  243,  251,  309 
Aconite,  Ginseng  and  Ginger  (Fu  zi  li  zhong  tang)  103,  110,  116 
Agastache  Formula (Huo xiang  zheng qi  san)  183,  300 
Anemarrhena,  Phellodendron and  Rehmannia  Combination (Zhi  bai  di 
huang tang)  62,  105,  107,  118,  128,  174,  201,  240,  295,  297,  310 
Anemone Combination (Bai  tou weng  tang)  99 
Antelope  Horn and  Uncaria  Combination (Ling yang  gou  teng  tang)  167 
Apricot Seed  and  Perilla  Formula (Xing  su  san)  176,  233 
Baked  Licorice  Combination  (Zhi  gan  cao  tang)  249 
Bamboo and  Poria Combination (Wen  dan tang)  181,  235,  253,  254,  304 
Big  Pearl  for  Internal Wind (Da ding feng  zhu)  99,  240 
Blood  Replenishing Decoction  (Oi  chuan  jian)  199 
Bupleurum and  Chih Shih Formula (Si  ni  san)  109,  124 
Bupleurum  and  Cinnamon Combination (Chai  hu gui  zhi  tang)  115,  124, 
197,  308 
Bupleurum and  Dang Gui  Formula (Xiao  yao  san)  125,  197,  266,  280,  281 
Bupleurum and  Dragon  Bone Combination (Chai  hu  jia  long gu  mu  li  tang) 
39,202 
Bupleurum and  Peony Combination Oia  wei  xiao  yao  san)  39,  40,  109,  201, 
228,276,280 
Bupleurum  Formula (Yi  gan  san)  125,  167 
Cannabis Seed  Pills  (Ma  zi  ren  wan)  302 
Capillaris  and  Poria  Five  Herbs  Formula (Yin  chen wu  ling  san)  274 
Capillaris  Combination (Yin  chen  hao  tang)  39,  285,  304 
Cinnabar Combination (Zhu sha  an  shen wan)  201 
Cinnamon  and  Dragon  Bone Combination (Gui  zhi  long gu  mi  li  tang)  250 
Cinnamon  and  Poria  Combination (Gui  zhi  fu  ling  tang)  109,  126,  181,  198, 
199,  202,  231,  311 
Cinnamon Twig  Combination  (Gui  zhi  tang)  97,  115,  119,  123,  169,  196,  197, 
261,  306 
Cinnamon, Ginseng  and  Ginger Combination (Gui  zhi li  zhong wan)  200 
Circuligo  and  Epimedium Combination (Er xian  tang)  293 
Citrus and  Crataegus  Combination  (Bao  he wan)  51,  111,  199,  300,  311 
Citrus and  Perilla  Combination (Fen  xin  qi  yin)  112 
Citrus and  Pinellia Combination (Er  chen  tang  Two  Cured  Decoction)  57, 
110,  180,204;235, 259,262,263 
Clear the  Nutritive  Level  Decoction (Q!ng yin  tan)  132 
Clear  the Stomach  Powder  (Q!ng wei  san)  174,  299 
Clematis  and  Stephania Combination (Shu  jing huo xue  tang)  127,  180,  198, 
199 
~ 
399 
iNDEX OF  CHINESE HERBAL fORMULAS 
Clove  and  Persimmon  Calyx Combination (Shi  di  tang)  300 
Coptis and  Cinnamon  Formula Oiao  tai  wan)  258 
Coptis and  Gelatin  Combination (Huang lian  e jiao)  128 
Coptis and  Rhubarb  Combination (San  huang xie xin  tang)  39,  45,  175,  309 
Coptis and Scutellaria  Combination (Huang lian  jie  du  tang)  99,  104,  lll, 
117,  173,  197,  309 
Coptis, Scute  and  Pueraria  Combination (Ge  gen  huang qin  huang  lian  tang) 
173,  301 
Dang Gui  Four Combination (Si  wu  tang)  39,  100,  107,  109,  197,  202,  229, 
247,  276,  284,  287,  310 
Dang Gui,  Dipsacus  and  Tienchi  Combination (Shu  jin san)  199 
Dang Gui,  Gentiana and Aloe  (Dang gui  long hui wan)  174 
Decoction for  Removing  Blood Stasis  in the Chest (Xue  fu  zhu yu  tang)  197 
Decoction of Polygonatum  Rhizome  Oia  jian wei  zhu  tang)  115 
Decoction of the  Four  Ingredients  and  Three Yellow  Herbs  (San  huang si  wu 
tang)  252 
Dianthus Combination (Ba  zeng  san) 205 
Disperse Vital  Energy in  the  Liver  Powder  (Chai  hu su  gan  san)  228,  281 
Du Huo and Loranthes  Combination (Du  huo  ji  sheng  tang)  198 
Eight  Precious  Herbs  (Ba  zhen  tang)  50,  100,  104 
Emperor of Heavenis  Tonic  Pill  for  the  Mind  (Tian  wang  bu xin  dan) 248 
Ephedra  and  Asarum  Combination (Ma  huang  fu  zi  tang)  170,  214 
Ephedra  and  Ginkgo  Combination (Ding  chuan  tang)  197 
Ephedra Combination  (Ma  huang  tang)  56,  97,  114,  123,  169,  197,  260,  306 
Ephedra, Apricot,  Gypsum  and  Licorice  Decoction (Ma  xing shi  gan  tang) 
132 
Eriobotrya  and  Ophiopogon Combination (Q!ng zao  jiu  fei  tang)  176,  265 
Eucommia and  Rehmannia Combination (You  gui  wan  Replenishing  the 
Right  Pills)  101,  242,  293 
Evodia  Combination (Wu  zhu yu  tang)  129,  197,  286 
Fantastically Effective  Pill  to  Invigorate the  Collaterals  (Huo  luo xia  ling  dan) 
199 
Five  Peels  Decoction (Wu  pi san)  197 
Five  Seeds  of Creation (Wu  zi  wan)  296 
Forsythia  and  Rhubarb  Combination (Liang  ge  san)  104 
Four  Major  Herbs  Decoction (Si  jun zi  tang)  SO,  100,  107,  197,  199,  227,  264, 
270,  276,  310 
Gardenia and Prepared  Soybean  Decoction (Zhi  zi  dou chi  tang)  126 
Gastrodia  and  Uncaria  Combination (Tian  ma  gou  teng yin)  167,  283 
Gentiana Combination (Long  dan  xie  gan  tang)  104,  200,  201,  202,  205,  285, 
297,  304,  305,  309 
Ginseng and Astragalus  Combination (Bu  zhong yi  qi  tang)  44,  100,  104,  227, 
272,  303 
~ 
400 
iNDEX OF  CHiNESE HERBAL FORMULAS 
Ginseng  and  Dang  Gui Ten  Combination  (Shi  quan  da  bu  tang)  100,  104, 
197 
Ginseng and  Ginger  Combination (Li  zhong tang  Regulate  the Middle)  103, 
127,  197,  198,  199,  200 
Ginseng and  Gypsum  Combination (Bai  hu  jia  ren  shen  tang)  131 
Ginseng  and  Longan  Combination  (Gui  pi  tang)  201,  247,  256,  272 
Ginseng  and  Zizyphus  Combination  (Tian  wang  bu  xin  tang)  201,  257 
Ginseng,  Poria  and Atractylodes  Powder  (Shen  ling  bai  zhu  san)  273 
Gypsum  Combination  ( Shi  gao  tang)  104 
Hoelen  and  Areca  Combination (Wu  pi  yin  Five  Peel  Powder)  51,  238 
Inula  flower  and  Hematite  Decoction (Xuan  fu  dai  zhe  tang)  228 
Jade  Screen  Powder  (Yu  ping feng  san)  56,  100,  115,  119 
Lily  Bulb  Decoction  to  Consolidate  the  Lungs  (Bai  he  gu  jin tang)  233 
Lonicera  and  Forsythia  Combination (Yin  qiao  san)  98,  104,  114,  131,  166, 
172,  196,  262,  306,  309 
Lotus  Stem  and  Ginseng Combination (Qing shu  yi  qi  tang)  182 
Ma  Huang and  Apricot  Seed  Combination  (Ma  xing  shi  gan  tang)  263 
Magnetite  and  Cinnabar Sedative (Ci  zhu wan)  201 
Magnolia  and  Hoelen  Combination (Wei  ling  tang)  180 
Major  Bupleurum Combination (Da  chai  hu  tang)  101,  124,  197,  198,  214, 
2 6 ~  282,  289,  302,  308 
Major  Rhubarb  Combination  (Da  cheng qi  tang)  39,  51,  101,  111,  117,  125, 
198,  199,  241,  307 
Mantis  Egg-case  Powder  (Sang  piao  xiao  san)  200,  201 
Minor  Blue  Dragon  Decoction  (Xiao  qing  long  tang)  56,  114,  181,  213,  214 
Minor Bupleurum Combination (Xiao  chai  hu  tang)102,  115,  124,  213,  214, 
266,  308 
Minor Cinnamon and  Paeonia  Combination (Xiao  jian  zhong  tang)  198,  201, 
237 
Minor  Rhubarb  Combination  (Xiao  cheng  qi  tang)  39,  51,  101,  111,  125,  197, 
198,  199,  307 
Morus  and  Chrysanthemum combination (Sang  ju  yin)  98,  131,  166,  306 
Morus  and  Lycium  Formula (Xie  bai  san)  267 
Mume  Formula  (Wu  mei  tang)  101,  129,  199 
Nine  Herbs  with  Notopterygii  Decoction  Oiu  wei  qiang  huo  tang)  260 
Ophiopogon  and  Trichosanthes  Combination  (Mai  men  dong yin  si)  177, 
233 
Ophiopogon  Combination  (Mai  men  dong  tang)  56,  214,  268,  299 
Persica  and  Rhubarb  Combination  (Tao  ho cheng qi  tang)  126,  231 
Polyporus  Combination (Zhu  ling  tang)  200,  305 
Poria  Five  Herb  Combination  (Wu  ling  san)  51,  110,  127,  235,  238,  305 
Pueraria  Combination  (Ge  gen  tang)  97,  123,  169,  198,  261,  306 
401 
iNDEX OF  CHlNESE HERBAL FORMULAS 
Regulate  the  Middle  Pill  (Li  zhong  tang  Ginseng and  Ginger Combination) 
100 
Rehmannia  Eight Combination (Ba  wei  di  huang tang)  64,  101,  107,  116,  196, 
197,  198,  200,  201,  242,  293,  294,  309,  310 
Rehmannia Six  Combination (Liu  wei  di  huang tang)  39,  62,  101,  107,  118, 
200,201,240,268,284,290,295,310 
Rehmannia Six  Combination with  Lycii  Berries  and  Chrysanthemum (Qi ju 
di  huang wan)  288,  289,  290 
Replenishing  the  Right  Pills  (You  gui  wan  Eucommia and  Rehmannia 
Combination)  101,  242,  293 
Replenishing  the Yang  Decoction (You  gui  yin)  64 
Restore  and  Revive  the Yang  Decoction (Hui yang  jiu  ji  tang)  251 
Rhinoceros  and  Rehmannia  Combination  (Xi  jiao  di  huang  tang)  132,  232, 
240,  310 
Rhubarb  and  Mirabilitum Combination (Tiao  wei  cheng qi  tang)  111,  117 
Rhubarb  and  Moutan Combination (Da  huang  mu dan  pi  tang)  126,  198, 
231,  307 
Saussurea  and  Cardamon Combination with  Six  Noble  Ingredients  (Xiang  sha 
liu  jun zi  tang)  200,  273 
Schizonepeta and  Ledebouriella Combination Oing  fang  bai  du san)  97,  166 
Scrophularia  and Ophiopogon Combination (Zeng ye  tang)  233 
Siler  and  Platycodon  (Fang  feng  tung shen san)  39,  45,  311 
Six  Major  Herb Formula (Liu  jun zi  tang)  50,  200,  227,  270,  275 
Spleen Warming  Decoction  (Wen  pi  tang)  199 
Stagnation Relieving  Pills (Yue  qu wan)  112 
Stephania and Astragalus  Combination (Fang  ji  huang  qi  tang)  311 
Stephania and Ginseng Combination (Mu  fang  chi  tang)  249,  255 
Stomach  Purging Decoction with  Pinellia (Ban  xia  xie  xin  tang)  51 
Sweet Wormwood  and Tortoise Shell  Combination (Qing  hao  bie  jia  tang) 
101,  107,  118,  240 
Two  Cured  Decoction (Er chen  tang  Citrus and  Pinellia Combination) 57, 
110,  180,  204,  235,  259,  262,  263 
Vitality Combination (Zhen wu  tang)  44,  107,  116,  127,  271,  277,  309 
Warm  and Activate  the Circulation of the  Heart Pills  (Guan  xin  su  he wan) 
251,  258 
White Atractylodes  and White Peony  Powder  (Tong  xie  yao  fang)  302 
White Tiger  and  Cinnamon Twig  Decoction (Bai  hu  jia  gui  zhi  tang)  198 
White Tiger  Decoction  (Bai  hu  tang)  99,  117,  126,  173,  196,  201,  309 
Xanthium Powder (Cang er san)  56 
Zizyphus  Combination (Suan  zao  ren  tang)  39,  201 
~ 
402. 