  North Node Astrology
Rediscovering Your Life Direction
       and Soul Purpose
       Elizabeth Spring M.A.
                         Dedication
This book is dedicated
First and foremost
To you, dear Reader
For taking the time to read it~
And to all my teachers
And loved ones~
Especially Harry
Sarah, Shane, Greta
Mildred and Wesley.
May you all be blessed;
And may we each find that
treasure
Which arises from love
Of self to love of Self.


“Tis the good reader that makes
the good book; in every book he
finds passages which seem to be
confidences or asides hidden
from all else and unmistakably
meant for his ear; the profit of books
is according to the sensibility
of the reader;
the profoundest thought or passion
sleeps as in a mine, until it is
discovered by an equal mind
and heart.”
Ralph Waldo. Emerson
                         Table of Contents
Title Page
Copyright Page
Introduction:
        “Purpose is the place where your deep gladness meets the world’s
     needs.”

Ways to Read This Book
Astrology; Myth, Magic and Mystery
1.   “Cocktails and Karma; Reincarnation Anyone?”
2.   The Family Karmic Inheritance; Loving Our “Synastry”
3.    “Whats Venus Got to Do With It?” The Alchemy of Desire Healing
        the Wounded Heart
4.   The Astrology of Mid-life and Menopause
5.   Jupiter: Opening to Gifts of Grace, Opportunity and Talent
6.   Saturn: Moving Through Times of Great Change and Opportunity The
         Saturn Returns at ages 29 and 59
Character, Destiny, and Fate: Do It Now! Openings in the Curtain of Fate

7.   Uranus: “We Are Constantly Invited To Be Who We Truly Are.”
8.   Using Neptune Homeopathically; “Spiritus Contra Spiritum”
9.   Pluto’s Ruthless Orchestration of Fate; “Called or Not Called, God is
         Present.”
10. North Node & the South Nodes: Our Soul Messengers “When an Inner
        Situation is not made Conscious, It Happens Outside as fate.”
11. North Node Compensatory Medicine and the “Gold in the Shadow”
12. Where’s my North Node? The Chart.
13. Tracking Your Karmic Journey by Sign:
1—North Node Aries; South Node Libra
2—North Node Taurus; South Node Scorpio
3—North Node Gemini; South Node Sagittarius
4—North Node Cancer; South Node Capricorn
5—North Node Leo: South Node Aquarius
6—North Node Virgo; South Node Pisces
7—North Node Libra; South Node Aries
8—North Node Scorpio; South Node Taurus
9—North Node Sagittarius; South Node Gemini
10—North Node Capricorn; South Node Cancer
11—North Node Aquarius; South Node Leo
12—North Node Pisces; South Node Virgo
14. Tracking Your Karmic Journey by House:
1—North Node in First House
2—North Node in Second House
3—North Node in Third House
4—North Node in Fourth House
5—North Node in Fifth House
6—North Node in Sixth House
7—North Node in Seventh House
8—North Node in Eighth House
9—North Node in Ninth House
10—North Node in Tenth House
11—North Node in Eleventh House
12—North Node in Twelfth House
15. Going Deeper: Unraveling the Unconscious Story “In all chaos there is
       a cosmos, in all disorder, a secret order.”
1—Squares to the Nodes, Planetary Rulers, and Planets Aspecting the
        Nodes
2—Pluto and Polarities
3—Reversed Nodes in Signs and Houses
4—Karma and Free Will: The Mystery of the South Node
5—What You Don’t Know About Your Self
6—Retrieving the Gold in the Shadow of the South Node
7—Pulling It All Together—A Question of Priorities
16. “You Can Make Astrology Prove Anything”
17. “Surrendering to the Gods:” Where Jungian Psychology and Astrology
        Meet
Further Thoughts~ About Me, About You ~ Services, Suggestions &
                               Introduction
      “Purpose is the place where your deep gladness meets the world’s
                       needs.” Frederick Buechner

    Writing a book about how to find one’s life direction and soul purpose
might sound a little arrogant or naïve, depending on whether or not you
believe astrology has anything truly worthwhile to say at all. One’s life
direction seems to evolve through the mysterious equation of “fate plus
character equals destiny.” I’m intrigued by how that middle factor of
character grows and is changed through our choices. How much free will
do we really have? How random is fate? Metaphysical questions abound,
yet I believe that it is in the making of character through our choices that
makes all the difference, and the depth of the insight that accompanies it.
    My hope is that this book gives you, dear reader, a rather “special and
curious tool” to dig deeper into the whys and wherefores of character and
destiny. Our life direction is like the arrow which we shoot through the
skies, and aimed or not aimed it lands somewhere. We choose our target
based on what we know. And as for soul purpose, I share a common yet
sacred bias here, in saying that it is ultimately bound up with our growing
ability to love and be loved.
    Similarly, as a counselor I’m inclined to say that one’s life direction and
soul purpose is about the movement towards healing and wholeness—for
who among us is not wounded and less than whole? Our life direction
seems to evolve as much by default as it does by purpose, and yet we sense
that it’s more than the “visible hat” we wear in the world. It is about our
healing, wholeness and deep happiness, and this is different for each of us.
    Can you remember when you first heard the words of the poet, William
Wordsworth, when he said
     “Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting, the Soul that rises with us,
     our life’s Star, hath had elsewhere its setting, and cometh from afar:
     not in entire forgetfulness, and not in utter nakedness, but trailing
     clouds of glory…”?

    Maybe it’s true that life existed before this birth, perhaps not. However,
embracing the theory of reincarnation is not necessary to get something out
of this book—what I might see as the re-incarnational story, you the reader,
might understand as the effect of early childhood experiences and parental
DNA. Either theory works.
    As you might rightly assume, my point of view is that I like the theory of
reincarnation, because although not provable, it’s a way to look at the world
that holds the promise of fairness and justice. It’s a hopeful bias—because
we know that life is often not “fair” to a person in one life, yet it may prove
to be somehow mysteriously “fair” over many lifetimes. The law of cause
and effect, of karma, operates silently with its twin sisters, fate and destiny,
in ways we don’t fully understand from our perspective. Yet we may be
able to discern an order and an invisible pattern when we look carefully—
such as when we look closely at the tangled threads on the backside of a
tapestry or when we see the “lay of the land” from the top of the mountain.
The closer I look and the farther I look, the more interesting the patterns
become.


     What are these invisible patterns we might not see? A friend once said,
“Be kinder than necessary because everyone we meet is fighting some kind
of battle.” What is that invisible battle we don’t see in our friend? What are
the invisible patterns in our life? What happens when we attempt to talk
about theories such as astrology and reincarnation to non-believers? It is in
these realms I seek to probe, and it is from that probing that the true story of
“Cocktails and Karma” evolved.
     So I accept reincarnation and astrology as a “kind theory” that
challenges chaos and randomness. It gives me faith that there is
“meaningfulness” to existence even if it can’t be proven or discerned in one
life. Without looking at things this way, life feels too cruel. Yet when we go
to movies we can accept the drama and tragedy there. Do you remember
being told as a child: “movies aren’t real, don’t cry”? What’s real? Perhaps
when we come to the end of our journey and pull the curtain back we may
be surprised at who is the real “Wizard of Oz.”
     In the Eastern philosophy of Vedantic Hinduism we were all once part
of the One that created this great pattern or Story. This theory of
reincarnation postulates that we live through lifetime after lifetime of lila and
maya, of play and illusion, till we arrive back at the place where we started
at the beginning: as One. According to this philosophy all sentient beings
are part of this evolutionary unfolding; each of us being like an actor in a
role in which we continually “forget and remember” who we are and where
we’re going—all in a grand homecoming drama that we wrote and directed.
     The legendary occultist, the “magus” Hermes Trigmegestus once said:
“As it is above, so it is below, as it is in the inner, so it is in the outer.” Man
is the microcosm, the universe the macrocosm, and in some metaphysical
sense he postulated that they are One. He was one of the first to theorize on
the synchronistic correlations and resonances between things. I like to
entertain the possibility that these ideas may be true, since Vedanta
Hinduism carries the weight of centuries of scholarly belief, and “old
Hermes” himself knew a lot more than I do.
    If you can suspend your skepticism about reincarnation and entertain the
idea that astrological symbolism is a language best used to explore
psychological and spiritual terrains—well then, I invite you to consider the
theory that there may be something in your birth chart that speaks
specifically of your life direction and soul purpose.
    When you approach this material with an open and curious mind, then
you come to the question—why do I have this particular astrological chart?
Why was I born at this particular time and place? Did I come here to learn or
experience something unique to me? This kind of thinking challenges you to
question everything you think you know about yourself and to look beneath
the obvious. This kind of thinking has led you to this book, and to the
healing message of your North Node. It will take you to the ancient past life
parable of your South Node as well.
    Using your curious mind as a tool, you’re ready to begin excavating the
“soul’s code” embedded in the ancient astrological points of the North and
South Node, known in India as Rahu and Ketu. These nodes aren’t planets,
but astronomical points that have been overlooked in the recent past by
astrologers preoccupied with prediction, rather than purpose. I believe they
are true astrological gold.
    Astrological gold? Yes, like the alchemist’s philosopher’s stone, these
esoteric points in the birth chart give us a base to turn the Saturnian “lead” of
mundane reality into philosophic gold. An astrologer might say they offer a
mercurial secret knowledge.
    A psychologist might say the Nodes intrigue a person just enough to
begin the process of self-inquiry, and that it presents the psychological
concept of “compensation” as being the essence of how the North Node
operates. In the chapter on the North and South Nodes we’ll look at the how
the South Node holds the discarded parts of the self—our shadow qualities,
and how the North Node seeks to bring wholeness to the psyche by
compensating for whatever is not balanced within us. It holds our Soul
aspirations and is like a guiding compass, or a North Star.
    This process of looking to an oracle—or more accurately, looking for an
oracular sign for direction, is like asking to make conscious what is
unconscious. It’s like unraveling a good mystery novel, and lends us a small
but useful measure of control over our life. As Carl Jung once said, “When
an inner situation is not made conscious, it happens outside as fate.” How
exciting it is to ponder the idea that we might have some say in our fate! Is it
an interesting theory, or a gift of grace from the gods? You decide.


     Whether you are a therapist, astrologer, an evangelical or agnostic, this
book is written you—for aren’t we all hungry for spirit and thirsty for
meaning? Who isn’t looking for more to nourish a sense of hope and
possibility? I love what happens when you compare and blend different
attitudes—especially when you combine “Evolutionary Depth” Astrology
with Jungian Psychology—it heats up! It provokes new ideas, questions and
possibilities. One becomes challenged to see the similarities and differences
and to speak across “party lines.”
     Here is where we each become students of the Psyche; here is where we
each become a contemporary alchemist combining astrology and
psychology in a crucible. And if you are willing to let go of your resistance
to the mixing, distilling and re-marriage of these two, then you’ll change
yourself in the process. Alchemists know this to be true.
     For a long time I considered myself a Theosophist, and I think I am still
one at heart. Through that spiritual philosophy I learned that what was once
hidden as esoteric teachings are now being revealed: truths don’t need to be
kept secret from the “masses and the uninitiated” any longer. Instead,
Theosophists have taught that we’ve come into an age where we each
communicate our truth—and no more “my way is the only way.”
     The author and Western sage, J. Krishnamurti, ushered in that idea at the
turn of the last century, reminding us that Truth is a pathless land, unique to
each of us. Now the great challenge is to know ourselves just enough, and
to be healed in our hearts just enough—so that our deep gladness and the
world’s needs can meet, as in the quote at the beginning. In that, we find our
life direction.
     And so this book is written in that spirit—to share some distillation about
life direction, relationships, and transitional life passages. I do not pretend to
have all the answers, nor am I a model of how to do this great alchemy. I
wrote North Node Astrology because I believe there is a new way to look at
the blend of what the wise Swiss psychiatrist, Carl Jung taught, and what
depth astrology can offer us. We can use Nodal astrology for guidance, not
just for prediction. We can use Jungian psychology to deepen and fertilize
our vision and imagination.
     The astrological Nodes are a magnet that pulls the astrological chart
together, synthesizing and highlighting the confusing bits of paradoxical
information in the birth chart. You do not need to be an astrologer or an
analyst to understand any of this. You simply need to be willing to do a bit
of self-reflecting along with your reading. I believe you may “connect a few
previously unconnected dots” or entertain a few flights of fancy that will
help you make decisions more in alignment with your soul’s destiny and
with the yearnings of your heart. Why not?


    Carl Jung once said there are three key ingredients in psychotherapy
(which means, in Greek, “attending to the Soul”): insight, courage, and
enduring action. This book is about the first, because in finding insightful
knowledge we are well on our way to discovering our deepest sense of Self.
    Self with a capital S? Yes. When Jung was growing up he made a
distinction between a part of himself that he called his personality “No. 1”
and another part of himself he called personality “No. 2.” He, and many
astrologers and theologians since him, have talked about Soul and Spirit as
being two separate but related concepts. In a similar fashion, I’ve chosen in
this book to use Self with a capital S to designate that “wiser sense of Soul”
and self with a small s to designate the more egoic personality. One could
also say that it is from the healing of our wounded self that we find our way
to know our wiser Self—this “Self” that unites our personal sense of self to
the cosmic Spirit.


    Oscar Wilde once said: “To love oneself is the beginning of a lifelong
romance.” Isn’t that a delicious and outrageous thought? Who doesn’t want
to rediscover themselves and fall in self-love again; to “re-invent” our lives
and feel that sense of Self? Or maybe we are more humble and simply want
to have “a more determining say” in our destiny and fate; and perhaps like a
good makeover, we confess it’s an intriguing idea. So one of the things
we’ll do is to play with the equation: fate + character = destiny.
    Most of us believe, like Mother Teresa said: “We can’t all do great
things, but we can do small things in great ways.” It’s not always about
what we do in life that truly matters, but how we do what we do. And how
we speak about what we do—for example, I could say this book is about
my re-enchantment with life and “my inner Jung; my inner wise
man/woman” or I can say it’s about astrology and Jungian thought.
    So “life purpose” isn’t about quitting your day job and moving to India
to work in an orphanage, although that might be perfect for some. Life
purpose evolves as we find meaning in whatever we do, and we do this by
bringing to consciousness what we have kept in the unconscious; in our
“shadow”. This term shadow is about all those very human things we
disown about ourselves—things we tend to not see or that we dislike, and all
those things we tend to “project” upon others who either irritate us. Yet this
shadow also holds the “gold”— those noble tendencies and talented parts of
ourselves that we have been too blind to see. In astrology, we find this by
inquiring into the Nodes—
    These Nodes hold the leaden, stuck places within our psyches as well as
the places of aspiration, dreams, and unsuspected talents. It takes courage
and a bit of “reading between the lines” to get it. I remember when first
reading the philosopher, J. Krishnamurti—I would have to frequently pause
between the lines to see if I could catch the gist of what he was trying to put
words to—it wasn’t easy. The Nodal descriptions here in this book aren’t
dense reading at all, conversely, they are almost too simple. You still have to
read between the lines.
    It is humbling work to look at our South Node—to look into our past life
story and this shadow. It is not for the faint of heart or for those who want to
see themselves righteously or piously. Looking at one’s “unfinished
business” is a humbling experience, and daring to act on the suggestion of
the North Node isn’t comfortable at first. It usually feels unfamiliar as well.
Yet it is through this integrating process that we glimpse the possibilities of a
fuller life.
    And as Jung said, the third part of “attending to the Soul” is about
enduring action: the willingness to withstand the tension of the opposites—
the tension of holding the opposing voices in our heads, and not to break the
alchemical vessel with lack of attention or self-sabotage. We need to hold
ourselves gently, so that we may transmute the lead, the wounded parts of
the ego, into the gold of insight and action.


    Relationships are the crucible in which we become who we truly are.
And not just romantic relationships, but also our relationship with Self, with
Others, and our Work. Some of us whine about the hopeless “Search for the
Magical Other,” but beneath the cynicism I hear a yearning for something
else. The youthful illusion of being saved by “the Romantic Other” gets
reinvented as we get older as we see how much we’ve used relationship as
an escape from our personal journey or as a distraction or even a sabotaging
of our own calling! The romantic fantasy has carried so much on its
shoulders—it’s carried so many of our hopes for deep soul connection and
joy. It simply is too much to ask of any one person’s human shoulders to
hold so much of what is truly only ours to carry.
    Our life direction and Soul purpose is a quest—a question that a
workout in the gym, a pay check, or an internet search isn’t going to answer.
Yes, we’re googling for new solutions to old problems, exploring new
paradigms, but I think we’re still going to have to pull back on some of our
expectations, and be very patient with ourselves. As we live into the
answers to some of these questions, we may find that even imperfect maps
can be helpful.


     So, how we talk about Soul matters. Soul can be understood as an
illusive inner sense of Self—a kind of personal embodiment of Spirit. We
don’t need to define it here, but rather to feel it. We could say that it’s an
energy that wants something from us; something that impels us to live up to
whatever our full potential could be. But no matter how we choose to define
it for ourselves, it is how we feel about our connection or disconnection to
Self that either feeds or depletes us.
     How we find our life direction is also crucial. We can fishtail around in
the world of jobs, careers, vocations, and relationships but unless the heart is
moved and old painful habits are released, we may stay stuck. When we
make life decisions from an insightful heart-space we tap into the collective
unconscious, which holds deep wellsprings of wisdom…pockets of gold as
well as illusive shadow dragons.
     Then what ails us? Is it our tiredness or aching back, or the fear that if
we look deep there may be nothing there? My sense is that we are ailed by
that fear—that sense of existential anxiety that there isn’t any more to life,
and even if there is we can’t get there from here. That we’re too old, too fat,
too uneducated, or too lazy.
     Or even worse is the fear that if we had our freedom to be all we could
be, we could end up having to fundamentally change. We might have to go
it alone, take a journey, learn new computer skills, or confront our
“hardening of the attitudes.” We might have to reconsider our attitude
towards our friends or partners. Yes, we may say we want a fuller life, but
we usually want it on our conditions. This is a part of that anxiety and “fear
and trembling” the existentialist philosophers wrote about—the price of
living an authentic life.
     We often calm this anxiety by distraction and amusement rather than
delving into the depths. We forget how anxiety and excitement are two sides
of the same coin, as well as depression and boredom. Who can hold the
tension of these opposites easily? Why who knows, you could annoy your
friends if you talked astrology and offended their academic or religious
philosophy. We keep so many good discussions going in our heads, and
instead read books like this in bed before falling asleep.
     But before you fall asleep now, I’d like to offer you a thought—if you
choose to explore the mystery of the Nodes contained in the mandala of
your birth chart I promise you that you’ll find meaning there that incites a
kind of “make-over” that comes with renewed self-confidence. Sales pitch?
Yes…and I’ll add that at the very least, you will find it interesting enough to
be disturbing.
    Looking at life symbolically invites magic and synchronicity, disturbs
the status quo, and renews a sense of faith and trust.Why? Because when
you see how your personal life story synchronizes with patterns that are
larger and bigger than you, you’ll touch on your connectedness with the
whole of life. You’ll get a sense that your life might have a meaningful
pattern that underlies the apparent chaos. Now don’t you think the unfolding
story of your life—your personal mythology—deserves at least as much
time as you give to caring for your body, your relationships, or your
finances?


    Although I’ve studied astrology since 1969 it wasn’t until about 15 years
ago that I became fascinated with the North and South Nodes in the birth
chart. Before then, I didn’t know there was a particular point in the birth
chart that would reveal clues to life direction or our soul purpose. In fact,
most astrologers overlooked at the Nodes back then, in their search for
prediction, and it wasn’t until relatively recently that the Nodes became one
of the most talked about aspects in astrology.
    The internet is a rich resource of sites where astrologers and non-
astrologers debate the meanings of these astrological enigmas. (Currently my
North-NodeAstrology blog site receives about 300 hits a day from curious
people.) And the insight I’ve gained from studying the North and South
Nodes has made an enormous difference in my life by reminding me of core
beliefs I’ve held that keep me “out of alignment”, disembodied, and not
authentically me.
    These North/South Node default patterns show me what ails me, but
also what cures me. The clue is in the North Node. Each one of us is a
wounded healer, a “Chiron” that knows best the medicine that cures. I call
that medicine the North Node.


    Again, how we talk about Soul matters. This book isn’t meant to prove
astrology or to be simply a Nodal cookbook for the psyche, but rather to
provide you with a soulful language to talk about things that matter—like
purpose, direction, destiny and fate, without a religious agenda. You may
find that the Nodes points a way like a Zen master pointing a finger at the
moon. I believe it’s through music, poetry, stories, and the symbolic use of
language that we slip beneath the surface of the mundane to that wordless
place where we feel inspired, and where our souls feel nourished. And so,
along with the charted descriptions of your Nodal journey, I’ve chosen to
interweave some of my own stories as well, so as to show how the
symbolism and the particulars of a life can fit together.


    Have you found the place where your “deep gladness meets the needs of
the world” as Frederick Buechner wrote in the opening quote? We often
judge our lives by our work and our relationships because this is the
alchemical crucible where our life story gets “cooked.” But there’s another
way to look at our lives that doesn’t just chalk things up to status, money, or
marriage—or good or bad karma in this life or another. It’s about asking
questions such as: Is what I’m doing now in alignment with my Soul’s
journey? Is there a way I can know more about that? Am I using all the
“unrecognized” talents I was born with?
    Whether you have a job, a career, or a “vocation” doesn’t matter as
much as how you feel about what you’re doing. Maybe you wanted to be a
nurse, and became a nurse’s assistant instead. The life direction and soul
purpose might still be fulfilled either way, and hopefully this book will help
deepen your understanding about whatever it is you do. I also hope it helps
awaken you to consider new possibilities, as well as providing a map of the
twists and turns in the road—those life passages that astrologers call transits.
    Ancient astrologers pointed to the North Star. We know that a map of
the heavens or earth is not the territory, but the North Node is a useful
compass. And, the astrological road map that the planetary transits give us
allows us to see the “transiting” waves of emotional highs and lows. Perhaps
by using the map you won’t hit the bumps so hard or feel it for so long.
“This too will pass!” has soothed many a tired soul.
    But still, you ask, do I need to understand astrology or even believe in
astrology to use this book? No. I suggest you simply take this as a theory
you test for yourself. What do you need in order to use this book? Two
things: use your birth day and year to take a look at the chart (Look at the
chart in the chapter: “Where’s My North Node?”) in order to find the sign of
your North Node, and second, use a copy of your astrology chart if you
want to delve deeper into understanding the meaning of the other planetary
archetypes and transits.
    You can get a free copy of your chart through my North Node blog at:
http://NorthNodeAstrology.blogspot.com. So if you buy this book directly
through me or the blog, I’ll send you your “parchment birth chart” if you
email me your birth information including your birth time if you have it. If
you don’t have your time of birth, I can still send you your sunrise chart,
which shows your Nodes with all your planets, signs and aspects. The time
of birth does not usually change the Nodes, nor the signs of the outer
planets, which are what we are considering here.You can also get your birth
chart on the internet by googling “free astrology charts.” Because most of
this book focuses on the Nodes and the life-changing transits that happen to
everyone at roughly the same age, you’ll only need to use your chart for a
few sections of the book.


     However, to get the most out of this book you will need a humble
curiosity and an openness to consider a different way of thinking that goes
beyond the purely rational. It’s a theory—see if it works for you. Whether
you are a Jungian analyst or a Baptist minister, a full-time mother or an older
person reflecting on a life mostly lived, it doesn’t matter. What matters is an
attitude of openness to all the various ways we can say “Yes!” to life in all
its mystery. So this book is dedicated to you, dear reader—may it help you
on your journey.
     ~ Elizabeth Spring January, 2009
                    Ways to Read This Book…

    …how about from beginning to end? That is fine, unless you want to go
right to the chapters on the Nodes. You’ll soon see that this book could have
been divided into two books—one, just on the Nodes, and one on the
planets and their age-related passages called transits. It was a hard decision,
but ultimately I chose to put it all in one book because each part is intricately
bound together in a life. It’s all food for your intuitive imagination.
    It can be amusing to play with these ideas, but there’s a serious side to
this as well. The longing and yearning you feel when you’re out of
alignment with your Nodes makes all the life transits harder—so, the more
resistance or reactivity you have to your Nodal life path, the tougher the
transits will be. Although Buddhists remind us that suffering is an intrinsic
part of life, authors such as Cheri Huber say that some suffering may be
optional. Truth is often found in paradox.
    A few readers may wish there was more Nodal emphasis in the first
section of the book. However, the risk in doing that was to create “cook
book style” writing that you, the reader, might not venture beyond. I didn’t
want to do that. The way it is now, you have a chance to read about the
outer planets from Jupiter through Pluto, and also get a chance to ponder
their effects on your life through their transits. Then you get to pull it all
together through the sign and house position of your Nodes, their aspects
and rulers, and ponder ways to prioritize and synthesize it all. I hope you
find your own best way to roam through the kaleidoscope of this approach,
and find the material digestible as well as provocative.


     So, here’s the menu: we start with Self and Story—because the sense of
Self is forged in the crucible of relationships with family, with partners, and
our body, I’ve chosen that as the logic of beginning with chapters on those
first, and then moving to the life passages/transits we all experience at
roughly the same ages, and then to what the Nodes have to say about life
direction and soul purpose.
     I feel that you’ll find a more heartfelt narrative by reading this book that
way, from beginning to end, and you’ll see how thoughts build on each
other and amplify—but it is still equally valid to start in with the chapters on
the “North and South Nodes: Your Soul Messengers.”
     However, a word of caution: If you read the Nodal descriptions without
reading the introductory chapter on the North and South Nodes first, as well
as the North Node Compensatory Medicine chapter, there will be a number
of questions that are sure to come up for you. And, without reading the
“Going Deeper” chapter to flesh out critical nuances of the karmic nodal
story, I fear you may put down this book feeling unsatisfied.
    One could also say that “Astrology; Myth, Magic and Mystery” is
another introduction, or a prologue. It is in essence a copy of a talk I gave at
Brown University and I’m including it here because it has some facts, twists
and turns that aren’t in the rest of the book. It explains a few of the nuts and
bolts of this kind of astrology in a more direct way.
    And for those of you who feel the lump of indigestion arising around the
concepts of karma and reincarnation, I’ve included an important true story in
“Cocktails and Karma” that may make the “chewing” on those ideas a little
easier. I’m still not asking you to believe, but I am asking for consideration
—a word whose origin comes from “with the stars.” And for those who
enjoy the challenge of making bridges with people who don’t agree with
you, then you might find some tasty offerings in Cocktails and Karma for
heartfelt discussions.
           Astrology: Myth; Magic and Mystery

      When someone asks what work I do, I always have to summon up a
little extra courage before answering “I’m an astrologer.” And the reaction is
usually the same. “Really?” they say, and then after a pregnant pause and
intense eye contact, they either quickly change the subject, or ask with
raised eyebrows—”So how long have you been doing it?” When I say I
started studying thirty-eight years ago, I often see a shy smile and hear their
confession: “Well, I always wanted to try that, although I don’t know if I
believe.”
      That’s my cue to say that I don’t know if I actually “believe” either! I
don’t put much stock in newspaper or internet horoscopes, but I find them
fascinating. I take them as a theory, and then look to see if my experience
matches what they say. I’m actually quite a skeptical person, and I do know
that I don’t believe in any woo-woo vibrations from planets, and I don’t care
if Pluto has been demoted by the scientists, and I’m simply not interested in
trying to prove astrology to anyone—but I am interested in explaining it.
      And then I hear myself saying: Have you heard of the concept of
synchronicity? Do you know about the Swiss psychiatrist, Carl Jung? Do
you know about the Nodes? About then I know I’ll need to have another
cup of coffee because the conversation isn’t going to end quickly. People
are curious and they want to know more.
      In 2003, according to the Harris Poll, 31% of Americans believed in
astrology. That is roughly 100 million people; 1/3 of the almost 300 million
people we are in this country. I don’t know what the figures are now, but in
this year alone, Americans will buy approximately 20 million books on
astrology—which is 4 times the numbers of such books they bought two
years ago. But still—it’s the black sheep of the family in most circles. And
that is because astrology, like religion, or alchemy or even the nature of
love, is something that rational reasoning and scientific inquiry will never be
able to prove.
      I can easily accept the hypothesis that astrology, may not be verifiably
‘true’ at all, and that the planets in the heavens are simply the names we
give to deep psycho-spiritual processes. But when astrology is dismissed
glibly by people who have never experienced it, it’s more than annoying.
      So why does it work? It appears to be a richly symbolic language of the
Soul that defies reason. And it works, as said before, not because of any
woo-woo vibrations of the planets, but for two reasons. One, because when
we ask questions in a spirit of sincerity I believe the Universe conspires to
show us answers if we listen well. It follows Jesus’ law: “Ask and ye shall
receive.”
     The second reason is because of the grace-filled principal of
synchronicity. The philosopher Plato, and the late Swiss psychiatrist, Carl
Jung, developed this theory of synchronicity, which literally means “united
time”—’syn’ means ‘to unite’, and ‘chronos’ means ‘of time’.
     Synchronicity is the theory of meaningful co-incidences in which there
is no rational causal connection between event A and event B. But instead
there is a meaningful or beautifully symbolic relationship between the two
disconnected events. Jung shared his discovery of synchronicity and his
many experiences with it in his autobiography, Memories, Dreams and
Reflections. His chapter on “Psychiatric Activities” was a particularly
fascinating re-read for me, underlining the importance of feeling and inner
awareness, coupled with the synchronistic phenomenon—as he says there:
“Anything can be settled by an intellect that is not subject to the control of
feeling—and yet the intellectual still suffers from a neurosis if feeling is
undeveloped.”
     For me this also explains why there needs to be a feeling, a sincerity and
something of importance that you are dealing with, in order for the “gods to
intervene” in creating a synchronistic moment. Perhaps this is why when we
use astrology or other forms of divination too lightly, the results are likewise
“light.” However when we come from a place of heartfelt emotion in
therapy, romance, dreams, or prayer we may sometimes be quite shocked by
what connections can be made. Synchronicity may take our conscious egos
by surprise, but like a serious clue in a good mystery, it is something to be
reckoned with.
     In terms of astrology, Carl Jung noted that one’s birth time and place is a
true synchronistic event, and that astrology works because of it. (Ask any
woman in labor how much feeling is in that moment!) Jung went on to say
that “We are born at a given moment in a given place and like vintage years
of wine we have the qualities of the year and of the season in which we are
born.” Jung didn’t understand the mystery of this process, but found that by
experience—that astrology simply works. So he used it in his analysis with
clients, even though he was often reluctant to talk about it because he feared
professional criticism.
     But here’s a good question—what about those twins or quadruplets all
born at almost the same time, to the same parents, and in the same place?
Since their charts will look so similar, what’s the difference? The difference
is that they each are separate and unique Souls. The incoming story of each
baby Soul here will look similar on paper, but we don’t know how these
Souls lived out their past life karmic stories. They probably had similar
challenges, and perhaps wanted to re-incarnate with other Souls they’ve
known before, but the essence of it is that they are each bringing in
variations on a theme, and in this life they’re going to play out variations on
a theme. Their Nodes will look similar—but their responses will be
different.


     Astrology is what I do—it’s my spiritual practice, and I believe in it as
one might believe in any religion—and mostly because it makes sense out of
the injustices in the world when viewed in the karmic re-incarnational light
of multiple lives. This kind of world view, this kind of evolutionary
astrology, reminds me repeatedly that our Souls are on a journey Home, and
that on this grand Quest we encounter quest-ions, and we have chances,
over and over again to make things right for ourselves. Every life is a unique
path to its own home. No right or wrong, no dogma or rigid expectations.
     The type of astrology I practice has elements of Buddhism, Hinduism
and the Judeo-Christian worldview in it. And yet it’s not based on any of
these—instead it draws out of them a non-judgmental compassionate view
of life, and adds to them a belief in the plausibility of reincarnation and the
soul’s pre-existence. This belief system holds that there is an evolutionary
process moving the Soul from separation from its Divine Nature towards re-
connection with a benevolent Source. It suggests that we have so much free
will that our Soul actually chooses the time and place to be born into so that
it brings over both the gifts and challenges from previous lives.
     So, how does it all work? When an astrologer draws up a birth chart
based on that very important birth time and place, it will show tendencies, or
probabilities, but it doesn’t show destiny. We still have free will. Each
choice and every attitude in life builds character, and character and fate are
delightfully intertwined. Why is it delightful? Because most astrologers
believe in that formula of fate plus character equals destiny, then we can
consciously work on our character. Fate can throw us hard times, but we
create our destiny by building our character in response to what life presents
us with. We use our free will to continually make choices, and those choices
are either conscious or unconscious, and are based on what we know at the
time. I’ve always liked what Jung once said about this: “Free will is the
ability to do gladly that which I must do.”
     For me, I sense a plan of divine justice here, and a cosmic pattern that
affirms a meaningfulness, and a divine dance between the macrocosm and
the microcosm; between God and man; between the heavens and the earth.
Astrology accepts the ancient occult saying “as above, so below, as within,
so without” and so it presumes a relationship between the planets above and
the earth below; between the numinous “mind of god” and the individual
psyche within.
    When you look at your own chart, you’ll see a psycho-spiritual
description of yourself that transcends one life alone. Every planet in the
chart is karmic. Karmic suggests habitual patterns, and reflects the usual way
or style you have of doing things—and it may continue over many lives.
Some of your old habits serve you well; others seem to be trouble makers.
So karmic patterns are reactive knee-jerk responses—they are your “default”
patterns when you’re not applying a lot of conscious willpower over a
situation. Karma is not all bad, in fact, just like all the planets and the signs
can be read in a positive and negative manner, your “karma” contains your
gifts as well as your stubborn resistances. In a nutshell, karma is the law of
cause and effect. But not all “karma” is obvious or linked in a fair and just
manner in this one life, so the subject does get mysterious. But who doesn’t
love to attempt to understand a good mystery?
    Character, choice, and fate intertwine in mysterious ways, and my focus
here is not to predict, but to help you explore all the possibilities in your
charts. For example, let’s say you are born a female with blue eyes and red
hair and perhaps an Irish background. It’s also significant if your North
Node or Sun in your birth chart is tightly aspecting Pluto. The closeness of
your North Node to Pluto or the Sun to Pluto tells you that your father, and
your paternal inheritance is very strong, and that you have a kind of intensity
and charisma that other people may find intimidating at times. It also
suggests that you may have lost a “gift” from the father—he may have been
absent in some way.
    This aspect suggests you are not going to shy away from the deep and
sometimes taboo areas of life, but rather will be drawn to explore them in
order to regain the gift. You will want to understand the challenges that your
father and grand-father had, so that you can understand your family karmic
inheritance and not act out urges unconsciously. There’s a legacy with this
aspect, and the goal is for compassionate understanding—and often
forgiveness, so that you do not act out the karmic-genetic tendencies blindly.
    Because the planets don’t cause anything to happen, but merely reflect
the climate of a particular time, we have free will in determining how we
will play out the symbolism of our birth chart and the astrological weather of
the transits. You can choose to play out your “karma” on what might be
called a higher octave rather than a lower octave. The more you know, the
more choices you have, the better your decisions—this is when knowledge
becomes power. Wisdom and “character” is what happens along the way.
    Astrology works—and occasionally doesn’t work—for many reasons.
Like the Judeo-Christian concept of prayer, we ask and hope to receive.
When astrologers, like other spiritual teachers or guides, move into the literal
mode too much and attempt to predict the mind of God, we lose. When we
honor the fact that spirituality echoes the mysteries of our lives, we find that
astrological insight can be profound. It can inspire courage and faith in the
process of life and death. It can give hope.
    Magic and mystery arise when synchronicity is felt—when what you see
in your chart and what you know of your life are congruent; synchronized,
and reveal a pattern. Astrology is not meant to merely define, predict, or
forecast—it’s meant to stimulate our insight and make us whisper: “Ah-
hah!” Its here to help us do what the oracle at Delphi commanded—“Know
Thyself.” It helps us make better choices, as it gives us a glimpse of who we
are, where we’ve been, and where we’re going.


    So here’s briefly how it works—-by knowing the date, time, and place
of a birth we can draw up a natal chart that shows the exact positions of the
planets in the sky at the moment of birth. It’s like a snapshot. And this
snapshot looks like a mandala divided into 12 sections called houses, with
planets, signs, and aspects. We know that every planet is a symbolic
archetype with a rich mythology attached to it, and every sign describes a
way of being in the world. The planets tell us who or what we’re talking
about—our Self, our persona/masks, our ways of relating—and the sign,
such as Aries, Taurus, etc. describes the qualities of that planet. The aspects,
like the squares and oppositions, describe how the planets, or the voices in
your psyche, are all relating to each other. And it all describes something
quite uniquely fascinating about us!
    As we age and time progresses, the planets move, and so astrologers
draw up a second “transit chart” that shows the current positions of the
planets for any given moment of time—usually the present moment, and
place this chart in a bi-wheel around the birth chart. By doing this one can
see, for example, how the planet Saturn in the sky, in its orbit around the
Sun, shows up in both our birth and transit charts in a geometric relationship
that can “predict” Saturnian times in our life. It remains essentially a mystery
as to why this correlation between the outer movement of Saturn in the
heavens resonates with the inner mystery of Saturn in our psyche, but that is
the nature of synchronicity.
    So by measuring the degrees of the angles between the position of the
birth planets and the moving transiting planets, one can describe the kind of
interaction, or the psychological climate of a particular period of time.
Computers do this calculating for us today, and these geometric angles
created by the second chart let us know how the planets are now interacting
with each other. Are they in a tense and challenging square now? That
suggests a tension between those two energies represented by the planets
squared. If they’re in a trine/triangular relationship they are supporting and
enhancing each other instead. Astrology books cover all these nuts and bolts
of astrology in great detail, so I’ve only touched lightly on these basics.


    What I am going to do instead, is to suggest that you go right to the heart
of the matter. And that heart is embedded in the essence of your chart: in the
North and South Node axis. Think for a minute of the image of the medieval
navigation device, the astrolabe—it’s a double circular globe with an arrow
shooting through it. The arrow is like the Nodal axis, pointing through to
what I call our personal North Star, our North Node. This arrow unifies all
the details of the complex chart—saying “Look here—this is where you are
meant to go. This is direction of the North Node.”
    So how can you understand these most ancient, yet new, aspects in your
chart? As an evolutionary based astrologer I see value in delving into the
theory of the past life “parable” as it shows up in the South Node and how it
affects the present life. This past life pattern that emerges through the South
Node of the Moon may not be literally true, but I believe it holds “emotional
truth.” Like in a good story, when something reaches deep into the heart and
resonates—we know something is hitting home. Literalism in facts is not
what is being looked for here.
    The emotions that are so often locked up in us could be the result of
early childhood development, or the residual result of karmic dramas of past
lives. They could feel, in moments of reverie, like a barely conscious
memory of a dream. Or, like “incest that we barely remember” it may be an
emotional truth if not a literal truth. The mood, like the Moon is still there,
influencing the moment, but it may be obscured, in the dark.
    This lunar “South Node hangover” influences our experiences in this life
now. It acts as an invisible magnet beneath consciousness, and we are wise
if we know our moods and tendencies to be pulled certain ways. We can act
out the old story lines of default habits and past karma, or create a new story,
based on fresh aspirations.
    What’s exciting for me in all this “theorizing” is that as we learn about
our chart, the Nodes, and the transiting “weather forecast” the planets offer
us, we get the chance to release these emotions locked up in past lives and
heal them. We get to do something new as well. The North Node is very
pragmatic in offering suggestions, compensations, and practical ideas. In the
Nodal axis we see where we have repeated old themes and in the North
Node we glimpse what we’ve often denied seeing about ourselves—and this
includes forgotten and unused talents as well! The North Node and Jupiter
“hold” not only suggestions, but hints of forgotten innate talents that we
have yet to discover. And with these new ideas and insights we become
freer to make better choices.


    Astrology is a fascinating blend of myth, magic, and mystery.
Ultimately, it can be a deeply compassionate tool that we can each use to
help chart our course in life.
    We understand astrology to be a soul language that confronts us with the
puzzle that is us—we take it apart and put it back together in order to find
the invisible connecting threads between what we know, and what we don’t
know.
    Good astrology seeks to confirm, to comfort, and to subtly guide. A
good astrologer is compassionate, hopeful and healing. In this book, you are
the astrologer and the client. You are the mystery, and the problem to be
explored.
                       Chapter 1.
         “Cocktails and Karma: Reincarnation
                      Anyone?”

     “Let us give thanks for this work That repeatedly shows us how wrong
 we may be—That what we see first, is not all there is—That people are far
richer, more complex And nobler than we imagine, And that what we see as
 God or human flaw Is flawless in design. For the gift is in the effort—In the
practice of reaching to understand All the unknowable mysteries For which
                          we are so truly grateful.”
                              ~Elizabeth Spring

    I was at a party last Saturday night talking to a reformed-Baptist minister
from rural Rhode Island. It was late enough in the evening so I was
sufficiently soothed by food and drink to attempt a real conversation with
someone on the other side of the philosophical waters. It’s good to create
bridges, I thought.
    “The trouble,” he said, “is with evil. People get shut down by the
tragedies they see in the world—they don’t see enough justice happening in
their lives.”
    “Ah, you mean like ‘When bad things happen to good people’ I asked,
wondering if he knew the book I was thinking of—the one written by the
Rabbi scholar that had helped me when I was going through a difficult
passage at my first Saturn return at age twenty-eight.
    “Yes…” The minister had tired soft blue eyes. “I’ve been reading the
new book Why Good People Do Bad Things.” He turned his intense gaze
on me while biting into a chocolate éclair. “So how do you make things
‘right’ in your astrological world? Is it just that bad things happen ‘under a
bad moon’?”
    “No, it’s not so easy,” I said, pouring myself a full glass of Pinot Noir.
“Astrologers help people recognize life cycles and trust the process of
change, especially when they’re going through hard times. It’s a bit like
being a cosmic cheerleader.” That’s a truthful, but light-hearted reply I
thought, as I was absorbing the fact that a minister was asking an astrologer
a philosophic question. It seems that it’s only rarely, at times like this—at the
late night cocktail party—that “non-believers” are open to discussing a taboo
subject like astrology. I remembered how Carl Jung was warned not to
discuss alchemy or astrology lightly, as it might sully his reputation. I had
nothing to lose.
     As he stood there licking his fingers, it occurred to me what an
opportunity this was to create a bridge between our worlds, yet I wondered
if I would have the energy or tact to do it skillfully. I’m a Libra sun sign, and
I must admit I prickled at the thought of real confrontation just now, but his
kind eyes inspired me, so I went on: “Do you remember that religious
question—-the equation that says: if God is all knowing, and if God is all
powerful, then can it be true that God is all loving?”
     I looked up at him and saw him suddenly raise his eyebrows. I couldn’t
tell if he was remembering that equation or getting ready for battle, so I
quickly added: “It just doesn’t equate for me that if God is all knowing and
all powerful that he could allow evil to exist. It would be like a mother
allowing her child to be hurt when she could do something to stop it….that
is, if she was all knowing and all powerful.” I could hear a pleading quality
in my voice.
     “I know,” he said, “but because God loves us he’s given us free will and
in giving us the freedom to choose, then the possibility for evil enters in.”
He spoke as if he had said those words too many times before. Leaning over
the wine table he perused the choices for a moment and picked up the bottle
of sparkling water and poured himself a glass.
     “Interesting conversation you two are having….!” A woman who I
knew only as a local psychologist walked over and interrupted. “Have you
ever heard of Matthew Fox?” she asked. The minister shook his head no.
“He writes that we’re meant to co-create with God by choosing goodness
and creating new solutions to the problem of evil.” Perhaps she was hoping
that this famous Christian writer could be a bridge between us.
     “Oh yes, now I remember.” The minister seemed to light up for a
moment. “He was the maverick Catholic monk who challenged the Pope!
Yeah, everyone thinks they’re right in some way. Each side in an argument
or war believes they’ve got God on their side. Even astrologers too, eh?” He
turned to me. “So, can you guess what sign I am?”
     My heart dropped. “I don’t do that kind of thing,” I replied, as a wave of
weariness crashed over me. I took a long sip of wine, and looked back at the
minister, “But since you brought up the subject of evil, most astrologers
think about that quite a bit. Many of us think that God’s justice isn’t often
evident in one life, but it doesn’t mean it doesn’t exist. We think it takes
lifetimes for divine justice to happen. It’s a mystery—because we don’t get
to see the progress of a soul over so many lives. ”
     “God’s got the mountaintop view, for sure, it’s we who don’t” he
replied. “We just have to hold to our faith and not get discouraged. It’s hard
to feel powerless, to feel like you’re strung on the cross, and to wait, to
simply wait.” He turned his gaze so intently at me for a moment that I
wondered what he was waiting for, or expecting from me. Then he spotted
another chocolate éclair next to us. He picked it up and smiled at me. “You
look like you were born Irish Catholic, am I right?”
     “Oh, yes.” I could hear the ministerial voice advancing in my direction,
and I literally stepped back. “A recovering Catholic,” I laughed, but noticed
I bowed my head.
     “Nothing wrong with that,” he said. “Always time to recover and time to
be reborn….there’s great peace in being able to surrender to divine will.”
     “Surrender?” I said too loud. Surrender is a hard word for a woman with
an Aries Moon and Aries rising. “Surrender to a God who allows only one
chance in one lifetime to get it right? What if you’re born into abuse and
poverty?” I could feel my steam rising. “Even a good mother gives her child
a few chances to get something right. That’s why I believe in reincarnation
—we get many chances to get it right. Isn’t it a little righteous for Christians
to believe they can know from their interpretation of the Bible, who and
what is right or wrong, or good and evil? It feels sort of righteous.”
     He didn’t say a word but let my words echo around us. Did I really say
that? My Libra Sun blushed, as my Aries Moon was rising up from slumber.
Here was a challenge. I began pleading my case, waving my hand in the air
like some Italian orator: “I trust, like you, that there is a benevolent order
behind it all that we ultimately return to—but my “God” just doesn’t look
like your God. In fact, my God may even have a “shadow” unconscious
part of himself.” Did I just say “himself”? “The only thing that makes sense
to me is reincarnation and the pattern of cause and effect—you know,
karma.” I took a breath.
     Any good Libra Sun would be heading for the hors d’oeuvres by now.
Instead, I touched his arm. “Sorry, I didn’t mean to get so wound up. Can I
tell you a little story I just remembered? It’s about good and bad luck, but
you could also think of it as being about good and evil, or karma.” He
nodded ever so slightly, and so I began:
     “Once upon a time a farmer had a horse. But one day, the horse ran
     away and so the farmer and his son had to plow their fields
     themselves. Their neighbors said, “Oh, what bad luck that your horse
     ran away!” But the farmer replied, “Bad luck, good luck, who
     knows?”

     The next week, the horse returned to the farm, bringing a herd of wild
     horses with him. “What wonderful luck!” cried the neighbors, but the
     farmer responded, “Good luck, bad luck, who knows?”
     Then, the farmer’s son was thrown as he tried to ride one of the wild
     horses, and he broke his leg. “Ah, such bad luck,” sympathized the
     neighbors. Once again, the farmer responded, “Bad luck, good luck,
     who knows?”

     A short time later, the ruler of the country recruited all young men to
     join his army for battle. The son, with his broken leg, was left at home.
     “What good luck that your son was not forced into battle!” celebrated
     the neighbors. And the farmer remarked, “Good luck, bad luck, who
     knows?”

     The minister looked like he was trying to digest that one. “I’d say that
farmer was a wise man. He trusted in God—that is, he had faith that he
couldn’t really know what was good or bad.”
     I nodded my head in agreement. “So what we agree upon is that good or
evil and lucky or unlucky is not always evident in the moment. You might
call it surrender, I call it acceptance of a process…and astrology gives me a
perspective about cycles of time so that I can see things from a more
objective perspective.”
     The therapist nodded her head: “It reminds me that Shakespeare once
said: ‘Nothing’s either good or bad, but thinking makes it so.’”
     We all smiled knowingly. Then she went on: “However, the problem
with astrologers like you, and Christians like you, is that you both make
people feel guilty at themselves or mad with God, when things go wrong!
You know, if I’m having a Saturn transit—to speak your language—it’s still
my fault!”
     How impressive to combine Shakespeare, astrology, and Christianity
into one swift verbal kick! At this point I was making quick guesses as to
how Saturn might be making a harsh square to Mercury in her chart, when
the minister came back with a quick defense.
     “Oh no, it was the Puritans who believed that if you were a good
religious person then only good things would happen to you, and that if you
didn’t live up to the word of God, then bad things would happen. Today we
just say that we can’t always understand God’s will for us—but then, you’re
right—people do get mad at God for allowing evil or pain to come into their
lives.”
     The psychologist shot me a look that could kill. “Yes, but then in the
‘70’s you “New-Agers” started resurrecting that old Puritan idea that we are
somehow all responsible for everything—by saying how we create our own
reality. Remember? So if something bad happened, you’d say: so why did
you do that to yourself? You know you’re responsible on some level for
your cancer…or whatever…. you shamed us again!”
    Well, this was heating up in good Martian style, and the synapses in my
brain started firing off: “No, there’s a difference.” I said. “First of all, you
can’t throw all new age philosophies into one soup and say that’s astrology
—even among ourselves we don’t agree on everything.”
    “I know.” The therapist smiled and took a sip of something that looked
like Pinot Grigot in a long stemmed glass. “I have to confess, I’ve had my
chart done! It’s fascinating. The astrologer who did it had written a book
about how the chart is like a blueprint or a time-line for events on a soul-
level. And she said that it’s the Soul that creates the reality, not the
conscious person….she said the soul chooses to re-incarnate for purposes
that our egos will never know.”
    “Wow! Well said!” I was impressed by this confession of her
astrological explorations. I looked at the minister to see how he was
swallowing that one.
    “Well, reincarnation was accepted by the early Christians—but you’re
going a little far by saying an astrologer is going to know why the Soul
reincarnates!” The minister started tapping my hand with his sticky fingers.
“Ah, is it the truth vs. the Ouija board now? Astrology or God? Do you
think you know the Soul’s agenda, my dear? Maybe I should be taking
notes for my sermon tomorrow?” He was laughing, but I wasn’t going to let
him sidetrack me. I pulled my hand back and pointed my index finger right
at him.
    “Look at it this way: Who is the one responsible? I see a conscious ego
and a mysterious Soul. Two parts of us. One dies, and one lives on. We
have an ego that we identify with—we call that our Sun sign, but aren’t we
more than this ego-centric self we’ve created? Aren’t we more than this
person who has a story full of drama, trauma, sin and glory?” We all
laughed.
    I noticed the therapist was wearing a professional pin of some kind on
her lapel, and the minister had a cross in the same place on his suit. But
where was my shield or button for my club? Get over it, I thought to myself,
as I felt myself reach out to the wall for support.
    The minister looked like he was choosing to space out for awhile, but
the therapist held her ground: “Some astrologers think they can read all this
in the chart, right? I know someone who says she can tell you about your
past life. Do you believe that?” I heard the hint of disbelief in her voice.
Astrologers must sound arrogant and righteous at times.
    “Well, I would only go so far as to say the chart tells a parable of what
our reincarnating story is about. It gives hints, not facts. Those are what the
North and South Nodes in the chart give us clues about. But there are a lot
of ways we can play out the stories of our lives, and I think it’s dangerous to
get too literal. But it can re-awaken the soul to a vague memory of what
went before…..” I noticed my wagging finger was now making circles in
the direction of the minister.
     “A vague memory? You mean the Soul has a memory, like a hangover
from its past lives?” He took another sip of his sparkling water. He certainly
wasn’t going to have a hangover tomorrow. But I might. I poured myself
another glass of Pinot Noir as the noise in the room seemed to get louder.
     “Yes,” I continued, “you could say that the reincarnating Soul has an
emotional memory of all its past lives, from the habits or karma it’s acquired
—that’s called the South Node. But what’s really interesting is that we also
each have a guiding star, a North Node, that helps us chart our course in life.
It’s where our Soul yearns to go towards….” The minister looked like he
was lost in a reverie for a moment, so I touched his sleeve to bring him back
into the conversation. “Hey, are you still with us?”
     “I’m here. I hear you, but what feels good or right for one person,
doesn’t always feel good or right for the other. Perhaps it’s just a different
language that’s hard to get around—these Nodes and all this chart business,
it sounds so mathematical and intellectual almost. ” He ventured a kind
smile, and I forgave him instantly. “My question to you, or anyone else
would be this—how much have you learned to love?”
     Zing! I could feel a shiver run up my spine. He got it, perhaps better
than I did. I took a deep sigh. “That is the ultimate question, isn’t it?”
     “It is. But I can see your point too—if we understand ourselves and each
other better, then it’s easier to love. Without understanding, there’s little
hope for love.”
     “But I still don’t get why a person, a soul, would choose to be born into
an abusive family or get cancer at twenty-two!” the therapist added, looking
a little snarly, but perhaps that was my projection. I bet her heart has been
broken many times by some of the stories she heard.
     I re-adjusted my voice into my wise woman persona: “I think that
difficult lives are not punishments but opportunities for spiritual growth.
And in some mysterious way it balances or repairs an injustice or
ignorance…or heals a family. For example, an ambitious Soul in that space
between lives might choose a short or difficult life. But it may have reasons
we know nothing about. Maybe it wants to learn certain lessons for itself.
Sometimes I wonder, why does anyone go to a scary movie, you know?” I
could hear myself losing my wise woman persona now. I hate it when I hear
myself saying “you know.”
     “Really?” She was listening beyond my persona. “So you’re saying that
the Soul, on some mysterious level, chooses to be born into a bad situation
even though it could evolve into a victim or criminal situation?”
     “Yes. And it’s only from this deepest level that we can say we’re
responsible for things that happen to us.” I remembered the metaphysical
writer, Ken Wilbur, writing about this confusion of levels across the
metaphysical playing fields, but there was no way I could retrieve the details
of that information at this time of night. But a distant memory surfaced: “I
remember an older woman, a Theosophist, once telling me that there’s also a
family and a national karma as well as personal karma, and that karma is not
a tit-for-tat kind of thing.”
     She let out a deep sigh. “I don’t know. Your words sound good, but I
hear this undercurrent of making the victim responsible for something awful
that is happening to them. That doesn’t feel right.”
     I must admit I agreed too, and the minister nodded his head. “If we have
free will you’ve got to admit there’s some level of responsibility…at times.
But in the struggle between good and evil, we can’t control or even know
what God’s will is for us.”
     “Astrologers try.” I grinned mischievously. “Sometimes I think we
attempt to read the mind of God.”
     The therapist got hooked on that one, and rose to the occasion. “God’s
mind! God’s will! I can get really angry at God when something bad
happens to someone I love.”
     She was now pointing an accusatory finger at me; I flinched and cut her
off—“But what if—what if on some mysterious level you made a contract
before birth to choose a challenging life? Then couldn’t you accept the idea
that what looks totally irrational might not be? And just what if God or some
benevolent power gave us a chart, a life map, that we could use to
understand things better? Could you accept bad things happening to good
people then without getting so mad—if you saw things in terms of evolution
and cycles of life?” She was still frowning.
     “We call that life map the Bible.” The minister raised his eyebrows and
went on teasing: “Maybe you two have issues with anger at God?”
     I wondered if maybe I did. And maybe I really was angry with the
attitudes of some ministers and therapists, but not with the two people in
front of me now. I was thoroughly enjoying the verbal debate. “Oh yeah, I
do. And maybe we make a mistake when we use words like good and bad
because from the soul’s perspective, who knows?” No comment. I couldn’t
tell if they were looking tired or just thinking about that one. But I wondered
if the moment of bridge-making was beginning to collapse.
     Yet I strode on: “I’d rather be angry at my own choices rather than feel
angry at God or at a random, chaotic universe. But you know,” I said as I
leaned closer to them, “in this way of thinking, the soul really has a lot of
free will. It makes choices as to where and when to be born…and to whom.
And then it forgets it all.”
    The minister’s bushy eyebrows rose again. “Forgets?”
    “Yes, it forgets,” I replied, thinking that there was just one more thing I
could say that maybe they could hear. “Did you ever hear the old Hassidic
myth about forgetting? I’m sure you remember that reincarnation was once
part of the Judeo-Christian tradition, and that wise men once looked to the
stars….. but anyway, there’s an old Hebrew story about how an angel
comes to each baby just before it’s birth and as she blesses the infant she
places her index finger on this little indented spot right here above the lips
and below the nose, and impresses her finger there, telling the Soul to forget
everything that has gone before the moment of birth.”
    “That’s a sweet story,” he sighed. “So perhaps we can trust in the angels
as well as God, and not be angry then.”
    “Or discouraged,” the therapist added.
    I began thinking how hard her job must be. I wondered what she really
believed in that helped her trust her trust the process of life, and to put evil
into a larger perspective.
    She took off her glasses just then and looked like a lawyer making her
closing statements: “I don’t think you can prove any of this. It still feels too
much like blaming the victim, and it’s all too sad. Too intellectual, for me, I
stay with the body’s truth. But it’s good for you both to try to bring as much
hope into the world as you can.” She smiled weakly as I noticed her glassy
watery eyes. I couldn’t help but wonder how much pain she had suffered in
her life and in her body.
    “Maybe someday we’ll all really understand what Jesus talked about,”
the minister added touching her hand lightly, “And then like that rebel priest
you mentioned before, we’ll each be courageous enough to tell our stories,
and speak our truth.”
    The therapist started rubbing her tired eyes. “Or we can question our
most basic assumptions.”
    “That’s true,” I concluded. I liked the direction we had turned. “And we
can continue to build bridges between each other.” I paused. “You know,
astrologers don’t think about everything the same way either, but we all
think about life symbolically. You know: good luck, bad luck, who
knows?” They smiled, and I thought—there I go again: “you know, you
know, who knows?” My vocabulary was deteriorating, and as I looked with
affection at my two new acquaintances, I also looked at my watch. It was
indeed time to go.
    I could see that we had come full circle and had each said and done just
enough. We knew we could have gone on and on, but instead we simply
chose to say good-night to each other, kissed each other on the cheek, and
walked away to our respective corners and went home…each of us happy
and ‘right’ in our own way. What a good evening this had been.
                        Chapter 2.
              The Family Karmic Inheritance

     “If we could read the secret history of our enemies, we would find in
      each man’s life a sorrow and a suffering enough to disarm all
                hostility.”—Henry Wadsworth Longfellow

    As an astrologer I am continually struck by the potential for sorrow and
suffering when first reviewing a client’s chart. However upon meeting them,
I am usually astounded at how uniquely they have coped, survived and even
flourished in spite of the potential for anguish. How do they thrive in spite of
their history? How do they forgive and let go of their past? Longfellow must
have had a sense of it when he wrote that sentence, and if we change the
word “enemies” in that quote to “families” then the most important point of
this chapter would be made. If we could know each other’s pain, this would
indeed “disarm all hostility.” I believe that the oracle that speaks through the
language of astrology teaches compassion.
    It has been said that the soul is ruthless in seeking its own path home,
and that the needs of the soul, not the desires of the personality, orchestrate
our lives. I have been finding that there is a mystery and history to each of
us that reaches back beyond our present lives directly to our family lineage.
We’ve inherited a karmic legacy that reflects the victories, defeats, and hard
won battles of our ancestors, for they are indeed very much with us.
    Within families there is a karmic inheritance that is handed down the
family line along with the genetic blueprint. We inherit deeply entrenched
emotional and mental perspectives, as well as unearned propensities such as
musical and mathematical talents. Yet unfortunately, we know that
alcoholism, depression, abuse and certain illnesses are also inherited. We
gladly accept the unearned talents—such as Mozart-like propensities, but a
negative family inheritance such as the Kennedy family “curse” is not
pleasant to think about.
    Even if we believe that our soul “picks” our family and our karmic
inheritance so that we can inherit both the gifts and the challenges needed
for our highest soul growth, it’s still hard to understand. Essentially the
soul’s choice of when and where to incarnate is a mystery. Yet astrologers
believe that the synchronistic moment of birth is the key element in the life
story, because it gives us a genetic, or karmic blueprint of the soul; a map of
the psyche. By looking at our family members charts, we can decipher
emotional patterns that have been playing out for generations. All that we’ve
learned so far about the Nodes and the planet Pluto, figures strongly in this
tale.
     These karmic patterns are not in themselves innate curses or blessings,
for our will, intention, and grace are always operating. But anything can
behave erratically if willfully suppressed for generations. Carl Jung wrote
about the personal as well as the collective unconscious, saying that both
talents and troubles are to be found in the subconscious. He didn’t say how
the unconscious works its way through the family lineage, but he did claim
that there was gold in the “shadow” of the personal and collective
unconscious. I believe that we can use the astrological technique of
overlapping charts, called synastry, to help us see that gold in the family
inheritance, as well as the imprint of family shame and secrets. We can
become conscious of what has been hidden, and become freer by stepping
out of the secret matrix of familial denial. We can then make choices to
express and heal rather than to conceal. We can change the pattern for the
next generation.
     Everyone, not just astrologers and Jungians, are aware of the
unconscious nature of family dynamics and what I call “the family karmic
inheritance.” Just as we might see that we’ve inherited our parents’ tall
bodies and long noses, we might also see a predisposition for sudden anger
or alcoholism. We might notice too that the males in the family pride
themselves, and judge others by physical prowess and athletic ability. But
what happens when mental illness, greed, sexual confusion, or insatiable
power and control dynamics are passed along? Isn’t it then that we question
ideas of fate and destiny, wondering if we were born trailing not only
“clouds of glory” but “clouds of dust” as well?
     Most astrologers accept the theory of reincarnation as the basis for this
inheritance, whereas other people see it more as some mix of genetic and
emotional DNA. Evolutionary astrologers find the theory of re-incarnation
makes sense as it resonates with a sense of justice that moves beyond the
karma of one life, as it echoes back to the idea that the “sins of the fathers
shall be visited on the children for seven generations.” It’s a thought or
theory that I never liked, but everything I knew about the Nodes seemed to
fit in—-at least in theory.
     Actually I didn’t choose to delve into this karmic stew as much as it
chose me. One Sunday morning many years ago, I awoke with a confusing
depression that had been building for months. I knew my Uranus
Opposition was almost exact, and that the time for something to “come to
light” was upon me. I had moved across country, to California, and had
made significant changes in my life. Yet I couldn’t feel the joy or freedom
that is the “gift of Uranus” despite my efforts. As was usual on Sunday
morning, I called my mother, and had another depressing conversation with
her. She was threatening suicide again if I didn’t return East. Nothing had
changed in that area of my life, even though I fought the co-dependency by
moving thousands of miles away. It was a constant litany of shame and
blame between us, with tears and heart wrenching reconciliations followed
by more accusations of abandonment and blame. I was on the defense, and
as usual, nothing I said assuaged my guilt, anger and grief.
    But this morning, the grief overflowed into tears that didn’t stop. I was
paralyzed; I had no psychic energy left to move out of this mood. I glanced
at my chart and saw the same line-up of planetary archetypes, the same old
story. But next to my chart was a “mythic” Tarot deck I had just bought,
written by one of my favorite astrologers, Liz Greene. Because astrology
pulls its symbolism from myths, similar to Tarot, I had bought this as a tool
to go deeper, and to amplify what I knew astrologically. Now here it was for
me at my time of need. I needed an oracle, an insight, something that could
bring new light to this unending situation. (It’s always hard to be objective
about one’s own chart! Asking advice from other astrologers or using other
similar symbolic systems can be of tremendous help when you are blocked.)
    So that morning I took out the deck, pulled the Ten of Swords, and read
the story about it. On a divinatory level it said that this card marks the
ending of a difficult situation, and it went on to tell the story of Orestes and
the curse of the House of Atreus. It is a dark tale full of conflict and
bloodshed involving Athena, the three Furies, and Orestes. I remembered
that Athena, as a goddess of justice, is often related to Libra, my Sun sign,
and the Furies have to do with feminine fury and unrest.
    I could feel a shift beginning to happen within me as I wrote down what
I read: “A family curse such as Orestes has to bear is an image of inner
conflicts passed down from one generation to another, where the
grandparents and parents have been unable to face life’s conflicts honestly
and the children must inevitably suffer until insight is gained.” It went on to
say: “A deep seated and ancient problem is now forced to the surface and
something must ultimately leave our lives…we can now move on not
merely disillusioned, but freed of some deep canker which has its roots in a
past older than ourselves, and which our own suffering has released and
redeemed.”
    I then went to my computer and pulled up the charts of my grandmother,
my mother, and myself—three women linked by genes and an obscure
family history. I had often felt as if there was some secrecy in the family
history, yet when I questioned my parents and grandparents they would
speak only of their successes, or of the failings of others. The same old
stories repeated; and I found that probing questions yielded little. But now I
questioned the nature of this family karmic inheritance by looking at the
interconnecting positions of the Nodes, the Sun, the Moon, Chiron and
Pluto. What I saw in this synastry of charts was a pattern of connections that
was enough to lift the morning’s depressing fog. At least now I could see—
and once seeing, I could make an attitude adjustment. I could feel a mood of
compassion rising.
     So I pulled up my chart and had another long look at it. I knew that
Pluto in the horoscope is the “Lord of the Underworld” and reflects the Law
of Nature for which the Greeks had so much fear and respect. And there it
was, strong and highly visible in my chart. While thinking about the
mythological curse that the Tarot hinted at, I rummaged through my
astrology reference books and found that a family ‘curse’ involves some
violation of natural law by earlier generations. I read that one can expect
Pluto to be strong in the horoscope for anyone who has the need to make
peace with an inheritance from the past.
     What makes Pluto strong? It’s strong when it is in hard aspects to the
Sun or Moon or to the other personal planets, Venus and Mars—and when
it’s conjunct a Node. In these situations it suggests a karmic past life
inheritance deep in the unconscious usually connected with the family line
as well. When I first looked at my chart, I didn’t seem to have Pluto
aspected that way. I looked again—well, Pluto was the “ruling planet” of
my Scorpio South Node—there it was! A powerful sign to bring to
consciousness whatever was brought down the family line.
     So here was the challenge. How was I to make peace with my Pluto
ruled South Node? I pondered the charts: my grandmother, Elizabeth
English, had a chart with a predominance of planets in the earth sign of
Taurus and—Ah! There was the Pluto aspecting the Sun with a tight
conjunction. I couldn’t tell which house it was in because I only knew her
birth day, and didn’t know her time of birth. But I could see that the South
Node was in Cancer (family enmeshment!) with a North Node in Capricorn.
I knew that she was born in 1880, and that she had been a talented artist as a
young woman, and after she married she had five children and never painted
again. Her husband died in his late fifties at his Second Saturn Return, of
alcoholism. With five planets in Taurus, there were issues around money,
security, and self-confidence, and with Sun conjunct Pluto she would have
experienced many symbolic—if not real—deaths and rebirths in her life. In
fact, her mother and sister both died young from “heart problems” and when
her favorite son succumbed to alcoholism as well, she retired to her room for
the rest of her days. She struggled in her own way to move away from that
enmeshed and culturally defined Cancer South Node, and towards her more
ambitious Capricorn North Node; yet she remained a woman of her time.
Her artistic freedom was severely curtailed by raising children, like most of
the women of her generation. Yet I remember her speaking with an inner
authority and independence, and she carried herself with a quiet dignity and
a pride in her children. But I also remember an unexplained sadness she
carried, and I was confused by her stubborn refusal to paint again, despite
encouragement. She died at age 74 when I was eight.
     It seemed as if my grandmother, Elizabeth, never felt the deep emotional
serenity and financial security that is the touchstone for Taurus—-without
which Taurus folks cannot release all their gifts. She was financially secure
in her later life, but the mystery of her abandonment of her art was never
told to me—however, her only remaining oil painting is a dark Rembrandt-
like rendition of a fortune teller reading the tea leaves in a china cup to a
well dressed lady at the turn of the century. The painting was done in 1903
when she was twenty-three years old, and now hangs in my astrology
office. Some people see only its darkness and the sad look on the woman’s
face; I however find it delightfully fascinating that my grandmother’s last
painting, “The Fortune Teller” foreshadowed the astrological work that I,
her grand-daughter would do.
     When I overlaid my chart on hers, and saw that my North Node was
conjunct her Taurus Sun—implying that there was something about who
she essentially was (her Sun sign) that could be an inspiration or a
suggestion for me, I took that to heart. At my Uranus Opposition at age 41, I
took my grandmother’s first name for my own, and am now known as
“Elizabeth.”
     The story continues with my mother—when I looked at her chart and
mine, I saw that her South Node, hinting of the past life story, was at the
exact degree of my Libra Sun. I know that any planet aspecting another
person’s South Node is an indication that the two souls might have been in
relationship before in another life. Ah—yes, our enmeshment and struggles
in this life felt “larger than this life” and to see that we might have “danced
together” in some way before was not really a surprise. In fact, it felt like a
relief to see that our connections were part of a karmic dance that had its
roots long ago in other lifetimes.
     I suspected then that all my work in therapy around us was more
significant than I originally knew. Our charts were riddled with conjunctions
and oppositions—just like us.
     Then I noticed that her Capricorn Sun was within 2 degrees of her
mother’s Capricorn North Node. So if the North Node was a “good
suggestion” for my grandmother, then something about her daughter’s life
could be an inspiration for her. And indeed, my mother was able to combine
motherhood with her art, and she painted up until her death at the age of 88.
She may have learned, by negative example, what not to do with her
combination of art and motherhood.
    I could see our wounds. There were painful issues around creativity,
freedom, and ambivalent feelings about motherhood here, as well as
enmeshment and co-dependence. I could see the connections though the
wounded secret trail of Pluto’s pride, shame, and insecurity. I couldn’t know
the secrets of my grandmother’s family or the specifics of possible alcohol
abuse that her son and husband suffered from, or the pain of the early deaths
of her mother and sister—but what I could see was my grandmother’s Sun
touching Pluto and her Nodal conjunctions with my mother and me.
    My mother’s continuing demands for both independence and
connection, reflected by her own North Node Aries/South Node Libra were
a painful struggle that demanded too much of me, her only child. In today’s
psychological language she would be called a borderline personality. In part,
she wanted me to “mother” her, something I could never do well enough.
But by virtue of simply living a long life, fourteen years beyond my father’s
time, she did attain some of the independence of her North Node Aries.
    In my life, I’ve struggled with independence, artistic creativity,
motherhood and career, but my Nodal axis of NN Taurus, SN Scorpio still
warns me not to expect or take what isn’t mine. I must use my own
resources, not another’s, and stay clear of melodrama in all its guises. As a
potter, astrologer, mother, daughter, wife…there have been many roles and
side journeys. It hasn’t been an easy road for me. I’ve struggled to bring as
much consciousness to it as I can, gladly accepting the positive artistic
inheritance and motherly nurturance that has been handed down the
maternal family line along with the pain.
    And finally, when I pulled up my daughter’s chart, I saw more
correspondences and overlapping. She is an Aries Sun, (embodying my
mother’s North Node), and her Venus is in the exact degree and sign as my
mother’s Venus. Yet her Nodal patterns seem to pick up more on the
paternal family line, and we have an easy loving relationship. Something has
been healed.
    It is both fascinating and overwhelming to bring up family charts and to
look at the connections between them—yet delving into this kind of
astrological analysis, this “synastry,” is best done with an
astrologer/counselor who is familiar with the technique. But even a glance at
the intertwining aspects tends to open understanding and empathy.
    In all the charts within my family, the aspects between Pluto, the Nodes,
and Venus hinted of an inherited struggle with artistic creativity and
relationship. It all echoed back to Elizabeth English who fought with the
competing demands of art and children, and seemed to lose. I would never
know the secrets of her heart, or what pain she may have passed on to my
mother, but my heart was beginning to open. Astrology was acting as a
healer.
    In a much more radical fashion, we can look at other charts, such as our
country’s royal family, the “presidential Kennedy’s” and see their history of
greatness and loss and wonder what legacy was handed down the family
line. In 1969 when Senator Edward Kennedy saw the collapse of his
Presidential hopes after Chappaquiddick, it was said that he actually asked
whether there was a “curse” on his family. And indeed, if one examines this
family there are elements in the family story that suggest this possibility,
though a thoughtful astrologer would never call it that.
    Call it what you may, what happens with the challenges that are
unconsciously inherited down the family line? Sometimes a bad seed
develops, as rage and alcoholism can insidiously move down through the
family genetics. Some children, such as serial killer Charles Bundy, showed
signs of this at the age of three when he encircled his sister with knives as
she slept, showing the peculiar signs of inherited rage. What’s happening
here?
    At heart I believe we are up against a mystery, because in each life the
soul has free will and can play out genetic or karmic tendencies so many
ways. We may be able to see the footprints of something in a chart, but
astrologer’s move into shadowy hubris when they dare prescribe “how it
will be.” Free will and consciousness gives us a great chance to change
patterns. We don’t have to pass these secrets and silences down to our
children. Instead the “buck can stop with us” as we heal the pain of our own
legacy. We don’t have to perpetrate silent crimes.
    Instead we can look at the heart of astrology—the myths that the planets
are named after, and we can find clues. And we can study the Nodes to see
how Nodal aspects relate to each other—and to the Sun sign that each Soul
has chosen to incarnate into as its “vehicle”. There are also certain features
which appear in every myth about a family curse, and it usually begins with
an individual’s abuse of a God-given talent or advantage. Something
positive gets misused or distorted through arrogance and pride, what the
Greeks call hubris. The abuse of creative potential, which is sometimes
linked with a subtle or not so subtle abuse of children, is made worse by the
denial and hubris carried on within members of the family. In generations
past, we hid our shame within our families. Today we assume it’s all out in
the “open” because secrecy is the stuff of soap operas and reality shows and
the evening news. But shame runs deep.
    In mythology, we see that although each generation and each person
could expiate the negative family inheritance, or “curse” by accepting a
certain degree of limitation or humility in their life—-they often choose not
to do this—and this refusal to make what is unconscious conscious, or to
make the necessary sacrifices needed, can be seen as an act of putting
personal desire or hubris before the needs of the soul. Yet the soul’s needs
are ruthless, and require a transformation of consciousness to change the
family legacy.
     Consistent unconsciousness and denial can behave like a curse. Because
we have free will, our behavior can change fate, although old attitudes with
very entrenched roots are harder to change. In the case of the Kennedy’s,
one could speculate that the arrogance, ambition, and possible abuses of
“Papa” Joe Kennedy (including his choice to have a lobotomy done on his
first daughter) exacerbated a karmic situation that had its roots in the history
and sufferings of the Irish people. Perhaps it’s a long shot to think that way;
perhaps not. But if one looks at he collective struggle of Irish against
English, Catholic against Protestant, and the tragedy of the famine which
drove so many of our grandparents out of Ireland we can see how this could
have fueled his ambition. He may have groomed his children for political
power in order to redeem, in his mind, the shame and tragedies the Irish
have had to endure in the last few centuries.
     It was perhaps the obvious flaw in his daughter would have caused him
great shame, and he took powerful action to correct it. Could this powerful
man have set in motion a set of inherited attitudes that produced both great
goodness and unforeseen tragedy? Was his ambition and the shocking
deaths of his sons a necessary sacrifice for the greater good of our country
and the Irish? Perhaps.
     Were John Kennedy’s (and Bill Clinton’s) sexual transgressions an act
of hubris? When John Kennedy Jr. died in his night flight through the fog,
was he acting like the mythical Icarus when he dared to fly on a foggy
night? There was a judgment he made that night that failed. Could he have
avoided this by observing the limitations of flight or the cautionary
limitations of the exact transiting Pluto square which he was in? An
astrologer might have cautioned him from any daring acts, and called his
attention to his North Node in Virgo, which demands attention to details,
yet…. perhaps all this is just speculation and hypothesis, but this is what
astrologers do.
     The opportunity to heal the pride, shame, and painful family legacy is a
challenge, and the opportunity to act out the unlived talents of our family
legacy is a privilege. We do it by bringing the issues to consciousness. We
do it not to blame, but to bring to light the repressed painful attitudes, and to
bring compassion to our past. What a unique chance it is to redeem what
was once lost through ignorance, lack of courage, arrogance, or willful
unconsciousness! Especially at each major life passage, such as the Uranus
Opposition and the Saturn Returns we get a chance again to ponder our
karmic inheritance and to bring forth all that is longing to be expressed
through us.
    On that particular Sunday morning, during my Uranus Opposition at the
age of forty-one, I began to look at my maternal inheritance differently. The
painful legacy of expectations and attitudes that my mother inherited from
her mother was not quite a “curse” although her desperate expectations
sometimes felt that way. I could see again my inherited gifts: the artistic
ability and a feisty blend of persistence and tenacity. But now I had a
choice. I could see what I would accept in this inheritance and what I would
attempt to heal or to reject.
    That day, the simple act of seeing the reflection of pain and grace
moving through the charts lifted my depressive fog. I could see that I was
not alone in my struggle to free myself, but that these women had struggled
too, in their time and in their unique way. The mythology behind the
planetary configurations enlarged my sense of Self, and it was comforting to
see how the orbs of my personal mythology touched the collective
mythology. My unconscious wound was really no different than Orestes’
wound or the Kennedy family’s wound. Until that morning, I had been
bound in my family’s karmic web until I began to lovingly separate and
untangle the knots. There was still mystery and secrecy, but I could now
begin to choose what I wanted to inherit.
    I had originally tried to ease the pain of my family inheritance by
moving across the country—thousands of miles away from maternal
intrusions. But this was not going to improve my difficult family inheritance.
External solutions to internal problems are the line of least resistance. It took
a lot of effort to move, but Uranus, unlike Saturn, is not about “efforting.”
Instead, Uranian grace and insight comes like a sudden storm—in its own
time. When I consulted with “the gods” that morning, I felt a sense of awe
and a lightening of my spirit. I didn’t know any more of the family secrets,
but I knew there was not only a “blood line” but a karmic bond made of
similar patterns along this family line. I felt we were of “one skin.” It was a
compassionate epiphany, and it was then that I changed my first name from
Janet to Elizabeth. It was then that my heart began to soften.
    By looking at such family patterns one can almost hear the ancestor’s
whispering: “This was my hope and fear for me and my children; I tried to
do my best.” One gets a sense that the soul’s choices (the Nodes) are not
always those of the conscious ego. The connection between soul and ego
always has this mystery, this uncharted territory, leaving room for free will.
And misfortune and sorrow are often the soul’s last resort in moving a
person closer to the right path for them. And who is to say what is truly
misfortune? The soul’s path is not easy to describe, and rarely simple to
resolve. But we try.~
                    Chapter 3.
     “What’s Venus Got to Do With It?” The
    Alchemy of Desire: Healing the Wounded
                    Heart

       “What happens when love ceases to be the endorphin-filled romance of
   wine-tinged illusions but rather the wrenching away of all our hopes and
even our sense of reality? This is not a time for failure of imagination—now
  is when we need new definitions of love and life to carry us through to the
safe ground of sanity. What could love feel like? What would contentment be
 like? Perhaps the challenge is to re-imagine the possible and to re-invent a
  life while not indulging in tight expectations. If we can wait and “cocoon”
     while holding the tension of the opposites of hope and despair in these
      times, then what Carl Jung called the ‘reconciling third’ may indeed
                                     appear.”

    “You seem to have led a charmed life,” her words echoed
uncomfortably in my ears. Yes, after twenty years of marriage all the visible
markers of a charmed and successful life were in place: a healthy child, a
thriving business, and a beautiful home. But something was wrong, and I
knew that beneath the beautiful backdrop of my life was an inner hunger so
strong it was boring a hole through my stomach. I had an ulcer, as well as a
fiery nature that fueled my dreams. I was 46 years old.
    It was clear that my partner and I were developing different interests, but
wasn’t that normal? Where once we had worked in tandem on so many
projects, we now worked independently, and what fired me up, left him
cold. Despite all my noble efforts to create ‘the good life,” a sadness seemed
to be creeping in, showing me that the life that once seemed to be good
enough for us, wasn’t enough. In my husband’s chart, I saw that transiting
Saturn was conjuncting his Moon—a frequent “signature” for serious
events, if not depression or exhaustion. A slow fear began to envelop me—
whether I plunged into my work or deepened my friendships, or quietly
grieved with my journal, there was no relief. There were no Excedrins for
my heart.
    Because I owned a metaphysical bookstore and have read many of the
books on relationships, I expected myself to move quickly beyond this
confusion. But this journey was moving in a manner and time far beyond
my control. My mind obviously didn’t know what was happening, so my
body began speaking up; anxiety attacks arose within me with no known
cause, and I would wake at four AM with bolts of electric energy running
through me. For months my sleep was disturbed.
    As my body chemistry began shifting, I took myself to a therapist—a
man who loved the books in my shop and who had a gutsy acceptance of
the dark side of life. Because I believe the spiritual and the emotional are so
bound up with issues around forgiveness of our humanness, I chose a man
who was familiar with this territory. I didn’t want to do a spiritual by-pass
on anything—I wanted to question myself, my partner, my spirituality, my
expectations, and…to fix it!
    Instead, my therapist gave me a copy of a letter that Carl Jung wrote in
Bollingen, Switzerland in August of 1945. Here it is:

     “Dear Frau Frobe, There can be no resolution, only patient endurance
     of the opposites which ultimately spring from your own nature. You
     yourself are a conflict that rages in itself and against itself, in order to
     melt its incompatible substances, the male and the female, in the fire of
     suffering, and thus create that fixed and unalterable form which is the
     goal of life. Everyone goes through this mill, consciously or
     unconsciously, voluntarily or forcibly. We are crucified between the
     opposites and delivered up to the torture until the ‘reconciling third’
     takes shape. Do not doubt the rightness of the two sides within you,
     and let whatever may happen, happen. The apparently unendurable
     conflict is proof of the rightness of your life. A life without inner
     contradiction is either only half a life or else a life in the Beyond, which
     is destined only for angels. But God loves human beings more than
     angels.
     With kindest regards,
     Yours sincerely,
     C.G. Jung.”

    Reading that letter felt nurturing on a soul-level, but a harsh reminder
that there was going to be no quick fix. In fact, the first issues to come up
were not even about my marriage, but were around my inability to forgive a
betrayal in friendship and the constant pain of dealing with the suffering of
my aging mother. Week after week I turned my attention to the work I was
doing with the therapist, and I began feeling loved, heard, understood. I
became receptive to his wise words and to the process we were involved in
—and I began seeing meaningful connections in my life. I learned how to
hold and protect myself by aligning myself with a higher power, and soon
felt “full” enough to forgive my friend, and to endure my mother’s suffering
and constant needs. As an only child, I had always suffered the
responsibility of her life in a way that was without boundaries. Now I was
learning what was mine to heal and what was not.
     I also felt how the deep and intimate relationship with the therapist stood
in sharp contrast to the lack of intimacy in my marriage. I began aching for
that type of emotional presence that I had transferred onto my therapist. I
tried to bridge the gap with my husband but it felt as if we had no common
language and little energy for it—we felt powerless and without words
together. He also wasn’t feeling good; he looked exhausted from his own
work. In his own way and without words, he was hurting deeply and
grieving too.
     I however, was not only in the process of self-discovery and healing, but
of living an illusion of sorts: I had projected my soul, my “animus” (as the
Jungians would say) onto my analyst and withdrew energy from my
marriage. I turned to the therapy, to books, to God, to going back to school,
to writing. My expectations of how it should all be were falling apart but I
was going as fast as I could to hold onto something.
     As time went on, and the dependency and transference of love to my
therapist slowly began to release itself, I felt the growing pains of my
neglected marriage. I was plain lonely, and couldn’t deny that I was moving
through hell, like Persephone, always struggling to get unstuck and up into
the light again. But by then my partner had disassociated himself from my
hell, my pain, and withdrew himself into his work. I felt that I was alone in
holding all the darkness and pain of our life. I wrote poetry and yearned for
a deeper love. As the denial of our failing marriage fell away, we tried in all
the old ways to being responsible to our duties, and we tried couple’s
counseling, but it simply brought up more sadness.
     Synchronistic events often mark transitions, and that winter the diamond
literally fell out of my wedding ring and was lost. With a cold and poignant
sweetness, my partner and I decided to try to give each other the only thing
that was left: freedom.
     Yet nothing changed our lives until my body demanded to be heard.
Astrologers often say that when the heart is unhappy, the Moon—our
emotional nature, shows how it feels through the body, somatically. I went
for a mammogram and it came back undeniably questionable. It looked like
cancer. After many x-rays, I was advised to go to a Boston specialty clinic
and get the definitive results. There machines could tell in a day if I had
cancer or not. My husband didn’t offer to go with me that day; this
“emergency” was seen as a part of my fearfulness, my dark drama, not his.
A friend went with me that crucial day as I found out I was not a victim to
cancer, but to a broken heart.
     Someone once said to me a rather sexist comment about separations:
women grieve, men leave. Perhaps it is the feminine in all of us that grieves,
and the masculine part that takes action. That day, I clearly saw strains of a
self-imposed victim-hood and chose to leave. The masculine part of me rose
up in anger, in freedom, and in the middle of a raging snowstorm—I moved
out. I found a new place to live that very day, and summoned up all the
courage I could to face the inevitable void. The planet Uranus was opposing
my natal Mars then, and I felt impatient, scared, perimenopausal and
impulsive.
     It wasn’t so bad at first. With a new apartment, my creative juices
flowed into making a new nest for myself. My husband and I agreed to
never talk badly about each other in front of our teen-age daughter, and we
explained our separation to her in the most compassionate of ways. She in
turn, was compassionate with us, and never took sides or complained.
     We seemed blessed with no high drama, so I thought maybe we could
all just get over this, let go for awhile, and get on with life. But all the
beautiful and sweet moments of our marriage and family life kept creeping
back into my psyche. The feminine grieving had a grip on me. I couldn’t let
go and I found myself crying at every turn.
     I’ve heard it said that suffering is a hard kind of grace that teaches us
compassion. For twenty years I’d worked on a dream that was now
shattered and I expected myself to just get over it. My persona of self-
sufficiency hid my aching desire to be held in sweet surrender in a lover’s
heart. I was just beginning a crash course in compassion—compassion for
myself and for all others who have lived through great suffering. Is it trite to
say I was finally getting in touch with my true feelings? That I was
outraged, terribly sad, and pissed as hell that it might take a very long time
before I could go for more than two hours—or two days without crying?
     Dating seemed like the best cure—or was it revenge? And it did feel
good to have those “highs” of being seen and heard and courted. Yet by the
end of that summer I stopped my dating. And that’s when he began his
serious dating. At this point all I could do was grieve and rage at our loss.
     It must have been toxic right down to my gut, for when my body acted
up again, this time it was with a serious attack of appendicitis that put me in
the hospital for over a week. (This was a transiting Uranus/Moon aspect
indeed!) The toxicity had spread, and at one point I thought that death was
not a totally unwelcome probability. My old therapist visited me daily. My
husband, who was very busy with his new love at this time, went through
the motions of getting me released from the hospital, but he wasn’t willing to
sit and be with me in my fragile state. Twenty years of marriage sat face to
face with twenty days of his new love, and she won.
     I remember the night before leaving the hospital—I raged at his
coldness, wrote volumes in my journal, and thought: “I don’t have to burn
anymore—I can choose to let it go.” Nearly exhausted, but fueled by my
anger, I got out of my hospital bed, turned up the music on my radio, and
began dancing like a naked solitary spirit; moving my body slowly and
rhythmically, letting it all go once again. I was being released. Something
new was being born in me at that moment. My natal Moon sign in Aries had
suffered a serious blow; however the Aries archetype is known not only for
anger but for the ability to survive.
     The next day I felt a great sense of gratitude for simply being alive. I
pondered my choices, and knowing that my Libra Sun sign was conjunct
Neptune, I had to get over feeling the victim and feeling that someone had to
rescue me. I knew I had to endure some suffering, but I also knew I didn’t
have to shame or blame or feel crazed. So when my “ex” came to release me
from the hospital, I had journaled, danced, prayed, and burned through to
the place in me which knew that we were each doing what was right for us
now.
     “Letting go” is what I do now, over and over again. I realize how hard it
is for me to let go to all the ways of thinking that trick me into believing that
I am separate from the rest of humanity and special in my suffering. It’s
always a good idea to look at the blind spot in our birth charts—to the sign
and house where Neptune is—so that we see where we may feel especially
confused, without boundaries and permeable to the moody states of illusion
and disillusion. These are all Neptune’s realm.
     In my birth chart, Neptune is in the 7th house of marriage and one-on-
one relationships, and it is here that I can fall into these illusory traps of self-
deception, wavering judgment, and hopes for redemption. Yet it’s here too
that I feel spirit in my life, and sense a spiritual process that is greater than
my small ego. In one-on-one relationships I find and lose myself over and
over again. As a counselor or in therapy, in marriage, or with close friends,
it’s an intense “dance” for me.
     Neptune is the planet of Spirit, and not an easy one to hold onto
tangibly. In Vedantic Hinduism they teach a way through these Neptunian
mirages: they say we need to find what is true, by finding what is not true
—-they call it “neti-neti” meaning: “it’s not this, not this.” And in finding
what is illusory, we can find what is true beyond the realms of illusion and
duality.
     Most spiritual traditions encourage us to accept the idea that we are held
lovingly in the heart of God, and grounded in a Oneness into which we can
let go. I’ve been looking at this—testing it almost, and there does seem to be
elements of grace and synchronicity that move me along when I trust and let
go. It’s a good practice, this: “neti-neti.” The poet, Wendell Berry, put it
well: “Willing to die, you give up your will. Keep still until, moved by what
moves all else, you move.”
      Poetry and prayer are also powerful messengers and healers. When I’m
feeling vulnerable, and being the earnest striving person that I often am, then
I tell God what I need—one form of prayer. But when I live from the part of
me that trusts, then I listen and ask, rather than talk—another form of prayer.
And I’ve been wondering lately: what is God asking me to see or let go of at
this moment? At these times I often find or write a poem that speaks directly
to my heart. There’s often a question being asked or answered, and when
I’m receptive, I get it.
      Get what? The answer I get is to go on being a person worth loving, and
to “cocoon.” That is, to process what’s happening by giving my self some
simple time and space without expecting too much too soon.
      And as I began doing this, I began to suspect that I’d been
unconsciously orchestrating a release from this relationship that simply had
run its course. Astrology reference books are always teaching this harsh
sense of karmic responsibility when it comes to describing a difficult transit
by saying: “This may happen to you….or you may find yourself creating the
circumstances to bring this event about.” And so we are constantly reminded
to move from an attitude of victim-hood and blaming, to one in which we
own our own power and accountability.
      Cocooning has its own rewards—while my heart waits to know one
special love again, there is still grace and synchronicity everywhere, and I
strive to be busy with the work I feel called to do. Sometimes I doubt
myself, but mostly I have faith. I believe now that as my heart was breaking,
it was also breaking open and softening, rather than closing and hardening.
I’ve been choosing to soften, and to honor the truth of my story. Despite the
wounds I gave and received, I strive to look at this separation with spiritual
eyes, sensing that there is a meaning and a blessing here.
      Cocooning into a greater consciousness is the great work for me now;
and it’s a daily job that brings not joy, but contentment. And when I feel the
little unexpected graces—that surprise call from an old friend perhaps—then
I know that while my heart heals, I am being held, and I trust.


    That was what I wrote at the time of my separation. That was published
in Spirit of Change Magazine, and four years later I wrote this for the same
magazine:
     “Twenty years married, four years divorced, and now we’re six months
into seriously dating—again. It’s not an uncommon scenario, but it certainly
is one that makes people smile when we tell them how our divorce didn’t
work out. Like a good ending to a movie, love survives. Some people can
heal. We’re hoping we can.
     Many years ago when I wrote that story about the ending of our
marriage it was my way of making sense of what didn’t make sense—a
good marriage that unraveled for no apparent reason. I thought it was a
brave attempt to delve into the discrepancy between the overt and the covert
facts. The shock of our mutual choice to separate had sent me into a state of
withdrawal and grieving, which I called “cocooning,” and simultaneously
challenged me to be in the world in a new way—wounded but not whining.
It took a consistent and at times faltering effort to do that, to not shame or
blame him or myself. I can simply say now that we didn’t know how to do it
any better at the time.
     The question has come around again, and the answer remains to be seen:
do we know how to do it better at this point? Have we really grown in such
a way that we can now re-marry? We’re hoping the answer is yes, but we
don’t really know.
     Our story is not an unfamiliar one, yet the reasons people reunite can be
quite varied. Loneliness and dismay at the dating experience are obvious
reasons, but that wasn’t our primary experience. My husband had loved and
lived with a woman for most of those four years, and although he was never
engaged, they appeared to be blissfully happy. They bought a lovely
country house together and moved out of state. I, too, made a valiant attempt
at happiness, becoming engaged to a man after a two year courtship. But I
found myself missing my old love at the strangest times. I would be the last
to think that I would be beset by heartache while vacationing in Italy on the
shores of Lake Magiore with my new fiancée. But these moments did occur,
and eventually I broke off my wedding engagement six weeks before the
marriage. (I do regret having hurt my fiancée, and yet I could not seem to
change the course of my destiny, although I tried.) So both of our new
relationships were serious attempts to disengage from each other and they
each failed. Why?
     Perhaps before getting to why, I should explain “how” we got back
together. After I broke up my engagement, I went away on vacation by
myself, and in the process of slowing down and allowing myself to really
feel and assess my life, I noted over breakfast one day that I seriously missed
my ex-husband. So I wrote him a letter right then, telling him that there was
a split in my life that I felt no other man could heal. I wrote that we felt like
an unfinished story, and that the bittersweet weight of our mutual history
was deeply with me. I felt that I had been tragically severed by our mutual
decision to separate.
    I waited, and we talked a bit, but it took six months before I got a serious
reply from him. He found himself unexpectedly in tears one day while
browsing through the Hallmark cards; the anniversary cards were too much
for him to bear. He too felt that our story was unfinished. So he called for a
date.
    So was it nostalgia? Maybe, and forgive me if I sound too romantic, but
we’ve come to believe that we never really stopped loving each other.
Perhaps we simply weren’t conscious enough to see that a mid-life crisis, a
passing depression, or a growing apart, are events that can be part of a
marriage and not a reason to end it. We needed a healing and a time apart,
but we came dangerously close to losing each other altogether.
    Why couldn’t we commit ourselves to our other loves? Since I don’t
believe in accidents but do believe in choice, I suspect we needed to do
exactly what we did. We needed to experience in our new relationships
what was missing in our partner to see if that made a difference. And so we
found partners who supplied qualities each of us lacked. He found an
emotionally supportive, consistently cheerful woman who, yes, even looked
like me, and who helped him feel safe enough to do some inner work and
therapy. She was not as demanding as I had been. And I had found a man
who liked to read, travel and talk intimately about everything. He said “yes”
to many of my dreams and, although he looked nothing like my husband, I
must admit he had some of the same traits. (Being an astrologer I once
jokingly prayed to God to never send me another Virgo. Well, “he” was a
double Virgo! Who knows best what we need?)
    It is still a mystery—the way love is a mystery—yet it seems to be less
the fault of the significant other and more about how we felt about ourselves
and our marriage. Why did we come back together? I’ve often simply said
that we were deeply rooted in our shared history and felt “at home in the
same soil” and so the transplant, the divorce, simply didn’t work. But
perhaps we were still haunted by our original love and our vows to hang in
there through thick and thin. Perhaps we had also learned to see love as
being bigger than the times when it feels romantically good, or when it feels
depressingly bad. We had both gone into therapy individually and perhaps
now we were more able to take responsibility for our emotions. My husband
also explains that therapy gave him a “language toolbox” that he could use
with me so that we could speak the same language, and put words to
feelings.
    The negative patterns of our South Nodes had emerged under stress and
exhaustion, and it took time, humility, and suffering for us to reach out to
each other again—and to reach for the healing hints embedded in each of
our North Nodes. We were so numbed by our suffering in the beginning
that we couldn’t see what was being asked of us, or how we could bring in
those Nodal qualities that had a lot to do with both of our South Nodes
being in the 8th house. Unconsciously we may have expected 8th house
trauma and disappointment. We had not attained the self-confidence in
ourselves that the North Node in the 2nd house bestows—we fell back on
our default 8th house, and so we truly “died” before we were reborn.
Eventually we found and embraced a new way of being together.
    Last weekend I was at a craft festival helping my ex sell his pottery. As I
was wrapping up a pot in a newspaper I spotted a recently published article
on Ram Dass, the spiritual spokesperson for many baby boomers. Three
years ago, just before the massive stroke that severely challenged his ability
to speak, he was told by his editor that his new book (being published this
month) was too glib and not visceral or deep enough. Today he sees his
stroke as a “fierce grace” which allowed him to know and respect the
extreme suffering and vulnerability that can come with age. People close to
him noted that the stroke changed him, making him more humble and
compassionate. The truth is that it nearly destroyed his faith.
    As I read the article, the similarities between a near-death experience,
such as a stroke, and the psychic earthquake of a divorce resonated in me.
The shock to the system, the tearing away of illusions and vanity, and the
vulnerability must be experienced to be known. At these times the soul’s
ruthless orchestration of destiny confronts us with uncomfortable questions.
If God is compassionate and I’ve been “good,” then how can this be
happening to me? Who’s wrong? Can I redefine what is a loving God or a
loving mate? Are “they” giving us what we want or what we need? When
we are in the midst of illness or tragedy, we are motivated to redefine our
relationship with a loving or not so loving God, whereas redefining human
love in relationship is a conscious choice not everyone chooses to do. It feels
easier to start over or drop out.
    In his interview Ram Dass noted that in preparing for death one prepares
for the deepest mystery of the universe—“You prepare so that you’ll be
open, curious, and not clinging to the past. You’ll just be present, moment
by moment.” This may be the key. In loving and in dying the act of not
resisting the present moment allows the soul to have its voice. It allows for
the unexpected, for newness, for a chance to see things differently. In not
resisting what is, an attitude of acceptance frees the energy that was
previously bound by old expectations.
    Some people say if a relationship didn’t work before, it won’t work now
because people don’t change that much. Astrology would agree and
disagree—our birth charts stay the same throughout our lives reflecting a
basic consistency, but the transits and progressions reflect our constantly
changing selves, as the same issues come round and round again to be dealt
with in new and unique ways, and with new chances to bring in the healing
energies of the North Node.


    I believe we are constantly invited to change and to re-invent ourselves.
When the shattering of romantic illusions and all the small betrayals stand
face to face with every real hope for peace, healing, and forgiveness, the
chance for change is seductive. When I consider that my ex-lover/partner
has heard the hard edges of arrogance and fear in my tone of voice and feels
the uneasy questions within me and is still willing to love me again…well,
that’s something to consider. In Latin, “con” means “with,” and “sider”
means “from the stars.” Perhaps forgiveness and re-enchantment is a gift of
grace “from the stars.” Yet I believe we have to do the work necessary to be
open to that receptivity, and that doesn’t come easy.
    Last week I came upon a poem by Wendell Berry that moved me so
much I inscribed it on a clay tablet and gave it to my new “old love”. A
sweet synchronicity seems to be echoing here:
     “How joyful to be together, alone as when we first were joined in our
     little house by the stream long ago, except that now we know each
     other, as we did not then and now instead of two stories fumbling to
     meet, we belong to one story that the two, joining, made. And now we
     touch each other with the tenderness of mortals, who know themselves;
     how joyful to feel the heart quake at the sight of you old friend in the
     morning light, beautiful in your night robe!”
Healing the Wounded Heart; the Astrological Perspective
     That was the end of the second article. Now we are eight years
remarried. We still struggle with all of the same issues—but incrementally
we’re bringing more love and understanding into accepting the ways we’re
different and the ways we’re the same. We are an example of a classic
marital problem: I have a fear of abandonment, he has a fear of engulfment.
We both share the same values, and desire for intimacy and connection.
     He’s a grounded Virgo craftsman with lots of Uranus in his chart,
reflecting his almost paradoxical desire for both Virgo routine and Uranian
independence. I’m a “more intimacy please” kind of Libra, with a lot of
intense Scorpio, combined with an edgy “let’s go for it” Aries energy. It’s
not perfect. Yet with my North Node in earthy Taurus in the second house
of “owning my own personal resources” I benefit when he makes me do
things myself that I’d rather not do on my own. His Gemini North Node has
lots of different interests that grow his Soul, and challenge him to be a better
communicator. We talk more than before—he stretches to find the words
and lingers longer in our intimate conversations. I let him know now when
something is really important to me, but we do not expect so much from
each other. The sting of how we hurt each other in the past did not leave the
moment we re-married, but it’s cooled and softened over the years. These
days we delight in coming together at the end of our work days over some
bowls of pumpkin soup I make and serve in his hand made pottery bowls.
We remember things the other has forgotten in our mutual history, and we
allow more room for “letting go” of what isn’t truly important.
     As an astrological counselor, I’m always being asked about the aspects
and omens of love and divorce. When do we know its coming? When do
we act, and when do we wait? It’s a complicated question, and it’s
necessary to look at not only one’s own transits and progressions to the birth
chart, but also the comparison, synastry and composite chart for both people.
There are no definitive “signatures” for marriage or divorce, and the
chemistry created by two people is unique. It doesn’t matter if you are a fire
sign Aries, and your lover is a watery Cancer. Why? Because your Moon,
rising sign, or another aspect could “complement” that emotional water
element.
     Unfortunately, there are entire books which will tell you what sun sign is
good or bad for you, and what to “red flag” and what to go for—but I
believe it’s more complicated than Sun and Moon sign astrology. It does tell
us some general things, just as knowing if a person is Italian or Swedish or
their sexual orientation, or their age will all give us something. But it’s not
enough.
     So when I’m asked specifically about what might traditionally be called
a hard or good aspect between couples, I explain that astrologers today look
for both grace and grit. Easy aspects and hard ones. Because the “grit”
promotes soul growth and deeper understanding, relationships need grace
and grit. Nothing is fated, and the charts are reflecting the chemistry of a
relationship, so they hint more of the emotional feeling-tone one will be
exposed to, but not the outcome. What is most important is the intention of
the couple, their knowledge of themselves, and their willingness to make
conscious decisions at the right time.
     All the outer planets play havoc with relationships, and there are books
enough out there to offer suggestions—-but here’s some astrological
indicators for you to consider: In a comparison of two charts, the two most
difficult situations to deal with are aspects between Uranus and Pluto to the
Sun or Moon, Venus or Mars. The reasons are simple: Uranus, the planet of
individuation and rebellion, likes space and freedom, and the chance to “do
something different.” In mythology, Uranus is a rebel, and like Prometheus,
it is willing to steal fire from the gods when necessary. It doesn’t favor the
kind of coziness that other archetypal energies can accommodate—nor does
Pluto, the Lord of the Underworld and deep transformation. He isn’t a
comfortable bedfellow either. Uranus and Pluto aspects between two charts
say that this couple is involved in a relationship of profound transformation,
and if they can’t take the heat, well….you know the rest.
     If there is any “red flag” between two people’s charts, I’d watch
especially for Pluto aspects between couples. This is because there is so
much unconscious obsessive-compulsive activity going on, that if
everything isn’t totally above board and honest, one person is going to feel
deceived or betrayed. Pluto is an invisible archetype in mythology, and often
describes unconscious destructive power struggles.


    It is the timing of things that astrology addresses best, as there are times
to “make love and times to make war” as it says in the Bible. Planetary
transits are all about timing. When you’re having a transit of Saturn, Uranus,
Neptune or Pluto to one of the angles of your birth chart, or to the Sun,
Moon, Mars or Venus, then you’re deep in the crucible of life change.
    Each archetypal planetary transit calls for a different response: for
example, when you’re in a Neptunian cycle of your life, it’s hard to
accurately assess what you feel. Issues can be deceptive or not what they
seem, so an astrologer will often caution you not to sign on the dotted line
for anything just then. Whereas in a life-changing Pluto transit, where one
part of you has to die so another can be reborn, you may simply have to sign
on the dotted line and surrender to a divorce, foreclosure, or a health/surgery
document.
    When Saturn hits your personal planets, as it did with my husband at the
time of our separation, you may feel quite serious, or depressed with low
energy. That “energy” has gone below into the unconscious and is stuck
around the complexities of the issue. (However lest we condemn the serious
Saturn too much, I must admit that it was under an influence of Saturn to my
Moon when I wrote the letter that began to reunite us, and it was when
Saturn was conjuncting my North Node when we re-married. Saturn
summons us to serious action as well as reflection.) In contrast, I was
experiencing the impulsive transit of freedom-loving Uranus when I walked
out the door of my house in a snowy blizzard and left my marriage so many
years ago. Both Uranus and Saturn summon us to change, but they do it
differently.
    When people individually experience Uranus and Pluto transits they are
in moments of deep change and renewal. But the red flags I’m most
concerned about between two people aren’t so much about the transits—that
is, not about the changing times, but about when a couple has Pluto or
Uranus in hard aspect to each other’s personal planets in their birth charts.
You see this in the comparison of two charts, of putting one chart within the
other in a bi-wheel chart, allowing you to see where there’s a conjunction,
square or opposition to the “Other’s” Sun, Moon, Mars or Venus. Those
birth chart difficult aspects are the ones that give one pause to consider…I
like what the poet Rilke said—some good advice to consider if the natal
aspects between two people suggests too much grit and not enough grace—
he said: “And then the knowledge comes to me that I have space within me
for a second, timeless, larger life.” It is this that we can look forward to.


    One thing that is noteworthy in this huge subject of relationships is to
remember that the search for the “Magical Other” is often a search for the
Beloved Self within ourselves. We expect too much when we yearn for the
romantic “Other” to fill those inner spaces that only our relationship with our
Self can do. The search for romance can be an escape from the calling of
one’s personal journey.
    But then too, the journey to our “individuation” or the Inner Beloved
doesn’t warm our toes on a cold winter’s night the same way a real person
can do. Nor does it give our necks a gentle stroke after a hard day! Only a
real person can do that, and that’s no small thing.
    Aside from the joys and burdens that “romance” carries in our culture,
we all need relationships. However it is a sad psychological truth that what
we do not know about ourselves (both the good and the bad in our shadow)
will be projected onto the Other. We all project our childhood wounding
and longings onto each of our relationships to varying degrees. But since the
Other cannot bear responsibility for what is essentially ours, our projections
give way easily to resentment and power struggles. Working to heal a
relationship is a powerful way to self-understanding, and fuels the Jungian
process of individuation.
    I’d like to end this chapter by moving away from my story and theories
about relationship to some very practical thoughts for those times when the
heart must wait—ideas for you to use during those outer planet transits when
there are no Excedrins for the heart.


     When we see in our charts difficult transits, and feel the suffering they
often entail, we need to remind ourselves that the Universe is not out to hurt
us, but rather seeking to transform us—but it often begins this transformation
by ruthlessly (such a Pluto word!) taking away from us the very thing we
think we need most—love. Not only do hard circumstances erode our outer
relationships, but they give us glimpses into our own “bad behavior” and
leave us feeling less self love.
     So what can we do when our wounds, our nastiness, our unloving
feelings arise? As a counseling astrologer and as a psychotherapist, I am
uncomfortable staying at the level of diagnosis without some prescription.
So, I’m going to take off my astrologer’s hat for just a moment and put on
my therapist’s hat. Actually I would love to see the two more integrated,
with less emphasis on technique and prediction, and more on the use of
astrology as a healing tool that moves seamlessly into the other healing
professions. Just as chiropractors deal with more than just adjusting bones,
astrologers too can prescribe as well as describe. As long as our bias is
known—whether our prescriptions are flower remedies or a range of
holistic ideas, if we share our knowledge openly, the client (or reader) can
choose to take it in or not. My bias in a reading is towards the North Node
compensatory medicine implied by the North Node sign and house, yet I’d
like to share a few of the generic ideas that helped me with my “Venus
affliction” that has been the substance of this chapter.


    The healing work happens first beneath the surface of consciousness,
just like a physical wound heals from the inside out. We might be wise to
tend to this wound in a very similar way to any other wound—here are
some things to consider:
    1—First slow down. When you are wounded you stop! I like to think of
this natural impulse to slow down, as the call to go inward and begin to
“cocoon.” Just as when you are sick you go to bed, so also, when your
“heart is breaking” your energy flows inward to question and grieve, leaving
you little energy for anything else. Give yourself a break, slowing down,
and taking care of your basic needs: food, rest, and basic self-care.
    2—Diagnosis: What do you have? Do your transits tell you anything? Is
this the last wound of a broken relationship—perhaps the last pass of Saturn
over your natal Venus? Or is it a Uranus urge for freedom and change that is
pushing on the stability of your marriage? Maybe there’s another way you
could play this out? Or is this a confusing Neptunian warning sign, an
“angina” of the heart? How do you describe the condition, how long have
you had it, and how did you get it? The wounded heart often needs
professional help with this, just as we sometimes need to see a doctor. But if
this isn’t possible, you can do some of this work with your journal and your
astrology chart. Take out pen and paper and write it all down. The search
for clarity is a good beginning, and the chart is a good Rorschach test even if
you’re not an expert astrologer.
    3—Create a Treatment Plan for yourself—Apply something to calm the
pain down. Go inward to find the healer within, and follow instructions!
Engage the healing power of Venus. Beauty and order help heal. Your own
intuitive healer may say you’ve got to write it out, paint it out, cry or rage it
out, or simply clean your house with a passion. This inner healer, speaking
perhaps this time with the voice of Uranus, might ask you to do something
radical—and if it’s not too rash, do it! Example: you may benefit by getting
away for awhile from your home or circle of friends—consider a retreat or
vacation to some place where you can gain perspective. Even a day away,
or something to break up familiar routines can help. Do you always end the
day with a glass of wine and a book or movie? Let your inner Saturn as
healer, inspire you to sign up for a class instead, or take yourself to the
library—anything to let your psyche know that although things have
changed, they are moving in new directions with new possibilities.
    Consider the combination of Venus and Neptune. Reach out for help
with life affirming things and beauty. When artist Georgia O’Keefe was
suffering from heart-wounding depression early in her life she was delighted
to discover how surrounding herself with color, plants, and bright light
restored her. Could you repaint your bedroom? Could you change the
lighting? Consider surrounding yourself with things that innately hold
inspiring energy, or simply things you love. This could be allowing yourself
things you’ve tended to deny yourself. Why not get yourself a cat, fresh
flowers, a musical instrument, or whatever else you may have put on hold.
(After my divorce, I hated the loneliness of my double bed. So I bought a
large aquarium and delighted in creating a Neptunian underwater scene. I
put this in my line of vision across the bed and lit it up at night.) I also had a
little dog. You’ll intuitively know what’s right for you to do.
     Next, get yourself a therapist, coach, astrologer, or friend (or all!) and
tell your story enough till “the sting” is out of the story. You’ll need to tell
and re-tell your story until you can see it as one drama within the larger story
of your life. Consider what lessons or insights can be gained and be open to
the idea of how this experience can generate new possibilities for you. Move
beyond shame and blame. Find out what was unconscious and invisible in
the relationship. Could you look at a comparison, synastry or composite
chart of the relationship? Where is Pluto? What unconscious elements led up
to this? How have your expectations, fears, or anger created or irritated this
wound? Where’s Mars in your chart? You may not be able to see it all at
first. Keep cleaning and poking around. It hurts, but you need to understand
the part you played in this wounding so it won’t be repeated in the future.
During difficult transits we often regress to obsessive-compulsive coping
patterns, so by admitting your anger and your less-than-perfect behavior,
you cleanse the wound with a deeper level of understanding.
     4—“Apply a clean bandage.” The bandage is your attitude and your
healing plan. It will be temporary and will need to be changed. Stick with
your plan even when it’s hard. If you re-expose yourself to your ex-partner
you risk contagious anger and re-engaging in the shame/blame game. Is
Mercury retrograde and more talk likely to be misunderstood now? If
possible, don’t expose yourself to re-infection or more wounding unless
you’re with a therapist who can professionally help you reflect.
    5—Give the tender wound time to heal. Timing! So much of astrology is
about timing. Protect your heart from the sometimes toxic “advice” of well-
meaning friends, and resist the urge to expose your vulnerability to the
world. But yes, you will sometimes break down crying in the produce
department of your local supermarket. So be patient and pace yourself. Can
you create some scheduled routines and “dates” in your week? (Saturnian
structures help.) This could be as simple as knowing that every Wednesday
night you go to yoga, and every Friday night you go out to dinner with
friends, and every Sunday night you call your sister for a heartfelt talk.
Perhaps part of your treatment plan is to go to the gym or out for a walk
every other morning for 30 minutes. Engage Mars! Put the schedule up in a
place you see frequently, and forgive yourself if you’re not perfect. The
wound is healing beneath the surface.
     6—Find alternative “healing medicines.” Here’s where astrology can
also be helpful. What other transits do you have besides this one that’s
wrecking havoc? What are the good ones? (Yes, I know we shouldn’t use
words like good or bad, but on a feeling level you know what feels good,
and any transit has good in it. Look for it.) For example: Have you seen that
your 9th house of the higher mind, education, and travel is being activated
by Jupiter this spring? Could you take a class in Spanish and begin planning
a trip to Mexico? Or that 9th house inclination to take that foreign language
class could land you a job teaching English as a second language. What
starts as your gladness turns into something that the “world needs.” Look at
your chart to see where you can play with new possibilities and also to see
the length of the “illness.” Like all wounding, full healing takes time, but we
don’t have to suffer constantly—there are times in healing that are full of
light and unexpected epiphanies. We are regaining the sense that we are
loveable and that we can love again.
   Trust in the process—that’s astrology in action for me. Or, as a
Chippewa Indian sage once said it: “Sometimes I go about pitying myself,
and all the time, I am being carried by great winds across the sky.”
                     Chapter 4.
      The Astrology of Mid-life and Menopause

    Between the ages of 42 and 59 there is a revolution in women’s lives
that doctors’ call menopause. Astrologers have three names for it: the
Uranus Opposition around the age of 42, the Chiron Return at 51, and the
Second Saturn Return around 59. These three stages that span the entire
menopausal experience are the rites of passage into our wise woman years.
Like any journey they have their merciless moments of drama as well as
quiet epiphanies. But how might menopause be different if these times came
with an instruction manual like some of us received when we turned 13?
“This is menstruation! Welcome to Becoming a Woman.” How might it be
different if we did get a menopausal map?
    Astrology offers us the closest thing to a wise woman’s survival guide of
these times that I’ve ever seen, although the links between these three stages
of menopause haven’t been truly explored. I’m going to touch on this huge
subject and offer a few insights, although the exact timing of these events is
best explored with your own astrologer.
    At the first stage of the Uranus Opposition we begin our journey by
being slightly unnerved and restless. The body’s electrical energy system
begins to get revved up—fired up by new messages from our glandular
system. Uranus rules the electrical circuitry in our bodies, and the
evolutionary purpose of Uranus is to create change—our life opens up; we
see new options and possibilities. Our culture calls these years
“perimenopause” but astrologers see this as the time when we begin to be
more true to ourselves, and do things differently. We may be shocked
because repressed aspects of ourselves and long-forgotten dreams now come
forth and demand expression. The unconscious stirs as we hear ourselves
speak raw and out-spoken truths in a way that startles even us. This is the
same energy that makes us feel even sexier and stronger as we become
serious truth-tellers.
    Peri-menopause is powerful and underestimated, especially since it
creeps up on us undetected. It’s as if our internal “shit-detectors” are amped
up, and we can smell a rat or hear a lie a mile away. At this first entrance
into the menopausal journey it’s time to consciously make new plans, craft
new intentions, de-clutter our inner psyches and outer homes, and prepare
for a new life. The Uranus Opposition is the first call towards what the
Jungian psychologists call individuation; towards becoming who you truly
are. Trying to maintain the status-quo at this time is the worst thing one can
do. Let this be your motto: “Let’s do something different.”
     As we move through our forties into menopause, it’s as if we’re being
stripped of the Teflon coating of hormonal agreeableness, as we’re being
catapulted into a time of intense honesty punctuated with times of intense
irritation. The worst physical culprits, such as loss of sleep and hot sweats
exhaust us, allowing the emotional rollercoaster of moodiness to have its
way with us. When we’re awake and sweating at 3:00 AM, we may find
ourselves contemplating the limits of sanity, divorce or freedom even when
we have a good mind, a good marriage or good job—-or so we think, up till
now. Reflecting and reframing our lives is best done at 9:00 AM with our
best friend over coffee, when we can exaggerate our “wet sheets story” just
enough to get a good laugh and a tender hug.
     While the age of 51 is the average age for menopause to occur, the
process that leads up to it is as powerful as the actual ceasing of our periods.
This is the turning point into our wise woman years, and many of us find
ourselves coming into our own power and personhood more in our 50’s
than ever before. We’ve already been experimenting and finding out what
works for us and what doesn’t. We’ve made changes—physically,
emotionally and spiritually. We are keenly aware that our life is already
more than half-lived.
     As we move towards the Chiron Return at age 51, the electric and truth-
seeking trials of Uranus link up with the archetype of Chiron. The changes
we’ve made and the healing we’ve done stand us in good stead as we
approach the time when our periods actually stop, usually around the time of
the Chiron Return. .
     Chiron can be seen as the mythological image of the “wounded healer.”
As we round the corner past 50, we’ve gained some experiences and
wisdom that can be helpful to others. The mythology of the planetoid
Chiron is fascinating to read. The essence of it is that Chiron, the
mythological god who was unable to heal himself, becomes able to heal
others. Through the process of experimentation and self-healing he learns
how to become a useful mentor, healer, and teacher although he was never
able to completely cure himself. Chiron is like all of us who struggle with
menopause and its many cures in an effort to heal and be whole. We delve
into new remedies and try out new lifestyles seeking to find physical relief
and the best life, but perfect healing may allude us. We do the best we can
as we struggle through it. Menopause is sloppy in all the ways of
imperfection, but if we take good mental notes on our process we learn a
great deal. We learn that change can be good and that open-heartedness and
experimentation lead to healing. We find our way, and then we are able to
help others do the same.
      As we make our way through the fifties we begin to approach the
Second Saturn Return, which comes for most of us around the age of 59.
This Saturn Return is typically easier than the first Saturn Return at age 29
as it ushers us into our wisdom and Elder Years. This third and last part of
the menopausal journey is when any unfinished business physically or
emotionally needs to be taken care of. We cannot afford to be lazy in our
attention to what needs to be done at this time, especially caring for our
bodies. If we put off that call to the dentist, it may not be long before we’re
calling the oral surgeon. If we don’t listen to our body’s messages now we
may have some tough lessons with “reality”-that’s Saturn’s job.
      But don’t be too hard on yourself. We all have unfinished business—
coping with aging parents, health issues, loneliness…there are old problems
and perhaps new solutions. We may slow down a little, and others may say
we look tired. This is the time when our culture gets us thinking about
retirement, and we are shocked when we tell someone our age. Can it be
true? Our mental image of this age is ready to change.
      This is when we need to look deeply at the anatomy of our intentions. It
is indeed time to see oneself as a wise woman and to act the part with quiet
dignity. But do you have any great ambitions? Have you looked at what
Jupiter and Neptune in your chart is whispering in your ear? Maybe you
could aim higher in your intentions? Or is it just about losing weight and
interior decorating? On your death-bed will you remember poignant
moments doing volunteer work at the hospital or the time when you lost
(and perhaps regained) fifteen pounds?
      But what are the words in our hearts as well as our heads? Intentions
and affirmations may find a “disconnect” if these two are not synchronized.
For example, if our heart desires a new partner and yet we’re aware that our
habits and lifestyle leave no room for another person in our life, then
chances are it won’t happen. Or if we are still holding a powerful longing or
resentment towards a past partner, where’s the room for a new person? This
is the time to avoid the seductive power of our shadow and avoid scenarios
where we feel our old unconscious stuff emerging—our old tapes of “not-
good-enough” or “nobody loves me.” A reality check may be called for.
      Someone once told me that a good suggestion for this time is to “sneak a
little God into your daily chow.” This means different things for everyone.
And we need to add the Saturnian practicality to the chow as well—-a
Muslim might say: “Pray to god, but tie your camel”. Or we remember the
old-fashioned phrase: “God helps those that help themselves.” The gift of
the Second Saturn Return is a practical wisdom combined with a more
compassionate attitude, but you can’t bring naiveté to it. It’s time to get
savvy. Saturn is the archetypal planet of reality that rewards in the long run
for work well done, but who, as the Lord of Time, can bring delays and
occasional moments of melancholy. We lose our naiveté, but gain a larger
perspective.
    Having just finished this third and last stage of the Menopausal Journey,
I’ve found that I still feel the occasional hot flash of Uranus, the struggle
with Chiron-ian experiments in healing, as well as enjoying Saturnian
moments of sitting quietly in my chair journaling. I’m finding that there is a
new sanity and serenity emerging in which my ego needs are relaxing. And
I’m remembering that when I’m not happy it doesn’t always mean there’s
something wrong—it may be that I’m in the process of getting something
right!
    The Second Saturn Return also ushers us into the age of the “Yoga of
Generosity.” We may find that our biggest joys come from having the
chance to give whatever we can to all those “youngsters” under the age of
sixty. Whether it be giving our time, money, or telling our stories, it’s time to
link the pieces together into a whole, sharing our wisdom with the story of
the rough road of the journey. Remember that the difference between the
boring old person and the one with the love and sparkle in her eyes is that
she’s done her homework of digesting her stories. She doesn’t ramble or
bore you. She’s learned something from her life.
    How do you do that? Many people find this a good time to write a short
memoir in which you touch on the highlights of your life as a first draft.
Then go back and find photographs that not only add a rich visual element,
but may inspire a second draft, or a deeper level of writing. Some people use
sketches or collage to express moments in which life was complicated and
paradoxical. Other people simply find that the Saturn Return is a great time
to begin psychotherapy again—-this time not for crisis, but for telling and
integrating your life stories.
    As you move through your menopausal journey you’ll see the
connections and the dropped stitches of meaning and healing along the way.
You can make a point to take good care of yourself, aligning your heart’s
truth with the mind’s intention. Then point the arrow of intention in the
direction of your dreams and let it release. It’s no “secret” since you’ve been
doing the work and taking good notes. Chances are you’ll find the Second
Saturn Return to be a very pleasant surprise.


    Till then, be patient your menopausal journey as a way of holding
yourself tenderly; you could think of it as a way of being “pregnant” with
the new you that is being birthed. And if you find the hot flashes
embarrassing, you could simply say “my internal thermostat is broken.” But
we know the alchemical heat within you is birthing something quite special.
                       Chapter 5.
           Jupiter: Opening to Gifts of Grace,
               Opportunity and Talent

     Where am I lucky? Where do I have talents I may not know about?
Have I earned or learned anything in a former life that can help me now?
YES! These are the questions I often hear, and there’s a way you can
explore this yourself without having to have private sessions with an
astrologer. You simply need to find where Jupiter is on your chart. Jupiter,
that little glyph that looks like the number four with an open top, is the
largest planet in the solar system, and for you it represents the area of your
life where you have an innate gift of grace and a unique opportunity.
     Where Jupiter is in your birth chart, and where Jupiter is transiting in
your chart and life now, is the area where you have built up karmic credit
that you can turn into gold. Jupiter is a capsulation or distillation of the
North and South Nodes “gifts” which I believe we have earned through our
actions in former lives, and shows where we are graced and where our
“gold” is located.
     Gold? Alchemical/philosophical gold or money? Perhaps both. Where
you have Jupiter is where you are likely to have abundance, opportunities,
talent, faith, and expansiveness—which can easily translate into money.
Jupiter was called “the old benefic” in ancient astrological texts, and its
position and transits were always deemed lucky, and even somewhat
protective. Today we also know that Jupiter has a down side—“too
muchness:” too much abundance, too much faith (arrogance), even too
much food—and therefore weight! But even so, with a little forethought it’s
not hard to make Jupiter work for you rather than overdoing its blessings.
     If you’re looking at your chart now, look for the glyph that looks like the
number 4 done in fancy calligraphy, with that open ended top. It will be in
one of the 12 sections of the chart’s circle and will have a sign next to it.
That sign describes how Jupiter works for you; what is its manner and style.
So, for example, if Jupiter is in the sign of Aries, it will operate in a
courageous and forthright manner. The sign always describes the planet like
an adjective.
     We are going to look now where it is located in your birth chart. (If you
don’t have your birth time, and therefore can’t know the correct house
placements, you can still learn something by using the sign your Jupiter is in,
and correlating it with the house number—Aries then, correlates to the first
house, Taurus to the second, Gemini to the third, and so on through the
natural zodiac.)


     So your chart is a circle that is divided into 12 sections called houses.
The sections of the chart start with house number one being at the position
of nine o’clock, and go backwards around the “horoscope” with house
number two being at eight o’clock…and so on through the twelve houses.
Each house section represents a different sphere of your life and Jupiter is
sitting happily in one of the sections! So if you will imagine your chart to be
a clock, put your pen at the section of the circle that would be the hour
between 8:00 and 9:00. This is the section called the “first house.” The next
section, going counter-clockwise (between the hours of 7:00 and 8:00) is the
second house. Now write in the numbers of each section from 1 to 12 going
counter-clockwise in your circle and note where your Jupiter is…it’s like a
map, and you’ve just found the gold.
     Here’s a short translation of what Jupiter in each area, or ‘house’
represents:
    1st House: You have an enthusiastic personality, a warm hearted
optimistic style, a sense of self-awareness, and usually good health. People
tend to really like you, simply for who you are. Your ability to deal
effectively and pleasingly with others will always be a part of your grace or
“gold.” This is a position where you need to guard against over-eating and
drinking—instead, let your enthusiasm for life move you towards saying yes
to abundant opportunities. Sales work, teaching, and anything where your
personality makes a difference is favored work.
    2nd House: You are likely to find that you have strong urges to make
money and the willingness to take the financial risks that pay off for you. (If
you haven’t tried it, now’s the time!) Jupiter here brings generosity of heart
and an abundance of resources—you know the value of true wealth and
need never fear poverty. If afflicted (ask your astrologer) you could go over-
board in a fling of investing or spending, but generally, anything involving
financial investments, public relations, and the arts are favored.
    3rd House: Jupiter’s influence here reflects a bright and savvy intellect
that enjoys a mental challenge. Dare to share your opinions as you tend to
be lucky in the world of communications—-teaching, writing, working with
children, and journalism are favored.
    Also consider working in your local area or neighborhood, and consider
engaging your brothers and/or sisters to help you—they can be a benefit to
you.
    4th House: Your early family life and married family life are favored
here, as you create a great home atmosphere. Your family roots can nourish
you as you understand the world of feelings and the importance of family,
home and emotional bonding. You benefit from women and your extended
family. Psychology, real estate, interior design, parenting and
home/landscape design are favored.
    5th House: Optimism, enthusiasm, and a creative flair are reflected here.
Try your hand at acting, painting, singing—any of the arts are favored.
There can be a tendency toward risk taking and gambling, yet you
sometimes seem luckier than the average person does when it comes to
those things…. and with a little caution you can do well on your hunches.
Working with children and all self-expressive activities are favored.
    6th House: Being of help to others comes naturally to you and you are
good at it. Your generous spirit and willingness to work hard often means
you’re seldom without things to do—again don’t overdo, either with work,
or with eating and drinking. You will find you have talent in crafts, in
communication fields, and in all the helping and medical professions. Your
health is good, and when you help others, you empower yourself.
   7th House: The challenges and rewards of marriage are an issue for you,
and you usually benefit both emotionally and financially from being
married. However, don’t let your expectations of your mate keep you from
“working” on the relationship, or you may find you have an abundance of
marriages and partnerships. You prosper when you work with others, as
anything you do “in tandem” tends to bring you luck and joy.
    8th House: Financial gains through investment and inheritance is often
indicated here. There’s also sexual exuberance, and a certain luck and deep
understanding in dealing with life’s major transition points—marriage,
death, religion, etc. Following your interest in spirituality benefits you.
Psychology, investigative work, research, and banking are all favored.
Building and using joint resources will tend to bring you wealth.
Traditionally, Jupiter in this house would suggest “long life.”
    9th House: The imagination and intellect are stimulated and strong here,
and there’s a deep spiritual understanding of people and other cultures.
Travel, international relations, religious/philosophical work, teaching, law,
and publishing are all areas of gold for you. You have an adventuresome
spirit and need to bring a sense of freedom and possibility to whatever you
do. Teaching a language or a philosophy in a foreign country would tend to
bring you “joy.”
    10th House: You’ve got dramatic flair and tend to be lucky in careers
where you can stand out and shine. You’ve got both an enthusiastic and
practical approach to most situations which gives you a successful edge in
whatever you do. With Jupiter here you tend to follow your vision to the top
of your field and you are steadfast and successful with your career. Politics,
acting, management, and anything that puts you in the public eye is favored.
    11th House: You have a great way with people, and know how to work
successfully in groups of all kinds. Work on committees, take a political
office, work for a cause you believe, and use your networking skills in
everything you do. Friendships are rewarding and benefit you. Fundraising,
social activism and humanitarian work are all favored. Keep adjusting your
priorities, goals and dreams and use the internet and other networking tools
to help you. Traditionally, you may tend to “blossom” later in life.
   12th House: You’ve got an inner sanctuary in your psyche that brings
you peace of mind whenever you turn inward. Jupiter is ruling your
unconscious and can come up in all the areas of your life when you least
expect it. Your keen mind has a philosophical edge to it that permeates
whatever you do. Your work speaks for itself, so no need to be “on stage.”
The arts, crafts, writing, and the helping professions are particularly good for
you.
    This ‘taste of Jupiter’ is a beginning, but there’s more to be savored and
explored in this area—adding Jupiter to your North Node “medicine” is a
great idea as long as you don’t overdo it. Moderate with Jupiter. Meditate on
the sign that describes your Jupiter. “Mine your Jupiterian gold” whenever
you can, remembering that as long as you don’t overextend in things in that
area that Jupiter rules, you’ll tend to be lucky in that sphere of your life—-
for you’ve earned that karmic gold!
                 Chapter 6.
   Saturn: Moving Through Times of Great
Change and Opportunity; The Saturn Returns
    at Ages Twenty-nine and Fifty-nine.

    “When an inner situation is not made conscious, it happens outside as
                            fate.” C.G. Jung

    The Saturn Returns at ages twenty-nine and fifty-nine are times of great
change and opportunity. And so, they can also be times of crisis. What do
you think of when you hear the words: “Know Thyself” and “Nothing in
Excess”? These were the words inscribed above the sacred oracular temple
at Delphi, Greece. One might think that by understanding and trying to live
by those wise words one might avoid the great troubles in life. Perhaps they
help. Our understanding of these words changes as we age, but life often
plays some nasty tricks on us in the meantime. Perhaps this is why folks
who understand “just a little” astrology view the coming of the Saturn
Return, at approximately 29 years old and 59 years old, with deep sighs. But
then, a little knowledge can be a dangerous thing.
    Saturn is the archetypal symbol of a way of being that slows us down
and makes us take a cold hard look at the realities we’ve built up in our
lives. It can feel like the voice of the inner critic. In ancient times Saturn was
seen as the “old malefic” and its passage was viewed with some suspicion.
Saturnian times tend to frustrate and delay—they feel serious if not
melancholy, and then we are called to change! The word itself has roots in
the idea of melancholy, timely delay, and the demands of a wise old elder.
    However Saturn also represents the arrival of the harvest, and rewards
us in the long run for our hard work and effort. It brings a good harvest if
we’re willing to wait. Its passage in a chart—especially at the times of the
Saturn Returns, marks a time when we have an opportunity for deep change
and life-renewing rewards. Not so bad!
    There are two Saturn Returns that happen to everybody: the first is
between the ages of twenty-eight and thirty, and the second, between the
ages of fifty-eight and sixty. It’s necessary to consult the ephemeris or your
astrologer to find the exact dates for you, but the feeling of the Saturn
Return permeates this whole time period. Astrologically speaking, the first
return is when we truly come into our adulthood, and the second is when we
come into our maturity or elder years.
     Our culture sees the age of twenty-one as the time of becoming an adult
—but not for the astrologically minded. For us it’s twenty-nine. And you
may get your Social Security at sixty-five, but it’s at fifty-nine at the second
Saturn Return that your true personal and social security comes up for
review. Saturn Returns can be times of rough passage, or harvest, and
they’re usually a bit of both.
     The good news is that although Saturn’s passage in our lives may mark
times of plain hard work and self-questioning, it’s also a time when
opportunities present themselves to be thoughtfully examined.
Procrastination now seems like a bad idea, but quick change isn’t in the air
either. Perhaps the old lover has finally committed “the last straw” and you
know you must end the relationship. You make the difficult break, and then
accept an invitation to go out for coffee with a friend. New possibilities are
discussed, but the leaden weight on your heart slows you down.. Or you’ve
landed the new job, but the learning curve on it sends you home in tears for
the first two weeks. But you hang in there. Or you’re finally pregnant, but
you’re so sick you can’t enjoy it.
     That’s the feeling of the first Saturn Return, but look what’s coming! If
you follow through with your new vision, you’ve taken the first steps
towards a true new beginning. Saturn likes to create forms and structures
and new beginnings, but not without strong foundations.
     The first Saturn Return is often marked by these kinds of personal
milestones. We move, marry, divorce, go back to school, etc. The
navigational tools are twofold: you must take a chance now, and you must
give it all you can. If you are willing to do that, you will be rewarded.
     Saturn asks us “Whose movie am I in?”” and then challenges us to be
the director and author. Wouldn’t it be so much easier if we could just read
some “manual to life” and have the ghost of “Christmas Future” come to us
to show the way? Instead, we are called to become our own best “author-
ity,” to truly become the author of our life.
     We’re being asked now to re-write our personal life script with our own
spiritual muscle. Not always so easy, especially when our life drama is full
of people who no longer reflect who we really are and what we are
becoming. “Letting go” is another key concept for this time The human
unconscious has ways of conjuring up people, events, and situations that
challenge us to the bone. Psychologists sometimes call it projection, and we
feel it as the remarkable synchronicity between what’s happening in our
inner lives with what’s happening to us in the outer landscape—I don’t think
it’s just an uncanny coincidence. At times it’s as if we’ve conjured up
whoever or whatever we most wanted to avoid—or attract—in our lives. It’s
as if the unconscious “hires” other people to play out parts of our life stories
—this one is the boss, this one the victim, this one the unfaithful lover.
    At the Saturn Returns you’ve probably “had it” with some of these
people and situations and its time to write them out of the script of your life
drama. At each Saturn Return we are challenged to take back our
projections and to look at the drama of our life as our responsibility. It’s too
late to blame anyone anymore.


     The Second Saturn Return, in the late fifties, is also a time that calls for
concrete actions in the real world, but it can be more subtle and occasionally
more insidious. If we don’t do what needs to be done now, we might not be
given a second chance. If we put off our yearly physical exam or don’t stop
the spread of some nasty growth, it may be too late later. If we take a stiff
upper lip attitude and deny the fact that “the job is killing me” it may indeed
kill you.
     As the body ages, depression and physical difficulties inevitably arise,
yet as the body becomes less an object of vanity it’s a chance for the Spirit
to rise.
     This is also the time when we may feel an uprising of irritability as a few
old habits or attitudes have the chance to rear their nasty heads again. This is
because now is the time to cut them off—to be done once and for all with
them. You may ask yourself: why am I dealing with these same issues
again? The answer is: because you’ve almost resolved them. And the last
straw can be the hardest. The hallmark of the second Saturn Return is that if
you deal maturely with the old pockets of unfinished business you gain the
gift that will last till the end—the gift of wisdom.
     And how do you do that? Priorities need to be clearer, and metaphorical
closets and basements cleaned. There is a need to look at what we feel
disillusioned about and let the illusions go, lest these old ghosts feed on us
and make us bitter. It’s time to slow down and allow more sweetness and
companionship into our lives, and to let the wild dogs of ambitious
willfulness fight elsewhere.
     And if we’re going to be ambitious, we need to do it in a way in which
we can bring the fruits of our life to bear on the project—such as returning
to something we already do well but doing it even better, and mentoring
someone as well. With an attitude of reverence, we develop wisdom, and as
we acquire that, we’ll be naturally called to “mentor”, to pass along the gifts
of learning and expertise, especially to the folks at their first Saturn Return
who are truly stepping up to the plate now. Sometimes they are our children.
    It has often been said that under strong Saturn transits one can choose
between exhaustion and depression—-some choice! It implies that because
Saturn is often about doing hard work in the real world that exhaustion is the
better choice—- indicating as Mark Twain once said: “It is better to wear out
than to rust out.” It doesn’t need to be so tiring. So what are the tools needed
to successfully navigate Saturnian waters? Here are a few ideas:
    1—Be Discerning. You are at a time now when you understand things
you didn’t understand even last year. Use your new wisdom to make wise
choices based on clarity of intention. Dream into your future and discern the
path through the woods. Here is where the quotes: “Know thyself” and
“Nothing in Excess” become relevant. At these times there is a necessity to
pull back from the excesses of your younger years and to know what you
can and cannot do.
    2—Take Heart. Find ways to reach out to others and be humble enough
to ask for advice. If your marriage is in trouble, ask yourself the questions: Is
the relationship the true source of dissatisfaction, or is it the repository of my
own misery? How much am I projecting my insecurities onto my partner,
and not taking responsibility or even listening ‘with heart’?
    3—Go Deeper. Superficial “all or nothing” solutions can be a quick fix
and Saturn doesn’t like quick fixes. No quick decisions: instead, hold the
tension of the opposites and conflicts within yourself till you see the
emergence of a new idea. Then, and only then, is it time to stretch beyond
your comfort zones to new places of thought and action. As was said so
many years ago:

     “Dig deep; the water—goodness—is down there. And as long as you
     keep digging it will keep bubbling up.” Marcus Antoninis

    4—Take Action. Saturn ultimately rewards those that act and depresses
those who procrastinate. In ancient texts, Saturn was sometimes seen as a
devil who made a hand signal that said: “All that you see, is all there is.”
That’s the devil’s lie. Prove him wrong.


    So Saturn can be seen as the spirit of Father Time, passing through our
lives at these transits and “Returns” in the way Scrooge experienced his
encounter with the Spirits of the past, present, and future. The purpose of
these visits wasn’t to give Scrooge a bad case of nerves, but to give him a
second chance at life. He saw himself differently; he grieved, he tried
denying and avoiding, but ultimately he acted, and propelled himself—just
in time—into his new life. ~
Character, Destiny and Fate: Do It Now!

   “When I was younger, so much younger than today, I never needed
anybody’s help in any way. But now those days are gone, I’m not so self-
assured, now I find, I’ve changed my mind, I’ve opened up the doors.”

     Sound familiar? The Beatles wrote those lines in their song: “Help” in
1965 when they were in their twenties. These lines convey part of the
underlying theme of both of the Saturn Returns: Help! Life feels different
now and reaching out for help at the Saturn Return might just be the wisest
thing we could do.
     Each Saturn Return, one at roughly age twenty-nine and the second at
fifty-nine, marks the entry into a new life, a life where we’re going to be
able to help others. And yet ironically, the transition in these years almost
always feels like a rite of passage where we’re more inclined to say “Help!”
rather than “Can I help you?”
     Help? Many people at these ages, as well as anyone going through
strong Saturn transits, may be surprised at the subtle, yet fierce changes in
their lives now. There’s an insidious clash that takes place during Saturnian
times between the acquired personality and the demands of the true Self—
not the self you’ve grown into becoming in your life so far, but the newer
version of the Self that is struggling to find its place in your world. It’s as if
you may have been trying to fit into clothes that were too small or simply
not right for you anymore, or the feeling of living in a house that’s too big
with rooms that are never lived in. Saturn passages are the times when we
change the outer appearance and inner structures of our lives to make a
better fit.
     An Insidious clash takes place? That sounds threatening, dangerous and
unconscious. And I’ve carefully chosen those words because I’ve come to
believe that this unique time period is different than what I previously
believed. It can be as quiet and personal as an “attitude adjustment” or as
silently serious as a brain aneurism or stroke.
     All rites of passage carry a dangerous feel to them yet the nature of this
transition often looks easy unless we find ourselves not listening to the
warning signals of the body and soul. Around the time of the Saturn Returns
people often say: “If I had only listened to my body and lost that extra
weight before I had the……” or “If only I had realized how deep my
resentment was, I might have gone into therapy first, before divorce court.”
     Saturn strikes us where we have unfinished business. The outer world
doesn’t know our inner business and we may have learned such excellent
coping skills that even our best friends don’t know what’s happening with
us. Everyone has some regrets, wounds, betrayals or lost expectations and
illusions that still need to be compassionately dealt with—and this is the time
to do it.
     Saturnian times tend to hold some melancholy as the word “Saturnian”
implies. But astrologically, it is also a call to action in the real world. This is
time when we would be wise to ask for help with our soulful introspections,
because after the first whiff of melancholy has passed, we realize that what
is facing us are very do-able changes, and we certainly don’t need to
chastise our self or to metaphorically “knock the house down” when all we
really need to do is to add a small room of our own.
     So what’s your unfinished business? What do you say when people ask
you how you are doing? What if how you say what you are and how you’re
doing is not what’s really happening? How much would people smile, if
after they asked you how you are, you just looked them squarely in the eye
and said “I’m in the middle of a serious attitude adjustment just now…”
     There’s an inner shift; an earthquake of varying intensity happening
within most people who are enduring Saturn transits. The first Saturn Return
appears to change the outer life in more drastic ways, and in my experience,
is simply more stressful. The second Saturn return can actually be rather
quiet and inner oriented.
     These two Saturn Returns that transform our psyche could be described
as a shift from the holding of youthful illusions and magical thinking to a
more grounded mature movement of the Soul towards its own destiny. And
of course, all this happens both consciously and unconsciously. Sometimes
for example, it could mean a shift from holding onto a romantic illusion of
falling in love with a “magical other” to learning to truly love the people
who are in our lives now. Or we might reconsider what “loving” means for
us, and what form real love could take in our lives.
     Another word to consider here is “destiny.” This is a strangely vague
word—it’s different from “fate” which implies pre-ordained. Whereas
destiny comes from the Latin verb “destinere” meaning to determine, and
implies making choices—in Greek, the etymology of destiny is
“proeiroismus” which means to flow within relatively fixed but still
changeable boundaries, as a river may flow. Whereas fate is derived from
the Latin noun, “fatum” meaning “to speak of divine law.” Here we have
something outside of our ability to influence.
     So destiny is a verb that implies choices and determination. (And how
interesting too, that we make our choices so often based on desire, which
means “of the stars” in Latin. As my friend Jim Hollis says, “Desire helps us
guide our ship across the wine dark sea.” But who can read the stars
correctly anymore? Most navigators do not rely on the stars to guide them,
but instead it’s the astrologer who now looks up to the heavens above for
counsel. And I wonder, how many astrologers can accurately read what is
written there?


     Back to Saturn—ask yourself: what is my unfinished business that
Saturn wants me to attend to?
     What hidden attitudes or hidden agendas are still creating a destiny that
has unhealthy unhappy patterns?
     What is the default story I tell myself about “how my life is?” Am I still
overcompensating for feelings or beliefs that aren’t true anymore?
     Carl Jung believed it’s a complicated question because this unfinished
business is most likely coming from a part of our nature that we don’t often
pay attention to—in fact, we avoid it. He said that neurosis is about the
suffering of a Soul that hasn’t found its meaning, and that our suffering
comes from trying to avoid the true struggle with the issues that we are
destined to struggle with. So avoidance, procrastination, and distraction are
the true devils here.
     What’s complicated too is that we are always pulled in so many
directions by the various voices in our psyche: our inner committee. There
may be a Self/Soul that is constant and central, the chairperson, but it’s
surrounded by a committee of various archetypal characters who each have
their own agenda and lobbyists. They each clamor for dominance and
attention like the different planets in our birth charts that pull and oppose and
square each other. The Sun as the committee chairperson tries to give
balance, integrity and time to each of these parts of us, and the North Node
is like the messenger with the unconscious contract for this life. But do we
listen?
     What are we to do? Why not give ourselves time to truly listen? What if
we listened to all the voices, all the planets, and took good notes and
prioritized our needs based on our deepest values. How would we be
different? It’s not an easy thing to contemplate—most of us are afraid of the
answers, because we still base the locus of authority outside of ourselves,
whereas at Saturnian times we are called to be our own best authority—and
there’s nothing frightening or judgmental about that.
     I recently heard a story about a woman who was in her Saturn Return
who was talking to her new therapist about all her problems. The therapist
was overwhelmed at first by the physical, financial and interpersonal pain
this woman was suffering, and was yet surprised by how well she seemed to
be coping with it in spite of all the confusion. When the therapist asked her
client how she managed the woman answered, “Well, when my body hurts I
ask it what it needs, and I listen. And when I’m lonely, I ask what my heart
needs to be happy, and I listen. And when I can’t pay my bills, I think about
ideas I can come up with…and I listen.” The therapist knew from her
willingness to ask herself these questions that she was going to do well, and
in fact she did make her way through this transition time successfully.
    That dialogue with the Self is the essence of Saturn transits. We all have
certain unique problems at each stage of life, but it’s our willingness to take
the time to honestly dialogue with our own conflicting desires and opinions,
rather than running from them that makes the difference. If we are to open
up to the largeness of a life to which we are being summoned, then we need
to pay attention to our internal promptings—or as astrologers would say, to
our planetary archetypes and their changing functions.
    At the Saturn Returns, the archetypal energy of Saturn is more likely to
ask us now—how can I be more self-sufficient, and how can I help the
world and those I love? At the first Saturn Return, we are meant to help
ourselves gain a workable ego and a place in the world. At the second
Saturn Return, we need to shift our emphasis from building up our life, and
an ego to be able to handle it, to the quieter requests of the Self.


    As we move through the passage of each Saturn Return it’s a great time
to say “Help, I need somebody!” Like in the Beatles song, the two Saturn
Returns herald us into new levels of subtlety and challenge. Having lived
through lost illusions and betrayals as well as successes, we must now afford
ourselves the time, energy, money, and whatever resources we have to ask
ourselves: “What do I really value now? What is life trying to tell me at this
point in my life journey? Saturn, like the old good teacher that he is, may
feel intimidating at first, but like a wise teacher, he brings forth the answers
out of ourselves and rewards us for asking and for being motivated. He
reminds us not to let the obstacles of this next phase of life get us down
—“illegitimus non carbarundum” he might say: “don’t let the bastards grind
you down.” And then he’d turn and walk away with a smile on his face…
Openings in the Curtain of Fate; The Interweaving of Saturn and
Uranus
     In a few months I’ll be turning sixty. I’m shocked by the word “sixty”
and all its implications, and I’m shocked by how I look before that first cup
of coffee in the morning. Being part of the “Pluto in Leo baby-boom
generation” I’m a classic of that type: I still act and feel young and resist the
undertow of aging in every way. Being an astrologer, I’m motivated to look
at the mid-life transits of aging again and to glean what I can about these
changing times. Is there life beyond the Second Saturn Return? Something
to look forward to from the astrological perspective?
     What’s next? What about that Uranus square coming up at around 63?
And then the Saturn square at 67, the opposition at 75, the square again at
82 and finally the Uranus Return at 84? And beyond that? Is there life—or
is it the art of dying—at another Saturn opposition at 90? Of course there are
other planetary cycles, but the oscillating patterns of Saturn and Uranus—of
contraction and expansion, of constructing and deconstructing, are intriguing
—have you noticed that there’s three Saturnian “events” to every one
Uranus event? After the Uranus Opposition at age forty, Saturn opposes and
squares itself three times before Uranus comes knocking on our door again.
What’s that about? Maybe something’s happening here that isn’t obvious.


    We know that Saturn is about the urge to create form, to make a
foundation, and to build slowly and carefully a structure in which to contain
a part of our life. Whether it is the slow process of building a house, or being
pregnant, or writing a book, Saturn demands time and patience. And when
something isn’t right, there will be delays and discomfort. The good news
about Saturn is that when we do what must be done—when we do our
“homework” we are rewarded. Saturnian times often feel contractive and
limiting, but they are do-able; we can focus, make an effort, and usually see
the fruits of our efforts.
    Uranus is about change; often unexpected change. It’s the archetype of
the inner rebel and it expresses the urge to break free from some of those
Saturnian structures and self-imposed limitations that we’ve created.
Although Uranian times seem to arise without warning, and feel shocking,
they are ultimately liberating, and are a release of the tension which has been
building up over time. Uranus breaks down and breaks through—it allows
us to feel free and start afresh. It allows for radical aliveness, and is known
as the planet of individuation.
     One could look at the interplay between these two planetary energies as
the interweaving between doing and being. Both energies engage us in a
process of self-creation that seeks to hold our be-ingness and do-ingness in
balance. This idea is central to the philosophic concept of Existentialism.
     The existential concept that “existence precedes essence” was the motto
for those French Café Existentialists of the fifties, such as Jean Paul Sartre
and Albert Camus. They revolutionized the world with a concept that
moved their readers to inquiry into the nature of freedom and structure in
their lives. The existentialists challenged people to not just accept themselves
by their roles, their sexuality, their nationality, or whatever external
structure, but instead to take more freedom (Uranus) and responsibility
(Saturn) into their lives and to live their full potential. The existentialist’s 3
word formula was: existence precedes essence.To claim that existence
precedes essence is to assert that there is no such predetermined essence to
be found in man, and that an individual’s essence is defined by him or her
through how he or she creates and lives his or her life. As Sartre puts it in
h i s Existentialism is a Humanism: “man first of all exists, encounters
himself, surges up in the world—and defines himself afterwards.”
     It’s been said that Existentialism is now the true religion of the world,
because no matter what your metaphysical beliefs are, most people practice
the existential religion of personal self-creation. We make our identity and
reality, just like we “work” and make significant choices in our Saturn
transits. This working and choice making allows for what those
philosophers called true authenticity. Astrologers might consider the
intertwining and opposing pulls of Saturn and Uranus the fuel for the urge
for authenticity and individuation. So no matter how disruptive or anxiety
provoking the freedom of Uranus can be, or how heavy the responsibilities
of Saturn, one can hope that not only are these energies fuel for the journey
but also part of a divine plan to help us become all we can be. I believe it is
so; yet I don’t believe we can understand the justice or karma of one life
alone—I think we would have to see it amidst the backdrop of many lives.
     So as we age, there is a dilemma here—we sense that we are coming up
to a last chance to do something. Serious ambitions can arise. Saturnian
concerns for security and structure move in. And yet as the body loses some
of its “sovereignty” there is a natural tendency to feel depressed about what
we can no longer do as well as before. We may have to work harder during
the Saturn Return so that we can get a chance to let go and BE later on.
     This dance between Saturn and Uranus, like the tension between doing
and being, can inspire us to see that the time is soon coming to relax the
needs of the ego to prove itself, and to explore the mystery of what is
beyond the small story of “self”. The doing, constructing, and reflecting
aspects of Saturn set the stage for the radical aliveness that Uranus ushers in.
Uranus transits draw open the curtain of fate and allow us to say, “Here I
am, this is really me, like it or not.”
    These interweavings of Saturn and Uranus feel like a call of destiny and
a call to action in the real world. They feel personal and in-our-face, as well
as metaphysical. Their transits are as much a crisis of the spirit, as a crisis of
aging. We know that if we resist the constructive building and “taking out
the trash” aspects of Saturn and resist the need to rebel and liberate ourselves
in Uranus times, we’re going against the nature of the transit. And when we
resist the natural order of things, suffering happens.
    So Saturn calls us to look again, to redefine, and to slow down—it can
depress us too, if that’s what it takes to make us re-evaluate ourselves and do
what must be done. But Saturn transits give us the time to make the do-able
changes of letting go of superficiality and to move into a more real life. It
always asks us to find our inner authority, and with that a deeper
authenticity in the world. It calls us to set the stage of our life.
    So it’s after Saturn has “worked us over” through the inner squares,
outer oppositions, and the “knock you down and bring you around”
conjunctions, then we are ready for the Uranus transits. We’ve done what
we could; now Uranus gives or takes away that which is no longer needed,
or creates an unexpected twist in our life drama. Uranian transits have the
“aha” quality of synchronistic grace when they’re good, and the inevitable
mark of fate when they’re not. They’re irritating, exciting, and life changing.
What we sometimes forget is that although they can be edgy they can also
be a great adventure.


     I’ve decided that after this Saturn Return is over, I’m going to look
forward to the Uranus square at 63. I don’t know what will happen then, but
I have a feeling I won’t have to try so hard at my “doing” or care what
someone else thinks about how I’m “being”. I can feel it coming. Perhaps
it’s implicit in the work of the Saturn Return itself, though I can’t see just
how it will work out yet. However I’m setting the stage now, creating my
focus, and leaving the curtain of possibilities open for Uranus to enter.
     And so at sixty-three, I might just be ready to take things a little less
seriously and have more fun. I might even find more joy in Saturnian
pursuits, whether it be the soft pleasures of grand-parenting or writing a
memoir or mentoring….and the Uranian “aha” may be about buying or
building that new house that is finally the right size and in the right place—
even if it’s across the country. Or instead of working or traveling more, I
might just decide to travel “inward” to the terrains where I can be in pursuit
of the mystery of Self. I’d like to explore more deeply into this dance of fate,
character, and destiny. And all that feels very good, and very alive. ~
                   Chapter 7.
     Uranus: “We are Constantly Invited To Be
              Who We Truly Are.”

   “If you think you’re about to fall, point your hands in the direction you
are going, and dive gracefully. At the very least you’ll inspire someone
watching you.” E. Spring

     Henry David Thoreau once noted: “We are constantly invited to be who
we are.” Uranus transits are that constant invitation. And whether you’re
falling down, waking up, or dancing to your own drumbeat, there are times
when you may wonder—isn’t there a different way to do this? ‘Diving
gracefully’ is always a good option if you are falling, but there are times
when if you want to soar you’re going to have to break the rules. These
periods of Uranian liberation are a call for you to do that! Break your own
rules—challenge your status quo.
     ‘When I’m sixty-three’…or twenty-one, forty-two, or eighty-four years
old, something rather magical happens—or can happen. Uranus transits
happen to everyone at approximately these ages, and we live out these times
optimally, from an astrological perspective, when we savor the changing
opportunities and sometimes shocking epiphanies rather than trying to
maintain the status quo. It may feel like we’re falling or coming apart, but
these Uranian ages are truly opportunities to soar and dive rather than
collapse. These are the years of radical new beginnings that give us the
chance to become more of who we really are.
     Uranus transits are times when we are called to release our grip on the
Saturnian status quo that we have created in our life, and it often feels like
the low rumble of an earthquake approaching our solidly build structure.
Not a pleasant feeling unless you are an excitement junkie. So something
begins to create anxiety, and we can see it as the call to change and exciting
possibilities, or we may simply feel it as fear. Something has to de-construct
in order to make room for us to re-construct. The whole house doesn’t have
to fall down, but now we may remember how long we’ve procrastinated
moving.
     Astrologically, it is at the times of Uranus transits that we can feel safe in
saying yes to change, and safe in allowing our inner rebel more freedom. At
these ages, and whenever Uranus makes a strong contact in your chart, you
are wise to accept the idea that the road to safety is through change. You
must “dive or soar” now or the Universe will cosmically arrange a “fall” or
disruption of some sort. Most of us would prefer to be proactive, and so I’d
like to offer the suggestion that you follow your inspiration and intuitive
“inner rebel” now and go for it. You have nothing to lose that can’t be lost,
and everything to gain.
     In this way of thinking, the Universe is ultimately kind even when
seemingly destructive. And if the earthquake destroys the house, let’s hope
that your new beginning awakens in you potentials and adventures you
never dreamed possible.
     Of all the Uranus ages and transiting times of change, the Uranus
Opposition that happens to everyone between the ages of 39 and 42 is the
strongest. Let’s rate that one at least a five on the Richter scale. The Uranus
Opposition is an extremely transformative, exciting, and unnerving time—
it’s a great time for a “reading” or to begin psychotherapy, or even just to
keep daily journals—why? Because this is the time when you truly get a
chance to re-invent yourself and to pick up the threads of dreams you’ve
tucked away till now. Most of us need a little help and encouragement with
that—especially if it should mean a radical change of job, partner, or
changing an old habit that has limited us.
     Although it’s a bit simplistic, we could say that we respect limits during
Saturn transits and break limits during Uranus transits. And although the
natal position of Uranus in your birth chart is an important reminder of the
constant call to awareness and change (in the part of the chart Uranus rules)
the transiting aspects are the call to change NOW.
     Look to see what area of your life—what house—Uranus rules in your
natal chart and look to see where it is transiting now. The natal position is
where you were born with divine dispensation to break the rules. One might
even say that you are not only given permission to do things differently in
this area of your life, but that you must do things differently and
authentically here—you are called, in this area of your life, to be radically
honest and a little more daring than ordinary.
     For example, if you have Uranus natally in your birth chart, or by transit,
in the Fourth house that rules your home and family, there is a subtle divine
imperative that you rebel against your family of origin in some way, or
change something in your “home, heart and hearth.” It could be as simple as
a change or rebellion in the way you tell your story about how it all is. You
don’t have to make changes dis-respectively and you don’t have to stop
loving and communicating with them. However, you are called to break the
rules of the family myth here—as the family myth may sound like this: ‘Isn’t
it funny how all the men on this side of the family are bi-polar?’ Or “Isn’t it
funny how all the women of this family marry abusive men?” When Uranus
moves through your fourth house you probably have heard some variation
of a ‘not-so-funny’ theme like this handed down the family line and you’re
going to need to make a conscious effort to break this family legacy.
    For you to survive spiritually there are times when you need to learn to
stand up to authorities and separate yourself from what has been culturally
ingrained in you. You may think you are already aware of these influences
and that you did the work of rebelling against these cultural imperatives
when you were 21—or before. Yet it may have taken you to the Uranus
opposition around the age of forty, to realize how deeply you were
programmed to be a certain way. Maybe it took that long for you to divorce
the wrong person you married, to find your vocation instead of your job, or
to reclaim your natural love for music. Uranian times call for you to reclaim
aspects of your Soul you’ve put on hold, and to challenge yourself and rebel
against your own assumptions about what’s right for you.
    Radical acts of reclaiming ourselves and daring to break the rules can
happen at any age and are specific to you alone. However, it’s almost as if
the Universe gives you a chance for enlightenment or liberation at those
ages when Uranus metaphorically “turns the lights on and off” in your life.
What was going on for you at the Uranus waxing square at 21? The
opposition at 42? What could happen at the waning square at 63 and the
return at 84?
    At 21 years our culture says we are now an adult, but in fact, most of us
have been in school or in less-than-empowering positions for most of this
time. Our parents and the culture have exerted pressure, overtly and
covertly, to mold us into something. Now we have the first chance to say:
“but this is now my time and I want to find out who I really am.” So we
summon our courage—often with the help of our peers and abundant
sources of alcohol—to dare to move out on our own into whatever may
await us. But it’s usually not untill we’re close to thirty, and have the first
responsibilities of true adulthood—at the first Saturn Return, that we commit
to a deeper level of our truth and make major and usually sobering
‘Saturnian’ life-style changes. But that’s only part of the story.


    In the process of living our adult lives, parts of us never get a chance to
be expressed. In order to raise the family and/or pursue the career, we live
our lives with parts of our essential nature sacrificed. We tell ourselves that
some day we will take up singing/painting/writing again, but at the moment
we remind ourselves that we have to work two jobs, perhaps raise two
children and make enough money to pay for the cell phones as well!
Priorities are what count—we need to honor our commitments and our
ongoing responsibilities, but perhaps ask ourselves—where is the wiggle
room in all of this for the Self to be honored? Where can I give myself the
personal time to honor my deepest desires? Do I even know what they are
anymore?
     When we approach forty, the awareness comes to us that we’re at mid-
life and we’re closer to our death than our birth—-and by forty the lights
have been blinking on and off just enough to remind us that if we’re going
to do ‘it’ we better start now or we may never do it at all. So we have the
first classic mid-life epiphany of waking up to the preciousness of time.
Many people will marry, divorce, move across country, or take up ‘guitar
playing’ at this time. Others will need to make time to rediscover what part
of their Self they have put on the shelf and consider if its worth the effort to
reclaim their forgotten ambitions or unacknowledged joys.
     So at the Uranus Opposition there is often anxiety, restlessness, and a
desire to be rebellious against what has held us in check. We may be
shocked by how liberated we finally feel when we act on what appears to be
impulse. But that impulse has had years of pressure building up behind it.
And yet if we should miss this chance, we get another chance for living our
deepest truth at the waning square of Uranus at age 63. We may have
thought that the time for new beginnings has ended. Not so!
     It’s worth taking a moment to think of what makes ‘an elder’ an
interesting and vital person. What gives charisma to an older man or
woman? Could it be that they don’t care so much about what other people
think about them any more? This Uranian attitude is one part simple
acceptance of themselves and others, and one part ‘detached wildness.’ This
quality of wildness looks more like a wide smile and a quick laugh than a
purple hat with a red feather.
     At each of these Uranus cycles—at 21 and 42 and 63 and 84 we get a
new chance to answer the voice within us that calls for more unique
individuality. Even at 84 when Uranus returns to its birth position, there’s a
part of us that opens up to ways of seeing things differently. Personal
epiphanies abound at age 84 and people often notice a renewed sense of
well-being and a feeling like a “breath of fresh air has come into their lives”.
Some people, such as Carl Jung and Joseph Campbell completed their lives
at this time.
     The closeness of death itself stimulates us to recover our core
individuality. You are being called at these Uranian ages to allow a radical
honesty to arise within you, and to take up the ‘yoga of doubt and
questioning’ and turn questioning into ‘questing’. Being true to yourself
requires courage, but life helps us as we approach these ‘Uranian times.’
You don’t have to know all the answers and figure it all out yourself. These
are the times when you can expect help from the Universe by the occurrence
of unexpected events—unusual feelings, new opportunities, and paradoxical
situations. Not all will be pleasant, but the effect will be to move you to the
next stage of your life journey.
    Uranus transits are times to answer inner restlessness with a ‘Yes’! Try
something liberating and freeing—make a little noise; cause a little havoc,
give up trying to be too self-sacrificing. (If a child is always ‘too good’ don’t
you become suspicious? What is being repressed? Why are they saying
they’re bored?) At these ages you have a ‘divine dispensation’ to break the
rules—so ask yourself: how have I allowed life to dampen my energy?
What’s inhibited me? What still resonates and stimulates me when I think of
it?
    Einstein once said: ‘God doesn’t play dice with the universe.’ I don’t
think God plays dice with us either, and no event is without the potential for
using it for creative liberation. The writer George Eliot wrote: ‘It is never too
late to be what you might have been.’ Experiment with that idea, and let
your mantra be: ‘Let’s do something different.’ And if you should fall or
fail…well, as I said earlier: ‘point your hands in the direction you are going,
and dive gracefully. At the very least, you may inspire someone watching
you.’ But chances are, you’ll soar.
                    Chapter 8.
     Using Neptune Homeopathically; “Spiritus
               Contra Spiritum”

    “Similia, similibus, curantur.”
        Latin: “Like cures like” by S. Hahnemann

     Last night I awoke in bed at 3:00 AM to find myself struggling to name
that familiar ache in me that has no name—that core pain that sometimes sits
heavy on my heart. I thought about all the times I’ve felt it: my childhood
homesickness that hurt so bad it felt like a toothache, my adolescent
struggles to separate from my mother, the unrequited loves of my twenties,
the sense of loss before my divorce, and the various pains of betrayal from
friends through the years. They all have a theme: separation from a place of
togetherness. Of all the aches in the heart, that particular pain of separation,
yearning and disillusionment—of an unlived or ill-used Neptune, may be the
hardest and the most illusive of all pains.
     I say “illusive” because the depth and scope of Neptunian pain is so
often permeated by illusions and its healing can defy rational analysis. It’s
not that its causes aren’t clearly evident it’s more that the cure for Neptunian
problems may lie precisely within its own realm, and respond best by
homeopathic thinking.
     As we know, Neptune is about the urge to merge and refers to
permeable boundaries and those things that don’t separate us. It can be the
longing for a lover, a philosophy, a true friendship, or even a better way of
living. It’s that part in us that longs to transcend the daily routines, to let go
of differences and “flow with the waters of life.” Neptune yearns for divine
love, and despairs at how human love so often falls so short of the ideal.


    In Neptunian times we often react to the pain of disillusionment and
separation by wrapping ourselves in a fog of self-deception and addictions.
We’re confused. Romantic illusions, painful melodramas, glowing sunsets
with morning hangovers, and the larger-than-life spin we put on the stories
we tell, are all in Neptune’s oceanic realm. We play out the merging and
imaginative qualities of Neptune either positively or negatively (and often
both at once) depending on how it’s aspected in our birth and transiting
charts.
    When we fall under the spell of this mythical sea-god we need new
medicine. The same astrological culprit that created our feelings of
separation, loneliness, or disillusion can be the one to cure it. “Like cures
like” say the homoeopathists. Neptune cures Neptune. This homeopathic
remedy uses the inspiring qualities of Neptune to cure its disease.


     But first you might ask: Is Neptune strong in my chart now? Everyone
has Neptune somewhere in their birth chart “doing” something, but it only
gets activated at certain times as it transits across the sky and aspects your
chart in a particular way. If you don’t have your chart or astrologer to help
here, you could ask yourself: Am I generally “high on life,” inspired,
idealistic and at times naive? Yet do I struggle to maintain the feeling that
life is as it should be and that I am all I can be? Do I see both sides of the
question when it comes to decision making? Do I feel the pain of lost loves
and friendships more than most people you know? Does even reading this
article make me ready for my evening glass of wine, even though it’s only
noon? If you’ve smiled knowingly to those questions, then Neptune is
playing a prominent role in your chart and life now.
     So how do we use Neptune homeopathically? Or simply said, how do
we cultivate the higher octave, the wisdom of Neptune? Carl Jung delved
into this when he said: “Spiritus contra Spiritum.” This Latin quote is what
Jung said to the founder of Alcoholic Anonymous; essentially it is only
“spirit that can counteract spirits.” Jung felt that all adult neurosis originated
from our separation from the meaning making function of Spirit. He saw
how we tend to literalize spirit, and drink it instead as “spirits.” Alcohol
eases the existential pain of our separation from our spiritual nature briefly,
but it isn’t the cure.
     Surely we can nourish our self with all that inspires us, and renew our
connection to spirit in whatever form that takes for us. We can take
ourselves to the ocean for inspiration and baptizing by her waters, or enjoy a
glass of wine at the end of the day, or do its literal opposite and not have the
wine, but join AA instead, and find a community of like-minded spirits. Or
we meditate and read books that speak to our Spirit and attend “spiritual
rituals”.
     Ironically, some of these things can be especially hard to do in
Neptunian times if we’re feeling very disillusioned. In India, the Hindu’s
have a spiritual saying for that: “neti, neti”—meaning “it’s not this, not this,”
implying that we find our way to what is true and healing for us by finding
what is not—by finding what is illusion, false fear, and needless drama, and
then letting it go.
     Jungian psychologists deal with this problem by saying we need to hold
the tension of the opposites within us, without trying to deny or escape the
situation. In the “holding” of the situation we create a container, or crucible,
for alchemical energies to create change and transformation. One is
encouraged to hold the despair or the unsolvable situation till the third
“numinous” option appears. Jungians suggest we wait till there’s an opening
in the veil of maya, the opening between illusion and disillusion. Astrologers
too, also usually counsel waiting during a Neptune transit, and caution
clients to not “sign on the dotted line” during these times.
     Waiting is an option, as synchronistic events will often appear and lead
us where we need to go. However, for those of us who like to be proactive,
or use the homeopathic idea, then we can use Neptune itself to solve
Neptunian problems. Here are some very practical proactive ideas for doing
that:
     First, consider the benefits of “breaking your own narrative.” Neptunian
reality is a story we tell ourselves about how it was and how it will be. Is it
really true? Would it be seen differently by someone else? How would it be
for you if you didn’t hold onto your beliefs about your story? The
subconscious is very suggest-able and the stories we tell ourselves about
“how it all is” go deep. Much has been written about how we can monitor
our thoughts to avoid repeating the same old tapes in our head that feed on
the low ebb of self-esteem. At these times we can replace the tired stories of
our life with ones based on new insights as to why things happened. You
can find new seeds of inspiration and retell the story of your life with a new
slant! You can choose to see how the universe has co-operated with you to
give you what you needed, not always what you wanted.
     Second, could you use your Neptunian gifts of visualization to dream
into your future? As Jung said: “Your vision will become clear only when
you can look into your own heart. Who looks outside, dreams; who looks
inside, awakes.” Practice intuitive strategies on yourself based on what only
you—or your astrologer knows about you. Only you can read between the
lines of what you say and think. Neptune represents our ability to use our
intuition and to know things about ourselves that others can’t know
rationally. One can’t say “yes, but” to ourselves indefinitely, before we
realize that we need to dig even deeper into our psyche to take more
responsibility for our lives. Neptunian dreaming ignites the urge for change.
This is good medicine.
     Third, could you use this “spaciousness” or the open-minded fogginess
of a Neptunian time to let go of tight expectations of ourselves or others. Get
a little looser. At these times we stand on shifting sands of illusion and can
unwittingly deceive ourselves and others without meaning to—for example,
we may give affection and attention when we don’t really mean it, or simply
make poor decisions. Instead we could give time to exploring new ideas,
people, and plans that are tangible and will hold up in time. But, as any
addiction therapist knows, one of the hardest things to do in treating an
addict (read: a rough Neptunian transit) is the recurring sense of despair that
comes with a realistic outlook. We need to dream “high enough” to excite
us, yet be grounded enough to find sources of true support in hard times.
    A last consideration: Neptunian energies need thoughtful release not
repression. Don’t let anyone tell you to keep your dreams or your despair
under wraps, yet there’s a need to differentiate between sheer outbursts of
grief and acting out indiscriminately. We don’t want to be “dry drunks” in
any sense of the word—people who live their wounds, drinking or not.
When we enter into the experience of our Neptunian-separation pain, we
would be wise to bring some reflection and containment on the emotions we
want to express. Could we search for the name of what truly ails us? And if
we can, could we express it through a poem, a song, or a nurturing talk with
a good friend? Could we use it to counsel someone else with a similar pain.
In all of these, we are using the feeling of yearning, longing, and
disconnection to fuel us to connect with Self. Neptune curing Neptune.


     Here’s an example of how this process can work. A woman I’ll call
Catherine called me for a reading when she was on the verge of a divorce.
She had already separated from her husband, and as she talked I began to
feel that what she wanted to hear from me was encouragement to finalize the
divorce. She wanted to “sign on the dotted line” but there it was—transiting
Neptune squaring the Sun, and it still had over a year to go in that position. I
had to counsel her to wait, to endure a state of not-knowing and to look for
new sources of inspiration. I could tell she was quite depressed and not
happy with my response.
     The next time she called, she sounded a lot better, and was happy to tell
me that in her “waiting” she had gone for a massage when she was at her
lowest ebb of feeling. While under the nurturing hands of this therapist she
felt revived—both by the subsequent massages and her new friend, who
encouraged her to start attending massage school. She picked up on this new
inspiration and loved the school, although she said that the waiting was still
hard and her teenage son had started acting out in school. She didn’t know
what to do with him. I again listened and had to counsel continued more
Neptunian homeopathy.
     The third and last time I talked to her was just after the Neptune aspect
had passed, and she had good news—she was just graduating from massage
school, felt less financially fearful, and her husband and son were respecting
her in a new way for all the hard work she had done at school. Even her
voice sounded lighter as she told me that as part of the divorce mediation
process, she and her husband began seeing each other with new eyes! They
felt their mutual love for their son was acting as a bridge for them to truly
hear each other for the first time. Because they hadn’t signed on the dotted
line, their marriage was getting a second chance. Her son now was having
his own Neptunian problems with alcohol and we brain-stormed ideas as to
how he could find the connection to spirit that suited him best. The Neptune
homeopathic remedy we felt might work for him was to encourage and
support his love of acting; a Neptunian art in which one enters into the spirit
of another person and works with others to create an entertaining illusion.
     There are many ways to use astrological homeopathy, and it’s
particularly effective with Neptune. When planets make strong aspects by
transit we need to honor them by “feeding them what they need” which is
simply to act out the higher octave of their very own nature. This works for
all the planets. Neptunian homeopathy calls for dreaming into the future and
a re-visioning of our lives as well as finding new ways to deeply reconnect
with our Self, with others, and Spirit. Neptunian transits appear to be subtle
times, but in truth they are very potent times—reach for the highest octave of
the sign, and be careful what you wish for as it may come true. Neptune
knows how to wish upon a star…
                      Chapter 9.
       “Pluto’s Ruthless Orchestration of Fate;
      “Called or Not Called, God is Present.”

     Pluto’s transits have everything to do with what makes you feel really
crummy—you feel as if you are “falling apart.” That’s the way it strikes at
first. Sickness, divorce, moving house, changing jobs, the Uranus
opposition, and mid-life “menopause” (for men and women!) can all fall into
that realm. Although the feeling of weariness or even death is metaphorical
most of the time, you still feel it in your bones—this dying and being re-
born sensation. The phoenix-like nature of Pluto is powerful and ultimately
purges us of our worst habits and karmic weaknesses. It appears
unwarranted and uncalled for—just plain unjust and unnecessary, but
apparently the “orchestra leader” has a different idea for us.
     The first part feels destructive and disintegrating because it has to “tear
down” before it can “build up.” Just like when a contractor goes into a
neighborhood and tears down a house first before he can build a new one—
it doesn’t look so pretty at first, but it has to be done that way. So Pluto
brings up, irritates, and hopefully heals those South Node default patterns
we’ve been discussing. It ultimately changes things for the better—or at least
on our deathbed we might say “it changed things for the better.”
     “Ruthless” is a word that is commonly associated with Pluto, partially
because it seems so unbending in our efforts to change it. The really difficult
moments of transiting Pluto are when we feel the hand of fate moving
through our lives, and changing—without our permission—the orchestration
of our lives. That’s why the words surrender and let it go so often come up
at these times. We deal with Pluto best when we allow ourselves to let go of
every image we have of “how it all should be and look.”
     When Pluto comes into your life by transit—that is, when it hits a hot
spot in your chart, such as conjuncting or squaring your Sun or a personal
planet, you know something’s about to undergo a metamorphosis. The ego
is usually under attack in some way, or the part of your ego that is tied up
with your South Node complexes. Most people feel overwhelmed and
“attacked.” As you ego fragments under pressure, your inner voices start
screaming and it’s easy to project those attacking inner voices onto other
people. We regress and lose our maturity at these times, and there’s nothing
to do but endure and trust the process until there is a moment of palpable
shift and insight. There will probably be many of these “attacks and
insights” or regressive acting out times followed by little “Ah-hah!”
epiphanies. Whew! It can be quite tiring.


    Pluto transits are long, often lasting a couple of years, and they have two
parts: a deconstruction/de-integration phase and a reconstruction/re-
integration phase. The first part of the transit involves this disintegrating
phase—sometimes this deconstruction part, if it’s not resisted, can simply
feel like the closing of one chapter of your life. The reconstruction part is
where we open the new chapter, and it can be like having physical therapy
—we keep at it because we know we’re in a healing process—we endure
and hold on. Examine your South Node shadow, to see what you can do
and where you could possibly take on more responsibility. And, this is the
time to look at your particular “North Node Medicine” and use it.


    Wherever the South Node and Pluto is located in your birth chart
points to an area of deep karmic wounding, and from that wounding
there evolves a behavioral distortion or a complex. We all have this in
varying degrees. The good news is that when we have a Pluto transit,
or a powerful transit to our South Node, we get to revisit this at some
level, and to make it better. In a sense, we are getting a chance to be
reborn. We can often feel the sense of fate; the hand of God
orchestrating all this, and so it actually brings us closer to God, our life
purpose, and what the Jungian’s call “the transcendent function.” The
suffering involved is a high price to pay, but ultimately worth it. The
less resistance we offer, the less suffering there is. As Buddhist author,
Pema Chodron once said: “Suffering is optional.”


    So when you see this transit coming, you look at the planets and houses
involved, and get a sense for what area of your life will “be reborn.” But
before you let out a huge sigh, let’s ponder this a moment…
    Pluto holds the potential for great healing and renewed personal power
—and there’s a secret that Pluto holds. Yes, you can skip to the end and
get a quick look, but it you can take a couple of minutes; let’s start at the
beginning…


    When you think of the word ‘alchemy’ do you think of obscure etchings
in ancient books where the alchemist-astrologer hovered over a crucible
seeking to distill the philosopher’s stone? Do you remember how he was
supposedly trying to find the meaning of life by transmuting lead into gold?
Astrological symbols infused these strange images that were meant to
both teach and conceal teachings that were thought to be too advanced
for the ordinary man. But we have an advantage. Because we understand
the language of astrology we don’t need to be an occultist or of royal blood
to apply what they thought was esoteric—we can translate the abstract texts
and practice real alchemy in our lives.

    The ancient alchemists knew that there was power in transforming the
base metals—or the base emotions—into gold. Whether it was the
melancholic Saturnian lead, or Plutonian ‘shit’—that modern term for all
that is dark, disagreeable and trouble-making in our lives—they knew that if
we didn’t transform it, we would project or transmit this negative energy to
others, laying the blame on them. And the results would not be pleasant.
Simply put—one transforms or one transmits.
    Surrendering to the process of transformation is one of Pluto’s key
secrets. We need to willingly submit ourselves to the transformation rather
than resist it. And if we can gather up whatever trust we have in the process
our life, and in the astrological saying that “this too shall pass” than we are
better prepared to submit.
    So if fate, through the hands of Pluto, is going to transform us, then our
response to this summons is really quite exciting. We have power in our
response, and here’s where we need to look again at the higher octaves of
our Nodes and say “now is the time.”
    Let’s take an example: let’s say you have transiting Pluto conjuncting
your Venus, or your progressed Venus conjuncting natal Pluto. Similar
situations—but what’s Pluto going to do with this? What’s love (Venus) got
to do with it? Quite simply, we have to look at what happens when we put
desirous Venus together with Pluto; God of the Underworld.
Uncomfortable bed-mates for sure, but like Persephone and Hades, very
powerful.
    We know Venus is about beauty, love, and the striving for harmonious
relationships and Pluto is the uncontrollable urge to go deeper and to
transform. The Venus way of desire is the positive yearning for something,
and has a sweet flavor. We can deal with the juicy desires of Venus without
complaint, but the deeper realms of Pluto are shrouded in unconsciousness
and are seldom dealt with pro-actively. They happen to us through all
degrees of unpleasantness, yet still we remember that the Universe is not out
to hurt us. It’s just that most of us don’t change till the situation gets very
intense! Plutonian circumstances seem to come at us from others—or from
external circumstances—-and force us to look at what we don’t want to look
at and ‘corners us’ into making a change.
     Pluto’s favorite stomping grounds are relationships, and not the
easy ones—the ones that matter—the ones that stir your ambition or
hormones or survival urges. So whether we’re talking about Pluto/Venus
aspects or simply any Pluto aspect, know that it’s going to enter the
relationship realm at some point. Relationships can be life transforming and
we enter into them willingly because we are drawn by the chemistry or the
possibilities of the encounter. And though you may be thinking of ‘good
sex’ here, it’s also about deep friendship, relationships with your brother or
sister, and even the relationship you have with your boss that hints of
possibilities not included in the employee manual.
     So, two of Pluto’s ruthless swords are envy and jealousy. The good
news is that envy is the highest form of flattery. You wish you had those
“looks,” that position, that relationship, or that house. And it may make you
uncomfortable to see your lack—can you admit that? But the high road here
is to use this feeling as a guide-post, a wake-up call, and a directional map.
You don’t have to go unconscious and drop into the resentful emotions of
jealousy. Instead you can choose to embody and be that which you desire—
you can follow your destiny. And yes, you might just need to have what it is
you feel envious about! But before you despair and argue that it can’t
happen; think about it—it doesn’t mean that you must have that particular
person, job, or educational advantage specifically—-but you can have or
become what it very deeply symbolizes for you.
     Here’s where even a little understanding of alchemy can help. In
relationships, and in particular in Venus/Pluto contacts, what needs to be
understood first is who’s right or justified in the situation, right? Who’s got
the most ‘shit’—right? No. Pluto has come along because something was
old or stuck or rigid and needed to die and be reborn.
     Pluto doesn’t care who is right or wrong—it is simply ruthless in its
demand for change, reform and rebirth—and it doesn’t care if you are the
innocent party or not.
     And because Plutonian feelings are so unpleasant we all love to point
the finger of blame somewhere. Remember that the central law of projection
is that whatever is unconscious will be either repressed or will “show up” in
the other person—maybe even at your therapist or best friend for not
warning you that your lover acts like a jerk most of the time. Projecting the
blame may ease your conscience, and may be completely true, but it doesn’t
make the pain go away. Something is dying; and eventually a new birth will
take place. The labor is never easy.
     But you can get the good feelings back and reclaim your Soul. If
you want to have a relationship with Mr. or Ms. Unattainable or have
whatever Pluto has taken from you, then you’ve got to play at the level of
Pluto. Suffer the lack of it. Feel and see what it is you desire. Name it. Pray
and sing and swear about it. Then wait, and let die whatever is holding you
back from “getting it.” Then you reclaim yourself and your power in a
new way.
     You may feel like you’re dying—but don’t stop at the death part—
keep going and make the little changes, and wait without hope. Hope at
this point, might be hope for the wrong thing. Just do what needs to be
done. Take that 12 step program or weight loss plan or go back to school, or
do whatever you need to do to bring the essence of what you desire into
your life. Move into the labor, knowing you are birthing. Know that you are
coming into your power and that you are creating that which you most
desire.
     Part of the alchemical secret is in the knowing that it’s not always
about the literal object of your desire. Alchemists would say they were
looking for gold, but it wasn’t the literal gold they wanted, although that
would have been an acceptable by product. It’s also about what is behind
the person or thing and how it all makes you feel. And there are many ways
of getting at that. Use your desire—your Venus energy—to make the
connections to other people and a new way of life. Create a transforming
new crucible by eliminating what is not essential to your highest purpose.
Release the old pattern, person or situation in whatever way you feel called
to, and begin to get slowly out of that stew.
     It won’t feel good at first to let go of what you’ve been obsessing about.
But here’s where ‘the Secret is’—and it’s an old Jungian concept that is
indeed a miracle. Now Carl Jung wouldn’t call it that, but I will. You’ve got
to hold the tension of the opposites, the pain of the situation and wait. You
need to hang on the cross of your own suffering and simply wait—holding
onto the awareness that you see no solution right now. But as you hang
there, feeling the impossibility of it all—and not trying to escape to a quick
addiction or release, you will eventually see the appearance of the “the
sacred third.” A new idea/feeling starts to arise. And as you begin to sift
through the muck you’ll now be able to distill flickers of insight there. Use
them to fuel your new actions and new life! Then you’ll be well on your
way to understanding what the “philosopher-alchemists” knew—that what
does not destroy you makes you stronger—and that nothing has the power
to destroy your essence without your consent. But the secret is in the
waiting…
                  Chapter 10.
   The North and South Nodes: Our Soul’s
 Messengers “When an Inner Situation is not
made Conscious, It Happens Outside as Fate.”
                 C.G. Jung

    “The Nodes are the single most important point in the chart—they
describe what your Soul wants to learn and experience in this life. They are
the Soul’s Messengers.”

    On my desk, and on the cover of this book, is an “astrolabe”—a globe-
like open sphere with two circular orbs connected by an arrow going right
through it. In Medieval times, these strange little spheres with their roman
numerals and astrological signs were used to make astronomical
observations. It was a navigational device. Today, as I see it “glowing” there
on my desk, I think—this is it! The arrow shooting through the astrolabe is
like the North Node in the astrological chart pointing to our personal North
Star.
    In ancient Indian Vedic astrology this North Node point was called
“Rahu” and the base of the arrow, the South Node, was called “Ketu.” The
astrolabe’s encircling spheres have a little ball right in the center of the arrow
—reminding me of that Mystery that is our Self. The arrow itself is like a
soul messenger pointing to this North Star Node—showing the South from
where we came, and the North to where we are going.
    The image of the astrolabe pulls all the details and confusion of the
astrological chart together. The chart itself is a guide, but often such a
confusing one to synthesize. Within each of us are so many “voices” in our
psyche, and so many paradoxes. And then there are so many theories on
what’s important astrologically. It’s simply hard to know what to prioritize
in our charts. For me, the Nodes contain the most important and the most
unconscious karmic parts of our evolutionary journey—I honor them as
alchemical gold. .
    So what are these Nodes? The Nodes describe the evolutionary needs of
the Soul—-the North Node describes what your Soul yearns to go towards
—what it longs to learn and experience in this life, and what compensatory
actions we can take to make our lives better. The South Node tells a story
about the past; about the influence of heredity and karma, or simply the
“default” patterns we fall back on when we’re not being conscious.
    The South Node is usually understood as what we didn’t get right in the
past, the unfinished and unhealed business of either previous lives, or our
early life, or even the family genetic tendencies. It describes the personal
karmic habits we’ve come into this life with, and which we are now ready to
grow beyond. Yet there’s “gold in the shadow of the South Node” as well
—for just as we inherit negative traits from our family and personal past
experiences we also inherit the good traits as well. And because we inherit
goodness, or “gold” in the South Node, we can give to others what we
innately own and understand. Vedic astrologers say we “feed others”
through our South Node. As we access the higher qualities of the South
Node and offer what we know to others, we also benefit by “feeding
ourselves” by stretching towards the North Node qualities. Are you with me
so far?
    The “Nodes” answer questions of soul purpose and life direction—-not
from the perspective of ego and personal ambition, but from the Soul’s
perspective. For centuries, astrologers overlooked the message of the Nodes
in their search for sun-sign predictions, and Indian Vedic Astrologers
viewed the Nodes not as auspicious, but “malefic” influences. Perhaps in
India, change in itself was viewed suspiciously. In a time and culture where
there had been little free choice and mobility, people felt unempowered and
learned to accept their fate. Predictions reigned, and free will was
questioned.
    Now these old malefics are seen differently, and are sought after sources
of knowledge about who we are, what we may have “brought over” from a
previous life, and where we’re meant to be going in this one. So the North
Node, originally called the” head of the dragon” and South Node, “the tail
of the dragon” have emerged out of Indian astrology and mythology to offer
us clues into our past patterns and future aspirations.
    Today the Nodes are perhaps the most controversial and debated aspect
in astrology. It has been a great mistake, in my opinion, for astrologers to
have written books where they combined the sign and house position as if
they were one, because they are related but not the same! Signs describe the
planets and the Nodes; the houses describe in what sphere of your life the
“action” is happening.
    There are an increasing number of books, websites, and blogs dedicated
simply to understanding and deciphering the Nodes. There’s a great
curiosity about what these points can tell us, and there seems to be no end of
debate over how far we can—or should—try to excavate their esoteric
meanings. As the psychologist Carl Jung once said: “When an inner
situation is not made conscious, it happens outside as fate.” The Nodes are a
tool to help us change fate to choice, unconsciousness to consciousness.
There’s great mystery here, and we seem to be bravely drawn to explore this
mystery—to look at our shadow selves and to make conscious what has
before been before kept secret.


     Have you ever wondered what life-lessons and experiences your Soul
wants to have in this life? Do you know what you truly yearn for? Do you
worry that your mother’s “personality disorder” or your father’s alcoholism
could be inherited the same way as you’ve inherited your grandmother’s red
hair? This ancient astrological technique of examining the North and South
Nodes offers profound clues into these questions. Combine these clues—-
these suggestions from the Nodes—with a little astrological savvy, and
you’ve got “a message from the gods.”
     So what are these Nodes? The Nodes are not heavenly bodies, or
planets, but are a mathematical point based on the relationship between the
Sun, Moon and Earth at the time of your birth. The Moon’s Nodes are
where the Moon’s obit around the earth intersects with the “apparent path”
of the Sun around the Earth…the ecliptic. Astrology’s frame of reference is
the earth (geocentric) even though we realize the Sun doesn’t orbit the earth.
The Sun and planets do not circle haphazardly around the Earth, but in a
disk-shaped path as seen from our frame of reference on Earth. The Moon’s
orbit around the Earth is like a hoop, with the Sun’s path, as we see it,
creating another hoop through the heavens. Where the Moon’s orbit crosses
the ecliptic in two places, these are the Moon’s Nodes. Astronomically, the
moment-to-moment position of the Nodes “wobble” up to a degree and a
half—not usually enough to make a difference in a chart. So most
astrologers use what is called the calculated mean node.
     The Nodes create a polar axis—that arrow—and they are always in
perfect opposition to each other. So if you think of the Nodes as the places
where the Solar and the Lunar orbs connect, it underscores the primal
importance of the active principle of the Sun and the reflective principle of
the Moon, and how important they are in “a reading.” When it comes to
understanding the chart, the Sun, the Moon, and the Nodes are the holy
trinity.


    Now if you take a look at your astrology chart, you’ll see that the North
Node is a glyph that actually looks like headphones or a little doorway. It
could be seen as a cosmic doorway through which we would be wise to
pass through, since it hints at qualities of character we need to emphasize. It
offers insights into how we can move past our comfort zones into new
territories—-territories that we are not always comfortable or familiar with,
but which contains our “growing edge.”
     By contrast, the South Node looks like a reversed doorway, or a
horseshoe with its ends pointing up. It describes what we’ve brought over
from our youth, from our parents, and from our previous lives—if you
believe in reincarnation. Or more simply, it can be seen as our default
patterns, reflecting our deeply habitual and ingrained ways of being and
thinking. In times of stress, you’ll fall back on your South Node habits
because they are so very familiar, but they don’t help you move along in
your life. A better direction and soul purpose is contained in the “message”
of the North Node.
     The South Node holds what Jungian analysts call the shadow: the
negative and repressed qualities that our Soul wishes to move away from—-
some people might be inclined to see it as our downfall. But the Swiss
psychiatrist Carl Jung was wise enough to recognize that there also is “gold
in the shadow.” When we uncover and use this goodness or gold in the
shadow of the South Node, while leaving behind the negative old patterns,
we move into playing out the higher octave of possibility here. This gold is
often the unrecognized and repressed talent that is latent in our psyche,
brought over from a former life.
     Astrologers and Jungian psychologists would argue that we don’t truly
access the positive potential in the shadow of the South Node until mid-life,
and it is then that we can begin to “feed others” with what we’ve learned
from our past. Jung reminded us of this change in our life when he noted
that we cannot live out the afternoon of our life in the same way as we’ve
lived the morning. He felt we truly come into ourselves at mid-life, not
before. Astrologers point to the 18.5 year cycle of the Nodes around the
chart, noting that it takes 2 revolutions of the Nodes around the chart to
bring us to age 37, which was about the age that Jung felt that the real
process of growing into our true nature begins—-the process he called
“individuation.”
     So the South Node reflects the unfinished business and challenges that
we didn’t “get quite right” either earlier in this life or in previous lives. As
the gateway of the past, this nodal door opens onto what has been sown
before; the karma of the past and it is where we tend to retreat when
challenged. Gold or no gold, there’s a lot in the shadow of the South Node
that needs to be eliminated. But because there is gold in the shadow, we
benefit by knowing our family karmic inheritance—both the positive and the
negative traits and secrets that have been handed down the family line. This
is discussed in the chapter on the family karmic inheritance.
     The foundation of the theory of the Nodes rests on the concepts of
karma and re-incarnation. However, if you prefer not to think in terms of
karma and reincarnation, you can think in terms of the unrecognized gifts
and challenges brought down the family line that you’ve inherited from the
parental DNA. You can also think of karma as simply being the law of
cause and effect. The root meaning of the word karma means “action” and it
isn’t too far of a stretch to see how the “actions” of our early lives and of our
parents and grandparents might have influenced our current life now. It isn’t
hard to imagine that we “karmically” learn from both our mistakes and
theirs. One can simply see the karmic story as “what goes around, comes
around” whether it be in this one life, in many re-incarnated lives, or in a
family over generations.
    When the Nodes are understood in the light of re-incarnation, they are
said to reflect the story of the original Soul intention on coming into this
world. In this viewpoint, the Soul progresses through a series of lives
growing in experience and wisdom until it returns to the original Oneness.
The South Node shows the mistakes that have been made along the way,
the lessons that weren’t quite learned, and the suffering that ensued. Because
the South Node holds hints of your past life experiences and the North Node
speaks to the direction your Soul longs to go towards in this life, then a link
of cause and effect creates a karmic pattern that gets imprinted on the Soul
and this story is embedded in the chart. Some astrologers also flesh out
details of a “past life parable” by examining the rulers and aspects to the
Nodes in great detail.


    So how does this all work together in a chart? Let’s look at my chart as
an example. My North Node is in Taurus in the 2nd house, and South Node
in Scorpio in the 8th house. What can we understand about that South Node
being in Scorpio in the 8th house and its Taurus polarity? If you look ahead
to the chapter on the Scorpio/Taurus polarity you can read about it in more
detail. But generally, the Scorpio South Node has connotations of dramatic
life changing experiences, power struggles, sexual bonding, and other
people’s money and resources—suggesting that my Soul purpose is to move
away from hurtful power struggles, melodramas and to ground myself in my
own talents and resources. The Universe gives me strong hints whenever I
move into territory that is not my own to claim anymore. The Taurus North
Node speaks of the desire for serenity from the drama and trauma of what
came before, and the need to not repeat the dramatic excesses of my earlier
years and/or former past lives.
    I’ve worked on acquiring the qualities of loyalty and persistence of
Taurus, and keep reaching to find the “sacred in the commonplace” which is
such a beautiful quality of Taurus. Early in my life I did this by becoming a
potter and I suspect that the “gold” in my Scorpio shadow/South Node is my
intuitive ability and emotional empathy that I now use as an astrological
counselor. Scorpio, both sexual and intense in nature, has its “snout to the
ground” in order to find out what undetected emotional truth is happening in
any given situation, and so Scorpio is the sign of the investigator, the truth
teller, and the shaman. Taurus, on the other hand, loves ownership and
being grounded in the sensual things of this world. Taurus is the Earth
Mother (or Father) who bakes fresh cookies for the children, and knows
exactly how much money is in the bank—although she may not want to
think about it!
     Until I came of age at my “first Saturn Return” at age 29, I acted out my
South Node by stubbornly learning things the hard way, by being
ungrounded and going to excess. I had an intense longing for the kind of
perfect love that no human could ever fulfill. Not surprising, I married late,
and after 20 years of marriage was divorced for five years, and later
remarried my husband. We’ve been married now for eight years, and
continue to do the wonderful and horrible work that soul mates do with each
other: we help each other grow. I can see how he naturally pushes me to live
out the independence and grounded values of my Taurus North Node as I
encourage and stimulate the curiosity of his North Node in Gemini. There’s
grace and grit here—-what I’d call a true marriage.
     But what about that South Node in the intense and dramatic sign of
Scorpio? It tried to seduce me in every way you can imagine. As a child of
the sixties, I found myself in sexual and powerful relations with other people
who were in positions of prominence. Because that South Node in Scorpio
was also in the 8th house of other people’s resources, I suspect I was
repeating a past life scenario of being the person who was the “power
behind the throne” or the woman who basked in the glory of the one who
was out there doing the work. (In the chapter called “Going Deeper” you’ll
see how the house placements of the Nodes add more dimensions to the
nodal signs.) Earlier in my life, I also sensed that as long as I lived in the
reflected light of other person’s glory, I would only feel a temporary high. I
could feel that something was inauthentic in my life, but it took many years
for me to learn a craft(s) and then a profession in which I truly followed “my
own God home.”
     It’s significant too, that I have no earth planets in my chart—-except the
North Node—-and so perhaps I was unconsciously drawn to compensate
for this by developing a skill in pottery making, and then choosing to live in
an old stone house, and marrying a man with lots of earth signs in his chart.
One could call that the “pull of the North Node.” It’s as if the North Node in
earthy Taurus had pulled me first to compensate for the lack of earth—
Jungian psychologists call this the unconscious compensation of my inferior
function; the sensate, the earth element. Then, as I became more grounded in
a stronger ego, I was able to retrieve the gold in the shadow of the South
Node and study the “Scorpionic” and spiritual realms of astrology and
psychology.
    These days, I continually recommit to ever deeper levels of grounding
and persistence in my work and life. I find that astrology reflects the internal
dialog between the sometimes paradoxical parts of my nature, but now I
know which “voice” in my psyche is the wisest—that North Node.
    A chart can never be interpreted once and for all, but needs to be looked
at over and over again, just as we look in the mirror to see how we’ve
changed from day to day, year to year. And what is the value of predicting
the next upcoming “event” when the original Soul purpose is overlooked?
All the planets in the chart are karmic and tell a story, and there may be an
important full Moon, eclipse, or grand alignment of whatever going on in
the heavens, but if it doesn’t aspect some planet or sensitive place in your
chart, then it’s not as likely to affect you personally.
    The Nodes, like all the transiting planets, move around the birth chart in
a timely manner awakening us to new possibilities—they make a full cycle
around the chart every 18.5 years. When the Nodes and planets hit a
sensitive spot on our charts it’s as if the planet is summoned into your life for
a “tune up.” However it’s the signs and positions of the birth nodes that
never change and this is most important. The meaning of the birth Nodal
axis is what pulls it all together. It can take a life-time of observation for the
symbolism of the Nodes to reveal its secrets.


     So now you may be wondering about how “your sign” fits into all this
—how your Sun sign relates to the Nodes. You could think of your Sun
sign as the vehicle which your Soul has chosen to utilize in this life. The
combination of your Sun sign and your North Node reminds me of a make
and model of a car: like Toyota/Camry. Ok, so maybe you’ve chosen a
vehicle for this life that reads: Libra Sun/Taurus North Node. That says a
lot. The Sun describes the personality/ego/self that’s coming into its true
Selfhood. The Nodes hold the more subtle description of the vehicle and the
directional log for the journey. It hints at where you’ve been and where
you’re going—holding in its cryptic way, the most important piece you’ll
need to know to navigate your journey home.
    Now it’s time to take a look at what I call North Node Medicine: finding
the sign of your North Node, and reading its description along with its
opposite sign, the South Node. Then, if you have your astrology chart in
hand, you can expand on the story by looking to see what section of the
chart (the house) that the Nodes fall in, what aspects it, and what “rules” the
Nodes.
    It’s like a puzzle you put together—here are the signs of the Nodes, here
are the houses, and here are amplifications of that story through aspects and
rulers—we can get pretty detailed here, but the deeper you unravel the clues
of this journey, the more room for greater intuitive insight, but also error. It’s
best to think symbolically and metaphorically rather than literally, and to find
the places where the pieces of the puzzle overlap and repeat—that’s where
you’ll find your truest story.
    If you really understand the basics, and the subtleties of you Sun sign
and the Nodes, then you have a great map for your Soul journey. Let the
understanding grow over time. And as you move through your life passages
—your transits—you’ll have a reassuring guide in hand, in a soul language
you can understand. You’ll then know the conscious story of your
personality and Sun sign, and the unconscious soul memory that is
embedded in the Nodal story. That’s powerful, and indeed good medicine!
                    Chapter 11.
      North Node Compensatory Medicine, and
            the “Gold in the Shadow”

    At the first reading of your North Node Sign you may be nodding your
head in agreement, and then thinking: Well, isn’t that true for everyone?
Yes, if something is deeply true, then it is true for everyone. However, each
sign has a particular truth that rings truer for you than for others. All the
North Node “Medicines” have a particularity to them through their sign and
house position, and a potency that is activated by that particular polar
dynamic. The prescription, like a vitamin, might be good for anyone to take,
but it’s really only necessary and highly effective if you have the symptoms
and the chemistry particular to your own Nodal nature.
    Here’s an example: Let’s compare 2 sign/house placements: the sign of
Leo which naturally rules the 5th house, and Pisces which rules the 12th
house.
    I think of Leo and the 5th house as “the house that Joseph Campbell
built.” Why? Because he popularized the phrase: “Follow your own bliss.”
This is good medicine for those who have their North Nodes in Leo or the
5th house because they both point to self-expression and open hearted
generosity, as well as all the joyfulness and creativity that comes when we
become as little children again and just play.
    North Node Leos, with their South Node past in Aquarius, have had
childhoods or past lifetimes when they were separated from this particular
kind of creative, loose, joyful play—they could have been exiled,
persecuted, a genius, a role-model (one who had to be a good example!) or
one who didn’t quite fit in for some reason—they could have been ill or
restrained in some way, or they may have placed duty above personal
expression and joy. They come into this life having forgotten what playing
and self-expression can do! Now there’s a soul yearning for this person to
come into the group, into the circle of love—through intimate relationships,
children, artwork, or just having a good time. They are being summoned to
simply follow their own bliss.
    Let’s compare that with the “House that Carl Jung built”—the 12 th
house and Pisces. If you have a North Node in Pisces or in the 12th house,
you are being summoned to explore the world of the “collective” and the
unconscious. But how can consciousness enter into unconsciousness? We
can enter that world indirectly through dreams, divination, active
imagination, and by noticing moments of synchronicity between what we’re
feeling on the inside and what’s happening on the outside. This is Jungian
territory. We are called here to go beyond traditional boundaries into the
Neptunian worlds where the mind and the heart join, and where mysticism
and psychology meet.
     This is not for everyone. But if your North Node is in Pisces or located
in the 12th house, then there is something for you to gain in exploring these
worlds. There is healing medicine for you deep in your psyche, and you
have been given “cosmic permission” to seek Oneness with this world. This
is an area where we are not duty-bound, not having to be “right”, and not
having to march to anyone else’s drummer. You are simply and quite
mysteriously being called to become aware and conscious! Some might say
you are called to be enlightened. Some might say you are called to peek into
the” in-between lands” where fate, destiny and character all conspire to
make a life.
     In ancient times, the 12th house was sometimes called the house of
suffering, or the “call to the monastery.” Today we could say that having an
astrological 12th house emphasis calls you to serve the collective spiritually
or psychologically; and that not being conscious of that world might cause
you suffering.


    So, North Node medicine is about many things, but primarily it’s about
the effort to make conscious what is unconscious, and using that awareness
to heal your self. The previous example was easy to understand because the
example was simplified in that Leo and the 5th house are similar, as are
Pisces and the 12th house. However, for most of us, we’ll have Nodal signs
and houses that aren’t matched, so we have to do the work of overlapping
the meanings and connotations of each. So you might have a Leo North
Node, but it’s in the 10 th house of career instead of the 5th house of self-
expression. Or that Pisces North Node falls in the 7th house of relationships,
instead of the 12th house of the deep psyche.
    Any beginning astrology book will give you simple meanings for the
houses, but I suggest you use instead the amplified versions here of the signs
and houses as you “track your karmic journey by sign and house.” But
you’ll still have to do the alchemical work Of combining the two! It’s as if
you are being asked to rationally “grok” the two fundamental clues of sign
and house, and then to take the intuitive leap to see how they fit together
into the story of your life. You’ll need to actively use your imagination here
to combine your life story and all its particulars, with the symbolic stories
and examples presented here.


     North Node medicine includes the psychological law of compensation,
which Carl Jung thought to be one of the truest functions in the psyche. He
wrote that the psyche has a natural balancing mechanism that “compensates”
for itself unconsciously.
     This compensation, however, can often feel quite uncomfortable,
showing up as an aching back, insomnia, bad dreams, and difficulties in
relationships. The compensatory function wants to maintain “homeostasis”
and correct what is out of balance. This is compensatory function is what is
held in the North Node, and is a way of describing the particular “vitamin”
or anti-biotic that is just right for you in this life now. It’s the particular area
to which you need to bring some compensatory behavior, for example, too
much righteousness? The medicine would be a little naughtiness. Too much
seriousness? A little humor might be called for.
     Because the Nodes are a polarity, it’s important to remember that
polarization calls for balance and integration. The compensating medicine
always calls you to become more whole, not good. We need the highest
expression of both Nodes, but we need the North a little bit more because of
its compensating effects. The Vedic Indian tradition describes it by saying
that we feed ourselves through our North Node and we can feed others
through our South Node. Westerners, such as Carl Jung, talked about it in
terms of compensation, and said that compensation was the truest natural
law in the psyche! Meaning that all nature seeks balance, and that if we
don’t do it consciously, the unconscious will do it for us. Neurosis, and
distorted or repressed behaviors, will tend to leak out of us when we are not
maintaining a natural balance within. So…the right medicine at the right
time is what we are aiming for here.
     Good medicine is what happens when synchronicity is felt—when what
you see in your chart and what you know of your life are congruent;
synchronized, and reveal a pattern. Astrology is not meant to merely define,
predict, or forecast—it’s meant to stimulate our insight and make us whisper:
“Ah-hah!” It’s here to help us do what the oracle at Delphi commanded
—“Know Thyself.” Magic and mystery arise when synchronicity is felt—
and when we make better choices we get a glimpse of who we really are,
where we’ve been, and where we’re going. And surrounding it all is the
mystery of free will, character and fate: “the magic of the heavens above us,
and the stars within us.”
                    Chapter 12
         Where’s my North Node? The Chart.

     “We are born at a given moment in a given place and like vintage
     years of wine we have the qualities of the year and of the season in
     which we are born.” C.G. Jung

   Simply find your birthday below and you’ll see the sign of your North
Node. The descriptions and examples for each sign are in the following
chapters and automatically includes the South Node sign. The North and
South Nodes are always 180 degrees away, and therefore are always polar
opposites to each other.


    What’s a house? The chart is divided into 12 sections, called “houses”
each relating to a different sphere of activity in your life. The house
description of the Nodes always tells us in what area of your life something
is happening, and where attention is needed to be paid. We are advised to
move towards the area of life ruled by the house that holds the North Node,
and away from the limitations of the area of the house that holds the South
Node. You’ll find out how to find where your house is in the chapter on
Tracking Your Karmic Journey by House.
    However, remember that it is a polar axis we’re describing and the
opposing signs and houses always have elements in common with each
other. If you use the high expression of the South Node house and sign,
you are doing well. And when you reach for the high expression of the
North Node house, you are stretching beyond your comfort zone to
maximize all you can be. That’s good medicine. The sign and house that
holds the North Node is an area of life that your Soul yearns to go toward,
and is therefore a “great suggestion”. In this section you’ll see the sign of
your North Node, and when you turn to that chapter it automatically shows
the South Node. Begin there, and then go to the Houses.
                        Here’s the North Node chart:

[Beginning day and year through last day and year: North Node Sign]

      June 7, 1913—Dec. 3, 1914: Pisces
      Dec. 4, 1914—May 31, 1916: Aquarius
June 1, 1916—Feb. 13, 1918: Capricorn
Feb. 14, 1918—Aug.15, 1919: Sagittarius
Aug. 16, 1919—Feb. 7, 1921: Scorpio
Feb. 8, 1921—Aug. 23, 1922: Libra
Aug. 24, 1922—Apr. 23, 1924: Virgo
Apr. 24, 1924—Oct. 26, 1925: Leo
Oct. 27, 1925—Apr.16, 1927: Cancer
Apr.17, 1927—Dec. 28, 1928: Gemini
Dec. 29, 1928—July 7, 1930: Taurus
July 8, 1930—Dec. 28, 1931: Aries
Dec. 29, 1931—June 24, 1933: Pisces
June 25, 1933—Mar. 8, 1935: Aquarius
Mar. 9, 1935—Sept. 14, 1936: Capricorn
Sept.15, 1936—Mar. 3, 1938: Sagittarius
Mar. 4, 1938—Sept. 12, 1939: Scorpio
Sept.13, 1939—May 24, 1941: Libra
May 25, 1941—Nov. 21, 1942: Virgo
Nov. 22, 1942—May 11, 1944: Leo
May 12, 1944—Dec. 13, 1945: Cancer
Dec. 14, 1945—Aug. 2, 1947: Gemini
Aug. 3, 1947—Jan. 26, 1949: Taurus
Jan. 27, 1949—July 26, 1950: Aries
July 27, 1950—Mar. 28, 1952: Pisces
Mar. 29, 1952—Oct. 9, 1953: Aquarius
Oct. 10, 1953—Apr. 2, 1955: Capricorn
Apr. 3, 1955—Oct. 4, 1956: Sagittarius
Oct. 5, 1956—June 16, 1958: Scorpio
June 17, 1958—Dec.15, 1959: Libra
Dec. 16, 1959—June 10, 1961: Virgo
June 11, 1961—Dec. 23, 1962: Leo
Dec. 24, 1962—Aug. 25, 1964: Cancer
Aug. 26, 1964—Feb. 19, 1966: Gemini
Feb. 20, 1966—Aug. 19, 1967: Taurus
Aug. 20, 1967—Apr.19, 1969: Aries
Apr. 20, 1969—Nov. 2, 1970: Pisces
Nov. 3, 1970—Apr. 27, 1972: Aquarius
Apr. 28, 1972—Oct. 27, 1973: Capricorn
Oct. 28, 1973—July 10, 1975: Sagittarius
July 11, 1975—Jan. 7, 1977: Scorpio
Jan. 8, 1977—July 5, 1978: Libra
July 6, 1978—Jan. 12, 1980: Virgo
Jan.13, 1980—Sept. 24, 1981: Leo
Sept. 25, 1981—Mar.16, 1983: Cancer
Mar.17.1983—Sept.11, 1984: Gemini
Sept.12, 1984—Apr. 6, 1986: Taurus
Apr. 7, 1986—Dec. 2, 1987: Aries
Dec. 3, 1987—May 22, 1989: Pisces
May 23, 1989—Nov. 8, 1990: Aquarius
Nov.19, 1990—Aug. 1, 1992: Capricorn
Aug. 2, 1992—Feb. 1, 1994: Sagittarius
Feb. 2, 1994—Jul. 31, 1995: Scorpio
Aug.1, 1995—Jan. 25, 1997: Libra
Jan. 26, 1997—Oct. 20, 1998: Virgo
Oct. 21, 1998—Apr. 9, 2000: Leo
Apr.10, 2000—Oct. 12, 2001: Cancer
Oct. 13, 2001—Apr. 13, 2003: Gemini
Apr. 14, 2003—Dec. 25, 2004: Taurus
Dec. 26, 2004—June 21, 2006: Aries
June 22, 2006—Dec.18, 2007: Pisces
Dec. 19, 2007—Aug. 22, 2009: Aquarius
                    Chapter 13.
      Tracking Your Karmic Journey by Sign:
       Aries North Node, Libra South Node

     Your Aries North Node Soul wants to find its courage. It wants to be
excited, to explore, and even to be stressed out—- if that’s what it will take
to bring forth the independent and courageous side of you! Courage is the
high road for Aries, and it’s what we do each time we step up the plate and
“show up” whether we feel like it or not. Courage is what we need to have
to survive and to be a pioneer. You are the natural survivor, pioneer,
entrepreneur and sacred warrior of the zodiac.
     Is it that fools rush in where angels fear to tread? Or simply that your
enthusiasm and fresh attitude of “why not?” motivates the rest of us? You
may not feel like the fearless one—for courage is often stressed into a person
by acts of bravery, but remember that courage is something you learn as you
allow yourself to feel the fear and do it anyway. Your Soul may have
chosen to be born into situations that have motivated you to develop the
spiritual muscle of bravery. You are here to walk your talk and to learn to
“step up to the plate.”
     As you exercise your independent nature, rather than re-enacting old
tendencies of enmeshment or co-dependence, you inspire us to want to be
with you, and to hear your stories, your truth. Don’t be too cautious. Earlier
in this life, or in former lives, you may have heeded too closely to rules of
justice, reason, and skillfully “getting along” and in the process
compromised parts of yourself in a deadening attempt to please and
accommodate. Now you are called to let conventional roles and habits give
way to a more exciting, truthful, and passionate nature. As you dare to
follow through on what truly excites your curiosities, you leave behind your
South Node traces of dependency and—dare we call it “normalcy?” In this
life, you don’t want linger too long in any social group, for your Soul needs
some alone time as well as a good dose of adventure and risk taking. Inter-
dependence rather than co-dependence seems to be called for now.
     For you there is a yearning for the adrenaline rush of new beginnings,
and you excel at seeing fresh possibilities and new ideas. Give yourself
permission not to have to follow through on every last detail. And, if you try
to be overly accommodating and to try to make peace at any cost, you may
lose your focus or energy. Like in the old fairytale about the Emperor who
rode through the streets naked and didn’t know it, you are meant to be the
one to tell the Emperor he has no clothes on! And there’s no social niceties
with that one.
    Aries North Node understands the paradoxical nature of people and life,
and has a keen intelligence and humor that often surprises people. When
you dare to act and speak outside the norm, you can delve surprisingly deep.
And as a “slayer of dragons and a rescuer of maidens” (or lads) you are best
when you are not only a thinker, but a doer as well….maybe even a sacred
warrior.
    Somewhere in the midst of your life journey, usually after your first
Saturn Return (at approximately age 29) you are able to turn on your path to
redeem the gold in the shadow of your Libra South Node. Redeeming the
gold in the shadow of the South Node is about reclaiming your natural gifts.
But these natural abilities are also your familiar path of least resistance and
are best redeemed only after you have done the work of the North Node—-
after you have survived the slings and arrows of this new call to a
courageous life. Then you can be the tactful mediator and peacemaker.
Aries and Libra are ruled by Mars and Venus, respectively, and there’s
nothing juicier than to allow the masculine and feminine aspects of your
nature to stimulate and balance each other.
    Soul Purpose: Courage, survival, entrepreneurial pioneering in any field.
Dependence on your own skills and abilities, rather than enmeshment with
others.
    Shadow: Compromising behavior and fearing to share your deepest
feelings, ideas, and talents. “Going along with things” leads you into the
shadows.

    *** Psychological ground-breakers Sigmund Freud and Carl Jung both
had the Aries North Node. Each of these men embodied the Aries
pioneering spirit that broke new ground in the world of psychology. With
South Nodes in Libra, they were called to break away from the limitations
of partnerships and relationships—even with each other—and to reach for
the self-directed, independent qualities of Aries.
    Jung’s North Node was in the 2 nd house of self-worth, suggesting how
important it was for him to produce a body of work that would prove
himself to himself. With his South Node in the 8 th house of other people’s
values, he needed to let go of the approval of others, and acquire the self-
confidence one gets by defining oneself in one’s own terms. Jung’s break
with Freud at his Uranus Opposition (around age forty) was extremely
traumatic for Jung and precipitated his short but intense psychological
breakdown. In later years, Jung’s independence and disregard for other’s
opinions, allowed him to have intimate relationships with many people, and
to explore the taboo subjects of alchemy and astrology.
    Freud’s North Node Aries was in the 6 th house, suggesting that he was
called to be both devoted to his work and to the needs of his physical body.
Whether he was a hypochondriac or in as much physical pain as he said he
was, was not as important as the need he had to attend to his body as well as
his Work. Many people would say Freud had psychosomatic illnesses and a
cocaine addiction, yet despite this, few people would discount the great
work that he pioneered in his life. It’s worthwhile to remember that we
should never be too judgmental about another person’s success or lack of
success in reaching their North Node aspirations. We all fail and succeed in
varying degrees.
Taurus North Node~Scorpio South Node
     With your North Node in Taurus, your Soul craves peace and serenity in
this life—as well as good music, a loyal lover, and picnics on the beach with
good food and wine! Doesn’t everybody? Yes, but not like you—-you need
these things to remind your Soul that life can be good and safe and beautiful.
     Having suffered too much drama and trauma either earlier in this life, or
in a previous one, you’re suffering now from a slight despair of spirit—one
could even say that this Nodal combination has a “forgotten emotional
memory” of life at its most tragic. The cure for this soul sickness is to
nurture your self with the things that make life worth living. Cultivating
loyal friends, enjoying nature and the physical world, and creating a
beautiful home that feels like a safe harbor are all good things for you to do.
     By choosing to find the “sacred in the commonplace” you re-awaken
your Soul to the Divine in all things. You’re not being a materialist when
you truly enjoy the beauty of a hand-made wooden spoon or pottery bowl,
or take time away from your work and ambitions to watch the sun set with
an old friend. By seeing into the true nature of things, you get a sense of
what many of the mystics have seen—that God is here and now, and found
in the ordinary/extraordinary things of this life.
     What do you truly value? What do you stand for in life? Something in
you needs to know yourself deeper and to prove yourself worthy. The old
path or habits that need to be left behind involve too much immersion in
other people’s dramas…a helping hand is fine, but don’t get embroiled in
dramas that aren’t yours. Power and control issues as well as your ability to
manipulate situations need to be let go of. You’ve done too much of that in
the past. The focus now needs to be on you, and finding what you value and
what nurtures you.
     This life is about finding that mystical sense of belonging to a Universe
that is benevolent. No easy task! It’s a profound spiritual calling to find spirit
in matter, and to find yourself in “right relationship” with others.
     On the Taurus-Scorpio path it’s important to ground yourself with a
workable level of financial and emotional stability. If you can do that you’re
ready to retrieve the gold in the shadow—your Scorpio South Node.
There’s hidden wisdom and power there, for in your Scorpio past you
deeply understood other people and had a keen intuitive-psychic nature.
You might have been the detective, the shaman, the priest, or the power
behind the throne—-the one who could hone in on the emotional bottom
line. Now if you can bring your new level of security and grounded faith in
the goodness of life into your relationships with others and into your work,
you can nourish others with your profound wisdom.
     Soul Purpose: serenity and stability, regaining a sense of the sacred in
the ordinary, a sense of having earned and gained by one’s own efforts,
honoring good traditions and preserving what is valuable for future
generations.
     Shadow: Looking to another for definition, self-confidence, or too much
support. Taking things that aren’t yours. Collapsing into a felt sense of
emotional pain from previous lives, and adapting an overly serious, gloomy
attitude. Going to quickly into studying the occult and transpersonal realities,
and thereby taking a spiritual bypass on your emotional life.


     Oscar Wilde, Irish playwright, poet, novelist, and great wit had his
North Node in Taurus in the ninth house. A man who celebrated his
homosexuality in Victorian England, he paid the price of his passion and
suffered a dramatic downfall—he was imprisoned for it and died at the age
of forty-six. Wilde certainly shows the polarity of the Nodes in his life and
art, and although the Venus ruled Taurus North Node would seek serenity,
he profited in the world through using his dramatic Scorpio nature. The
nodes, on the 3rd /9th house axis, relate to communication in all its forms,
and his North Node in the Ninth house reflected his enthusiasm, his liberal
open-mindedness, plus his enjoyment of startling people and breaking up the
normality of life—all Jupiter/Sagittarius/9th house qualities. Wilde was also
known for his humor and philosophic spirit—again, a 9th house trait.
Although one might hope for a better balance with this polarity, and
therefore a longer life for Wilde, he nevertheless might not have achieved
his greatness without his life of extremes.
Gemini North Node, South Node Sagittarius
     “Thou shall not tell too much Truth” was once said to a friend of mine
with this Nodal combination. She was told this as a child and then it
reappeared later in her life as a repeating dilemma. When she told her Truth,
and lived her life by her Truth, she often got “slammed by the Universe”.
What was wrong?
     After some discussion, she was the one who retrieved the answer. In
telling her story, her opinion, her “Truth” in the Sagittarian South Node
manner, she spoke it reactively, without reflection, and the abruptness of it
often hurt people. Sagittarius suffers at times from “foot in mouth” disease,
but more seriously, she realized that by adding more tactfulness as well as
by being more objective and “contained,” she could still live and speak her
Truth, but in a way that didn’t injure herself or others. She realized that this
reflection and containment allowed her to see how life was much more
differentiated into many shades of gray, rather than the black and white of
her first reactive perception. This Nodal axis takes the raw experiences of
life and puts them into a crucible that produces either wisdom or bitterness.
By the reflective “cooking” of these Nodes, the raw anger and bitter
injustices of life can be distilled, and transmuted into a compassionate
wisdom.
     Gemini needs new experiences. A good idea for North Node Gemini is
in the motto: “Let’s do something different!” Your Soul longs for new
experiences and different perspectives, and you may not even know it. You
may think you’ve seen and done it all before….but now it’s time to do it
differently. Earlier in this life, or in a former life, you earnestly pursued
Truth and developed a powerful self-convincing story of how Reality is.
However it wasn’t the whole Truth; you got the view from the mountaintop
perhaps, but not from the valley or the marketplace. You may have been a
cloistered monk, nun, or an opinionated scholar in a former life, but it was
lonely, and now it’s time to ride into the market-place and take a fresh look
at things.
     Indulging your curiosities and breaking up your routines are good things
for you now. Go to the bookstore, the cafe, get on the internet, and find new
stories to tell. In this life you are challenged to be non-judgmental, to widen
your perspectives, and to really listen to another person’s truth in order to
cultivate empathy and open-minded thinking. Your perceptual bias is
changing, so that you can see things from many different angles—not an
easy thing to do! Your reality may feel shattered at times, and you may
wonder where your self-confidence has gone. Certain aspects of your life
need to de-construct so it can be re-constructed in a new way. . By allowing
yourself to follow your dreams and gently releasing old concepts of how it
all is, you begin to break new ground.
     Life is breaking you open to enlarge your heart and widen your
perspective; for you are being trained to be the compassionate
communicator. You can be the one with new stories to tell that are grounded
in personal experience. You’re not just the book-smart armchair philosopher
any more—you’ve walked your talk.
     It will continue to be important for you to find ways to slow down, and
simply connect with others in a way in which you each share the paradoxes
and mysteries of life as well as your own “truths.” That truth you came into
this life with is in the process of getting much bigger. And as you do this,
you’ll find that writing, teaching, selling, counseling, and communicating in
all forms can bring you great success. With your South Node in philosophic
Sagittarius you’ve got some spiritual gold in your past, and now the trick is
to take your old wisdom and new found “Gemini street smarts” and unite
them. The world needs to hear what you have to say, that is, as long as
you’re following a path with heart.
     Keep checking in with yourself that your objectivity hasn’t run away
with your Soul. In your desire to embrace change, be gentle towards those
who lead more mundane lives and don’t be too quick to judge. You have so
much to give!
     Soul Purpose: It’s important for you to immerse yourself in the fullness
and chaos of life; indulging your curiosities, being a communicator, and
daring to risk your security for a life of adventure, both inner and outer. In
telling your Truth and your stories skillfully, with objectivity and reflection,
you awaken others to great insight. Communication is a key, but
communication is not limited to words alone; it is inherent in the arts,
healing practices, and in the “act of loving” in relationships.

    Shadow: Your default pattern of letting your enthusiasm override your
empathic listening, combined with a philosophic “know it all” attitude, could
blind you to life’s complexities and wonders. If you are addicted to
certainty, you will deny truths or experiences that run counter to your
expectations and belief. Allow room for dialog and relationships that
challenge you to expand your concepts of “how it all is.”


    Maya Angelou, much loved American sage, writer, artist and civil
rights activist has a Gemini North Node in the 10th house of career and
public life. She has been called “America’s most visible black female
autobiographer”. Angelou is known for her series of six autobiographies,
starting with I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings in 1969. She has been
telling her story! Her volume of poetry, Just Give Me a Cool Drink of Water
‘Fore I Diiie (1971) was nominated for the Pulitizer Prize. As testimony to
her success, Angelou recited her poem, “On the Pulse of Morning” at
President Bill Clinton’s inauguration.
     Emerging from a violent and emotionally impoverished childhood, her
South Node in Sagittarius in the 4th house expressed itself through harsh
experiences of poverty and abuse, yet she was able to skillfully find a way to
speak her truth with reflection and empathy through her writing and
lecturing.
     “I Know Why The Caged Bird Sings” represents Angelou’s experience
of racism and other forms of potential imprisonment: by drugs, marriage, or
the economic system. This metaphor of the bird in the cage invokes the
“supposed contradiction of the bird singing in the midst of its struggle”.
Maya communicates constantly (Gemini) the necessity for people to arise
above conflict and despair, and to embrace life with renewed (Sagittarian)
enthusiasm despite the circumstances.
     Maya has used her Gemini survival skills and street smarts to rise above
a childhood that could have imprisoned her—and as she says in one of her
autobiographies: “Women who survive must be at once both tender and
tough.” This combination of tender empathy, reflective thinking, and an
intense desire to communicate expresses the essence of this Nodal axis.
     Maya’s most common speaking engagements occur on college
campuses, “where seating is sold out long before the actual event.” When
Angelou speaks, she sits on a stool and entertains the audience for
approximately one hour, reciting poems by memory and following a flexible
outline. Entertaining people, whether through poetry, music or acting, is a
form of communication that reaches across boundaries and prejudice. Maya
has been a public charismatic figure for most of her life, and is one of the
world’s great wise women.
     Cancer North Node, South Node Capricorn
     When you work a long day, its good to come home and rest, and when
you feel the need for help, its good to feel comfortable enough to ask for it.
But for you, there can be a resistance to these very natural things.
Somewhere in your past, either earlier in this life or in a previous one,
you’ve worked hard pursuing your goals and doing what needed to be done.
You’ve come into this life with an attitude that knows how to survive by
being practical and by adapting to the harsh realities of life and making a
living. (Some of you have even allowed an almost pathological sense of
caution or reserve to develop in response to having to keep a stiff upper lip.)
Now it’s time to soften, relax, and heal from being in a competitive and
overly pressured environment.
     Now it’s time to shift focus from “them to you”, and to take the
emphasis off the goal and onto the process of life unfolding. How do you
feel about what’s happening? That’s the question to consider. Part of your
soul purpose is to heal from the limitations of your past, so there’s a
necessity at times, to cry a few tears…to simply feel. It’s not giving into self
—pity though, and you won’t linger long in that place, for the balanced
attitude of your Capricorn/Cancer axis is one that innately knows how to
hold the tension of the opposites.
     After your first Saturn return around the age of 29 the emphasis will turn
even more towards nurturing yourself, your family, and your friends. Home,
heart, and hearth become a priority. There’s a desire to feel secure and at
home with those you love. You may want to feel a kind of “heart security”
you may never have experienced before.
     In the past you may have had times when you’ve had to shut yourself
down emotionally, and now you realize you’ve missed something in the
focusing on the goal rather than the process. Some of the sweetness and joy
of life won’t happen if you’re focused on goals and ambition rather than
taking the time to tend to your inner life.
     Cancer North Nodes are nurtured by being by the ocean (or any bodies
of water) by delving into their family history, and by honoring the good part
of traditions. The family karmic inheritance is usually strong, and it would
be good for you to sift through the positive and negative inheritance you’ve
received and to see what part of it you may be unaware of.
     Cancer, being ruled by the moon, fluctuates in its moods and has a wild
and loony side as well. No other sign can be so content cleaning out its
closets one moment and dancing on the beach by the light of the moon later
the same day. With your North Node here you’ll want to honor this intuitive
and lunar side of yourself because it’s the fertile soil of your Soul. Take time
to slow down and feel whatever comes up for you, and when you feel
you’ve outgrown your current life, dare to let go of the past and open a new
chapter of your life. Cancers, like the crab, periodically outgrow their shells
and need to bravely release their fears and defenses to bring new dreams
into reality. The pull of continued growth and evolution through
regeneration and resurrection is strong in this Cancer/Capricorn axis.

    Soul Purpose: In this life it’s important for you to heal from duty and
necessity—you may need to cry a few tears to unblock your emotions and
express your true feelings. You may also want to make it a priority to give
and receive love, and to watch what happens when you tend to the process
of life rather than the goal. Dare to risk new beginnings that lead to
metaphorical death, re-birth and resurrection, taking calculated risks. Use
your sense of humor to repair, entertain, and mend bridges between family
and friends.

    Shadow: Honoring of the demands of “sheer practicality” can be an
excuse to not be in touch with your feelings of sorrow or joy. By not
allowing the feminine and “lunar or looney” side of your personality out, it
can make you appear to be a bit of a glum “Eeyore” at times. Another
defense mechanism you might be tempted to use could simply be an
appearance of pride—the kind of “Hubris that cometh before a fall.”



    English blues rock guitarist, singer/songwriter Eric Clapton has these
Cancer/Capricorn Nodes. Often viewed today by critics as the greatest
guitarist of all time, his music—and life—has always been grounded in the
blues. When Eric was 9 years old he discovered that he and his brother had
been deserted by his real parents, and that they’d been raised by his
grandparents. When his brother died unexpectedly, Clapton became, in his
own words, “a lonely and nasty kid.” (Maybe just an Eeyore?) He tried
playing the guitar but found it so difficult to learn that he almost gave up, but
the connection to his emotions through the “blues” pulled him through and
kept him at it. So instead of shutting down his feelings or being out of touch
with them, as South Node Capricorns can do at times, he reached for them
—through ‘the blues.” One of his more famous songs in his later life was
called: “Tears in Heaven,” that came out of the unexpected tragic death of
his son.
    Before this, at one point in mid-life, Clapton let his emotions slip into
serious drug abuse, but with help he was able to get clean and later opened a
drug rehabilitation clinic which he still financially supports. Clapton has
mixed the professional Saturnian hard working nature of Capricorn with his
fluctuating emotional life to make a powerful impact in the world of music.
He uses his music to connect deeply with the promptings of his heart, and in
healing himself, he heals all of us.
Leo North Node, South Node Aquarius
    It’s time to take center stage! Have you been waiting for the support of
friends or colleagues, or even for “more information” before stepping up to
the plate in your life? Your Soul yearns to come forward now, to take
chances, to see life as a game worth playing—simply because it’s fun and a
challenge. Somewhere in your past you may have lost a joyful sense of play
and spontaneity and now it’s time to recover your exuberant self-confidence,
and to share it.
    Either earlier in this life or in a former life, you were living on the
sidelines watching others interact on center stage. You felt exiled, even if
you weren’t. Now its time to engage yourself actively—be creative with a
paintbrush, your children, or simply with how you live each day. Color
outside the lines of your everyday life and rejoice at the results. “Follow
your bliss” the mythologist Joseph Campbell was fond of saying, and as the
Persian poet, Rumi once said: “Let the beauty you love be what you do.
There are a thousand ways to kneel and kiss the earth.” Following your
passion is good North Node medicine for you. If you don’t know what
“your bliss” is, then you are called to listen to yourself more—ask yourself:
what makes you laugh, cry, rage?
    When a person holds the energies of the rebel, the genius and the
outsider, we see the signature of Aquarius strong in the chart—often with a
South Node in Aquarius. There’s an unconscious soul conditioning here to
think differently, and therefore you may be aware of not being really heard.
You may speak your Truth, but not understand how it’s being received. So
learning to communicate well, and with empathic feeling is important for
you. A person with a South Node Aquarius can tend to be so objective or so
focused in one direction, that he loses touch with the feeling based world he
lives in.
    Why is this? In re-incarnationally based evolutionary astrology. it could
be said that you may have soul-memories of persecution or even torture, so
there can be a tendency to dissociate at times—a reflex defense that “gets
you away emotionally”. And why not, if you might have suffered as an
exiled heretic before? Now, you are moving away from that lonely position
of being the outsider to the savvy position of being effective in the world—
and feeling connected to others. You are learning to love and to express
yourself with others who might have burned you at the stake in a former life
for the beliefs you held. Whew—evolutionary re-incarnational theory can
get intense at times.
    So…whether married or single, don’t detach yourself from emotional
situations, but engage yourself fully and find ways to keep all your
relationships fresh and alive. But this is not a license for irresponsibility, in
fact, you may be surprised by how upset people can get with you when you
act carelessly around issues of trust or with changing plans—people can get
quite attached to you and take your actions too personally. It is also through
the interrelationship with others that you’ll find the high energy and passion
that feeds you.
     In this life it’s healing for you to leave behind an overly balanced sense
of objectivity, seriousness, and perhaps aloofness as well. You are meant to
open your generous heart to everyone this time around and to let your true
light shine. Be real and unique, for you have the soul of a performer, the
touch of the aristocrat, and the charm of a child. You’ve come into this life
to be seen and accepted and to feel the joy of knowing love. Dare to give
your talents and gifts to the world. Don’t wait for others to ask you—take
the initiative yourself.
     As you turn on your path and retrieve the gold in the shadow of your
South Node of Aquarius, you may find that you have a talent for
discovering fresh ideas, new inventions, and innovative ways of being in the
world. However be mindful of what groups and friends you choose to
affiliate yourself with. There is a tendency for some N. Node Leos to get
into groups they don’t have a natural affinity with. When you act from your
own passions, values, and priorities you’ll naturally find the people who are
right for you. Don’t sacrifice who you really are for the appearance of
popularity or for the sake of duty. Instead, keep your mind on your intuitive
promptings and proceed step by step to making your dreams a reality…and
in the process you’ll find your true friends as well.

    Soul Purpose: To create loving connections with others in order to heal
the sense of being the outsider or the persecuted one. By leaving behind
harsh judgments of self or others, the idea now is to “Come in from the cold
and become one of us.” Join with the family of man, and make your
presence felt. Be effective and compelling rather than “being right” and
alone.

    Shadow: A deeply entrenched unconscious fear can entice you to be
controlling, inflexible or stubborn especially in the little things of life.
Practice forgiveness and letting your funny bone out. You could be a good
comedian! Humor acknowledges the dark side of life with a detached and
ironic perspective. A heartfelt humor that knows the pain of life can accept
the full drama of it as well.
    Folk/rock singer songwriter Joni Mitchell has this Nodal combination.
Writer of songs such as “Woodstock” and “Both Sides Now” Joni has had
great professional and personal success in her life. As a child, Joni moved
around Canada quite a bit with her parents, but discovered her passion and
joy at an early age: At the age of nine, Mitchell contracted polio during a
Canadian epidemic, but she recovered after a stay in hospital. It was during
this time that she first became interested in singing. She describes her first
experience singing while in hospital during the winter in the following way:
“They said I might not walk again, and that I would not be able to go home
for Christmas. I wouldn’t go for it. So I started to sing Christmas carols and I
used to sing them real loud… The boy in the bed next to me, used to
complain. And I discovered I was a ham.”
    In later life, Joni was able to happily reunite with her daughter whom
she had given up for adoption earlier. Her early life feelings of social
disconnection (past life?) could be described in an interview she gave to the
The New York Times in which she said that her memoirs were “in the
works”, and that the first line would be “I was the only black man at the
party.”
Virgo North Node, South Node Pisces
    Virgo is probably the least understood and most under-estimated sign of
the zodiac.
    Whether it is your Sun sign or your North Node sign, you have a unique
ability to visualize the ideal and the willingness to do what must be done to
bring this ideal into reality. What a gift! However for you to do the high path
of Virgo, you must use the tools of discrimination and discernment—which
also means you need to “dot your i’s and cross your t’s.” By carefully
attending to the little details of life, and by analyzing what’s really
happening, you’ll be able to make your dreams come true.
    Earlier in this life, or in a former life, you’ve merged with the Divine in
some way and yet you weren’t savvy about how to live the mundane life on
earth. Whether you merged with God, your Art, your lover, or your bottle of
wine, you now need to relax the urge to merge and pay attention to the
demands of reality. Some of you may have died, suffered, or been
persecuted because of your beliefs, so now you need to regain your faith
that life in the real world can be good. Many lifetimes may have been spent
in the dissolution or sacrifice of ego or simply sacrificing your life for the
sake of another person or ideal. Now it’s time to develop a healthy ego and
strong sense of Self that allows your Soul to feel safe.
    As a North Node Virgo, you’ve been naturally drawn towards
developing a vision of the “ideal” and you innately know how to bring that
vision into reality. Don’t allow yourself to get distracted, but get good at the
mundane details of life and see how that process of focusing and becoming
competent enables you to bring your dreams into reality.
    Dare to take risks in spite of fears, and avoid addictive tendencies and
escapism. The wisdom and sense of Oneness you earned in former lives can
now support you in this world. Because you see the ideal and are willing to
work for it, you often get what you want, as long as you don’t let your
perfectionism or self-criticism stop you from giving 100 percent in whatever
you do. There is a need to plan and strategize in this life and follow through
on your ideas.
    You are likely to have skills in crafts, teaching and in the healing
professions, but whatever you do, use skillful means to your ends, and
empowerment will happen naturally. You have a psychic sensitivity, a great
imagination and a uniquely creative way of seeing things. These attributes,
plus an innate understanding of people helps you in countless ways.
    As you turn on your path and retrieve the gold in the shadow of Pisces,
remember         your       half-forgotten      visions   and      sense      of
knowingness…“remember to remember” all that is good and beautiful and
meaningful in life. Remember the magic you know in your heart.
    Soul Purpose: to bring order, harmony, healing, and practical wisdom
into your life and the lives of those you touch. By knowing what is truly
good—since you’ve been doing the work of “separating the wheat from the
chaff” and the real from the illusory, you preserve and maintain the best of
what our culture and our mutual lives have to offer. Learn a skill and offer it
to the world. When you become truly useful to others—when you are “in
service” to others—you regain a lost sense of self and self-appreciation.

     Shadow: A default tendency to see the world as a dream, and one in
which you don’t have a strong sense of Self. You may have spent lifetimes
dissolving the ego in unselfish tasks, or religious life, but that stance doesn’t
serve you now. In a former life you may not have developed a strong
enough ego that could have helped you thrive—you might not have been
“mirrored well” as a child, or you may have lost your sense of sense in the
collective (like in the military) or in addictions (communing with the bottle.)
When you don’t look beyond your inner world to skillfully participating in
life, you sink into a dull dream of life that’s bound by other people’s
expectations, and you lose that cherished love that comes from serving and
loving others. There’s a subtle difference here—basically, give your
gift/service to the world, but do it your way!


     Joseph Campbell had this Virgo/Pisces Nodal polarity. Campbell was a
world famous mythologist, writer, and lecturer in comparative religion and
mythology who also became popular to the American public due to the PBS
television series, the” Power of Myth” with Bill Moyers. In this series,
Americans remember him for his depth of sharing on the “myth of the hero”
through all cultures, the Universality of certain spiritual “truths” and the
necessity for “following one’s bliss” in life.
     As a North Node Virgo, Campbell tackled the enormous job of
chronicling, cataloging and synthesizing details of the world’s mythologies
and religions. His painstaking analysis allowed us to see connections and
parallels in man’s religious nature—the kind of work that Carl Jung had also
done.
     However Campbell began his studies in the time of the Great
Depression, and when conventional graduate school wasn’t available to him
he devised a plan of study as he was trying to figure out what to do with his
life. He engaged in a period of intense and rigorous independent study
which he discussed in The Hero’s Journey: Joseph Campbell on His Life
and Work. Campbell states that he “would divide the day into four four-hour
periods, of which I would be reading in three of the four hour periods, and
free one of them…I would get nine hours of sheer reading done a day. And
this went on for five years straight.” Now this is reaching for that skillful and
disciplined North Node Virgo!
    Campbell believed the religions of the world to be culturally influenced
“masks” of the same fundamental, transcendent truths. All religions,
including Christianity and Buddhism, can bring one to an elevated
awareness above and beyond a dualistic conception of reality—that is,
beyond the idea of “pairs of opposites,” such as being and non-being, or
right and wrong. Indeed, he quotes in the preface of The Hero with a
Thousand Faces. “Truth is one, the sages speak of it by many names.” In
this line, we can hear the echo of his Pisces South Node: that place in him
that could permeate beyond boundaries, masks, and linguistic or cultural
divisions.
    Campbell’s body of work was huge and even affected the world of
screenwriting and film. George Lucas was the first Hollywood filmmaker to
openly credit Campbell’s influence. Lucas stated following the release of the
first Star Wars film in 1977 that its story was shaped, in part, by ideas
described in The Hero With A Thousand Faces . Campbell’s life itself was
like a film of one hero’s journey, and contains both the discipline and the
imagination of the Virgo/Pisces axis.
Libra North Node, South Node Aries
     Achieving “serenity” is a soul aspiration for you in this lifetime,
although the thrill of the hero’s journey and the grand quest is strong for you
with these Nodes. Your South Node is ruled by the mythical hero, Mars,
who embodies the ideal of the spiritual warrior and the one who breaks new
ground. However, with your North Node in Libra, ruled by Venus, it is
through the more feminine side of yourself that you come home to yourself.
Venus compensates for the excesses of Mars, and yet she can be a
demanding muse or irritation, depending on how you treat the
masculine/feminine polarity within yourself.
     With this Nodal axis it will be important for you to find ways to calm
down, release tension, and allow all forms of beauty and harmony to heal
you. Like a finely turned violin, you need to catch stress and pressure before
it causes something to snap. There may have been something exhausting
earlier in this life or in a previous life experience where you placed great
emphasis on personal achievement, self-sacrifice and courageous action.
Now it’s time to release the singular survival urge and ambitious mentality to
develop your North Node’s Soul’s yearning for deep serenity. For you, this
suggests nurturing co-operative relationships and finding release from the
mental/emotional “tension of the opposites.”
     The symbol of your Venus ruled Libra North Node is the ancient image
of Athena holding the Scales. This mental weighing and balancing of the
‘great opposites” in life is exhausting, yet the challenge of knowing what is
“right and fair and true” is too delicious not to embrace. You delight in
having had the courage (South Node Aries) to go where others have not, to
endure, and to bring home the “golden fleece”. Yet it is ultimately about the
learning of “right relationship” that is one of the main tasks for you in this
life. It will require a relaxing of some old ways of thinking and being, as you
create win/win situations with others and relax the urge to engage in victim-
rescuer scenarios.
     As your understanding of human nature grows, you acquire a tolerance
for paradox and ambiguity and for the many different ways people perceive
reality. As this increasing acceptance of the complexities of life and people
grow you may find yourself in positions of peace-keeping or as a counselor
or mediator.
     You can excel in the Venusian fields of art, entertainment, and beauty, if
you choose to develop this side of your nature. Home, heart, and hearth can
take on increasing importance—one could say that these Venus ruled areas
are good compensatory medicine for you. As you grow into a more
balanced focus on inter-dependence rather than too much dependence or
independence, you’ll finally find a way to assert yourself with more
confidence and without creating conflict. Your compassionate objectivity
can bring a deep contentment into your life and into the lives of anyone you
touch.
    Earlier in this life, or in a previous life, chances are that you were
engaged in “a serious battle” of some sort. It could have been a war, or it
may be a vague emotional memory of trauma. However, those left-over
default patterns, or shadow qualities of Mars—the feeling of needing to
know, to be right, and in your place of power, only increase the dramatic,
intense and overly emotional backdrop of your past life that your Soul longs
to move away from. Your unconscious knows the horror of trauma and
drama, yet you also know how to numb the effects of battle, and how to
create the soothing rush of the adrenaline high with a new beginning. You
can dare to slow down. The war is over; you’ve won.
    As you move to redeem the “gold in the shadow of Aries” in mid-life
you may need to become less self-centered to find the serenity and co-
operation with others you desire—and how many and varied the ways you
may consciously and unconsciously do this! No matter how accommodating
you may see yourself, you may occasionally need to dip back into this gold
in the shadow, and tap into that Martian/Aries assertiveness again. Yes,
Libra is about balance, justice and beauty, but without a good dose of the
Martian courageousness and sense of adventure, Libra can be ineffective
and indecisive. As you continue to learn to tolerate the complexities and
paradoxes in life (an on-going Libran task!) you discover a new sense of
equanimity, and you may notice that life comes to you, rather than you
having to go to it. Allow yourself time to not rush into making decisions—
you need to weigh and balance all the different ways you perceive and think
about things.
    In the latter part of your life you’re more likely to seek the comfort of
love rather than the drama of love earned through effort and ambition.
Where there is no war, there is also greater beauty.

    Soul Purpose: To cultivate a willingness to see all sides of a question
and be able to forgive. Release the addiction to passion, ambition, and anger
as personal fuel, and replace it with the Venusian nurturing qualities inherent
in all things beautiful—music, nature, and art are all healing for you.

    Shadow: Having to be right and to righteously defend a cause while
causing a lot of inner and outer disturbance. Too much emphasis on the
powers of the ego and not enough on the Self, and/or Self in relationship to
others.
     William Butler Yeats, Irish poet, dramatist, astrologer and occultist, was
one of the foremost figures of 20th century literature. Yeats had his North
Node in Libra, South Node in Aries, and despite (or because of) his many
literary accomplishments, he is often looked at curiously for his unusual love
life and his passionate quest for a direct experience of Spirit. His many
relationships with women were tumultuous, and the Venusian muse was
particularly hard on him. He was refused in marriage multiple times by
Maud Gonne, the love of his life, and again by his proposal of marriage to
her daughter.
     Yeats was in love with Maud Gonne for 28 years (a full Saturn cycle)
and claimed to have a spiritual marriage with her—perhaps providing Yeats
with the emotional suffering necessary for an alchemical breakdown to take
place. It seems significant that Yeats’ life long desire to channel spirit
information came to him, not by the excesses of his passion, but through his
later life marriage to his wife, Georgie. One cannot know if he found the
“serenity” that is the hallmark for Libra, but one could hope that in accepting
the responsibility of their marriage and two children, Yeats may have turned
the base metal of everyday human life into the gold he so yearned for in his
spiritual quest.
     As a member of the occult society of the Golden Dawn it became
necessary for Yeats to grasp the unity of opposition over and over again,
and the necessity of alchemical healing through suffering and purification.
His magical name in that society: Demon Est Deus Inversus (the Devil is
God inverted) underlines that opposition.
     Yeats knew that in Vedic Indian astrology, his “head of the dragon,
Rahu,” was in Libra, and the “tail of the dragon, Ketu,” was in Aries. C.G.
Jung wrote in his book, Mysterium Coniunctionis.“…in the image of the
uroboros (the serpent or dragon swallowing its own tail) lies the thought of
devouring oneself and turning oneself into a circulatory process. The
uroboros is a dramatic symbol for the integration and assimilation of the
opposite, i.e., of the shadow…”
     It is interesting to note that the South Node shadow for Yeats was in
Aries, with it’s polar opposite, in compensatory Venus ruled Libra, while
the opposite is true for two other men who pioneered in the area of the
unconscious—Sigmund Freud and Carl Jung. They both had the opposite
polarity of North Node being in Mars ruled Aries, and South Node in Libra.
All three men shared the passionate Venus/Mars polarity with its intense
interest/disinterest in sexuality, love, and the life of the spirit.
Scorpio North Node, South Node Taurus
    The passionate Scorpio nature feels its way through life, sensing
undercurrents and daring to look deeply to find the emotional bottom line. In
order to move towards the heights of your Scorpio North Node you need to
relax your concerns around money, security, and possessions as well as
being willing to risk losing your current level of comfort to gain a higher
state of power and vitality.
    Can you leave behind tendencies to possessiveness and attachment and
open up to the excitement of change? Will you dare to look deeply and
bravely into the underworld, into ‘the other side of the question’ and into the
places where the deepest level of truth resides? Superficial “people pleasing”
is not for you. You are meant to look into the eyes of the murderer and find
the frightened unloved child there. You are meant to know the whole story,
and to travel the roads many of us declare unsafe.
    The eagle, the phoenix, and the scorpion are the symbols of Scorpio,
and like the eagle you were meant to fly high and be powerful, and like the
phoenix, you are meant to risk dying and being reborn, knowing you are a
survivor. As you dare to delve into the mysteries of life, you come up with
deep treasure.
    The third symbol of the scorpion hints at the shadow side of this sign
which can see all aspects of truth, including that which is not always full of
light and joy. The wisdom of the Scorpio nature evolves because it has
dared to explore the dark, the taboo, the unspoken, and then takes this ability
to see and embrace the dark and transform it. It’s a high calling and that’s
why North Node Scorpios are often the best doctors, healers, investigators,
and friends to have in times of crisis.
    Scorpios are the truth-tellers of the zodiac. In the old storybook tale it
was probably a Scorpio who told the emperor he had no clothes on.
Because you are good at delving into the minds of others, you can be
intense, yet your Soul yearns to deeply relate to others and benefits by
working in partnership. Let yourself explore and experience what sex,
money, God, and politics can teach you. Go where others have not, and let
yourself experience it all. Be brave, for like the cat with many lives, you too
have many lives to live.
    When you come to a turning point in the Scorpio-Taurus path you’re
ready to retrieve the gold in the shadow of your Taurus South Node. You
can now relax into enjoying the fruit of your passions. For example, turn the
grist from the mill of your life into something creative and pleasing. Have
you ever tried singing or songwriting? (Taurus rules the throat and singing.)
Or writing a mystery novel or screenplay? Own your experiences by
creatively giving birth to something that is uniquely you.
     Soul Purpose: Integrating your instinctual goodness and vulnerability
with a willingness to do the hard and often conflictual work of making both
relationships and career “work” for you. You have to go deeper than you
may be comfortable with, and learn to move beyond “goodness” into
wholeness. This means having the ability to withdraw negative projections
from others, and to see with compassion where you may have control issues,
sexual hungers, and feelings that are sometimes less than nice. You are
meant to make peace with you own “inner scorpion.” Doing this will give
you a power and charisma that will make you successful in whatever areas
of life you choose to dwell in.

     Shadow: Trying to keep everything safe and predictable. You are called
to the edge to look at the complexities of life and the moral ambivalence and
paradoxes of life. Not an easy thing to do! Being lazy and going for the
creature comforts only puts you back into old habits. Release any addiction
to financial security as being the “bottom line.”


     Ellen DeGeneres, Emmy Award-winning stand-up comedienne, actress
and host for the syndicated “The Ellen DeGeneres Show” has this Nodal
combination. Although we can’t know the details of her personal experience
in reaching for her phoenix-like Scorpio North Node, we can see her gutsy,
hard working, truth telling nature in her public expression. We know that
before becoming famous, Ellen worked as a waitress, house painter,
bartender, and retail clerk. And we know that she came out publicly as a
lesbian in an appearance on The Oprah Winfrey Show.
     DeGeneres received wide exposure on November 4, 2001, when she
hosted the Emmy Awards-TV show. Presented after two cancellations due
to network concerns that a ceremony following the September 11, 2001
attacks would appear insensitive, the show required a more somber tone that
would also allow viewers to temporarily forget the tragedy. De-Generes
received several standing ovations for her performance that evening which
included the line: “We’re told to go on living our lives as usual, because to
do otherwise is to let the terrorists win, and really, what would upset the
Taliban more than a homosexual woman wearing a suit in front of a room
full of Jews?”
     Ellen became formally married to Portia de Rossi in 2004, and they live
together as Vegans with their three dogs and four cats. As a lover of
animals, and as a savvy business woman, Ellen faced a dilemma in the 2007
writer’s strike when she crossed the picket line to do her television show.
Although Degeneres verbally supported the strike she said that she could not
break her contracts or risk her show losing its time slot. As a show of
solidarity with the strikers, DeGeneres omitted her monologue during the
strike, typically written by WGA writers. However, the Writer’s Guild
condemned her, and said that she was “not welcome in NY” saying: “We
find it sad that Ellen spent an entire week crying and fighting for a dog that
she gave away, yet she couldn’t even stand by writers for more than one day
—writers who have helped make her extremely successful.”
     This Taurus/Scorpio Nodal combination can sometimes put one into
situations where we need to be true to ourself and our needs, as well as true
to what we believe is correct. Whether we believe she was wrong or right in
her decisions, I think Ellen showed courage in her stance of truth telling,
both in her coming out in her sexuality/marriage, her humor-filled tactfulness
after 9/11, and in her business needs—she is a good example of the
complexities of choice and moral ambivalence contained in the Scorpio
North Node.
Sagittarius North Node, Gemini South Node
     Having come into this life with the talent for seeing so many different
points of view, it’s important now for you to continually hone in on your
own “Truth” and find the philosophic rudder for your life. It’s good for you
to keep seeing life as a quest and as a profound journey in which you keep
expanding and integrating your experiences. By allowing yourself freedom
and time for reading, traveling, and being out in the world you acquire the
experiences that nurture you.
     Earlier in this life, or in a past life it was important for you to be quick,
fast talking, and to know all the answers if you could. You were willing to
try many things and sought to understand how others thought and acted—-
but now your Soul yearns to look beyond the relativity of everything to find
some essential Truth of your own to live by.
     This new philosophic grounding, or rudder, allows you to see life as a
grand adventure, and to feel a certain safety in your position. Your psyche,
like a sailboat, won’t tip so easily when your Soul has framed your
experiences in a way that allows for mistakes, changes, and even betrayals,
because there is a growing understanding of how human and divine nature
interact. You now have the wisdom to see life as a grand adventure, and it’s
important to take the time to share with others what you’ve discovered about
the meaning of life. You need to find new ways to tell your story.
     There’s a bit of the gypsy, scholar and philosopher in you. And as you
develop your intuitive nature more and speak from your higher mind, your
friends will delight in your storytelling ability and deep wisdom. You’re in
the process of leaving behind the impatient, overly logical part of yourself
that constantly hungers for more factual information. When you spend time
by yourself in nature, or pondering a reflective book, or simply open
yourself up to true inspiration, you begin acquiring a deeper purpose in life
and a soul-full resonance that echoes in the way you present yourself to the
world.
     As you move along this path, you new found sense of security in this
life allows you to keep a good attitude and an optimism that attracts others.
You are also good at distributing “good and fair ideas” and you would do
well as a teacher or speaker in whatever field you have competence in. As
you pick up the gold in the shadow of Gemini, you treasure the wealth and
variety of different experiences you’ve had in the past—-you’ve lived more
in one life that some people have in many. And now you’re able to pull it all
together into a coherent life. The new Sagittarian vision is one that adds
meaningfulness to the full palate of your Gemini experiences.
     Soul Purpose: Expanded consciousness and a wide breath of experience,
through study, travel or contact with other cultures, that encourages a
philosophy of life that you live by, and perhaps teach. You need to give
yourself time to think about the big picture of your life, to ponder what all
your efforts will amount to, and then avoid the distractions that keep you
from achieving your highest ideals.

     Shadow: Over-extension, over-doing, and “tripping the life fantastic.”
Are you all about too many tactics and clever action, but have no long range
strategy or goal for your life? Are you constantly avoiding commitments in
order to keep your options open? Release any addiction to the desire “to stay
forever young.” With your keen intellect and sense of wonder and curiosity,
you may have a talent with language and communication—be sure to use it
soulfully and not glibly.


    Bill Gates has this nodal polarity. As American business magnate,
philanthropist, and the world’s third richest person (as of February 8, 2008),
he is chairman of Microsoft, the software company he co-founded. Gates is
one of the best-known entrepreneurs of the personal computer revolution.
Although he is admired by many people, others criticize his business tactics,
which they consider anti-competitive, an opinion which has in some cases
been upheld by the courts. In the later stages of his career, Gates has
pursued a number of philanthropic endeavors, donating large amounts of
money to various charitable organizations and scientific research programs
through the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, established in 2000.
    Before getting married, Bill’s focus was strictly business oriented. From
Microsoft’s founding in 1975 until 2006, Gates aggressively broadened the
company’s range of products, and wherever Microsoft achieved a dominant
position he vigorously defended it. First hand accounts of Gates in business
meetings describe him as verbally combative, berating managers for
perceived holes in their business strategies—he often interrupted
presentations with such comments as, “That’s the stupidest thing I’ve ever
heard!” and, “Why don’t you just give up your options and join the Peace
Corps?”
    Bill was born with Gemini street smarts, and has been known to even
brag about his IQ. However street smart savvy he is, one wonders if he
would have ever moved towards his philosophic Sagittarian North Node
without the influence of his wife. Sagittarius is ruled by Jupiter which rules
both humanitarian and philosophic endeavors, as well as all things
expansive and abundant One could make a case that Gates didn’t find the
philosophic rudder of his ship till he married his wife, Melinda. Gates on
January 1, 1994 and began a new career as the father of three children.
    Bill Gates stepped down as chief executive officer of Microsoft in
January, 2000. In June, 2006, Gates announced that he would be
transitioning from full-time work at Microsoft to full-time work in his
philanthropy foundation. One wonder perhaps if in some way he is the one
who is now joining the Peace Corps? Bill and Melinda’s foundation has
given away over 14 billion dollars so far, and its estimated that Bill and
Melinda will give away close to 100 billion in their lifetime. Melinda has
also recently unveiled a plan to eradicate malaria, which the couple will help
finance.
    I suspect it was Bill’s acceptance of Melinda in his life that made all the
difference in his life’s trajectory. It’s much more comfortable for people with
lots of Gemini and Sagittarius in their chart or on the Nodes, to rally around
the cry “don’t fence me in!” Partnership commitment, intimacy and
receptivity to others on a deep level doesn’t come easy for them. According
to Wikipedia, friends of the couple say that Bill wouldn’t be shifting gears if
it weren’t for Melinda. Moreover, they say, she has helped Bill become
more open, patient, and compassionate. “Bullshit!” he bellows. Nicer,
perhaps? “No way!” he shouts, grinning because he knows it’s true. About
the philanthropic work he says, “I don’t think it would be fun to do on my
own, and I don’t think I’d do as much of it.” The couple’s close friend,
financial wizard, Warren Buffett, who has known them since 1991 says:
“Bill really needs her.” However, it was Bill choice to bring her into his life
—it was his Soul’s choice. Buffett also has stated that Melinda makes Bill a
better decision-maker. (Doesn’t that Gemini South Node see almost too
many possibilities? Indecision catches the Gemini South Node as a default
pattern as a first response—but then once committed, Sagittarius will defend
any personal cause to the bitter end….and he certainly defended Microsoft.)
“He’s smart as hell,” Buffett went on to say. “But in terms of seeing the
whole picture, she’s smarter.” Would Buffett have given the Gates
Foundation his fortune if Melinda were not in the picture? “That’s a great
question,” he replies. “And the answer is, I’m not sure.”
Capricorn North Node, South Node Cancer
     Integrity is the key to your life. By following your personal code of
ethics and beliefs you have an inner compass for your life. As you develop
self-control and self-care while approaching life in a goal oriented manner,
you integrate the lessons of your past and bring your dreams into reality. In
former lives, or earlier in this one, you were more concerned with the
process of life rather than your goals and visions, and were overly immersed
in your emotional life. At times you succumbed to moodiness and a
dependence on others that was not healthy. Now you are learning to truly be
the author of your life: you are coming into your own “author-ity” and
finding the satisfactions of independence.
     By setting positive and reachable goals, and taking the steady steps to
reach them, you release old fears of rejection and find that you have what it
takes to be a leader and a person in authority. This may feel quite new, as
you may have spent other lifetimes in which you were a householder and
identified with your role in your family and clan. You may still have some
difficult family karma to resolve, but you’re willing and able to do what
needs to be done. You are not one to be irresponsible and you are not naive
either.
     In this life you are called to be a builder, a creator, and a preserver of all
that is valuable. You have a deep respect for the good part of traditions that
have been handed down, and you may find yourself given the opportunity
to succeed in the world in a surprising way. Others see your integrity, and
trust that you can be the person of authority.
     Because of your innate seriousness and strong work ethic you can
sometimes feel isolated from others, so make it a point to find ways to lightly
and creatively express yourself, as well as finding loyal friends to cheer and
encourage you. You are more respected and loved than you realize.
     As you pick up the gold in your Cancer South Node, you’ll find that any
left-over tendencies to control others by emotional over reactions and
manipulations will fall away as you come into your own. You have a keen
sense of intuition and although you may feel at times as if you are blocked,
or don’t want to open up fully to all your emotions for fear that it is
dangerous territory, you would still be wise to do so. But trust your
intuitions, and go at your own pace.

    Soul Purpose: Building a life, a business or career, or some structure that
is worthy of your ambition. You are “toughening” into becoming an Elder
and a wise one, but you need to mature into it by wise use of solitude and a
savvy attitude in the world. You are leaving behind a family oriented
dependence and moving out into the public world. You could become a
high achiever and successful in whatever field you choose, but remember to
“be in the world, but not of it.”

    Shadow: Not setting up appropriate boundaries between your self and
family members or business partners. The goal is inter-dependence with
others, and an outward looking perspective that still honors the integrity you
deeply understand. Never forget the old Biblical saying: “What does it profit
a man if he gains the whole world but lose his immortal Soul?”


     Oprah Winfrey, television talk show host, wise woman, and possibly
one of the world’s wealthiest and most influential woman, Oprah has this
Nodal aspect. Born in rural Mississippi to a poor teenage single mother and
later raised in an inner city Milwaukee neighborhood, Winfrey was raped at
age 9, and at 14-years-old gave birth to a son, who died in infancy. She was
sent to live with her father, who encouraged her education, and Winfrey
landed a job in radio while still in high school. She began co-anchoring the
local evening news at the age of 19. Oprah is credited with creating a more
intimate confessional form of media communication, and by the mid 1990s
she had reinvented her show with a focus on literature, self-improvement,
and spirituality. She is generally admired for overcoming adversity and for
becoming a benefactor to others—in 2006 she became an early supporter of
Barack Obama, which may have helped him win the election.
     Oprah shows the characteristics of deep integrity and goal orientation
that is embodied in her North Node Capricorn. Her strong work ethic helped
move her beyond the South Node “Cancerian immersion” in the drama of
family life and she chose instead to focus her energy and goals towards the
larger “family” of the world. Although Winfrey has a partner, she never
married, and believes that the reason she never had children was because her
students at her South Africa’s Academy for Girls were meant to be her
daughters: I never had children, never even thought I would have children.
Now I have 152 daughters; expecting 75 more next year. I said to the
mothers, the family members, the aunts, the grannies—because most of
these girls have lost their families, their parents—I said: “Your daughters are
now my daughters and I promise you I’m going to take care of your
daughters. I promise you.”
     Time magazine wrote about Oprah’s power to blend the public
(Capricorn) and the private (Cancer): “Like a family member, it’s as if she
sits down to meals with us and talks to us in the lonely afternoons. She
makes people care because she cares. That is Winfrey’s genius, and will be
her legacy, as the changes she has wrought in the talk show continue to
permeate our culture and shape our lives.”
    Yet in 2009 Oprah has admitted that she has let her goals, ambitions and
work become out of balance with her personal life and need for self-love.
She admits that her life long battle with weight gain appears to be connected
with a problem of self-nurturance and love, which has been a fluctuating
theme in her life. This is the precarious balance of the Nodes here; balancing
home, heart, and heart with the work that one is called to do. So far, it
appears as if Oprah has done an amazing job of following her life direction
and soul purpose.
Aquarius North Node, Leo South Node
     Your soul yearns to dance to the rhythm of your own drumbeat, for in a
former life or earlier in this life, you may have lived a life that had little
connection to your true Self. In this life you may feel generally liked by your
peers, as you have a charismatic “shine” about you, and others tend to
project things on you which may or may not be true. They may even see
you as being more lucky than you really are, or they may feel that you
embody an ideal. However much others may project on you, your own true
freedom and honest self-applause is more important now than the approval
or praise from any group. You may have had previous lifetimes when you
were on center-stage and had a fair amount of attention, and you may hold
deep within you a feeling of being “special” but it may not have been a
good fit for your Soul. Now there is a deep desire to be true to your self and
not to follow the majority rule or herd instinct.
     You care deeply about humanity and humanitarian ideas, and you need
to risk disapproval from others to develop a more satisfying feeling of self
approval. Because you are blessed with a keen intellect and the ability to see
things differently, you have a lot to offer the world.
     Aquarius North Node folks are visionaries and dreamers when they
follow their North Node Soul Path. They are astutely aware of the
importance of equality and fairness, and are usually brave enough to share
their ideas with others—they’re the ones who write the Letters to the Editor
and organize the charity fund raising and peace rallies. Known as being
non-conformists, romantics, exiles and brilliant thinkers, their challenge is to
inform and balance their intellects with the sometimes irrational promptings
of the heart.
     Yet there’s always a need for greater objectivity, and a need to leave
behind making changes just to exercise authority. As you learn to relate to
others apart from their roles, as equals, your desire for friendship will grow.
You thrive best when you nurture yourself and others with your warmth and
fresh ideas.
     It will be important to leave behind any old melodramatic tendencies to
insist on doing things your own way, and taking dramatic risks. When you
ask God and the Universe for what you want and then let it go, you allow
life to bring you exactly what you need with its own perfect timing. In this
life, you can relax feelings that you need to be in control and be responsible
for everything.
     Because Aquarius NN folks were blessed with the ability to see things
that others cannot, you are challenged to bring in new ideas especially in
science, metaphysics, and human rights. As an idea-breaker and visionary
forerunner for the rest of us, we look to you to see where we’re going.
     As you turn on your path and retrieve the gold in the shadow of Leo you
may want to rekindle the warmth and openness of that generous heart of
yours, and then to turn that warmth and non-judgmental quality on yourself.
Expect the unexpected in life and keep dancing to that distant drumbeat—-
life will surprise you and delight you, when you least expect it.

    Soul Purpose: Being a person who knows when to preserve what is
good, when to reform what is in need, and when to overthrow what is
corrupt. You are called to be visionaries and dreamers who are willing to do
life differently. Avoiding the seductive undercurrents of other people’s
expectations and projections on you is important—Aquarius is truly about
freedom and authentic soul expression. Don’t settle for less.

     Shadow: In wanting to share your generous heart, you can come across
at times as being self-centered and seeking the spotlight just a little too often.
There’s an awareness here of wanting to share your gift with the world, but
unless you do it with a “warm touch” and pure intention it can come across
at “first whiff” as being attention getting and self-serving, albeit in a rather
subtle playful manner.


    Marianne Williamson is a spiritual activist, author, lecturer and founder
of The Peace Alliance, a grass roots campaign supporting legislation
currently before Congress to establish a United States Department of Peace.
She has published nine books, including four New York Times #1
bestsellers.
    A minister in the Unity Church, the driving force behind Williamson’s
philosophy is to offer a new thought approach to spirituality. She addresses
both established Christianity and Judaism in statements such as “You’ve
committed no sins, just mistakes.” Her earliest fame came as a result of her
talks in a Course in Miracles, a step-by-step method for choosing love over
fear. She credits her breakthrough to Oprah Winfrey who invited her to the
Oprah Winfrey show to discuss Williamson’s first book A Return to Love, a
book of which Oprah bought one thousand copies.
    Marianne’s famous poem, “Our Deepest Fear,” was wrongly accredited
to Nelson Mandela, but its message is unique in expressing the
Aquarius/Leo Nodal axis. In this poem she challenges all of us to dare to
share our light in the world—this is a good example of bringing the “shine”
of the Sun ruled sign of Leo out into the humnanitarian public world of
Aquarius, and she does this by acknowledging the fear inherent in her own
South Node of Leo.
    “…Our deepest fear is not that we are inadequate. Our deepest fear is
that we are powerful beyond measure. It is our light, not our darkness,
that most frightens us. We ask ourselves, who am I to be brilliant,
gorgeous, talented, fabulous? Actually, who are you not to be? You are a
child of God. Your playing small doesn’t serve the world. There’s nothing
enlightened about shrinking so that other people won’t feel insecure
around you. We are all meant to shine, as children do. We were born to
make manifest the glory of God that is within us. It’s not just in some of
us; it’s in everyone. And as we let our own light shine, we unconsciously
give other people permission to do the same. As we’re liberated from our
own fear, our presence automatically liberates others.”
Pisces North Node, South Node Virgo
    Having been the one who was duty-bound and played according to the
‘Rules’ in a former life (or earlier in this one) you now have the chance to
relax your linear mind and move towards your heart’s true desires. What is it
you truly long for now? Is it love, beauty, imaginative creativity? Or is it
simply the chance to relax your guard and take in the view from the
mountaintop? In the past you may have felt that you were the person who
always had to do the right thing. You were being observed, and you had
high expectations of yourself and others did too. You may have been a
doctor, priest, or skilled craftsperson in a previous life—someone who was
expected to be precise and perfect.
    But now you have the chance to relax, to not be perfect and to unite the
impulses of your heart with those of your head. You can dare to be gentle
with yourself now, and dare to make mistakes, to let some details go, and to
be as compassionate and forgiving with yourself as you are with others.
    It’s a good idea to practice getting out of unpleasant situations gracefully
rather than being duty-bound or judgmental. You don’t “have to be right”
now or confrontational, and you can dare to use your intuition and take
action even when you don’t have all the answers. You don’t have to over-
analyze things any more. Part of your soul-yearning in this life is to learn to
trust in the process of life and to surrender your anxieties to a higher power.
You are more loved than you realize.
    Pisces North Nodes often find that having two or more jobs or roles is
more pleasurable than just one—-you can be an artist as well as a parent, or
an accountant by day and a musician by evening. And at times you will
benefit from swimming against the prevailing social currents of your time
and swimming upstream like the two fish shown on the symbol for Pisces.
At times you may find yourself struggling with issues around fear and faith,
spirituality vs. religion or independence vs. dependence or addiction. You
will find that beauty in all its forms nurtures you and helps you to access
your higher power. Like the salmon that make their way home against all
odds, you have the inner strength and the homing radar that can lead you to
your spiritual home.
    As a Pisces North Node person, you are the compassionate visionary
who lights the way for the rest of us. And no matter what career path you
choose, it’s going to be your inner compassion and intuition that bring you
success and satisfaction. As you reach for the gold in the shadow of your
South Node Virgo you’ll still enjoy analyzing, yet you’ll be able to soften in
your position—and sometimes just simply doing what needs to be done with
an accepting attitude. There’s a purity of heart in the Virgo ways that is
released by the hopes, yearnings, and struggles of your Pisces North
Node…..and remember…. that which you are reaching for, is already deep
within your Soul.

    Soul Purpose: Transcending boundaries by bringing compassionate and
imaginative awareness into everything you do. You are meant to become an
explorer of the deep psyche; the unconscious in all its manifestations, and to
know that you are loved unconditionally. Let go of the idea that life “is a
struggle” and embrace the idea that a pleasurable life is a good life, and that
you deserve the “magic of a creative life” in which your head and heart,
body and soul, work as one. The phrase “Be good to yourself” is meant for
you.

    Shadow: Do you still feel yourself struggling, self-doubting, and
stressing about the little things in life? Lack of self-confidence, and issues
around duty, guilt and shame need to be released. You are your worst
enemy at those times when you buy into limiting beliefs about yourself.


    The “anti-guru Guru” J. Krishnamurti, had these Pisces/Virgo Nodes.
He was raised by New Age Theosophists in the early 1900’s to become a
great spiritual leader, and he had enormous expectations put on him to “be
right and almost beyond human” in all he did. In fact, he was expected to
move into the role of becoming a World Teacher, if not “the second coming
of Christ.”
    The pressured discipline inherent in his South Node Virgo played itself
out in his early life, and ultimately brought him to a nervous
breakdown/enlightenment in his late twenties. Taken out of India as a child,
he was educated in England, and it wasn’t until he was past his first Saturn
Return in his thirties that he truly came into his Self-realization and self-
confidence. At a huge assembly in Belgium, Krishnamurti stood up in front
of thousands of people and declared that he was not the Messiah they were
hoping for. He released himself from expectations and roles, and insisted
that the only thing he could teach was how to be free. However he spoke
with so much charisma, and experience bred from his personal struggles,
that he created followers even in his rebellion.
    Krishnamurti insisted that the only thing he could teach was about the
nature of the mind itself and the way to freedom—a way that was without
dogma or guidelines. He distained spiritual gurus and religions of any kind,
and essentially had the heart of a mystic which shines through in his poetry.
Ironically he ended up becoming just what the Theosophists predicted—a
great spiritual teacher, yet what he taught was radically different than
expected.
    Freedom is the foundation for the Pisces North Node. Krishnamurti
suffered in order to be free from limiting expectations, and he is best known
for his teachings around the philosophy that: “Truth is a pathless land.” The
use of “spiritual imagination” is another cornerstone for Pisces, and
Krishnamurti evolved into becoming a cognitive mystic who dialogued
constantly about moving beyond the realms of duality that most of us live in.
His teachings influenced millions of people, including metaphysicians such
as David Bohm.
    The Pisces North Node urges us to bring the head and the heart together,
and to find ways to transcend traditional boundaries and even to flow into
altered states of consciousness. Meditation, in all its forms, is one of the most
time honored ways to do this, and Krishnamurti spoke endlessly about
meditation—here are a few of his quotes on the subject:
     “Meditation is one of the greatest arts in life-perhaps the greatest, and
     one cannot possibly learn it from anybody, that is the beauty of it. It
     has no technique and therefore no authority. When you learn about
     yourself, watch yourself, watch the way you walk, how you eat, what
     you say, the gossip, the hate, the jealousy-if you are aware of all that in
     yourself, without any choice, that is part of meditation.”
     “Man, in order to escape his conflicts, has invented many forms of
     meditation. These have been based on desire, will, and the urge for
     achievement, and imply conflict and a struggle to arrive. This
     conscious, deliberate striving is always within the limits of a
     conditioned mind, and in this there is no freedom. All effort to meditate
     is the denial of meditation. Meditation is the ending of thought. It is
     only then that there is a different dimension which is beyond time.”
                    Chapter 14.
       Tracking Your Nodal Journey by House:

    To use this section most accurately you’ll need to have your birth chart
and look at which of the 12 sections of the chart your Nodes fall in—
remembering that the North Node looks like a set of head-phones, and the
South Node looks like its reversed image: a horseshoe. (They are always
exactly 180 degrees apart and retrograde.) If you don’t have your chart,
there are numerous sites on the internet which will show you your chart, for
free, in minutes. Or if you buy this book from me directly or from my
website, I include a free copy of your chart with it.
    If however, you don’t have your birth time—the house information
won’t be accurate, because it’s based on the time of your birth
    However, you can still greatly amplify your understanding of your
North Node SIGN by reading about the HOUSE it occupies in your
chart, which is the “default natural zodiac” house position if you don’t
have your birth time. Each description of a house will say what sign is the
“undertone” for that position. Reading this will add to your
understanding. Try it out—! it also offers more karmic information that
may prove surprising, interesting, and valuable to you.


    So, to review: The house description of the Nodes always tells us in
what area of our life things are happening, and where attention is needed to
be paid. We are advised to move towards the area of life ruled by the North
Node, and away from the limitations of the house that holds the South
Node. However, remember that it is a polar axis we’re describing, and the
opposing houses always have elements in common with each other. If you
draw attention to the areas of life ruled by both your North and South
Node house positions, than you are on the right track.. And when you
accentuate these areas of your life as being important, then you are
stretching beyond your comfort zone to maximize all you can be.
    It is good to remember with the area of life ruled by your South Node,
that there is an emotional memory here—unconscious, but similar to a dream
that we can’t quite remember—and the element of defeat and despair
remains of what we didn’t get right earlier in this life or in a former life. So
be gentle with yourself in the area of life ruled by the South Node, as this is
where you’ve experienced wounding before. Whether we did it, or it was
done to us, the “emotional hangover” may feel somewhat similar.
North Node in First House
   Is your North Node in the first house? Then it has an undertone of Aries,
and your South Node automatically falls into the 7th house, which has a
Libra undertone. Add the description of the sign of your North Node to this
house position to deepen your understanding of your Nodal axis:

     Here, with the North Node in the First House, which has its normal ruler
Aries, it reflects a soul desire towards independence and individuation—to
taking care of our own needs and desires first, and putting emphasis on
surviving and fighting for what we believe in. The first house is about the
individual rather than the group, family or couple, so the individual needs to
come first, before a healthy relationship with others can be achieved. But the
house emphasis here says: pay attention to all one-on-one relationships,
marriage, business partnerships, close friendships, enemies, and even close
advisors, like lawyers. It is in the arena of your life that independence needs
to be strongest.
     At the opposite of the North Node in the first house is the South Node in
the Libra ruled Seventh house of partnerships, marriage, and one-to-one
relationships. We see that the default pattern which the Soul wants to leave
behind involves being in relationships that are unhealthy. It points to too
much enmeshment or co-dependency with another or any unequal
relationships in which you sacrifice too much.
     This Libra/Aries polarity from the seventh to the first house is ultimately
about the balance between you and another person, between I and Thou,
between Mars and Venus being in co-operative relationship with each other.
Even though the Nodes always show an imbalance, they also show a
fascinating inter-relationship—and this time it’s between the male and
female parts of our nature. And here, it’s saying that the assertive, male,
independent qualities are calling to be further developed. And yet we know
there is gold in the wisdom of the receptive, feeling orientation of the
classically female side of ourselves. That is the “gold in the shadow.” But
now we need to use that assertive, goal-making part essentially
Martian/Aries part of ourselves to become all we can be, and not to let the
emotional drama and trauma of relationships throw us off balance. A bit of
creative tension between people is a good thing when it comes to redefining
who we are and what we’re about, but we’re never meant to lose ourselves
in the other person, or to collapse in melodramatic unselfishness. (Which
you could do very nobly if your partner was sick or old or…..) The goal
now is to erase the fear of separation and to use a bit of enlightened
selfishness to get you there. It’s always easier said than done! But there is
nothing healthier than a good balance of Mars and Venus: these two Nodal
energies, working in the first house of the Self.
North Node in Second House
    Is your North Node in the second house? Then it has an undertone of
Taurus, and your South Node automatically falls into the 8 th house, which
has a Scorpio undertone. Add the description of the sign of your North
Node to this house position to deepen your understanding of your Nodal
axis:

    Away with the drama and trauma and melodrama! No more tragic love
stories, no more battles for power, struggles for revenge, hidden agendas
and all the stuff of great novels. Just peace. Serenity. That’s the movement
away from the South Node in the 8th house to the North Node in the 2nd
house. Your Soul needs a rest. You need to come home to yourself and to
value your own resources. You are called to focus on whatever gives you
emotional, financial, and physical self-confidence and freedom.
    The 8th house South Node, ruled by Pluto, has struggled to transform
and be re-born like the phoenix, and somewhere in all that struggling has
come an exhaustion and weariness of the spirit. This life is now one where
you are being called to rethink your values, your priorities, and put the
Venus ruled 2nd house of Taurus back in its position of prominence. This is
not the Venus of the struggle, but of gentle inquiry—-the one that has the
savvy to pick her own battles and chooses the “mutual fund” that agrees
with her political and ecological consciousness. This is the Venus that
soothes us, and reminds us of our roots in this good earth. She’d rather write
a poem than put on the dress that makes her into the femme fatale. She finds
the sacred in the commonplace, and makes it extraordinary.
    The South Node here has great gold in its shadowy inheritance—-it has
a hard won wisdom and occult knowledge that can serve us well when used
right. Certainly astrologers and those interested in astrology, have resources
here in the 8th house. With this placement however, we paid too much
attention to other people’s business rather than our own. We were the power
behind the throne, or the one who “borrowed” another’s values, glory,
money or husband. Our own yearning for these things seemed to make it
acceptable, but we missed the basic course in ethics or fairness.
    This North Node in the 2nd house is deceptively easy—-just stay away
from all that occultism, and politics, and other people’s money. Just be good
and mind your own business. But do “mind your business” because there’s
a need here to prove yourself to yourself, to regain self-confidence, and to
do that by creating a body of work, or to create “a life” in whatever way is
meaningful to you. Does it mean creating a strong and good family? Does it
mean being really good at what you do? Yes, and it also calls for you to
enjoy yourself in the process, so that your Soul can remember that this Earth
can be a joyful and safe place to be. You’ve had too much drama and
trauma before, and you now need to recover from all of that. You are now
meant to take pride in yourself and your accomplishments, and also to take a
picnic to the beach to watch that beautiful sunset. Easy….yes?! Here’s what
someone wrote to my blog wrote about this placement:
     “This new north node in the second house is deceptively easy” is my
     favorite line…ever. As a native of this nodal position, it’s so amazing
     to be alive in an incarnation where, I, am precisely the thing which
     places obstacles in my way and then gets to realize that I am not bound
     to suffer that harsh path. I just made a huge career change thinking that
     I needed to go through a very difficult, rite of passage into adulthood.
     The necessary rite was to realize that I don’t have to suffer in order to
     become what I am “meant” to become. Now it’s time to piece back
     together what I can and re-establish my REAL goals.” Anonymous.
North Node in Third House
    Is your North Node in the 3rd house? Then it has an undertone of
Gemini, and your South Node automatically falls into the 9th house, which
has a Sagittarian undertone. Add the description of the sign of your North
Node to this house position to deepen your understanding of your Nodal
Axis:

     “The breeze at dawn has secrets to tell you. Don’t go back to sleep. You
must ask for what you really want. Don’t go back to sleep. People are going
back and forth across the doorsill where the two worlds touch. The door is
round and open. Don’t go back to sleep.” Rumi
     This saying by the Persian poet, Rumi, speaks to us in many ways. With
a North Node in the 3rd house you are called to learn to live with mystery,
with a sense of awe, and to live with uncertainty and an open mind. To do
this, you focus yourself in your daily life with great curiosity and pay
attention to those around you—brothers, sisters, neighbors, everything that
confronts you each day in the marketplace of life.
     Rumi says: “You must ask for what you really want” and this reminds
us that spiritual etiquette requires us to ask God/Universe for intervention
when needed. Intention made in prayer or ritual holds a lot of weight, and it
increases when we speak them to a friend over coffee in the morning. This
3rd /9th house axis stresses the importance of your communication skills in
daily life, and your willingness to take your metaphysical blinders off and
see what “Truth” is right in front of you.
     If your South Node is in the 9th house you may be familiar with “the
doorsill where the two worlds touch” if not consciously, then in the deep
recesses of your psyche. Having a Ninth house South Node implies that you
sought after Truth in the past—either in former lives or this one—and told
yourself a self-convincing story of how it all is. You may have been a
mystic or religious leader, and “right” in your own way, but you caught the
view from the mountain-top, and didn’t understand the view from the valley
or marketplace. In some ways, you simply got it wrong. You didn’t get the
whole picture and your enthusiasm for an ideal or a religious or political
point of view, probably undermined you in some way. Now, your ability to
have an open mind to new things is a great gift to use.
     So you are cautioned not to go back to sleep, (or into another state of
consciousness where you only see things one way). You can do this by
relaxing your ideas about needing to know all the answers. What you need
now is to open up to new information and insights gained as you see the
multiplicity of life and “truths” as revealed to you in the messiness of life in
the “marketplace” or within family life, not the mountaintop.
    You may have spent former lives in a religious organization or simply as
one who distanced him/herself from the clutter and clatter of human
relationships. Now you can bring some of the “gold” in the innate spiritual
wisdom you had in a previous life and use it in teaching, writing, speaking
and communicating to others—but this time without prejudgment or
aloofness. You are ready to listen and hear the paradoxes of life now, and
your curiosity, tact, and ability to convey deep truths with compassion and
fresh insight is a profound gift you have to share. Use it wisely; don’t go
back to sleep.
North Node in the Fourth House
    Is your North Node in the 4th house? Then it has an undertone of
Cancer, and your South Node automatically falls into the 10th house, which
has a Capricorn undertone. Add the description of the sign of your North
Node to this house position to deepen your understanding of your Nodal
axis:

     With the North Node in the 4 th house you’d be wise to focus on the 3
H’s: home, heart and hearth. Your home now, and your home life in your
family of origin, has a huge impact on you and there’s gold there for you!
How do you understand the story of your life? What is your personal
mythology? Writing a short memoir of your life with an emphasis on
feelings and home life might be eye-opening for you. You may have
focused more easily on your goals and career earlier in this life, or in a
former life, and you may have even achieved a good measure of fame and
self-respect along the way. Now however, its time to take the emphasis off
the doing and put it onto the “being.” And, one could say, it’s time to “make
home” and review your life story in front of your own hearth!
     For 4th house North Node people it will be important for you to show
empathy and validate your own feelings and those of others, and to work for
emotional security in this life. You would be wise to focus on the process of
getting things done, rather than the ego satisfaction alone, of the job
finished. When you focus on your self and not try to take charge without
fully understanding the situation, you win. Use your intuition! You don’t
need to feel overly responsible anymore. You also don’t need to hide
feelings and fears in intimate relationships or always do what is socially
acceptable rather than totally honest. By understanding and accepting
other’s fluctuating moods without judgment, you can find the “job” gets
done anyway, and people are much happier when their feelings are honored.
     The movement from the outer-world orientation of the tenth house, to
the fourth house of one’s inner world of family and personal mythology,
suggests the wisdom of not sacrificing your personal life in the pursuit of
worldly ambition. It hints of a need to focus more on the process of doing
things rather than the goal or end result.
     We also hear a suggestion implying that the personal subjective response
to life is the right one for you—and that as Jungian analyst, Jim Hollis once
said: “Reject the seductive impulse to encapsulate the mystery by reason.”
The 4th house and Cancer is ruled by the Moon, and you don’t want to
sacrifice the mystery and process of life to logic, reason, and anything that
diminishes the depth of the inner response. Now you can afford to feel the
mystery, rather than intellectually analyze it.
     In former lives, or earlier in this life, you may have trained yourself to
repress feelings, instincts, sensual enjoyment for the sake of what needed to
be done. You may have achieved positions of authority or respect, but you
may have been separated from a sweeter flow of family interactions and
personal reflection. This life is now meant to create a better balance between
accomplishing things and nourishing and supporting yourself and others.
     As you turn on your path and retrieve the gold in the shadow of your
South Node of Capricorn, you use your commonsense and savvy by being
an effective person in the life. You have integrity and ambition. And
because you intuitively know how to be successful in the world, having
done that in former lives, you now have the freedom and challenge to soften
into a personal response to life. You can draw on both your masculine
assertiveness with your feminine receptivity. Maintaining the balance of
these two energies is key for you.
     You are bringing gifts with you into this life that make you a natural
leader and person of authority; use these ‘default patterns’ of behaving to
stretch into the realms of emotion, mystery, and deep connection to Self.
Inner work is as valid, or more valid, than outer work in the world in this
life, so keep that soulful connection to your spiritual, meaning-making Self.
And in loving yourself for that, you will love and honor others for their
efforts to do the same.
North Node in Fifth House
    Is your North Node in the fifth house? Then it has an undertone of Leo,
and your South Node automatically falls into the 11 th house, which has a
Aquarius undertone. Add the description of the sign of your North Node to
this house position to deepen your understanding of your Nodal axis:

     Your fifth house North Node here wants to have more fun, and to see
life as a game worth playing. It can bring out your entrepreneurial and
artistic side as well. This Nodal axis wants to get personal—to risk the love
affair, to have a child, to express itself creatively. It doesn’t need to get
philosophical and talk about saving humanity—-how about just one child at
a time? And maybe that child could just be your inner child that’s been
neglected for awhile.
     In past lives you might have been living on the sidelines watching others
interact. You could have done great things as a scientist, an eccentric genius,
a humanitarian….one who gave selflessly. Now it’s time to “give to the
giver” and to feel the flow of love in and out of your heart. You’ve earned
it.

   With this South Node you’ll want to move away from the lower
expression of Aquarian qualities: being emotionally aloof and detached,
avoiding confrontation and intimacy, and having a tendency to think you
always need more knowledge before taking action. Instead, it’s time to take
more risks, to reach for center stage, and to develop one’s self confidence—-
even if it means allowing your childlike qualities to come out more, and for
you to be more of a “character.”

    Are your “friends” the kind of people who support your goals, your
values, and see you for who you really are? Or are they people who have
“just happened to you” along the way? With the South Node in the 11th
house, there’s a chance that you need to move up an octave in choosing
friends who support you and your dreams, and also a need to leave behind
peer pressure in any of its forms. It’s important for you to become clear on
who you are and who you want to spend your time with—move away from
the crowds or groups that simply fill your time, and find a few “heart-mates”
instead of acquaintances, and look for the community or place where you
really belong. Look around a bit, so that you can sit at the right “camp-fire.”
    Having the North Node in the fifth house suggests you put the focus of
your life on letting your light shine through self-expressive ways of being in
the world. What would that mean for you? More creativity? More joyful
times with friends, lovers, or children? Daring to risk your heart in a love
affair? The fifth house rules short term relationships too—and its been said
that people with many planets here, or one of their Nodes, may have some
important “unfinished business” with people they may only know for a
relatively short time—this is where the idea of love relationships, rather than
marriage or friendship comes into play. So for you, don’t rule out the
importance of the people you meet even for shorter periods of time—you
don’t need to have a “love affair” but consider your relationships with the
ordinary people you see for short times. How do you relate to these people?
The Leo undertone of this sign suggests that you bring a generous open
heart into all these relationships.
North Node in Sixth House
    Is your North Node in the 6th house? Then it has an undertone of Virgo,
and your South Node automatically falls into the 12th house, which has a
Pisces undertone. Add the description of the sign of your North Node to this
house position to deepen your understanding of your Nodal axis:

     With the North Node in the 6 th house, you’ll want to become effective
at handling the daily details of life and honoring the idea that one’s life itself
is the greatest art! You’ll do well if you skillfully educate yourself to give
your gifts to the world, for you’ll find that you are greatly appreciated when
you act on your dreams and turn them into reality. To do this, you’ll need to
have a workable ego that can withstands the pressures of the marketplace
and the valley, rather than the mystic view from the mountaintop.
     In this life, you bring with you a compassionate and perhaps mystical
understanding of life which needs to be grounded in the affairs of this world.
Having the South Node in the Twelfth House of the subconscious, hints that
you may have spent many lifetimes in dissolution of the ego—either through
meditation and spiritual quests or drug/alcohol abuse, co-dependence, of
confinement in convents, prisons, or asylums. You might also have felt
exiled or ostracized (or you emigrated) away from your community, and in
this life there’s a desire to regain your identity, your sense of Self, and to
manifest your vision in a concrete way here on Earth.
     An important soul lesson for you in this life-time will be to come back
into your body and to feel the joy of health and sensuality. There may be a
karmic memory of pain or deprivation in the physical body, and a default
tendency to want to escape from this world. For you, spirituality means
coming back into your body. In former lives, or earlier in this one, you may
have experienced something of the impermanence and pain of life, and now
there is the question—will you flee from this world, or truly make it a better
place for yourself and others? The good news is that if your intention is the
latter, you may rather easily find yourself with the teachers, guidance and
inspiration you truly crave. But first the commitment must be made.
     So with this Nodal placement, you’ll want to leave behind: feeling
yourself to be a victim, escapism and addictive tendencies, withdrawal and
feelings of inadequacy, oversensitivity and the avoidance of planning. The
qualities for you to develop are: bringing order to chaos, creating routines,
focusing on the here and now, being of service to others, taking risks in spite
of fears, and choosing to value and analyze details.
     With this Nodal axis there can be a desire for a person or mentor who
you can trust and learn from—it’s good for you to search for this, or for a
school or a “way” that can help you. There can be a healthy desire to learn
new things and to be a disciple (“to discipline yourself”) to whatever it is
you love doing. And when you emerge into the “marketplace” of the world
and share your skills and talents, you may find that you have become the
mentor as well as becoming your own best “author-ity.” You have now
become the author of your own life, in the here and now, and what you feel
may be a deep sense of gratitude and peace.
North Node in Seventh House
   Is your North Node in the 7th house? Then it has an undertone of Libra,
and your South Node automatically falls into the 1st house, which has an
Aries undertone. Add the description of the sign of your North Node to this
house position to deepen your understanding of your Nodal axis:

    The North Node being in the Seventh House, ruled by Libra and the
planet Venus, speaks to the desire for harmonious and right relationship with
others. It softens the Arian independent Mars, and it asks a soul question of
whether or not you will consider engaging with another person in a full
respectful dialogue of “I and Thou.” The North Node placement here in the
house of partnerships and marriage, encourages you to seek out close one-
on-one relationships, whether they are in friendships, in counseling
relationships, in marriage, or in business. It also asks that you learn to accept
the paradoxical nature of human relationships in which you are called to
balance the opposite qualities of light and shadow, good and bad. Accepting
the humanness in oneself and others, with compassionate understanding and
forgiveness is a huge part of this placement.
    Having a South Node in the first house reflects the pattern of the
independent Aries-like hero/heroine, who is on a quest to know who they
are and to move assertively into the world. Some people see the Aries
archetype as the warrior—the spiritual warrior or the hero in the story that
begins: “Once upon a time there was a…….” By suggesting this
hero/warrior myth, the life story moves from being played out as the martyr,
the outsider or the lost one, to the empowered one, and the one who
transformed the Self. Freedom may have been an issue too; as anyone
knows who is in relationship, freedom and expectation are things one
negotiates within a relationship once the honeymoon period has worn off.
    So the emphasis shifts to the North Node in the 7th —the relationship
arena which has at its core the evolutionary issues of trust and commitment.
How does one learn to trust and how does one balance needs for freedom
with intimacy? Boundary issues arise, and it’s problematic. With the South
Node in the first house, it was all about you—your personality, your way of
seeing the world, the nuts and bolts and nuances of how you would describe
yourself, and how others would describe you. With the South Node here it
describes a pattern of self-containment and retreat that caused an attitude to
arise that may have felt cynical or simply alone in the world.
    When we look at the South Node houses it’s about the nature of the
unfinished business in a previous life, and reflects the habits and mind-set
that was needed to be finished or improved upon. Otherwise we would not
be taking an incarnation at all. So, we look here at perhaps an exaggerated
sense of independence or freedom or even excessive fear or worry—
something which kept the person with this placement away from committed
interaction with another. There could have been shyness or concern for the
needs of others, or even a sense that others were “enemies”—and it may
have been true. Even though there may have been great courage and
wonderful assertive action, the compensating challenge is now of bringing
in significant “Others” and partners into your life to round out your story.
That’s the 7 th house! There’s a move here from independence to inter-
dependence. From aloneness to togetherness and partnership, and that can
be pretty sweet.
North Node in Eighth House
     Is your North Node in the 8th house? Then it has an undertone of
Scorpio, and your South Node automatically falls into the 2th house, which
has a Taurus undertone. Add the description of the sign of your North Node
to this house position to deepen your understanding of your Nodal axis:

     The Eighth House, with the Scorpio association coming from its ruler
Pluto, is all about the willingness to die and be reborn if necessary in order
to live a life of integrity. Like the phoenix that rises from its own ashes, the
realm of the 8th house is the edge of transformation—where people go
bankrupt, inherit a million dollars, or have a near fatal disease or accident
that forever changes them—-the kind of “wake up call” that gives life deep
meaning. There’s no false security or living in the world of denial for North
Node Eighth House people!
     With the North Node in the eighth house, the house of Scorpio, we are
called to find the emotional bottom line in all we do. It calls us to move
beyond comfort, security, and even the simpler pleasures of life to a deeper
level of truth and reality. It asks us to look into the eyes of the bully to find
the frightened unloved child there. It calls us to become an empowered
person and to dare to risk closing one chapter of our lives and opening a
new chapter. It calls us to reach for the understanding of another’s point of
view, other than our own, and the willingness to intimately and dynamically
become related with that “Other.”
     Having the North Node in the 8th house, ruling gritty transformations
and other people’s values, is a high calling. It brings up issues around
intimacy, money, power, and healing—the kind of healing that people call
“occult” because of its hidden nature. More than any other sign or house
placement, the 8th house and Scorpio can heal themselves and others, and
have a gift there. It also asks that you come into this power and healing by
understanding another person’s values when they’re different from your
own. Here too is where we can truly know the meaning of loyalty and trust.
A North Node in this Eighth house is quite a gift if we can bring the 2 nd
house qualities of stability and integrity into a new life that is ambitious,
effective and deeply connected with others.
     We know that the South Node represents what we’ve come into this life
with—-the gifts, the wounds, the challenges. On the most basic level, the
South Node is where we are comfortable, because we are familiar with the
territory, and in the Second House we may have been very comfortable
indeed. Taurus, Venus, and the Second House all love security, good food
and drink, loyal friends, and the type of pragmatic philosophy that is rooted
in a confident and sensual understanding of life. The second house calls us
to “own” the self confidence and independent resources that can create a
good life on this earth.
    So this Nodal combination honors that, but speaks to the need to move
away from some of the security and comforts of this 2nd house towards the
willingness to risk one’s present level of security for a more vital and
courageous life.
North Node in Ninth House
   And…is your North Node in the 9th house? Then it has an undertone of
Sagittarius, and your South Node automatically falls into the 3rd house,
which has a Gemini undertone. Add the description of the sign of your
North Node to this house position to deepen your understanding of your
Nodal axis:

    The call of the Ninth House, which is ruled by Sagittarius, is a North
Node call to expand outside the mental, physical and spiritual bonds of your
community, your nation, and your old ways of seeing things. It’s a call to
enthusiastically bring more of the world into your private life, to break up
old routines, and to find a true spiritual rudder for your Soul’s journey
through this life. A North Node house placement here is always colored by
whatever sign the Node is in, but it still carries the message of adventure—-
asking you to read, travel, and to dare to understand your life from the
highest perspective—the mountaintop view rather than the view from the
marketplace.
    This North Node is also in the realm of the higher mind, and it wants to
be nourished by contact with anything that inspires and stimulates you to
find “meaning.” Because it seeks to expand into seeing life as a “quest”
overflowing with many questions, it is not only the house of meaning-
making, but also the realm of spirituality, religion, law, and philosophy.
    The 3rd and 9th houses resonate with all the curious parts of our nature
that makes us ask “why” and then urges us to share what we’ve learned. So
teaching, speaking, writing, and telling our story can deeply gratify us. With
a North Node here in the 9th house we are called here to see life as a grand
Quest, and then to tell the story of our journey—to communicate what we
know and what we’ve learned. With our 3rd house “street smarts” we’re
naturally savvy, and want to know “what’s happening.” But when not used
well, a South Node here can be flighty and fearful of going too far or too
deep. As the third house relates to the sign of Gemini, we could say that any
of the negative characteristics of Gemini would apply here—-especially the
puer or puella complex, also known as the Peter Pan Syndrome; hinting that
a part of us is reluctant to take on the role of growing up and expanding our
world beyond the familiar.
    The crucial piece for the North Node in the 9th house is that we’re being
called to slow down! We’ve got to have time to truly digest what we’ve
experienced, and get down to the soul of things. Glibness, speed and
superficiality are the default patterns of this Nodal combination, and those
behaviors have robbed our Soul of a certain depth and resonance. Now its
time to discover the core values that give us a rudder to our life, but moving
from reaction to reflection. No more quick band aids and easy answers now
—you’re being called to the Graduate School of the Soul and you can’t use
the cliff notes anymore.
    The South Node in the Third House also suggests unresolved karmic
issues with brothers and sisters, and situations from our early childhood.
Communication is the key word for this Nodal axis, and how interesting it is
that it is with our brothers and sisters and oldest friends that we are often
trapped in an unending conversation that goes on for a lifetime…. even
when we’re not speaking with them. Karmic issues with siblings are another
mystery, like that with our parents—why did we choose them; or why did
they choose us? Did we know them before? Did we come together now to
learn and grow more? As always with this Nodal placement, thoughtful
communication is the key.
North Node in Tenth House
   Is your North Node in the 10th house? Then it has an undertone of
Capricorn, and your South Node automatically falls into the 4th house,
which has a Cancer undertone. Add the description of the sign of your
North Node to this house position to deepen your understanding of your
Nodal axis:

    In this placement the Soul is moving from a process-oriented emotional
enmeshment in the family and clan to a goal-oriented position of being out
in the world. Moving towards our North Node in the Tenth House, and/or
Capricorn, means we are called to follow a grounded plan of conscious
action and discipline to achieve our goals. We are meant to move out into
the world—to make our professional lives a priority. No longer will we be
bound by our emotions or co-dependent relationships, but rather we are
headed out of the deep Cancerian waters of our family of origin and into
creating a place and name for ourselves in the world.
    The South Node here can succumb to moodiness and a dependence on
others when in its default pattern. Because the South Node represents where
we’ve come from earlier in this life and perhaps in a former life, it hints at
the unfinished business due to prioritizing family above everything else. In
this life the relations with family may still be deep and tangled, but whether
there are good relations now or not, the point is that you can no longer
afford to be defined and engulfed by family.
    People with this placement are often more loved than they realize. It’s
important for them to make it a point to find ways to lighten up and
creatively express themselves, as well as making time to keep company with
good friends. They may find themselves given work and opportunities to
succeed in the world in surprising ways using talents that they didn’t know
they had. Perhaps the challenge here is to learn to honor the fluctuations and
inspirations and ‘moods’ of the lunar Cancerian nature while taking
purposeful steps to achieve goals in the outer world. And what would those
be? It’s locked inside the heart of the Capricorn/Cancer nature, and only
they know the way to dream it out into reality….
North Node in the Eleventh House
    Is your North Node in the 11th house? Then it has an undertone of
Aquarius, and your South Node automatically falls into the 5th house, which
has a Leo undertone. Add this to the description of the sign of your North
Node to this house position to deepen your understanding of your Nodal
axis:

     With an 11 th house North Node you need to ask yourself: Who and
what do I really care about in this world, and how can I connect with others
who have similar passions? Who is my community, my “tribe,” my network
of friends? Are they a default pattern of strangers or are they co-workers and
friends? I often think of “networking” as an eleventh house good “idea.”
     The core of the healing process with an 11 th house North Node is to
learn to take in a longer, larger view of life, to think strategically, and to take
time to make decisions and develop one’s life. It takes time to learn to
discern what is valuable and what is not, as well as what and who supports
you. People with planets and Nodes in the 11 th often don’t come into their
own till later in life….but they do blossom.
     With the South Node in the Fifth House, the default pattern or the past
life pattern of the Soul was concentrated on personal self-expression, risk-
taking, and whatever brought joy and pleasure—-and sometimes it was too
much, too quick, and changed your life forever. Like joining the military for
the wrong reasons at too early an age, or falling in love and getting pregnant
as a teenager (and making a quick decision into parenthood)—all these can
be tragic for some people. With this Nodal placement, the Soul has
experienced some thing like this in the past—decisions that came too fast,
too hard, and weren’t right in the long run. Now there’s a desire to learn
discernment and to move away from any excesses and bad judgment calls
from the personal ego.
     On this axis we are called to work with other people in finding our true
path in order to fulfill our hopes and dreams. We are not a solo agent
anymore; we are meant to interact with others in those things that are most
important to us. Personal risk taking now gives way to considering what is
of greatest good to the whole—and consensus decision-making.
     A fifth house South Node is related to the sign Leo, and when we read a
South Node we read the negative aspect of whatever sign it rules. So here,
we can see too much self-preoccupation, narcissism, combined with all the
5th house issues around children, love affairs, creativity and sometimes over
the top hedonism. There’s great creativity here—but in the past the energy
flowed backwards and inward to the self rather than outward to benefit
humanity. We are reminded here with this South Node that what we do
slowly, strategically, and by careful planning, often works to our best
advantage. And when we truly follow our hearts dreams, we find the groups
of people who share similar dreams.
    (A side note: The computer and all the new technologies are excellent
11th house tools, so finding “one’s tribe” and networking with kindred
spirits is made easier through using the internet. We no longer have the
excuse of isolation due to physical restrictions, both geographically and
personal. We have so many ways to find our 11th house soul-friends, and
new ways to find where we belong in the world. Another 11 th house group
dynamic is embodied in all the 12 step groups—they are a great example of
a healing and supportive group that has changed many lives.)
North Node in Twelfth House
     Is your North Node in the 12th house? Then it has an undertone of
Pisces, and your South Node automatically falls into the 6thth house, which
has an Virgo undertone. Add the description of the sign of your North Node
to this house position to deepen your understanding of your Nodal axis:

    With a North Node in the 12th house we are deep in the “house that
Carl Jung built.” This is the area of the deep psyche, the unconscious, and
with a North Node here we are wise to explore the body/mind/spirit
connection in our life. How are they interconnected? It calls us to participate
in all that lies beneath the surface levels of life, and to reach for what can be
learned through the more subtle worlds of music, art, poetry, painting and
depth psychology.
    With a North Node here we are called to “the monastery” in the sense
that it is a summons to explore all that is beyond the purely rational and to
seek the spiritual call towards Self awareness. The 12th house has
sometimes been called the house of troubles, because it can’t be dealt with
logically and pragmatically, and to do so doesn’t benefit the person with a
North Node in this house. However, the key to this house placement is that
there is no longer any need for troubles, duties, obligations, humility and
service! All those are embodied in the shadow of the opposite 6 th house. As
a 12th house North Node person you have earned the right to nourish
yourself on the deep pleasures of the unconscious: gifts of magic, insight
and deep peace.
    The karmic pull of your past with the South Node in the 6th house will
be one that tries to pull you back to be of help to others, with an emphasis
on the skillful use of the mind and duty, rather than the promptings of the
heart. The default tendency here is usually around thinking rather than
feeling, working rather than playing, honoring logic more than intuition.
    The North Node compensatory medicine here is a move away from the
particular and detailed attention that the 6th house requires, to the spiritual
“meaning-making” and boundary-less quality of the 12th house. This
evolutionary pull towards the 12th house, which is ruled by Pisces, will be
to balance and correct that tendency to dutiful work with a more imaginative
and collectively conscious type of thinking. The yearning here is to create
more compassion in our lives by simply loving ourselves and others more.
We’ve earned a degree of rest and release from duty.
    The high road for North Node 12th house folks is a fascinating journey
into worlds where not everything is controlled, obvious, or as it appears to
be. It’s a world where even limitations, chosen or not chosen, can be a
profound gift. Who has not enjoyed the occasional “mental health day”
when we’ve stayed in our pajamas the whole day without leaving the
house?
     In the 12th house, the shadow and the gold that is buried in the
unconscious longs for conscious understanding and acceptance. Jungian
psychology and counseling, with its emphasis on creative expression of non-
verbal feelings and images, and its encouragement towards unique
individuality rather than collective moralities, can be very nurturing for 12th
house people. However, it is worth noting that this placement is
paradoxically, not an easy one, because it’s not as consciously accessible by
rational thought.
                   Chapter 15.
     Going Deeper; Unraveling the Unconscious
                     Story

   “In all chaos there is a cosmos, in all disorder, a secret order.” C.G.
Jung

    I can imagine advanced students of astrology going right to this section
of the book first for some quick verification and to see if they agree with the
finer points. However, going into more depth in examining the Nodes is not
for everyone. You may have enough information to go on right now. But
for those of you who want to explore the “plot” of the prior life story, you
will find those connecting dots here. Because you may want to read just
sections of this chapter, and because some points need to be referred to
again, I hope you will forgive any overlapping and still find the answers to
your questions here.
    This chapter covers the issue of squares to the Nodes and the Ruler of
the Nodes, the polarity of the Nodes, reversed nodes in signs and houses,
planets aspecting the Nodes, the karma and free will of the South Node, and
two sections about what you don’t want to know about yourself, and
retrieving the gold in the shadow. Whew! Sounds like it could be too
much…and I think it could, that’s why this chapter is not as long as it could
be.
    Other writers, such as Steven Forrest, delve into the details of these
questions very thoroughly, however I have chosen not to go into too much
detail here. I hope to give you just enough detail, but mostly I want to give
you the theory of how to do it, and have you use your intuitive active
imagination with it. My fear in giving too much of a “detailed cook-book
answer” is that you may get a wrong “reading” of your self by
overemphasizing some “details” and miss the more important point of
synthesizing this information with the other themes of your birth chart, such
as the basic brush strokes of Sun, Moon, Ascendant, and of course the
notorious and ever popular, Pluto. I’m not saying the subtleties of the Nodes
aren’t important, I’m simply saying that if you use your “astrological
imagination” with this, you are likely to come up with a truer intuitive “hit”
on your situation than if I spell out how it might be.
    That being said, we are still going to delve into the evolutionary theory
here, while remembering that it is crucial to prioritize and synthesize all the
elements in a chart. When we see what the North and South Node is doing,
how do we see Pluto supporting this? What is Saturn summoning us to do?
Are the Sun and Moon and other planets in agreement or adding a
paradoxical piece to this story?
    Attempting to understand the basics of the Nodal story is an act of
imagination, and it lends itself to error if taken too literally. We are looking
for emotional truth, not literal facts. So when we look at what are the rulers
and the aspects to the Nodes I think any extrapolations need to be
“seconded” by the rest of the chart.
    It’s key to remind yourself too that when you are looking at planets
aspecting the South Node you are looking into your prior life nature. Planets
that are closely conjunct the South Node are like a planet conjunct the Sun,
except we are talking about in a prior life. The bizarre thing here is that
past life aspects and situations tend to repeat themselves in this life until we
bring consciousness to these patterns, and accept or reject parts of them. It is
uncanny how often the past life “parable” is really the current life story as
well. Karma repeats.
1—Squares to the Nodes, the Planetary Ruler of the South Node, and
Planets aspecting the Nodes—the big questions!
     Squares to the Nodes are your karmic “Skipped Step.” It is that extra
piece of information, or that particular area of life which you tend to skip
around, to deny, or to not engage with….so when you ask: How do I get to
my North Node? How do I know how best to prioritize things? What has
been left unresolved karmically from past lives? This is where we look.
     Like using those cheating “cliff notes” to pass the exam in high school,
you’re now suddenly in need of knowing what you’ve skimmed by—
you’ve got to turn around and go back—if your Nodes are squared, there’s
something you missed! The entire PLOT of your life story now may hinge
on the overlooked skipped step you took along the way, and now you need
to go back and do it the right way.
     For example, say you have Saturn in Leo in the 5th house squaring your
Nodes. There’s a blockage suggested here—that’s Saturn, constricting the
joyful expression of your heart’s generosity—that’s Leo, in the 5 th house
ruling children, creativity, love affairs, and all things “5 th house” related.
You would then be called in this life to not avoid that skipped step, but to
make more space for those things in your life now and to question what
resistances you may have there. Have you dared to be creative? How much
stage fright do you have? Do you engage in joyful activities with loved ones
or children, and are you in touch with your inner child? Have you allowed
the generous hearted nature of Leo to express itself in this life? The story of
your daring to do these things, holds some of the “plot” of your life.
     Not everyone will have a square to the Nodes. But for those who do it’s
an extra piece of insight. To understand it you need to let your imagination
roam around the meaning of the planet that is squared. Again, what sign is it
in? What house? There is something in the nature of this placement that is
telling you what you need to do as part of your process of getting to the
North Node. You need to pick up the unfinished business here—there is
something about that sign and house placement that describes what that
skipped step is! It may be as strong as a “complex” or as simple as a
forgotten way of thinking that needs to be brought into your life now. You
can understand that skipped step as being a karmic “bad habit” from a
former life, or simply a blind spot in your psyche.
     Blind spot? The skipped step is often what we don’t want to look at or
deal with—it’s the missing piece of the puzzle, the dropped stitch, the piece
that needs the most priority in your life now, and often receives the least.
Bad habit? It may be as simple as holding onto an attitude of scarcity in this
life. With that attitude, how can the gifted guitar player really do his best if
he doesn’t think he’s worthy of spending money on a really good guitar?
Sometimes what is skipped is just a tweak in one’s attitude.
     For example: today I did a reading for a woman who had so many skills
and abilities, yet she was feeling quite stuck for a number of reasons. We
touched on what those issues were about, but I was left with the feeling that
if she would take care of her body/health, then the rest would fall into place
rather easily. She needed to address the square to her Nodes, which pointed
to the 6th house of health. And, at this point in her life I felt there was a
certain urgency to it, and with Jupiter there, it involved overdoing and issues
with sugar.


     Jeffrey Green and Steven Forrest were the first I know of to call this
aspect the skipped step. The blockages and distortions that are symbolized
by the planet and house that is square to the Nodes is a critical piece to
consider when looking at a chart. Yet nothing is ever truly skipped or lost—
it’s just put away till another time, or done unconsciously. But for those who
want more direct answers to life direction and soul purpose questions, these
aspects are a wealth of information. Ironically, as easy as they are to see,
they’re never easy to act upon.


    The astrological ruler of the South Node—its ruling planet—is a very
important lead to follow if you’re trying to piece together the full past life
parable or to understand the nuances of the Nodal quest. The ruler of the
Node is the planet that rules the sign, and we look to where it is located in
the birth chart and what aspects it makes.
    For example: say that the South Node’s sign is in Scorpio, with Pluto as
Scorpio’s ruler—so we look to what is happening to Pluto in this person’s
chart. What house is it in? What is aspecting it?
    Can Pluto as the ruler of the South Node point to both the problem and
the medicine to cure it? Indeed it can, especially if we look to the North
Node. If the South Node Sign is Scorpio and its ruler is Pluto, therefore the
Ruler of its opposite sign, is Venus in Taurus. The North Node. Perhaps
you are being called to integrate Venusian beauty and love with the
mysteries of the Underworld, or into the power dynamics of your
relationships.
    Another example: Let’s say you have South Node in Sagittarius. It’s
ruled by Jupiter, and you see that Jupiter is in your 11 th house conjunct
Mars. So there’s several pieces to put together here: the 11 th house issues
(groups, friends, and how they relate to your long term goals) are described
or challenged by Jupiter, the self-confident archetype of expansion and
abundance, and it’s also conjunct the Mars assertive male energy. One could
“read” into this configuration several ways depending on the understanding
of the whole chart, but this information could be suggesting that you would
be wise to pick up friendships with males (or strong females) who have
something in common within a group—and that you bring into this group a
“Jupiterian” attitude of self-confidence, meaning-making, and perhaps
joviality. It also hints that you weren’t able to do this easily in a former life,
or earlier in this life.
What about planets aspecting the Nodes by conjunction, trine or
opposition?
     Essentially this is where you don’t need a cookbook answer. Just treat it
for what the planet and aspect means—ie if a planet is conjuncting, or
opposing, or making a trine to your Nodes, think of it “classically” the same
way as you would a planet doing that to your Sun. It simply is amplifying
and describing more of what that Node is about—except that because you
are looking at Nodal information, the important point is the aspects to the
South Node hint of your past life patterns. You probably lived that planet
out quite thoroughly in a former life.
     A planet tightly aspecting your South Node describes you in a former
life, and like looking through a piece of stained glass, it also colors your
current life today. Read it for what it is! Moon conjunct the South Node?
Put the puzzle together: Moon: mother, mothering, feelings, reactivity. What
sign is it in? You have Moon in Sagittarius? Is Sag concerned with the
balance of freedom and issues of communication? Is it expansive and over-
bearing at times in its enthusiasm? Is this Moon/South Node in the house of
close committed friendships and marriage, or is it in the house of career?
Where then might you be acting out these South Node tendencies?
     A planet conjunct the North Node is a piece of that North Node
Medicine I’ve talked about before—there’s something about what this
planet embodies that you need to bring into your life more. The energies of
that planet may have opposed you earlier in this life, but now it operates as a
compensatory function, and it is this way because the evolutionary theory
postulates that you were in opposition to this planetary energy in a former
life. It opposed you as a person, or a “the brick wall of reality” that you
couldn’t get around. Now you can use it, by integrating those energies into
your life.
     For example if you have Venus in Cancer conjuncting your North
Node, you’ll know that something about the nurturing nature of love in
relationship is good for you now, and is what you didn’t quite get right in a
former life or earlier in this one. Then, you make note of which house it’s in
to tell another piece of the story.
     This kind of Nodal expansiveness in a reading stretches the imagination
to play out a few variations on a theme—why not? You never know what
you might find.
     Still confused? Let me say it the way Steven Forrest expressed it so well
in his book, Yesterday’s Sky:
     *A planet opposing the south node hurt you or stalled you in the past.
Read it negatively.
   *That same planet, on the North Node, shows you the way forward.
Read it positively.
   Got it? =grin=
2—Pluto and Polarities: the Yin/Yang Symbol
     Most of us die with unresolved issues. Most of us die with a few regrets
and unanswered questions. We have held grief, and know of the illusions,
betrayals, and expectations of ourselves and others that weren’t met. Most
astrologers look to the planet Pluto to tell more of the Soul-story about this
aspect of life, as Pluto carries the archetype of the deep wound. When we
feel our emotional body to be heavy with grief, when we feel anger, abuse
or fear the potential of power and power struggles, then we know Pluto.
     The South Node holds the history of Pluto through many unresolved
past lives. So much of what we carry within us unconsciously is buried here.
The personal unconscious, as well as the family unconscious, carries an
“imprint” from these lives, as well as from our early childhood. Here are the
blockages, the complexes, the issues of betrayal and lack of trust; here are
the psychological distortions some of us call evil.
     Perhaps it is within the archetype of Saturn that we are truly invited to
do the work to find new endings to old stories, and to release and heal
whatever is still undigested by the heart. Not an easy thing to do! The good
news is that deep in our psyche is also a remembrance of inner truths,
talents, and inclinations that only we can intuit. Some astrologers look to
archetype of Jupiter for the story of this. Look to the sign and house position
of Jupiter when you need to see more closely where you are graced.
     But it is within the North and South Node that we hold the full duality of
promise and pain. Just like the wound of Pluto, and grace and gift of Jupiter,
each holds a part of the other within it. The symbol of the Yin/Yang with
the circular dot in the center of each side, embodies the relationship of the
Nodes what I call the “gold in the shadow.” The curving symbol of the
yin/yang with the complementary dots in each side, suggest the
interconnection between the two.
     We understand the Yin/Yang symbol as reflecting the intricate balance
and connection between these two polarities: the progressive/light/positive
qualities and regressive/dark/negative qualities. The Yin/Yang symbol
shows the potential for the highest and lowest expression in each choice we
make, just as each Node speaks to both what is unresolved and undigested
within us, as well as being the “medicine” that will bring us greatest relief.
     The North Node can be seen as where we are open to an “inflow” and
where we nourish our Souls. However, there’s something unfamiliar about
the North Node, and like tasting a new food, we often don’t know what to
think about it. Do we really like it? Are we open to it? If we can take it in,
it’s our best cure; it’s the vitamin that we’re deficient in. We feed ourselves
here.
    In contrast, the South Node, in its highest expression, is where we can
feed the world; it’s our gift—it’s something we innately understand and can
give to others. The power of Pluto past and present, resides here. The South
Node, in its lower expression, is like the tail of the dragon—it’s where we
release the bitter undigested parts—dare we say it’s “where we shit.” And,
where we spread our un-healing pain into the world.
    The polarities and paradoxes of the Nodes are not truly opposite—in
fact, because every astrological opposition carries within it the seed of its
opposite, like the yin-yang symbol, each side holds a piece of the other
contained in it. So it’s not all about just reaching for the highest expression
of the North Node and struggling against the lower expression of the South
Node—what is truly expressed in this symbol is the very human, imperfect
movement between the two—a give and take: a dance.
    When we are able to hold the balance, what “shows up” within us is an
energetic re-engagement with life, an inspiration, and a growing re-
enchantment with the process of our life. Ah…here is where we extend
ourselves past our comfort zones—when we reach into that place where we
can love more and truly give of ourselves. The surprise is that in the giving
we are able to receive more, and because of the receiving, we are able to
give more.
3—Reversed Nodes in Signs and Houses
    How do you understand your Nodes when the direction they are
pointing to by SIGN, is the opposite of the direction they’re pointing to by
HOUSE? Good question! The short answer is that the SIGN describes the
kind of behavior and attitude that is optimal to use, and the HOUSE
describes the particular area of life—of “where”—this behavior and attitude
is going to find its greatest impact. And, it’s important to realize that the
Nodes are always on a polar axis with the signs and houses always opposite
each other—so when they’re reversed, it calls for a more subtle
understanding of the dynamic. People and their charts are complex, and
sometimes paradoxical!
    I wrote a blog post on North Node Capricorn and here’s someone who
replied to having a reversal in their chart—he has the North Node in
Capricorn but in the 4th house, Capricorn’s opposite sign naturally, with the
South Node in the 10th house, which normally rules its opposite sign—-as
he says:
    “This is all fine and good, but what happens when you have this
placement with a North Node Capricorn!!!! It turns everything inside out.
What do I do?” (He has the South Node in the 10th house, North Node in
4th house.)
    So with a North Node Capricorn he is called to act on all the high
Saturnian qualities of good integrity, and patient, step by step, goal oriented
behavior. He’s called to move away from the “lower octave” description of
his South Node in Cancer—-i.e. moving away from fluctuating, moody and
fearful Cancerian qualities:(“nobody cares to understand me and I think I’m
running out of money.”) It’s a call to accessing the highest qualities of the
SIGN—in this case, Capricorn—but in the realm of the 4th HOUSE of life:
which is the family of origin, the way we see and frame the story of our life
(our personal mythology), and all that has to do with the 3 H’s: home, heart,
and hearth. So somewhere in that area of his life, he’s called upon to be a
guiding person of integrity; the one who sets the goals and integrity of the
home, who moves patiently to set realistic goals within the family for
himself and others…..and the one who can frame his life story in terms of
what was actually done, in spite of difficulties and outcome.
    We know that following the description of the North Node sign is good
medicine, and a great idea for all of us. When we succeed at “doing our
North Node” it’s the kind of thing we remember on our deathbed. In this
case we have this confusion: the sign is descriptive of what we’re talking
about, and the house describes where in life the dynamic is likely to happen.
Always we look to the SIGN first as being the most important thing to
consider, and the HOUSE placement next, because the house system is the
weak link in astrology. We may have our birth time inaccurate (which sets
the houses) or we may use different house systems according to our
astrological beliefs. So trust the SIGN first!
4—The Karma and Free Will of the South Node
    Karma is about the law of cause and effect and reaping the
consequences of what we have sown. It’s also simply “habit” and all the
default, comfortable, knee-jerk patterns in our lives. We can read about that
karma in our South Node, for it is here that we see the blockages, the
unresolved wounds and all the self-limiting ideas we hold. We see the
description of that karma in the South Node as well as in the karmic
placements of all the planets in our chart.
    However, it can look confusing if we forget that all the signs and planets
can be read both positively and negatively. They can all play out in our lives
on a high octave or a low octave, and it’s especially important to be aware
of this polarity when trying to understand the karmic message of the North
and South Node. We have free will to bring insight and consciousness to
our reactive South Node patterns or not—
    So in every karmic Node, and in fact, in every planet, there is a “story”
there that reflects an ambivalence or polarity that exists within us. The
Nodes in particular need to be understood as both problem and solution to
problem…as the disease and the medicine to cure the disease! The South
Node is a statement about your Soul’s evolutionary situation either in a
former life, or earlier in this one—and the North Node a formula or good
suggestion for how to advance beyond it. Viva La Difference!
    Here’s a letter that expands on that, and brings in a curious situation:
    Dear Elizabeth:
    Your writings on the north nodes are the best I’ve found, thank you! My
question is this:
    My North Node is in Gemini, 4th house; South Node in Sag. in 10th
house.
    My Midheaven (MC) is in Sag. 10th house…. so if my South Node
represents things to move away from, but my MC is in the same sign as my
South Node, which is my “career path,” how do you recommend
managing both?
    I feel torn—how can I consciously move away from South Node
tendencies that are outworn, yet still play up my midheaven potential?
    Thanks so much,
    Karen

   This question is important and similar to the questions: “If my Sun sign
and South Node sign is in the same sign, or if my Sun is conjunct the South
Node, how can I understand this?” The key here is to see the difference
between a high expression of a planet’s energies and a lower reactive
expression of the negative aspects of the sign. In fact, all these situations
underline the importance of making conscious efforts to reach for the highest
expression of the sign. It doesn’t matter if we bring in the mid-heaven (MC)
or any other piece of information—it all still works the same way.
    So, with Sagittarius for example, you want to keep the free spirited,
optimistic, communicative ability of that sign, but you’ll want to move away
from its tendency to speak before it thinks (foot in mouth disease!), dogmatic
thinking (disguised in a jovial manner), and a tendency to not seeing the
multiplicity of Truth and different points of view. Sag loves to talk, teach,
and travel; it needs to keep it’s humility in the process as well. And as
always, be aware of not overdoing with all Sag placements. Hope this helps
clarify.
5—What You Don’t Know About Yourself
    Or maybe you disagree—you think you’d like to know everything about
yourself—or perhaps you’re curious to know what others sense about you
and you don’t? The Nodes in their polarity hold what the Jungian
psychologists call the “inferior function” and the process of “compensation”
is done through the integration of the Nodes.
    What do I mean by this? Compensation, according to leading Jungian
analyst Jim Hollis, is the most important principle that Jung identified. What
it means is this: Whatever is true to consciousness is compensated by its
opposite in the unconscious. So if you’re acting “too good” or a bit too
pious, you can bet that there’s quite a bit of nastiness or violence lurking in
the unconscious. What about those dreams you’re having? What about the
way your body feels? What about how unreasonably angry your sister
makes you feel? When we try too hard to carry one particular attitude, such
as goodness, ambition, courage, etc. you can bet that its opposite is being
constellated in your unconscious. Or…and…..it then gets projected onto
other people who annoy you by acting out those qualities you’ve dis-
identified yourself from, and/or it goes deep into the body.
    This is why we try to make conscious what is unconscious—why we try
to not have our unconscious contents leaking out inappropriately in distorted
ways at the worse times and places. This is why Jung said it is better to be
whole than it is to “be good.” When a person or a country tries to be too
good, and doesn’t integrate its own negativity and problems, it projects them
out onto others—and then you get things like the ethnic cleansing of
Germany from the non-Aryan Jews. Or you get the really nice woman next
door who flips into a rage. A truer morality would be to look for the
opposites in ourselves, in others, in our culture and then treat it with
compassion. To not do this, drives those feelings and energies into the
unconscious where they wait for a chance to express themselves—
inappropriately.
    This is what an understanding of the Nodes and our birth charts help us
to do. Even though some astrological insights may be uncomfortable at first,
if we would be open to exploring our personal “North Star” the North
Node, we would find that it ultimately feels much better than our former
patterns—-the South Node. The South is the area we’ve been mired in,
stuck in the past, and failed at to some extent. The North Node is fresh—it’s
new territory. It’s a call to try something new. When we consciously use
these North Node qualities, we compensate for the undeveloped or
wounded parts of our psyche and bring wholeness back into our lives.
    However, as an astrologer and therapist, I find that most people simply
don’t “hear” what their North Node is suggesting. It’s in the realm of denial;
it’s the blind spot. We’re all more likely to recognize the South Node
because it’s our default pattern. We know the South Nodes positive side—
the gifts, and most of our sins and failings, even if we don’t want to admit it.
But when confronted with the new possibilities and challenges of the North
Node sign and house and aspect patterns, there’s usually a silence in the
conversation. The information is trying to settle in, but it feels unfamiliar,
and almost—-wrong. “No, that isn’t me,” I can almost hear a client saying.
     The balance of the Nodes can be developed. The North Node holds the
qualities, traits and areas of life that we are most unfamiliar with, and it’s the
particular arenas of life we try to avoid. “Must I really go there?” we ask.
“Do I really need to be more that way?” We have an innate antipathy to this
region of life. Yet if we want to be truly conscious and healthy, we would
be wise to do as Carl Jung suggested: integrate the shadow—and dare to
look at where we “compensate” both consciously, and unconsciously. When
we look beneath the visible outward story of our life, we “attend to our
Soul” and nourish ourselves deeply. I believe it’s possible to heal what we
didn’t get earlier in this life, and create ourselves anew.
6—The Near Death Experience: Retrieving the “Gold in the Shadow”
     We retrieve the “gold in the shadow” of the South Node, of our past,
when we’ve done the work of the North Node. Here’s the theory: we grow
up repeating the patterns of the South Node, and we use the “vehicle” of the
astrological Sun to create an ego with which to live in the world—until the
time of our first Saturn return at approximately the age of twenty nine.
Somewhere in that “awakening Saturnian time” we truly begin reaching for
those qualities embedded in the North Node, and in so doing, compensate
for the excesses and woundedness of our past. We begin to come home to
our Self.
     When we’ve done this long enough to sustain a workable life—that is,
when we’ve worked to use both the positive qualities of each Node so that
we create a balance in our lives—it is then that we are ready to begin the
process of retrieving the “gold in the shadow” of the South Node. It is then
that we can safely approach what the Jungians call the shadow and extract
something that is not simply a default pattern.
     If we think of the Nodes as being like the yin/yang symbol we talked
about earlier, we could visualize the gold to be the circular dot that is
embedded within the space of each opposite. This astrological gold is a gift
of grace that is available for all of us—and in my experience it tends to come
around the time of the Uranus Opposition: somewhere between the ages of
38 and 41. It is at this point that the psyche intensely feels the anxiety and
necessity for change—it must retrieve what it has not lived out to this time.
And in so doing, people change. It is now that one sees people at this age
doing all those things they’ve put off—moving cross country, divorcing,
marrying, having a baby, leaving their job, finding their true vocation. They
are now on a new journey.
     The exciting thing about this is that we can now “take” and handle the
goodness in our family karmic inheritance, and reap the rewards of latent
talents. We can also take something from a past life experience that we’ve
“earned” but perhaps not used skillfully in the past.
     When I think of this, I remember the Near Death Experience I had
around the age of twenty-one. After experiencing some of the classic
luminosity of it, I also received a message—a message received through
“automatic writing” saying that I would be wise to ground myself in the
world in a very tangible way, and not come back to explore these “other
worlds” until I had my feet firmly planted in this reality.
     I took the message to heart, and became a potter for the first part of my
life, married a Virgo, and had a child. It wasn’t until my forties that I
returned to school to get my graduate degree in counseling and became a
full time astrological counselor and writer.
     My North Node is in Taurus in the second house; my South Node in
Scorpio in the eighth. I see this movement from South Node to North Node
and back to the gold in the South Node with clients. The Nodes feel, not
only like a directional pointer, but also like a tool of the psyche/Soul to
create balance, and I believe we move between the two in ways that are
both mysterious and yet somewhat calculable.


     Would you ponder one more thing before we end this chapter? Who
doesn’t ask occasionally: “Who am I beneath this story of my life?” Or, like
in the myth of the Holy Grail, we may ask ourselves: “Who is it that I truly
Serve?” The gods of family, finance, freedom and romance are always
there, but there are others. For some the symbolic life of the Self/Soul is
perhaps what matters most, for others that is a meaningless statement. Who
is this Self that still holds a glimmer of numinosity, like a vague memory of a
half-forgotten dream?
     We’ve been asking in this book: What does it mean to quest for our soul
purpose—to “attend to the Soul?” In Greek, the word “psychotherapy”
actually means attending to the Soul. Somewhere in our life journey we may
come to a “dark wood” and it is then that we are more hungry for Spirit and
thirsty for meaning than ever before. Always the Self remains and asks
questions of us.

    And so we ask: who are we now? The Self, rather than the ego, wants
to be attended to, and yes, psychotherapy might be a way to do that, but we
also attend to the Self when we do anything that is in alignment with our
true nature. When we feel something resonating within us and the timing is
right, it’s as if a harmonic chord is hit.
    One could make a case that there are two kinds of soul work: outer and
inner. The first soul work is in the fields and marketplaces, and in our streets
and institutions. This is the work of the janitor at the local community
college and the nursing assistant at the nursing home. Or perhaps it’s the
soul work of the single parent making dinner and doing homework with
their only child at home. Within the routine and unglamorous work is the
hard work that must be done, and here too, are all the barely noticed but
special connections we make with each other—the kinds of connections that
warm our hearts and touch our spirits.
    The other kind of Soul Work is the reflective inner work we all do with
ourselves and each other in moments of reflection, in therapy, and when we
move into the symbolic and artistic realms—when we move into the
language of the Soul.
     In North Node Astrology I’ve attempted to help you find what uniquely
resonates with you, and to be aware of the timing of your life passages; your
transits. Astrology can also help us see relationships clearer, as relationships
are a critical part of our soul journey. It seems as if this Self has a deep
yearning to be met by another “consciousness” in a space of freedom and
possibility, and in this space to see itself more clearly. Perhaps that is a topic
for another book.
     We may have many names for this “Self” I’ve been speaking of…some
may think of it as Atman/Brahman; the connection between the God within
and the God Out There. Others may see this Self as simply the unique
individual they have grown into becoming. Others may call it Jesus. We
know we are all seduced by diversions, distractions and ailments that pull us
away from this “Self”—this part of who we are, and to not “put any other
gods before Me.”
     My sense is that the call to reconnect with a guiding vision, or deep
wellspring, grows more subtly intense as we age. We want to rediscover our
life direction and soul purpose. Many of us look to find ways to live a
deeper life more connected to Source, and reject easy answers and old
solutions to this quest. Astrology and depth psychology, yoga and
meditation may intrigue us. We may want to travel down and in now, rather
than wide and far. Our imagination is re-ignited to new possibilities where
we don’t have to go farther than our living rooms…or the library or the
internet. We take up playing the harp or reading Rumi or decide to learn
Reiki. This desire to re-discover, re-connect, and replenish this wellspring
always seems to rise again. This is the retrieving of the gold in the shadow.
My hope is that this book has personally been helping you with this
retrieving and replenishing.
7. Pulling It All Together Astrologically…A Question of Priorities

     Two astrologers sat at dinner one night
     And I between the two
     Listened to catch a wise or wondrous word—
     Like jewelers they talked
     Each exclaiming the beauty of their gems
     The profundity of their skills
     The folly of the mind.
     Their suspicious interplay
     Left me hungry.
     Two astrologers sat at dinner one night
     And I between the two
     Listened…
     To their circumscribed landings,
     Like bees…gathering no nectar.”

     That’s not what we want! I wrote those lines many years ago when I
was new to astrology, and it was sadly written the morning after what had
hoped to be a night of inspiration. When you care enough to go deeper into
astrology, and into understanding the North and South Nodes, it can get
confusing indeed—but perhaps the worst thing, especially to hear as a client
or friend, is when pride and astro-jargon obscure emotional truth.
     But how do we even clarify things for ourselves? With so many things
to consider, it’s hard to know what is important and what isn’t. As we all
know, a little knowledge can be a dangerous thing, and we know we have
to start at the basic understanding of the signs and houses, and work it up
from there. So synthesizing the various elements and “pulling it all together”
by prioritizing is a crucial part of the process.
     We know we have to have a basic grasp of the chart as a whole, and the
importance of the Sun as the evolving ego or vehicle of the Soul, and the
Moon as the unconscious default mood of how the Soul feels—that’s a
beginning. The Nodes, being based on the Sun and Moon are next in
importance, and intricately tied all together.
     If we see the Nodes as describing the karmic journey, then the first step
is to read the description—the SIGN of your North and South Node, and
then to read about where this is happening in your life, what life arena is this
getting played out in. This is the section of the chart, the HOUSE, that they
each fall in. This tells you a lot, and is enough for many people.
     If however, you want to delve deeper and begin to unravel the details in
order to more fully understand your past life karmic inheritance, or
“parable,” you need to go farther. The next step to consider is what
PLANET rules your South Node? What PLANET rules your North Node?
And where is that planet located in your birth chart and what is it doing in
terms of aspects and houses?
    Following this trail begins a process that takes you from the
deconstruction of the chart to a reconstruction of it—like working with a
puzzle or mystery. You analyze the Nodes, and then you look at the
overlapping pieces of information about them, and then let your intuitive
mind play with those overlapping repeating themes. Let your intuition guide
you at this point, and approach the subject now with heart and imagination
—leave the astro-jargon behind at this point and feel your way into what
might have been and what is now. And when you talk about it with
someone else, remember that you are “treading on their life” and kind words
and good ethics must accompany your story.


    Besides looking at the Ruling PLANETS of the Nodes, it is significant
if you have a planet conjuncting the Nodes, that is, within about 8 degrees
of either Node in your birth chart. If you have a planet conjuncting the
South Node, then this planet describes something about who you were
either in a former life or earlier in this life. For example: Do you have Mars
next to your South Node? This Mars conjuncting the South Node brings an
Aries survivor, pioneering, warrior, and entrepreneurial nature to who you
once were. Any planet conjuncting a Node modifies the description of it.
    Now if a planet is conjuncting the North Node instead of the South, then
it describes two things—-one is that it’s good North Node Medicine for
you to integrate and embody those qualities described by that planet into
your life now, and, it also suggests that in the past you were UP AGAINST
someone or something that opposed you in a way described by that planet.
You came up against a “brick wall of reality” that you had trouble getting
around—and it had the quality of that planet. It may indeed have been a
person, and in the case of Mars, it would have a lot to do with “showing up
and having courage.”


    The last part of prioritizing the Nodal story that is fascinating to look at
revolves around the aspects to the Nodes. The aspects describe something
more about the story or plot of your “past life parable.” A square to the
Nodes is a possible skipped step, as Steven Forrest describes it, and
describes the unfinished business or skipped/resisted/denied thing that we
need to do (or be!) in order to reach our North Node potential.
    This is what Evolutionary Astrology does—and the chapter on the
skipped step discusses this. But don’t be surprised if you don’t “get it.” It’s
truly like a meditation koan, and not something that we can easily see about
our self. It’s a bit of a blind spot, this skipped step from earlier in this life or
a former life. You truly have to meditate on what the planet, sign and house
placement is telling you, in order to get it. Keep all the possibilities open till
you begin to see a pattern emerging from where there are overlaps or
repetitions in the chart as well as in the puzzle of the skipped step. This is
when another trusted person or astrologer would be useful for you—
together you could ponder the ways you may have avoided or tried to live
out this part of your life.
                  Chapter 16.
    “You Can Make Astrology Prove Anything”

    “You can make astrology prove anything,” she said to me with a
malicious little grin. “It’s like the Bible—just pick the right verse and
chapter, and you can make a case for God’s approval or disapproval on
almost anything—astrology included.” My friend had been studying
astrology just long enough to get both confused and excited, and I could feel
the tense undertones of emotion mixed in with the pleasantries of our after
dinner conversation. “Look at the choices,” she went on, “mid-points, solar
arcs, transits, fixed Stars, secondary progressions—just pick a time and you
can back up anything you want to say with some aspect.” She had a point
there, but she was missing the larger picture of how astrologers work with
the increasingly growing tool-box of choices we have at our disposal. And
beyond that, she was missing something even harder to explain. But I
wanted to try.
    I understood her complaint about all the astrological systems: Vedic,
Sidereal, Placidus, Koch….evolutionary, medieval, psychological…..can it
really all be true and ‘under one sky’? And if so, how are we to know what
works best? And what should we expect from an astrologer when we have a
“reading?”
    As astrologers, we quickly learn that there is an almost overwhelming
smorgasbord of choices to make, both in how “to do” the reading, and
which techniques to use. I take a strong hint from the ancient alchemists.
The alchemists understood the process of things—you take things apart,
separate them, let them “cook,” and then put them back together into a
whole—a new synthesis. The Nodes are like the flask or cauldron that
contains the heady mixture of astrological elements. In a reading you don’t
have time to truly let all the elements fully cook, but you, or the client can do
that after the session….or in a particularly good session, you may get a
strong “whiff” of the heady stew, and see the gold that is beginning to
emerge.
    As a counseling astrologer, I have a Master’s degree in counseling
psychology with an emphasis in the work of Carl Jung. Most of my
astrology teachers used the tropical Placidus house system, and viewed the
planets as mythological archetypes within the spiritual mandala of the birth
chart. I believe in the same priorities that most of my teachers believed—that
the nuts and bolts of a good astrology reading depend on: a) a good
understanding of the natal birth chart, b) the outer planet transits, and c) the
inner planet progressions. I now feel that the North and South Nodes
synthesize the message of the entire chart reading, so they are the gold.
     Of course there has to be a solid understanding of the Sun sign, Moon
sign, Rising sign and all the planets in the natal chart. The North Node and
South Node, and the transits and progressions make a reading complete, and
without them all I feel it’s inaccurate. I think that not to include all of these
in one session is wrong—separating the birth chart from the crucial transit
“forecasting” feels like cheating—if the client is having a major life
changing transit and the astrologer is only talking about the birth chart, how
inaccurate is that! Or even the other way is wrong—to only look at the
transits/progressions while not checking back to the birth chart can be
hugely inaccurate.
     For example, if the transits show a potential for being very accident
prone at a certain time—say, some Mercury/Uranus/Mars aspect is peaking,
and the astrologer doesn’t look to the birth chart to see if the person shows a
vulnerability in their birth chart to being “accident prone,” then it would be
wrong to counsel them to avoid travel at that time. The astrologer could
mention it, but not over-emphasize it, because the birth chart doesn’t
substantiate the claim. And the other techniques, such as solar returns,
relocation charts, etc. are good too, but I only add them to the stew when
necessary. Prioritizing is key.
     Let’s look for a moment at the basics. If you were to ask: Who am I?—-
and then describe yourself in terms of your Sun sign, in most cases—not all
—you would be recognizable by the traits of your “Sun sign.” But people
are paradoxical and complex, and a description of your obvious personality
traits alone does not define you. And if your Sun sign is next to or conjunct
another planet it changes the nature of the sign.
     How do you perceive the world? What’s your style? How were you
seen as a child, and what’s your persona or mask? This is your rising sign,
or ascendant. It’s also a hint of what you might look like—Virgo rising?
You look younger than your age. Aries rising? Do you have something red
in your appearance—a face mole or a red undercolor in your hair? Do you
wear red a lot? The ascendant is about how we appear, and how we present
ourselves.
     The Moon gives us hints as to what makes you happy and sad. Do you
love a challenge? Do you love to be a little feisty and dare to “feel the fear
and do it anyway”? That could be an Aries Moon. Or would you describe
yourself as being both introverted and extroverted? Are you happy cleaning
out your closets one moment and then ready to dance by the light of the
moon on the beach the next day? This could be a Cancer moon….especially
if you were to tell me how much what your mother did and didn’t do for
you while growing up affected you. So, the Moon represents our emotional
nature.
    Each sign describes another part of us. We are complex creatures, and
the astrological chart tries to describe so many things—- how we respond to
authority and discipline (Saturn), how we are rebellious or not (Uranus),
how we feel about spirituality, getting high and boundaries (Neptune),
where we are lucky, expansive or gifted (Jupiter), and even how we
experience and handle life’s toughest moments (Pluto).


    The chart is a fascinating yet inexact map of the territory of our lives.
The wild card is that we have free will to play out the signs and aspects. We
can bring consciousness and energy to them, or we can play on our
strengths and go for an easy ride. We inherit a family karmic inheritance that
predisposes us to certain ways of behaving that are not as easy to change as
our hair color. And at every moment of our lives we have an assortment of
different challenges and moods—these “transits and progressions.” A good
astrologer should trace the pattern of particular challenges and opportunities
and help you prepare for and accept the stage of life you’re in at the
moment.
    So when you have an astrological reading done, the astrologer will tend
to describe you in terms of all the different facets or signs, and then look at
what is happening to you in the present moment by looking at the patterns of
transits and progressions. However, there is always the big picture. And the
big picture is the Nodes. Your karmic story.


    Here’s another way to look at it: my bias is that the best “readings” are
not the ones in which I rely heavily on technique and prediction but simply
when the metaphors I use allow the client to see deeply into their life. I
know this is happening when they start looking at the question behind the
question that they presented initially. And when the particulars of the client’s
experience match strongly with the symbolic description of the transits and
progressions and the Nodal story, then there’s a feeling of rightness and
resonance. And then the technique becomes secondary to the quality of the
moment of insight.
    In every astrology reading, I suspect that no matter what techniques are
used, the hope is that there will be a synchronistic moment of “ah-hah”
when there’s been an accurate mirroring of that which is above, to that
which is below. Isn’t that what we long for—-when some piece of the
client’s truth and the astrologer’s technique rise up to a little epiphany
together! Ahh…. then there is that felt moment of meaningfulness that makes
all considerations of proof of technique secondary.
     And so I offer you the idea that the technique that brings this about is
already embedded in most systems: the idea of silence and reflection.
Perhaps that is our only safeguard in truth-seeking; not forcing a prediction,
symbolism or bias on our client, but honoring instead the idea that we are
acting as instruments of the Divine. We can present whatever combinations
of symbolism we think will be most evocative, but then, let’s allow them a
moment to swallow, to digest, and to truly look at their chart. I believe they
will take what they need when we make it simple, clear, and in a language
they understand. And in that moment of silence we give a chance for the
Spirit to enter; for what the Jungians call the numinous moment, when you
or your client looks at the chart and see the “answers” projected there—-
upon the clear sky of the heavens above and the gods within. ~
                   Chapter 17.
   “Surrendering to the Gods:” Where Jungian
        Psychology and Astrology Meet

    I’m just finishing writing this book, and I’m aware of how it’s been
much more work than I originally thought it would be. And so I’ve been
wondering, why did I write this book? And then I remember—I love
making connections—to people and ideas. And I crave the sense “of
belonging to the world” and of making heartfelt and thoughtful connections
with others—people who playfully and seriously like to entertain these
ideas. Jungians and Astrologers. Writers and readers. You and Me. I like to
bridge the gap.
    I also sense that there’s a gap between the two worlds I hold so dear to
my heart: the Jungians and Astrologers. The Jungians often view popular
predictive astrology with disdain, yet quietly study astrology and talk about
it with their friends (or their astrologer.) They tend not to write about it in
their professional journals.
    The Astrologers hear the reserve in their attitude, but often don’t know
what the Jungians are really talking about! To those Astrologers who focus
on pragmatic approaches, the oohing and aahing of the Jungians and their
general quacking over the “obvious” may make them seem like odd ducks.
And to what use? These Astrologers will help their clients, like coaches,
find their jobs or careers, but forget that the word “vocation” has its roots in
the ability “to listen” to our deep selves. How do we get to that place of
deep listening to the Self?
    First, there’s very short term counseling vs. long term counseling.
Astrologers can sit with someone once, for a couple of hours talking with
them about “their map of the psyche” and the astrologer will translate the
archetypal patterns in a way that the client says would have taken months
with their more traditional therapists.
    A Jungian will sit with someone, for hours over many years helping
their client listen to the various inner voices in order to discover who they
essentially are. They give time for the inner work and the “alchemical
process” to truly evolve and they support the client in the process. A sense
of safety and love develops. It’s powerful!
    Both astrologers and Jungians honor the complexity of the Self, and the
variety of our inner personalities—call it what you will: voices, archetypes,
planets. Both know that we need to understand the “gold” and the “shadow”
parts of ourselves. We need to understand the unique gold of Jupiter and the
North Node, and the shadowy wounding of Pluto and the South Node. We
need to bring responsibility into our lives—Saturn, and yet dare to take our
freedom—Uranus.

    Different words, same ideas. Dreams or divination? Both Astrologers
and Jungians would agree that we project ourselves out into life and yet
swim in the deep wine-dark sea of the unconscious. There are reasons
beneath reasons why we do what we do, and our outer choices and inner
revelations echo each other. The outer pragmatic solutions of the coach or
astrologer will reverberate with the inner “Jungian” nourishing and
unfolding process of the Self, and it will reverberate with life in the outer
world. Neither better—both needed.


    Carl Jung was a trickster, a shaman, and a scholar as well as a spiritual
man. His psychology came out of his life; he broke some rules, he kept to
some. As John Perry, a Jungian scholar and friend of Jung once said: “There
was always a little something magical about the way Jung’s mind worked.
He said that he felt him self to be more shaman than psychiatrist.” And Jung
studied and practiced astrology and alchemy. He was a bridge maker.


    I do not aspire to be Jung. But I have “an inner Jung” within me that
desires to make connections and bridge gaps. I want to keep encouraging all
the ways we can “attend to our inner life”. We come into this life bringing
woundedness and a sense of wonder and possibility. It’s a great thing if we
can stay aware of both, and how they continue to play out in our lives. And
so then we ask….can I accept my fate and live it out well? Can I work
within the limits that I have, and yet stretch to be all I can be? Yes, I think
yes….we can all do that. And make bridges…


    Jim Hollis, in “Enterviews with Jungian Analysts” says: “The greatest
gifts of Jungian psychology are found in recovering for us a sense of
participation in an ancient drama…and in a mindfulness regarding the
profound sea of soul in which we swim at all times. When most modern
psychologies serve the ego fantasy of control, Jungian psychology affirms
a more sober appreciation of the summons to surrender to the gods, to
what wishes to live through us into this world.”
    I love that last phrase! It hints of a knowing that something is calling to
come through us, and that we are able to discipline ourselves—we can be a
disciple to that which is calling us, but that we are also summoned to
surrender ourselves to that which we must do. Jung spoke about this as
“doing gladly that which I must do.”
    Sometimes it’s just putting one foot in front of the other. If you’ve had a
stroke, that is a huge effort! If you are caring for a baby, that is a huge effort!
So the summons and the calling may sound soulfully glamorous at times, but
as Jim Hollis is also suggesting here “Jungian psychology affirms a more
sober appreciation of the summons.” For everyone and anyone who has
worked long hours at a task, we can appreciate that soberness also has its
high moments.


    At the heart of Jungian psychology is the concept of individuation; the
“story of our coming home to ourselves.” And, as we’ve seen, the astrology
chart can be seen as a road map of the journey, giving us clear points of
reference along the trajectory of the individuation process and the complexes
we carry within and meet along the way.
    A good understanding of the astrology chart reveals the nature of the
complexes and how we are individually wired. I understand Jung to be
saying that we are each wired to experience life in a particular way and
some of this wiring is unique to us alone and some of it is common to the
collective. Astrologers see the individual chart as the blueprint of that
wiring. It doesn’t tell you everything about your life, but the chart will tell
you how you are “wired,” for example, in how you perceive your mother,
and something of how you perceive nurturing and mothering in your life.
    Jungians look beyond the personal, to the collective unconscious in
humanity and see it as a universal imprint in our psyche, existing like an
underground aquifer which we dip into at various moments in our lives.
We’ve seen how Astrologers chart these moments of psychic “dipping” by
looking at the transiting chart that surrounds the birth chart.


    Jungian analyst, Medora Woods, from Minnosota, sums up what I’ve
been attempting to say in this book when she wrote to me and said: “The
Nodal approach helps me see, as I do a reading, how someone is in touch
with their individuation path. If they are blocked, the blocking complex is
usually connected to the Nodal axis or the Moon. And then, their transits
and progressions tell me where their current challenges and opportunities
might be as they work in the direction of their evolutionary potential.”
    I love this combination of Jungian and Astrological thought and
practice! I also know how hard it is when we come up against our own
blockages repeatedly, and when we see that people we love may not get
unblocked in this lifetime. But what a gift it is to be able to delve into the
Jungian and Astrological world views, and to use this knowledge to help
ourselves and others. This final poem came out of that sense of gratitude:

         Soul Work; A Prayer of Thanks
         “Let us give thanks for the work we do—let us pay homage to the
     gods, goddesses, symbols, signs and synchronicities that make their
     appearance as grace when the choice is made ‘to ask and then to
     receive.’ when “Whether called or not called, God is present.”
         Let us give thanks for the chance to be messengers—to bring the
     good news that all is well, and all manner of things are well—that life
     has meaning that there is a rhyme and reason, a warp and woof, an
     inner and an outer, an ‘as above, so below’. Let us give thanks for this
     knowledge that grows into wisdom that honors life cycles as well as
     well as season’s cycles-that sees meaning, where others see despair that
     sees patterns, where others see chaos that sees hope and evolution,
     where others see none.
         Let us give thanks for this ancient soul language that challenges us
     to find the words to translate the subtle geometry of the Soul; a
     language that sees little acts of change as large acts of courage—that
     delights at seeing the shy smile of recognition when the personal story
     meets the larger story and is truly heard.
         Let us give thanks for this work that repeatedly shows us how
     wrong we ma be—that what we see first, is not all there is—that people
     are far richer, more complex and nobler than we imagine and that what
     we see as God or human flaw is flawless in design. for the gift is in the
     effort in the practice of reaching to understand all the unknowable
     mysteries for which we are so truly grateful.”
                                             ~elizabeth spring, August, 2006
                          Further Thoughts…

ABOUT ME~
    Elizabeth Spring, M.A., has a degree in counseling psychology with an
emphasis in the work of Carl Jung. She began her astrological studies with
Isabel Hickey in Boston in 1969, and has continued studying (and
certification) with astrologers Steven Forrest, Alice Howell, Liz Greene, and
Sharon Russell. She has done post-graduate work at Pacifica Institute in
California, Salve Regina University, and Krotona Institute of Theosophy.
She teaches periodically at the Boston Jung Institute, and has lectured at
Brown University, RISD, and yoga centers around New England. Elizabeth
has been a psychotherapist and practicing astrologer since 1992 and is a
member of the astrological organizations, ISAR and NCGR. Many of her
published articles can be read on her website: www.elizabethspring.com or
web blog: http://North-NodeAstrology.com Elizabeth’s full bio, lectures,
and teaching can be found on her home website as well.
MY WORK:
    I’m available for counseling sessions, with details on:
www.elizabethspring.com. These sessions are arranged by phone or
internet, and most are 60-90 minute phone conversations based on your
astrological birth chart, and your current and future transits and progressions.
Sometimes relationship comparison charts are used. Follow-up
counseling/coaching sessions with less astrological emphasis are also
offered.
ABOUT US:
    Do you have comments, questions, or ideas to offer? Do you have
suggestions for my next writing project? Would you like to link sites or have
me as a guest writer for your blog, or speaker for your group? Would you
like me to lead a workshop for your group? Contact me at:
elizabethspring@aol.com
BOOK DISCUSSION:
    This book will be used for an interactive discussion on my blog:
http://NorthNodeAstrology.blogspot.com Come share your thoughts and
ideas! Do you have friends, or a book group who might be interested? You
might enjoy using this book to open up new areas of discussion and
contemplation.
                  “Following threads
                 of chosen words,
                One crafts a book
               as one crafts a life—
                Following threads
              of small acts of choice
                  and courage—
             Raveling and unraveling
              the particulars of a life
          Following the story-line home.

    Catching hold of a purple thread of sorrow—
               a yellow line of joy—
            I needle through the cloth,
    buttoning together the places of the heart
                that must be bound.
                Knarlly and knotted;
               piecing and stringing
     this tapestry, by such fragile threads—
        I hide the back-side from view—
‘Such a beautiful piece’ they say, ‘Strung together
          by such rich, colorful threads’.

         Yet I know how I suffered the broken
                      threads—
The illusions, false engagements, subtle betrayals—
          So much paradox and possibility;
           At times, the fabric barely held.

                  For far too long—
            I’d look at the torn places
                 And tried to sew
             Through button-eyes—
                  Un-knotted—
          They released themselves—
         As I sought to make connections
          That were not mine to make.

       But now the needle moves rhythmically
            through the holy quartet
         of a single button—
     I see how the parts relate—
      How the singular threads
Need to be knotted and interwoven—
       Buttoned with the belief
 That there are meaningful patterns
  In this life of sixty-one years…
 The stitches are beginning to hold;
    the torn places are mending.

         Slowly and persistently
      the heart still cries out—
And what needs to become attached,
             Attaches—
And what needs to become detached,
            Detaches—
 And nothing gets thrown away…
As I’ve become a keeper of buttons.”
          ~elizabeth spring
