Postmodern
Stress
Disorder:
On Dopamine and the
Hazard of Left-Brain
Dominance



Andronicus
Discipulus Aeternus
                                            1994




“If I cannot inspire love, I will cause fear!”


                                              Mary Shelley (1818)
                                                      Chapter 17
                            Frankenstein: The Modern Prometheus

              www.neuroanthropologist.com                  2 of 107
    Disclosures/Conflicts of Interest
I have no conflicts of interests.
I do not represent any special interests.
The ideas represented in this lecture are taken
from important thinkers whose works are
referenced and recognized.
I am humbled to be a part of the intellectual
conversation taking place across time and space
with each of you.


Cover Art Credit: Picaso 1923 Portrait of woman in d`hermine pass (Olga) https://www.wikiart.org/en/pablo-picasso/untitled-1937-8

                                                         www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                3 of 107
            Lecture Objectives
The effects of food and environmental stress on
dopamine brain systems.
The cognitive burdens of technology and
information processing on dopaminergic pathways
in contemporary society.
Physiologic responses to taxed executive
functions such as hypomania, ego depletion, and
addictive behaviors as seen during clinical
encounters.
The Main Subject is Life under left-brain dominance.

                    www.neuroanthropologist.com        4 of 107
The left hemisphere is competitive, and its
 concern, its prime motivation, is power.
                                            Iain McGilchrist (2019)
                                       The Master and His Emissary




              www.neuroanthropologist.com                    5 of 107
    My Post-Fact Qualifications
Graduate Studies @ Twitter University
Advanced Studies @ Praeger University
Postdoctoral Fellowship @ Facebook University
Dunning-Kruger Distinguished Chair of Self-
Ordained Expertise @ University of Google
Excellence in Teaching Award @ Podcast
University
Certified in Advanced Pharmacology @
www.drugs.com

                 www.neuroanthropologist.com   6 of 107
                        Pseudo Expertise Kills
On the morning of January 20, 2015, fifty-five
year-old Steven Pasceri quietly demanded to see
cardiovascular surgeon, Dr. Michael Davidson.
in Exam Room 15. (2015, June 30). Boston Magazine. https://www.bostonmagazine.com/news/2015/06/30/brigham-and-womens-hospital-shooting/
                                                                                                                                          The Murder




        –     Pasceri was disgruntled over the death of his
              mother while under the care of Dr. Davidson for a
              heart and lung condition.
        –     Pasceri “was sure” that the improperly prescribed
              drug amiodarone, had killed his mother from what
              he read on www.drugs.com.
        –     Davidson was 44 years-old when Pasceri took his
              life with a .40 caliber pistol.

                                                    www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                           7 of 107
                                            Ersatz Expert:
                                                made or used as a substitute,
                                                  typically an inferior one,
                                                       an affectation;
                                                    not real or genuine.




https://www.legacy.com/obituaries/telegram/obituary.aspx?n=stephen-pasceri&pid=173928265



                                                         www.neuroanthropologist.com       8 of 107
 Postmodern Stress Disorder (PMSD)
Responding to the murder of Davidson, Eiser (2015)
recommends PMSD as a new diagnostic disorder.
Eiser, A. R. (2015). Postmodern Stress Disorder (PMSD): A Possible New Disorder. The American Journal of Medicine, 128(11), 1178–1181.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amjmed.2015.04.039


         –    “This disorder appears to [relate to the] excessive
              stimulation of the amygdala and loss of the normal
              inhibitory inputs from the” prefrontal cortex.
         –    The postmodern condition includes “ascendancy of
              digital communication, computerized entertainment,
              Internet usage, violent video games, cyberbullying,
              large-scale bureaucracy, multiculturalism, and
              growing anomie.”


                                                       www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                       9 of 107
           The Misinformation Age
What Eiser (2015) failed to identify as an important
etiological factor in fostering postmodern stress,
O'Conner (2019) discusses in her book, “The
Misinformation Age.”           O’Conner, C. (2019). The Misinformation Age. Yale University Press.



   –   Increasingly, we are basing our decisions on lies,
       falsehoods, and partial information which are
       whitewashed of necessary context.
   –   Online social media platforms are providing
       voluminous information and data-sets so fast that
       we mistake ubiquity and repetition for the truth. (See
       Reuters, AP Wire, echo chambers and “news feeds”)
   –   My opinion is equally as valid and on the same
       footing as the facts.
                          www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                10 of 107
         We Have Become Inflated Fictions
In “Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man,”
Marshall McLuhan (1964) warned us that the coming
media would have a distorting impact on us more
so than the content itself.
Press.
                                         McLuhan, M. (1964). Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man. Ginko




         –   “For the 'message' of any medium or technology is
             the change of scale or pace or pattern that it
             introduces into human affairs.” (p. 8)
         –   Pasceri, and by extension each of us, live a
             distorted sense of self-aggrandizement as we
             assume the scale, pace, and pattern of powerful
             search engines on the internet, i.e. media.

                           www.neuroanthropologist.com                                               11 of 107
   There is a veering between two apparently
opposite positions which are in reality aspects of
the same position: omnipotence and impotence.
                                               Iain McGilchrist (2019)
                                          The Master and His Emissary




                 www.neuroanthropologist.com                   12 of 107
   We Live on the Hypomanic Edge
According to John Gartner, PhD (2005)
Edge. Simon & Schuster.
                                                          Gartner, J. D. (2005). The Hypomanic




        –     Hypomanics are brimming with infectious energy,
              irrational confidence, and really big ideas.
        –     They think, talk, move, and make decisions quickly.
        –     Hypomanics are not crazy, but “normal” is not the
              first word that comes to mind when describing
              them.
        –     Hypomanics live on the edge, between normal and
              abnormal.



                            www.neuroanthropologist.com                              13 of 107
        Founding Member
     Hypomanics Anonymous®
Hello, my name is Andrew.
I am a hypomanic.
I am the product of a hyperculture.
I am a citizen of a post-fact world.
I am addicted to dopamine.
I am a legend in my own mind.
My Life Motto: “Second place is the first loser.”


                   www.neuroanthropologist.com   14 of 107
Dopamine Fuels this Fire

         Left-Brain
        Empowered

         Dopamine

         Hypomania




       www.neuroanthropologist.com   15 of 107
A Left Brain Struggle
    Evidence          for Change
              of Climate  Dominance




Venus of Willendorf
    30,000 BCE
                      www.neuroanthropologist.com   16 of 107
     We Went From ...

          Song to Speech
          Poetry to Prose
      “I and Thou” to “I and It”
      Authentic to Inauthentic
        Real to Hyper-real
Right-Brain to Left-Brain Dominance



           www.neuroanthropologist.com   17 of 107
                               We Are of Two Minds
In “Tales from Both Sides of the Brain,” Gazzaniga
(2015) describes the research that led to the
discovery of two minds in one brain.
Sides of the Brain. New York: HarperCollins Publishing.
                                                                                        Gazzaniga, Michael. 2015. Tales from Both




         –     “There was no getting around it; the new work on
               split-brain humans was haunting.” (p. 114)
         –     “To suddenly think [the brain/mind] can be divided,
               that two minds are coexisting in one cranium, is
               almost not comprehensible.” (p. 114)




                                                          www.neuroanthropologist.com                                18 of 107
We must inhibit one in order to inhabit the other.
                                               Iain McGilchrist (2019)
                                          The Master and His Emissary




                 www.neuroanthropologist.com                   19 of 107
                               The Perennial Battle
Kinsbourne (2003) illuminates how the corpus
callosum mediates interhemispheric oscillation
and determines hemispheric dominance                                                                                           Kinsbourne, M. (2003).
Chapter 10: The Corpus Callosum Equilibrates the Cerebral Hemispheres. In The Parallel Brain: The Cognitive Neuroscience of the Corpus Callosum. MIT Press.


         –    “To ensure 'singleness of action,' the self-organizing
              nervous system selects one action system,
              suppressing other candidate systems” (p. 271).




                                                       www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                            20 of 107
              “Dopamine-Urgent”
In their book, “The Molecule of More,” Lieberman
& Long (2018) state, “[T]his single molecule is the
ultimate multipurpose device, urging us, through
thousands of neurochemical processes, to move
beyond the pleasure of just being, into exploring
the universe of possibilities that comes when we
imagine.”   Lieberman, D., & Long, M. (2018). The Molecule of More. BenBella Books.



   –   Dopamine underwrites important left hemispheric
       differences which will be highlighted here.




                                    www.neuroanthropologist.com                       21 of 107
                                                      Dopamine




Barron, A. B., Søvik, E., & Cornish, J. L. (2010). The Roles of Dopamine and Related Compounds in Reward-Seeking Behavior Across Animal Phyla. Frontiers
in Behavioral Neuroscience, 4. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnbeh.2010.00163


                                                      www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                             22 of 107
                       Hemisphere of Abstraction
In “The Master and His Emissary,” McGilchrist
(2019) lists key histological and hemispheric
differences.                          McGilchrist, I. (2019). The Master and His Emissary: The Divided Brain and the Making of the Western World (2nd, New
Expanded Edition edition ed.). Yale University Press.


         –     There is less dendritic overlap in cortical columns
               and less INTRAhemispheric interconnectivity in
               the left compared with the right hemisphere.
         –     The left hemisphere is capable of magnificent feats
               of abstraction that results in a fragmented,
               disjointed, re-presentation of the world.
         –     The left brain must confabulate a narrative that
               connects the various islands of abstraction.

                                                        www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                             23 of 107
               The Postmodern Condition
In “Who's Afraid of Postmodernism,” James K. A.
Smith (2006) discusses the critical theories of three
markedly postmodern, French philosophers. As
we will see, the bridge carrying us over the
postmodern divide comes on the back of an over
reliance on left-brain processes.
Postmodernism: The Church and Culture. Baker Academic.
                                                                                  Smith, J. K. A. (2006). Who’s Afraid of




        –     “There is nothing outside the text.”                                Jacques Derrida
                ●    Life is decontextualized from history and culture.
        –     “Incredulity toward meta-narratives.”                                  Jean Francois
              Lyotard
        –     “Power is Knowledge.” Michel Foucault

                                                    www.neuroanthropologist.com                                     24 of 107
     Postmodernism is Hyperculture
In “Hyperculture,” Bertman (1998) identifies the high-
modern pathology as a function of speed and an
insatiable consumer culture.
Praeger Publishers.
                                                 Bertman, S. (1998). Hyperculture: The Human Cost of Speed.




         –    [E]xcessive speed and the cumulative effects of
              multiple systems operating simultaneously
              overwhelm, rather than aid, the individual. (p. 35)
         –    A fast-paced “hyperculture” thrives not on
              reflection but on stimulation. (p. 129)
         –    Preferring short-term stimulus to long-term
              reflection, we take delight in this titillation of the
              senses and revel in trivia that masquerades as
              meaning. (p. 131)
                              www.neuroanthropologist.com                                            25 of 107
 Premodern/ Modern/Postmodern
In “The Homeless Mind,” Berger, et. al. (1974)
characterize life across the neurocultural
landscape:      Berger, P., Berger, B., & Kellner, H. (1974). The Homeless Mind: Modernization and Consciousness. Vintage Books.




Identity is unitary. Identity is a duality. Identity is a
                                            multiplicity.
Life is here and     Life  is both here
now.                 and there.             Life is neither here
                                            nor there.
Experience is        Experience    is
whole and            fractured and          Experience is
connected to place. distributed.            atomized and
                                            disconnected from
The world is natural The world is           place.
and animated.        mechanical and
                     lifeless.              The world is abstract
                                            and virtual.
                                   www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                             26 of 107
               Unfallen vs Fallen Motif
In “The Fall: The Insanity of the Ego in Human
History and the Dawning of a New Era,” Steve
Taylor (2010) demonstrates how climate change
and subsequent resource scarcity over 200,000
years gave rise to the dominant, left-brain sense
self. Taylor, S. (2010). The Fall: The Insanity of the Ego in Human History and the Dawning of a New Era. John Hunt Publishing.



  –   Ultimately, around 6,000 BCE an “ego explosion”
      takes place which allowed for survival in a hot,
      crowded, and resource depleted world.




                                               www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                        27 of 107
       Neurocultural Timeline

  Premodern                    Modern                Postmodern



 This timeline demonstrates
      the confluence of
 cultural dynamics (postmodernism)
  Unfallen                                  Fallen



with environmental
                1650 CE
                        dynamics
                           1950 CE
             6000 BCE

  Premodern, Modern, Postmodern are more socio-historical terms.
      Prefallen and Fallen are more neuropsychological terms.

                      www.neuroanthropologist.com                  28 of 107
          Life before the Bite




                         Right-Brain Dominance



Photo Credit ID 12625647 © Deborahr | Dreamstime.com   www.neuroanthropologist.com   29 of 107
Where is God when you pray?




       www.neuroanthropologist.com   30 of 107
                 Right-Brain Existence
Look Down: Peripersonal Space
“What you see when you look down are things
within your reach, things you can control right
now, things you can move and manipulate with no
planning, effort, or thought.”
Books.
                                             Lieberman, D., & Long, M. (2018). The Molecule of More. BenBella




         –   The neurochemicals predominantly responsible for
             the “Here & Now” (H&N) experience are
             concentrated in the right brain.
         –   They enable you to savor and enjoy, or perhaps to
             fight or run away, right now.
         –   Serotonin and norepinephrine.
                           www.neuroanthropologist.com                                              31 of 107
                                          Me, Myself
In “The Face in the Mirror: The Search for the
Origins of Consciousness,” Keenan, et. al. (2003)
conclude that our basic sense of physical or
objective self resides distributed across right-brain
structures with special emphasis in somatomotor
areas.     Keenan, J., Gallup, G. G., & Falk, D. (2003). The Face in the Mirror: The Search for the Origins of Consciousness (1 edition). Ecco.



   –   “Since much evidence shows that the right
       hemisphere sustains a sense of self without
       language, we can assume that the sense of self,
       consciousness, is independent from language.”
       (p.251)




                                            www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                                 32 of 107
             Right Hemispheric Goldmine
McGilchrist (2019) states, “If a neuropsychologist
had to choose three things to characterize most
clearly the functional contribution of the right
hemisphere, they would most probably be                                                                                            McGilchrist, I. (2019).
The Master and His Emissary: The Divided Brain and the Making of the Western World (2nd, New Expanded edition ed.). Yale University Press.


         –    “the capacity to read the human face”
         –    “the capacity to sustain vigilant attention as
              opposed to left-brain selectivity”
         –    “the capacity to empathize”




                                                       www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                             33 of 107
                     System 1 Thinking
According to Kahneman (2013), System 1 Thinking
is dedicated to fast thinking.
Straus and Giroux.
                                                Kahneman, D. (2013). Thinking, Fast and Slow (1st edition). Farrar,




         –    It almost solely relies on intuition and almost
              entirely disregards information.
         –    System 1 is in control every time we do an activity
              that requires quick thinking and reactions.
         –    System 1 Thinking may be related to right-brained
              processes that is more dependent on H&N
              neurochemistry which is fast and indefatigable.




                             www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                34 of 107
                     Unfallen/PreModern Man
In his book “Saharasia,” climatologist James
DeMeo (2011) characterizes the peoples living
across the plains of northern Africa, the Levant,
and Asian Steppes prior to 6,000 BCE.                                                                                      DeMeo, J. (2011). Saharasia:
The 4000 BCE Origins of Child Abuse, Sex-Repression, Warfare, and Social Violence in the Deserts of the Old World. Natural Energy Works.


         –    The peoples who lived in Saharasia when it was
              still fertile were peaceful, non-patriarchal, and
              egalitarian, with a healthy, open attitude toward sex
              and the body.
         –    These peoples tended toward System 1 Thinking




                                                       www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                            35 of 107
                                     How did the Shift
                                    to the Left Happen?




                                                        www.neuroanthropologist.com   36 of 107
Photo Credit: ID 173489715 © Mastaka | Dreamstime.com
        Epigenetic Punctuations
PMSD can best be understood as the culmination
of epigenetic changes occurring to the brain over
the past two-hundred thousand plus years.
  –   Hominins left the trees 4.3 million years ago.
  –   Major “Larmarckian” punctuations have occurred
      200,000 years ago, 8,000 years ago, 500 years ago
      and 50 years ago.
  –   These punctuations align with brain hemisphere
      changes and two, crucial dopaminergic pathways.




                     www.neuroanthropologist.com       37 of 107
       Neuroanatomical Punctuations
You might think that as brains evolve to become
larger, the interhemispheric connections would
increase in tandem. They actually decrease
relative to brain size.                                          McGilchrist, I. (2019). The Master and His Emissary: The Divided Brain and the Making of the
Western World (2nd, New Expanded Edition edition ed.). Yale University Press.


         –     “The bigger the brain, the less interconnected it is,
               and the smaller the corpus callosum.”
         –     “Rather than taking the opportunity to increase
               connectedness, evolution appears to be moving in
               the opposite direction.”
         –     “[In the] modern human brain, its twin hemispheres
               have been characterized as two autonomous
               systems” in a struggle for dominance.
                                                        www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                              38 of 107
                                          4.3 Million YA




Andrews, P., and R. J. Johnson. 2020. “Evolutionary Basis for the Human Diet: Consequences for Human Health.” Journal of Internal Medicine 287(3):226–37. doi:
10.1111/joim.13011.
                                                        www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                             39 of 107
                                  Early Hominin Diet
Dennis McKenna (2014) wrote in the Preface to
“Return to the Brain of Eden”:
Restoring the Connection between Neurochemistry and Consciousness. Inner Traditions.
                                                                                       Wright, T., & Gynn, G. (2014). Return to the Brain of Eden:




         –    “[The] rainforest environment favored a
              frugivorous diet rich in flavonoids, monoamine
              oxidase (MAO) inhibitors, and neurotransmitter
              precursors that was relatively low in steroid-
              containing or steroid-inducing elements.”
         –    “This dietary regime potentiated pineal functions,
              neocortical expansion, and hemispheric
              integration.”



                                                      www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                           40 of 107
                           Unfallen Hominin/Man
In “Return to the Brain of Eden,” Wright and Gynn
(2014) discuss how climatic changes by 200,000
BCE shrank the ancestral forests forcing hominins
onto the Savannah reducing the concentration of
fruit in their diet.                              Wright, T., & Gynn, G. (2014). Return to the Brain of Eden: Restoring the Connection between
Neurochemistry and Consciousness. Inner Traditions.


         –    Dietary polyphenols found in fruit resulted in lower
              levels of androgens and higher levels of
              serotonin and norepinephrine.
         –    Loss of rich sources of dietary polyphenols resulted
              in increased levels of androgens and lower levels
              of serotonin and norepinephrine thus favoring the
              advent of left-hemisphere dominance.
                                                      www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                                41 of 107
             A Major Dietary Punctuation
Previc (2009) in his book, “The Dopaminergic Mind
in Human Evolution and History,” examines the
role of diet and the advent of left-brain dominance
that had its origins some 200,000 years ago.
(2009). Dopaminergic Mind in Human Evolution and History. Cambridge University Press.
                                                                                        Previc, F. H.




         –    Iodine-rich, dietary shellfish supported thyroid
              gland expansion which catalyzes tyrosine
              hydroxylase to increase brain DOPA.
         –    The essential fatty acid content of fish is also
              known to increase both dopamine levels and it's
              receptor binding characteristics.


                                                       www.neuroanthropologist.com         42 of 107
          The Shifting Sense of Agency
In their article “Dopamine and Sense of Agency,”
Render, et. al. (2019) describe the necessary role
that dopamine plays in our capacity to create
actions, influence our surroundings, act
independently, and to make free choices.                                                                                          Render, A., & Jansen, P.
(2019). Dopamine and sense of agency: Determinants in personality and substance use. PLoS ONE, 14(3). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0214069


         –    The brain readies itself and initiate movement well
              before we become consciously aware of it (see
              Libet)
         –    Under normal dopaminergic conditions, the left
              brain identifies agency from within.
         –    See Jaynes (1976) for more.

                                                       www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                            43 of 107
                                                                   Life after the Bite




                           Left-Brain Dominance
                                                          www.neuroanthropologist.com
Photo Credit ID 173396015 © Laurentiu Iordache | Dreamstime.com
                                                                                        44 of 107
                          Fallen/PreModern Man
In his book “The Fall,” Taylor (2010) makes a critical
review of the pressures that led to radical changes
in human behavior around 6,000 BCE.
Insanity of the Ego in Human History and the Dawning of a New Era. John Hunt Publishing.
                                                                                           Taylor, S. (2010). The Fall: The




         –    Between 8,000 BCE and 4,000 BCE equatorial
              Saharasia became desertified.
         –    This environmental change had a devastating effect
              on their psyche flipping their right-brain way of life
              to a left-brain approach in order to survive.




                                                       www.neuroanthropologist.com                              45 of 107
                  Saharasian Desertification
According to climatologist James DeMeo (2011)
glacial retreat and desertification of Saharasia and
the Levant by 6,000 BCE to 4,000 BCE resulted in
significant crop failure, water scarcity, and loss
of hunting fauna.                                          DeMeo, J. (2011). Saharasia: The 4000 BCE Origins of Child Abuse, Sex-Repression, Warfare, and
Social Violence in the Deserts of the Old World. Natural Energy Works.


         –     Said resource scarcity is linked to the cultural
               practices of child abuse, sexual-repression,
               warfare, and social violence.
         –     It is noted that many origin myths of this region
               consist of man being cast from a lush and fertile
               garden.
         –     An improved survival strategy was necessary.
                                                        www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                           46 of 107
         (Desire) Survival                     Dopamine
Lieberman & Long (2018) characterize (desire) survival
dopamine as follows.       Lieberman, D., & Long, M. (2018). The Molecule of More. BenBella Books.



   –   “Desire dopamine makes us want things. It is the
       source of raw desire: give me more.”
   –   “Desire dopamine overpowers the more rational
       parts of the brain.”




                     www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                     47 of 107
I want to tell you my
secret now ...




 I see widespread threats to
 my resources and ...
 you can't reason with me.
            www.neuroanthropologist.com   48 of 107
       Mesolimbic Survival Dopamine
The mesolimbic system takes its origin in the
ventral tegmental area (VTA) of the mid-brain and
interacts with important medial cortical and
subcortical elements including the nucleus
accumbens (basal ganglia), amygdala, hippocampus,
anterior cingulate cortex, olfactory cortex, and the
ventromedial prefrontal cortex.
and History. Cambridge University Press.
                                                                  Previc, F. H. (2009). Dopaminergic Mind in Human Evolution




         –     This pathway is connected to reward, addiction,
               mania, compulsive behaviors, and psychotic breaks
               including schizophrenia.
         –     It is an important survival pathway that modulates
               fear responses.
                                           www.neuroanthropologist.com                                           49 of 107
          Mesolimbic Desire Dopamine




Arnsten, A. F. T. (2009). Stress signaling pathways that impair prefrontal cortex structure and function. Nature Reviews. Neuroscience, 10(6), 410–422.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2648
                                                        www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                                 50 of 107
                               Mesolimbic Salience
Gazzaniga, et. al. (2014) outline the role of
dopamine in the salience network which
connects bottom-up processes through the
mesolimbic pathways to connect the anterior
cingulate and the insular cortex.                                                                   Gazzaniga, M., Ivry, R. B., & Mangun, G. R. (2014).
Chapter 12: Cognitive Control. In Cognitive Neuroscience: The Biology of the Mind (4th ed.). W. W. Norton & Company.


         –     “Dopamine activity indicates that something is
               worth paying attention to, and when things are
               associated with reward dopamine our activity
               reflects how desirable the object is.” (p. 531)




                                                        www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                              51 of 107
                              The Terror of History
In “The Terror of History,” Teofilo Ruiz (2011)
discusses the manner in which fear gave shape to
our lives across the swath of time from prehistory
to the present day.
Princeton University Press.
                                                             Ruiz, T. (2011). The Terror of History: On the Uncertainties of Life in Western Civilization.




         –     [T]he unpredictability of history—the weight of
               endless cycles of war, oppression, and cruelty
               beyond description—shapes our individual and
               collective lives. (p. 6)
         –     Fear is more a feature of right-brain processes
               whereas anger is more a feature of left-brain
               processes.                   McGilchrist, Iain. 2019. The Master and His Emissary: The Divided Brain and the Making of the Western World.
               2nd, New Expanded edition ed. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.




                                                       www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                                    52 of 107
Anger is the left-brain coping mechanism
    for the right-brain fear reaction.




            www.neuroanthropologist.com    53 of 107
            Left-Brain Existence
Look Up: Extrapersonal Space/Saccadic Eye
Movements
“What do you see? To reach them, you have to
plan, think, calculate. Even if it’s only a little, it still
requires some coordinated effort. Unlike what we
see when we look down, the realm of up shows us
things that we have to think about and work for in
order to get.”  Lieberman, D., & Long, M. (2018). The Molecule of More. BenBella Books.



   –   Dopamine marks abstraction in thinking.



                             www.neuroanthropologist.com                                  54 of 107
             On Hemispheric Domination
In “Ways of Attending,” McGilchrist (2018) gives us
clues as to the “why” and “how” of lateralization.
McGilchrist, Iain. 2018. Ways of Attending: How Our Divided Brain Constructs the World. 1 edition. Routledge.


         –     The overall increase in function in the left
               hemisphere in humans is due to a deliberate
               handicapping of the right hemisphere.
                                              hemisphere (p. 8)
         –     Lateralization occurs to allow us to “sing”
               denotatively about things removed by time and
               space. (See Mithen, 2006, The Singing Neanderthals)




                                                         www.neuroanthropologist.com                            55 of 107
                                                                                Yakovlevian Torque
                                                                                                      Asymmetry and
                                                                                                  lateralization of the
                                                                                               hemispheres conveys
                                                                                                      a dual sense of
                                                                                               ourselves in the world.

                                                                                                           “For the right
                                                                                                   hemisphere, we live
                                                                                                  the body; for the left,
                                                                                                  we live in it, rather as
                                                                                                   we drive a car.” (p. 21)
Oliveira, E. P., Feitosa, E., SANTOS, G., SILVA, E., PINCERATO, R., &
PORTELA, L. (2016, March 2). Left Brain, Right Brain: Cerebral Asymmetry
Beyond the Handedness. An Anatomic Review on Brain Laterality [Text]. ECR                           McGilchrist, I. (2018). Ways of Attending: How our Divided Brain
2016 EPOS; European Congress of Radiology - ECR 2016.                                                                    Constructs the World (1 edition). Routledge.
https://epos.myesr.org/poster/esr/ecr2016/C-1559



                                                                            www.neuroanthropologist.com                                             56 of 107
                                            Ego Explosion
It was this point in history (6,000 BCE) when peoples
developed a strong and sharp sense of ego. The
ego explosion refers to the intensification of the
human sense of “I” or individuality.
Insanity of the Ego in Human History and the Dawning of a New Era. John Hunt Publishing.
                                                                                           Taylor, S. (2010). The Fall: The




         –    Firstly, a new kind of intelligence that fostered a
              practical and inventive problem-solving capacity
              was needed as their environment changed.
         –    Secondly, some 6,000 years ago when their crops
              began to fail, when the animals they hunted began
              to die, when their water supplies began to fail, it
              may have encouraged a new spirit of selfishness.

                                                       www.neuroanthropologist.com                                  57 of 107
                              Mesocortical System
The mesocortical pathway arises from the
dopaminergic cells of the VTA (ventral tegmental area) and
connect to the dlPFC and the dmPFC.
Mind in Human Evolution and History. Cambridge University Press.
                                                                                     Previc, F. H. (2009). Dopaminergic




         –    This interconnected system is known to subserve
              cognitive control, motivation, and emotional
              response.




                                                       www.neuroanthropologist.com                           58 of 107
    Mesocortical Control Dopamine




Arnsten, A. F. T. (2009). Stress signaling pathways that impair prefrontal cortex structure and function. Nature Reviews. Neuroscience, 10(6), 410–422.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2648
                                                        www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                                 59 of 107
         Control/Thrive Dopamine
Lieberman & Long (2018) characterize “control”
dopamine as follows.        Lieberman, D., & Long, M. (2018). The Molecule of More. BenBella Books.



   –   Control dopamine is the building block of
       imagination and creative thought: ideas, plans,
       theories, abstract concepts such as mathematics
       and beauty, and worlds yet to be.
   –   It gives us tools to comprehend, analyze, and
       model the world around us, so we can extrapolate
       possibilities, compare and contrast them, then craft
       ways to achieve our goals.



                      www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                     60 of 107
             Medieval Punctuation (Mid 1300s)
Norman Cantor's (2001) “In The Wake of the Plague:
The Black Death and the World it Made,”
describes the events that laid the groundwork for
the modern mind.
Press.
                                                  Cantor, N. (2001). In The Wake of the Plague: The Black Death and the World it Made. The Free




         –   Medieval warm period (900 to 1300 CE) altered
             farming practices and increased cattle herding.
         –   Around 1280 the warming trend began to run down
             with crop failures close behind.
         –   The plague created religious, social, and economic
             upheavals, with profound effects on the course of
             European history.                        Black Death. (2020). In Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?
             title=Black_Death&oldid=964284010




                                                 www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                          61 of 107
                                                 Modern Man
In “A Primer on Postmodernism,” Grenz                                                       (1996)
characterizes modern man as follows:
Postmodernism (3rd ed.). Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co.
                                                                                      Grenz, S. J. (1996). A Primer on




         –    “The modern human can be characterized as
              Descartes’s autonomous, rational substance
              living in Newton’s mechanistic world.”
Cantor (2001) suggests that modernity may have
been a byproduct of the Black Death as an
attempt to understand the pestilence.
Plague: The Black Death and the World it Made. The Free Press.
                                                                                    Cantor, N. (2001). In The Wake of the




                                                      www.neuroanthropologist.com                              62 of 107
                 Phenomenology of Duality
Taylor (2010) in “The Fall,” hypothesizes that much
of what ails us psychologically has to do with a
profound sense of separation from the world
and ourselves as we advance further into the
abstractions of life.
Era. John Hunt Publishing.
                                 Taylor, S. (2010). The Fall: The Insanity of the Ego in Human History and the Dawning of a New




         –     Our profound separation from Nature/Eden/God is
               mirrored in the profound separation of our
               hemispheres.
         –     We have been cast out of our right hemisphere
               to live in the divided and abstract rePresentations of
               the left hemisphere.

                              www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                            63 of 107
The right hemisphere, the one that believes, but
 does not know, has to depend on the other, the
left hemisphere, that knows, but doesn’t believe.
                                               Iain McGilchrist (2019)
                                          The Master and His Emissary




                 www.neuroanthropologist.com                   64 of 107
                     System 2 Thinking
According to Kahneman (2013), System 2 Thinking
is dedicated to slow thinking.
Straus and Giroux.
                                                  Kahneman, D. (2013). Thinking, Fast and Slow (1st edition). Farrar,




         –    It always relies on information and almost never
              on intuition.
         –    System 2 requires energy, because it operates
              voluntarily.
         –    System 2 Thinking is related to majority left-brained
              processes/systems that are more dependent on
              dopamine neurochemistry which is slow and easily
              fatigued.


                             www.neuroanthropologist.com                                               65 of 107
                               Change Accelerates
In “Cognitive Neuroscience: The Biology of the
Mind,” Gazzaniga, et. al. (2014) describe how the
brain works by building predictive models of the
body and the world that facilitate decision making
and movements.                                         Gazzaniga, M., Ivry, R. B., & Mangun, G. R. (2014). Chapter 12: Cognitive Control. In Cognitive
Neuroscience: The Biology of the Mind (4th ed.). W. W. Norton & Company.


         –    Predictive models of psychosocial interaction
              breakdown in a “hyperculture.”
         –    There is “FutureShock”




                                                       www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                                66 of 107
        Prelude to Postmodernity
Alvin Toffler (1970) describes the component
stressors that are coming together to radically
change the fabric of society in his classic book
“FutureShock.”      Toffler, A. (1970). FutureShock. Bantam.



   –   Life Accelerates its pace exponentially
   –   Transience, Novelty, and Diversity
   –   Limits of Adaptability (Ego Depletion) lead to the
       disorder that Toffler referred to as “FutureShock.”




                        www.neuroanthropologist.com            67 of 107
                        Postmodern Self
In “The Saturated Self,” Gergen (1991) describes the
fragmentation, multiplicity, and frenetic
dimensions of our mental life as we cross over
the postmodern divide.
Basic Books.
                                         Gergen, K. (1991). The Saturated Self: Dilemmas of Identity in Contemporary Life.




        –      Our attention spans have all but disappeared.
        –      Reality has been breached and has given way to
               hyperreality.
        –      Our lives are no longer guided by either fact or
               fiction, but by “faction.” (p. 116)



                              www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                      68 of 107
                               A Fragmented World
McGilchrist (2019) warns us that the left brain
underwrites a fragmented world view.                                                                                 McGilchrist, I. (2019). The Master and
His Emissary: The Divided Brain and the Making of the Western World (2nd, New Expanded edition ed.). Yale University Press.


         –    The left brain is “literally more limited in what it can
              see and less capable of understanding what it does
              see than the right brain.
         –    The left brain “is less aware of its own limitations”
              and should give us pause and “good reason to
              reappraise the left hemisphere’s world view.”




                                                       www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                              69 of 107
               Entering the Shallows
In his book “The Shallows: What the Internet is
Doing to Our Brains,” Nicholas Carr (2011) catalogs
how we are getting lost in the distracting
cacophony of stimuli.
Company.
                               Carr, N. (2011). The Shallows: What the Internet is Doing to Our Brains. W. W. Norton &




       –   The way we access information no longer follows
           a linear path from start to finish.
       –   Our eyes and minds dart around chasing after
           flashing adds, pop-ups, hyperlinks, and closing
           windows that results in a fragmented experience of
           the world.
       –   We are losing mesocortical control to mesolimbic
           (desire) survival.
                         www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                          70 of 107
www.neuroanthropologist.com   71 of 107
                           Startle-Effects
In the “Heart-Mind Matrix,” Pearce (2012) describes
how television programs overcame the catatonia
of its young viewers thus “startling” them back to
active viewing.
Street Press.
                            Pearce, J. C. (2012). The Heart-Mind Matrix: How the Heart Can Teach the Mind New Ways to Think. Park




         –      “Media-induced startle-effects are created by a
                variety of arbitrary, abrupt, incoherent, and
                nonlogical extremities of contrasts in light, sound,
                and general imagery in televised content.”
         –      “These startle-effects result in unstable, shifting
                visual-auditory tapestries not found heretofore in
                nature or ordinary daily situations.”

                                   www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                            72 of 107
                                                        Stimmung
In “Madness and Modernity,” Sass (1992) describes
the “stimmung” or “mood” of schizophrenia while
pointing out commonalities with late modernity.
Sass, L. (1992). Madness and Modernity: Insanity in the Light of Modern Art, Literature, and Thought. Harvard University Press.


         –     “[T]he world is stripped of its usual meanings and
               sense coherence and defies standard description.”
         –     “Everything bristles with a new and overwhelming
               quality of definiteness and significance.”
         –     Stimmung usually includes a disturbing sense of
               unreality, a sense of awe at mere existence, a
               disturbing sense of fragmentation, followed by
               apophany or sudden manifestation of meaning.

                                                         www.neuroanthropologist.com                                              73 of 107
                Enter Conspiracy Theories
DeYoung (2013) offers us clues into how the
dopaminergic systems drive exploration, mental
model building from often unrelated or
contradictory facts.                                        DeYoung, C. G. (2013). The neuromodulator of exploration: A unifying theory of the role of
dopamine in personality. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2013.00762


         –    Apophenia is the identification of meaningful
              patterns in noisy or random visual stimuli.
         –    Hyper left-brained individuals such as
              schizophrenics often see elaborate narratives in
              simple inkblots.
         –    See also Pareidolia.
         –    See also “Joker” with Joaquin Phoenix

                                                       www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                                74 of 107
www.neuroanthropologist.com   75 of 107
     With post-modernism,
     meaning drains away.
                               Iain McGilchrist (2019)
                         The Master and His Emissary




www.neuroanthropologist.com                                         76 of 107
                              Photo Credit ID 686327 © Wikus Otto | Dreamstime.com
                     We're Being Pulled Apart
In “The Distracted Mind: Ancient Brains in a High-
Tech World,” Gazzaley & Rosen (2016) conclude
that technology is reducing us to superficial
automatons with an addiction to flashing lights,
electronic tones, and haptic vibrations.
The Distracted Mind: Ancient Brains in a High-Tech World. MIT Press.
                                                                                      Gazzaley, A., & Rosen, L. (2016).




         –     Interference comes in two forms; distraction which
               is involuntary and interruption which is voluntary.
         –     “We are all cruising along on a superhighway of
               interference.” (p. 28)



                                                        www.neuroanthropologist.com                          77 of 107
                      Loss of Impulse Control
In “Behave,” Robert Sapolsky (2017) assures us that
(dis)stress can take our prefrontal cortices off-
line resulting the loss of impulse control.
The Biology of Humans at Our Best and Worst. Penguin Books.
                                                                                   Sapolsky, R. (2017). Behave:




        –     “Stress can disrupt cognition, impulse control,
              emotional regulation, decision making, empathy,
              and prosociality.” (p. 134)
        –     Aside: [A]lcohol only evokes aggression in
              individuals prone to aggression via the
              mesolimbic pathway. (p. 134)
        –     It's like waking a toddler from a nap.


                                                     www.neuroanthropologist.com                  78 of 107
                                               Ego Depletion
Baumeister (2002) advanced the hypothesis of ego
depletion as an energy-well with limitations
R. F. (2002). Ego Depletion and Self-Control Failure: An Energy Model of the Self’s Executive Function. Self and Identity, 129–136.
                                                                                                                                      Baumeister,




         –     If self-control operates like energy, then the first act
               of self-control will consume some quantity of this
               resource, and so the person will face the second
               task with a diminished capacity to engage in self-
               control.
                  ●    Burnout may arise when one has exhausted their
                       resources in futile efforts to help people.
                  ●    Trauma victims may become passive and unable to
                       function because the need to cope with the aftermath of
                       trauma (including affect regulation) exhausts their
                       resources.
                                                          www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                 79 of 107
                 Limits of Adaptability
In “FutureShock,” Toffler (1970) describes both the
physiological and psychological when novel
events challenge “one's preconceived world
view” where he quotes the sociologist Lawrence
Suhm:    Toffler, A. (1970). FutureShock. Bantam.



   –   “We are going through a period as traumatic as
       the evolution of man's predecessors from sea
       creatures to land creatures … Those who can adapt
       will; those who can't will either go on surviving
       somehow at a lower level of development or will
       perish – washed up on the shores.”


                                            www.neuroanthropologist.com   80 of 107
       Coddling of the American Mind
Lukianoff and Haidt (2018) identify three “untruths”
affecting the thinking and behavior of young “Gen
Z” students on college campuses.                                                                           Lukianoff, G., & Haidt, J. (2018). The Coddling of
the American Mind: How Good Intentions and Bad Ideas are Setting Up a Generation for Failure. Penguin Books.



         1. "What doesn’t kill you makes you weaker"
         2. "Always trust your feelings"
         3. "Life is a battle between good people and evil
           people"
                 ●    These “untruths” may be nothing more than a reaction to
                      transience, novelty, and diversity happening faster than
                      cognitive, predictive models can be built, torn-down, and
                      rebuilt. They may be signs of the limits of adaptability.


                                                       www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                             81 of 107
                    The Coming Dark Age
In “Distracted: The Erosion of Attention and the
Coming Dark Age,” Maggie Jackson (2008) details
our future imperilment
Prometheus Books.
                                     Jackson, M. (2008). Distracted: The Erosion of Attention and the Coming Dark Age.




        –    [W]e are corroding the three pillars of our
             attention: focus (orienting), judgment (executive
             function), and awareness (alerting).
        –    The costs are steep: we begin to lose trust, depth,
             and connection in our relations and our thought.
        –    Without a flourishing array of attentional skills, our
             world flattens and thins.
        –    And most alarmingly, we begin to lose our ability
             to collectively face the challenges of our time.
                             www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                       82 of 107
                                                Lie Machines
In “Lie Machines,” Philip Howard (2020) discuses
how we consume decontextualized, digital
propaganda promoted by troll armies, bots, and
political operatives across network platforms with
increasing gullibility.                                        Howard, Philip. 2020. Lie Machines: How to Save Democracy from Troll Armies, Decietful
Robots, Junk News Operations, and Political Operatives. New Haven: Yale University Press.


         –    “We tend to trust our instincts for evaluating the
              truth, and we tend to trust friends and family as
              sources of good media information; as sources of
              news, many of us prefer social media to
              professional print media.”



                                                       www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                            83 of 107
Vēritās sentīrī ā virīs miserīs nōn potest.
     Truth cannot be perceived by troubled men.




                www.neuroanthropologist.com       84 of 107
                                                      Solipsism
Bertman (1998) eloquently posits the present day
mind tends toward solipsism. It is self-absorbed,
only knowing its own modifications and states.
S. (1998). Hyperculture: The Human Cost of Speed. Praeger Publishers.
                                                                                     Bertman,




         –    “In spite of being subconsciously connected to other
              minds, it perceives itself as autonomous and free
              acting on its own decisions.”
         –    We have become addicted to ourselves and our
              self-righteousness.




                                                      www.neuroanthropologist.com   85 of 107
                                   Blocking the Exits
McGilchrist (2019) suggests “that it is as if the left
hemisphere, which creates a sort of self-reflexive
virtual world, has blocked off the available exits,
the ways out of the hall of mirrors, into a reality
which the right hemisphere could enable us to
understand.”                            McGilchrist, Iain. 2019. The Master and His Emissary: The Divided Brain and the Making of the Western World. 2nd,
New Expanded edition ed. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.




                                                      www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                             86 of 107
                                      Technopoly
In “Technopoly: The Surrender of Culture to
Technology,” Neil Postman (1992) frames how
technocracies (modernity) develop tools (such as computers
and bureaucracies) to empower society while
technopolies (postmodernity) find themselves
imprisoned by the very tools that they once
used to liberate themselves.
Technology. Vintage Books.
                                                              Postman, N. (1992). Technopoly: The Surrender of Culture to




         –    A technopoly is a society in which technology is
              deified.
         –    “Men have become the tools of their tools.” Henry
              David Thoreau (Walden, Chapter 1, “Economy.”)


                                        www.neuroanthropologist.com                                               87 of 107
If you're not paying for the product, then


You are the product.



              www.neuroanthropologist.com   88 of 107
www.neuroanthropologist.com   89 of 107
 We Have Become Hungry Ghosts
“In the Realm of Hungry Ghosts,” Mate (2010)
radically alters our notion of what addiction is.
He redirects our focus from a biophysical cause to
a cause based in human tragedy and trauma.
(2010). In the Realm of Hungry Ghosts; Close Encounters with Addiction. North Atlantic Books.
                                                                                                 Mate, G.




         –     “The reason I do drugs is so I don’t feel the
               f**king feelings I feel when I don’t do drugs,”
               Nick, a forty-year-old heroin and crystal meth addict
               once told me, weeping as he spoke. (Chapter 1)




                                                        www.neuroanthropologist.com             90 of 107
                        Psychache and Suicide
In “The Suicidal Mind,” Shneidman (1996) after
making an extensive review of over 700 suicide
notes coins the term “psychache” (sīk-āk) to
explain the reason for the taking of one's own life.
Shneidman, Edwin. 1996. The Suicidal Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.


         –    Psychache is the hurt, anguish, or ache that takes
              hold in the fragmented mind.
         –    It largely stems from excessively felt shame, guilt,
              fear, anxiety, loneliness, angst, dread, dread of
              growing old or of dying badly and the associated
              internal dialog of these strongly felt states.
         –    When there's no escape from the hall of mirrors or
              the echo chamber, there's suicide.
                                                       www.neuroanthropologist.com   91 of 107
            We Need to ...
Find a release from the tyranny of
the left-brain ego.
Find a pathway that can lead us
back to our right- brain selves.




             www.neuroanthropologist.com   92 of 107
        We Need to Take the Trip Home




Anon. 2019. “No Link between Adolescent Marijuana Use and
Adult Brain Structure, Finds Study.” Huffs n Puffs. Retrieved July
25, 2020 (https://www.huffsnpuffs.com/adolescent-marijuana- www.neuroanthropologist.com   93 of 107
use/).
          Sleep: Glimpsing the Right Brain
Casagrande & Bertini (2008) describe the shifting of
hemispheric dominance with the onset of sleep.
Casagrande, Maria, and Mario Bertini. 2008. “Night-Time Right Hemisphere Superiority and Daytime Left Hemisphere Superiority: A Repatterning of Laterality
across Wake–Sleep–Wake States.” Biological Psychology 77(3):337–42.


         –     “We found a right hemisphere superiority when
               the brain is sleepy and when the vigilance system
               has to monitor for potential warning stimuli.”
         –     “A decrease of left hemisphere vigilance, with
               respect to the right, could enable a hierarchical
               reorganization of cognitive mechanisms, functional
               to a mental activity that is different from the one
               typical of the wakeful condition.”


                                                        www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                              94 of 107
               Religion/RHA (Right Hemispheric Activation)
According to McVeigh (2020) in “The Psychology of
the Bible: Explaining Divine Voices and Visions,”
“the god-side (right hemisphere) usually, if not always,
spoke in poetic verse” (p. 50).
Voices and Visions. Exeter, UK: Imprint Academic.
                                                                      McVeigh, Brian. 2020. The Psychology of the Bible: Explaining Divine




         –     “Given that we hear and appreciate music using our
               right hemisphere, it should not be surprising that
               music, poetry, and song were used in induction
               procedures to activate linguistic regions of the right
               hemisphere” (p. 51).
         –     [It has been] suggested that music may have been
               invented as a technique for neural excitement,
               triggering hallucinations of gods needed for
               decision-making (p. 51).
                                                    www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                95 of 107
                          A Silent Left Brain
In “My Stroke of Insight,” Jill Bolte-Taylor (2009)
describes the first-person experience of having
had a stroke in her left temporal parietal junction
(TPJ).   Taylor, J. B. (2009). My Stroke of Insight: A Brain Scientist’s Personal Journey (Reprint edition). Penguin Books.



   –   “I felt a powerful and unusual sense of
       dissociation roll over me. I felt so peculiar that I
       questioned my well-being. Even though my
       thoughts seemed lucid, my body felt irregular.” (p. 38)
   –   “I felt strangely detached from my normal
       cognitive functions.” (p. 38)



                                              www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                     96 of 107
               Right-Brain Consciousness
In “Entheogens and the Development of Culture:
The Anthropology and Neurobiology of Ecstatic
Experience,” John Rush, et. al. (2013) connect the
use of tryptamines and right-brain
consciousness.                                           Rush, John. 2013. Entheogens and the Development of Culture: The Anthropology and Neurobiology of
Ecstatic Experience. Berkeley, California: North Atlantic Books.


         –     The right hemisphere and its serotonergic and
               noradrenergic systems inhibit the left hemisphere
               and dopamine.                                (Found in Chapter 2: Altered Consciousness and Drugs in Human Evolution)


         –     Hallucinogens appear to strengthen the right
               hemisphere's ability to inhibit the left.


                                                          www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                          97 of 107
                          The Reducing Valve
In “The Doors of Perception,” Aldous Huxley (1954)
describes a personal, psychedelic experience
with mescalin where the left-brain “reducing valve”
is.
  Huxley, Aldous. 2009. The Doors of Perception: Heaven and Hell. Digital Edition. New York: HarperCollins Publishing.



   –    In the final stage of egolessness there is an
        “obscure knowledge” that All is in all—that All is
        actually each. This is as near, I take it, as a finite
        mind can ever come to “perceiving everything that
        is happening everywhere in the universe.” (p. 10)
   –    Mescalin appears to expose right-brain
        consciousness.


                                                 www.neuroanthropologist.com                                             98 of 107
                              The Dragons of Eden
In “The Dragons of Eden,” Carl Sagan (1977)
considers the work of Sperry and Gazzaniga in
light of the influences of marijuana.
Speculations on the Evolution of Human Intelligence. Ballantine Books, Inc.
                                                                                       Sagan, C. (1977). The Dragons of Eden:




         –     “Marijuana is often described as improving our
               appreciation of and abilities in music, dance, art,
               pattern and sign recognition and our sensitivity to
               nonverbal communication.” (p. 177)
         –     “It is never reported as improving our ability to read
               and comprehend Ludwig Wittgenstein or Immanuel
               Kant; to calculate the stresses on bridges; or to
               compute Laplace transformations.” (p. 177)
         –     Cannabinols might suppress the left hemisphere.
                                                         www.neuroanthropologist.com                             99 of 107
Perhaps the point of the smoking the blunt
     is to blunt the left hemisphere.




             www.neuroanthropologist.com   100 of 107
                                                           Ego Relief
By Lebedev, et.al. (2015) showed that psilocybin
reduced medial temporal lobe, salience network,
and interhemispheric connectivity which
relieved/reduced subjects of their sense of ego-
identity.                Lebedev, A. V., Lövdén, M., Rosenthal, G., Feilding, A., Nutt, D. J., & Carhart‐Harris, R. L. (2015). Finding the self by losing the self:
Neural correlates of ego‐dissolution under psilocybin. Human Brain Mapping, 36(8), 3137–3153. https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.22833


         –     Tryptamine psychedelics such as psilocybin, LSD,
               DMT, 5-MO-DMT and phenethylamine psychedelics
               such as mescaline leads to psychedelia and varying
               degrees of ego dissolution.
         –     The effect appears to be produced by stimulatory-
               binding to the 5-HT2A and 5-HT2c serotonin
               receptors receptor
                                                         www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                                   101 of 107
                                   Non-Duality
Religious scholar and psychonaut Martin Ball (2012)
describes the egoless, nondual experience of 5-
MeO-DMT in his book, “All is One: Understanding
Entheogens and Nonduality.”
Nonduality. Kyandara Publishing.
                                                        Ball, Martin. 2012. All Is One: Understanding Entheogens and




         –     The overwhelming sensation of the experience of 5-
               MeO-DMT is one of immediate and potentially
               infinite energetic expansion and identification.
         –     Practically speaking, the experience of 5-MeO-
               DMT, from the ego’s perspective, is akin to dying.




                                   www.neuroanthropologist.com                                             102 of 107
        Drug-induced Ego Dissolution
Millière (2017) reports on the phenomenology,
neurophysiology, and philosophical significance of
Drug-induced Ego Dissolution of DIED.                                                                                     Millière, Raphaël. 2017. “Looking
for the Self: Phenomenology, Neurophysiology and Philosophical Significance of Drug-Induced Ego Dissolution.” Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 11.


         –    DIED consists of the disruption of subpersonal
              processes underlying the “minimal” or “embodied”
              self, i.e., the basic experience of being a self rooted
              in multimodal integration of self-related stimuli.
         –    “Functional connectivity analyses also revealed that
              psilocybin (2mg/IV) decreases coupling between
              the PCC and the mPFC, and increases coupling
              between the mPFC and task-positive areas such as
              the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC).”
                                                       www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                            103 of 107
                      In “Food of the Gods,”
             McKenna (1992) discusses the
                       origins of the cultural,
             ritualized uses of psychedelic
                         plant medicine from
               premodern to modern times.
                Here we have a replica of a
                     cave drawing in Tassili,
                 Algeria. Some sort of bee-
                 faced shaman (5,000 BCE) is
                 depicted, with mushroom-
              looking objects sprouting out
                  of his shoulders and legs.
              McKenna, Terrance. 1992. Food of the Gods: The Search for the Original Tree of
                                                            Knowledge. New York: Bantam.



www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                104 of 107
                          The Microdose
In her book “A Really Good Day,” Waldman (2017)
discusses the science and legal ramifications of
microdosing with LSD to control her mood
disorder.   Waldman, Ayelet. 2017. A Really Good Day. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.



   –   “What I took is known as a 'microdose,' a
       subtherapeutic dose of a drug administered at a
       quantity low enough to elicit no adverse side effects
       yet high enough for a measurable cellular response.
   –   A microdose of a psychedelic drug is approximately
       one-tenth of a typical dose.”
   –   “There’s nothing hypomanic about this mood. My
       mind is not racing. I feel calm and content.”
                                      www.neuroanthropologist.com                  105 of 107
  The Existential Problem Remains
McGilchrist (2019) concludes that an “increasingly
mechanistic, fragmented, decontextualized world,
marked by unwarranted optimism mixed with
paranoia and a feeling of emptiness, has come
about, reflecting, ... the unopposed action of a
dysfunctional left hemisphere.                                                                McGilchrist, Iain. 2019. The Master and His Emissary: The
Divided Brain and the Making of the Western World. 2nd, New Expanded edition ed. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.




                                                       www.neuroanthropologist.com                                                          106 of 107
 Thank You MCPA DII
      Dr. Russ Matthias
         Dr. Rob Riley
   Dr. Ragan Fairchild-Bonci
     Mark Jankelow, MSN
           All of You!!

      The
Hypomanic
  Delivery
        www.neuroanthropologist.com   107 of 107
