RAHU & KETU
   (MOON',S NODES)

         IN
PREDTCTM ASTROLOGY   1
         by
  MANTT CHAND JAIN
                     CONTENTS
Chapters:
 l. Introduction                                 I
 2. Rahu & Ketu in Hindu AstrologY              7
 3. Rahu & Ketu in WesternAstrologY            t2
 4. True conceptionof Rahu & Ketu              l8
 5. Rahu & Ketu in Houses                      23
 6. Rahu & Ketu in Signs                       28
 7. Rahu & Ketu in AsPects                     33
 8. Combinationsof Rahu or Ketu with Planets   4L
 9. Rahu & Ketu in Vimshottari Dasa            60
10, Rahu & Ketu in Transits                    il
ll. Transit Rahu & Ketu aspectingPlanets       94
12. Transiting PlanetsaspectingRahu & Ketu     r 06
13. Kala-SarpaYoga                             lll
14. Eclipsesin Nativities                      r20
15. Rahu & Ketu in FemaleHoroscopes            130
16. Rahu & Katu in SYnastrY                    t35
17, Karmic Destiny                             141
18. FamousPeople                               153
                        PREFACE

   Thereare somewho will say that the Moon,sNodes(Rahu
and Ketu) are worthless.Otherswill claimthey help. Who are
you to believe? It is through pain staking effort and the
collection of many charts that I have been finally ableto
understandas tO how to use Rahu and Ketu. In the horo-
scopesof several criminals, Rahu/Mars associationwill be
clearly visible.

   Someof the learnedauthors.areof the opirrionthat Rahu
and Ketu do not solely produce any significanteffectancl
their influenceis also minimum. But thereare some authors
who say that Rahu and Ketu may cloud'theresultof a house
by interferingwith rhe Sun or the Moon or both, but they do
not work independently. Through the last pagesof thisbook
by way of illustration, I have very much proved that Rahu
and Ketu do work independentlyand work powerfully.
    If you have beentaught that the Moon's Nodeshave little
or no value and you ignore them completelythat is your
prerogative. If you want to take the chancewith your own
chart, that is your right, too. How far they are reliableahd
to what extent they can be incorporated into your methods
of predictionwill dependon your studiesand research.
   So far there is not a singlebook being written on Rahu
and Ketu in India. One of the prime reasonsfor this neg-
lectedarea is the lack of available informatjon on Rahu and
Katu. Many authors have not given much importanceto the
Moon's Node's, and whateverscatteredinformation we get
from the different authors through the periodicals is not
                                                                  \




enough to justify as a book on Rahu and Ketu. Then there
are controversial statements. in the texts and the reader is at
loss as to make out which ii right and which is wrong.

    I do not claim that I have originated the text. I have no
hesitation in admitting that I collected and compiled the text
from the various sources. In this strenuous, work, Asirolo-
gi<'ol Magazine, Bangalore. India, mostly came to my rescue
and my thanks are to those learned authors from whose
writings I have taken the advantage of. However, before
incorporating them, I have examined and tested them on the
touch-stone of experienceto avoid erroneous judgment and
the consequent disrepute of Astrology and embarrassment
and discouragementto the Astrologer.

    It is my earnesthope that no astrological student will read
and study this book uncritically. In actual fact, the un-
critical student, instead of being Astrology's best friend is
indeed the worst enemy. Astrology would, at the present
time, have been occupying an honoured and revered place
among the scienceswere it not for him. The principles set
forth in its pages should be scrutinised and tested thoroughly,
for we do not wish any body to accept them blindly. But
they are nevertheless of an importance to be examined by
experiments and observations, in order that they may be
verified or rejected as invalid.
   The book in your hand is the result of my researchesand
experinqents,and I have taken considerablepains to verify the
accuracy of predicting events based upon Rahu and Ketu.
Start with your own chart first and then thrill yourself with
the delight of knowing that evenyou can count on a bit of
luck norv and then.
   It has to be pointed out to those who are rvell-versed in
the philosophy of astrology, that absolute fatalism is on part
of the credo of the knowledgeable astrology. Allowance has
to be made by the factor of envirenment, which limits
opportunity. Such factors are capable modifying forecasts
accordingly to the degree to which they are able to limit the
terms.

    However, this work is capable of considerable extension
and rmprovement. lt is my hope that the interest of the
reader will be fired to such an extent that he will join silent
band of researchscholars in the task of verifying these state-
ments, adding to or embellshing them, in order that
ultimately the standard book on the subject may at last be
written. The day is not far offpropounding a clear interpre-
tation of the €ffects of Rahu and Ketu.



                                           Manik Chand Jain
                      CHAPTER I
                      Introduction
   Amongst the salient features of Hindu Astrology is the
importance and recognition that is given to Rahu and Ketu,
the two Nodes of the Moon, physicallynon-existant, yet regar-
ded and treated as full-fledge planets. The Hindus conceived
the Moon's Nodes asthe cross-roadsof magneticinfluencesfull
of potencyand gave them the status of planets in so far their
effects are concerned. The real character of the Indian
Astrology can thus be said to be dependenton thcsetwo
shadowypoints.
    A knowledgeof Rahu and Ketu has existedfrom ancient
times. That is apparentfrom the known fact that our prede-
cessorsofthousandsofyears ago were able to forcast Eclipscs.
The names they attached to these points wcre accordingly
somewhatstriking. A monster called the Sergentor Dragon,
with little variation of form, was usedto depict the general
inffuenceof thesepoints.
   Followers of the so-calledscientificschoolshavs deniedthe
significanceof Rahu and Ketu in astrological studies. They
have scoutedthe idea that mere mathematicalpoints, however
important, could have any effect. There was no material body
there, so how could they influence? In putting forth our
defence, we might ask them what about other methematical
points such as Ascendant, and Mid-heaven. How crn tbcy
afrect anything ? But they still allow the uses of these two
points -Ascendant and Mid-heaven ; and at the same time
deny the importance of two points-Rahu and Ketu, which
ancients thought so much, as they have no body.

    The Earth itself is symbolicallv presentedin the horoscope
in two important ways. One is the position of the Earth with
reference to the earth's annual motion and this is given by the
apparent position of the Sun. The second is the particular
point of space and moment of time when a birth takes place.
and this is the ascendant.

    If you leave out of the Moon's Nodes, you can miss one of
the most important luck areas in any chart. There is little
doubt that the omission of the Moon's Nodes (Rahu and Ketu)
from a nativity is a severe handicap to the interpreter of the
horoscope. The subtle relationship between the Sun, the
Moon and the Earth plays a large part in the unfoldment of
each individual's consciousness. The ecliptic is the plane of
the Earth's journey round the Sun. Rahu and Ketu show at
which points the Moon is also in alignment with Sun-Earth
relationship, thus making possible a more perfect rapport bet-
ween the three bodies and indicating at which precisepoint in
the zodiac the main effects of such a rapport can be anticipated.
    It is really astonishing to note that mere points of inter-
section of the Earth and the Moon's Nodes should be so strong
in their impact on human life. It had been recognised that
they produce marvellous effect, at times more than the planets.
Since Rahu and Ketu are in exact opposition to each other, the
effect of these Nodes should be considered simultaneously.

   Second important question is asked from them : How do
they supposethat the massesof silicate and metallic ores,gases
etc, which the Spectroscope reveals as the constituents of thc
Planets, have the long life effects on mind and earthy destiny,
which they accept ? Seeing the accordance between the heave-
nly movements and our mundane affairs, clearly provable as
they are, is it not palpable that the apparent astrological
effects of the zodiac and planets, ascendantand mid-heaven
and other important points are rather the handwriting of God
in the Heavens. They are simply used for our guidance and it is
our duty to attend them. The advanced student will find
much of intcrest and matter for deep study in noticing the
influence of Rahu and Ketu on human affairs.
    Rahu is known as the Dragon's Head and Ketu as the
Dragon's Tail. This provides a clue to the significance of the
Moon's Nodes, for the Head is forward looking, while the
Tail rcpresentsthe past. The position of Rahu representsthe
qualities to be developed and work to be done during the
present incarnation and the position of Ketu shows the quali'
ties developed during past lives and thus indicates attitudes
that come naturally to the native. They are classified as
Karmic planets. We can thus expect to find the native mani-
festing a good many of the qualities represented by the sign
containing Ketu and to be seeking to express the qualities
belonging to the signs in which Rahu is placed. The manner
in which these qualities are expressedwill be shown by the
 sign and Houses they occupy and the aspectsthey receive. A
 planet in conjunction with Rahu or Ketu has special signifi-
cance in relation to the things signified by the Node it is with.
     We can generally say that Rahu in the first half and Ke:u
in the second half of a natal chart indicate that the native's
position will deteriorate with age. Ketu in the fisrt half and
Rahu in the second half suggest that the native will be more
and more prosperouswith age. The intensity of efrectswill,
however, be subjectto the powers of other planetson Rahu
and Ketu.

      Well positedRahu and Ketu with beneficialconnections
and aspectsrise the native to dizzy heights in life. No other
planet can be comparedto the Nodes in this respect.So, too,
the afflicted Nodes strike the native with leprosy,drive them
mad or chasethem to forests.

      Accordingto Hindu Astrology,both Rahu and Ketu are
maleficsbut Ketu is consideredto be spiritual causing salva-
tion to human souls and Rahu is more earthly indicating mun-
dane prosperity.The effectsof the Nodes are not alwaysevil.
They are alsoproductive of what are called : Raja yogas-indi-
cating power, position and attainments-andthesebecomefully
manifest during their main and sub-periods,By and large, the
Nodes seemto have a constructiverole to play in the long run,
for, after making the native passthrough various phasesof
difficulties and sufferings,rhey wilt also enablehim to progress
spiritually.But in caseswhere the Nodesjoin 'poisonousparts
of the constellation' along with Mars or Saturn'without any
beneficassociationor aspect,life will be marked by misery,
struggleand misunderstandingthroughout.

      Ancient sageshave called Rahu a diplomat and Ketu,a
seer. Rahu and Ketu eclipsethe Sun and the Moon represen-
ting the soul and the mind respectively. Hence, they have a
great influenceon the Soul's liberationor rebirth. Rahu or
Kctu within two degreesof the ascendantgive an unusualtype
of personalityand very disrinctiveappearance.
     Rahu has the influenceof Venus and Jupiter. When the
native learns the growth at Rahu, with Jupiter/Venus influ-
enceexertedhere, he beginsto give at this point. Rahu is
Exaltedin Gemini, Ruler in Virgo, Harmony in Libra, Fallen
in sagittarius,Detriment in Piscesand Inharmony in Aries.

      Ketu has the influenceof a Mars conjunct Saturn. When
the native learns the disciplinary influence that the Saturn/
Mars connotationexertsover his Ketu, he is meeting destiny.
Ketu is exaltedin Sagittarius,Ruler in Pisces, Harmonyin
Aries, Fallen in Gemini, Detriment in Virgo and Inharmony
in Libra.

       Rahu is feminine. Its gem is Agate or Lapisluzzili. Rahu
rules over three asterisms-Aridra,Swati and Satabhisa.They
fall in the signs of Gemini, Libra and Aquarius ruled by
Mercury, Venus and Saturn respectively;which form a group
of very intimateplanets. Mercury rulesintellect,'Venusrules
pleasureand Saturn rules misery, henceRahu's portfolio is to
give thesein plenty. Rahu by nature is said to resembleSaturn,
who hassway over Air, one of the five elements.Incidentally,
it may be noted that all thesesigns,indirectly ruled by Rahu,
from the Airy Triplicity. Rahu governspeternal grand-father
and maternal grandmother. Rahu's period is for l8 yearsin
Vimshottari Dasa.

     Ketu in enunch. Its gem is Turquoise.Ketu rulesAswini
Magha and Moola, which are situated in the signs. Aries, Leo
and Sagittarius respectively. Thesesignsare ruled by Mars,
the Sun and Jupiter respectively.Thesethreeplanetsare very
intimate friends. Mars rulespowers,Sun rules the soul and
Jupiter rules the wisdom. A correct blending of thesethree
characteristicswill lead to liberation. Hence Ketu is said to
be conductiveto liberation. Further, these signs form the
Fiery Triplicity. Fire is ruled by Mars, hence Ketu is said
similar to Mars in giving effects.Ketu rules maternal grand-
father and peternalgrand-mother. Ketu's period is for 7 years
in VimshottariDasa.
     Rahu giveseffectsthroughout while Ketu in the ending
period. Rahu representsthe tall, while Ketu the short persons.
                      CHAPTER 2
           Rahh & Ketu in Hindu AstrologY
    It was Rahu (Satan)to awaken the idea of earthy pleasure
in the minds of Adarn and Eve in the Garden of Eden and
thus causing their downfall and not Saturn (Satan). saturn is
too spirituai to be a tempter. However, he is a tester' Though
Rahu was very much there in the West,but Roman,Greek and
Egyptran *yittology ignored him. Even in the East, someof
the learnedastrologersdid not give any seriousimportanceto
Rahu and Ketu, though there are storiesabout the,creationof
Rahu and Ketu in the Veclasand Puranas'
    Puranic Tradition : The origin of Rahu and Ketu is an
interesting reading. Mythologically, Rahu is a Giantdemon'
a Demi-god,the lower part of whosebody endedin a Dragon's
 Tail or Serpent'sTail' f)emon Swarbhunu,performed severe
 penanceinvoking Lord Bruhma and the latter appearedbefore
him. Swarbhanu asked Brahma a boon : to confer on him
 the status of a planet in the lleavens' Brahma granted him
 the boon and disaPPeared.
   Later on. Lord Vishnu and Kurnra Avatura for extracting
nectarby churningthe ocean-Kshirasagar"The DevasGods)
and the- Danavs (demons) churned the oceanto obtain the
nectar. Vasuki. the Serpent king was the cord to churn the
mountainMainukctwith ; but to keepthe mountainup Lord
Vishnu took the form of a tortoise and supportedthe mountait't
on his back. Many things were churned out, Amrita (nectar)
camein the last. By taking Amrita, one becomesimmortaL
It was prayed by Devas (gods)to Lord Vishnu that Amrita
neednot be given to demons, lest evil become permanent
glving no opportunity to good influeuces to thrive in the
World.
    To deludedemons with the transientmaterial temptation,
Lord vishnu took the form ofan enchantressand also the
responsibility of dlstributing thc divine nectar to gods and
dcmons. He made them to sit in two different lines,so that he
will distribute nectar to gods only. The demons,captivatedby
the beauty and form ofthe enchantress,failed to notice thl
trick. Swarbhanu. who was different than the other demons
and who was interested in the real thing, for he knew its true
worth, had infiltrated into the ranks of thc gods and managed
to partakeit. Lord vishnu alsowanted to fulfil the boongiven
by Lord Brahmato him, so He, too overlookedto Swarbhanu.s
presence.
    Sun and Moon (gods)discovered Swarbhanuin the line of
gods and on this discovery, the gods became annoyed and
appealedto Lord Vishnu to destroyhim. Lord Vishnu severed
Swarbhanu's head from the body with his Chakra, but it was
only after he had partaken the nectarand thus becameimmor
tal. Lord Vishnu feignedignorance and acted as if He did so
on the hint given by them (Sun and Mobn). This madehim to
developbitter enmity againstthe Sunand the Moon.

   On Lord Vishnu'schopping-offthe headof Swarbhanu.the
headwasjoined to the body of a Serpentand he becameRahu.
swarbhanugot the statusof a pranet himserfas Rahu and his
counterprrt as Ketu. africting the Sunand the Moon enternallv.
On account of this incident, the Hindu Puranas have spoken
of this eclipse allegorically as Serpent's swallowing of the Sun
and the moon on New and Full Moon days.

    Rabu in Vedic Age : Vedic age was the begining of the
Astrology age. According to Rigveda, Rahu was not a planet
but a demon. According to Vedic Sages, the phenomenon of
a Solar Eclipse was the result of the Sun being devoured by a
demon called Swarbhanu. Here Rahu was considered a demon
and not a planet. On New Moon day, the Moon entered the
Sun and this caused the phenomenon of Solar Eclipse, when the
demon Swarbhanu devoured both. So the conception of Rahu
being the eater of the moon and Ketu that of the Sun belongs
to a later age. In any case Rahu was not a planet then.

   In Vedic conception, the conjuction of the Luminaries on
New Moon day created Rahu while the opposition of the
Luminaries on Full Moon day created Ketu. The Vedic con-
ception brings out two factors. The spiritual darkness is Rahu
and the spiritual light is Ketu.

    The Second factor is the linking of the Sun and the Moon
with Rahu. The Union of the Soul or the Sun with the Mind
or the moon brought out the mightier child of Maya (material-
istic world) in Rahu. In our daily life, wd directly feel the
influence of the Sun and the moon only. We thus come to
believe that the Luminaries of the Sun and the Moon are.
therefore, the supreme earthly planets.

    In Puranic legend, Rahu and Ketu are two parts of the
same demon, linking Rahu with the upper part of the body
suggestsall the organs of knowledge and vital organs of action
to be in his possesion. He is looking down on the earth in
                                              Thus his interestin the
search of the lower part of the body'
earth is againProved'
                                                is the Sun and Vishnu
      In Vedic terminology' Lord Vishnu
                                                            refers to the
Chakra, is ecliptic. T-he 'toty allegorically
                                                      Moon's Nodes-are
urtrooomi."l fact that Rahu and Ketu-the
                                      orbits  of  the    Luminaries and
the points of iutersectionof the
                                        understanding        of the causes
                of this fact led to the
                                         this fact    and   also about the
of eclipses' Hindus are proud of
"Jit*""ty
antiquitY of their civilization'
                                                                  literature
        Hiudu Mythology: The Hindu Mythological                          and
                                      Rahu    and      Ketu'     Rahu
speaksof another sym"iolismof                                    the  other'
                                          One  is the   Heads
Ketu are supposedto be serpents'
        (l) Lord   Vishnu   is rectiningon  the serpentbed(2) Lord
Tail.
                                                   on head around the
Shiva is wearing serpentsas ornaments
                                                   is alwavswith a ser-
;;tr; and hanal (3) Lord Subrahmanva
                             dancedon Kalingu'       thc   several-headed
 O"t,-i+il-".cl Krishna                  in ancient     Hindu    scriptures
serpent. There are many fables
                                        rolesin blildine,or
 whereSerpentsplayedimportant                                        !.e1]::..
            clestiny of an  individual' Cotrra   is saidto obey certarrr
tt;;rh"                                    to Truth' It will never
 laws and it is expectedto conform
                      '11 has the dreadfulyet attractive hood' In
 ;;-;;it"tily.                              endorved rvith gems of
 Puranasit is saicl ,tui CoUtos are
 extremebrilliance'
                                                     It is perltapsdue to
      'i""t all this tussabout the serpents'l
      Why
                                                        in the shapeof a
 ,f,"         itat the Kundalittipower coiled
                                             rousedand taken
 serpentbeneaththe back-bone'when                                      lt:n:
                                     poY."lt'.So      long the power rs
 ir"oa, gin., abundantspiritual
                                                   slvay' Rahu can be
 incipient,material attachmentswill hold
                                                           the back-bone
 ;;;;";.;      to the coil and Ketu' to the top of
                                     l0
possibly the head, brain etc. Thus it is that Ketu said to give
liberation and Rahu, attachment.

      The very purpose of life is evolution to higher states.
Prophets and sages demonstrated that they have controlled
the serpents and are ready to help us if we ,pray to them for
liberation or Supreme Wisdom.
      Greek Mythology : The python of the Greek Mythology
was the huge serpent or monster slain near Delphi by Appollo,
but ordinary python is described as a large snake that crushes
its prey. The python is different from snake not only on
account of its huge size but also on account of the fact that
while the snake has speed and is dynamic, the python only
creeps and is comparatively speaking static. It has a wonder-
ful power of immobilsing its prey by its hypnoti c gaze. It
draws the prey into its mouth and swallows it.

      When we add the epithet selestial meaning of the sky,
heavenly or divine, it can refer to only one python that has
been identified through the ages with the ecliptic belt (Vishnu
Chakra). Some refer to it loosely as the Snake and the story
of the snake is woven in a thousand patterns in the religious
mythologies of the world, The reference of the killing of the
Python by Apollo (Sun) near Delphi is also the story of the
ecliptic and the Sun.




                              ll
                       CHAPTER 3

         Rahu & Ketu in Western Astrology
    Till today most of the learned astrologers in the West do
not take Moon's Nodes into consideration. Their arguments
are : that since Moon's Nodes are not physical bodies, they do
not have any place in predictive astrology. If we accept their
approach, then the ascendant and M.C,, too, should not be
taken into consideration also. These, too, are not physical
bodies either. Through the astrological notings and writings
of the ancients, it has been found that the Moon's Nodes form
an important axis across the chart. Called Rahu and Ketu in
Hindu literature, they are frequently called Caput Draconis
and Cauda Draconis-Head aud Tail of the Celestial Dragon
in the West. Hindu astrologers use the symbol to this day and
usually treat them as the most potent influence in the affairs
of man. To ignore them is to miss a valuable clue to inter-
pretation, for they provide an indication not only of the focus
of activity during the life but also of the main purpose behind
a particular incarnation. As to the ilnportance of the Moon's
Nodes, we may add that no one can live to 40 years of age
without experiencing their favour or lnalice, and in due course
of time. both.

  l. George White is one of the learned astrologers of the
West who, in is his book : The Moon's Nodes ancl Their Imp<tr-
 tance in Natai Astrology, mentioned the importance of Hindu
 Astrology and astrologers. The author is very correct when
 he saysthat though the Nodes are opposite to each other,
 they do not contract but act complimentaryto eachother,
 both in the natal chart as well as by Transits.
    GeorgeWhite is the only author to our knowledge who
 has spoken about the physical statureof the individual by
 the presenceof Rahu near the ascendantthough it was not
found correct on test. However, some of his observations
 are startingly correct and provide the missing link in the
 predictive astrology.
    White, among other writers, has stressedthat Rahu in or
 ctose to the natal ascendantis indicativeof more than the
usual self-confidanceand not a unpleasing .Lordliness,'
whereasKetu so placedtendsto be lackingin self-confidence
and in order to make up for the lack, is too much on the
defensive. The author saysthat either Nodes in the First
houseattracts attention, favourable c.r adverse,to the native.
white givesemphasisto the Moon's Nodes that rvasoriented
or elevatedin the natal chart.
    2. Ada Muir in his small book : The book of the Nodes
and The Part of Fortune, has said ! Since great stresswas
laid upon Rahu and Ketu by ancient astrologgrs,we would
urge studentsto give attentionto the Moon's Nodesespecialty
if Sun, Moon or planetsare aSpectingthesepointsu. gr.ui
deal can be learned from these concerning the sprinls"
                                                           of
action.
    3. Mohan Koparkar in his book 2 Lunar Nodes,observed
Ketu brings the past life, or Karmic, influencethrough the
Nodal axis which is utilisedthrough Rahu in the chart. Thus,
Ketu becomes the suction point for all incoming Karmic

                            l3
energy from, the past incarnations. This energy is then
processed by that individual and redistributed into this
present lifc with the network set forth by Rahu'

    The planets ruling the signs of Rahu and Ketu axis are
called the Karmic Controlling Planets. Since Ketu is the
intet point for Karma, the planet ruling the sign of Ketu is
called the incoming. or past life, Karmic Control' The planet
ruling the sign of Rahu controls the Karmic distribution in
this life. For this reason. it is called the Karmic Distribution
 Control. The Controlling Planets have storing implications
 depending upon where they fall in the chart and the aspects
 they make with the Nodal axis. This aspact made by the
 Controlling Planets to the Nodal axis is of great significance
 in Karmic understanding.

   4. Bernice Prill Grebner, author of Lunar Nodes*New
Concepts, states : In Sanskrit, Karma means act, deed or
work. Whatever your, explanation, it seems to be the
point that indicates our destiny. This is especially true con-
cerning Rahu and Ketu, but Saturn also seems to play a
major part in our Karmic destiny. We were born during a
certain cycle to fulfil a certain action, or a certain Karma.
Call it what you will, the fact remains we are required to
learn, to do, to compensate, to atone for a certain thing and
lvc can only do that during a certain period in time.
    Ketu is the faculty learned from a long period of reincar-
nation of the soul. Another explanation of Ketu is that it
represents the last of a long line of certain hereditary strain.
It is a faculty inherited at birth, for which we are not to
struggle to achieve. One of the main purpose of our life is to
                                        'overflow'
control this gift instead of letting it            and control us.

                               l4
There rs a danger of destroying the new growth at Rahu by
too much concentration at the Ketu area. We always need to
be aware of maintaining a balance at the Nodal axis.
    5. De Vore in his ; Encyclopedia of Astrology, writes:
From the position of the Moon's Nodes, we can see whether
there was an eclipse condition shortly before or after birth,
whether a planet near Rahu or Ketu would shortly be acti-
vated by the Moon's transit. or that of the Sun, and similar
and sundry factors which the modern astrologer can trace
from the ephemeris but often does not. The Nodes themselves
merely point to places where something may happen at such
times-which itself is of no small matter. Things happen
because of the time, the place and the planet and the Node
is often the middle factor in that formula.
    6. Ronald C. Davison in one of his articles observed
Some years ago when investigatrng the astrological indications
of screen and stage talent, I noticed that in a large number of
cases, the Lunar Nodes were placed in the 5th and llth
houses, the sectors of the horoscope linked rvith public ent'er-
tainment. Sometimes Rahu would appear in the 5th.
sometimesin the I lth. there being no marked preponderance
either way.
    A planet in conjunction with either Node has special
 significancein relation to the things signified by the Node it
is with. There is little doubt that omission of Rahu and
Ketu from a'natal chat, is a severe handicap to the inter-
preter of the horoscope. The Nodes in transits often mark
the arrival of a significant period in the native's affairs.

   7. W. Lilly, the famous l7th Century English Astrologer
paid much attention to the Moon's Nodes in his book

                              l5
Introduction to Astr ology : The Head of the Dragon is mas-
culine, of the nature of Jupiter and Venusand of himself a
fortune. The Tail of the Dragon by nature is quite contrary
to the Head, for he is evil.

   8. Car Leipert has an interesting interpretation on the
Moon conjunction either of its Nodesas "an often unaccount-
able, instinctivefeeling of protection and guidance" not
necessary logical, not immediatelyapparent, yet nonetheless
true, as "an equally vivid, instinctive senseof danger"on
such occasions.This conjunction with Rahu places emphasis
is on the sense of danger. It can be so strong that it is
almost a reversionto a primitive type of reaction.

   9. Dr. H.L. Cornwell in his ; Encyclopediaof li(edical
Astrology, cites the position of Rahu with the ascendantor
M.C. as fortunate when conjunct or in favourable aspect
with other vital centresof the nativity.

   10. Caulson Tumbull says that when the Sun or the
Moon is sextileor trine Ketu, the darknessof Ketu is ex-
changed for Light. Such a sextile or trine was listedas an
outstandinghelp in the chart.

   ll. Heinz Antoni through his book: Moon'sNodesin
Delineationand Direction, explainedand proved the efficacy
of the Moon's Nodes by statistics and many illustrated
examples.

    12. A.L. Cilliers in his article has said : The ancients
saw thesetwo important points opposite each other on the
ecliptic stretehedacrossthe heavens like a huge dragon lying
                           l6
in wait of the Sun and the Moon, to swallow them at
intervalsduring,the Solar ano Lunar eclipses,which occur
near the nodal points. It is quite possible that a solitary
Node in an otherwise unoccupied house indicates certain
eventswhich could not be otherwise deduced from the sign
of the cusp of that house and the aspectsof its ruler. There
is no doubt, whatever that the nodal conjunctionswith or
squaresto *he various Planets are of great importanuc and
should never be neglected,though the sextileand trine aspects
seemto be rather weaker and of less importance. Western
Astrologerswould do well to head to the Moon's Nodes
mdre closely.

    13. Thyrza Escobarin her article observed: The Nodes
generally considered to be particularly Karmic in their indi-
cations. Rahu shows"what has alreadybeen learned.', and
thus is an area where these lesson-easy or difficult-are to
be learned and debts are to be paid. From this stand-point,
the Nodal axis may be likened to a balancesheet of personal
assetsand liabilities in the horoscopewhich is a kind of
Cosmic Ledger for eachsoul.
   14, Curt Knupfer concludesafter making his statistical
investigations
             : The results with the Moon's NodesSystem
was the second-bestamong six different systems which were
applied.




                            t7
                      CHAPTER 4
         True Conception of Rahu & Ketu
   Rahu and Ketu are controversialfiguresin Hindu Mytho-
logy, Astronomy and Astrology. Whatever may have been
the liables of mythology, the physicsof eclipsestells us that
the shadowsare causedby the Earth, the Sun and the Moon.
and they do not exist by themselves. In solar Eclipse.it is
Moon that covers thd orb of the Sun and castsits shadow on
the Earth and causesthe eclipse, ln Lunar Eclipse,it is
reasonablythe Earth that caststhe shadow on the Moon and
cause the eclipse. But if we seethe movementin both the
cases,it is the Moon that causesthe eclipse by playing hide
and seek.
   What are Rahu and Ketu. The usual explanation given
by some of the learned astrologersis that they are as much
physicalbodies(planets)as other planets are and they are
invisible because their discs are dark. Others are of the
opinion that they are points in the eclipticwhere the plane of
Moon's orbit cuts the plane of Sun'sorbit.
   Rahu and Ketu posedifficult problems for the astrologer
and have been the cause of considerable controversy in
the recent past. Authorities differ about them. From
what Varahmihira observesin is his Brihat Somhita.itis
obvious that he was aware of the true causesof eclipsesand
other celestialphenomena.
     It must, however, be stated at the very outset that there
 is a fundamental differencebetweenRahu and Ketu and the
 other planets. The other planets are bodiesof physicalmass,
actually existingin the sky and visible to the eye. They have
form, shape and colour and their mass, gravity, atmosphere,
motion, distancefrom the Sun etc., have been studied in
detail and ascertained. On the other hand, Rahu and Ketu
 are only tqre imaginary points in the heavens,without shape
or form. They are the points of intersectionof the apparent
path of the Sun with the path of the Moon. As these paths
are nearly circular, the points of intersectionare two which
lie I 80 degreesapart.
    Now the basic assumptionof astrologyis that planets in-
fluence the earth and its inhabitants. Man dwells upon the
earth and so is influencedby them. The planetspossessmass
and have force of gravity. They also emit electro-magnetic
viberations. Theseeffect the earth and its inhabitants.
  Rahu and Ketu do not existin the heavensand possesno
mass. They are only two imaginary pointsin the heavens.
Then how do they effectthe earth and its inhabitants?
    It has alreadybeenstatedthat Rahu and Ketu are the two
points of intersectionof the path of the Sun and the Moon.
The apparentmotion of the Sun is due to the revolution of
the earth around the Sun. And the Moon revolves around
the Earth. Therefore, Rahu and Ketu are the points of
intersection of the paths of the earth and the Moon in the
heavens.
   The Earth and the Moon are two bodies possessing
physical mass. They move on definedpaths in the heavens.
Their movements on their paths createfields of force. The
                            l9
naine of the force is not material. It may be called electro-
magneticor any other. The inhabitantsof the earth are not
aware of the field of force createdby the earth, becausethey
are a part of the earth and move along with it. This fact
may be explainedthrough an example. The movementsof a
Railway Train on its track createsa field of force which is
noticed by a passerby and not by persons who are in an
equilibrium. Similarly, the inhabitants of the Earth are in
an equilibrium with referenceto the field of force created by
the earth during its motion around the Sun.
   The equilibrium is, however. disturbed where the paths of
the earth and the Moon intersect. It is natural that where
two fields of force meet with eachother, somethingunsual
should happen. Rahu and Ketu are two Nodes of the Moon,
are the two points of disturbanceon the paths of the Earth
and the Moon. The path of the earthsor the apparentpath
on the Sun is thb ecliptic. Thus Rahu and Ketu are the two
points on the ecliptic 180degreesapart and in whose vicinity
disturbed condition prevail. They representthe cross-roads
on the fieldsof force of the earth and the Moon.
   But what about the influenceof Nodes, whibh are ima-
ginary points ? They cannot either emit rays or reflectrays
emanatingfrom the other celestialbodies. So what is their
positionin Astrology.
    Latitudes of the planets depend on their Nodes. so the
mutual relationshipin the positionof the planetswill not be
the same at any two instants in Kalpa, (one Kalpa, being
equal to lO90Maha-yugasand one Maha-yuga is of 4,32tr000
years), as the periodsof revolution of the Nodes are different
for different Dlanets. It is said that History repeatsitself but
                              20
not in a identical manner. This truth is established on a
consideration of astrology. The events may be similar but can
never be identical.

    Since the astrological influence of planets depends on their
latitudes, (their Nodes), even though they are tmaginary
points naturally exerciseastrology influence on the earth and
the living beings on it.

    The effect of Rahu and Ketu forces itself on our attention
most clearly at the time of the eclipsesof the Sun and the
Moon. When the Sun and the Moon come near the Nodes
at the time of the Full Moon or the new Moon and a certain
other conditions are fulfilled an eclipse of the Moon or the
Sun take place. Then the light and other electro-magnetic
viberations coming from the Moon or the Sun are cut off and
the normal arrangenents rvhich obtains for the earth are dis-
turbcd. Persons, who are born at the tinte of.eclipscsare
always prone to mental abnormality and to other physical
suffering. They are also likely to have week constitutions
and short lives. It is known fact that during the period of
eclipsesand sometimes before and after them. the normall
functioning of the human system-suchas digestive apparatus
etc. is disturbed and that is why it is said that no food should
be taken during the period of an eclipse.

      But it is not only the Sun and the Moon that suffer when
t h e y c o m e i n c o n t r a c t w i t h R a h u o r K e t u . O t h e r p l a n e t sa l s o
develop abnormal traits when they come in contact rvith
t h e m a n d t h e i r n a t u r a l q u a i i t i e s s u f f e r ,u s u a l l y f o r t h e w o r s e .
W h c n S u n c o m e s i n c o n j u n c t i o n w i t h R a h u . t h i s g i v e sa
sttong :rdvantage to the Rahu area. The ego and the new
activity flow along the same path. Whenever the Sun is loca-

                                                  2l
ted is where there is strength, vitality, action and warmth.
But when Sun is in conjunction with Ketu, this givesgreater
difficulty in establishingthe new growth. In order to grow
and learn,the personmust build a strongego. To cut short,
wheneverRahu is in conjunctionwith any planet, it will en-
hancethe basic quality of that planet.
    It is only in recentyearsthat Rahu and Ketu are recogni-
sedi4 Westernastrologicaltexts-thisis surely a sign of Indian
influenceon Westernastrologicalthought. Lately few astrolo-
gersof the West have written few booksproving with illus-
tration that the Moon's Nodes play an impartant part in
human affairs.




                            22
                          CHAPTER 5
                   Rahu & Ketu in Houses
    Whenever Rahu wil| be in the first house, Ketu will natrrral|y be in
the seventhhouse. Their results are comptimentary. so when we deal
with Rahu in the first house,no separate delineation of Kctu in the
seventh house is necessary.

    All studentsof astrologymust recognise the law of Cause
and Effect, even though they may feel that the fact of reincar-
nation is not Proved.
    Rahu is tbregiver, Ketu, the taker, and since giving and
taking are results of former action, we may morc clearly see
the justice in present gains and losses as indicated by the
H ousepositionof Rahu and Ketu. Rahu (unafricted attracts
 blessings accordingto the house it occupies,while Ketu robs
us of covetedprizes.WheneverKetu happensto fall natally,
that area of the chart will need more effort from the perdon
than the oppositearea. Rahu and Ketu do better in 3, 6, l0
and ll houses.Casesof abortions,still births, death of child-
ren happinessfrom children, all comewithin the purview of
Rahu/Ketu influences.
    FIRST HOUSE : This position often signifies that the
personalvaluesare more important than general public or
partnership.This personneedsto learn to do things for him'
ielf, to rely on his own initiative. He will needto accomplish
things through the po wer of his personalityand developself
 sufficiency. The partnership activities 'are often
                                                    a drag for
 them in many ways but they have to learn to cope
                                                     with that.
 Other people or partnershios become a medium
                                                    of learning
 experiencbs without choice.

      SECOND HOUSE : This condition often signifies
                                                            unusual
  fina'cial activities or abilities to deal with earning
                                                         and mana-
 ging'his own resources. They have to learn
                                                   to abide bv their
 own resourcesas it is an inborn instinct for
                                                    him to iepend
 upon other's finance and resources.He must
                                                   build his own, if
 his destiny is to be fulfilled. He should rry
                                                 to stay away frorn
 credit matters and othdr's resourcesas much
                                                     u, porribl.. If
 affiicted, years of affiuence are followed by years
                                                       of privation,
 so the sound investments should be made to provide
                                                            for less
 productive period.

       THIRD HOUSE: This condition often signifies
                                                          unusual
 intellectuai ability to share his senseof awa1s1sss
                                                        rn his life
 with tirose in his sociar environment and receive
                                                      from their
 senseof awareness and impressions. Excellent
                                                     relationship
 with brother and sisters are noticed. Benefits
                                                frorn travel ani
short moves are often noticed in their life. If affiicted,
                                                            pleas_
ure through short.iourneys and neighboring cities
                                                       is denied.
Extreme view on national problems are expressed.
                                                          Ketu in
the 9th house in Sagittarius is good for spirituality
                                                         but bad
for worldly luck and good fortune.

       FOURTH HOUSE : Benefit comes through parent,
                                                      a
probably the mother. Gain is made through
                                              im-ou.ubl" p.o_
perty or mineral wealth,. For some reason, home
                                                   or domesti-
fication is highly significant in their life. There
                                                     may be a
problem in connection with a parent or an
                                               imbalance in his
love for them, loving one more or it could give loss
                                                     of one at

                               24
  an early age. Career is given a second priority
                                                   in their life,
  Although they have strong self displaying ego,
                                                 circumstances
  may not give tlem the opportunity to be prominent
                                                        in their
  field

        FIFTH HOUSE : This condition often
                                                 signilies close
 relationship with children. He is to learn
                                             to  use   his heart
 and becotne 'attached' in a very personal way.
                                                   He needs to
 love deeply and intensely on a oni_to-one
                                            basis. They have
 fairly good successin love/romance, but regarding
                                                    friendships
 they may have some disappointments. pleasure
                                                through social
 in_tercourse. Speculative gains are shown,
                                                unless heavily
 affiicted.  He should develop a great desire to be creative
                                                              in
 some endeavour.

           SIXTH HOUSE : The recuperative powers
                                                                                        are great
and health can be regained through fasting
                                                                             or avoiding exce_
sses' This condition often signifies work-rerated
                                                                                       areJs and
t h e i r i m p o r t a n c ei n r i f e . w i t n l t r i s p o s i t i o n
                                                                             h e n e e d st o r e a r n
to work and be of service to otlters. For
                                                                            spiritual growth,
this.is quite a good position of Rahu Afllictions
                                                                                 lessent-hetime
available for these studies and incrase heartrr
                                                                             difficurties. Ketu
in the l2,th house in Sagittarius is bad
                                                                 tbr u,ordly pleasures,
like conforrs of the Couch but very good
                                                                          for Ui*inu o, sal-
vation, meaning releasefrorn the .epeateO
                                                                          cycle of births and
deaths.

         S E V E N T H H O U S E : f h i s c o n d i t i c r no f t e n
                                                                                        s i g n i l i e st h a r
m a r r i a g e o r p a r t n e r s h i pa c t i v i t i e s a r e
                                                                   e x t r . e n l e l yi m p o r t a n t i n
h-islife. Marriage or businesspartner
                                                                   is usually ltlore mature
than the native. This person hasto
                                                                   w o r k w i t h a p a r t n e r ,t o
I e a r n t h e b a l a n c ei t t a k e s t o d o t h i s . p l e a s u r e s
                                                                                        is obtained
through contact with public. They are
                                                                     very charnting, diplo_
                                                    25
matice and polite in generalexpressionor communication,
Affiictions threatensseparation from partnersand law suits'
Ketu in the ascendantis not conduciveto the health of the
native. When affiicted,evil resultsmay happen which may
adversely affect the native's health, reputation and relation
with theGovernment. sudden fall from position can happen.
       EIGHTH HOUSE : This position forces the personto
learn to accept another'sfinancial help' Money is obtained
                                                                  his
through partners. Legaciesare promised' Sometime in
life, h-e *itt u" forced to learn the  acceptance  of  the humility
oftakingfromothers.Stronginterestintheoccultorhidden
sideofthelifeisnoticedasarescuefromthematerialworl
i.urrrlrrg from the idea or reality of death and regeneration
                                                           poverty'
is strongly noticed in this case' If affiicted' fear of
                           weakness   according to  the  sign  at the
nnunUui lorr.r, physical
8th house.
       NINTH HOUSE : When the position is not developed'
                                                            in many
 they have to learn a lot of lessonsfrom theirmistakes
                                                           This can
 cases,they cannot even comunicatetheir problems'
                                                      get involved
 also indicate disregard for religion' They will
 with publication,  publicity or  some   foreign  affairs/activities
                                                            needsto
 in their life-time due to strangecoincidences' He
                                                          his imme-
 becomemore objectivein his interpretationswithin
                        of brothers  or sistersare   very   destined
 diate world. Affairs
 in their life whetherthey   want  or not'

     TENTHHoUsE:Thisconditionoftensigniliesstron.
ger successin the professionor careerarea but the native will
huu. u checkeredcareer. Avocation should be followed'
                                                         life'
sometimeto the point of sacrificinghome and domestic
                                                   way'  and
This meansworking for or with the public in some
                               26
he will have less time to spend on home matters. Public
recognitionand honours. Often difficultiesduring childhood
bring about a mother/father complex to this person. They
are a lot closer to their father than mother. Their first half of
life is not. very in the enjoyable comparedto the secondhalf.
When affiicted,others contrive to bring about his downfall.
      ELEVENTH HOUSE : This position often signifiesthat
the person has considered friendship. Friends, in a better
position than the native, assistin time of need. Many hopes
are realised. Here they must becomelike an Aquarian in the
highestsenseof the word; a true humanitarian.Problemsand
difficultiesusually stem out of romancesand quite often form-
ation of a successfulrelationship is very difficult. There next
difficulty is with regard to children. Aflictions createenmities
and jealousies.
       TWELFTH HOUSE : The personhas a lot to learn in
this life time with or without individul choiceand needs self
sacrifice. It is helping those less fortunate. handicapped,or
affiicted.In their work, they are quite methodical, practical,
punctualand steady. The digestivesystemor problemswith
circulation needsattention in their case. Affiiction sometimes
resultin lack of mental balance, vague imaginationsand
forebodings. Occult studies should not be indulged in at
such time.




                               27
                                       CHAPTER 6

                              Rahu & Ketu in Signs
   WheneverRahuis in Aries,Ketu will naturallybe in Libra. Their
axis is alwayscomplimentary to eachother. Sc the delineationof Rahu
in one sign, will itutomaticallycoverthe delineationof Kettrin the
oppositesign.

    l. Rahu/Ketu posited in dual signs and in conjunction
with or aspected by the rulers of the 6th or 8th or the l2th
housc will causeloss of elder brothcr or tather or the native.
But if they are connected with an angle or trine ruler, then
wealth, power. status etc. will be conferred on the native.

    2 . R a h u i d e n t i c a l t o i t s e x a l t e d s i g n ( G e r n i n i ) p l a c e di n
an angle or trine gives political power and fame. He will have
all the comtbrts and will become the chief of his clan.

     3 . R a h u p l a c , : di n T a u r u s . C a t t c e ro r A r i e s g i v r s r v e a l t h ,
e d u c a t i o n .g o o d s e r v a n t s .p l e a s i n gw i f e / h u s b a n d a n d b e n r : l i t s
from the government.

      ARIES/LIBRA : In his past life. the person was lucky and
was surroundeil by luxuries aud comlbrls. He was engagr:din
h i g h e r s p i r i t u a l l e a r n i n ga n d g o o d t h i n g s i n l i f e w e r c t h e m a i n
p u r s u i t s o f h i s s o u l . I n t h i s l i f c t i m e . t h c d r a n r a t i c i n s t i n c tl s
strong and there is usual plenty of self-command. T'here u'ill
b e a u s p i c i o u sc e r e m o n i c si n t h e . h o u s e . a c q u i s i t i o n o f l a n d s ,
perfect domestic harmony and happiness. Failure to keep both
hands tied up may cause loss of many successful opportuni-
ties in the present incarnation.

   TAURUS/SCORPIO: In his past life, the person was enga-
ged in many underworld aitivities. Distorted sexual life and
misuse of potver was the lifestyle. Consequently; he must
have undergone several punishments before the present birth
takes place. [n this life time, he has a senseof mastershipand
a democratic view of human necessity. There will be pilgri-
mage to shrines and holy places and increasein philosophical
knowledge. He will try all his best to live nicely and comfor-
tably and struggle to, at least. maintain his Karmic status.

    GEMINI/SAGITTRIUS : The person spenr his past life in
various philosophical and mystical pursuits. He preferred a
a life of freedom and independence. In this life, very marked
sense of humour coupled with the desire to be just to all,
makes him an admirable character. If he tries to isolate and
withdraw from the society, the .;ircumstancesforce him to be
with others. He has the power to suggestor transfer ideas
to others at a distancesand foreseeevents. He seldom has a
chance or opportunity to cultivate his emotional and material
base.

    CANCER/CAPRICORN:           In past tife, rhis person has
suffered many difficult and confining situatjons. Domestic life
was unpleas.antand unhappy. In this life, he will have a keen
interest in new ideas and enterprises if they relate to home
comforts. Family cohesion is important to him. Some pride
is shown and a tendency to boast also. He may show a colder
exterior, but you can get to him through proper emotionalism.

                             29
He would like to servethe sufrers and will have enthusiasm
for national service.
    LEO/AQUARIUS : He has spent his past life in many
unu$ualactivities.He hardly had time for his personal needs
and worked towards achievingthingsfor others. In this life
time, he will have vitality to carry forward large enterprises.
He has the capacityto superviseothersand capableof under'
taking responsibilitiesvery early in life. His mental harmony
is possibly his greatestcharm. Strong self-conditioningand
self-confidence  is noticedin him in this life. He will build new
housesand will travel in forqign lands.
   VIRGO/PISCES : In past life, he was almost an incognito
person.He did not have many opportunities,becausehe could
not identify them and make use of them. In this lifetime,social
ddsiresare very pronouncedand there is often much stability
and perseverance. He has beengiven many opportunitiesin
this life, but at the sametime, he has to achieve themvery
methodically.Thus. he cannotjust skip and go on to the next
gamein life. Therewill be suddenaccessto much wealth.
    LIBRA/ARIES : He has spent his past life with a lot of
physical activities, temper and aggression. In that life he
gained and lost many thingssimultaneously       as he could not
learn to balancethem. In this life, he  will be mild and gentle,
and dignifiedand upright. Whateverhe doesin this life will
have a senseof justice. He will achievemany success      in this
life without fighting for them and just by utilising his mental
energies.He may not be after materialisticcomforts and luxu'
ries,but he is alwayslucky to be in plentiful in that respect-
    SCORPIOITAURUS:He has spenthis past life in luxuries
                               30
and comforts without caring for the higher learnings. He
would not listen to anybody and will go with a routine life. In
this life time, there is seldom steady accomplishmentand
mental discord robs him of much pleasure in life. He will go
from one extreme stage of living to another during the same
life, His hidden motive and energiesare strong aud he will use
them whenever he has to. As long as no body disturbs him, he
will be quiet, polite and gentle. He may forget, but never
foregives, what others do to him.

    SAGITTARIUS/GEMINI:           The past life was spent in
many commrmicative and intellectual activities. He had to
deal with others constAntly and had to fulfil what they expec-
ted of him.      In this life. desirp for direct results leads to
impatience and impules. Now he js choosing a path of indepe-
dence and isolation. He will take a keen interest in public
affairs, but is apt to overreach himself. He will achievesubs-
tantial esoteric knowledge or understanding with or without
being too involved in the occult. He is very much interested
in the material things as well as in the human emotionalism.
    CAPRICORN/CANCER : In his past life, home and the
surroundings was the key focus. He has spent.his past life in
various domesticated activities. He could not get a chance to
go out and do things. As a result of this, he is required to do
lot of thingsin this life outside home. He is endowed with
grace and idealism, has much sympathy for others and interest
in seeing those in his own circle accumulate wealth. He is
logical in argument, takes an interest in politics, like grandeur
in buildings and gives of his substanceto the weaker and less
fortunate.

   AQUARIUS/LEO        : Hc was very much self-centered in his
                               3l
past life and had no time for othersr His status was pretty
high and commanded a great respect for his powers in the
society. Now in this life he is to learn to be humanly, to mix
with others and help them to solve thcir problems. He will
have the tendency to neglect home or office routine if these
interfere with his social ambitions. His innovations and abili-
ties to tackle situations is quite amazing. Unpredictability is
always on his side which he has difficulty dealing with in this
lifetime.

    PISCES/VIRGO : In past life, he was very methodical and
detailed oriented to a point of extreme. He spent his past life
in substantial discriminating conditions and instincts would
not even get close to him at that time. Endurance in research
work, persistanceand efficiency as well as the desire tbr the
minutest accuracy mark the influence of this lifetime.      His
decision may not be logical on the    surface.  but he does not
care in that respect. Dealing   with people and  their emotions
is important for him as he likes the exchange of feelings in
this material world to keep him happy.




                              32
                         CHAPTER 7
          ,       Rahu & Ketu in Aspects
     Aspects in Hindu Astrology are different than the so^calledmodern
aspects.For the purposeof this work, we follow the modern aspects.In
our studies,we have observedthat aspects with the Moon's Nodes are
workable upto l0 degreeorb.

                      Conjunctions to Rahu
    SUN. It gives advantage to the Rahu area. This aspects
provides strong personalelevation wherever the Sun is located.
The destiny often helps them in most of the ways it can
during life. Responsibilitiesare often given to them just as
they are ready for them. People do lose their mates somehow,
since this automatically puts Ketu in the 7th (marriage) house
to the Sun.

    MOON. This person has a good personality that is well
received by the public. This aspect provides great internal
emotional satisfaction for these people. In our opinion, Moon
conjunct Rahu makes it a more familiar territory than other
aspects.Women will play an inlportant role in this department
of his life.

    MARS. This aspect provides strong interest in athletic or
physical activities in these individuals. This position over
stimulates and sornetimesexaggeratesexual arousal. Strong
assistancefrom brothers and sistersis seenin getting aheadirr
life or vice versa.

   MERCURY. They often havegood communicativetalents
and their energiesseemto comefrom someunknown sources'
All aspectsto Mercury have psychicvalue It givesgood
spirits and cheerful nature. Assistancefrom brothers and
sistersis highly significantin their life and often it is a mutual
exchangeon a timely basis.
   JUPITER. lt givesluck ano goodfortune in balancingthe
nodal axis. In this aspect,higher philosophiesand excellent
wisdomflow throughthesepeople. Theseaspectdoes provide
good material possessionsor often financial self-sufficiency'
You can consider it very fortunateif someoneis born with
Jupiterand Rahu in conjunction.
     VENUS. The person with this aspectis affectionate      and
 warm-hearted. The good thingsin     life   have   a tendency  to
 comeby them quite easily. This addsto     the Venus  charm and
 makesfor great popularity. Marriage relatiohshipoftenare
 successfulfor them, at leastfrom the surfaceof it' We cannot
 be too sure, that Rahu with Venusis actually as good as it
 sounds.
     SATURN. tt give considerable   patienceto fulfil the work
 of balancingthe   Nodes.   All their  learningexperiences   and
  limitationsare properly analysedand   utilised  in order not  to
  make the same mistake    again.   Often   this aspectmay  deny
  good physicalhealth.
      URANUS. He is the adventurerand is romanticallyeccen-
  tric. His mind is way ahead of the masses.Considerableutili-
  sation of built-up nervous energ-vis often well-channelledby
                                34
these individuals, depending upon the house location of the
conjunction. Rahu with Uranus very often gives stroke and
                           'freak'
heart trouble, Encourages          accidents of type which are
completely out of the individual's ability to control.
    NEPTUNE. The idea is to distribute the Neptunian
cnergies, either for good or bad, to the surroundings and asso-
ciates. Here we have a generous, hospitable. sympathetic
nature, ready to help all 4n need. His sensivity and awareness
is very keen.    This seems to be a favourable Karma.    Natal
charts of many composers or musicians have Nodes with or
squaring Neptune.
   PLUTO. This will give sex problems of some kind or pro-
blems concerning partners' money. Basically, it is Karmic
lesson,reward or punishment, utilising the Plutonian means.
This. all to often. seemsto indicate a confrontation with death
or problems dealing with the Occult.     Rahu or Ketu in con-
junction or afriction with Pluto can increase any cbancesof
glandular problems or in the case of women, female organ
problems.

                     Oppositions to Rahu

    SUN. This gives a greater difficulty in establishingthe neu'
growth.   This ascept indicates lack of physical vitality and
general suppressionof ego. Often a conflict from a previous
life with the father has brought about this condition and
bircumstance.

     MOON. This aspect is Karmic in nature. Circulatory
problems of difrculties with dige stive system are quite common
for these individuals. Possible difficulties can concern homc
life or can be connected with the public, mother or women in
general.

                              35
    MARS. Action and fear need to be balanced. Circulatory
problems or blood difficulties can be normal for thesepeople.
lndulgence and misusesof physical power, sex and energies
in past life have brought this condition in this life.

   MERCURY. This may make the person suspicious,out-
spoken, and somewhat tyrannical. This givesa fluctuating
type of mind.     Judgement can the poor. so the poor, so the
person may not be good at giving advice. Nervous system,in
general, gets affected due to this aspect.

   JUPITER. It gives great love of adventure, always seeking
new experience of some kind.      These people often learn to
overcome the materialistic barrier either by choice or by
heavenly force. Based upon the rest of the chart happiness
from children might be a void issue to these people.

     VENUS. This does not exactly favour happiness. The
person is usually sensitive and cannot expresshis affection
comfortably.                They face several hidden problems regarding
love/romence.With people of opposite sex, there can be great
s a c r i f i c et o a n i d e a l l o v e .

   SATURN. Sacrifice or surrender is the key word here.
Success is also hard to achieve where saturns position is
located by sign and house. They just have to go through wordly
and unwordly experiences and then the significance of
patience. Things have a tendency to occur as late as possible.

    URANUS. The person with this aspect is eccentric with
fitful energy which limits him in making good use of his
talents. It is not good for partnership or marriage becauseit
gives too great a desire for freedom. Their methods rvill be
strange as far as others are concerned.

                                  36
      NEPTUNE.                   This person must be careful of drug aud
                                                                                         sex
abuse, and over stimulation of the imagination
                                                                               fr,irrr over-
i d e a l i s t i ct h o u g h t s . T h e a s p e c rw i l l g i v e t h e
                                                                            individual the
ability to inhale spirituar and idealistic goars ro
                                                                             org,,nir.' oni
restructure the individuality.

    PLUTO. He seemsforced to project himself into
                                                       a separa_
tive action. They will not hesitate to use destruction
                                                         foi the
sake of construction but only as a last l.esort.
                                                   K e e p i n gt h e
peaceand harmony will be their rnotto.

                                 Squares to Rahu/Ketu
   S U N . T h i s s e e m st o p u t a s t t . o l t g e tr h a n u s u a l
                                                                             accent on
the Sun and its position. Under this condition,
                                                                             r>nehas [o
adjust the right amount. lt is dilficult for
                                                                  hirn to arrive at
successin life. The action and stressseem
                                                                  to colneout .rt the
Sun position.

     MOON. This can give problems with health
                                                                                 lbr rnosr of
the person's life. This aspect produces peculiar
                                                                                     ernotional
i m b a l a n c ei n t h a t i n d i v i d u a r . T h e a c t i o n
                                                                     a n d s t r e s ss L ' e n r st o
come out at the Moon's position and through
                                                                             problc.nrsn,ith
wornen. It is best to releasethe feelings
                                                                   solne way.
    MARS. Along rvith this aspecr cornes
                                                cruelty or stenl
nature. It gives impatience and may
                                            disturb ,i" pf,yr;.ui
vitality which can cause physical suff.ri,.,g.
                                                Ofr.crr one finds
that they have no energy rvhen [hey hau"'u
                                               ror ro tro.nd vicc
versa. It givc.srnuch sexual energy. sometiurcs
                                                    t., tt.," puini
of sexual prorniscuity.

    MERUCRy.      lt may ntake the person seem aloof.
                                                       Therc
rs a tendency to fault linding exaggeration. .lhey
                                                     need to
t'eel good' but they are frequentr|
                                     unabre t' do so f,r no
                                               -j7
specilic reason. Hidden      tensions with     brothers/sisters are
often seen.
JUPITER.     This person is at one extreme or another' never
                                                   good luck or
down the middle of the road' Hindrance in
              is often  seen in  this aspect' For  these people
opportunities
                 children is quite  common  and prominent'  He
learnings from
can be revolutionary   and  reckless'

    VENUS      This aspect tends to break-up his numerous love
                                                       put obs-
affairs. It may not deny love in his life but it can
                                             The  square  is no
tacles in the way that he must overcome'
good for lasting love and tend to make the    person tyrannical
and jealous'
    SATURN'      This is quite a strange aspect to sush an
                                                                  This
exrent that limitations in life are doubly,significant.
                               The life   seems     to be fated'  Call
position can give lorieliness.
                             you  will,  it    is that area  which we
it. fate. Kalma, ot what
can rlo little about except surrender   to  it  in strict discipline'

     URANUS. This person varies from moody and sensitive
                                                  utilised to
 to reckless. Deliant strange ways and means are
 achievethingsinlife.Hehasalovefordrasticaction.It
                                                     prone'
 can complete him to take risks, making him accident
     NEPTUNE,somewiththisaspectseekfalsesatisfaction
                                                        sides to
 in the seuses. Many times, this aspect indicates two
 tlrerlature.apullbetweenundueidealismandover-sensiti
                                                         Karma
 vity with power hungry selfish gratifications' The
                                                  house position
 ,niil be according to the nature of the sign and
 and aspects.
     PLUTO. He seemslbrced to project himself into a sepa-
                                                           and
 rative acrion. In this aspect, the life is full of action
                                   38
suppressionof action without any significant events. If pre-
planned and properly executed, ideas of these people have a
substantially great influence over mankind.
                 Trines/Sextiles to RahuiKetu

    SUN. This aspect provides good popularity. personal
elevation and execution of proper ego for that individuat.
Correct and constructive actions come naturally to success-
fully fulfil the destiny of the Nodes. Circumstantial assis-
tance in getting recognisedin the world is noticed.

    MOON. This aspect gives a calm and steaoy emotional
nature. In a man's chart, it attracts a woman who will
help him. It gives a cheerful temperament. The health is
affected beneficially and the personality colnes acrosswell
with the public.

    MARS. This aspect provides added physical strengrh or
reserve energles. It can give a feeling of independence
                 'vital
because of the          nature'these people have. Assistance
from brothers or to them is very prominent in this person's
life,

   MERCURY.       This is an intellectually stimularing aspecr.
Trine aspect is good for an astrologer. All aspects to
Mercury have psychic value. Their communication and ex-
ternalisation has a magnetic force associatedwith that which
others cannot help but notice.

   JUPITER. Financial good luck and material . sbccess
without sacrificing any Karmic debt is seen in this aspqct.
This aspect indicates wholehearted pursuit ol the nodal
positions and aids in an effective way. ln this aspect,
proper use of knowlcdge and wisdom is shown by the indivi-

                              39
dual.        He is also the philospher.
    VENUS. This aspect in a man's chart makes him attract
beautiful women with much charm of manner and they can
expect better luck regarding money matters.     This gives a
nature that is dependable and well able to put action behind
the feglings of affection.

     SATURN. This aspect provides excellent working habits
to these individuals. Here they have the ability to see the
serious broad view and stick to it: In this aspect, the harder
the person works, the better will be hisrewards. Emotional
a n d s p i r i t u a lm a t u r i t y i s s e e n e v e n i n e a r l y c h i l d h o o d .
    U R A N U S . H e c a n e x p r e s sh i n r s e l fb e s t t h r o u g h h u m a n i -
tarian and social reform. Brilliant ideas and innovative
things are often associatedrvith this aspect. Orle good thing
about these people is know how to, and when to. use their
unsual energies.

      N E P T U N E . T h i s p e l s o n i s t a l e n t e d i n m u s i c a n c lt h e
arts, or has a great appreciation of thenr. This aspect pro-
v i d e s s t r o n g s e n s eo f s p i r i t u a l i t y o r e v e n m e d i u m i s t i ca t t i t u d e
to the individual. lt inclines him to metaphysical studies.
H e s e e k st h e s e e m i n g l yi m p o s s i b l e .

    PLUTO. Even the good aspectsto Pluto can be separa-
tive, but the seperatiol is for good. Their temper, when not
in control is quite destructive, not only to them, but to their
surroundings as well. lt denotes force and depth.




                                                  40
                                       CHAPTER 8

               Combinationsof Rahu or Ketu with
                         the Planets
      It is rather difficult to give all the combinarions of the Rahu or Kelu
w i t h t h e p l a n e t s ,b u t i n t h i s c h a p t e r , w e w i l l p r o v i d e s o m e o f t h e
important conrbinationsrvhich the readcrs uill find useful in predictive
astrology.

                                                SUN
       l . A s s o c i a r i o n o f R a h u r vi t h S u n . M a r s a r r d S a t n r n
n u l l i f i e sa l l t h e o t h e r g o o d c o u r b i n a t i o n so f t h e h o r o s c o p e .
      2 . C o m b i n a t i o no f t h e S u n . l O t h l o r d a n d t h e a s c e n d e n t
lord aspected by Rahu rnakes [he negative proficient in reli-
gious scriptures. Some result is indicated if Raliu is in
c o t r b i n a t i o n r v i t h M a r s a n d t h e 2 n d h o u s el o r d .
      3. Rahu, 2nd from the Sun and 9th fronr Saturn conl'ers
s p i r i t u a l i t y o n d t u r n s t h e n a t i v e i n t o a r e l i g i o u sl e a d e r .
      4 . R a h u s c l u a r et o S u n a n d t r i n e t o S a t u n . r o l R a h u
p l a c e d3 r d o l t l t h l ' r o r nt h e S u n o r S i r t u r n s o n f c r s r o y u l i t y o n
t h e n a t i v e i r r r n o s to f t l r e c a s e s .
      5 . T h e b e s t p o s i t i o n o f R a h u i s t o b e p o s i r e di n t h e l s t
h o u s ea l o n g r v i t h S a t u r n . t h e S u n a n d t h e M o o n h a v i n g t h e
9 t h r e s p e c to f J u p i t e r .
      6 . R a h u w i t h t h e 7 t h l o r d i n S a g i t r a r i u so r P i s c e s r n u k e s
t h e n a t i v e a d u l t e r o u sa n d i f t h e S u n j o i n s w i t h t h c r n . h e r v i l l
h a v e s e x u a l r e l a t i o n sr v i t h t h e w o l n e n o t ' h i g h b o r n l r r r n i l i e s .
     7. Rahu in the 6th, Saturn in the 8th. Mars and the
 Sun in the l2th housecausesthe native to lose his mother in
 his l2th year.
    8. Rahu in the 5th, Moon in the ascendent,Venusin
 the 2nd and Sun/Mercuryin the l2th house; the person will
 be greatly troubled by his wife and children.
    9. Moon joins Rahu, Saturn joins Mars and placed in
 the ascendant,it is evil for the mother. However, if Sun/
 Mars do not aspect Saturn, there will be comforts of the
Mother till late in the life.
    10. Mars in the llth house with Rahu and thesun in
the 5th house,the native will lead a life as a chief of the
town.
    ll. Rahu in the 7th houseaspectingVenus or Venus in
the 7th house from Rahu and if from Venus, Sun/Marsare
in the 3rd house,the personwill fall from a tree and die.
    12. Personis not born on Thursday,Jupiter joins Rahu,
Mars join Saturnand Moon joins Sun. the native will become
lame.
    13. Rahu in the 2nd house with Sun, Mercury, Venus
and Saturn, the mother dies soon after the delivery.
    14. Venusin the 7th house;Sun, Mars, and Jupiter are
placedin a signowned by an evil planetand Rahu is placed
in a sign of maleficplanet, the nativervill sufferfrom chronic
illness.
    15. Rahu in the 5th houseand the ascendantlord is in
association with the Sun. Mars, Jupiter and Saturn. the
child will die soon after birth.
    16. Rahu in the 2nd house.Sun in the ascendant,Mars
in the 3rd house.Mercury in the l2th houseand Venusis
exalted in Pisces,the native will enjoy royality.
                             42
   17. Moon in the 2nd house. Rahu in the 3rd house,
Jupiter in the 4th house, Mercury in the l2th house and
Saturn in the llth houseor 6th house,with exaltedSun in
Aries, gives rise to exceedinglypowerful Raja Yoga. If of a
Royal birth, the native is sure to becomean Emperor.
   18. Corrjunctionof Rahu and the Sun in the 4th houseis
not favourable. There wlll be many financialtroubles, fear
to enemies,and failure of plans. Theremay be the problems
of children also. Finally the native will leavefor another
town or country.
    19. Rahu conjunction Sun in the 7th, the native will
loosehis wealth through the associationof women.
    20. Rahu conjunctionSun in the l0th house will bring
elevation in native's life. but the political careerwill be a
failure. He will havemany ups and downs in life. Rahu
conjunction Sun in the 9th housewill give higherlearnings
 and foreign travels.
   21, Conjunctionof Rahu and the Sun is bad in Aries,
Gemini, Libra, Scorpio and Aquarius. Sun conjunction
Ketu destroysthe housewhere they are placed.
   22. Rahu or Ketu in close.conjunction     to the Sun in the
8th housecurtailsthe longevity.
   23. Rahu conjunction the Sun in l,eo is termed favour-
able. Similarly conjunction of Rahu and the Sun in the lst,
3rd, 5th or l2th house is excellent. It will bring fame,
social elevation,dignity etc. but the relationsbetweenthe
father and the Sun will not be cordial.
    24. If Rahu or Ketu conjunction the Sun is affiicted,
placed in malefic houses or aspected'by -malefic planets,it
causes lossof professionand prestige. There will be frustra-
tions and comforts of the children rvill be denied.

                              43
         25. If Rahu is 5rh from the Sun and Jupiter and 2nd,
                                                                           ^
   3rd,.. 5th, _6th, 8th, 9th, 'l lth or l2th from the M;;';
   p u b l i c l e a d e ri s b o r n .
        26. Rahu in square aspect to Saturn, the Sun the Moori
  and Jupiter, the politician is born. Jupiter in trine aspect
  instead of square, shapes the administrators amongst them.
  Alternatively, Rahu in the 2nd, 6th, gth or l2th house from
  Saturn. the Sun, the Moon and Jupiter gives rise to a
  politician and administrator.
       27. Caplicorn ascendant. the native is claisified as luckv
  if Rahu is not rvith Jupiter, Moon is with the Sun and Mars
  is with Saturn.
       28. Rahu in the 8th house aspected by Sun/Saturn and
  not especred by the benelics; 8th or l2th year will prove
 critical for the native.
       29. When Ketu is in Sagittarius upto 3"-2A', anrJ the
 M o o n a n d S u n h a v e t h e s a m ed e c l i n a t i o ' s , t h e n w h a t e v e r
 may be the other combination denoting rank, status and
 position the person cannot rise in life.
                                            MOON
       l . S a t n r n i n t h e 5 t h h o u s e a s p e c t e do r . a s s o c i a t e db y t h e
 M o o n a n d R a h u c o n j u ' c t i o n 5 t r r h o u s el o r c r b r i n g s a b o u t t h e
                                'I'he
 loss of children.                      same results are incliiated, when Rahu
i s a s s o c i a t e dw i t h J u p i t e r . r o r c l o f t h e a s c e n d a n t i s w i t h
M a r s a n d t h e r u l e r o f t l r c 5 t h h o u s er s w e a k .
      2 . R a h u i n t h e 6 t h . t i t h o r l 2 t h h o u s er v i t h t h e M o o n
a n d S a t u r n a n d a s p e c t e d b y t h e l o r d o f t h e a s c e n d a n tbring
about the deathin bad circuurstances.
      3 . W i t h t h e a s p e c to f R a h u o n S a r u r n , r v h e n t h e M o o n
i s v e r y w e a k . r v i l l l e a d t h e n a t i v e t o u n d e r g o t h e operattolr
of the head.
      4. Rahu prorluces rvhitc- lcprosy u,hen combinedrvith
Mars or Moon.
     5. If Rahu is 8th from Saturn, l0th frcm Jupiter and 3rd
from the Moon, a great scientist is born.
     6. Ruler of the ascendentwith the ruler of the 6th house
and Rahu in the sixth house, the native will die by poison at
the hands of a woman. Some result is produced if Moon is in
the ascendantand Venus is with Rahu or Ketu.
     7. Rahu with Moon in the 9th house and Jupiter in the
 lOth house the native will be blessedwith lucky and beautiful
children.
     8. Capricorn ascendant, Ketu 7th to Moon and 4th to
Venus, there will be 3 marriages or there rvill be three women
in his life.         No cordial relations with the children. The resi-
dence will by old and mother's comforts are denied. The
native will alsg suffer from the heart disease. Such a Moon
brings diseaseand trials.
     9. Capricorir ascendent,Saturn Sth to the Moon and Rahu
5th to the Moon, the mother of the native is rendered. Unfor-
tunate. There will be freckles on the face or birth-marks on
the body.
     10" Jupiter and Moon in the l2th house are classifiedas
unfortunate, but if Rahu or Ketu stays with them. the defect
is cancelledand classifiedas fortunate.
     I l. Rahu in the ascendent without Moon or any benefic
planet, Saturn in the third house and malefics in the 4tir, ?th
and l0th houses, the person will have nothing but sufferings
all through the life.
     12. Rahu in the 4th housewith the Moon in the 8th houses
a n d m a l e f i c a r e i n t h e l s t , 4 t h , 7 t h a n d l O t h h o u s e s ,t h e l o n g e -
vity of the native is short.
    13. If Rahu with the Moon, Mars and Saturn stays in
either the 7th or 9th house, then the health will be disturbed
on the 7th day or in the 7th month.

                                                45
    14. Rahu in Aquarius, Mars in Capricorn, Moon and
Saturnin Virgo with Jupiter in Leo, the native will becomea
king.
    15. Rahu in the ascdndantor in the 8th houseand is
aspectedby the Moon, the lOth day will be evil. (b) Rahu in
the 4th house Moon in the lst, 4th, 7th or l0th house,the
20th year will be critical. (c) Rahu in the 4th, 6th or 8th and
the Moon in the 8th, the 20th day will be evil. (d) Rahu in
the Sth house and the Moon is in the lst,4th,7th or l0th
house,then the life is short. (e) Rahu in the ascendant,the
Moon in the 6th house,the native may suffer from convul-
sions or fits. (f) Rahu in the 8th housewith a weak Moon
shows falling sickness. (g) Rahu in the 4th house with the
Moon in the 6th or 8th house,the life will be short.
    16. Rahu with the Moon in the 3rd house,mother will die
at an early age.
    17. Rahu/Moon conjunctionwithout benefic aspectsgive
rise to all sortsof mental diseases.Other planetsdeveloptraits
when eonjoined with Rahu or Ketu. (b) The conjunction
taking place in the 3rd housegivesone anxietyon accountof
one'sown pervertedthinking.The sisterbecomeswidow.
    18. Moon in Capricorn aspectedby jupiter and Rahu in
Virgo, one may have numberof childrenout of which two or
three would survive.
    19. Rahu's association    with Moon alonein soft constella-
tion is good for intution. But if Mars join the combination,it
will have a very undesirableeffect. The person may suffer
from hysteria, swellingsand epilipticfits. One may become
sensitive and apt to suffer throughcontactwith the rougher
side of life. He will be highly stungand liable to nervous
exhaustion.
    20. Moon/Mars/Rahu or Moon/Saturn/Rahuor Mercury/
Mars/Rahu or Mercury/Saturn/Rahu associations' especially
in Sagittarius, Aries, and Scorpio or in the constellation ruled
by Mars or Saturn is a dreaded combination unless there are
beneficial aspects. The person's life, coinciding with the
operation of main periods of any of the planets concerned, is
liable to be shattered and frustrated. Headstrong, restlessand
 intolerant of restraint. ill-controlled temper inclines thc person
to go to extremes.
                             MARS

    l. Mars, Jupiter and the ruler of the 5th house are in
conjunction and aspected by Rahu from the ascendant, death
of children is indicated.
    2. Rahu and Venus in the 4th house while Mars or Saturn
is posited in the ascendant produce a mark at the heel or left-
leg.
    3. Rahu in the ?th house and Mars in the 4th house, the
native will behave like an animal to satisfy his lusts.
    4. Rahu in the 7th house, Mars in the 6th house and
Saturn in the 8th house, the wife will be short lived. This
combination will destroy the brothers as well.
     5. When 6th house ruler aspectedby Rahu or Ketu is in
 Aries, or Scorpio or in ascendant with Mars, thieving, cheat-
 ing alrd lying tendencieswill be prominent in the native.
    6. Combination of Rahu with Mars and Saturn in the
 ascendantgives rise to the diseasesof the generativeorgans.
    7. Combination of Rahu with Mars and Saturn makes
 the native accident prone. The house position will indicate the
 part of the body to be affiicted or shatters the prosperity of
 that house.
     8. Combination of Rahu with Mars and Saturn in the 8th

                                47
  house makes the person perverse, cruel and immoral.
                                                                                         There
  will be sudden rise and sudden fall.
      9. If Mars or Jupiter is with Ketu in the 3rd house
                                                                                               in
 conjunction with the rord of the 2nd house, the native
                                                                                             can
 shine well as an author or an editor.
      10. Rahu or Ketu with Mars and Saturn in the 9th house
 the father will die after untold hardships.
      I l. Capricorn ascendant,Rahu 3rd to Murcury and
                                                                                          Mars
 3rd from Rahu, there will be prominent birth_Mark or a
                                                                                           scar
 on one of the legs.
      12. Rahu in Gemini, Mars in Leo, Saturn in Libra
                                                                                            and
 Venus in Virgo. the mother will die earlv.
      13. Mercury 8th to Mars and nanu -sttrto Mercury,
                                                                                             the
 person will have an stomach ailment and will have
                                                                                    financial
 problems.
      14. Rahu, Mars and Jupiter together in the 6th, gth or
 l2th house, the native will earn the displeasureof
                                                                               the ruler.
      15. Mars or Venus or Mercury in the lOth house, identi_
cal to its own sign with Rahu, there will be sudden gains
                                                                                           and
sudden fall.
     16. Rahu in the l0th house, Jupiter in the gth house
                                                                                           and
Venus is 4th to Mars, the person will get his hands
                                                                                      or feet
injured. He will become paralytic and thereby incapacitated
profesionally.
     17. Rahu in the 4th house. Mars in the ascendant
                                                                                           and
Saturn in l2th house, 8th month will be critical (b) Rahu
                                                                                              in
the 3rd house, Mars and Saturn in the 2nd house, longevity
can be estimated as one year. (c) Rahu in the 7th house witl
the Moon, Mars and Saturn, the 7th day or the 7th year can
be critical for longevity. (d) Rahu or Ketu in the ascendant,
and ascendantlord joins Mars, the lgth year will be critical.
     1 8 . M a r s / R a h u i n t h e 3 r d h o u s ek i l l s t h e e l d e r b r o t h e r o r
  the native will be the eldest. He will
                                         be slaveto his emotions.
  Peoplewill have no regard for him.
                                              If Rahu/Mars are in
  Gemini in the 3rd house,the native will
                                              live fo, i+y."*      ;;;
  will die on a Wednesdaymorning when
                                             the Moon is in Revati
  asterism.
      19. Mars/Rahu in the 4th house (a)
                                             :       lf beneflc_the
  subjectwilr gain through metal, gold,
                                          sirvererc. and through
  cloth etc. He might get a legacyas well. (b)
                                                  If affiiciea:,f,"?"
  will be lossof wealth and tossesthrough
                                              enemies and rogues.
  Various types of obstaclesand delays
                                         irise.
      20. Mars/Rahu in the Sth house,
                                             there will be no male
 issueor issuesdies. Rahu in the 5th
                                       t,our. in Ari.,       i;;;;
 or aspectedby Mars bringsabout the loss
                                                of sons. ";
      21. Mars/Rahu in the 7th house gives
                                                     more than one
  wife and indicateslove affairs before
                                         marriage.
     22. Mars/Rahuin the gth house spoils
                                                   the health, gives
 middle ageand deathas a result of poison
                                                 or beingbitten by
 poisonousinsect.
           Mars conjunctionKetu, there will be
  - .??                                             fear about male
 children, of weapons,of il_health.
                                            There will be lossof
 wealth,family troubles, divorce and
                                         death but towarOsiie
 end of Dasa of Mars or Ketu, there
                                           will be an increaseof
luck and much benefit.
     24. Mars/Ketu in the 4th house, fear
                                                   will arisedue to
eitherof the following : (a) sons, (b) weapons,
                                                        (c) diseases.
Lossof wife and lossof wealth has to be
                                                apprehended. At
the closeof Ketu Dasa,there will be happiness
                                                     and gains.
    25. Mars/Ketu in the 5th house,there
                                                    will be an emo_
tional problemin the lgth year, por.litf
                                              a love affair. The
hair will beginto fall-premature'baldness.
                                                  There may be as
many as three marriages.

                               49
    26. Rahu in Gemini arid Mars in Leo, the native will
enjoy all sort of comforts, authority and will becomethe
king.
    11. Mars/Rahuin the l0th or llth or 2nd house produce
detective writers. Makes the nativerich by understandand
questionablemeans.
     28. Mars in close conjunction to Rahu or Ketu makesa
personviolent.Suchapersoncannotcontrolhisangeran
iometimes murderoustendencyappears. Rahu/Mars associa-
 tion also givessuicidal tendencies,speciallyin certain destruc-
tive parts of different asterisms' Rahu/Mars/Moon in the
 asterismof the ascendantbrings about sucideby the native.
     29. Rahu in the 2nd houseand Mars in the 7th house'
  the wife will not survive.
     30. Rahu in the 6th, Mars in the 5th Venusin the 8th
  and the Sun in the 9th, the personwill lead his country or the
  nation.
                                                            l0th
      31. Rahu/Marsin the 6th houseand Mercury in the
 house,thenativewillrisetoanauthoritivepositionandw
 have an Excellentcareer'
    32. Rahu and Jupiter in the 8th house causesstornach
                                                       are those
 diseases. If the parts of the constellationsinvoli'ed
                                    an  operation'    If for this
 of Mars or Ketu, one undergoes
                          in the 3rd house,he  will undergo   the
 combination.Mercury is
 operation in a foreign country'
                         MERCURY

     l. Combination of Rahu/Mercury/Saturn in the lOth
  housesometimesresultsin the amputation of the leg'
     2. Combination of Rahu or Ketu with the ascendant
  lordandtheMoonorwithMercury'inahousewillindicat
                                                        house'
  the skin diseaseon the part of the body ruled by that
                               50
 Rahu produceswhite leprosywhen combinedwith the ascen-
 dant lord and Mercury.
    3. Rahu aspectedby Saturn, Venusand Mercury becomes
very powerful to do good. Although Rahu is stated to be
friend of Mercury, Venusand Saturn,but the conjunctionwith
theseplanetscausesmore affiiction than otherwise. In fact,
Rahu is no one'sfriend.
    4. Capricon ascendant,Rahu 3rd to Mercury' successas
a farmer oldairy owner. Large number of cattle and wealth
through animalsis indicated. He will enjoy great comforts.
    5. Mercury/Jupiterin the 2nd house and Rahu identical
to Gemini, the native will be benefittedby three well-to do
relations.
    6. Rahu conjunctionJupiter in the 7th houseand Mercury
in the 9th house, the personwill leave his country of birth
and will live in foreign lands.
    7. Rahu in the l2th house with Mercury, Jupiter and
Saturn in the 5th house; it will be bad for the longevityof the
native.
    8. Rahu in an angle(l-4-7-10) with Saturn'Jupiter,Venus
and Mercury, the person will be a healthy strong man with
good children, honour etc. and long lived.
    9. Rahu or Ketu with Mercury and ruler of the 2nd house
positedin the 6th give rise to diseaseof the mouth, ear and
nos€.
    10. Rahu 8th from Mercury, the parentswill be sickly and
renderedunfortunate.
    ll. Mercury 2nd to Rahu, the native will leave the
country of birth and will residein a foreign land.
    12. Rahu 7th to Mercury may leavethe chicken-poxor
small-poxon the body.
    13. Rahu/Mercury in the 4th house gives gains and
                             5l
money. It giveshigh position and socialstatus,but if the sign
is Pisces.there will be sorrows due to relations' friends and
children.
     14. Mercury with Ketu or Rahu in the 6th or l2th house
 and heavily afflictedgivesrise to a disease which cannot be
diagnosedor cured. Even nervousbreakdown or insanityis
caused.
     15. 'Rahu conjunction Venusin the 4th housewill give all
comfortsand pleasuresbut if Mercury joins them, the native
 will indulge in sexualexcesses, damaginghis health.
     16. Rahu conjunction Mercury in the 5th house, it may
 affect the brain.
                            JUPITER
     l. Capricornascendant, Rahu in the lOth and Jupiter in
 the 8th house, the native rray possibly suffer from rheuma-
 tism, paralysisor polio.
     2. Jupiter in the ascendant and Rahu in the 8th house
 give a mark on the left hand. Sameresultswill be produced
 if Rahu/Jupiterare in the ascendantand 8th houseis occupied
 by malefics.
     3. Rahu conjunction Jupiter in Leo giveslong age. Same
 will be the resultsif Rahu alone staysin Aries or Virgo.
     4. Saturn conjunction Rahu or Ketu, but under the
  beneficrays ofJupiter, producesa great Yogi.
      5. Rahu in squareor trine to Jupiter or in trine to the
  Sun createswriters.
      6. Capricornascendant. Rahu 4th to Jupiter and Venus
  4th to Rahu, the persOn will be lucky and prosperous. In
  addition to wealth, he will enjoy nameand.famebut therewill
  be fluctuationstoo.
      7. Rahu in the 3rd house, Saturn in the 2nd houseand
  Jupiter in the ascendant,thc native destroys his mother and
                             52
 alsokills his brothers.
     8. Ketu conjunction Saturn in the 3rd houseand Jupiter
 in the 9th house, the person born will be outside wedlocli.
     9. Rahu conjuction Jupiter in the gth house, there will
 be a stomuchailment and also the birth-mark near the naval.
     10. Rahu in the ascendant,Saturn in the 7th house and
 Venus conjunction Jupiter in tlre l2th house, the child will
Iive for one year.
     I l. Rahu in Taurus in the 9th house with Venusand
 Jupiter, the personwill live for a very long age.
     12. Jupiter in Aries and Rahu with Venus occupies the
 10th house, the person born will be prosperousand fortu_
nate. He will enjoy somesort of authority also.
     13. Jupiter in the l0th house, Rahu in the sixth house
and Venus in the 2nd house, the native will rise to great
heights even if born under humble circumstances.
     14. Jupiter conjunction Rahu or Ketu, without any
benefic makes the native scoff at religion and higher valueoi
life but if aspected by benefics,the native will love and
respectthe learned and religious people.
     15. Rahu conjunction Jupiter in the 4th house with
benefic aspects will make the native religiousand God fear-
ing. He will have wealth and prosperity,and will distinguish
himselfas a lawyer.
     16. Jupiter conjuction Ketu destroys the fruit of the
housein which it takesplace.
     17. Jupiter conjunctionRahu in favourablesigns in lst,
5th, 9th or Jupiter aspectingRahu when placedin the lst,
9th or l0th house, the native rises very high and will be
respected  by all.
    18. Capricorn ascendant. Jupiter conjunction Rahu in
the 9th house. The subject will rise high and will enjoy all
                            53
                                               will die'
sorts of comfortsbutnearly 5o/.of his children
                           Jupiter  in the  5th  house' there
   19. Rahu conjunction
may be lossof issuesor abortions'
                            VENUS
                                               give-all-sorts.of
     l. Rahu/Venusin the 4th house will
                                       Tfere  will  be domestic
gains including money and lands' .
                                   Relations  and   friends will
;;;,     nutto"v and comforts'
be of great helP.
                                              ascendent'there
     2. Rahu in the 8th and Venus in the
will be a mark on the head or left ear'
                                                3rd house and
     3. Rahu in the l2th house, Saturtrin the
                                           be defective'
Venus in the 5th house, the right eye will
     4. Saturn/Ketuin the  3rd house'  Rahu  aspectsVenus in
                                        for the oppositesex'
the 5th house, there will be fascination
                                             Rahu' the native
      5. Venus in the 7th house aspectedby
 may sufferfrom choleraor diarrhoea'
                                               7th' 8th or l2th
      6. Venusconjunction Rahu in 3rd' 6th'
                                            Venus trine Rahu
 houseis bad but is good in other houses'
 give the native excellentmoral character'
                                       perversesexoutlook'
      7. VenusconjunctionKetu gives
                            SATURN
                                              and Saturn 8th to
     l. Rahu in Capricorn or Aquarius
                                           scienccs'
 Rahu the native takes interestirr occult
                                   in the 9th   house' there will
    2. Rahu conjunctionSaturn
                                            rulers and fear of fall
 be Jispleasurewith the parentsor the-
                                     may  leave  ihe country of
 from a high position. The native
 birth or town of residence'
                                                       the mother
     3. Saturn conjunctionRahu in the ascendant'
                                54
would have suffered from labour pains and the native will
suffer ill-health in his childhood and the wounds will affiicr
him in young age.
     4. Rahu in the lOth house ano rofd of the l0th house
with Saturn posited in the 3rd house, the native will be
wealthy, religiousand lgarned.
     5. Rahu or Ketu with Saturn and 4th house ruler,
placed in the 8th house will give stomach and digestion
troubles.
     6. Saturn canjunction Rahu or Ketu in a malefic house
givessuicidal tendencyand criminal bent of mind.
     7. Saturnin the constellationof Rahu and Ketu in the
constellation of Saturn, involving the 8th house, denotes
predispositionto paralytic strokes.
                              HOUSES
     l. Rahu invariablyoccupiesthe candenthousesfrom the
major planetsin the casesof ordinary men.
     2. Rahu's associationwith the rulers of the ascendant
and the ruler of 6th house brings about poisoning from
snakes,women, and fear from thieves.
     FIRST HOUSE. Rahu in the ascendantand the ascen-
dant lord in l0th houseshowsthat the time of delivery the
native issuedleg foremost.
     2. Rahu in the lst, 4th, 7th or l0th house aspectedby
malefics,it is evil on rhe lOth day or in the lOth year.
     3. Rahu in the ascendantidentical to Leo with benefic
aspectsgivesa kingly life. Rahu in the ascendant identical
to Aries. Taurus or Cancer protects the native and bestows
all the comforts.
    4. Rahu in Gemini or Virgo and placedin the lst, 4th,
6th, 7th, l0 or l2th house, the person wilt be charitable,
grateful, God-fearing. He will have no sufrerings and rvill
                             55
bc blessedwith all sorts of comforts.
    5. Ketu in the ascendant identical to Capricorn or
Aquarius bestowson the native wealth and children.
    6. Rahu in the ascendantwhile lord of the ascendantis
associatedwith a malefic gives the native troubles from
thievesand cheats.
    7. Rahu in the ascendantin Aries, Gemini, Leo, Libra.
Sagittariusor Aquarius gives the native a lean body.
    8. Rahu or Ketu in combination iwith the lord of the
ascendant and 6th house and placed in lst, 4th 5th' 7th'
9th or lOth housemay result in the chain impriscnment of
the native.
    9. Rahu or Ketu when positedin the lst, 4th, 5th, 7th'
9th or l0th houseand is associatedwith the rulers of one of
thesehousesbring about prosperityand fortune to the native.
Their conjunction with the rulers of 5th or 9th house is
beneficial any where in the chart. They confer happiness.
childrenand wealth. on the native.
     SECOND HOUSE. Rahu or Ketu in 2nd or 7th house
in conjunctionwith or aspectedby the ruler of the l5th or the
9th house,bestowswealthi,long life and authority.
     THIRD HOUSE. Rahu with the ruler of the ascendant
ir' the 3rd housemakesthe personone of the twins.
     2. Rahu posited the 3rd, 6th, or llth house with the
aspects or associationsof benefic planets removes all the
troublesand difficultiesof human life.
     3. Rahu in the 3rd house (affiicted)kills the eldest and
 the youngest brother, Ketu in the 3rd housedestroysall or
 brings in troublesfrom then.
     4. Rahu in the 3rd housewith the ruler of the 3rd house
 makes the native bold within but he will behave like a
 coward. Ketu in the 3rd house with the ruler of the 3rd
                            56
house makes the native coward within, with an outward
show of bravery. Rahu or Ketu in the 3rd housewith a
--ibu"nfH
malefic  givesrise to the diseaseof the neck.
               HoUsE. Rahu in the 4th house with evil
planetsin the ascendantand the 7th houseand maleficsin the
2nd or l2th house, the 7th day after birth will become very
critical. Rahu in the 4th house affiicted by maleficsmay
bring about the death in the first year of birth or in the l0th
or l4th year.
    2. Rahu in the 4th houseindicates that the native will
have a closed mind. He will never open his headto any
one. When afflicted, it induces the native to put up an out'
ward appearattceof a good and religious man and act
accordinglythoughinwardly he may be quite the opposite'
    FIFTH HOUSE. Rahu exalted or debilitated in the 5th
 causessorrow through children.
    2. Rahu or Ketu in the 5th housewith no benefic aspect
 reduces the comforts. There will be fear of all typesinclud-
 ing fear of women and serpents. Children and family
 members will be the source of worry, and the native will
 haveweak memory. If Rahu aspectsthe 5th house, the son
 will derideand disobeY.
     SIXTH HOUSE. Rahu in the sixth house gives wounds
 or scar marks on both the legsof the native Ketu in the sixth
 house brings in cuts or wounds or scarmarks near the eyesor
 on the belly.
     2. Troubles from evil spirits are produced by Rahu or
  Ketu in the 6th housewith aspectsof maleficsand with evil
 amsas.
     J. The mere occupation of the 6th by Rahu with the
  malefic aspectsgivesthe native lying or cheatingdisposition.
     4. Rahu in the 6th house with the ruler of the lst and
                              57
6th houses and other malefics, makes the person sickly and
short tempered.
    SEVENTH HOUSE. Rahu in the ?th house with the 7th
lord identical to Sagittarius or Pisces, the person will have
sexual relations with religious and respectablegirls.
    2. Rahu or Ketu in the 7th house brings about sexual
union with women during their periods. The native's wife
will have a long, hanging and ugly breasts.
     3. Rahu or Ketu in the 7th house aspected by malefics
indicate that the wife of the native will not be chaste and
will be interested in other men. If Rahu or Ketu are heavily
aflicted. the native will not have a wife or if he marries. the
wife will die in a very short time.
    4. Ruler of the 7th house aspected by malefics and
combined with Rahu or Ketu, the native will be prone to
commit adultery.
     5. Malefic Rahu in the 7th house, death can be appre-
hended in the 10th year. When Rahu is inimical and
occupies the 7th or the 9th house, it is evil for the native in
his l6th year.
    EIGHTH HOUSE. Rahu or Ketu in the 8th house or
associatedwith 8th lord, indicates typhoid or like fevers.
    NINTH HOUSE. Affiicted Rahu in the 9th house gives
tendencies for crual deeds. A hard healted and merciless
leader is born when Rahu or Ketu is placed in the 9th house
and 9th lord is debilitated.
    2. Rahu or Ketu posited in the 9th or l0th house in
conjunction with the lord of the 5th or the 9th house will
bestow all sorts of luxuries arrd the comforts on the native.
    TENTH HOUSE. Rahu in the l0th with benefic planets
gives the native pilgrimages to holy places and shrines. The
second half of life will be prosperous and fortunate.
                              58
ELEVENTH HOUSE. Rahu in the llth house is bad for
children but brings about large number of friends even
amongstthe great.
   TWELETH HOUSE. kahu in the l2th house lands the
native in wastefulexPenditure.
   2. Rahu's associationwith the ruler of the llthhouse
resultsin the lossof a limb when the 12th houseis occupiedby
the malefics'
    3. Rahu in the l2th house with the ruler of the ascen-
dant and aspected by the 6th houseruler, givesall sortsof
mental and PhYsicalworries.




                             59
                      CHAPTER 9
         Rahu & Ketu in Vimshottari Dasa
    As said earlier in this book, though Rahu and Kelu are
not physicalbodiesin the heavens,but they have been given
th€ status of planets in Hindu         Predictive Astrology.
Naturally they cannot be ignoredin Vimshottari Dasa System
also. Rihu's period is for I I years and Ketu's T years.
Rahu and Ketu do not rule any signslike other planetsbut
the fact that a major share of Vimshottari Dasa period has
been apportioned (25 years) to these two planets speak
volumes of their importance Rahu and are termedKarmic
planets and their Dasa periods and sub-periods are quite
interestingin a sensethat they do bring the native back to the
Karmic or destinedpath. Freewillalmost does not exist in
termsof Node'speriods.
    Similarly the Dasa periods and sub-periodsof Karmic
ControllingPlanets(rulers of the signs occupied by Rahu
and Ketu) are to be interpreted in a different manner. but
that is not the subject of this book. For other planets,
either they are consideredfrom the natal ascendantor from
the place occupiedby them is to be treated as Acendant for
that planet's Dasa, but for Rahu and Ketu, we are to cor-
porate both the schools.
    For interpretingRahu and Ketu Dasa, we are to consider
the houses occupied by them, the signs in which they are
placed along with the position of the planet ruling the sign
occupicd by Rahu or Ketu and the aspects they receive.
There will be so many promutations and combinations,that
a completedelineationis not possiblein one small chapter of
this book but we will try to give somebroad outlinesfor the
guidanceof the learned readers. For illustration, we take
the examplegiven in Chapter 17, "Karmic Destiny" of this
book. Ketu is in Aries in 4th houseruled by Mars and for
interpreting Ketu Dasa, the position of Mars (Karmic
Controlling Planet) in natal chart is equally important.
Mars is in Libra in lOth house. Had Mars beenexaltedin
the Ascendant,Ketu Dasa results would have been totally
different than what they had been now, i.e. Mars in its
Fall in the l0th house. The native had to changeas many as
six professions and he could hardly stay on one job for two
years Ketu Dasa proved to be the most unfortunate part of
his life. In addition. the learned reader must also consider
the stellar position of Rahu and Ketu. If they are placed on
the asterismsof Yoga-karka planets, their results will be
considerablymodified to do good.
    Some of the broad outlines to be followed in connection
with their Dasa result interpretationsare as under :
    1. In Hindu Astrology, (6th. 8th and 12th houses are
termed as Dussthanas(malefic house). Whenever Rahu or
Ketu is placed(a) on the asterismof the ruler of the 6th, 8th
or l2th house, (b) placed in 6th or 8th or l2th house, (c)
associatedor aspectedby the ruler of 6th or 8th or 12th
house;the nativewill be subjectto disturbinginfluences. By
modificationsdue to benefic planets,the evil will be mini-
mised, but cannotbe nullified altogether.
    2. Similarly. angles(1-4-7-10)and trines(5-9)are termed
as benefic houses and whenever Rahu or Ketu is placed(a)
on the asterism of the rulers of these houses,(b) in these
houses(l-4-5-7-9-10),(c) related to be rulers of thesehousesby
aspectsor associations;their Dasa periodswill be favourable.
                               6l
    3. When Rahu or Ketu happened to be (a) in
2nd, 3rd or llth house(b) or associatedor aspected by the
rulers of these (2-3-11)houses,(c) or placedon the asterism
of the rulersof 2nd, 3rd, or 18th house, mixed results will
occur and will not be powerfuleitherway.
    4. When Rahu or Ketu is placed on the asterismof
Ketu, various unpleasant eventswill take place in its period,
but if Rahu or Ketu is placed on the asterismof Rahu, it will
give good results. (In Hindu Astrology, Rahu and Ketu are
termed as malefics,but so are the Sun and MarS. Our
experiencesaysthat when it comesto wordly affairs, Rahu is
to be taken as beneficand Ketu as malefic. Reverse will be
the case, if the subject is engagedin religiousand spiritual
pursuits).
    5. As said earlier, Rahu and Ketu do not own any sign.
So Rahu and Ketu will give the resultsof the housesin which
they are posited, the results of the owners of the houses
occupiedby them and also the results of the planets with
whom they are associated.
    6. Technically all the planets are classified either as
malefics or benefics but in practical applicationit is not so.
Everv planet standsto be modified by its location, aspects
etc. For example,Mars is maleficbut it is the only planet of
energy. Personwithout energyis as good as dead' It will
be upto the person concerned to use this energyconstruc-
tively, subject to Mars position in the natal chart. One
 cannot be an athlete and earn international reputation with-
 out Mars' energy, then how this planet can be termed as
 malefic? Sameis the casewith all the other planets includ-
 ing Rahu and Ketu.
    (a) When favourable, Rahu will confer on the native all
 round prosperity, high position of authority, all kinds of
                             62
virtues and wealth. The native will resort to holy shrines,will
acquire sacredknowledgeand power. If affiicted,the period
will be liable to dangers from poison,reptiles,diseases    and
troubles all over the body, danger from missiles and fire,
enmity with the mean,a fall from a tree and torments from
enemies.
    (b) When favourable,Ketu Dasa will bring successin all
undertakings,acquisitionof wealth through bloody deed.good
fortune through a foreign king, attempts at poetical composi-
tion and destruction of enemies. When afficted, Ketu will
causeto the native intensemiseries,all his efforts will'become
fruitless; he will be doing only unprofitable things, there will
also be lossof positionof low class,he will sufferfrom rheuma-
tism or sharp pain in the heart, tuberculosis,shakingall over
the body, misunderstandingwith'the religious persons. He
will further commit the worst follies.
    ?. In between Rahu and Ketu, Rahu's Dasa is always
more favourable and powerful than Ketu. Even if Ketu Dasa
is favourable, the personshould be cautious, becauseKetu
 takes away at the fag end of its Dasa, whateverit has given
 earlier to the nature. The benefitsof Ketu Dasa are seldom
durable and lasting.Rahu's results,either for good or for bad,.
 are generallypermanentand lasting.
     8. Rahu or Ketu natally in the signs (Capricorn or
 Aquarius) of Saturn doesnot give favourable results in their
 Dasa periods.
     9. Ruler of 2nd or ?th house is a death inflicting planet
 and even if Rahu or Ketu is well placed in anglesor (trines
 (l-4-5-7-9-10),but if they are associatedwith the ruler of 2nd
 or 7th house, they can biing death in their main periodsor
 subperiods. By their simply location in 2nd or ?th house,
 without any malg$c association. will not confer on them the
                              63
death inflicting powers. On the other hand, if they are asso-
ciated with benefic planets, they can bring fortune and
prosperityin their main &nd sub-periods.
    10. When it comestb Signs,Rahu and Ketu are powerful
in dual (3-6-9-12)signs and if (a) the ruler of the sign so
occupiedalso happensto be the ruler of 1-4-5-7-9-10       house,
the native is guaranteedpeace,prosperityand fortune in their
periods or subperiods,(b) on the cther hand,if such ruler
owns 6th, 8th or l2th house,it will take away the good quali-
ties of the sign and will inflict miseriesand sufferings. Same
resultswill be of low potency if Rahu or Ketu are placedin
moveablesigns(l-4-7-10)or fixed signs(2-5-8-ll).
    ll. If Rahu or Ketu (a) is placedin 6th or 8th or l2th
houseand associatedwith benefic planetsor, (b) if they are
placedin lst,4th, 5th,7th,9th or l0.thhouse and associated
with malefic planets,they will first give happinessand pros-
perity but in the end will inflict lot of miseriesand sufferings.
    12. lf Rahu Dasa happended to be the 5th or 7th from
the Birth Dasa,it will prove to be malefic;all sortsof misfor-
tunesand miserieswill be inflictedon the native. So much so,
that he can evenmeetthe unnaturaldeath.
                          Rahu Dasa
   The onsetof Rahu Dasa will be with unpleasantexperience
well markedin the life of the person. The end of Dasa,too,
may not be good. The end of Mars Dasa and the commence-
ment of Rahu Dasa-say the periodof six months-has been
said to be bad and painful as a rule.
   Rahu, in Pisces,in its Dasagivesbeneficresultsfor first l5
yearsbut during the last threeyears(during Rahu/Sun,Rahu/
Moon and Rahu/Mars), takes away all whatever is given
earlier. Someof the authors have divided Rahu in three parts
                              64
of six yearseach.First part will be sorrowful, second will be
happy and the last will be destructive.
                   Rahu in Houses/Signs
    While giving the Dasa results of Rahu through houses,it is
presumedthat the planet does not stand for any modification
either for good or for bad. No separate delineationis given
for Rahu and Ketu in the Signs;as First houseand Sign Aries
will give. more or less,the sameresults.If the sign is different
than the honse,it will be for the learned reader to blend the
qualitiesof both and predict the outcomeaccordingly.
    FTRSTHOUSEIARIES.The native will rise to a placeof
eminencein the world, will be happily placedin life, will be
physically strong, will have a brilliant appearance    and his
prosperitywill be on the increaseas his life progresses.
    SECOND HOUSE/TAURUS. There will be successor
acquisition of family acquisition of good children,good meals,
earning money by lectures,eloquencein speechand the con-
sequentapprobationof the audiencein the assembly.
    THIRD HOUSE/GEMINI. One oughtto expectfriendship
with the help from brothers,hearingof agreeable   news which
pleasethe mind, the exhibitionof one's valour, Ieadership    in
an army attainment of somehonour, help from      people   and a
priaseby othersof his virtuesand good qualities.
    FORTH HOUSE/CANCER. Help to relations,success            in
agriculture,friendship with females, acquisition of vehicles,
new land, new house,wealth, higher status (promotion) may
be expected.
    FIFTH HOUSE/LEO. The native may expectthe birth of
a son, respect and merriment with relationsor the post of a
councilor under kings. He will feed othersand enjoy all kinds
of daintiesin plenty. He will accomplish recognitionof his
creativeability.
                              65
   SIXTH HOUSE/VIRGO. The native will be able to sub-
due all his enemies by doing daring acts. He will enjoy prefect
health, will be highly liberal-minded, will be very powerful
and will live in all splendour and prosperity.
   SEVENTH HOUSE/LIBRA. The person acquires new
clothes, jewels, new bed etc. He will be contended, will fully
enjoy all pleasuresin the company of his beloved. He will be
very powe(ful and perform marriages or sirnilar auspicious
festivities in his family and undertake pleasure trips'
   EIGHTH HOUSE/SCORPIO. If favourable' one ought to
expect the complete discharge of debts, his own elevation,
cessation of quarrels and acquisition of moveable properties'
    NINTH HOUSE/SAGITTARIUS.            The person in the com-
pany of his wife, children, grand-children'  relations etc', will
enjoy continuous    prosperity, happiness  and   wealth; will per'
form rnertitorious deeds, receive   royal  favours, will be God
fearing, having respectfor religious literature.
    TENTH HOUSE/CAPRICORN. The person will bring to
a successfultermination any businessor undertaking originat-
ed by him; he will lead a happy life, he will bbcome widely
renowned. settle himself on a permanent position; will do
cleverly r,vhat is good and proper, or he will get happy news
 and will cotnmand great respect.
     ELEVENTH HOUSE/AQUARIUS' The person will have
 an uninterrupted influx of wealth, will meet with his kith and
 kin. will be served by the servantsand sub-ordinates,and
 there will domestic happinessand great prosperity.
     TWELFTH HOUSE/PISCES. There will be much spending
 or money by the native for the causeof the good. He will do
 meritorious acts, and thus ward off the several sins already
committed.
                               66
                  Rahu Dasa Sub-Periods

   RAHU/RAHU. 2y 8m l2d : If Rahu is in Cancer,Scorpio,
Virgo or Sagittarius,the native will command authority, and
respect.There will be financialgains, too. There will be pros-
perity in businessand promotion in service. Long travel in
the West will bring earningsand learnings. If Rahu is in 3rd,
6th, 10th or I lth natal houseand associatedwith beneficor
Yoga-Karkasplanets;the native will command respect from
the rulersand gainsthereby.Therewill be domesticpeaceand
happiness. If Rahu is placedin 6th, 8th or l2th natal house
associatedby maleficplanets,there will be miseriesand suffer-
ings. He himselfor family memberswill suffer from physical
ailments. Loss of money by theft. Wife and children will
Buffer,brother will becomethe causeof worry and the native
will earn the displeasure of the government. If a planet
happensto be the ruler of 2nd and 7th housesand is placed
in the 7th housewith Rahu, the personwill suffer practically
in all the departmentsof his life.

   RAHU/JUPITER. 2y 4m24d : If Jupiter is in lst, 4th,
5th, 7th. 9th or lOth housefrom the ascendantidentical to its
own or exaltedsigu.therewill be gainsin properties,placeof
mind, destructionof enemies,    greatcomfortsand respectfrom
the government.Therewill be prosperityall round. The person
will be requiredto travel to foreign countrieson a very impor-
tant mission of the government and will return back after
attaining great successand honour. He will have respectfor
learnedand religiouspeople. He may perform the marriageof
his son or someother suspiciousor religiousceremonies. If
Jupiteris in its fall or in debilitationand placedin 6th, 8th or
l2th natal houseand associatedwith malefic planets,therewill

                              67
  be loss of property, failure of business,reversionin service
  and lossof reputation and honour.Family membersand he
  himselfwill sufferfrom one diseaseor the other. If Jupiteris
  i n l s t , 4 r h , 5 t h , 7 t h , 9 t h , l O t h ,l l t h , 2 n d o r 3 r d f r o m R a h u
  with powerful benefics,it will enhancethe results of these
  house. The personwill be religiousand will be doing chari-
  table deeds. In the last two monthsof the sub-period,there
 will be losesof the elder brother, sufferings to the brothers
 and father and the native himselfwill suffer from physical
 ailments. Death may come during this sub-periodif Jupiteris
 6th, 8th or l2th from Rahu being the ruler of natal2nd or
 7th house.
      RAHU/SATURN. 2y lOm6d: If Saturn is in natal lst,
 4th, 5th, 7th, 9th or lOth houseidenticalto its own or exalted
 sign or is in 3rd or llth natal house,there will be acquisition
 of vehicles,honour. from the government. There will be
 marriageceremonies              in the family. He will build landedpro-
 perties, but the earnings mostly will comefrom scheduled
 castepersonsor muslims or christians. If he takes travels
 towards West to the foreign countries;there will be lossof
moneyand reputation.After failuresand poor h.ealth,he will
return back to his country. If Saturnis in its fall or debilita-
tion and is placedin 6th, 8th or l2th natal house,therewill
be dangerfrom the enemiesand the ruler. Family members
will sufferphysically. Domestic peaceand harmony wiil be
disturbedand the close relations will become the sourceof
worry. There will be failure of business. If Saturnis 6th, gth
or l2th from Rahu and affiictedby malefic,the nativewill
suffer from heart trouble, loss of respect and reputation,
quarrelsand sufferingsthrough the handsof ememies.Foreign
travelswill bring failures. If Saturn happensto be the ruler
of the 2nd or 7th house,there is a dangerofprematuredeath.
                                            68
    RAHU/MERCURY.          2y 6m l8d. If Mercury is in natal lst
4th, 5th, 7th, 9th, 10th or I lth house indentical to its exaltation
or own sign, the person will rise to a high status, there will
be peace and prosperity, financial gains from business, higher
learnings and acquisitions of superior vehicles. The person
will perform auspicious ceremonies,such as marriages etc. He
will receive financial honours and social recognition from the
rulers. Married life will be very happy. If Mercurry is in lst,
3rd, 4th, 7th, 9th, l0th or I lth house from Rahu, the native
will enjoy sound health. He will be happy and will earn the
name and fame. By doing charitable deeds and helping the
suffers, he will earn a great honour.     He will devote most of
his time in religious learnings and teachings. If Mercury is in
natal 6th,8th or l2th house in a sign of Saturn or in conjunc-
tion with Saturn or 6th, 8th or l2th from Rahu in association
with malefics, he will not have respect for reli,eionsand learn-
ed people, worldly comforf: will be denied, will tell lies, and
rvill be mentally sick. There will be danger from the enemies,
king and the snakes. Quarrels in the domestic life, death of a
son or a teacher, loss of money and punishment from the
authorities are some of the other indications of this manifesta-
tion. If Mercury, in this position, happened to be the ruler of
the 2nd or 7th house, there rvill be poverty and also there is a
danger of premature death.
    RAHU/KETU.         ly 0m l8d. Both the planets are Karmic
and   the native is to pay for the past Karmas now. There will
be unpleasant and tiresome journeys, loss of finances,death of
cattles, physical ailmerrts etc. If Ketu is in conjunction with
the Sth house ruler, it will give mental and benefic planets,
there will be financial gains and physical comforts. He will
buy the landed properties, will be honoured by the government
and will perform auspicious ceremonies. If Ketu is associated
with the Ascandant lord. the native will gain psychic and
                                 69
intuitive powers and will have comforts. If in conjunction
with the ascendantlord there will be financial gains. lf Ketu
is placedin natal lst, 4th, 5th, 7th, 9th or lOth house,the sub-
period will be beneficbut, placedin 8th or l2th house, there
will be physicaldiseases, fear from thievesand the fire. It will
also indicate separationfrom the parents, quarrels with the
brothers, mental worries and displeasurefrom the superiors.
If Ketu is in conjunction with the ruler of the 2ndlTth house,
there will be physicalsufferings.

    RAHU/VENUS. 3y 0m 0d. If Venusis in natal lst, 4th,
 7th, 9th, lOth or llth housewith powerful beneficplanets,
 there will be all round happiness,financialgains, marriageof
 the son, domesticpeaceand happinessand honours from the
ruler. If Venus is exalted,or identicalto its own sign,the
native will build his own palatial mansionand perform several
auspiciousceremonies. There will be- much gainsfrom the
business or profession. If Venusis in natal 6th, 8th or l2th
house,in its fall or debilitatedsignor associatedwith malefic
planets,(Saturn, Mars, Rahu), there will be physicalailments,
disputesand separationeither from the father or the son, loss
of brothers, sufferings to relationsand quarrelswith son-in-
law and superiors.There will be great miseriesand sufferings.
If Venusis in lst, 4th, 5th, 7th, l0th or llth from Rahu and
is associated with beneficplanets,the nativewill be honoured
with the highestaward of the nationand will commandmuch
respectand authority. lf Venusis in 6th, 8th, or l2th from
Rahu and affEictedby malefics, the native will suffer from
venerealdiseases,   therewill be dangerfrom the poison,snakes,
thievesand the king. Loss by death or separation from wife
and son is alsovisible. He may suffer imprisonment also. If
Venus is afficted by the rulers of 2ndlTth houses,there is a

                             70
danger of Premature death'
                                    lfsun.is in natal lst' 4th'
    RAHU/SUN. Oy 10m 24d'
                                 identical to its own sign or
StU, stn, iottt o. lith house
                                    with benefic planets' there
exalted sign, and also associated
                                 flnancial gains and acquisition
will be respectfrom the ruler'
                                be   appointedas a ruler of a
of landed properties' He may
                                       is in conjunction with the
small town or a village. ti Sun
                                        by the ruler of the 10th
rulers of 9th and trt ani is aspected
                                             honout:O
loor", the native will be respectedand                  :t-:l:,lt::
                                                           mrsslons'
     *11 be sentto foreign countries on.important
                                                   and authoritative
"nJ  will be appointed on someresponsible
 ^pori
He
                                            and his children will
      lon. ffis desirewill be fulfilled
                                 gains' If Sun is placedin 6th'
 also bring him honour and
                                        is in debilitation' he rvill
 8th, or 12th houset'onr Rot"" and
                                           to diagnose'displeasure
 sufferfrom chronical diseasesdifficult
                                                    foreign travels,
 of the ruler, incre; ;i enemies,unpleasant lst' 3rd' 4th'
                                             is in the
 fear from thieves and fire' lf Sun
                      or llth from   Rahu'    he will be honoured
  5th, 7th, 9th, l0th
                                       be general prosperityirnd
  in foreign countries,there will
                                                  rulers of 2ndi7th
  gains. tf Sun is in conjunctionwith -the
                                           diseases'
  iou..r, he will sufferfrom incurable

                                                is natal lst' 4th'
     RAHU/MOON' lly 6m 0d' lf Moon
                                      identical to  its exalted or
  5th, ?th, 9th' l0th ot i'f tn house                  will become
                                      the benefics' he
  own sigu, an<Jassociatedwith                              will be
                                       the. kings'  There
  the king or will U"' t"tp""'"d by                  and  comforts
                                             health
  financial gains, he *iit tnj"y sound                           all
  from wife, children.        f i"nOt' If the Moon is waxing'
                         ""4 luxuries will be conferredon him'
  the highest ftonou"-und
                                        lOth or llth from Rahu'
  lf Mo on is in lri-+ttt, ztrt' 9th'
                                  7l
    he wilt have the bressingof Goddess
                                              Laxmi. Therewiil be
    all.roundprosperity,financialgains
                                         and honours. If Moon
    is in 6th, 8th or l2th from R-ahu,
                                         tiere will be
   evil spiritsand wild animals,tor.'oi-nounces dangerfrom
   and sufferings from chronic diseases.                 and honour,
                                                He may be subjectto
   hospital confinement or sufferings
                                          through the hands of
   robbers and thieves. If Moon
                                     is affiicteOwith the rulers of
   2ndl7th houses,thereis a dangerof pr"_utore
                                                        death.
        RAHU/MARS. lly0m lgd. If Marsis
                                                     placed in naral
   lst, 4th, 7th, 9th, lOth or llth
                                      house identical to its own
   sign or exaltedsignand is associated
                                         with beneficplanets,the
  native will regain his lost property
                                           or estateand authority.
  Therewill be addition to the landej
                                            properties,birth of a
  fortunate son, and general p.ospe.ityl
                                                 If he is a king, he
  will regain his lost territory u.rd
                                      ir h'eis contestingelections
  in a Hemocraticcountry, his rvinn;ngat
                                              tt. polls and eleva-
  tion to the authoritative position is
                                          a foregone conclusion.
 If Mars is in lst,-3rd, 4th, 5th,
                                        Zth, Sth, tOth or llth
 house from Rahu, he will tou.'f*.ign
                                                    travels, will be
 appointed as ambassadorto foreign
                                                         or will gain
 the highestrank in Military s.rvici. "ounrri",
                                            Cr,ilar"r, will be the
 so-l,rceof happiness. Brothers will bring
                       .                        happinessand there
 will be
           -financialgains. If Mars is in i"th, 8th or l2th house
from Rahu and affiicted by malelics;
                                           ilr"     will be loss of
wife and children, sufferings through
                                            ihe Urotners/sisters  or
vice versa,-lossofproperty and
                                 change of residence. There
will be all sorts cf probiems
                                      *"orri*. First l/3 part of
the sub-periodwill be very bad,"nathere will be some relief in
,11 r:l! of 213period. If Mars
                                   is associateO     with rhe ruters
of 2ndhth houses,the rrativewitl
                                   suffer from constant fears
and poor health.

                               72
                         KETU DASA
     Ketu playsa major role in keying the astute astrologer
   -
 where the ripe Karma explodewith a vengeance.
                                                   Ketu is a
 very sinister indicator, radiating the very worst
                                                   Saturnian
 woes and calamities. The Dasa period of
                                               Ketu is for
 7 years.
    Ketu is the Inlet Karmic planet and during
                                                  this Dasa
 period. the native is to pay for his past
                                           Karma-s. Mostly,
 the outcomewill be bad.

                      Xetu in Houses/Signs
   FIIfT HOUSE/ARIES. The native may
-,                                             be imprisoned.
He will lead the life incognito, will sufferfrom
                                                 feai, disease
and mental anxiety, rvill participate in funeral
                                                  rite, or will
leavethe work and take up another'stask,
                                           will suffer loss of
positionand other misfortunes.
     SECOND HOUSE/TAURUS. The person
                                                   wiil behave
 stupidlyin a public assembly,will not beirue
                                                to his word, or
 to his family, will receiveevil tidings or write
                                                    bad letters,
 suffer eye-trouble, wiil be foul-tongued,
                                             spend heavily and
 fear of the sovereign.
     THIRD HOUSE/GEMINI. There may be
 .                                               demise of his
 brother, evil cOunselwill prevail in his
                                             undertakings and
there will be trouble through secret machinations
                                                      of internal
Gnemies, humiliation, discomfiture and
                                                 loss of pride
thereby.
    FOURTH HousE/cANcER.             There wiil be disrress tq
the- native's mother, sickness to his dear
                                            friends, a"ngrn iJ
his lands and house, and from water.
    FIFTH HOUSE/LEO, The person will
                                             loose ,of,. He
                                                    "
                              73
will have aberration of mined, deception, a wearisome
wandering, trouble in the stomach, displeasure of the
soverign and bodily weakness.
   SIXTH HOUSEIVIRGO. The native will be troubled by
thieves, suffer reverse,defeat and various diseases. He will
do wicked acts and servile duties. He will be despisedand
scandalisedand will suffer from wounds.
   SEVENTH HOUSE/LIBRA. There will be distressto the
native's son-in-law,there will be separationfrom his beloved.
Somethinguntoward will happento him through the opposite
sex. He will haveintrigueswith wicked women' sufferfrom
diseases in his privateparts and will be wandering.
    EIGHT HOUSE/SCORPIO. The person concerned
will suffer from excessivesorrow, want of sense, carnal
appetite, jealousy, unconsciousnesspoverty, fruitless rambl-
ing, calumny, sickness,humiliationand death.
   NINTH HOUSE/SAGITTARIUS. The person will have
to incur the wrath of the deity that had beenworshipped
formerly and suffer something untoward' There will be
trouble to his wife and children' He rvill do rvickedacts'
One of his elders or his father may die, and he may suffer
from penury.
   TENTH HOUSE/CAPRICORN. Anything donc by the
native becomes fruitless' He wil! further suffer loss of
honour, will be wickedin his behaviourand will be absent
in foreign places. There will be inauspicioushappenings.
He will leada bad life and suffertroubles.
    ELEVENTH HOUSE/AQUARIUS. The natire will have
 to hear evil tidings. There will be trouble to brothersor
                            '14
sickness to children, he will suffer misery, deception and ear
disease.
    TWELFTH HOUSE/PISCES. The person concerned will
suffer from various diseases, dishonour and bondage. All
his wealtli will disaPPear.
                KETU DASA SUB-PERIODS
    KETU/KETU.       Ov 4m27d. If Ketu is placed in natal
lst, 4th: 5th, ?th, 9th, l0th or I lth house and is associated
with the lord of the lst or 9th or l0th or Venus. there will
be financial    gains, acquisition of cattles and animals,
happiness from wife and children and honour from the ruler,
but the native will remain mentally disturbed. If Ketu is in
natal 6th, 8th or 12th and is associated with malefic planets,
there will be heart trouble, loss of honour and wealth,
suflerings to wife and children and destruction to moveable
properties. lf Ketu is in 2nd or 7th house and associated
with the ruler of the 2nd or 7th house house, there, will be
physical sufferings, mental worries and loss of close
relations.
    KETU/VENUS.        ly 2m 0d. Venus in natal lst, 4th, sth,
?th, 9th, l0th or llth house, exalted or identical to its olvn
sign and associated with the ruler of the lOth house, there
will be honour and gains, prosperity and comforts and
social elevation. If Venus is associatedwith the rular of the
9th and l0th; instant substantial financial gains. restoration
of lost territory or property and pilgrimage to the religious
shrines will be the outcome. The native will get honours
and donations from the ruler. If Venus is in lst, 3rd; 4th'
5th, ?th, 9th, 10th, or llth from Ketu, the native will
enjoy good health. There will be acquisition of moveable
and immoveable properties, auspicious ceremonies, domestic

                              75
 comforts and honours from the king. Venus in the 6th, gth or
  l2th house from Ketu aud associated with malefics, there
 will be sudden unpleasant events, loss and distruction of
 properties. Venus in natal 6th or 8th house in conjunction
 with any debilitated Planet, there will be enemity from
 brothers and close relations, physical discasesand sufferings,
 loss of honour and reputation, and physical sufferings to
 wife and children. If Venus is the ruler of 2nd and 7th natal
 houses, there will be physical and rnental sufferings.
     KETU/SUN.       0y 4rn 6d. If Sun is in natal lst, 4th, 5th,
 7th, l0th or llth house identical to its own or exalted sign
 and associated with benefic planets, there will be financial
gains, comforts and prosperity and recognitjon to the services
rendered. He will perform many auspicious ceremonies and
will develop insight and psychic powers. If placed in lst,
2nd, 4th, 5th, 7th, 9th, loth or I lth from Rahu, there will
 be financial gains and birth of a lucky child, wilt enjoy sound
health and develop self-confidence. He may become the
ruler of a small town, or city, will have many successfuland
pleasant journeys. Sun in 6th, 8th or l2th house associated
with    malefics, there will     be separation from parents,
displeasure from the ruler, danger from the thieves and the
snakes, rnigration to foreign countries, destruction of
properties under government orders, and rnany physical
ailments. If Sun is in 6th, 8th or l2th from Rahu and
associated with malefics, there will be no earnings and the
native is to suffer and starve. The cntire possessionswill be
destroyed and the native will be ruined. First 2/3 part of
the sub-period will be very evil and there wjll be some rclief
in the end of the sub-period. If Sun is affiicted being the
ruler of 2nd or 7th. there is a danger of premature dedth.
     KETU/MOON.        0y 7m Od. Moon in natal lst, 2nd, 4th,

                              76
  5th, 7th, 9th, l0th or llth house identieal to its own or
 exaltedsign, the nativewill be closeadviserto the king. He
 will get gifts and donations frorn the king and will be
 prosperiousand happy. There will be substantialgains from
 the business. If Moon is waving, the native will build
 charitable institutions,will be religious,and will enjoy all
 the happinessand comfortsfrom the wife and the children.
 If the Moon is in lst, 4th, 5th, 7th, 9th, l0th or ltth house
 from Ketu, he will be respectedand surroundedby friends
 and relatives. He will have financial gains and acquire
 properties. There will be successin all his undertakings,
 but in the end, he may earn the displeasure  of the ruler and
 may be exiled. tf the Moon is weak and locatedin natal
 6th, Sth or l2th house, there will be obstaclesin all his
undertakings,failures of enterpqises,physical and mental
 worries sepeation from parents and destructions of
 possessions.If the Moon is in the 6th, 8th or l2th from
 Ketu, these will be nothing but suffering and worries all
round. If Moon happened to be the ruler of the 8th natal
houseand afficted by the rulers of the 2nd or 7th house,
thereis a dangerof prematuredeath.
     KETU/MARS. Oy 4m 27d. Mars in natal lst, 4th, 5th,
7th, 9th or lOth house identical to i(s exaltedor own sign
and associatedwith the benefic planets, will give financial
gains. acquisitionof landedproperties,and sometitle will be
conferred on the native. If Mars is associatedwith the
rulersof the 9th and lOth houses,there will be gain in the
immoveable properties and prosperity there from. If Mars
is placed in the lst: 3rd, 4th, 5th, 7th, 9th, lOth or llth
house from Ketu, the native will enjoy the comfortsfrom
childrenand friendsand will have a social recognition. If
Mars is placed in natal 6th, 8th or l2th house or 2nd to
                             77
Ketu, the person will die. If due to some other benefic
aspects. the native survives this sub-period, he will have
nothing but sufferings and misries in all the departments of his
life. If Mars happens to be the ruler of natal 2ndlTth
houses, he will be subject to physical and mental tortures and
may die premature.

    KETU/RAHU.       ly 0m l8d. If Rahu is placed in natal
lst, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 7th, 9th, lOth or I lth house identical to
its own or exalted sign, there will be sudden and instanta-
neous financial gains, and protection and honour from a
foreign ruler. The native can acquire assets and landed
properties. The beginning of sub-period will be rnalefic but
the middle and the end of sub-period will prove to be the
suspicious one. If Rahu is in natal 8th or l2th house with
malefic planets, there may be the birth of a son, but the
native will suffer from physical ailments hard to diagnose
and cure. If Rahu is in natal 2nd or 7th house. there will
be fear, quarrel and danger.

    KETU/JUPITER.       0y llm 6d. Jupiter in natal lst, 4th,
5th, 7th, 9th. lOth. llth house identical to its exalted or
 orvn sign and conjunction with the ruler of the lst or the
9th or the lOth house, will give financial and property gains.
There will be domestic peace and harmony, birth or marriage
of a son, pilgrimages to holy places. The native wlll be
engaged in religious and charitable pursuits. He will meet
success in all his enterprises and will represent his country
in foreign missions. He will earn international recognition.
If Jupiter is in 6th, 8th or l2th house from Ketu and is
debilitated, he will have nothing but fear and will destroy all
the good things. There may be separation from the wife and
children and many sufferings. Beginning of the sub period
will be good but the end will be miserable. If Jupiter is in
lst, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 7th, 9th, l0th or llth house from Ketu,
associated or aspected by benefics, the native will be
respected and honoured, will travel to the foreign country on
some important mission. He will have a big family to be
looked after, but in the end, there will be change of
residence (house or town or coutry) and worries and
difficulties. If Jupiter is the ruler of the 2nd or the 7th
house, it can cause premature death.
    KETU/SATURN.        ly lm 9d. There will be sufferings to
or from the brothers physical ailments and mental worries
and anxieties, loss of property and finances due to the dis-
pleasure of the ruler, dismissal or reversion from the employ-
ment, exile or imprisonment and danger of theft. If Saturn is
in natal 8th or l2th house, the native will be dull, idle and
mentally sick. Saturn identical to Piscer, Libra, Capricorn or
Aquarius in natal lst, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 9th, 10th or llth
house associated with benefic planets, the native will meet
success in the enterprises and there will be financial gains.
The native will be free from debts, will have pleasure travel3
and journeys, will earn the goodwill of his inasters and will
have a happy home. Saturn in 6th. 8th or l2th from Ketu
affiicted with malefics will bring physical sufferings,mental
worries, obstaclesin enterprises and the death of one of the
parents. 'Saturn being the ruler of the 2nd or 7th house can
cause premature death.
     KETU/MERCURY. 0y llm 27d. Mercury in natal lst,
4 t h , 5 t h , 7 t h , 9 t h , l O t h o r l l t h h o u s e i d e n t i c a lt o e x a l t e do r
own sign, will give all sorts of comforts to the native. There
will be financial gains, birth of a son, auspicious ceremonies;

                                              79
will be doing charitable deeds. This is the time when the
native will develop psychic powers. If Mercury is asso-
ciated with the rulers of 9th and lOth houses,there will be
increasein prosperityand fortune, and the native will move
in the companyof religiousand learnedpersons. If Mercury
i s i n l s t . 4 t h , 5 t h , 6 t h , 9 t h , l 0 r h o r l l t h h o u s e f r o mK e t u ,t h e
personwill be free from sickness and diseaseand will enjoy
sound health. There will be a birth of a son, financialpros_
perity, socialetevationand recognitionand gainsin business.
If Mercury is in natal 6th, 8th or l2th house in conjtmction
with or aspectedby Saturn,Mars or Rahu, the native will
earnthe displeasure                of ruler and therewill be lossof pr,opert],
and vehicles. He is likely to be imprisonedor exiled. The
beginningof the sub-periodwill be favourable,but in the end,
there will be separationfrom the wife and the son and unplea_
santness. Same will be the resultsif Mercury is placed6th
8th or 12thfrom Ketu. If Mercury is the ruler of the 2nd or
7th house,there is a danger of prematuredeath.




                                             80
                     CHAPTER IO
                                'fransits
                 Rahu & Kctu in
       Very little importanceis given to the Transitsby Hindu
 estrologers though Dr. B. V. Raman has said inhis Hindu
 PredictiveAstrology; The Dasa resultsstand to be modified
 by the effectof Gocharaor transiting planet."
     Natal planetswork as Aerialsof WirelessReceivingSetsin
 Human body. Here is Planets(Human Aeriats) pick-up the
 radio-activityfrom the Cosmos, transmitit to human body.
 producing psycho-physicalchanges.Transits are more power-
 ful and enableus to predict the effectsofthe current period.
 In Hindu Astrology, it has been suggestedthat the Transits
 should be consideredfrom the positionof natal Moon, but
 our experience has shown that transits work better from the
 natal Ascendantthan the natal Moon.
    Sincethe Moon's Nodesare given in all Ephemerides,     it is
a simple matter for the student of place them in the chart and
notice the positionan{ aspects. As said in earlier pages.our
studieshaveproved that Rahu and Ketu have a strong bearing
on eventsin one's life; naturally their transits cannot be ig-
nored. The learned readers will find much of interest and
matter for deep study in noticing the transits Rahu and Ketu
through the houses,on natal planetsand when natal planet
transit over Rahu and Ketu in their own horoscopes.Transits
of Rahu and Ketu are very interestingand important when it
comesto Hindu PredictiveAstrology.
     In the life of an individual, the Node transits its own place
 in about 18.2/3yearsand is oppositetoitsplacein 9.1/3years.
 These are important years and should be noticed for the
 efrectsof the Nodes. If the Nodes were adverselyaspectedat
 birth, thtn theseyearsare of sorrow and trial accordingto the
 houseposition of the Nodes, while if they are well aspected
 at birth the 18.2/3year periods mark at a time of the acqui-
 sition of somedesiredobject.
     The transitsof the Nodes through the Housesof the birth-
chart should be noticed as they will havea powerful effect.To
put the matter briefly, the transit of Rahu through any house
enablesus to add to our acquisitionsaccording to the nature
of the house.As Rahu has the influenceof Jupiter conjunction
 Venus,it givesintenseappreciationand respect for the area
by housewhere Rahu is located or transiting. There is popu-
 larity in this place with optimism and cheerfulness. This is a
lucky place. However, to be more accurate,also take the sign
occupiedin consideration. Rahu in the 5th housein Cemini
will bc different than what it will be if it is in the sign of Sagi-
tt$ius. Every student will have to use his experience,intelli-
gpnceand discretion. Ketu has the influenceof a Mars con-
jund Saturn. In Ketu, too much of the Saturn accent can
producc fear and hold the Mars action back. This can give
poor timing, Mars representsenergy and Saturn, a cycle of
time. With the Combination, we needto take stock of the
issuerinvolved and do something about them. Thereis an
ambition for power where Ketu is locatedby house. Ihe trick
is to usc the energyof Mars in the right amount by the discip-
  lining of Saturn in an area of selflessservicerather then over-
possessiveness.
                    Rrhu through the Houses
     FIRST HOUSE: The native should developself-confidence
                               82
   and learn to do things by himself. He shoutd not
                                                          rely on any
   body but on his own initative. At this time, rife wilr
                                                            bring him
   into the situation where he wilr have to act
                                                    under his own
   discretionand determination. He should devetop p.r*n"firy
   that the world recognisehim as an "individual'i and "     he need's
   to take personalstand on things. Rahu transits
                                                         in the first
   houseis constantly forcing him to project himself
                                                           AepeJing
   on the sign position. The sign will indicate the reason
                                                               for thJ
  projection of self. He will need to accomplish
                                                      things throuh
  the power of his own personality and develop s"tf_.Jm"i.n"y.
       SECOND HGUSE: This transit of Rahu through the
                                                               s"cond
  housewill help the nativeto come closerto the culmination
                                                                      of
  his heart's desirein personalpossessions. If it is the money, he
  is interested,Rahu wilt help provide the meansof acquring;
                                                                       if
 it is fame,it is closerto his grasp; and if it is know t"Og.,"
                                                                     t
 will find the Teacher.with Rahu's transit in the secona"n"u.",         "
 he shouldlearnto developpracticality,physicalenduranceand
 perseverance.Temperamentally,he would like
                                                      tq.dependon
 other's money and resources,but he is to learn to uuna
                                                                    nis
 own if he wishesto be successfur.He shourdtry to build
                                                                finan-
 cial securitiesto his family membersand dependentson
                                                                  him.
 This is the time, with wise judjement, when he wil
                                                          be abreto
 build his reputation and draw the attention of influential per_
 sonswhich wilr prove to be an assetfor his future eoterprir"s.
      THIRD HOUSE: Happinesswill cometo the native
                                                              and to
the closerelativesmutually. Both will be helping           coopera-
ting with each other. This will prove favourabletime "ndfor travels
a-nd- journeys for pleasureor for learnings.
                                             This is a good tran-
sit for third houseaffairs i.e, study, teJching, lectuiing,
                                                                writ-
ing, travelsand publishing. Wise decisionsat this time
                                                              regar_
ding partnership,relationwith others, ambitions and
                                                             carier,
whether professional,business, domestic or social
                                                          will go a
                                 83
long way or future prosperity.with this transit, the native is
promisedbenefitsin his immediate environment and he can
enlargehis sphereof action by working and going aheadwith
the mattersthat are closeat,hand. Matters of small signifi-
cance,apparently,are not to be neglectedor over-looked,be-
causeif worked out properly, thesemay prove prosperousfor
future.
     FOURTH HOUSE: It is the time for developmentof the
 domesticlife and benefitswill comethroug the home and the
 mother. Changeof residence(houseto town or even the coun-
 try) is visiblefor batterment. The native will either be able to
 buy landed propertiesor make the additions and alternations
 in the present properties. This is the time when the person
 should build his future securities,put at the sametime, he may
 be burdenedwith the problemsof his parent or differences
 may developbetweenhim/her and the parent. This is the time
 when the personcan build generousand barmoniousdomestic
 life, if he developsthe attitude offorgive and forget the past
 disharmony. It may be possiblefor him to be benefitedfinan-
 cially through law. However, this is not the time to start a
 new but to complelethe old on gainful basis.
      FIFTH HOUSE: This is the time when the native need to
  love deeply and intenselyon a one-ts-onebasisand the plea-
  sure comesthrough the social intercourse. It may be difficult
  for him to find a permanentlove as he will work on the spurt
  of his emotions. It may not be possiblefor him to expresshis
  love fully and so he may be misunderstood. This is not the
  favourabletime for child-birth, and children born with this
  transit can prove to be the causeof unhappinesslater in life.
  If other transitsare favciurable,say Jupiter is also transiting
   the fifth houseat this time, children born will be lucky, pros-
  perousand will be the sourceof happinessto the native. The
                                84
samewill apply to spcculative business. The transit can be
positive or nagative subject to the manifestationsof other
transits.Fifth houserules over creativeability and if the ener-
gy of transiting Rahu is properly blended,the native can create
somethingunique provided such indications are availablein
the overall pattern of the horosecope.
SIXTH HOUSE: This transit of Rahu tells to learn to work
and be of serviceto others. He must learn to help otherswith
no personal interests. However, he should not overstrain
himself in doing so and he must take good care of his own
physicalhealth, and concentrateon health matters. fn return,
the person will be equally servedby others. The native is
advisedto be practical than imaginate.However while helping
others,he should use his discrimination;attend to detailsand
disipline himself. Matters which may seemof routine,rela-
ting to careerof partnership activities, may prove of great
importancefor future if attended methodically. He should
take stock of personalserviceassets. Generous,constructive
servicepays worth dividends.
    SEVENTH HOUSE: The person should overcomea ten-
dencyto go aloneand this is the time when he will be benefit-
ted by working with others. Transit of Rahu throughseventh
hbusewill help the native to enter in public life and get suc-
cessas thc all round cooperationwill be forth coming. Tbis
transit should also bear favourable fruits whether it is a mar-
raigeor opportunitiesare favoured. If already married,Iife
will be happy. Seventhhouserulesover opponents,so either
the person can win over his oppositionsor, if affiicted,can
involve himself in law and court-proceedings. A deepunder-
standingwill steerclearhis way and will lead to success.
   EIGHTH HOUSE. With thi! transit, eighth house affairs
                             85
will come to forefiont. It is the houseof sexpotentialand the
personneedsto learn the depth ofexperiencein sex,its proper
and beautiful purposeand the regeneration and rejuvenation
i t brings to human beings. If africted, it can causemany
emotional problems. Things which have been kept a secretor
looked will demandthe native's attentionnow. In addition,
eighth house also has to do with other's money and either he
will gain or lose subjectto the over-all pattern of the horo-
 scope. This transit promises legaciesand other's money but
 theseare lost if other transitsare not favaurable. Sometimes,
 tbis can placethe native in a humiliating and a owkward
 position forcing him to acceptfinancialhelp from others.
Excessof sexindulgencecan causethe discasesof the genera-
tive organs. Sometimes the death of someclose relation is
also accompaniedwith this transit.
NINTH HOUSE: Transit of Rahu through ninth housecan
 bring a new light or religiqus and philosophicalideas. The
native should becomemore objectivein his thinking and stu-
 dying, expandingmantally and spiritually. Long travelsand
jouneys can be undertakenfor higher learningsand expansion.
Opportunitiesalong linesof publishing, communicationand
distribution will comeand the nativeshould take the advan-
tage of them. Be creative and self expressivein thesefields. If
 affricated,it can give him the tendencyto defy law in some-
way or givesthe inclinationto find waysof working deviously
within the law. This can also indicate disregardfor religion.
Brothers and sisterscan becomehelpful or vice-versa.
   TENTH HOUSE: It is a period of public recognition
and added honours for the servicesrendered. Vocation or
professionwill need the person'sattention to the extent that
he may be required to ncglect his home and domestic life.
                             86
 This will mean that he wilr be working with the pubric
                                                         or for
 the public in some way. Through veiy substantial
                                                     effort and
great extertion,sucessin pubtic life will be
                                             attainedbut will
require personalsacrifice.Transit of Rahu through
                                                      the tenth
housewill give the urge to be a protector of great
                                                      massesof
people and to be a leaderamongstthem. plan
                                               i sound
sion programme. He should take advantageof nearby"*p"n_
                                                        oppor_
tunities which will lead him into a wider fierd
                                                  of influince.
Advancementis sure in social or business position,
                                                          more
remunerativesactivitiesor intangible but nevertheress
                                                        impor-
tant benefits.
    ELEVENTH HOUSE: It is the houseof things hoped
                                                              for
and with this transit of Rahu through the eleventi
                                                       house,new
friendships are formed and many of the native,s
                                                           dreams
materialise. Much dependsupon whether the sign
                                                         involved
is masculineor feminine to denote the type of
                                                     friends most
 favourableto the developmentof this house.
                                                     He needsto
learn the art of friendship and to become involved in some
type of socialendeavouror reform action. And besides,some
or all of these persons will be the meansof gain, the avenue
to opportunity, and the sourceof benefit to the person. On
putting it to test, the person wirl realise iis truth. Financial
benefitsmay result from club affiliationsor fraternal societies.
If in business, expect increased revenue and upsurgein
revenue making activities.
    TWELFTH HOUSE: The native is called upon to rendcr
serviceto othersand demandsself-sacrifice,It is helping those
lessfortunate,handicappedor affiicated.The personmust learn
compassion,accept others as they are and help them inspite
of any differences. This is the position of Karma, and seimr
to call for same kind of payment. Here the native should
                            87
learn more about health preservationand the store of occult
knowledgeis addedto. Certain intution will cometo him,
certain dreams, perpaps; This transit is an invaluable period
of preparations,if he bad nothing to offer, he will gain noth-
ing. What he is and had been doing during this period,will be
the basisof his expansionin the future. It is good for making
headwayin activitiesconnectedwith the institutions.
                  Ketu through the Houses
   The transit of Ketu through a house seems to announce
that the time has arrived for him to discardor eliminatesome-
thing which he had outworn, similar to the casting-off of a
Sarmentthat is no longer suitable.
    FIRST HOUSE: The native is calleduPon to assumemore
arduousand burdenromedutier. It will be the part of wis-
dom for him to direct his activitiesand govern his life systc-
matically, refusingto be the playing of chance,to think clearly
and plan his days,so that they will be filled with thc things
worth doing. Although, he may experience set-backs and
suddenreversalsnot to his liking, yet, by holding steadilyto a
single focus insteadof scatteringmental impulses,he will find
his attention wonderfully compensatedin the days to come'
The problemsin life seemto he very      much concerned with
                                    ''special"personality'SeH-
self, and he tries too hard to be a
confidencemay needto be reinforced by his recognitionof
cfficiencygainedthrough past or presentexperience'
SECOND HOUSE; The person will be dissatisfied        vrith the
working conclitions or with  the money  earned.  It  may  give
him many changesin the     jobs' or morc then one   sourco  of
income at one time. He     will always be honest and  sincere
to his work and the sourceof earning, with the result that he
                                88
may be confionted with the financial difllculties. Transit of
Ketu through the secondhousecan give an inability to comp-
letely earn one's own way. Satisfaction and successin this
area is usually delayed.Pastdebtsbecomedue and are de-
manded. Suddenchangesin income and finances. Older per-
sons and friends, either bring money or causcunexpected
reversesor both. To conclude,this transit is not termed favo-
urable for financesand possessions.

      THIRD HOUSE: This givesa strongpsychictie to brothers
   and sistersand couldbring lossof one through deathor se-
  paration. Ketu heredenotesa duty in caringfor brothersand
  sisterswho may continually drain him. With the transit
  of Ketu through the third house,it will be difficult for the
  personto finish his formal education.Neighboursmay become
  the sourceof worry and causeproblems. This is an influence
  that causesimpatienceand the personwill becomeproneto
  many accidentsif other transits are unfavourable' Tiresome
'
  and unpleasantjourneys are someoi' the other indications.
  His mino is more serious and thereis a need for weighed
  decisions. Here the person is given an opportunity to learn
  life's lessons.He may learn somothingthroughexperience   and
  responsibilitiesconnectedwith the relatives'andcommunity
  life.

     FOURTH HOUSE: This transit may bring many changes
 in his residence.Domesticpeaceand happinesswill be distur-
 bed. The person would like to live a quiet and retirecllife in
 seclusionand peace.He would not appreciatepublic or social
 life. Theremay be sorrowdue to the deathof a parent or he
 may be required to play a parental rolc for somebody'
 Whatever errors he has made in the past will demarrdamenCs.
                              89
   If there are any lingering problems,they will continueuntil he
   has resolvedthem in one way or the other. He should
                                                                 not
   risk permanentassets,credit, reputation; becausehe will not
   be able to build them again. Estatematters has its ups and
   downs.
       FIFTH HOUSE. This transit is bad for children. Either it
   can bring lossto them or they can becomethe sourceof worry
  and anxiety. child birth should be avoidedwith this transit,a-s
  the children born at this time are rikely to be deficient. There
  will be dissatibationin affectionsand emotions. This position
  delaysa permanentrove relationship.Receivingroveis denied
  until enough is given.Creativeability can be either high or
  low subject to other transits. Matters rooted in past iraim
 attention. Handle them with regardto inner values. progress
 of his interests may be slow and he needsto be patiJnce.
 Avoid any speculativeventureas theseare likely to resultin
 losses.Any new enterpriseshou,ldbe avoidedu, fu,          possible
 and if it is a must, do it by carefulpreparationonly. ",
      SIXTH HOUSE. Here Keru givesan instinctivei<nowledge
 on healthmattersand a drive to learn more concerningthis.
 It gives a desire to serve othersand a constant changeof
 working conditions. Transit Ketu through the sixth h-ouse
 also denotesmysteriousillnesses,which are difficult to diag_
nose. Transit Ketu conjunctionnatal Neptune .ornpounJ,
and accentsthe problemsand the nativemay alwaysbe runn-
ing to the doctor.He is to fintI solutionsto personalproblems,
if any, by cultivatinga deeperinterestin hii work. In makinj
servicea personalkeynote, the native can develophithereto
latent abilitieswhich can be morepubliclyrecognised       later on.
     SEVENTH HOUSE. This is a bad rransitconcerningpart_
nershipsand unions. The personcan becomeso involvedthat
he may loosehis individualityin others.Thereis a danger here

                               90
for the native to indulge in all kinds of relationships. If un-
married, marriage is not possibleduring this transit and if
married, it will be a Herculian task to get it going. There may
be parting due to death or divorce. Marriage in the "ideal
sense"may be many times tried and many times denied. The
personis not rational, where the partnerships are concerned.
He is capableof counselingothers, despite his own personal
problemsor more probably becauseof them, This is not a
good time also to deal with the public. Court proceedings
should be avoided as far as possibleor proceedcarefully
where it cannot be avoided. When collaborating,adopt the
reasonable lead to others, especiallyif they have had more
practical experiencein the matter.
    EIGHTH HOUSE. Transit Kptu in the eighth house gives
a desire to be supported by another or the partner's moneyis
extremelyimportant to him. This transit will give an extreme
interest in sexualmatters as true regenerativeand rejuvenative
fcrce. This transit will also provide the knowledgeand talent
for handlingother people's money. He is not afraid of the
thought of death or dying. Death seemsto play an important
part as a rejuvenativeforce in his life. Sexualpotentiality will
be low and he will not care much for the sexual satisfaction
of the partner. The native should take extra care while
handling other's money,other's possessions,  lnsurancematters;
all needmore than carefulhandling.
    NINTH HOUSE. With this transit,the persondeepens
his interest in serious subjects or continuedstudy with a
practical and lasting application. Whether it be supervi.sed
study or knowledgeacquiredthrough his readingor practical
experience, it can be appliedto advantagein his career later.
It is important that he establisheslong-rangeplans towardsa
                              9t
definite objective and should not think for immediate gains.
He should talk over matters with those close to him.       Local
activities tend to become broader  in  scope.   Decide   current
issues on the basis of furure trends. While planning for future,
he should take the advantage of his past experience. This
transit may coincide with travel, closer touch with distant
people and conditions, or a wider perspectiveeven though he
stays close to his own locality.

    TENTH HOUSE. Transit Ketu through the tenth house
brings disappointment and dissatisfaction with regard to his
vocation, bringing many changes. Ketu here gives a tendency
to resist control by others. At its best, the power and success
attained in the world must be used to assist to give to others.
When he will be able to do this, then destiny for this person
will be met. At its worst, when used for vain self-glory, he
will fail. Here the upper most thought should be the control
of selfish desires,ambition and power. He should try to hold
what-ever gains he has already made and should try to win
the goodwill and sympathy of those who count in his world.
Work with time. The person should be patient when he
encounters delay and consider this to be an opportunity for
further pr€Paration.

    ELEVENTH HOUSE. The native is likely to suffer real
diacomfort in close relationships between the members of the
opposite sex. Time and time again, he will find himsclf cherish-
ing the memory of old friends from whom he is apart. His
ass,rciationswill be based upon serious rather than frivolous.
interest. If unmarried, he may find romance through match
making acquaintancesor congenial intereats. lf married. he
and his mate can blend mutual pleasuresto accomplish more
well founded and lasting happiness.
                              92
    TWELFTH HOUSE. It gives a drive to seek seclusion and
                                                           while
an inclination to meditate' The person will fell happy
working with the sick and serving mentally sick. This transit
is Karmic and there is a very definite secret sacrificial service
of some kind involved. With this transit' the perstrn may
have a martyr complex which must be used at its highest in
sacrificial service and delving into the secretsof the sub-
conscious, bringing them trl the light of the conscious mind'
This is the area of self-denial, sacrifice excessivedutifullness,
compulsions,rebellion, self doubt, self-acceptance, self-assu'
rance, whol nessof personality, inner faith in himself as a full
person wholly in contact with the lifc he is leading' Settle
both accounts, both emotional and financial. He may also
be aware of shortcomings in himself and in others'

    We have not dealt with the transits of Rahu and Ketu
through the signs. Transit through the First house will also
mean transit through the sign Aries ; and it is for the learned
student to blend the quality of both the signs and the
houses when differently placed to come to a conclusive
opinion.

   Through Rahu and Ketu, we are taught flexibility and
how to adjust ourselvesto our environment and the pleasure
or pain of this adjustment is an indication of our progress.




                               93
                          CHAPTER II
         Translt Rahu& Ketu Aspectingplanets
      Moon's Nodes (Rahu and Ketu) always travel in retro_
  grade motion in the zodiac at the rate of lg months
                                                             in each
      sign approximately, and the cyclerepeats in every lg.2/3
  years. Transiting conjunctions and oppositions
                                                         oi either
  Rahu or Ketu to the natal planetsur"-of great importance.
  The other aspects being minor, are not considered
                                                                here.
  Transiting aspectsof Nodes to natal planetsare difrerent
                                                                than
  the transitin-gaspects of planetstolnatal planets. These
                                                                  are
  narmrc configurations and bring the person back
                                                              to its
  normal pattern of destiny. Thus, the Freewiil has
                                                          the most
  significant freedom to the two transiting connections,
                                                                 i.e.,
 when the desti'ed Kodes are making significant
 the natal planets, the free-will exisienci is at its"rp."i.-,o
                                                         minimum
 i.e. at this time the native pays for his past karmas.
                                                         In other
 words, it is the time when Destinyplaysits important,ot.
                                                                   ii
 his life and he has very rittre to choose.- This is like person
                                                         a
 tied to the pole with a chain, who is askedto go
 he pleasesas long as he does not break the chaln."oy*n.r"
                                                           ;.r*;
is a guide line, which has forceful powers over the
                                                           native,s
j.o.urneythrough life. If he does not ,believe,
                                                    in Nodes, he
will miss someof the best aspectsto his chart. If the peison
craves something with all his heart, why not he
                                                            should
gaugehis efforts to coincide with the luckiest possible
                                                            dates?
                    Rehu conjunctionto planets
   SLJN. This transit is Karmic and signifies the events of
   egol identity/personality. The urge for him to be in
  prominence and limelight will be strong. Successor failure
  will mainly dependon his own outlook to the developmentat
  this time. This is the time when he should keep himself
  active in the performance of worthwhile tasks. Usually
  this is the time when he can expect a greateramount of
  success. This is the time of reward collection provided he
 has earnedit. This is the time when he may feel that he can
 conquer the world, but it will be wise on his part not to
 over-doit. If he puts his best foot forward, there is hardly
 anything which he may not be able to achieveand so when
 he seesthat this aspcctis approaching,he should do his best
 to lay the foundations to stabilisehis position in the world.
 Before this aspect, he may find himself in a temporary
 confining or binding period to be followed by substantial
freeness afterwards. More than often, this aspect brings
recognition and a personal elevation at this time. When
transiting Rahu trines a natal Sun and/or Jupiter, this is a
 'luck'
        aspectand needsonly minor planetsto set it ofr.
     MOON. With this transit, native's sub-conscious         mind
 is working overtime making him more creative, causing
happiness to those dear and near to him. This often leads
to gloomy days before the transit completes,but he will have
a sign of relief and a smile on his face when this transit
passeson. It will be good for him if he shares the happy
influence with some one so that he can take the full
advantageof it. Women, in general, will play an important
role in his life at his life at this time. This transit will make
him more practical than imaginative with the result that he
will pay more attentionto his businesswhich will yield good
returns. This is alsothe time to collect money due to him.
A suggestion he makel to others at this time prove useful,
                                 95
but he must keep an close eye on what he is doing for
himself. His suggestionsto public issuesis helpful to those
who are in doldrums. An lmportant interview could work
out to his advantagewhich will havelastingvalue.
      MARS, This transit would give tremendousamountof
energyand urge to do things which the person would not
want to do in normal course. Whateverhe is going to start
now shouldmoveforward progressively      for a long tim:. The
person should stick to his chosenpath or action. get around
it tactfully, don't let others to interfere to cause him to
lose his tempcr or his good juCg:ment. He shouldusehis
own direction. In female's chart, this transit signifies a
strong male figure and his dominancein her life at this time
His creativeenergyis at high peak with this transit, but he
must not loose it by haste, excess or over-enthusiam
Accident prone tendencies overwork, and crossing the
endurancelimit should be carefully watched as he still has
the control over the output of his energies. High blood
pressure and irritable behaviour is quite commonwith this
transit, By acting with common sense and caution, the
person can make the best of this time. Selectwhat is sound
and reject the erratic.
    MERCURY. This is a positivetransit with regardto the
activities of natal Mercury and is likely to bring sudden
changes. It will prove profitable to alter someof his work-
ing methodsin his work or at home. It will prove beneficial
to switch from the old to the new with a minimum of mis-
understandings.Change in'his jobs or cornmunicative
patterns are often associated with this transit. Here the
nervousenergyis quite highly excited but it is consumed
within the soul. Strain in the brain givesit a fatigue test
which helpsevaluatehis mental stamina and capacity. He
                            96
 is equally likely to g:t involv:d with th: affairs of the
 brothers and sisters at this time. He should try to under-
 stand the viewpoint of those. he is interested in but at the
 same time he is not to be imposed upon, or lured into some
 emotional matter that is basically unstable and undesirable.
 If Mercury was retrograde at birth, coast along with the tide
 rather than push forth. He can make the best of this period
 by the controlled and purposeful use of his excellent and
 intellectual endow ments.
      JUPITER. This is the time when the person will have
 substaintial control over his finances and philosophies. This
 is a cycle of develop opportunities with self-confidence. but
 stays within the framework of the conventional and atterly
 realistic world. His general attitude is well balanced by his
 desiresand proper circumstantial support. At this time he
 may be doing something different than what the circumstances
 want him to do. Be conservative-it pays high dividents
now. Basically this will turn out to be an excelleht decision
in the long run as he does not fight too vigorously with the
 circumstances. During this transit, he should consolidate
his high aims and purpose. His popularity increaseswith
c h a r m a n d g e n e r o u s i t y o f h e a r t a n d m i n d w i t h i n t e r e s ti n
others. There is a danger of ovar-abum-dance in day-dreams.
w r o n g k i n d s o f a m b i t i o n s a n d a f a i l u r e t o c o o p e r a t ew i t h
others. He is prone to gain weight, so he should watch his
diet and all health measures.
     Case histories shows that someone has had a totally
demolished car. The individual himself is hardlv ever
injured and we are not able to decidewhether this is 'lucky'
b e c a u s eo f J u p i t e r c r o s s i n gR a h u o r ' u n l u c k y ' ( t h e c a r b a d l y
smashed) becauseof Jupiter opposition Ketu. A paradoxical
event often arises, then. confusing us as to which is lucky
                                              97
 and which is unlucky. PerhapsJupiter conjunct Rahu spared
 the individual's life who knows? Or perhaps the event
 would not have occured at all if Jupiter had not been
 opposing(etu.
      VENUS. For love and romance,it is rather a cooling
 down influence,it is a disturbing one but has a stabilising
 influence. The person should be careful that he is not lured
 in so'me emotional affairs that is basically unstable and
  undesirable. Some sober and harmoniousrelationshipmay
 developmaking him happy as well as bringing him prosperity
 in the material well-being. As this time, however,over
 indulgenceneedsa control. If he marries at this time, it is
  likely to be for love and money hoth. Financially, this is a
  pretty good aspect,but if he knows what he is doing.
  Businesswill be good. Income will be stable if not in
  abundance. There is a tendencyfor over-enthusiasm. He
  should take good care of his money-he tend to spendtoo
  much on a good time. This is a rare comhination and
  human relationships should be happy. The achievements,
  if well deservedwill come to him at this time.
      SATURN. With this transit, he may have been doing
  good job but his efforts will not be appreciated. Life
  limitations may reach a peak instantly and then thingsquiet
  down substantially. Saturnian problems get more acute or
. he gets aware of those problems at this t.me. This is the
  time when he shouldforget that the world oweshim a living.
  Old habits that were hard to break, now seemeasierto cope
  with. That transit is quiet known for many learning
  cxperiencesthat he goes through irrespective whether he
  wants to learn them or not. Changefollows change,what
  exitedyesterdaydoes not exist today. What was security
  yesterday,is no more security today; but with this transit,
                             98
the native will be able to compromise with the situations
quickly, This also bringsabout his Iimits of patienceand his
limits of patience and his general stamina to face the
situations. But be confident that all the testingis done for
his own benefitwithout breakinghim completelyapart during
the test. Older persons,older ideas and methodologyplay
an important role in his life at this time. Their assistanceis
well worth looking into as a guiding sourcefor his spiritual
growth during this transit.
    RAHU. At this time, the person will do well to save
whateverincomehe may get and to examinebusinesschanges
carefully before committing himself. What is available at
this time may be good. but it may not comeout to be as
promisingas it looked to be. He should also respecthis
food habits and avoid any type of indulgence. He should
avoid anything risky, but a progressivechange is welcome
and he should be on the look out for opportunity'hat is
both exciting, profitable and sound. Be generous, broad
minded, friendly and sociable. However, proceedcarefully
in dealing with superiors,credit, reputation etc., for some-
thing ahead. Adhere to what is sure and stick to the
scheduledway of life.
   URANUS. Basically,this transit is more of a construc-
tive outlet or favourableeventsforming situation. A great
deal of optimism and stimulated ego plus the desire for
             comesto the fore. The nativeshould not take
self-assertion
undue risk, or rely too much on hu own ability to speakhis
mind or to act too eccentrically. Be deliberate and forceful
at the sametime and he can find usualluck in the months
ahead.
   NEPTUNE. Transit of Rahu over Neptune is Karmic
and often bringsabout various psychicorspiritual experiences
                            99
 connected with the past life activities and their manifesta-
 tions in this life. Often a deep rooted creative talent comes
 out without prior warning at this time and amazesothers.
 Self-delusionor loss of individuality may occur if Neptune
 was affiicted in the natal chart. Rahu conjunction Neptune
 is more of a soft transit, bringing about better qualities of
Neptune, such as idealistic behaviour, general happiness
through high imagination and fantasies etc.
    PLUTO. Transiting Nodes over Pluto are not highly
significant as it is a very slow moving planet and the effects
occur on many people simultaneously Thus, the influence
is felt more on a generational level than on a single identity.
As a result of this, there is not much individuality involved
in these transits.
                 Ketu conjunction to Plsnets
    SUN. This is the time when the person be letting himself
in for some disappointment and he has to go through guiet a
squeezy period. Sudden and unexpected problems occurs at
this time which can land the person in troubles. If he is
engaged in a speculative ventures at this time. there is the
possitively that he will receive little or no return from his
investments. He is well advised to observe rigid economical
control at this time. With this transit often an inferiority
complex lack of self-imageand self-respectis noticed. If he
is already lying low, this transit may not be of any
significance to him. This aspect is equally bad for his
physical health due to, the lack of vitality. This aspect can
also bring possible sickness.death or regenerative process in
his close family members, especially to his father or male
figure. Fatigue, resentment, rebellion, pride, self-indul-
gence, physical and emotional excesses, stub-bornness-all

                             100
must be cured. At this time, if he will insist in going his
own way, he may have to face many problems of his life or
he may suffer ill-health from nervous strain or overwork.
    MOON.     This transit followed by depressionand isolation
with or without any reason. Do not let melancholy and
gloominess overtake the native. Affairs of mother or
'woman' in life are important and often their hindrance
would be a negative aspect for him. He should try to
maintain his patience with regard to home affairs and things
connected with the home. Many restrictions at home are
visible. Fundamentally, this transit is not favourable and
makes it difficult for him to run normal life. He should
keep an close watch on the health of his mother and
problems from excessiveor fertile imagination. Renovating
old property now can prove more satisfactory than buying
the new one. lf somebody is trying to take advantage of
him, he should say so on his face and don't let him impose
on him. He is to take an affirmative stand and let others
know that he will not tolerate an attcmpt to take advantage
of him.
    MARS. This is the time when the persons is likely to
make considerable mistakes in this undertaking with the
result that they likely to go wrong. There may be pressure
from the persons around him to make an change, but he is
to conserve his energies and reassert on the right things
decided by him in past. He is to avaid unpleasantness with
his associatesand keep his emotions under control. Accident
prone tendencies are quite likely and his health problems
need prompt attention. Low blood pressure or weak
energies, when trying to do a iarge project, occurs with this
transit. In a female chart, dangers' difhculties, and sorrow
from    male figures are visible and should be avoided'
                            t0 r
Temperamental difficulties cause future problems. Female
 physiologicalcycleoften getsdistortedat this time' Health
is to be protected by avoiding over-work and from debilitat'
ing affectsof nerves, worry, haste, impatience etc. He will
have to mark the time and it is advisedto do it with a good
grace, i.e. he must learn to compromisewith the circums-
tancesrather trying to fight with them.
    MERCURY. At this time, a non-communicativeperiod
is almost ftrrced on the person whether he likes it or not.
Nervousenergybuilds up at this time and it certainly needsa
positive outlet. If not properly channelled, this cause
a nervous breakdown. Balancing of the energy and its
proper utilisation is a must at this transit. If the personis
handling large sums of money for others or responsiblefor a
financial accounting, he needs to be especiallyalert at this
stage. The person should not neglect his obligations to
,orn.oo" who has been helpfut to him regardlessof how
minor he feelsthe considerationwas. Mental alertnessmay
pay him handsomedividends. Unattention to the wealth
bf knowledgewhich can be accumulatednow would be a
foolish mistake. Avoid any long term planning or long
travel under this transit' In case of it being a negative
transit, businesschangesmay force him to bow to the wrong
individual.
    JUPITER. Unforseenand unexpectedcxpendituremay
come with this transit that the native never plannedbefore'
This transit is likely to give him sudden deplection of
financial resources. This aspect will bring the nativesome
unexpected expelrses which he hasnot planned before'
This transit may be termed as negativewhen it will confront
him in all directions. So he should accept whatever comes
his way even though it may be much lessthan his expecta'
                            r02
 tions. lt is advised that the native should harmonise his
 desires with the things as they are and not in following
 expensiveday dream. Lie low, take what comes and he
 shouldprotecthis healthand position by avoiding excesses.
 This is a time when he should pay for past karmasand
naturally it will cause great strain. Here the native's
 philosophiesare testedand he is forcedto abide by his own
rules and regulations. Thus, he cannotdo anythinghe likes
and get away with it. Try to avoid borrowing and it must
be only done when there is no other alternative. Do not
disturbdomesicsecurityand happinessby temperamentor
impatience. At this point, loss of weight is quite likely un-
lesshis natal chart hasa lot of nervous creatingaspects.
    VENUS. It is not a good transit for love and romance
affairsand it can causethe native a great amount of trouble
and also may end abruptly. He may go wrong in his
judgernentsand should protect himself from the possibility
of appointments. It is not a good time to get married. If
married, it will need great amount of sacrificeby both the
partiesto keep this relationshipalive. Generally divorces
and separationscomeunder this manifestation. Financially,
too, this is not a favourabletime. Suddenlossesand diffi-
culties can crop up. He should keep his expensesfor
entertainmentand recreationto a minimum. He is advised
to participate in diversionswhich can provide him with
amusement,yet do not put strain on his financial resources.
This is not a good time to go for holidaysor pleasuretrips.
Businessmay not be good. Do not make any change in the
constitutionof businessat this time and alsodo not think for
any expansion. He should try to hold what he possesses-
finaneially or emotionally and should wait till the storm
passesover which will not take long.
                           103
    SATURN.      This is negative transit depending upon the
strength of Saturn in the person's horoscope. He should
avoid breaks wherever possible. He is to protect his health
by plenty of sleep and rest. ln natal Saturn is not very
prominent, the effects may not be noticed externally, though
he will know that something is happening, but he cannot
put his finger on it. General rcstrictions, physical weakness,
meloncholy or isolated attitudes and behaviour are all at the
door of this transit. Avoid nervous traits, mental fatigue,
worry etc. Probable sickness or death in a near family,
especially of     older relations, is noticed. Circulatory
problems weak bones, colds etc., are normal Saturian
problems which will come to surface now. In general, this
is a discouraging transit thai often ciistorts and disintegrates
the individuals on many fronts. If the natal Saturn/Nodes
aspect is favourablg, lhen the transit may not affiict the
native much, and at times can bb beneficial even. General
focus and areas of obstructions will come from the house
 ruled by Capricorn in the natal chart.

    RAHU. This is a time when therecould be a tendency
to slow down things or even to complicate them; but it also
lends strength and depth to the native's present opportuni-
ties. This aspect gives impetus to his aspirations and brings
a certain degree of luck that can be very beneficialif he
keeps his feet on the ground. He can also benefit by keep-
ing his eyes open. grasping what comes his way with courage
and confidence and avoiding actions and plans that could
undermine his security by being on a shaky foundation.
There is a tendency, howevcr, to do nothing and leave
things as they are. Thus it becomes like a short-circuit
aspect to whatever area it representsin his natal chart.

                             104
t
I

cE
    i:       URANUS. This transit is indicative of influencesthat are
         on a slightly destructive and discouraging level. This
         causescircumstancesto appear to oppresshis individuality.
         The person cannot rebel to good purposes,he must confirm,
         so relax and ride loosein the saddleof fate. He must move
         with care to avoid unhappinessand set-backs. Play safe all
         along the life. Efforts to force his will on others can lead to
         life, while discontent will cause a sense of frustration and
         unhappiness.
            NEPTUNE. The transit is slightly unfavourable and
         distorted, bringing about the lower, qualities of Neptune
         such as self-intoxication,exceqsiwdelusionand imagination,
         drugs, alcoholetc. The personis to keep his feet on the
         ground and avoid serious errors.of judgement. Be realist,
         face and facts, and thus gain inner power from closecontact
         with the thingsas they are.




                                      105
                      CHAPTER 12

          Transiting Planets AspectingNodes
                     Conjunctionto Rahu
    SUN. This transit is good and the person'sapproach
will be in harmonywith prevailingsocialconditions. He is
likely to earn name and fame. Childrenwill be the source
of happinessand his good fortune will be equally active in
speculation. Married life will be happyand he will be.well
respectedin his socialenvironments.
    MOON. This transitis favourableand will prove good
for public relations. Native's busines will prosper,family
popularity will improve and he will have healthy working
environments. He will valuefamily traditions and will give
due respectof his parents. Mentally he will be at easeand
peace.
    MARS. The person will work hard to get public recog-
nition, especiallythat which pretains to sports or physical
competition. He will try to rise in his professionalor
businessactivitiesand it will alsogive him politicalarnbitions.
His emotionswill be in harmonyrvith prevallingsocial trends
and he will commandrespectin his environments.
   MERCURY. The native will receive personal publicity
and social recognition through communications or his
personal ideas and communications will          receive social
approval.   It is a favourable  time for any type of comnuni-
cations including long travels and journeys. The person
will get popularity among his friends brothers/sisters,
neighbours and work associates. The relations and
friends will be the source of aspirations and happinessto
him. Intellectually,he will be in high spirits.
    JUPITER. During, this transit, the native will get increas-
ed  social prestige,public recognition and support for personal
bcliefs and ideals. There will be active participation in rcli-
gious philoso.phic,educational or cultural trends, and the
native will be benefittedtherefrom. If Rahu is in Sagittarius
or Pisces,the transit of Jupiter will bring misfortune. If Rahu
and Jupiter are in conjunction and Jupiter transitsthat sign
or its trines, ttie period will bring misfortuneto the native' We
have experiencedtremendous luck while transitingJupiter
alone was trining Rahu in our natal chart. Some luck will
 cometo him without exertion.
   VENUS. This transit will bring socialpoputarity, harmo-
nious awareness  of expectedsocialbehaviour,and acceptance
of popular socialattitudes. Emotionally,he will be in agree-
ment with prevailing attitudesand popular trends. At this
time his artistic and creativeability will be high and he will
get popularrecognition. If unmarried, the nativestandsa
good chanceto get married and if married,he will be able to
iron the differences,if there are any.
   SATURN. This time will have a needfor social confirmity
as a meanof protectingpersonalsecurity' He will not have
much of the respect for the prevailingsocial culture and
customs. He may face professional,business or financial
problemswhich will causehim menta[depression.      Worriesand
anxietieswill dominateduring this transit and the native-may
                                                        to serve
feel lonely. However, if he is engagedin selfless'3:;vice
                              107
 the masses, transit will prove to be very much favourable for
 him.

     URANUS. The person is likely to get involved in latest
forms of social and cultural experiments. He will not believe
and respect the prevailing customs and will become rebellious,
if forced upon.   His interest in businessand gadgets will be
designed to exploit prevailing beliefs. Looking from the
worldly point of view, this transit will be termed as benefic,
becausewhatever, he will do now,. it will result in success.

    NEPTUNE. This transit will bring him intutive awareness
and prophetic insight into prevailing conditions. He will not
blindly follow the religion and will have his own conception
about the current affairs. He will search for truth. He will feel
happy to serve the sufferers and down-trodden. Any amount
of suffering will not disturb him now.     This way he will be
paying his karmic debts.

    PLUTO. This transit will help the native to understand
and take advantage of mass psychology, and will give him
panetrating insights into the motivating forces. He will like to
work in cooperation or in group.work and will oppose the
authoritarian trend. In case he is involved in the worldly
affairs, he will equally exptoit businessand professionaltrends
for personal gains.

                                 Conjunction to Ketu

     SUN. This transit is bad. He will be burdened with rhe
responsibility of children and they may become the source of
w o r r y t o h i m . A n y s p e c u l a t i v ev e n t u r e w i l l r e s u l t i n l o s s e s .
Domestic peace and harmony is likely to be disturbed and
married life will be unhappy.                  The person should try to be

                                               108
 careful as he is likely to earn the displeasureof the government
 and socially he may be placed in unhappy environments.
    MOON. This is a disturbing transit and his emotional
attitude will be out-of-harmony with the prevailing family
traditions. This transit is not good for public relations or
pubhc contacts also and he will try to avoid them.   Business
activities will be slow and the person is likely to develop
differenceswith his parents. Serious or pessimistic outlook
towards life.
    MARS. The person may desire for a power and authority
which he does not deserve. There will be a lack of popular
support for his personal ambitions. He will have problems in
businessand will get unpopularity in his professionalor politi-
cal actions. He may be conservative in his outlook.
      MERCURY. The person will be critical to the general
views of the society and it will be a unfavourable time for
public relations or dealing with communications media. The
native will be burdened with heavy work responsibility. The
mental outlook will be conservative and he will be reticence
in expressinghis ideas. Not favourable for long travels.
      JUPITER. There will be lack of public support for perso-
n a l , e d u c a t i o n a l ,r e l i g i o u s a n d c u l t u r a l g o a l s . H e w i l l l o o k t o
the prevailing conditions with critical eyes, but he will have
respect for the religion and the social customs though he will
have his ways of doing the things. He may not do or acbept
which is being done normally.
    VENUS. Socially the person will be reserved and there
will be lack of interest in social activities that do not serve a
useful purpose for him. He will have reserved emotional,
social, romantic and artistic outlook.     Business will be slow
and there may be financial problems. It is not an auspicious
time to get married and if married,there may be domestic
unhappiness. Try to avoid any confrontaiion as far as
possible.
    SATURN. The person is likely to get involved in antiso-
cial activitiesor will havereclusive behaviour. He will not
have much of the respectfor religiousceremoniesand festivi-
ties. He will havenegativeoutlook towardsthe life with the
resultthat he witl get frustratedand depressedwhen desired
success   will not be fourthcoming. It is a malefictransit and to
be handledcautiously. Quite often, the personwill witness
the death of a relativeor someother person,he knows. How-
ever, the relativeor acquaintanceis not alwaysa closeone,so
this may not be as personally unfortunateafter all. During
this period,the native is not advisedto start anythingnew.
     URANUS. During this transit, friends and associates
will term the nativeeccentricand unpredictable.He will rebel
against the current socialculture and beliefs. For worldly
lif,e,i.e. for gains and comforts, this is not a favourable transit.
However, if the native is engagedin somespiritual pursuits,
he may seethe light.
     NEPTUNE. There will be confusionin social purposeand
lack of understanding      from surroundingculture. At times,he
may like to withdraw from social involvement and be of his
own. If the native'spersuit will be in the directionof spiritua-
lism, he will seethe light but if he is involvedin the materia-
listic world, he will have nothing but the sufferingsand
disappointments.
     PLUTO. This transit will make the native rebellion against
the traditionat cultural standardsand sociallaws . He will
like to go deepbehindthe religiousbackground.His business
activity will be related to antiques, re-useof old, discarded
items etc. He will look more in the pastthan in the present.
It is a difficult transit for worldly comforts.
                                  ll0
                      CHAPTER 13

                     KaIa-SarPaYoga

    Yogas (combinations of planets) play an important role
and enjoy a very prominent position in Hindu Astrology'
i"t"rarpu vogu it regardedas one of the dreadedevil yogas'
having significancein Mundane Astrology' Hindu ancient
astrol,ogicalliterature is more or lesssilent about it. Even the
learnedcommentatorsdid not make any detailed scrutinyas
to the effectsof this yoga in natal astrology,Lately someof the
                                                             for
learnedastrologershave comeforward to evolve a pattern
assessing the evil effectsof this yoga. This yoga is not fairly
common    (taking lJranus, Neptune and Pluto into considera-
tion) but can be traced in the horoscopesof both greatand
small. To the researchscholarsand practisingastrologers,the
significanceof this yoga cannot be denied.
   In our Chapter of Rahu and Ketu in Hindu Astrology, we
have explainedthe myth attached behind Rahu and Ketu'
Even the Westernastrologershaveacceptedthat Moon's Nodes
are Karmic and play an important role in an individual's life'
In Karmic astrology,it has been found that Rahu is Kala or
earth-life while Ketu is the Sarpd or serpent. Through these
nodal axis, we pay for the past Karmas in this incarnation. ln
someastrologicalworks,we find Rahu as representing   Serpent'
while in others, those under the influenceof Rahu are afraid
of Snakes. Who is this snake? Ketu has been symbolisedin
Indian Astrology as Serpent. Rahu is afraid of Ketu. The
Symbolof Serpentsis basicin Indian Occult Literature. On
the basis of this symbolism,the importanceof Kalasarpa
Yoga in Hindu Astrology can be well understood.
    When the Serpentis having its tail in its mouth, it is an
indicationof materialisation  of the Divine Principle.Astrologi-
cally, it becomesan indication of great importanceattachedto
KalasarpaYoga, as this yoga has the referenceto encirclement
of all the planetsby thesetwo Nodes(Rahu & Ketu) i.e. when
theseNodes hem all the planetswithin their semicircle.Under
this yoga,the native will indulge in all sortsof materialistic
gains rightly or wrongly, thus makinghimselfvulnerable to
suffenngs. KalasarpaYoga is brandedas the main causative
factor for downfall.
    Like so many other subjectsin Astrology,even this subject
is not free from controversies. Different scholarshavegiven
different versionsas to the formation of this Kalasarpa Yoga.
We have cometo the following conclusionsafter our research
and experiments.
    l. The planets should be hemmedin betweenRahu and
Ketu and not in betweenKetu and Rahu.
    2. From the ascendant,Rahu must be in the first six
houseand Ketu in lhe remainingsix houses.
    3. Kalasarpa Yoga is saved,if at least one planet is
outsidethe Rahu/Ketu axis.
    4. Thereis no KalasarpaYoga if thereis any planet with
Rahu or Ketu though it may be betweenRahu and Ketu
axis. Forexample.if Rahu is l5 degreesLibra and Moon
is 28 degreesLibra in chart, thereis no KalasarpaYoga as
thesetwo planetfall in the same sign. Similarly, if Ketu is
23 degreesSagittariusand Saturn is I I degreesSagittarius.
thereis no yoga present. Yoga present by the combination

                             tt2
of Rahu or Ketu with a planet will operate independently.

     One of rhe learned astrologers has done some research on
the yoga formations of Hindu astrology and has come out
with very scientific reasouingsin some cases. For Kalasarpa
Yoga, he has said that the astrologers must also take into
consideration the three fately discovered planets i.e. LJranus,
Neptune and Pluto. This is his answer to those learned
astrologers who did not find Kalasarpa Yoga operative in
certain horoscopes. His arguments as to the importance of
this Kalasarpa Yoga is that the Latitudes of all the planets
will be of the same sign (North or South) making the chart
completely unbalanced, as cosmic forces lack equilibrium.
 He does not say that it will be completely malefic, but his
 observations are that the native will be on extremes on either
side. With the discovery of lJranus, Neptune and Pluto,
Kalasarpa Yoga is not easily available in the charts-
  To a greater extent he is right, becausewe have seenthe per-
sons having such Kalasarpa Yogas in their charts having risen
to high positions. Whether they could hold the position or not,
is a different story. We can say with confidencethat the persons
born with Kalasarpa Yoga do come in prominence. It may
perhaps be argued that greatness manifested in such cases
may be due to some other benefic yogas and not becauseof
Kalasarpa Yoga. It is debatable whether Kalasarpa Yoga
confers only evil or prevents good, for it is seen that such
persons very often do not remain ordinary. Even if it is
admitted that this Yoga is evil, it is also establishedwith
practical illustrations that it cannot prevent the persong,
having Kalasarpa Yoga, from achieving greatness. We are
not in agreementwith the learned astrologerswho claim that
that     the Kalasarpa Yoga destroys all benefic Yogas of

                             lt3
of the horoscope. Any bad aspect of life due to past
Karmas. can be counteracted to a very great extent by hard
work and concerrtrationof mind.
    In the chartswith this yoga in addition to other benefic
yogas,it is observedthat such natives show themselves        a
shadeabovethe averageand      reveala  deep sharpness in  their
intelligence,(constructiveor destructive)and generallyfind
their rank abovethe ordinary. This doesnot mean that they
cannot fail in their efforts. It is also not arguedthat the
mere presenceof this Kalasarpa Yoga will confer greatness.
What is concluded here that this Yoga showsthe seedsof
ultimate greatnessby undergoing the process of pain and
suffering resulting in coming to prominence despite
difhculties.
    In estimatingthe evil contentsof this yoga, classicalastro-
logicalcannonsshouldnot be ignored, In charts of persons
born in humble circumstances,     this yoga makessuchnatives
industrious, perseveringand ultimately ieaching the top.
Some astrologers think that this Yoga renderslife short and
deprivesthe personsof money, inheritedor self-earned.Th:se
observationsmight be regardedas limited, being circumscribed
by so many other fatord also. It is, therefore. quite fair to
assume that Kalasarpa Yoga alone cannot affict untoward
miseriesunlessother evil yogasare present.
    Obviously,longevity factors do not need to be streesed
becauseof the presenceof the Kalasarpa Yoga. Kalasarpa
Yoga doesnot itself shortenthe life unlessother life shorten-
ing yogasare present,
    To Rahu, in spiritual astrology. is assigned the brain
where the thousandpettaled lotus, the abode of Lord Shiva.
believed to be located. Such a planet(having 18yearsin
Vimshottari Dasa and 12 years in Ashtottari) may not be
                             n4
regardedas totally evil but might be consideredto have some
mundane and spiritual good associatedwith it and if Rahu
and Ketu encloseother planetsbetweenthemselves,not much
evil needpredicted.
    lt is also possiblethat even without attach.ngmuch impor-
tanceto Kalasarpa Yoga in a chart, but subjectingit to criti-
cal analyticalmethods,one can possibly judge with a degree
of accuracythe strengthof the horoscope and easily predict
the eventsto come evenwhile taking note of the presenceof
this evil yoga.
    It is however,to be observed that salienteffectsof Kala-
sarpaYoga cannotaltogetherbc eliminated.The Yoga, strong
or week leadssometimesto unbearablestrains and tensions.
delayingsuccess   or makingsuccess look insignificant
                                                    in relation
to eforts made to achieveit. This Yoga is also found to be
associated  with frustrations and lossesalthough efforts are
madein pursuit of food or genuineand honest. The yoga
perhapsselectsthe pure and simplc.honestand truthful and
loyal and hardworkingsouls for its victims. Such individuals
sufer indignitiesof outrageousfortune despitetheir 'purest-
ray'quality and character.Paradoxicallvtherefore,this yoga
appears in chartsof blessedsoulsor thosewho can endure
evil and extractgood out of it. God sparesHis weakercrea-
tion from this Yoga lestit breaksthem. Knowing thesepossi-
ble capabilitiesof this Yoga. parentsshould be wary and take
early steps to sufficiently educateand make their children's
mind firm to avoid impact of future frustrations,if any. in
storefor them during Rahu-Ketu periods.

    Generally,effortsof Kalasarpa Yoga operate througout
life and especially
                  during Dasaor Sub-dasaof either Rahu or

                             ll5
Ketu, when the intensity either for good or evil would be felt
as modified by transits. With this Yoga, there are no opposi-
tions in the chart and this is important. So in transits, if the
chain will go for good by conjunctions, trines and sextiles,it
will continue for a long period of life. Similarly by Transits. if
the planets are affiicted by oppositions and squares, it will
equally take a long time for the native to come out of affiic-
tions. 28th year onwards may be worst in such caseswhen
transit Rahu comes to conjuuct natal Ketu at the prime of
youth.

   By positional aspect, Kalasarpa Yoga can only have six
formations: (l) lst/7th houses, (2) 2ndl8th houses, (3) 3rd/9th
houses,(4)4th/lOth houses,(5) 5th/l lth housesand (6) 6thl12l'}r
houses In different houses, it will manifest differently.
    Formation of this Yoga from the lst to the 7th is not re-
garded as good for material happiness.Conversely it might be
regarded conducive to spiritual pursuits as a result of fail ure
in marriage. But from Mundane point of view difficulties are
seen to be experiencedin married life and sometimes the very
fact of married status becomes oppressise. Here, astrology can
come to the rescue and by forwarding the timely advice to the
native, he or she can be led to side-track and possibly avoid
the marital catastrophe. Understanding is the Keynote
of happiness and what          cannqt be cured must be
 endured. Astrology thus soothes the native by wise guidance
 develop forbearance.
    Kalasarpa Yoga through 2nd/8th housesis not regarded
 good for money matters. It is not that he will be short of mo-
 ney, but most of his life he will be working with other's
 money by fair or foul means. Money may come easily and also
 may go easily. Either he will be indulging in too much sex
                                l16
preversion damaging his health and wasting his money or he
will be physically too weak to have any sex potentiality. He
will suffer from the diseasesof sexual organs. In one case,we
know the entire legacy was lost by bad health. positively as-
pected, persons are usually pretty gellerous and free with their
money, that is, according to their means, whichever way it
lies, but are not often really wasteful.

    Kalasarpa Yoga through 3rd/9th houses,people who stand
as advocates or pioneers of unpopular sciencesor doctrines
are often round with this yoga, persons whose energiesand
abilities would bnng them to the forefront, if they ran exclu-
sively on orthodox lives, are frequently handicapped due to
this Kalasarpa Yoga. To those people, rvho aim solely at the
material foreign investments, must meet a veritable pitfall
with this position. Home, as distinct from foreign. commercial
travellers may reap some advantage from it. Brothers and sis-
ters will either be the source of happinessor worry subject to
the overall pattern of the chart.'

    Kalasarpa Yoga through 4th/l0th houses possessgreater
power due to the natural Sarpa influences. The Karmic seems
to be well defined. These two houseshave much to do with
farrliy affairs, and this yoga shows difficulties and disappoint-
ments, failures and often disgrace. The horoscopes which show
trouble or disaster, this position makes them disastrousin-
deed There is a danger for a man to be the father of illegiti-
mate children or being himself as a illegitimatc child. Some-
times the children can become the cause of discomfort home.

    Kalasarpa Yoga through the axis of 5th and llth house; it
is one of the observedmanifestations of this yoga that the trust
reposed by a native would be misused and friends would prove

                              tt?
self-seekers.Friends are not likely to be of much assistance in
tife. Loss by and treachery of friends is a pretty sure result of
this Yoga.    It is common in the horoscopes of great flirts'
It is more conducive to flirting than to marriage' There seems
to be the possibility towards the production of illegitimate
children. This yoga gives the danger of too free a course of
life and we do not think asceticsare commonly favoured with
this yoga.
    Kalasarpa Yoga affiicted through 6th/l2th house axis can
cause even imprisonment. People born with this yoga are not
favoured lor Army or Navy employments. Remembering that
the l2th house is the house of secret enemies,and also of
regrets and self-undoing and that the 6th house has the ruler-
ship over health, diseases,work and enemies,this axis can
move the native on extremes. Either this yoga will be too bad
or ioo good. We do got see the middle course. On the positive
side, the native can take to higher learnirtgsand development
of the spiritual self. On the negative side, he can be tormented
with diseases,and poor health causing long confinement in a
 hospiral or can prove himself to be an ememy to the civilised
world.

   Why is Kalasarpa Yoga important in Mundane astrology
and rgnored in Natal astrology ? tn Natal astrology the
devastating effect of the yoga is concerned with a family only
while the ruin of a state involved with far-reaching conse-
quences for lakhs and lakhs of families forming as a nation'
The intensity of Yoga effects is felt in the minimum in indivi-
dual cases but assumes maximum proportions in national
sphere. Rahu makes an individual interested in self to the
exclusion of others; thus the individual is earning for enjoy-
ment for earthly pleasuresfor himself and his family' When
                               ll8
he comes under the influence of KStu he is no more interes'
ted in the welfare of self and family, but in the benefit of the
society and deprivation of enjoyment for self and family. He
parts with his savings for establishment of schools and
colleges, makes a gift of his house for hospital etc., and thus
bring misery for self and family.    Thus Kalasarpa Yoga f,or
individual simply means ruination of family.
    But whqlr the supreme executive ol a state is subject to
Kalasarpa Yoga, he fights his border states to gain territory
and other concessions.The native uuder such a King or Prime
Minister or Presidentbecomes prosperous and more and more
powerful. Later the influence of Ketu comes in' The Supreme
executive is not ready to subordinate national intereststo
international consideration. The bordering states, that had so
long clamoured about their territories, get back those terri-
tories. Flood and earthquakes in foreign lands result in send-
ing money and materials for the relief of the suffering huma-
nity.   The supreme executive is no more interested in the
increased national wealth but spends money out of the trea-
sury. Thus, on all sides, the state is ruined with calamities
 involving all the citizens.

    The net results of the observed efrects of this yoga would
suggest that astrologers should take care to assessthe efficacy
of this Yoga vis-a-vis the effects of other astrological pheno-
mena and then with a keen analytical approch and making
synthesis of the various effects noticed, make observations
about the evil or modified effects resulting from the Yoga.




                               l19
                                   CHAPTER 14
                            Eclipses' in Nativities
      Astronomy is thc science of the heavenly bodies : the Sun,
Moon, Planets. Comet and Fixed Stars. It treats of their
magnitudes,motions, distances,constituents, etc. Astrology is
the scienceof heavenly influences as related to the earth and
its inhabitants. Astrology and astronomy are as true now as
ever before. In ancient times astrology was a science, religion
and art combined, and as such has outlived all sectarian
b i g o t s a n d r e l i g i o u sf i y p o c r i t e s .

     A s t r o n o m i c a l l y ,a n c c l i p s ei s t h e i n t e r p o s i t i o n o f a d a r k
celestial bociy between a luminous one and the eye, or the
p a s s i n go f a l u m i n o u s b o d y i n t o t h e s h a d o w o f a n o t h e r b o d y .
Eclipses of the Sun always happen at New Moon and eclipses
of the Moon at Full Moon. Eclipse of the Sun always cornes
on from the West, and passesover eastward, while eclipse of
the Moon comes on from the east and passeswestward.
Ancient astrologersdiscovered the r'egularity of the reoccur-
rence of eclipsesafter a period of l8 years and odd. How they
arrived at this result, we do not know, as cclipsesare not
always visible in any single place.

   The ancients had only eclipses,transits and the New Moons
from which to make their predictions, and they were able to
trace definite connection between the changestaking place in
the heavens and the course of human events. Tne significance
of an eclipse having been determined by its sign position,
 u sually ccmes to pass €xactly at the time when one of the
major planets afterwards makes its transit, more so by conjun-
ction or opposition. The duration of an eclipse dependsoo th"
amount of time of obscuration, which shows as many years
for hours of obscuration in Solar Eclipse and months in Lunar
Eclipse. A solar eclipsein fixed signs: (2-5-g-ll) wiil last for
several years; in moveable signs: (l-4-7-10), the effectsare
over in a far more brief space of time; but in common signs
(3-6-9-12), the effects commence much sooner, and continue
for a long, while in force and affect mankincl far more power-
fully.    If an eclipse occurs during the time when a Comet isl
visible it usually, fortells the birth or death of some eminent
person or powerful ruler.

   Eclipse may operate unfavograble in a horoscope when
 hey fall in conjunction with, or 'opposition to any important
loints such as the Sun, Moon. malefic planets, Moon's Nodes
ard other sensitive points or.pasts of the natal horoscope. On
tle other hand, if they fall in sextile or trine to the Sun,
Moon and sensitive points, when in conjunction with benefic
pcints-Jupiter, Venus, Neptune-the ac:tionis favourable.
Th: permissibleorb is 5 degrees.

   Transits over eclipse positions affecting the significatorswill
 havethe maximum effect, according to the planets concerned.
 Planq5, that become stationary when in the act of transit over
 the ralical place of the significdtor, have greater effect than
those trat are direct in that department of life indicated by
the plaret or significator so affected. In this sense, Mercury
relates tt the intellectual life, rnental faculties, business,trade,
journeysand general activities. Venus may be significator
                                                                  of
domesticand social affairs. venus also indicates sisters.and
 Mars indcates brothers. Jupiter indicates uncles and Mercury

                               t2r
 indicates aunts. The Sun denotes the father. and the Moon
 the mother. Saturn also sometimesindicates the father, and
 Venus the mother etc. Uranus indicates uncles and the grand
 parents_or- scienific people. Neptune indicates cripples or
 mystical friends.

      Considerable information about the affairs of men and
  nations can be gleaned from the solar and lunar eclipses. Not
  only are they unfailing indicators of chronology but also
  valuable promotors of good or evil. Sepharial, the celebrated
  English astrologcr says in his "Theory and practice of Eclipses"
r that the Sign occupicd by the eclipsed luminary and the
  Ilouse in which it falls has the greatestdegree of significance.
  ln his : "New Dictionary of Astrology," he writes as follows :
     "As regards indiviciuals, eclipseshave not a great signifi.
 cance, unlessfalling on the places, radical or directionals, d
 the significators.i.e. thc Sun, Moon, planets, Mid-heaven an,l
 the Ascendant, when they have the greatest significancecf
 disaster, tribulation, sickness and even death, but the lattrr
 more especially when the said significator has vital prerofa-
 tives and is badly affiicted radically or by direction. Fallingon
 the Moon, they denote hurt to the mother, on the Sun tothe
 father, on Jupiter to uncles, on Mars to brothers on Venrs to
 sisters and on M:rcury to aunts."

     Another well known British astrologer Vivian E. Rrbson,
 writes thus: "An eclipse falling on any planet in the mp is of
 great importance and is usually adverse, as it cutsoffthe
 things signified by the body in the radical map. Urlike an
 ordinary new or full Moon, an eclipselasts Much lorger than
 a month and its influence is often felt for a long tine. The
 effects of an eclipse of the Sun are said to last fo. as many
 years as the eclipse is in hours in duration, and th<se of the

                               t22
Moon for as Many months. As the lunar eclipsecffectswill
felt stimulatedby directionsor transits,the most markedeffect
will always occur when a planetis in transitover the eclipse
point, the nature of the effectbeingshownby the natureof the
transiting body, Mars causingcuts and burns,Saiurn,falls and
so on. The affairs of the housein which the eclipse fall in the
radicalmap will alsobe disturbed. Although usuallyadverse
an eclipse may be sometimesproduceultimategood, and in
the caseof an eclipsefalling on Jupiter,and to a losserextent
 when on Venus, the immediateresultis unpleasantbut the
 final resultis advantageous.Eclipsesate of exterme impor-
 tanceand shouldalwaysbe most carefullystudied. The most
 dangerousare thosethat fall upon the Sun, Moon or Ascen'
 dant, as they usuallydisturb the health and frequentlydenote
 deathwhen the directionsare sufficientlysevere."(Text Book
 of Asrrology,pp 207).
    Sage Varahmihira,who quotesancientHindu Rishis has
given much informationin the Brihat Samnita,(Vol-I). lmpor-
tanceis attachedto the angle of the Sun or Moon in rela-
tion to the place where the eclipseis seen.Did it occur rising
or setting?In which sectionof the heavens-half risen, second
section,mid heaven,fifth sectionor sixth scction?This is easily
understood. You divide the semi-circlein to six sectionsof 30
degrees.You get six housesi. e.'l'12. At point 12the lumi-
nary would be rising,at point l0 it would be in the mid-hea-
ven and at point 7 it would be setting.It is statedthat should
the eclipse(Grahana)occur in the lgth nakshatrafrom the
 birth asterism,then that personwill feel the ill effectsof the
eclipse.

   So far the horoscopesgo, the following are important acc-
ording to Hindu Astrology:
                              r23
 l. lf a lunar eclipseoccursin the Suryc Lagna(Solar Ascen-
dant), the personconcernedwill suffer if the disc was not
aspectedby Jupiter.
 2. An eclipse falling on the Sun radix, the father's side will
guffer.

 3. If on Moon radix, mother'sside will suffer.

 4. If the solar or lunar eclipsefalls in Natal Ascendant, then
that person, who owns the horoscopewill suffer.
    Varahamihirastatesthat "if the Moon shouldbe eclipsed
b-vKetu, shewill destroy property, health and prosperity.,'
Are we to understandby this that when the Moon is eclipsed
by Rahu, the converseis the case?It must be so accordingto
the sloka: "Yorahathi parithyajathi dushtonrqhayathivyajathi
yasarahukh." He that is pure, he that doesnot combinewith
the wicked, and weak, he that deliversfrom the oppression
of the wicked he is Rahu.
    If one has a largefamily or a host of friends and you have
the accuratebirth timesof thesepeople,you do not haveto
go far away from home to watch effectsas the eventshappen.
Thosewho are clsoeto you can providemany interestingand
valuablefacts whicb will make your researcheasier.The clo-
ser to orb aspects to the cuspal point (Bhava Madhya), the
more potent is the effect. A six degreeorb seemsto be the
widestthat can be used,perhapslatertheremay be morefacts
to substantiatea greaterorb. If fact, there generallyis more
activity in the exactdegree,or one degree orb.

   FIRST HOUSE. An eclipsefallingin the ascendantwill
bring changesin the physical make up. The ngtive becomes

                             t24
                                                    involvedin
accidentprone and will have several One may be
                                              slip at homeand
an automobile accident and the other may
                                                  rapid succes'
meet a bone fracture. Such accidentscometo
                                                    worry'  Just
sion,though nothingserious,but enoughto cause
                                                   the eclipseis
walking iown the streetbecomesa problems'If
                       it will bring him personalelevation  that
in favourableaspects,
is lasting and   iurable.  He will meetsuccess  in whateverhe
will do at this time.,

   SECOND HOUSE. Relatesto financesand possessions'-If
                                                             the
favourably aspectedat an eclipse,it will not only enhance
person'sassetsbut will alsoprovide an    additional   source  or
                                            try his luck at spc'
,our"., of earning.This is a good time to
                                                          lossof
culation. Naturally, adverse aspectwould indicate
financesor failures at financial ventures' Remember watch
                                                       to
 when a planet by degreetransits an eclipsepoint' for all squa-
                                                             the
 res andoppositions will act in a negativemannel" while
                                                              in
 sextilesand trides will bring favourable events financially
his life.
    THIRD HOUSE. If favourablyaspected,the personwill
                                                      in
find relatives,communicationsany the whole envtronment
harmony. The mail will be full of good and promisingnews'
The adverse aspect may causehim unpleasantand tiresome
journeys.Closeielalionswill becomethe sourceof worry and
*ill ul*uy. be demandingmuch to his dismay' The mail may
be delayedor wronglYdelivered.
    FORTH HOUSE. If favouably aspected'the native will
 enjoy domestic peace and happiness. Family membersand
 pui.ntt will becomethe sourceof joy to him' Adversely as-
 pected will causeupheavelin the domesticlife and a parent
 will becomea greatburden or problemto him' If he is in ad-
                               t25
 vancedyears, there will be much misery and unhappinessfor
 the rest of the life.

    FIFTH HOUSE. If favourablyaspected,will bring plea-
surableand enjoyableassociations   into the native's life and
children will becomethe source of happiness. Somesort of
recognitionor elevationwill cometo his children. If adverselv
aspected, children will become the cause of worry ani
sufferingto him. He may have somedisappointments         in his
emotional hfe. If the native is femaleand she is of a romantic
age' many suitorswill be attractedtowards her. lnvestments
will bring nothing but grief and any sort of speculationwill
end in heavylosses.
   STXTH HOUSE. Rulesover health,employmentand ser-
vices.If favourablyaspected,
                           it will bring favour and improve-
ment in thesedepartmentsof the person's life, but with the
adverseaspect,he can be sureof some indisposition. Many
times, the adverseaspectfinds employees    hard to handleor
employerswill be too demanding. He must respecthis food
habitsand must consultthe physicianeven of a minor com-
plaint.

    SEVENTH HOUSE. Denoting partners (marriage or
business), unionsand open enemiesand are brought to fore at
eclipsetime. If favourablyaspected,   therewill bi cooperation
from the partnersand socialcontactswill be pleasing. If ad-
versely aspected,the person will havemuch bickeringand
unhappiness   in his marriedlife and businesspartnership. He
will just not get alongwith other people unless he is careful.
It may eveninvolvehim in litigationand law suits.Contracts
(businessor marital)shouldbe well studiedbefore
                                                   he puts his
signatureson them.

                            r26
    EIGHTH HOUSE. Brings activity other's money is
concerned, While a favourableaspect,securities   and reserves
will increase,he will get legaciesand gifts, loans will be
easilypaid off. Insurancepolicieswill get paid up. With the
adverseaspect, there will be drain on his reservesand he will
undergoheavydebts. Liabilitieswill increaseand taxation
department can proveto be very troublesome     for him at this
time. There may evenbe death of somecloserelation.
    NINTH HOUSE. The favourable aspects will bring
peace,prosperity with regard to his 9th houseaffairs. It will
bring long journeysand travelsin his life which are educa-
tional and full of pleasure. Adverselyaspected,the eclipse
herecan bring trouble through religious or litigation, which
may go against him. Many difrcultieswill be encountered
in travellingto distantplaces. There will be difficultiesand
problems in all his enterprisesand any amount of labour will
not bear favourableresults.
   TENTH HOUSE. lf favourable, the eclipse here can
bring the native fame and elevation. Working conditions,
professionalactivitiesand wordly affairswill be to his advan-
tage. If in employment.he can expect a rise and if in
business.he will have expansion. With an adverseaspect,
he will havenothingbut trails and tribulationsin his profcs-
sional career. Sometimesdeath of a parentor a separation
from them may take placeunder adverseeclipse. Remember
that this is the houseof native'sstatusin the world, the way
other peopleseehim. so be sure that he seesthe best side of
his natureand individuality.
   ELEVENTH HOUSE. Housethe hopes and wishes. It
alsorulesover friendsand associates.
                                  With favourableaspect.

                            t27
the person will be surrounded by influential and sincere
friends, who will extend full cooperation to enable him to
realise his hopes and wishes, even without his knowledge.
The adverseaspect will bring him many diftlculties through his
friends and associates. He will be blamed for the incidents
where he is least involved. He may be blackmailed, if
contesting for any elected office. All his efforts will end
in disappointments and failures. Be sure to choose friends
and associates wisely, especially new ones coming into
native's life during the eclipse period. The aspectsdetermine
the kind of people he attracts under this influence.

    TWELFTH HOUSE. This is the house of the residuals
of past Karmas and the house of sufferingsand self-undoings
in this incarnation. So either he helps others or hegets
helped by others. Under a favourable aspect, he wi[ be the
source of happiness and encouragement to the persons con.
fined in hospitals institutions, or Jails. He will be morc
inclined to religion and spiritualism. Under adverse aspect,
he may himself be subject to hospitalisation, confinement or
imprisonment. There may financial tosses through thefts
etc. but under favourable aspect, he will spend the money
for good cause, viz. children's marriage. As this is the house
of self-undoing, and if the native seesan eclipse point culmi-
nating in near future on this house; better be sure that this
actions and endeavours are above board.

    The major effects an individual may have from an eclipse
depend upon where the eclipse falls in one's horoscope. An
eclipse should not effect one particularly unless it makes some
direct contact with the luminaries, planets, Moon's Nodes or
sensitivepoints. We have seenthat an eclipse in conjunction
with a natal planet weakens the effect of that planet, as it cuts

                              128
off the things signified by that body in the radical map. If
the person so affected does not compromise with the situation
and attempts to force issues along lines indicated by that
planet, he is just heading for the troubles' One will do good
to have much self-control at this time. Eclipse opposition a
natal planet acts irr exactly the opposite manner. It is the
opposition point of that planet which gets depressed'
Opposition by eclipse intensifies and greatly increases the
power ofthat planet.
   Lahiri's Ephemeris for hundred years and many other
books list the degreesand signs of eclipses for years ahead, so
that the student can take the advantage offavourable aspected
eclipsesas well as to counteract any inharmonious activities
prevalent during an eclipse period' Astrology can be a guide
post in enabling us to note the adverse and favourable periods'
so we may act and guide out lives accordingly. This may be
a new phase to some of the readers but they may get excellent
results by watching their own and their family's charts' 11
will pay ricb dividends.




                              t29
                         CHAPTER 15

           Rahu & Ketu in FemaleHoroscopes

      The learned readers have already seen through
                                                       the previous
                                                           ^
 chapters that Rahu and Ketu piuy
                                               important role in
 prcdictive astrology and.help in piovialng
                                          "n the
                                                   clues ,o rn"ny
 missing links. In this Chapter, we will siecially
                                                     deal with the
 part played by Rahu and Ketu in Female
                                              horoscopes.
      l. If a girl is born in any one ofthe
                                                ereven ascendants.
 except Aries, with Saturn jn Libra, Sun and
                                                 Mars in the 7th
 house and Moon and Rahu in the llth
                                             house, she will have
 all the comforts through tife. With
                                           Aries Ascendant, the
 results will be revcrsed.
     2. Moon and Rahu in the 7th house will
                                                   make the girl
 wise and if Jupiter is in the gth house,
                                               she will Ue blesla
 with several pretty children.
     3, Ketu, Jupiter and Venus in the 4th
   .                                               house; the girl
will enjoy all the wordly comforts, but
                                            at the time of her
death, she will have no blood relation alive.
     4. Ketu-Mars conjunction in a female
                                                    horsocope is
classifiedas an excellent yoga as Ketu,
                                            being spirituai and
religious planet. wifi take away art the evil
                                              effects of Mars.
     5. Girl born under Leo ascendant
                                              with Rahu placed
therein will be attractive, beautiful and lovely
                                                  and will enjoy
a comfortable married life.
    o. We have said earlier that the effect of one of the
Lights (Sun/Moon) with a Node is always strong. The Sum
is especiallyfavoured by being North Node' and Rahu and
Sun     in    Leo are very powerful.         The    conjunction
of Rahu and Sun in Leo in    lst, 3rd,   5th or  l2th  house is
excellant. She will be married      to a  person of high status.
She will enjoy good health also. This   Sun-Rahu    conlunction
is equally good in 2-4'8'9 or llth house. In a female
horoscope Sun-Rahu in the 7th house is not termed bad.
    '7.
         Girl born with Mercury/Rahu in lst,,7th or 9th house
will get married to a learned husband of status.
    8. Rahu in the ascendant produces a good house wife.
Rahu in the 2nd house produces an intelligent house wife'
With Rahu in the 7th, the girl can not live without marriage,
though it may be late in life. Rahu in the 9th will make hcr
religious.
    9. Girl born with Venus in Aries and Rahu in the lOth
house or l0th sign (Capricorn); she may get married as many
as four times.
   10. Sun, Mars and Mercury (all three) in conjunction
with Rahu or Ketu, in the 7th house, she may not be legally
married or she may not be one man's woman.
   ll.  Sun, Mercury, Mars and Jupiter (all four) in conjunc-
tion with Rahu or Ketu in the 4th house or the 7th house
will make the woman either a widow or a prostitute.
   12. Rahu in the ?th house in Aries or Scorpio is an
indication of widowhood, if devoid of benefic aspects.
   13. Rahu in the 4th house.is good for married life, but an
affiicted Rahu destroys ancestral property or she feelsunhappy
in ancestral house. With affiicted Rahu, there will be no

                               l3r
  domesticpeaceand happinessbeforemarriageand it will be
  only after marriage that she will feel happy provided Zth
  houseand 7th lord are favourablystrong.
     14. Mars in the 8th is an indicator of widowhood. Same
  is the case when Ketu is in the gth house. The
                                                        eventis
 certainif Mars and Ketu (both) are in the gth house,unless
 strong benefic factors counler it. Ketu in the gth can make
 her a vishkanl'a(a poisonousgirl).
     15. Conjunction of Sun and Ketu in lst, 2nd, 3rd,
                                                            4th,
 sth, 8th, 9th, llth or l2th may bring about the death
                                                               oi
 husbandin her middrerife. Thc evil of this manifestation
                                                                is
 lessend in the lOth house. There is no malefic effectin
                                                             6th
 or 7th house.
     16. Rahu or Ketu are not termed favourable in the
                                                             7th
 housefor happy cordial relationwith the husband. Mars
                                                              or
 Uranus in conjunction with Rahu or Ketu in the Zth house
 is an indicationof widowhood.
     17. Conjunctionof Rahu or Ketu with benefic planets
                                                              in
 the 7th housemay result in a secondmarriage,Conjunction
 of Rahu or Keru with the ruler of the gtli house,the girl
 may not be a one man's woman,
    18. Ketu in the l2th is bad for a woman at the time
                                                              of
delivery. Ketu in the 9th is equally bad and deniesher
paternalhappiness. SimilarlyKetu in the 4th does not give
motherly happiness. In some cases,she may suffer at the
hand of step-mother.
    19. Mars_conjunction Rahu in the 5th, the womanis
,,
uKery to suner ltom irregular menstruationor excessive
                        _
menstruation. Rahu-Mars Conjunctionin the :ra. sfrema,
havedefectin her left leg or birth-mart on ttrat ti;:' ""- "'*'
    20. Rahu in the Sth denotesa big famity with poor finan_
cial condition. She is arso !ikery" to iuui----'ut.iiri""rir
troubles(8th houserulesover ,.*-ptt.ntlui).
                              r32
   21. Woman with Rahu conjunction Moon, Mars and
Saturnwill give birth to sickly children,
   22. Woman with Rahu in Capricorn ascendant and
Jupiterin the 9th will give birth to as manyas elevenchildren,
but only five will survive.
   23. If thereis a Grand Trine betweenMoon, Jupiter arrd
Rahu, there will be much difficulty at delivery and the
children will be unfortunate.
   24. Rahu in the 5th will destrorymany conceptions.Rahu
conjunctionSaturnin the 5th housewill causewomb diseases
and there will be no child-birth. The numberof conceptions
destroyedin the womb.canbe ascertainedthus : with Venus-
6; with Jupiter-S;with Mercury-4; with Mars-3; with Moon-
2; znd with Sun-one.
   25, Libra ascendant,Rahu in Aries. Venusin Cancerand
Mars either in Libra or in Aries, the woman will leaveher
first husband,marry secondtime and will be morally loose.
   26. Moon, Jupiter and Rahu in Taurus trine Neptune, or
Rahu in Gemini trine Sun and Uranusor Rahu in Gemini,
the 7th lord Jupitertrine Saturn on the cuspof the 7th house
or Rahu in Capricorn trine Venus and Neptune or Rahu in
Leo squareMars and Saturu but Jupiter sextile to the 7th
house lord Sun, Venusin the ascendant,the woman will get
happily married.
   27. Rahu in Cancer, Neptune square 7th house, the
woman will become a widow, Rahu in Sagittariussquare
Neptunewith Saturnin fall and 7th lord Jupiterin fall in the
8th, the girl will become widow shortly after marriage.
Cancer Rahu in Pushya Nakshatra ruled by Saturncauses
widorvhood. Rahu in Leo opposition Mooh, the 7th lord
Mars square Saturn, Neptune square 7th house, Moon
conjunction Jupiter in Capricorn, the girl will become a
widow at a very young age.
                            133
      28. Rahu in Virgo square Sun and Saturn or ?rh house
  ruler square Mars and conjunction Saturn and Uranus;
 clelayedmarriage but good moral character.
      29. Rahu in Capricorn, Moon in Cancer or Uranus in the
 7th house opposed to 7th houses ruler Mars or Uranus
 sextile the Sun, Mercury and Saturn-no marriage. This is
 possiblewith Taurus or Libra ascendantsonly.
     30. ,Rahu in Capricorn, Moon in Cancer, 7th house Jupiter
restrograde in the 6th-no child-birth due to mensestrouble.
     31. Moon conjunction Mars in Sagittarius and Rahu con_
junction Uranus in Gemini, the girl will get
                                                                              married at an
early age but will be deserted by her husband.
     32. Rahu in Capricorn in the 7th house square Saturn girl
will get married later in her life.
     3 3 . R a h u i n S a g i t t a r i u s ,S u n t r i n e N e p t u e , s q u a r e M o o n ,
conjunction Ir4ars, 7th house lord in Cancer, married bliss
w i l l b e d e n i e dd u e t o t h e d e f e c t i n t h e h u s b a n d .
     3 4 . T a u r u s , a s c e n d a nwt i t h S a t u r n , R a h u i n S c o r p i o ,S u n
and Venusin Leo, Mars ruler of the 7th house in Aquarius
square Saturn. unhappy married lil'e, constant quarrels
bringingimmorality.
     35. Capricorn ascendant, Rahu in Taurus with Mars, the
lady can lrave womb troubles as a result of which she will not
conceive. Aspected or associated by Jupiter, she may get
children, but all of them rnay die causing her unhappineis.
If Ketu is there insread of Rahu, birth of children*itt not
be denied, but the children u,ill be the source of unhappiness
instead of joy. Rahu ancl Mars in the 5th house on the aste-
rism of lVlars, the lady may deliver by a caesareanoperation.
    36. Fenralehoroscope, Capricorn ascendant. Moon is 5th
t o _ J u p i t e ra n d R a h u i s 5 t h t o - M o o n , t h e r e w i l l U " a d u e i i e
i n f l u e n c e sd u c t o t h e c h i l d - b i r t h a n d m a y a l s o b r i n g t h i
r h e u m a t i s mo f r h e t h i n g s .
                                             t34
                        CHAPTER 16
               Rahu & Ketu in Synastary
    The art of chart comparison or synastry is a difficult one,
since it calls for of an expertnessin analysing the essential
 personality pattern of both the individuals. This branch of
astrology needs for a wide knowledge of human naturc. As
said in the early pages of this book, astrology is a religious
science, occult and art and as such needs some sort of
intuitional ability and know instinctively what relationships
are good and bad. But persons with good background of
natal astrology can also try chart comparisons.
    The first step is a quick analysis of the charts of each
subject. This is essentialin order not to be thrown off track
in our synthesis. At all times, one should remember, it rs
the total person or the entire chart being compared with
another complete person, not a list of virtues and vices. So to
make our analysis, first pick out the obvious features of the
chart. Usually, the outstanding points of an individual are
determined by the over-all pattern of the horoscope.
    When Rahu and Ketu are opposite one another between
the two chaits, they seem to understand and help each other
the best. Whereverthe nodal axis falls on the other's chart
is $,here the area can get out of balance. Ketu always does
the teaching. Judgement would have to be made as to
whether the Nodes are in aspect to each other before a final
delineation can be made. Favourably aspectedNodes between
   charts can bring out about lasting influence. Unfavourable
  Nodescan causea separativeaction.
     We know that more is neededthan Rahu and Ketu alone
  in our considerationas the placementof eachplanethasits
  own say. However, much depend whether the person is
  accentuatinghis Rahu or Ketu in his life. It is that basic
 iharacteristic that lasts through Iife and influences every
 action. In our opinion Rahu and Ketu should be kept
 separate in our interpretation. They are of separate
 influencesand should be read as such. In betweentwo, it
 is Ketu which is stronger than Rahu. When Rahu will
'conjunct
            a planet, Ketu will naturallyopposeit, but it is the
 conjunction which is important and not the opposition.
 When it comesbetweenRahu and the planet; it is the planet
 which is strongerthan Rahu and it is Ketu which is powerful
 than the planet. These are some of the salientfeaturesof
Rahu and Ketu in synastry.
                     Conjunctionsof Rahu
     SUN. It is a positivestrongmagneticattractionand there
is a sinceredesireto understandand help each other. It is
Karmic and the Sun personwill comeforward to assistRahu
personto grow in strengthand vitality to build his destiny.
This conjunctionaddsto the sprrituality and self confidence
in both.
     MOON. It is againKarmic as Rahu and Ketu are closely
linked with Luminaries. It is something from the past life
carried over to this incarnation. The union between the
people of opposite sexesseemsdestined. There is love,
strong attracrion and spirit of consideration for each other.
This aspectwill work more favourably in domestic life than
ontsideworld.
     MARS. This conjunction will give ambition, creative
                               136
ability vitality etc. in both' Mars person will be able to take
Rahu person along with him to achieve successby stimulating
energy and drive. ln between opposite sexes,it is better to
have Mars in the male chart and Rahu in female chart to
have the laiting comPatibilitY.
    MERCURY.         One will help the other to stimulate intellec-
tual pursuits and growth. Each other will appreciate one's
talents and intellect. Rahu will help Mercury in his/her
educational pursuits and can spur to greater mental feats'
Mercury's reasoningwill keep Rahu balanced'
    JUPITER. This aspect will help both to develop on
spiritual lines. Both will have generosity and tolerance
towards each other. Jupiter also helps to develop self-
 confidence in Rahu and makes him to move forward.
    VENUS. Both the persons will bc sincere in affections
 and will try not to hurt the feelings of each other. In matri'
monial alliance, there is companionship and sympathy
between them. However, this aspect map make both the
personsextravagant.
   SATURN. This aspect will increase the sense of duty
between the both. Saturn person brings discipline and sense
of responsibility to the Rahu person and can prove to be a
great teacher. It is not a good aspect to be considered for
matrimonial alliance but it will prove good if Saturn is the
master and Rahu is the employee.
    URANUS.     Both the persons will respect each other's
need for freedom and individuality. Uranus will help to
stimulate creative ability of Rahu. Though Rahu may not
like to work under Uranus but he will not hesitate in admit'
ting the superiority of kahu. It is not good for marriage or
businesspartnerships but may work well for social life.
    NEPTUNE.      This cau be termed as spiritual and Karmic

                                t37
   contact. Neptune is the planet
                                     of past Karmas and Rahu
   will distribute them in this incarnation.
                                              These people can
   work for great constructive good
                                       in the area of love and
   compassion for others.
       PLUTO. This contact makes both
                                           the person feel that
  there is strong bond between them, perhaps
                                               a bond that even
  death cannot break. Both will fr.fp
                                      i""i   other in character
  improvement.
                                     Conjunctions of Ketu
       SUN. As said earlier, relations between
   _                                                                Luminaries and
   Nodes are Karmic. This aspect
                                                        muy explaio that thesetwo
   persons have probrems in their past
                                                         lives and will nu"t aguin
   in this life tc resolve thenr. So
                                                      they will be attracted to each
  other to work out the problems.
                                                         tutunyfarniliarities will be
  fo-und amongst them. k"tu p..roi
                                                             *iil always have the
  edge over the Sun person.
                                                   Ketu will try to dominate the
  Sun person, with the result resentments
                                                                 tend to build and
  eventually Sun person seeks a
                                                       ways to free himserf. The
  relations can never be lasting and
                                                        permanent, though initial
  attraction may be there.
      MOON. Ketu can always arouse
                                                                 the Moon person
 emotionally. Ketu will be demanding
                                                              of the Moon *i h;;;
 result unpleasant domestic changes
                                                           Jun tuk. piace. This
 aspect will causefluctuating and
                                                      disturbing relations between
 them and may not prove to be lasting.
                                                                 Contacts o.iginufff
 will be due to Karmic conditions.
     MARS. As said earlier. Ketu
                                                           is powerful and will
dominate over the planets. Here Ketu
                                                               man will restrict the
Mars personal desires, passions,
                                                     energy ancl action and will
try to subduc him. Between
                                                    opporit. sexes, it may work
t e m p o r a r i l yb u t w i l l n o t l a s t
                                                 Oue lo rivalry. This aspect is
not favoured in matrimonv.

                                       t38
       MERCURY.                Ketu person will have greater power over
Mercury and has something to teach him.                                 Ketu man will
create the situations where Mercury will need serious thinking
and this way, he will be able to increase his knowledge.
D uring cfisis, they may stay together, but their relations will
not last long and finding the suitable opportunity, Mercury
person will break and go away. This contact can be said to
be good between the teacher and the student.
      JUPITER. There will be over-flowing of energy and inspi-
ration between both with thc result that one will not accept
the superiority of the other. Initially Ketu may accept the
guideline from Jupiter, but having learnt it, will try to teach
him. This will cause resentment and Jupiter may break away
from him.
       V E N U S . H e r e K e t u w i l l t r y t o p o s s e s sV e n u s w i t h o u t
giving. Initially both will feel the responsibility to each other
for the love and affection as their duty, but later on when
V e n u s w i l l f i n d t h a t K e t u i s t o o s e l f i s ha n d d e m a n d i n g ,t h e y
w i l l s e p a r a t en o t t o m e e t a g a i n .
    SATURN. Saturn restricts and restrains and sometimes
conrpletely blocks Ketu person's development. Equally Ketu
can put strain on Saturn will cause the mood of depressionor
will give the feeling of to much responsibility on him with the
result Saturn will part and separate.
   URANUS. This is no aspect for compatibility. Such per-
sons can never go together for long, as there will be friction
amongst them. Uranus wants to rebel, Ketu wants to hold,
resulting in a break. Such peasonsshould not associatein any
walk of their lives.
   NEPTUNE.      lt can be termed as favourable if both the
parties are engagedin the persuit ofpsychic phenomena, astro-

                                             t39
 logy and occult learning. This combination can again
                                                           be
 termedas Karmic. However,this aspectwill prgve to be the
 worst and evil, if they are.engaged
                                   in indulgenceof any type.
In such casesthe relations may not last long.
    PLUTO This aspect can make them to indulge in sex
perversions,if there are other aspectsto support it.
                                                     This as_
pect will create sex problemseven if both the parties
                                                       are of
the samesex. Outwardly,they may look friendsbut inwardly
theremay be a desireto harm eachother in one way
                                                      or thc
other. It is advised that such personsshouldnever
                                                       come
together.
   The readers will observethat Ketu conjunctionwith any
planet is nevergood and Ketu person will always
                                                have the
dominanceover the other.




                           r40
                     CHAPTER 17

      pranetary
  Among      J:.',',?::::lL,               aremostimportant
the Moon being the closest light near the Earth. As the
influence of the Moon is very strong in a natal chart, so the
influence of Moon's Nodes is very important in the life of a
soul.

   The basic concept is that the Moon's Nodes work as a
vacuum tube connecting the pait Karmas with the present
Destiny. In other rvords, Moon's Nodes bridge the gap bet-
ween the previous form of soul to the present soul structure.
Moon's Nodes also help to corelate the present soul structure
with its possible connection to the future soul form.       This
automatically brings us to the Hindu concept of some form of
reincarnation process. During the course of our visit to foreign
countries to speak on Hindu Astrology, we found that more
and more personsin the West started in believing the process
of Reincarnation and Hindu Philosophy of life.
   In Karmic Destiny the first stage is to find out where Rahu
and Ketu are placed in the natal chart by Signs and Houser
and delineate them by taking into consideration the elements
of Signs and Houses. Next we ari to find the controlling
planets (Planets rulling the Signs occupied by Rahu and Ketu)
The third stage is to see the aspectsbetween Rahu and Ketu
with the natal planets. For conjtmctions and oppositions, we
have the orb upto l0', but for other aspects,the orb is not
allowed for more than one degree.
   For illustration,we have the author'shoroscope.His birth
detailsare :
   Placeof Birth. 77E30,30N00
   Day sl Birth. Tuesduy (In Hindu Astrology,day is from
sunriseto sunrise. He was born on 10thMarch 1920. before
sunrise,so his day of birth will be Tuesday and not Wednes-
duv)'
   Date of Birth : l0th March 1920
   Time of Birth : 4h 34m 38sa.m. I.S.T.




                        l?
                            oe
                            ,eJ
                             $D
               !-       |


                                         *:3:s
            l0'oo   r




                                   (tt
                                   Cr-
                                   ig



   As a simple rule, Ketu tells us about our past Karmas
broughtin this incarnation and Rahu will tell how we are
                                  r42
to redeem them. The redeeming net-work of Rahu consists
of the Grand Trine housesthat include the positions of Rahu
in the natal chart. Grand Trines are : l-5-9; 2-6-lO; 3-7-ll;
and 4-8-12 houses. For example. if Rahu is in the 7th house,
its distribution net work will consist of houses3-7-ll. The
areas covered by Rahu are quite important irr the Karmic
growth during your life time.

   Since Ketu has been assignedthe responsibility of inlet of
Karmas from the past life and Rahu is responsible for the
redemption of past Karrnas in this life, their location through
the signs and housesin a birthchart will help us to understand
more of Karmic Destiny in this life time. By knowing where
the Nodes are in the natal chart, one can estimate a general
Karmic attitude or function in one:s life. Remember, this does
not say what the whole life is going to be, but a general atti-
tude that will guide the soul in this life.

     ln the example horoscope, Rahu is in the lOth house i.e.,
2nd, 6th and l0th are the houses where the native needs the
grow'th in this life time. To conclude, it is the position of Ketu
(one incoming point) for the inlet of Karma, but it is the posi-
tion of Rahu (three houses)for the distribution and utilisation
of past Karmas during our life time. In the illustration, the
incoming point is the 4th house and he is to distribute and
utilise the past Karmas through the 2nd,6th arrd lOth houses,
during his life-time.
   In our illustration, Rahu is in Libra in the lOth house which
is in the same as Ketu in Aries in the 4th house. In this case,
past |ife Karmic energy (Ketu) is coming from the Fire (Aries)
by sign position and Water (4th house) element by house posi-
tion. Karmic energy distribution (Ranu) is happening through
Air (Libra) element by sign position and Earth (l0th house)

                            t43
element by house position. Thus the basic Karmic energy will
be from Fire-Air (by signs) and Water-Earth (by house). Here
both the conversionsare converging to the common boundry
of Air Earth domain. If the native can bridge the gap between
the interface of Air and Earth, the rest of the flow will be
quite smooth, The Air levels is-Intellectuality and Commu-
nicatiorrs, and the Earth level is-Practicality and Materialism.
    One Nodes conversion (Fire-Air) rs bringing higher know-
ledge into something logical that can be easily communicated.
The other Node conversion (Water-Earth) is trying to convert
understanding of feeling and sensitivityinto practical-matera-
listice attitud. The Karmic processof this person is to learn
to use his mind and intellect by planning a practical action
which can provide him material significance. Remember that
these elementalanalysis will not tell us a life-long story but a
path that is significant in the life of that person.
    The native was given to the wet-nurse to be brought up as
his mother was not keeping a good health at the time of his
birth. After couple of years, when the wetnurse brought him
back, his mother refused to recognisehim as hcr own child.
Her arguments were that the wetnurse had changed her baby
with somebody'selse. In his childhood, he suffered emotional-
ly for want of love and afrection from his parents. This is
due to Ketu in 4th house. and it was Karmic. But Ketu is in
Aries (Fire). This gave hime tremendous amount of energy to
fight his own way to establish his own individuality and it
was again Karmic. Had Ketu been in some other elemeni i.e..
Air or Water or Earth instead of Fire, his Karmic Destiny
would have been totally different. Rahu will redeem his
Karmic Destiny through 2-6-10 houses as stated earlier,
through Air and Earth elementsin this incarnation. During
this time so far, he had to work very hard.        Even today at

                               r44
this age of 59 years,he works for more than 12 hours a day.
This is the 6th houseaffairs. Financially, (2nd house)he had
neverbeenwell-offexceptfor a very short period in between.
Vocation (lOth house),he ha0 changed as six professionsso
far. Air element-whatever work he did or doing at present
in his life, he attained some sort of recognition and he is
alwaysa doer-practical (earth element).

    Rahu in Libra and Ketu in Aries: previous incarnation of
this personwas spentwith a lot of physical actions, temper
and aggression.He had, in that life, achievedand lost many
thingsas he could not learn to understandthe significance     of
balance. In this life time, he will definitely learn and be able
to use the concept of balanceas appliedto 'soul growth.'
Everythinghe undertakesin this life will have a definitesense
of justice, priority and deeper significance.His diplomatic
talentsare well worth nothing in this life. He will achieve
thingswithout fighting forthem and often otherswill surrender
to him just by his sensesand magnetism.Utilisationof mental
energiesis strongly noticed in this personin this life. Although
he may not be after material success,he always managesto
be in plentiful in that respect.
  Rahu in the l0th and Ketu in the 4th: This condition often
signifies stronger success in the professionor careerarea.
However, somedrawbacksare noticed in the home affairs.
Here, the individual convertsall the domestic energiesinto
professionaldirectioa. Thus, satisfactions and fulfilments
through the home are fairly low for him. His individuality
and strong ego are worth noticing. Often difficulties during
childhood brings about a distorted mother/father complexto
him. He is a lot closerto his father than to the mother. How-
ever, someof the hostilitiesor lack of mother elementis due

                            t45
lo recentpast life complications with her. Sensitivity and
emotionalis6 is something he has to overcome and show
an imageof tough practicality in this life. His first half of life
is not very enjoyableas comparedto the secondhalf of life.

                      Controlling Plenets

    The planefsrrrling the signsof Rahu and Ketu are called
the Controlling Planets. Since Ketu is the inlet point of
Karma, the planet ruling the sign of Ketu is called the past
life Karmic Control. The planet ruling the sign of Rahu con-
trols the Karmic Distribution Control. The controlling planets
have strong implications depending upon where they fall in
the chart and the aspectsthey make with the nodal axis. This
aspectmade by the controlling planet to the nodal axis is of
great significancein'Karmic understanding. Sincethe Nodes
are in exact opposition, the aspects made by the planet to
both the Nodeswill alwaysbe complimentary.For all practr-
cal purposes, we should take the shortest or smallest aspect
betweenthe controllingplanetand the Nodal axis.
    Coming back to our illustrarion, ruler of the iign occupied
by Ketu is Mars and the ruler of the sign occupiedby Rahu
is Venus.i.e. Mars and Venusare the Controlling Planetsin
this Nativity. Mars is the planetof the past life Karmic Con-
trol and Venusis the planet of Karmic Distribution Control.
    First we are to considerthe position of his Mars. Mars is
in Libra in lOth house. Combinethe characteristics     of all the
threeelements,  i.e Mars, Libra and the loth houseand we
will get the clear picture. The characteristicsof Mars-Fire,
quarrels, energy, initiative, effort,pain etc., i.e. in his past
incarnation, he was quarrel-some. fiery, and full of energy.

                                IM
As he could not balance himself in past incarnation (Libra
sign), he is to suffer in this incarnation in his married life
(Libra-sign of marriage)and his vocation (l0th house),Mars
is the ruler of the 4th he will suffer in his 4th house afrairsin
this incarnation,i.e. monther, domestic peace and harmony
ctc. It is due to his past-life-karmiccontrol.
   Next planet to be considered is Venus-the planet of
Karmic Dlistribution Control. Key Nodes for Venus are-
love, beauty, money etc. Venusis in the first housein Capri
corn. We are to blend thesethree characteristics(Venus,
First house and Capricorn) to understandthe Karmic Distri-
bution Control in this incarnation. Capricorn is the sign of
ambition but of restrictions also and the first housemeans
'person'. Naturally the presentlife of the native will be full
of ambitions but of restrictions also with regard to the
Keynotesof Venus(love, affection and money).

    Mars conjunction Rahu in the l0th house, (Orb is 10") in
Libra. This is quite a fortunate and powerful aspect. Strong
personal elevation is sought in life, basicallydue to Karmic
hidden support. Money and resourcesbecomes key issues
behind the go-getterprofessionalimage. Strong tensions with
father are noticed sinceearly childhood. Temper and aggres-
siveness go hand-in-hand to achievethe objective without
wastingany time. Physicalsex drive is often at its highestand
it has certain past-lifeconnections. Sometimes theseconne'
ctions are in the form of unfinishedmanipulation or simple
'get
     even' from the previous life. It seemslike the Martian
energiesare coupled with the previousmemoriesand they
have a Scorpion touch. Strong assistancefrom brothers and
sistersis seenin getting aheadin fife or vica-versa.
                               t47
     Venus square Rahu/Ketu. This is quite a frustrating or
 stressfulaspect. However,it does provide a lot of fighting
 spirit to the native to overcomemany obstacles.It seemsthat
 he is to learn his Karmic lessonssubstantiallyin details.These
 minute lessonscomefrom many areasof life. Theseaspecthas
 the most Karmic learningprocessin native'slife. Thus he
 fulfils substantialbalanceof Karma in this life alone. Strong-
 ly it may not seemso becausehe is learningfrom so many di-
 rectionsand without concentratingon any particular areaof
life. Thus, as he goes through higher reincarnations,he has
good and stiffstamina to cope up with added life process.This
sounds like basic Karmic training. Affairs of money and
possessions   are very significant,consciouslyor unconsciously.
Circumstances    behavestrongelywith him in this aspect.When
he plans to go after resourcesand money matters, cirumstan-
cesforce him to becomeantimaterialistic.On the atherhand.
if he decidedsto withdraw from the meterialluxury, he gets
circumstantiallrtangledwith other' resourcesand their man-
agement. Somehow,whateverhis choice is, circumstanees
force him to changehis strategycontinuously. This goeson
until the balaneis fully undestood.

                  Aspectsto Rahn & Ketu
    Moon con.iunctionRahu. This . aspect providessinternal
emotionalsatisfactionfor him. If not. at last he will provide
suchsatisfactionfor others. Basically.this aspectrepresents
better emotional distribution within or without the native.
Support from mother or 'mother image'is of utmost impor_
tancefor him in this life.
   The idea to takesomethingfrom 'mother'and be a mother
figure' to somoneis highly under focus. Theie peoplego

                            148
through ultra high and low emotional stagesin this category.
As a result, it is best not to provoke them emotionallyai the
wrong time. Vivid irnagination and stronger sensitivityto-
wards someof the past-lifeexperiencesand their iliumination
is noticed in this aspect. They may go through typical or un_
usual emotional experienceswhich could be part of their
recent life externalizatiunwith a great similiarity to reality.
    Sun trine Rahu. This aspect providesgood popularity,
personalelevationand execution of proper ego for him.
circumstantial assistancein getting recognisedin the world is
noticed. Strong foundation and establishmenr       of identityis
done by the help of the father-figure' in life. Successin the
public life or evenin politicsis seen. During his recentlife,
he had beenwell recognisedfor his assistaucc    to others. As a
result, in this life repaymentis done to him to get somewhere,
no matter wherehe starts in life. Optimistic attitudes and
open goals are quite comrnon for him.

                         Dasa Periods

   When it comesto Timing of Events,it is Dasa paddhati
(Vimshttari Dasa System)in Hindu Astrology wnich is unique
but if the learnedastrologerswill not be able to differentiite
betweenthe ruling Dasa of Karmic planetsand other planets,
they ere likely to err. Similarly, the Dasa periodsof Rahu and
Ketu are also Karmic, and are to be delineateddifferently.
    In our illustration, the native had the balanceof Jupiter
Dasafor 8 years9 monthsat the time of birlh. A change
camewhen he enteredin SaturnDasa,i.e. he was completely
disownedby his parentsand he had to work and earnhis own
livelihood. During these19 yearsof Saturn Dasa, he had been
                             t49
learning and earning and the life was quite regular and
smooth,though progresswas very slow. With the changeof
Mercury Dasa,a complete change camein his life. From
employment,he cameto the business,but this period was full
of struggleil,sufferingsand fluctuations, though every sufrer-
ing broughtand additionalknowledgeto him.
   With Ketu Dasa, his life was completelychanged.As said
earliei, this Dasaperiod was Karmis. Ketu is placedon the
asterismof Venus and it becameall the more important be-
causVenusis one of the Karmic Controlling Planets.With the
beginningof Ketu Dasa, he startedfrom the scrapand reach-
ed on the dizzyheightsof his life. Suchtime will not repeat
as he will not see Rahu Dasa. He was on TOP in his trade
and industry in the country, but beforethe end of Ketu Dasa,
he come to his normal pattern of Destinyi. e. there were times
when he had nothing to eat and nothingto wear. He had to
go without food and shelter for days'togetherand had to
sufferthe greatesthumiliation of his life. But perhaps God
has a purposebehind it. He becomereligiousand spiritualistic
from selfishand materialisticapproach.
    VenusDasa,planet of Karmic Distribution Centrol, bro-
ught about completerevolution and rejuvenenationin bis life
and he has attained a position which he could have never
dreamt of in his early life. Had Venus not been the Karmic
ControllirrgPlanet,the results of VenusDasa would havebeen
totally different. We would rather say, that he is a fortunate
man, becausemost of his Karmic debtsof past incarnation
were paid during Saturn and Mercury Dasa,Ketu Dasa taugh
him a lessonand he shouldhaveno problemin his old age
i. e. upto the ageof 72 years. Sun Dasa is likely to prove
death inflicting for hinn as Sun is placed on the asterismof
                             r50
il
 Jupiter (rulbr of the netal l2th house) and the Sun is in the
 2nd housebeing the ruler of the 8th house.

                          TRANSITS

    lVe are of the opinion that Transits are more powcful and
 decisivethan Vimshottari Dasa System, and even capableof
 modifying the Dasa System,though someof the learnedastro-
 logersmay not be in agreementwith us.

    All the transiting aspectsof Nodes to the planetsin the
 .chartare Karmic points or intercharge.The aspectsof conju-
 nction and positions of any Node are very significautto the
 planetsin the natal chart.

    Transit Rahu conjunct natal Ketu : First time this aspect
 took place in the year 1926when it concided wite the beginig
 of Saturn Dasa. Secondtime this manifestationtook placein
 the year 1948with the begining of Mercury Dasa and third
 time in 1966,n Ketu Dasa. All thesecanjunctionswere bad.
 and brought about revolutionswhich becamethe causeof hic
 sufferingsand downfall. These three phaseshad their distinct
 characteristicsin his life.

     Rahu conjunction Rahu-1939-40: He got married and got
 his first employment.Secondtime this conjunctiontook place
 in the year 1957,when he was releasedfrom all the sufrerings
 and bondage imposed on him by Rahu conjunction Ketu in
 the year 1948and a new cycle of life began. When this conju-
 nction took place third time in the year 1975-76,his astrologi-
 cal works were recognised and was invited to visit foreign
 countlies to speakon Hindu Astrology. His visit was a great
 Euccess.If one way it was a great honour him which comple-

                             151
tely cfiange the patterr of his life. This aspect may not operate
in his life-time any more.

    Rahu conjunction Sun in l95l brought about a financial
relief. Rahu conjunction Venus 1952 was the most unfortu-
nate part of his life (Venus is the Karmic Controlling planet
for the present lifetime). If Venus was not the Karmic Cont-
rol Flanet, this conjunction would have meant something
different and proved beneficial. Rahu conjunction Saturn in
year l96l brought about his daughter's marriage and a rise in
his employment. His salary was just doubled over a night.
Rahu conjunction Jupiter/Neptune during this year 1962
 brought another improv ement in his life. He was again
promoted.

   Rahu conjunction Pluto (6th House) jn 1964destroyed him
almost. Rahu conjunction Mercury in 1969 brought heavy
lossesin businessand he was almost completely ruined. Rahu
conjunction Venus in 1971, except his physical survival, no_
thing was left. With the entry of Rahu in his l2th house
opposing Pluto. he had to rebuild his life all over again.

   Whenever transit Rahu will come ro conduct Ketu or
other Karmic Control Planets, the outcome will be malefic.
For other planets, it will depend on other factors also.




                              t52
                       CHAPTER 18

                       Famous People
             1. Prime Minister Morarji Desai
   We start this capter with the horoscope of Prime Minister
Morarji Desai. This is one of the very few horoscopesof the
lgth Century, the corr€ctnessof which is not disputed.




                                   ft

              ar-a*\




               /oD
               Iv      ab
       we need readers' permissionto say that let them take his
   horoscopeto any astrologerof the world (irrespectiveof tn"
   school,he follows) and we.haveour doubtsif he can identify
  this horoscopewith the person,who is the prime Minister
                                                               o'f
  India. However, if you disclosehis identify, it will be qurt"
  easyfor any astrologerto justify his statusastrologically.
    l. cyril Faganand Garth, Alren have said in their resear-
  chesthat for a pcrson to be lucky and prominent,he should
  have the planetsin the Foreground(angles).fhis-importanci
  of the planetsin angresis equally recognishedin Eastern
                                                               as
  well as Western School. In this uase,there is not a singie
  planet in an angle.
   2. "When two planets,each owning a housemutually intcr_
  changeplaces,i. e. each occupythe others,house,the
                                                         action
 is termed Parivartana.when either the lord of the 6th or gth
  or l2th houseis involved in sucha exchanges  of houses,it is
 termed as Dainya yoga. The man born in a Dainya V"g"
                                                            *iii
 be a fool, wilr be reviling othersand commit sinful aitions.
 He will alwaysto tormentedby his enemies,wiil speakwoun-
 dingly and will be unsteadyin mind." phatadeepiLo   op rraan-
 teswara, Sloka 32-33,Chapter VI. There is a Dainya ioga
                                                              in
 this horoscopedue to exchangethe houses between
                                                        sa-turn
 and Venus.
   3. Some astrolggerswill arguethat three planets_Saturn,
Jupiter and Mars are exalted. But saturn and Jupiter
                                                            are
retrogrades. Uttorakalamrtuaby Kalidasa(Slokai_A.
                                                           tp,
Chapter II) has said : "When a planet is retrograde in
                                                            his
motion, his strengthis similar to that when in hlsextaltation.
If a planet conjoinedwith a retrogradeplanet, the strength
                                                              is
ll2 a Rupo. If a planet. be retrgradein tris motion
                                                     wn]le in
his exaltation house, he gets only his Neechabala
                                                     i, .. ;;:
thing."

                              154
  4. Phaladeepika, Slaka 5, Chapter XV: "When a house has
.itslord in the 6th, the 8th, or the l2th, or is occupiedby the
lord of any of these three,it suffersannihilation,say those
that know the propertiesof a house." ln this chart Mercury,
Venusand Mars in the 8th houseand Laturn, ruler of the 8th
is in the 5th housei. e. 7 out of 12 houseare rendered week
and powerless.If the readerstake thke the newly discovered
planets into consideration,then Uranus is in the 6th an<I
Neptuneand Pluto are in the l2th house.
   The point, we wish to stress,is that without the know-
ledgeof Rahu and Ketu or without incorporating them in
the chart, this chart cannot justify the elevation of the per-
son to be the Head of Government.
   The learnedreaders have observed through the earlier
pagcsof this book that the co-relationbetweenthe Lumina-
ries (Sun and Moon) has given the birth to Rahu and Ketu.
There are very few horoscopeswhere you will find both the
Luminarieswith Rahu and Ketu. In this, caseRa.huis with
Sun and Ketu is with the Moon and this by itself is an im-
portant Yaga.
  2. Chapter7, page33, about Sun conjunctionRahu we have
 said: "It gives advantagesto the Rahu area. This aspect
 providesstrorrgpersonalelevationwhereverthe Sun is loca-
 ted. The destinyoften helpsthem in most of ways it can du-
 ring life. Responsibilities
                           are often given to them just as they
 are ready for them." This conjunctiontakesplacein his 9th
.houseand the readers know all about the 9th housecharac-
 teristics. This conjunctionprovidesthe native success   in his
 ambitions.
  3. About Moon conjunction Ketu, GoergeWhite has said
 "The Moon is greatlystrengthenedby beingwith either Nodc
                              155
and rendered much more tortunate provided the North Node
is elevated: in fact this is the most essential points of the
Moon's dignity. If th9 Moon, is with either Node and the
North Node is elevated, it adds to a person's stature (look to
the native's height and social status) and also makes him
more fortunate in all the affairs of life.,, you take out Rahu
and Ketu from this horoscope, and it will become powerless.

     Rahu conjunction Sun and Ketu conjunction Moon jn the
horoscope have formed practically the conditions of true ec-
lipse and the learned readers are fully aware that how many
times the native has suffered eclipses like conditions in his
life.

  4. Sun (ruler of the sign occupied by Ketu) and Saturn (ru-
ler of the sign occupied by Rahu) are Karmic Controlling
Planets. They are in trine to each other, when the Sun is in
conjunction with Rahu. It was this configurtation i' his horo-
scope which has elevated him to be the Head of the Gavern_
ment. With incorporating Rahu and Ketu, the learned astro-
loger will be missing a vital link in the horoscope.

    He become Prime Minister during Mercury/Mars. (Mer-
 cury is the ruler of natal ascendant and from its location, hc
is the ruler of the 5th and the houses).Mars, ruler of 3rd and
 the lOth from Mercury, is exalted and placed in the first with
Mercury: There will be domestic peace,financial gains. The
native will regain his lost political power due to the blessings
of Goddess Lakshmi and will be made the ruler," (purashara
Hora). The readers will find it equally interesting to nore that
Mars is placed on the asterism of Sun and Mercury is placed
on the asterism of Moon; when Sun and Moon are in conjun_
ction with Ketu Rahu and respectivelygiving rise to a power-
ful Raja-yoga.

                             156
   At the time of electionsand his occupyingthe officeof the
Prime Minister, Rahu was transiting on his Saturnis the
ruler of the sign occupiedby Rahu and he is the planet of
Karmic Distribution Control. Sun (ruler of the signoccupied
by Ketu), planet of Incoming Karmic Control was transiting
in his lOth houseat that time.
   To conclude,his elevationto the presentposition is pure-
ly Karmic and it is at the door Rahu and Ketu.
         2. JacquelineBouvier KennedyOnassis
     40N54, 72W 23, Sunday 28-7-1929,E.S.T. 13-18-42




                                               'ea




       i:


                I
               Z
                           1;
   l. Moon (ruler of the l0th house)with Rahu
                                                    in the Zth is
  responsiblefor her becoming the First Lady
                                                of United States
 of America (wife of the president).
      Ketu is the ascendantin Libra (sign of marriage)
                                       '                     is res-
 ponsible to make her widow twice.
                                         s-uaaen fa' irom thc
 position can happen.
   3. Venus and Mars are her Karmic Controlling planents,
 who happenedto be the rulers of her ascendant
                                                       and the 7th
 houserespectively.They are also the natural planets
 riageand sex. Venusand Mars in a square                   9f mar-
                                               aspect,thus den_
 ying her the matrimonialhappinessin
                                         this incarnation. Mars
+rine Rahu: This aspectprovides her added ptrysicat;ir.;;;;
or reserveenergies.It can give a feelingof independ"n".6._
causeof the 'vital nature' in her." She
                                            may not marry any
more now.
     President Kennedy was assassinatedon 22-l-1963,
                                                               i. e.
when was undergoing Moon/Rahu sub_period.
                                                      Moon is on
the asterismof Ketu and Rahu is on the asterism
                                                        of Venus,
planet of              Karmic   Control.
            -Incoming                      Venus   is  in the gth
(nouseof death).Itwas due to her past Karmas
                                                     that she was
to sufer in this incarnation in her r;arried life.
                                                    At tfri,1i_.,
transit Rahu was opposingher natal Saturn,
                                                   transit Saturn
square natal Rahu./Ketu and transit Neptune
                                                     was on her
Ketu ,in the ascendant.
                 3 president John F. Kennedy
     7l W08, 43 N20, Tuesday, 29-S-lgt7,E.S.T t4 5l
                                                       24
  l. Ketu in the r0th housein its Fail in the Gemini is by
                                                           it-
self enoughto indicate that he will not be able to comjlete
his term as President. Ketu in the lOth houseis not
                                                      teimed
favourable for the secondhalf of life and does not promise
lasting prosperity and happiness.

                               158
                  ls
           tr


    'ta'                                  ti:
                                                        a


       *                                        e iar




                            t<
                                        v
                                                             in
 2. Karmic Controlling Planets-Mercury and-Jupiter-are
                                                       ruler of
conjunctionwith Mars (Planetof arms,voilenceetc')
the 8th, in the 8th (houseof tleath)' With this configuration'
                                                      meetthe
it was a foregone conclusion that the native will
                                                     placed  on
unnatural voilent death. Mercury 4nd Jupiterare
                                                        of self-
the asterismof Sun, ruler of the l2th house-house
                          Prime  Minister Morarji   Desai' too'
undoing and sufferings.
                                 (Mercury   is the ruler of-the
has Mais conjunctioi Mercury
                                                   but for him
ascendantin both the cases) in the 8th house'
 Mercury is not the Karmic Control  Planet'
                                                         Rahu/
  3. He became President on 2t-l-1961 i' e', during
                                 r59
   Moon and both the planets,in trine aspect,
                                                 are placedon the
   asterism of Venus.,a yoga karka planet
                                                placed in the 9th
  house,identicalto its own sign,Tuuius.
                                             tt" ,"u, assassinated
  on 22-ll-1963,i. e. in Jupiter/Jupiter.
                                           Jupiter,too, is no trine
  aspectto Rahu, but has gone on the
                                         ascertismof sun ,ur.i oi
  the natat t2th house.rufritei i; ;d;;;;;t
                                              of Karmic Distri_
  bution Control, placedin the gth house
                                             (death)i. e. his voi_
  Ient death was Kalmic indicatedby
                                        the position of Rahu and
  Ketu in his natal chart.
    4. 1960-61: Transit Rahu was on his
                                              natal Moon and tran_
   sit Saturn and Jupiterwere on his natar
                                               Rahu. All this transit
   Fere favourabte.22_ll_1963:Transit
                                            Rahu camei;';;;j.*;
   his Ketu and we have         in
                           -said earlier pagesof this book that
   this transit is most unfoutunate.  fnisiriggering by itself was
   enoughto bring this sad episodeof
                                          his life.
                      presidentMujibur
                                         Rahman
        23N36.89853. Wednesday,t7-3-tgZO,
                                                 I.S.T. 23_29_50
       He becamethe Head of the Government
                                                    (Bangladesh) on
  l2-l-1972, becamepresidenton 2S_t_lgi5
                                                 and was assassina_
  ted on l5-8-1975.We have said in our
                                            Arricle (Fate& i"rliiry
  October l9Z5)that yT.hir declaring
                                           Emergency and taking
 over as Presidentwhich is responsi-ble
                                             for his assassination.
      It.had beenrepeatedlysaid that whenever
 .
junction                                            Rahu is in con-
           _with any planei,it will               the basic quality
of that planet. We have also saiclthat"nt,un".
                                           whereverRahu is pla_
ced, there will be enhencementin that
                                              area. Enhancement
dcesnot meanfor good it can be
                                        bad also subject to the
characteristics   of the planet and the t ous.. Symbolically,
netsand signs are classifiedas                                 pla_
                                     maleficsand benefics,but
when it comesto actual operation,
                                       tfr.V-c"nwork vice_versa.
                              r60
   Rememberingthat the l2th houseis the house of secret
cnemies and also of regrets and self-undoing,it must be a
bad place for Rahu to lie. Here Rahu is in the l2th housein
conjunction with Mars. Mars is the ruler of the ascendant
and also the planet of Incoming Karmic Control. It is this
configurationin Mujibur Rehman'shoroscopewhich is res-
ponsiblefor his elevationas the Head of the Government and
also for his assassination.Sixth and twelfth are rather secret
add obscure housesto know much about. This axis is not
favouredfor the personwho.becomethe Head of this States.
Here Rahu has enhancedthe qualities of Mars, but also of
                            l6l
  l2th houseMars, as a ruler of the ascendant,conjunctionta_
 king place in the l2th house is responsiblefor his assassina-
 tiod. SinceMars is also the planetof Incoming Karmic Con_
 trol, this assassinationwas Karmic due to his past Karmas.
 Any good astrologercould convenientlyseeand predict the
 end of his life in the manner it has taken place, piovided he
 had consideredRahu and Ketu in his horoscope.
   Another interestingpart of horoscopeis that Mars is rpla-
ced on the asterismof Rahu when Venus, planet of Karmic
Distribution, Control is placedon the asterismof Mars, i. e,
Venusis under the sway of Mars and Mars is underthe sway
of Rahu. To conclude,his elevation and assassination  *.r.
Karmic and cannot be predicted safelyif we do not take
Rahu and Ketu into consideration.
     Wheneverthe lord of the ascendantwill be in the 6th, gth
  or 12th housein associationwith Rahu or Ketu or with Kar-
  mic control Planets,there will alwaysbe danger of unnatural
 and prematuredeath.
     He becamethe Prime Minister of Bangladeshon l2-l-19?2,
 when he was under Saturn/Moon. He was safe upto Saturni
 Mars, but saturn/Rahu createdproblemsin his political rife.
 There were difficulties, with the result he dissorvedthe
 Parliamentand becamethe president, which finally resulted
 in his assassination.
     Transit Rahu was in his ascendant in square aspect to
Saturn, Uranus. Venusand Moon. Transit Uranus was on his
Rahu and transit Jupiter was on his Ketu. Transit Mars was
opposingtransit Rahu. In the previouschapterson Transits
of this book, the readershave seenthat transit Ketu conjunc-
tion natal planet and transit pranetsconjunction Ketu ari not
termed favourable.

                            t62
                5. President Jimmy Carter
   84W 24,32N 02, Wednesday,l-10-l C.S.T.7-14-9a.m.




    Like PresidentSheikh Mujibur Rehman, PresidentJimmy
Carter,too, has his ascendantlord conjunction Rahu, but in
his caseplanet involved is Venus and not Mars and the con-
junction takes place in the 10th houseand not in the l2th.
Due to this change,Jimmy Carter's electionwas peacefuland
constitutionaland there is no danger of violent or premature
death.
    Like President John F. Kennedy, his Karmic Controlling
Planets-Moon and Saturn-are in conjunction, but in this
                            163
 casethe conjunction takes place in the ascendant and not in
the 8th house. With this change,it can be safely said that he
will completehis term peacefully and there will be no unro-
ward incident in his life.
    He was electedin Ketu/Venus. Venusis the ruler of the
ascendant, Venus is in conjunction with Rahu and Venusis
involved in Parivartana Yoga (exchangeof house between
Moon and Venus)termed as Maha yoga, Moon is the planet
of Karmic Distribution Control.

    Transit Rahu was in conjunction with his natal Saturn-
planet of Incoming Karmic Control. Transit Uranus was on
his Moon, but the most important transit was of Saturn on
his Rahu.
                  6. President Gelard Foril
     95W57,4lNl5, Monday, t4-7-1913,    C.S.T.l-32-lSa.m.
     We were amongst the very few astrologers of the world
 who saw the fall of PresidentFord in November 1976 elec-
 tions, (Fate and Destiny, October 1976). To our knowledge
perhaps President Ford is the only American who became
vice-presidentIirst and then president uncontested in a very
short period. Naturally, astrologersthought that he will be
successfulespeciallywhen PresidentCarter was not so popular
then.
   Here again,the nodal axis is important. Though Rahu/Ketu
axis through I lth/sth housesis very good but both the planets
are in Fall. Karmic Controlling planets are Mercury and
Iupiter and they are 6th/8th to each other and in Hindu
Astrology, this aspectis termed malefic.
   On 1-8-1974, tbe day he becamethe presidenthe wasunder
saturn/Jupiter and Jupiter is the pranetof his Karmic Distri-
                            lg
bution Control. Jupiter is placed on the asterismof Venus,
ruler of the ascendant.At that time, Rahu was transiting his
?th house and none planet was transiting on his Rahu/Ketu
axis.
                                                                  t
                                                                  :f
    On 2-ll-1976, he was under Mercury/Mercury, planet of
Incoming Karmic Control and Mercury is placed on its own          $
                                                                  ,f
asterismi.e. there was no modification and the PresidentFord      .i

was to pay for his past Karmas through his defeat at the Polls.
By this time, transit Rahu shifted to his 6th house to oppose     ,
his natal Mars ruler of the 7th and the l2th house. The in-

                             165
   teresting part of the caseis that president Ford
                                                     was defeated
   by President carter whose horoscope
                                            we have dealt earlier.
   Both the Presidentshave Venus as tie ascendant
                                                        ruler. At
   this time, when transit Saturn was in conjunction
                                                        with natai
  Rahu of Carter, it was in conjunctionwiih natal
                                                      M";;-;i
  Ford. If the learnedastrologerswould
                                               have given the'd;
  weight to Saturn'stransit on prisident Ford,s
                                                  Mircury, ptanei
  of Incoming Karmic control, it would not have
                                                    been difficurt
  for them to seehis defeat againstpresident
                                                Carter.
                      7. Queen EtizabethII
    W_._"lol"this chapterwith the horoscopeof
 _-                                           eueen Elizabeth
 II of Englandto answerpeterVidal,squestion-, .,Will
 ElizabethAbdicate?',SundayStandarld-October           ar;;;
                                                2, 1977.
    51N32,00N05,Tuesday, 20-4_1926     GMT 25_40_00
     For the foreign readers,who are not fully conversant
  __                                                        with
 Hindu Astrorogy,we wourd rike to add that in
                                                   Hindu Astro-
 logy, day and date beginswith sunriseand notfrom
                                                        midnighi.
 Naturally, the Queenwas born on Tuesday(and
                                                    not on Wed_
 nesday)on 20-4-1926,at midnight_25-40_00(1.40
                                                     a.m.). Her
 ruler of Destiny is Mars and ruler of the horoscope
                                                       is Jupiter
 (SiderealChart). Both the planets
                                       are in conjunction in the
2nd houseof possessions,   where Mars is exalted and Jupiter
 getsNeechabhangaRaja yoga (cancellation
                                                 of debilitation
and giving rise to Royalty). However, there is parivartana
                                                  a
Yoga (exchangeof house)arso due to the exchange
                                                       of house
BetweenMars and Saturn, termed as Dainye yoga
                                                      and this is
bad. But Prime Minister MorarliDesai, too, has this yoga
                                                            and
he has becomethe prime Minister of India at the
                                                     fag end of
his life. The author, too, has thisDainya yoga
                                                    butit could
not stop his elevationin the life. After analysinghundreds
                                                              of
                              166
                                                                   1
                                                                   I
                                                                  .,t




                                                                  ,ii




 the horoscopesof the persons,we cameto the conclusion
                                                         that
 this Duinya Yoga doesprovide many diffculties and
                                                     obstacles
 in one'slife, but it doesnot stop other good yogas
                                                   to operate
 in the horoscope.
     Learnedand renownedastrologerslike C.E.O. Carter and
 PeterVidal have put her retrograde Saturn in the natal loth       I
                                                                    l
 house,but we believein Equal House Division and Sidereal
 Zodiac. With our chart her Saturn is in Scorpio but shifted
                                                             to
 llth houseso the evil effect of this retrograde Saturn enume-
 rated by thesetwo learnedastrologersdoes not hold good in
our school of thought.

                             167
    Amongst other factors, it is Rahu rising in her ascendant
which is responsiblefor her royalty. The readersare requested
to refer to pages65166of this book where we have delineated
Rahu in the first house and in the sign Saggittarius and they
will be convincedof our statement. Sheis not to be blamed
as most of the British Empire was liquidated in her father's
(King GeorgeVI) time.
    According to Carter, Jupiter conjunction Mars opposition
Neptune (exact) may bring a withdrawal from power and
responsibility. Peter Vidal is of the opinion that there are no
indications either in the Queen's horoscopeor in prince
Charles'horosgoperhat anythingwill happento disturb the
statusquo of the royals in the nextfew yearsalthoughfactors
occuringin the Queen'shoroscopeduring l98l-82 could at
that time resultin bad publicity......Looking further ahead,
both horoscopesshow adversemajor configurationsinvolving
Uranus around 1985. At this self-sametime, the queenwill
have Saturn transits over her natal Saturd.
    Shewas Crowned during Venus/Moonsub-period. Venus
is placed on the asterismof Jupiter and Moon is placed on
the asterismof Mercury. Mercury and Jupiter are her Karmic
Controlling Planets. At the time of her Coronation, transit
Rahu was on her natal Rahu.
    She will be under Mars Dasa upro March 1983and Mars
is placed on its own asterism and is exalted.but we have
said in earlier pagesthat the fag end of Mars Dasa before
Rahu takes over is always troublesome.In rhe year 19g2,
pointed out by Peter Vidal, transit Rahu will be in conjunc-
tion with her natal Ketu and we have also said earlier about
this transit as malefic. Here we are in agreementwith his
observationsthough our upproach is totally different than
his.
                             168
      Rahu Dasa will be the 7th from her birth
                                                       Dasa pbout
  this, too, we have said that it will t; ;;rt malefic.
                                                       Shecannot
 outlive Rahu Dasa though Rahu Dasa should
                                                  not be bad, as
 Rahu is             in the ascendanr,thoughdebilitatej;il;;
             lrlng ,
 asterismof the Sun, ruler of the 9th hoise.
      During the year 19g5,she will still be under
    -                                                Rahu/Rahu,
 when transit Saturn will come to conjunct her
                                                   natal S"turo,
 but it is the transit Rahu opposition Saturn
                                                 which is impor-
 tant. The configurationis not termed beneircand
                                                     she witi be
placedunder difficult circumstances.Though
                                                our observations
are somehowin agreementwith peter vidar,
                                                  but we do not
accept Saturn transit conjunction natal Saturn
                                                      is as bad as
concludedby him. The readerswill agreethat
                                                  without incor_
porating Rahu/Ketu, a clear cut astrological
                                                   picture is not
formed in PredictiveAstrology.
   Though hundreds of tlre casesof Famous people
                                                      can be
cited to prove the validity of Rahu and
                                          Ketu in predictive
astrologybut we fell that these should suffice
                                              for the learned
leaders.Let them apply the rulas given in
                                           this book and get
convinced that predictive astrology is incomplete
                                                     without
Rahu and Ketu.




                             169
