Transits: What Days Favor You?




      Reinhold Eber n
               Copyright 1991 by Reinhold Ebertin

                       All rights reserved.

No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying
 or recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system,
    without written permission from the author and publisher.
Requests and inquiries may be mailed to: American Federation of
     Astrologers, Inc., 6535 S. Rural Road, Tempe, AZ 85283.

                    Cover design: Jack Cipolla
                   Translation: Linda Kratzsch

                          Published by:
            American Federation of Astrologers, Inc.
                       6535 S. Rural Road
                        Tempe, AZ 85283

                      www.astrologers.com
                            Contents

Chapter 1: The Cosmogram
Chapter 2: Aspects in the Cosmogram
Chapter 3: What Is A Transit?
Chapter 4: Reading the Ephemeris
Chapter 5: Determining the Transits
Chapter 6: The Parallels
Chapter 7: Mundane Aspects
Chapter 8: Evaluating the Transits
Chapter 9: Character of the Stellar Bodies
Chapter 10: Monthly Prognostication
Chapter 11: Sensitive Points and Half-Sums
Chapter 12: Midheaven and Ascendant
Chapter 13: The Best Day to Realize Plans
Chapter 14: Basic Interpretation, the Sun
Chapter 15: Basic Interpretation, the Moon
Chapter 16: Basic Interpretation, Mercury
Chapter 17: Basic Interpretation, Venus
Chapter 18: Basic Interpretation, Mars
Chapter 19: Basic Interpretation, Jupiter
Chapter 20: Basic Interpretation, Saturn
Chapter 21: Basic Interpretation, Uranus
Chapter 22: Basic Interpretation, Neptune
Chapter 23: Basic Interpretation, Pluto
Chapter 24: Basic Interpretation, Moon’s Node
Appendix
                               Preface

I                                                1928 it was pointed
out that the transits, i.e. the passage of the progressing stellar
bodies over the interpretive factors of the basic horoscope, provide
the best and most easily understood introduction to astrology or
cosmobiology. Those who have comprehended this method of work
can also quickly master the more difficult sectors of astrological
research into character and fate. The examples given in this book
have been taken from real life and show to what extent
prognostications based on the transits do indeed agree with fact.

    At the time of publication of this book in 1928, documentation on
Neptune was still new, hardly being included in other textbooks.
Now the effects of Pluto are to be added. Although only twenty
years’ knowledge has been gained on this planet, so much material
is available that a well-founded documentation on this ``outsider’’
among the stellar bodies can be presented.

    To differentiate between the positive and negative inclinations,
the signs + and - have been chosen; the conjunctions have been
designated by (C), as it is not always possible to derive the favorable
or unfavorable trends form the aspects alone.

   This book of transits has become the steady companion of many
thousands of people. Many readers have had to acquire a second or
even third copy because the pages of the first not only were too
worn from frequent reading, but had been literally read to pieces. I
trust and hope that this new, completely revised edition will gain
just as many true friends.
Reinhold Ebertin
                Chapter 1: The Cosmogram

T                                                         of a cosmic
constellation. The word “horoscope” has been avoided in this book;
the popularization of astrology through newspapers and magazines
has changed the meaning of this word completely. Originally, it
meant “hourly view,” i.e. the heavenly constellations as observed
and recorded for a particular hour. In the press, horoscope is given
to mean a statement based on the position of the Sun in the various
signs of the zodiac without regard to the hour of birth or correlation
to the other stellar bodies.

   The use of the term “stellar bodies” in this book is deliberate, so
as to include Sun, Moon, and the planets as well. The Sun and Moon
are not planets and therefore cannot be so designated, as is,
unfortunately, often the case in many books on astrology.

    The foundation for casting the cosmogram is the zodiac, which
the Sun moves through in one year, as below:
  It is advisable to memorize the signs of the zodiac using this
illustration, if they have not already been learned from the
calendars. Each of these signs supplies the name for thirty smaller
divisions which we call degrees. Accordingly, the whole circle
contains 360 degrees.

  To locate the positions of the stellar bodies in the zodiac more
exactly, one degree is divided into sixty minutes and every minute is
again divided into sixty seconds. This subdivision is so fine that it
cannot be portrayed in a zodiacal chart. Therefore, the position of
each stellar body is written in degrees, minutes, and, sometimes, in
seconds. When talking of minutes and seconds as designations of a
star’s position we do not mean minutes and seconds in terms of
space. For this reason, when talking of time, we use the symbols “h”
for hour, “m” for minute, and “s” for second.

   In addition to the stellar bodies, we compute in reference to time
that point of the zodiac which is highest at the time of birth, i.e.
culminates (Midheaven or medium coeli) and that point of the
zodiac which is just rising in the east—the point of ascent or
Ascendant. Drawing a straight line from the Ascendant through the
center of the zodiac, we can consider the upper half to represent the
visible part and the lower half the invisible part of the firmament. If
a straight line is drawn from Midheaven through the center of the
zodiacal circle, the left hand side is that part of the sky where the
stars are on the Ascendant, and the right hand side is where those
stars are recorded which have crossed the Midheaven and descend
opposite the Ascendant.

  The space within the zodiac is usually divided into twelve sectors
or houses, the first of which begins at the Ascendant. These sectors
or houses are supposed to represent certain facets of life. The first
house is said to characterize the personality of an individual, the
second house refers to money matters, the third house shows
relations to brothers and sisters and to neighbors, and also to
correspondence, etc.

   These days, we are all accustomed to a critical view of traditional
science, and this division into houses after the manner of a fortune
teller is no longer acceptable, and not only that, there are also
various systems of house division, none of which agrees with the
other, thus perforce leading to varying results. The author has
thoroughly covered this topic in his book Charakter and Schicksal
in Kosmogramm so that it only need be said here that the lower
portion of the cosmogram represents, as it were, the subconscious,
and the upper portion ego-consciousness; and the Ascendant or
horizontal line represents the sphere of experience where the
individual can develop his inborn potentiality and achieve his life’s
goals. In short, the following equivalents can be given:

  This spatial representation does not renounce completely its
connection to the old form of house interpretation, but rather,
presents it in a form clear even to the critical man of our present
day.

  •    Upper half: ego-consciousness

  •    Lower half: the subconscious

  •    MC: ego, life aim

  •    ASC: the individual in its environment

  •    DSC: position in the community
  •    IC: descent, origins, the primitive I

  If, for example, there are many stellar bodies present in the lower
half of the cosmogram, the subconscious forces of an individual will
tend to be strong; however, there will be difficulties encountered in
achieving goals in actual life, because the consciousness of self is, as
opposed to the unconscious forces, not potent enough. The upper
half of the cosmogram being occupied to a great extent means that
this particular individual takes his fate into his own hands and
attempts to realize all his plans with great expenditure of energy. If
there are many stars at the Ascendant, then such persons are well
able to assert themselves; stars gathered at the Descendant indicate
the more important role played by communal life (marriage,
teamwork, public life).

  Prerequisite to setting up a prognostication for the future is a
close examination of the cosmogram itself. It is clear that only those
dispositions, talents and potential already inherent can be
developed and realized.

   The cosmogram, which is set up for the moment of birth, is also
called the basic horoscope, root or radical horoscope.

  The chart below shows the cosmogram of a woman who, in the
years from 1950 to 1952, won the football pool several times.
  In the drawing, the Ascendant is on the left at 13 Sagittarius 22
and the Midheaven is situated at 15 Libra 16. These two locations
are called the personal points of the cosmogram because, in
conjunction with the stellar positions, these points can hardly be
held in common with other persons, as they are related to the place
of birth and calculated according to the exact time of birth. These
points move by approximately one degree within just four minutes
of time. The individual stellar bodies can with some deviation be
shared by those born on the same day, but place and time result in a
varying relationship of the stars to the Ascendant and Midheaven.
          Chapter 2: Aspects in the Cosmogram

T                                                            from
the positions in each sign of the zodiac, from the relation to the
Ascendant and Midheaven, possibly also from the system of houses,
and, too, from the angular relationship of one to another. Indeed,
the observation has often been made that these angles or aspects
are of greater significance than the positions in sign or house. An
angle is formed when straight lines are drawn from one point in
different directions (rays).

   In the cosmogram, an angle is formed by a connection of the
center point with two different points in the zodiac. But not just any
aspect is suitable for our calculations. A system of angles is
produced by a manifold division through the center point so that
two stars can be at the same point of the zodiac, as in the chart
shown in chapter 1, for example, Sun and Mercury in the sign
Scorpio in a conjunction; the stars can be opposite one another on
the bisecting line of the circle, as here Moon and Jupiter, which is
then called opposition, or an aspect of 180 degrees. If the halves of
the circle are themselves bisected, we get quarter circles, designated
square with a distance of ninety degrees. Here, Moon and Neptune
or Pluto are square. And then comes the semisquare meaning forty-
five degrees. Saturn and Venus are semisquare.

   Another system of aspects results from a division by three of the
circle. The circle has 360 degrees. This is a trine, here between
Jupiter and the Sun or Venus. A half-trine is one-sixth of the circle
or a sextile, meaning sixty degrees to be found in Illustration 2
between Sun and Moon.

   The aspects may be very accurate, in which case these are termed
exact. The square between Jupiter and Neptune is precisely ninety
degrees with a very slight deviation in the minutes. If the orb, i.e.
the radius, is greater, then the aspect is termed platic, not exact, for
example, as between Jupiter and Uranus, where the difference
amounts to approximately seven degrees. In traditional astrology, a
very wide orb or radius was used in calculation, sometimes up to
fifteen degrees on each side. There may be some cases where this is
justified. Nowadays a radius of five degrees to either side should not
be exceeded.

  If a stellar body is at fifteen degrees Libra, as is the Sun in
Illustration 2, there should correspondingly be a star situated at the
same place within a few degrees radius in the case of conjunction.
An opposition is then at fifteen degrees Aries, the squares at fifteen
degrees Cancer and Capricorn, semisquare at zero degrees Virgo and
Sagittarius, the trines at fifteen degrees Gemini and Aquarius, and
the sextiles at fifteen degrees Leo and Sagittarius.
                Chapter 3: What Is A Transit?

T                                         ’                  another.
The stellar bodies in the cosmogram are considered primarily to be
called the radix, with each of the radical stars marked by “r.”
Accordingly, Sun r 3o Scorpio means that the Sun is to be found in
the radix, in the natal cosmogram. The stars in motion are
designated “progressing,” abbreviated “p.” If, then, Uranus p is at
fourteen degrees Cancer, it is in relation to the Midheaven (M) in
our example at fourteen degrees Libra. Then we speak of Uranus p
square M r. A transit means then the aspect of a progressing stellar
body to a stellar body in the radix.

    Contrary to the transits, we also use directions for calculation,
whereby the stars in the radix are directed according to a particular
key and themselves form aspects. For this reason, it is absolutely
and always necessary to add the symbols r and p in the notations.

   Now we come to the problem of when the stars in progression
come into relation with the signification points of the radical chart.
In order to obtain a quick overall view, it is advisable to choose a
zodiacal chart with two graduated circles, so that the aspects to the
various stellar bodies as well as to the Ascendant and Midheaven
can be seen. If the position of a stellar body in progression is
known, the aspects can be immediately read.
  The chart above shows the cosmogram. We start, for example,
with the Sun and Mercury, which here are both at three degrees
Scorpio. Across from this point is the opposition at three degrees
Taurus; we note thus Sun opposition Mercury. The points of the
square are at three degrees Leo and Aquarius, and thus we note Sun
square Mercury. At three degrees Cancer and Pisces we find the
points of trine—Sun trine Mercury. The conjunctions do not have to
be noted because the stellar points are sufficiently prominent in the
cosmogram. The effect of the sextiles is negligible, as is that of the
semisquares and sesquiquadrates.
   Once the cosmogram has so far been set up, it is very easy to read
the aspects of the stellar bodies in progression to the radical stars.
Which brings us to the question of where the daily constellations
can be found. For ages, man has observed the heavens and has also
recorded the individual stellar progressions. Nowadays, we know
the constellations for years in advance, exactly computed and
contained in the astronomical ephemerides.
           Chapter 4: Reading the Ephemeris

S                           R                             page for
February 1952.




   The column for sidereal time is of no account for the observation
of transits; it is necessary for determining the Ascendant and
Midheaven for a particular time of the day. In the Sun column we
find Longitude and Declination. Longitude means the graduation of
the zodiac. Declination is the deviation of the solar orbit from the
celestial equator.

  Of primary interest for us is the solar longitude. For instance, on
February 1 the Sun is at 11o04’23” Aquarius. The entries in this
ephemeris are for midnight Greenwich Mean time, which
corresponds to 1:00 a.m. Central European Time.

  However, many ephemerides use noon, 12:00 p.m. Greenwich
Mean Time. These midday ephemerides are sometimes preferable
because the diurnal constellations are our subject of interest.
           Chapter 5: Determining the Transits

N                     .I                                          , or
to write down the days of the month on a sheet of paper, where in
each case the transits can be noted.

   Using the point of a pencil, we trace the degrees of the Sun,
starting from eleven degrees Aquarius and going counterclockwise
around the cosmogram. At thirteen degrees we find a square of
Venus, which itself is located at 13 Scorpio 46. According to the
ephemeris, the Sun is located at midday on the third at 13 Aquarius
36, and accordingly, reaches the square of Venus on the afternoon
of the third.

   On the fourth we have the Midheaven in a trine with the Sun, i.e.
the Sun reaches the trine of the Midheaven at 14o43’. Actually, we
should enter the p and r, but for the sake of simplicity we can omit p
and r if we remember that the first star is always the one in
progression, and the second the radical star.

  The next point of aspect is located at twenty-seven degrees
Aquarius, i.e. square Node. The Moon’s Node is at 26 Taurus 26.
The transit Sun square Node should be due on the sixteenth. On the
afternoon of February 19 the Sun passes over into the sign Pisces.
Here, various points of aspect accumulate: trine Uranus, trine Sun-
Mercury, opposite Moon, etc. We have the corresponding entries:
February 21 = Sun trine Uranus, February 22 = Sun trine Mercury,
February 23 = Sun trine Sun, February 24 = Sun opposition Moon,
February 28 = Sun square Neptune and Pluto and Sun conjunction
Jupiter.

   Because the Sun advances by approximately one degree daily, it
moves thirty minutes in a half day. Therefore, it can be quickly
discovered whether a constellation is due in the morning or in the
afternoon.

   The next thing to do is to take a look at Mercury, Venus, Mars,
etc., in order in the ephemeris. Namely, the fast moving stars form
many aspects, but are not all too effective. The duration of influence
barely lasts one day. Please remember Ebertin’s rule of transit: A
transit is influential only for the time it takes the progressing star to
move one degree.

  It is not possible to ascertain the exact duration of influence for
each stellar body because, as seen from Earth, each star moves at
varying rates at different times. For example, let’s take a look at the
movement of Mars. At the beginning of the month, it changes
degrees every other day, then every third day, and at end of the
month, every fourth day, and then to remain almost half the month
of March at eighteen degrees Scorpio. It is therefore worthwhile to
note the duration of influence of the slow moving planets. In this
way we can obtain a clear view of the duration of the influence and
potency of the constellations.
                    Chapter 6: The Parallels

T                                                                  can
use the parallels of declination. We speak of parallels when stellar
bodies have the same declination, i.e. the same deviation from the
equator.

   Taking a look at the movement of the Sun, we see that the Sun
crosses the celestial equator going north (N) on the twenty-first of
March every year. On the twenty-first of June the declination or
deviation from the equator has reached its greatest point, 23N27,
and the Sun starts back toward the equator, crossing it going south
(S) on September 23; the greatest distance from the equator is
reached on December 22 at 23S27, and the return to the equator is
made on March 21. Seen from Earth, the other stars follow the solar
orbit, with some deviation. It is therefore very frequently the case
that some stars occupy the same distance, the same declination
from the equator. These stars move in parallel circles to the equator.

    The ephemerides usually give the declination for three days,
because the process of change is very slow. In order to observe the
parallels of the progressing stars to the declinations of the radical
stars, it is of course also necessary to compute the declinations for
the radix, something which is often neglected.

    For the birth date October 27, 1891, these are the declinations:
Sun: 12S45
Moon: 14N33
Mercury: 12S03
Venus 15S32
Mars: 0S21
Jupiter: 9S47
Saturn: 3N32
Uranus: 11S41
Neptune: 20N07
Pluto: 10N12

   The parallels are computed in exactly the same way as the
transits. In the ephemeris, we first look under the solar column
under declination to see if any conformity is evident. On February 7
the Sun is at 15S23. On the seventeenth the Sun is at 12S25, and
thus parallel natal Mercury.

  Due to the Moon’s short period of revolution, its parallels are
computed only in rare cases. Because the Sun is parallel natal
Jupiter and contraparallel natal Pluto on February 24, it is
significant that on the twenty-fifth the Moon forms the same
aspects with the natal planets; the transiting also aspects Jupiter
and Pluto on that date.
               Chapter 7: Mundane Aspects

T                                                            beneath
them, i.e. which become in each case due in space, are termed
mundane aspects (mundus = world). In the ephemeris the mundane
aspects are placed into two categories: 1) the “mutual aspects” of the
stellar bodies, on the bottom of the ephemeris page, and 2) the
“lunar aspects,” also shown on the bottom of the page. The lunar
aspects are especially numerous because of the Moon’s speed. The
phases of the Moon are included on the right.

   It is of special significance when mundane aspects and transits
are due simultaneously in the personal cosmogram. Since, for
example, Sun and Mercury are in mundane conjunction on
February 22, a trine results in the cosmogram through Sun and
Mercury jointly to Uranus, Mercury and the Sun. Similarly, the
mundane trine of Mercury and Mars is in relation to Venus during
the last days of the month.

   There is a New Moon on the twenty-fifth, which is also a solar
eclipse. When extraordinary events are reported, we should always
take a look at the mundane aspects where we can find confirmation
time and time again, especially around the time of the New or Full
Moon. The solar eclipse on February 25 was total in North Africa
and Central Asia. Of interest in this connection is the fact that at
this time panic broke out among the people in North Africa, great
parts of Syria were overcome by severe floods, and in Iraq, locusts in
swarms 70 kilometers long devastated the country. A strong
earthquake occurred near Mannheim, Germany on February 24 at
10:30 p.m., and was thus also within the same range of influence.
            Chapter 8: Evalua ng the Transits

T                                                          about the
interpretation of aspects: Sextiles and trines are favorable, squares
and oppositions unfavorable, conjunctions and parallels should be
evaluated according to the character of the stellar body.

   The so-called neutral stars Mercury and Moon supposedly take
on the characteristics of the stellar body they have come into
relation with. This interpretive basis can only be considered very
primitive indeed. It may serve its purpose as a starting point for the
beginner in astrology, but the student will soon make discoveries
which are in contradiction to this method of interpretation. Practical
work and experience are always the best teachers.

    The most varying opinions arise from the mere speculation as to
what is favorable, and what is unfavorable. Many people today
consider winning the football pool as a special favor of destiny. A
newspaper survey showed that only very few gained any happiness
from their winnings.

   In previous editions of this book the differentiation was made in
the transits: f. = favorable, u. = unfavorable; the conjunctions were
marked c. This division has not proven correct. The observation was
very often made that squares brought about auspicious moments,
and one well-known expert spoke of “the curse of the trines.” This
may be an exaggeration, but there are cases where trines have had a
negative influence. If, for example, Saturn forms a grand trine to
Sun and Moon, then it is at the same time placed in the middle, i.e.
in the half-sum of Sun/Moon, which can be termed unfavorable.
Half-sums will be treated in a chapter towards the end of this book,
in the Appendix.

  The categorization into positive (+), and negative (-), is also not
quite correct, but yet it remains the best solution. You will often
find that a positive evaluation at the same time demands a negative.

   A person who is happy and gay is certainly in a positive frame of
mind, but here can be negative consequences if he at the same time
neglects his obligations. If an impoverished, starving man is invited
to a sumptuous meal, he will certainly be happy, but whether the
good food will agree with him after the long period of privation is
another question. A violent argument between two persons is
certainly something that cannot be termed pleasant; but if this
argument clears the air, and peace ensures, a state of disharmony
can thus be overcome.

  During certain constellations many persons are full of inner
tension. To achieve release, it is not necessary for an especially
favorable transit to come into effect; rather, just the end of an
undesirable cosmic equivalent can bring about the removal of
stress. These few examples should serve to demonstrate that it is
not easy to designate a constellation as favorable or unfavorable.

   In most cases, not one but several transits are due to appear at
the same time, which facilitates the careful consideration of a
prognostication.

   Every natal chart is different, the stars have differing influences
in each one. According to Parm, there are various “figurines,”
certain kinds of cosmograms. In the harmonious figurine, where all
stars are dispersed as evenly as possible, conjunctions, for example,
have negative influence, oppositions good, and trines are neutral. In
the opposition figurine, where most of the stars are in opposition,
the conjunctions have, in general, a good influence, oppositions are
of no significance, and trines are often disharmonious. In the
conjunction figurine, where most stars are clustered together in a
small area of the zodiac, conjunctions are unimportant, while
oppositions are critical and trines can bring about improvement.

   As we see, the basic cosmogram has to be examined first, and
then long range observations on the transits are recorded, and thus
we learn in which way the constellations act in the personal natal
chart.

   I have often advocated that the “axial aspects” which derive from
the “wind rose” (conjunction, square, opposition) signalize an
exciting moment, i.e. something is happening, while the tripartite
aspects (sextile, trine), denote a state of condition.

   In other words, the sextiles and trines indicate what life offers;
the conjunctions, square and oppositions reveal what life demands.

   The problem can be approached from any side whatever, lengthy
dissertations can be written on it, and one can only come to this
conclusion: The effect of the cosmic constellation is dependent on
the character and behavior of man himself.

   If astrology is not only to be construed as the interpretation of
the stellar constellation for the purpose of a prognostication of the
future, if the true aim of cosmobiology is the correlation of the
cosmos and the living creature, then a stellar constellation is not
alone the essence of the cosmos. Then:

  1. An individual is the product of generations, man carries within
himself hereditary factors which, corresponding to the cosmic
constellations, will take effect in life. Good or bad hereditary factors
cannot be seen from the cosmogram alone, but rather, solely in a
comparison to the cosmograms of the parents and family.

   2. Landscape and climate can give a completely different turn to
the effects of the transits. Not only is the location of the place of
birth a determining factor but also the respective whereabouts of a
person. Whether a person is in his homeland, in the tropics, at sea,
or near the polar region under critical constellations, the possible
effects on health, frame of mind, and attitude towards other persons
are everywhere varied, even if a general tendency can be traced.

   3. The environment in its various forms can hardly be deduced
from the natal chart. What we term environment is firstly the
narrow circle in which an individual moves: his home, family, work
or school, place of residence (village, town, city, country) and
landsmen. Many persons are easily influenced by their
environment, others are able to exert an influence on the
environment. The relationship between individual and environment
is variable from instance to instance, and, here, the respective
constellations play a great role. An individual has another relation
to his environment under a Saturn constellation as when under a
Jupiter constellation.

  4. The conditions of life are compounded not only from the
environment, but also from upbringing, from schooling, vocation,
financial situation in the home, and from personal activities. The
effects of certain constellations will be different in the case of a
laborer from those of an industrialist or a minister of state; the
poor, the rich, craftsmen and intellectual workers will experience
varying constellation effects.

  5. An important factor in the varying kinds of behavior under
different constellations is an individual’s philosophy of life.
According to whether he has been raised as a Catholic, Protestant,
Buddhist or Mohammedan, or has become a convert some time in
his life, a person will react differently.

   6. The stages of development vary from person to person. A child
will behave differently under certain circumstances from an
adolescent, an adult, or an elderly person in the very same
circumstances. A critical Saturn position can mean for a young man
fleeting illness, but for an old man, death. A child’s joy over a toy
can be triggered by a good Jupiter transit, and which would mean
for young persons some shared happiness, or for an older individual
new perception.

   7. The decisive factor in every reaction to cosmic influence is the
individual himself. The development of a person correlates in
manifold respects to the cosmic rhythms, be they of the Sun, Moon,
Uranus, or Saturn, the parallels are there. The real purpose of a
prognostication is to find the correct correlations in practical life to
the cosmos, to utilize favorable periods properly and better to
overcome critical times. The point is not to figure out great profits,
but to recognize those times when something can be undertaken
with the least risk in order to achieve success. Achieving the Big Win
by astrological calculation is not possible, otherwise all astrologers
would be rich men. Calculations can only be made of the
possibilities for success, but all such possibilities cannot become
fact because man is caught in a complicated steel web of
multifarious influences; of these the cosmic factor and perhaps the
individual’s own willpower are known, but there is a multitude of
factors which remain unknown.

  Even if we are conscious of the limits set to a prognostication,
there are still ample advantages to be offered by the application of
cosmobiology to practical life. Although not everything can be read
from the transits and other methods of calculation have to be
employed, even the knowledge of a favorable period lying before
him gives a person stimulus, confidence and incentive, so that
success is almost a sure thing. It is most certainly important to
know weeks, months, or even years in advance when there is a
favorable period of time for taking up a profession, for taking an
examination, for opening a business, for undertaking a change in
vocation or residence. However, it is also of equal importance to
know when checks, difficulties or impairment of health may be due,
to know when it is hard to keep in touch with people, when
estrangement or separation are possible. The possible consequences
will become clearer if the head of the family considers not only his
own natal chart, but also that of his wife and children. How very
difficult it is at times to understand and estimate correctly a small
child who has not yet learned to talk. If a crisis of health is
anticipated, a diet for prevention can be set up. The possibilities of
accident can be recognized ahead of time; and under favorable
transits, joy is great when the child makes good progress in its
development.

   If in the interpretation of transits we start from the assumption
that an individual with his own willpower determines to a great
extent the manifestation of the constellations, and through the
transits themselves is conscious of the potentialities and the limits
of a prognostication for the future in all circumstances, then this
person, after a period of observation and experience, will be able to
pilot his own way through life with greater assurance and success.
The way a person applies astrology depends on his ethical views and
his moral development. The stars cannot be held responsible for the
consequences of the improper use of astrology, only the individual
himself is at fault.

   A differentiation must first be made between the transits, a
differentiation between strong and weak ones, between those which
can bring about a change in life, and those which merely have a
hand in shaping ordinary, everyday life. The slower a stellar body
moves, the stronger its influence. Whoever has stood under the
influence of the transits of Pluto, Neptune or Uranus will hardly be
able to say he “has felt nothing.” The Sun often leads to a triggering
of stronger transits. The Moon moves too fast to be recognized each
time in its correspondence. But whoever has a cluster of planets in
his natal chart will notice when the Moon is just crossing these
points. Mercury and Venus also move relatively fast, so that their
manifestations are also not always ascertainable. Mars, on the other
hand, is certainly more perceptible; those who have experienced
great excitement, an accident, or have undergone similar strain, will
often note that Mars participated in these events. Moreover, Mars
frequently is effective one or two days before actual transit, while
most effects usually take shape on or at the mean due dates of the
various transits. Jupiter is usually overestimated in its effect; more
is expected of its good transits than is possible. It all depends on
whether, according to the ephemeris, Jupiter is apparently moving
very fast or slow. Saturn is almost always felt in its oppressing,
restricting or separating manifestation; Uranus often brings about
great upheavals in life; Neptune brings nerve-racking times; and
Pluto brings about a connection to the mass fate of contemporary
generations or leads to unusual occurrences.

   Every reader should first impress these basics on his mind and
use these general tendencies as guidelines for interpretation. The
reader will get farther by doing this than by concentrating on details
from the very first.

   Furthermore, it is essential to consider the character of the
stellar bodies.
       Chapter 9: Character of the Stellar Bodies

I                                                                   stellar
bodies as factors of interpretation more closely:

Sun: Creative spirit, excitement of life, male, heart, day.

Moon: The soul, fertility, female, mutability, bodily liquids, night.

Mercury: The mind, thinking, intellect, science, commerce, nerves,
language.

Venus: Love, attraction, beauty, art, joy, harmony, virginity.

Mars: Drive, desire, energy, willpower, action, activity, effort.

Jupiter: Satisfaction, happiness, wealth, luck, morality, ethics, law,
community, family, marriage.

Saturn: Restriction, organic as well as psychological inhibitions,
experience, concentration, mental and emotional pain, separation,
grief.

Uranus: Suddenness, release of tensions, excitement, emotion,
rebellion, reform, inventions, intuition.

Neptune: Receptivity, susceptibility, deception, disorganization,
paralysis, wearing down, psychoses.

Pluto: Force majeure,          providence,     power,    the     masses,
transformation, change.
Moon’s Node: Associations with other persons, sexual connections,
fellowship, cooperation.

Ascendant: Environment, behavior          towards   other   persons,
development of the personality.

Midheaven: Ego, individuality, aim of life.

  In interpretation, combine the various factors, i.e. the
combination of Sun and Moon pertains to male and female, parents,
marriage, body and soul, spirit and temper. Mars and Saturn result
in energy and restraint and can therefore also bring about tension,
conflict, difficulties, antagonism. Jupiter and Mars can be termed
planets of happiness or success (Jupiter), and of energy (Mars). See
The Combination of Stellar Influences.

   The table below is a guide for positive (+) or negative (-),
favorable or unfavorable, constructive or destructive, joining or
separating characteristics. The question mark (?) indicates those
cases where a clear-cut difference between + and - cannot be made.
Use the table primarily for squares and oppositions.
          Chapter 10: Monthly Prognos ca on

T
will first calculate the directions and transits for an entire year, will
ascertain the annual tendency and, finally, will investigate each
month individually. The novice in these studies who wants to
progress step by step will begin with a survey of the transits for one
month. It would not be correct to consider February 1 and then to
look for what Mercury trine Moon’s Node means; and then
February 2 would be taken up and the correlations of Saturn parallel
Saturn looked up.

   This sort of method of observation can be compared to the flower
lover who crouches on the ground looking at one flower after
another, and thereby completely missing the wealth of color and the
splendid variety of this carpet of flowers, an impression he would
get by looking at his garden as a whole.

   First the whole must be taken, and only then can the details be
considered, otherwise the coherence and interrelationship of the
compounding elements cannot be grasped. It should not be
expected that every constellation will manifest exactly on the day it
falls due; rather, its effect will generally show up amidst several
transits.

   Orienting ourselves according to the vertical lines, Saturn parallel
Saturn first strikes the eye, and signifies a period of restriction.
Because the due date of this transit is at the beginning of the
month, its effect will diminish towards the middle and end of the
month. Mars trine Jupiter serves around February 8 as a good
counterbalance, even though Jupiter parallel Saturn will still be able
to bring about a period of indecisiveness and lack initiative. Around
the middle of the month, Jupiter enters a trine to the Ascendant.

   Those transits, as personal points of the natal chart, of the
Midheaven, Ascendant, Sun and Moon, can be designated as
especially strong, because they apply not to that great circle of
persons born on this day, but rather to those who on this day first
saw the light of the world at a particular hour and minute, and at a
particular joy or happiness in their environment (Ascendant).

   The number of constellations increases towards the end of the
month. Here, Jupiter opposition Midheaven is particularly
predominant. According to the old method of interpretation, an
opposition would be unfavorable. However, if we combine the basic
interpretations: Jupiter = joy, happiness, MC = the ego, aim in life,
we can only speak here of joy and happiness, applying to one person
alone. In addition, follow Sun contraparallel Jupiter and Moon
contraparallel Venus, Sun, and Jupiter, denoting a woman’s joy, and
following these are weaker transits which lie with the same range of
interpretation as conjunction Mercury and contraparallel Jupiter.
These propitious constellations are grouped around February 24. On
this day, the native won 2,544 deutschmarks in the football pool.

  The weaker transits of the proximate days are completely
overshadowed by the continuing constellations. Of course, clues to
the event can be had from the diurnal constellations. On February
21, under Sun and Mercury in trine to Uranus, she must have had
the right idea occur to her about how to fill out her football pool
ticket; under Sun trine Mercury and Mercury trine Sun/Mercury she
acted and submitted her ticket; Mars conjunct Venus and Sun
opposite Moon brought about excitement and suspense until she
learned of her luck.

   We would be mistaken in saying that the constellations could
have indicated her winning. The fact is that we can only see from
the transits that this woman would experience a special joy or
happiness at this period of time, brought about by winning the
football pool. The result could have been different. The football pool
has existed only for a few years; therefore, this constellation would
not have resolved in the same way at an earlier date. It would
perhaps have been winning the lottery, or perhaps a special gift, or
moving into a new and lovely home. These remarks are only to
show that it is not possible to tie oneself to the details in such a
prognostication. Instead, one can only see the indications of a
particular destiny, the possibilities or tendencies. Under such a
constellation one does not perforce win the football pool, but rather,
one might win.

  The best thing to do in order to obtain a proper survey of the
month is to use a colored pencil and underline the aspects we
consider favorable in blue and the others in red. In those cases
where we are not sure, it is better to omit the underlining.

   This example has already been treated by Georg Hoffman in the
journal Kosmobiologie, and he found that several directions had
accumulated in the years 1950 to 1952, which were triggered by
transits. Namely, this woman not only won once, but twelve times,
and this although in the years preceding she never had any luck at
all in gambling.

  For the first example the monthly prognostication has purposely
been derived solely from the transits themselves, i.e. from the
aspects of the stellar bodies in progression to the positions of the
basic cosmogram. Most books in this field attempt to determine the
event itself by using further interpretive factors. In the previous
editions of this book, the following points were also brought to the
reader’s special attention:

   1. The nature of the planets in progression (the transiting body).
In our example, progressing Jupiter, which is generally counted as a
planet of happiness, is the prime key.

   2. The nature of the zodiacal sign in which the progressing body
or transiting body is positioned. In February 1952, Jupiter is in the
sign Aries, where it can bring about an optimistic attitude and spirit
of enterprise. We should remember, however, that winning is
possible at all times, irrespective of which sign Jupiter occupies.
Therefore, the nature of the stellar body itself seems to be of greater
significance than that of the sign.

   3. The kind of house in which a stellar body makes station. The
progressing Jupiter is at the cusp of the fourth house, which applies
to the parental home and the person’s own home, according to the
system of houses. One may certainly say that, here, Jupiter brought
luck to this woman’s home. Otherwise, the fifth house is known to
be decisive in matters of gambling, lottery, and speculation. The
fifth house has no part in this case.
  4. The kind of aspect the progressing planet forms. Jupiter is in
opposition to the Midheaven. Usually, opposition connotes
misfortune, but here it brought good luck because this was a
connection between Jupiter and the Midheaven, of luck and
individual. Of course, one could object and say that Jupiter is
conjunct the cusp of the fourth house, and therefore, brought about
this domestic happiness. But, as a matter of principle, we should
leave aside such matters of dispute and, instead, resolve to make
our own observations and to gain our own experience.

   5. The nature of the aspected radical point. The Midheaven
pertains here to ego, personal experience.

   6. The character of the sign in which the aspected point is
located. The sign Libra is doubtless of lesser significance than the
Midheaven itself. However, we could apply a somewhat artificial
interpretation and say that the sign Libra is decisive for conjugality
and public affairs, and that, in this case, the family state of
happiness was affected by good fortune as triggered by a public
occurrence.

   7. The character of the house in which the aspected point is
located. According to the old rule, Jupiter, in order to be decisive for
speculative profits, has to be located in the fifth house. In this case,
there is no planet at all in this sector. The Midheaven is regarded as
the cusp of the tenth house, which is decisive primarily for vocation.
Winning the lottery, however, has nothing whatever to do with the
profession. This win is no success because in the real sense of the
word, success is the result of work done well, but not of lucky
speculation.
   George Hoffman also pointed out in his article on this case that
this natal chart did not bring any confirmation of the significance of
the houses. One should endeavor with prognostication to make the
most of small means. The more factors one takes into
consideration, the more complicated becomes the interpretation,
and the few factors applied, the more clear-cut the overall view.
      Chapter 11: Sensi ve Points and Half-Sums

A                                                                   are
also investigated by way of the sensitive points, i.e. a combination of
certain stellar bodies with the Ascendant. The Wheel of Fortune, for
example, can be derived when the distance of the Sun and Moon to
the Ascendant is added; the Cross, as the point of disease and death,
by adding the difference of Mars and Saturn to the Ascendant; and
the Heart, as point for love and marriage, from the distance of Sun
and Venus to the Ascendant. There are many other sensitive points
used in calculation, but which become of no use when the time of
birth is not precise to the minute, resulting in the Ascendant being
changed by a few degrees.

   Alfred Witte, founder of the Hamburg School of Astrology,
introduced into astrology some decades ago the use of half-sums,
which are the midpoints between each pair of planets, and hence are
also called half-distance points, bisecting, or mixed points. The
application of the half-sums is for the novice cosmobiologist a bit
difficult at the beginning, for which reason only short mention is
made of these here. For detailed treatment of half-sums please refer
to my book Charakter und Schicksal im Kosmogramm and The
Combination of Stellar Influences. Also very instructive is the
cosmobiological study of a tragedy of love in the Kosmische Ehe. In
this example the following constellations, among others, are due:

   Uranus p 3 Taurus 31 opposite Sun p 3 Scorpio 21 with Moon at 4
Scorpio 28 (New Moon) signify in themselves an exciting event
(Uranus) between male (Sun) and female (Moon). In the female
natal chart, this mundane (earthly) position coincides with Mars at
4 Scorpio 54, which in itself already indicates an act (Mars) of
violence (Uranus). In the female cosmogram, Saturn is at 5 Virgo 26
and Moon at 3 Capricorn 13. The midpoint, or half-sum, of these
two stellar bodies is therefore at approximately four degrees
Scorpio, where Mars is located in the natal chart. This point is also
in square to the half-sum Uranus/Ascendant (Uranus = 4 Pisces 15,
Ascendant = 5 Capricorn 09, the half-sum Uranus/Ascendant is
therefore approximately four to five degrees Aquarius square Mars).
According to The Combination of Stellar Influences, Mars =
Uranus/Ascendant, for example, means: to be threatened, injured or
wounded. This young woman was murdered by her lover on the
corresponding day.

  The use of half-sums makes for great precision in calculation and
also more exact interpretation, so that after mastering the use of
transits, going on to the consideration of half-sums is highly
recommended.
         Chapter 12: Midheaven and Ascendant

P                               M          C       (M             ) and
Ascendant is very important. When a progressing planet is in the
vicinity of the Ascendant and Midheaven, attention should be paid
to when a constellation forms.

   You should note, for example, what effects the transit of Mars,
Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, etc. has brought about, and then compute
the positions down to the exact minute of the stellar bodies at this
moment.

  By virtue of numerous conformities, the exact value for the
Ascendant and Midheaven can be quickly obtained, on the basis of
which a more exact prognostication can be formulated.

   As long as the Ascendant and Midheaven have not been
ascertained, it is advisable in each case to extend the radius of
influence of the transits. Certainly, difficulties will arise when other
stellar bodies are located very near the Ascendant or Midheaven in
the cosmogram, so that it is not always easy to say whether an event
has been triggered off by a transit over the Ascendant and
Midheaven or over the corresponding stellar body. A result can be
obtained here through continuous observation and the precise
definition of occurrences.
       Chapter 13: The Best Day to Realize Plans

T                                                               of
course the sense of being in harmony with the cosmos, of directing
one’s life in line with the cosmic correspondence, but this without
becoming a slave to the stellar influence. The first differentiations
to be made are those between favorable and unfavorable, positive
and negative constellations. Under a beneficial Jupiter transit, one
will be enterprising, and under a poor Saturn aspect, one will have
to face up to a greater expenditure of energy in order to overcome
difficulties. Bit by bit, the attempt can be made to connect individual
transits with particular kinds of plans.

  Intellectual work requires good transits of or to Mercury (the
mind), Neptune (inspiration, imagination, and fantasy), Uranus
(intuition, constructiveness), Saturn (concentration), or Venus (art).

   Physical work is sooner crowned with success under transits of
or to Mars (energy), the Sun (the body), the Sun to Mars = physical
strength, Saturn (patience, endurance), Uranus (drive), or Mercury
(intellectually directed strength).

   Vocation, entrance into a profession, and aim in life depend on
their relationship to the Midheaven; in part, too, to the Ascendant
when this entails at the same time an influence on the environment
as, for example, in the case of a craftsman; promotion (Jupiter to
the Sun, Mercury, Ascendant, Midheaven; Saturn to the Sun,
Mercury, Ascendant, Midheaven); negotiations with a superior
(Jupiter to the Sun, Jupiter, Ascendant, Midheaven); change of
occupation (Uranus to the Ascendant, Midheaven, Sun, Mercury).

   Marriage especially demands great attention paid to the transits
to Sun (male) and Moon (female); to factors concerning sexual
relationship; Mars, Venus (sexual drive) and Moon’s Node (sexual
relationship); to those of Jupiter (happiness and harmony) and the
personal points Ascendant and Midheaven.

  Friendship and acquaintanceship between male and female
evolve under transits of Jupiter to the Sun, Moon, Ascendant,
Midheaven, Venus, Mars; under those of Uranus (sudden relations)
to the Sun, Moon, Ascendant, Midheaven, Venus, Mars, Moon’s
Node. Neptune plays a big part in evoking disappointments and
errors; Saturn leads to estrangement and separation.

   Profits through the lottery, football pool, and speculation in
general result primarily under Jupiter transits in association with
Uranus (sudden good fortune), with Neptune (hoped for luck,
speculation, profit without performance of work), with Ascendant
and Midheaven (personal happiness).

  Change in location and residence are furthered under transits of
Uranus to Ascendant and Midheaven, and also to Mercury, Jupiter,
and Saturn.

  Court trials are easier won when conducted under transits of
Jupiter. Jupiter trine Mars is especially favorable, but Jupiter
square and opposite Mars frequently lead to favorable decisions as
well.
  Examinations should be taken under beneficial transits of
Jupiter, Uranus, or even Saturn.

  Trips for recreation will turn out well if Jupiter is positioned
favorably in respect to Mercury, Uranus, Saturn, and, in the case of
ocean voyage, Neptune often plays a role.
           Chapter 14: Basic Interpreta on, the Sun

T      S                             ,                    physical, mental
and spiritual strength.

Psychological Correspondence

    + Will to live, joy of life, desire for power, magnanimity.

   - Lack of will to live and of willpower, indecisiveness,
extravagance, arrogance.

Biological Correspondence

   Health, vital energy, heart, circulation, (brain, right eye of males,
left eye of females, right side of body); heart diseases, eye disease,
nervous disorder, convulsions.

Sociological Correspondence

    Male, father, civil servants, persons of authority.

Duration of Transit Influence

    One to two days.

Transits of the Sun

1. Sun to Sun

    + (C) Harmony in body and spirit.

    - Ill-health.
2. Sun to Moon

   + Mental balance, good humor, pleasant contact, good relations
with the other sex.

   - Inner dissatisfaction, instability of character, conflict of
interests and obligations, tendency towards spiritual conflict,
impairment of health (especially true of women).

3. Sun to Mercury

   + (C) Practical thinking, clear intellect, consciousness of goals,
organizational talent. Favorable for matters of business,
negotiations, correspondence, short trips, acquaintanceships.

  - Obscurity, absentmindedness, disinclination to work, bad
humor because of letters or negotiations.

4. Sun to Venus

   + (C) Amorous feelings, power of attraction, popularity, affection,
sense of art, expression of emotional and love life, small successes
or gifts.

   - Uncontrolled love drive, disharmony, appearances exceed inner
value, pleasure seeking, needless expenditure.

5. Sun to Mars

  + Energy, resoluteness, creative power, instinct, courage,
ambition, striving for power, chances for success.

  -    (C)  Rashness,    irritation,  obstinacy, impulsiveness,
quarrelsomeness, inclination to illness and mishap. In case of
illness, high temperature. Extravagant demands, overstrain.

6. Sun to Jupiter

   + (C) Good health, striving for power and possession, recognition,
success in negotiations (with authorities), social sense, sociability,
joy, pleasure, small gifts.

   - Conflicts arising from arrogant and pretentious behavior,
negligence, extravagance, needless expense, illness through
improper nutrition, conflict with superiors or persons of authority,
difference of opinion in contractual matters.

7. Sun to Saturn

   + Quiet, persistence, absorption, self-assertion, seclusion,
modesty, creative endurance, concentration, contact with older
persons, getting ahead gradually.

   - (C) Weak constitution, enforced modesty and reserve,
restrictions and difficulties, tendency to pessimism.

8. Sun to Uranus

  + Inclination to change and reform, new plans, surprise visits or
sudden news, love of freedom, versatility, intuition.

   - (C) Sudden hindrance of plans, small setbacks, sudden
disharmony in love life.

9. Sun to Neptune

   + Receptivity to all impressions, vivid imagination, enthusiasm,
tendency to mysticism, profundity, liking for travel, empathy. Little
success in money matters.

  -   (C)   Impressionability,    disappointments,      plans   without
possibility of realization, inclination to alcohol, nicotine, etc., self-
delusion, deceit, enmities.

10. Sun to Pluto

  + Striving for power, desire to be superior to others, leading and
influencing others, self-assertion.

   - (C) Having to submit, misguided fanaticism, arrogance, over-
estimation of self.

11. Sun to Moon’s Node

  + (C) Desire for association and acquaintanceship, mutual
experiences, cooperation, fellowship, public relations.

   - Cooperation made difficult, disturbance of associations,
separation.

12. Sun to Ascendant

   + (C) Positive attitude towards environment, attainment of
recognition, public relations, desire to be important.

   - Disharmonious relation with the environment, being placed at a
disadvantage by others, estrangement.

13. Sun to Midheaven

  + (C) Consciousness of goal, industry and diligence, development
of personality, recognition of one’s mission, positive attitude
towards life, occupational advantages.
   - Obscure goals, aimlessness, wrong attitude towards life,
disinclination to work.

Practical Examples

   If the Sun alone is effective as a transit, then no strong
correspondence will result; of concern here are only matters of
ordinary daily life, things that most persons hardly even notice.

   For example, under Sun trine Venus, a young man will meet with
his female friend, or a woman receives a love letter; under Sun trine
Mars an office worker will be able to do his job well and will receive
due recognition; under Sun conjunct Saturn a writer in seclusion
will be able to concentrate on his work, whereas on this same day he
would otherwise have to overcome difficulties and hindrances in
public life; one man cuts himself while shaving under Sun
opposition Mars and is annoyed because he has to go to a dinner
with a cut on his face.

   One young man wrote in a letter once about Sun square Mars:
“On a Monday night, as this transit was due, I dreamed that I was
on my wedding trip with Miss X, and was very excited erotically, so
that I woke up. I went back to sleep and slept soundly, but I was still
very excited the whole day and could only get over it by exerting
great self-control.”

   Under Sun square Saturn a fourteen-year-old boy saw how his
parents quarreled, and how his mother degraded his father and
called him all sorts of bad names, causing the boy great anguish
because he loved his father very much.
   A solar transit alone will rarely be manifest in an event; usually,
several transits are due where the Sun acts as trigger. Above all, the
natal chart must be examined as a whole. In this examination one
must take into consideration whether or not the point transited by
the Sun has multiple links to other points of the natal chart through
aspects or constellation.
      Chapter 15: Basic Interpreta on, the Moon

T     M                                                  mutable. It
especially relates to the soul and the feminine principle, and to the
emotions and instincts of the individual. As a Full Moon it is
especially intense and stimulating in its influence, whereas as a
New Moon it has a weakening effect.

Psychological Correspondence

  + Motherliness, domesticity, caution, versatility, desire for
change, accommodation, benevolence.

   - Suppressed motherliness, indolence, impressionability,
carelessness, moodiness, vacillation, pretence, lying.

Biological Correspondence

   Fertility, system of bodily fluids, stomach, left eye of men, right
eye of women, sexual organs. Menstruation and the various stages
of motherhood are particularly subject to lunar influence.
Temporary paralysis and illnesses of short duration, catarrh,
emotional disturbance.

Sociological Correspondence

  Mother, wife, woman, family, landsmen, hereditary factors,
feminine persons, persons such as travelers, seamen, messengers.

Duration of Transit Influence
  Two to three hours.

Transits of the Moon

14. Moon to Sun

  + Amorous affection, visits, small gifts, advantages, recognition
and praise.

  - Disharmonious love life, changes in mood, ill health.

   C Usually favorable for male in respect to love life; for female,
slight ill health.

15. Moon to Moon

  + (C) Pleasant mood, relation to women.

  - Changes in mood.

16. Moon to Mercury

   + (C) Intellectual stimulation, small transactions, slight changes,
acquaintanceships, associations, news, letters, short trips.

  - Disinclination to work, nervousness, dispute, inclination to
headaches.

17. Moon to Venus

  + (C) Gay mood, feelings of love, desire for affection, sociability,
sound judgment of the material things in life, of advantage in the
purchase of clothes and jewelry.

   - Small disputes with women, moodiness, impressionability,
sexual excitement, ill health due to overeating and drinking, gossip.
18. Moon to Mars

  + Impulsiveness, consciousness of goals, acting on emotions,
enterprise, small successes.

  - (C) Unmotivated acts, excited mood, rashness, rebellion,
quarrelsome, irritable.

19. Moon to Jupiter

  + (C) Feeling of happiness, obliging, helpfulness, kindness, small
advantages, visits, gifts, recognition, favorable for negotiations with
superiors and civil authorities.

   - Indifference, negligence, inner conflict, unpleasant visits,
differences with superiors, tendency toward needless expenditure.

20. Moon to Saturn

   + Self-control, circumspection, sense of duty, settling matters of
importance. Good for working in seclusion and for negotiations with
older persons.

   - (C) Taciturn, sense of inferiority, slight inhibitions, small
difficulties, estrangement, lack of self-confidence, fear of exposure,
weak constitution.

21. Moon to Uranus

  + Intensified emotional excitability, ambition, acting on instinct,
self-will, surprises, unusual experiences.

   - Obstinacy, narrow minded, fanaticism, exaggeration, nervous
tension, restlessness, need for sensation; disputes arising from
rashness.

  (C) Tendency toward extravagant acts, excess.

22. Moon to Neptune

   + Delicacy, introspection, intense dream life, intellectual
stimulation, mystic experiences.

   - Illusion, self-delusion, instability, given to lying, defamation,
sleeplessness.

  (C) Not being understood, dissatisfaction,            inclined   to
overenjoyment of alcohol, nicotine, etc.

23. Moon to Pluto

  + Fanatic pursuance of certain aims, power of assertion.

  - (C) Sudden outburst of emotion, strong excitability of individual
complexes of emotion.

24. Moon to Moon’s Node

  + (C) Spiritual relationship, attitude toward other persons based
on the spirit, relations with women.

  - Interruption of spiritual contact.

25. Moon to Ascendant

  + (C) Harmonious attitude toward other persons, aptitude for
making acquaintances.

  - Disharmonious relation to the environment.

26. Moon to Midheaven
  + (C) Search for spiritual understanding, heartfelt affection.

  - Vacillation of affections, changing goals.

Practical Examples

   If several stellar bodies are clustered together in a natal chart,
thereby being in mutual contact with the Moon, every time the
Moon crosses this point, similar feelings or moods or events will
recur; that is to say, a certain periodicity of seven, fourteen, twenty-
one or twenty-eight days will result.

   One woman, in whose natal chart four stellar bodies were
positioned in Sagittarius, reports that she is always very irritable
when under a bad aspect of the Moon to Sagittarius. All her
relations keep out of her way in order to avoid any quarrels or
misunderstandings. On such days, she suffers not only from these
bad moods, but also tends to illness. From her other letters: “Just
lately, I had a favorable Jupiter position. At the very hour when the
transiting Moon was conjunct the natal Moon, a woman came for a
visit and because of previous favors brought me a lovely silhouette
picture.”

   “When I have Moon trine Jupiter I usually receive stimulating
letters or small gifts.” “Once I had an accident with my bicycle. It
happened at the very moment of the Moon’s crossing Uranus. At the
same time, Mercury was conjunct Uranus.”

   Just what effect the Moon as transit has depends on how the
Moon is positioned in the basic horoscope. Another woman reports:
“I find poor lunar aspects to be extremely unpleasant. This probably
comes from the Saturn-Moon conjunction in the basic horoscope.”
“We recently lost our luggage key under Moon conjunct Neptune. It
was gone three days and was found again as the Moon was trine
Uranus.”

    Due to the fact that the Moon’s influence lasts only a few hours,
its function is primarily that of a trigger to moods and events which
are indicated by stronger transits. In general, great importance
cannot be attached to the individual lunar transits. It is, however,
very interesting to observe changing moods under the lunar transits
and to see small setbacks and disturbances arise, how contact with
others can be interrupted, or, just at the moment of a lunar transit,
business livens, visitors come and go, special news is received, etc.
        Chapter 16: Basic Interpreta on, Mercury

M                                                ,     profession,
business affairs, of mediation.

Psychological Correspondence

  + Good powers of judgment, criticism, skill in expression and
writing, mediation, diplomacy, intellectual ambition.

  - Lack of judgment and objective criticism, intemperance,
nervousness, inconstancy, lies, slyness.

Biological Correspondence

    Nerve functions, nervousness.

Sociological Correspondence

  Intellectual workers, tradesmen, mediators, young people, office
workers, persons with dubious vocations.

Duration of Transit Influence

    One to three days.

Transits of Mercury

27. Mercury to Sun

   + (C) Desire to do intellectual work, creativity, intellectual
curiosity, good for negotiations, short trips, correspondence,
organization, advertisement.
  - Obscurity, absentmindedness, nervousness, disinclination to
work, poor atmosphere for negotiations.

28. Mercury to Moon

  + (C) Intellectual stimulation, ideas and plans, small changes,
negotiations. New acquaintanceships or associations. Letters, travel.

  - Bad humor, disinclination to work, irritability. Disputes with
women. Slight setbacks, gossip, lies.

29. Mercury to Mercury

  + (C) Good comprehension, intellectual stimulation, ease of word
and expression.

   - Lack of objectivity, bad humor through correspondence or
visits.

30. Mercury to Venus

   + (C) Emotionally accentuated intellect, take-it-easy attitude
toward life, levity, thoughts of love, love of art and beauty.
Relationships with women, affection, visits, sociability,
recuperation.

   - Pleasure seeking, luxury, extravagance, inordinacy, disputes
with women.

31. Mercury to Mars

   + Realization of ideas, active intellect, spirit of enterprise, quick
settling of affairs.
  - (C) Hastiness, inordinacy, restlessness, harping and nagging,
nervousness, dispute.

32. Mercury to Jupiter

  + (C) Constructive intellect, wealth of thought, optimism,
advantageous acquaintanceships or business transactions,
successful contact with authorities, advantages of many kinds.
Favorable for negotiations, contracts.

   - Thoughtlessness, unreliability,      exaggeration    (bluffing),
tactlessness, unlawful acts, conflict.

33. Mercury to Saturn

   + Good powers of concentration, perseverance, thoroughness,
diligence, philosophical thinking, relations with older persons.

  - (C) Inhibitions, mistrust, depressed mood, difficult working
conditions, inclination to selfishness. Slight ill health, headache.

34. Mercury to Uranus

  + Perspicacity, good powers of observation, new perceptions,
revolutionary ideas, unusual fields of interest,         desire   for
independence, versatility, love of sports, travel.

  - (C) Intemperance, nervous haste, rashness, unpleasant events,
spoiling of plans, unwelcome visits, dispute.

35. Mercury to Neptune

   + Rich imagination, fantasy, tendency to follow up sudden ideas,
inspiration, premonition of coming events, comprehension of things
on an intellectual and spiritual plane.

  - (C) Self-delusion, confusion, incorrect behavior, mental
depression, trouble due to others.

36. Mercury to Pluto

   + Desire to persuade and influence others, striving for general
recognition.

   - (C) Over-eagerness, fanaticism, over-estimation of powers of
self, nervousness.

37. Mercury to Moon’s Node

   + (C) Seeking or giving impulse, desire for contact, mutual
interests.

  - Making oneself unpopular, antisocial attitude, dislikes.

38. Mercury to Ascendant

   + (C) Attitude toward other persons, desire to get together with
others, exchange of ideas.

  - Negative attitude toward other persons, passing false judgment.

39. Mercury to Midheaven

  + (C) Ambition, love of work.

  - Vocational insecurity, obscure attitude, lack of self-criticism.

Practical Examples
   The deciding factor with the Mercury transits is whether Mercury
at the time is moving apparently fast or slow. At times, Mercury will
remain for days at almost the same degree, and its influence is
therefore greater; Mercury will sometimes also travel one degree
within a period of a half day, and its influence is then
correspondingly weaker. The Mercury transits belong to those
constellations having a triggering effect rather than one causing
moods and events.

   Here are a few extracts from letters: “I achieved a noticeable
monetary gain under Mercury conjunct Jupiter.” “Mercury conjunct
Uranus meant for me the beginning of labor pains and continual
pain.” “Under Mercury trine Uranus I paid a visit to a critic who later
wrote a particularly good review of my production.” “I was very
creative under Mercury trine Saturn; I could concentrate very well,
giving great impulse to my work.”
         Chapter 17: Basic Interpreta on, Venus

V                                             “               .” We are
indebted to her for the little joys of life and happy hours of pleasure.

Psychological Correspondence

   + Affection, erotic attraction, sense of harmony, beauty and art,
sociability.

  - Erotic aberrations, sentimentality, bad taste, carelessness,
waste.

Biological Correspondence

  Sexuality, secretive glands, kidneys, veins. Venereal disease,
emotional disturbances, throat disease, stomach disorders (due to
overeating).

Sociological Correspondence

   Girl, woman, lover, wife, mother, female office workers, all
persons concerned with physical well being, with the fabrication or
sale of clothing, or who entertain, artists.

Duration of Transit Influence

    One to three days.

Transits of Venus

40. Venus to Sun
    + (C) Affection, feeling of love, popularity, artistic stimulation,
sociability, comfort, visits, small gifts and favors, liking for the high
life.

   - Uncontrolled amorousness, disharmony, inclination to
extravagance, being unsatisfied, unnecessary expenditure,
disinclination, moodiness, ill health due to overeating and drinking.

41. Venus to Moon

   + (C) Content, liking for quiet and comfort, love, sociability,
visits, pleasurable events, good relations with women.

  - Disagreements, disputes with women, conflict in love life, ill
health due to overeating and drinking, gossip.

42. Venus to Mercury

   + (C) Emotionally accentuated intellect, taking life easy, levity,
thoughts of love, relations with women, visits, sociability,
recuperation, humor.

   - Pleasure seeking, luxury, extravagance, inordinacy, disputes
with women, rumor, slander.

43. Venus to Venus

  + (C) Affection, good humor, stimulation, sociability, sense of
beauty and art, tendency to purchases in clothes and jewelry.

  - Passion, aberration, bad taste, carelessness.

44. Venus to Mars
   + Pronounced need for love, sensuality, desire, artistic ability,
lively expressiveness, small successes.

  - (C) Disharmonious sex life, inclination to immoderation,
overexcitement, tactlessness, seduction, being unsatisfied, feeling
unwell, disputes with women, pronounced eroticism.

45. Venus to Jupiter

   + (C) Sincerity, grace, warm feeling, making oneself popular,
harmonious relations, sociability, pleasurable events, visits, small
gifts, comfort, happiness in love, festivities.

   - Indolence, negligence, incorrect          behavior,    arrogance,
extravagance, loss, legal conflicts.

46. Venus to Saturn

   + Sense of reality, soberness, sense of duty, thriftiness, reserve,
loyalty, self-control, relations with older persons, knowing the
worth of objects.

   - (C) Being unsatisfied, hardheartedness, self-torture, jealousy,
sexual inhibitions, cold awakening, tendency to separation,
isolation, ill health.

47. Venus to Uranus

   + Amorous excitability, sudden intensification of the senses and
feelings, surprise visits, small joys.

   - (C) Sensuality, peculiarities in love life, abnormal inclinations,
letting one’s emotions go, moodiness, desire for independence in
love, nervousness due to repressed desires, trouble.
48. Venus to Neptune

   + Respect for love on a higher plane and artistic events, a
daydreaming character, enthusiasm, platonic love, many wishes,
tendency for travel and great expenses.

  - (C) False sense of love, bad taste, insecurity, corruptibility,
impressionability, erotic aberrations, mental pain, jealousy.

49. Venus to Pluto

    + Strong feelings of love, exceptional attractiveness, intense sex
life, special artistic talent, fanatic attachment.

  - (C) Overpronounced sex life, lustful desire, immorality.

50. Venus to Moon’s Node

  + (C) Ability to adapt, obliging, love link.

  - Lack of adaptive ability, isolation, separation.

51. Venus to Ascendant

   + (C) Sincere and loving attitude toward environment, forming of
acquaintanceships, social gatherings.

  - Disharmonious relationship to environment.

52. Venus to Midheaven

   + Individual kind of love and affection, benevolence, love of
profession, sense of beauty and art.

  - Vanity, self-admiration.
Practical Examples

   One elderly lady reports that she felt no effect from Venus
conjunct Uranus. Soon after, she told of an unexpected visit paid her
that day. She was astonished when I told her that this was the effect
of the transit. Nothing out of the ordinary can be expected of such
weak transits.

   “Venus opposite Saturn: A day full of worry because my mother
was ill due to blood poisoning.” “Venus opposite Saturn at this time
resulted in a slight quarrel with my mother-in-law.” “Venus
conjunct Uranus made me very sensually aware; I had to pull myself
together.” “Venus conjunct Jupiter brought me an unexpected gift. I
received as a belated birthday present a lovely liqueur set.”
           Chapter 18: Basic Interpreta on, Mars

M      ,                                           destructive energy,
has these interpretations.

Psychological Correspondence

  + Willpower, activity, courage, spirit of enterprise, joy of work
and struggle, will to action, skill.

    - Violence, waste of energy, quick temper, slyness, ruthlessness.

Biological Correspondence

   Muscles, sexual function. Fever (Mars transits almost always
evoke an increase of temperature during illness.), venereal disease,
skin disease, accidents, injuries.

Sociological Correspondence

   Fighters, bears of arms, athletes, mechanics, technicians.
craftsmen, surgeons.

Duration of Transit Influence

    Two to three days.

Transits of Mars

53. Mars to Sun

  + Vigor, resoluteness, spirit of enterprise, ambition, striving for
power, desire to lead, self-assertion, recognition, success, good
business transactions and negotiation.

    - (C) Rashness, impulsiveness, misuse and waste of energy,
irritability, tendency to suffer accidents, danger of injury, quarrels,
increased temperature during illness, passion. If this over-
impulsiveness can be kept within bounds it can be brought to good
use.

54. Mars to Moon

   + Impulsiveness, passion, strong emotional excitability,
attractiveness, need for love, great deal of energy and creativity,
working together with women, love link, successes.

   - (C) Excitable personality, unmotivated acts, inner turmoil,
injury, illness or weakness due to over-expenditure of energy or
vital juices. Critical for women.

55. Mars to Mercury

   + Active intellect, intellectual energy, realization of plans, spirit
of enterprise, quick settlement of affairs, ambition, successful
negotiations and business transactions.

    - (C) Hastiness, exaggeration, nervousness, restlessness,
irritability, spoiling of plans, failures, disputes, accidents or failures
on trips, keen mind and sharp criticism.

56. Mars to Venus

  + Strong need for love, passion, love of social gatherings and
entertainment, artistic stimulation, little successes.
   - (C) Overexaggerated passion, disharmonious sex life,
tactlessness,    lack    of   self-control, being   unsatisfied,
oversusceptibility, disputes with women. Very strong menstrual
flow.

57. Mars to Mars

  + Energy, resoluteness, activity, joy of work, aggressiveness,
impulsiveness, little successes.

   - (C) Wasting of energy, ruthlessness, lack of inner clam, violent
acts, tendency to suffer injuries, disputes, destruction.

58. Mars to Jupiter

   + (C) Joie de vivre, linking for organization, creativity, desire to
bring about positive decisions or transactions, recognition, business
success, gifts, settlement of official or judicial affairs, favorable for
matters of love and marriage.

   - Desire to assert oneself and to bring about decisions, meeting
with opposition at negotiations, conflicts, difficulties due to
superiors or officials, precipitant acts.

59. Mars to Saturn

   + Willpower, concentration, power of resistance, perseverance,
indefatigableness, taking work earnestly, success through unusual
effort.

   - (C) Severity, harshness, insubmissiveness, stubbornness, desire
to overcome opposition, tendency to estrangement, separation,
grief, illness.
60. Mars to Uranus

  + Intensified creativity, desire for freedom and independence,
remaining undaunted, powers of quick decision, surprises.

   - (C) Contradictory personality, irritation, inner turmoil, desire to
release inner tension, to stand test of nerves, tendency to suffer
accidents and injury, spoiling of plans, danger through machines
and modern means of transportation.

61. Mars to Neptune

  + Intellectual energy, spiritualization, receptivity.

  - (C) Wanting something without doing anything for it, misuse of
energy, moodiness, inferiority complex, disappointments, being
harmed, secret enmities, tricks behind one’s back pathological
states, harm through the taking of drugs, e.g. nicotine, sedatives,
false medicine, inflammable fluids and gases.

62. Mars to Pluto

   + Demonstration of extraordinary energy                and   thereby
achievement of success, fanatic working zeal.

   - (C) Ruthlessness, brutality, violent acts, being harmed, danger
of accidents and injury.

63. Mars to Moon’s Node

  + Good cooperation, fellowship, associations, desire for offspring.

  - (C) Disharmonious cooperation, disruption of associations,
quarrelsomeness.
64. Mars to Ascendant

   + Imposing one’s own will on others, desire to lead, working
diligently with others, bringing about success.

  - (C) Aggressive attitude, conflict with persons in the
environment, pugilistic tendencies, quarrels, conflict.

65. Mars to Midheaven

  + Power of assertion, desire to act on one’s own, power of
decision, consciousness of goals, vocational advantages.

   - (C) Excitable personality, acting in excited state, precipitancy,
aimlessness or overshooting the goal, professional conflicts.

Practical Examples

  “Mars trine Jupiter brought about for me an unexpected but very
advantageous professional change.” “Mars trine Venus resulted in
an invitation to a social gathering which turned out to be very
entertaining.”

  “Miss S. suffered a dislocated knee and is still in bed. Mars
square Uranus was due.” “Mars conjunct Saturn meant sudden and
unexpected money worries and also a slight throat inflammation.”

   “Mars (first house) square Moon and Mars (tenth house): I
caught my apprentice red-handed at something dishonest, and this
brought about very unsettling days.”

  “Mars conjunct Neptune: My set vacation plans had to be
postponed fourteen days. This was very annoying since we had
invited relatives from Vienna for a visit, but who were not able to
postpone their vacation to a later date.”

   “Our child was very ill under Mars square Mercury; his head was
cold as ice, his body red-hot.” “Mars opposite Jupiter: I failed to
have my train ticket rebate reconfirmed by my director and had to
pay a fine.” “Under Mars square Venus and opposite Uranus my
boyfriend and I had a big talking-out with one another; my friend
told me he would never come to my house again, because of all the
gossip.”

   “I was aware of the Mars influences you have described (Mars
conjunct Moon opposite Saturn) and tried to find it. But on that day
at 9:00 p.m. the effect showed through. I had to dispel a pupil who
had been very impudent. It was something that had not occurred in
all the ten years of my experience. I was very upset. But in
awareness of the constellation, I fought against my state, so that all
the other pupils had the impression of my not being moved at all by
the affair.”
        Chapter 19: Basic Interpreta on, Jupiter

J                                                   , or harmony, of
the law and of religion.

Psychological Correspondence

   + Magnanimity, liberality, generosity, constructive attitude
towards things, fairness, optimism, social sense, kindness, striving
for expansion and property, moral and religious endeavor.

   - Unlawful attitude, extravagance, pleasure seeking, unsocial
attitude, greed, materialistic attitude.

Biological Correspondence

   Nutritional functions, corpulence, liver, gall bladder. Diseases of
the blood, liver and lung diseases, inflammation of the diaphragm,
self-poisoning, diabetes.

Sociological Correspondence

  Officials, managers, men of the cloth, judges, merchants and
bankers, soldiers of fortune.

Duration of Transit Influence

  Three to ten days on the average, thirty days in stationary
position.

Transits of Jupiter
66. Jupiter to Sun

   + (C) Good health, joie de vivre, good humor, spirit of enterprise,
striving for property, social ambition, improvement of health,
success in profession, successful cooperation, pleasant
acquaintanceships, happy associations, marriage, success with
authorities or superiors, good fortune in general.

  - Arrogance, fastidiousness, resulting in conflict. Illness due to
improper nutrition or overeating and drinking, inclination for the
high life compounded with disinclination to work, failure, conflicts
with the law.

67. Jupiter to Moon

   + (C) Feelings of happiness, enthusiasm, contact, readiness to
help, popularity, generosity, good relations with women, friendship,
love affair, social success, material advantages, foreign relations,
optimistic state of mind.

   - Indifference, negligence, discontent, moodiness, irritability,
marital conflicts, religious or judicial conflicts, disadvantages
arising from extravagance.

68. Jupiter to Mercury

   + (C) Good common sense, wealth of plans, organizational talent,
optimism, success as merchant, orator, scientist, advantageous
transactions, successful trip, success and recognition in tests.

   - Carelessness, absentmindedness, shallowness, unreliability,
tactlessness, arrogance, dishonesty, slander, speculative failure.
69. Jupiter to Venus

    + (C) Joy of love, sincerity, attractiveness, making oneself
popular, receipt of affection, harmonious relations with others,
living well, good sense of form, artistic success, gifts, happy
friendship, engagement or marriage, good time for purchasing
clothes and jewelry. Happiness and joy.

   - Indolence, negligence, overaccentuated and uncontrolled
emotion, inclination to excesses and extravagance, financial
difficulties, illness due to overeating and drinking or other excesses,
love conflicts.

70. Jupiter to Mars

   + (C) Spirit of enterprise, desire to do great things, striving for
success, skill in negotiations with authorities and superiors,
agreements, contracts, (engagement, marriage), will to procreation,
birth.

  - Opposition to regulations and authorities, tendency to
exaggeration, hastiness, intemperance, being faced with a decision,
conflicts, dispute, breach of contract, marital conflicts. Excessive
expenditure.

71. Jupiter to Jupiter

  + No cares, content, happiness, recognition, success, living well,
advantages, gifts.

   - Inclination to extravagance, pleasure seeking resulting in
disadvantages, discontent, bad humor, conflicts, sorrow, difficulties
with authorities, reduction of credit.
72. Jupiter to Saturn

  + Calm, perseverance, patience, diligence, resolute pursuance of
goal, sense of duty, responsibility, striving for possession, success in
matters of real estate, feeling of well being when alone.

   - (C) Vacillation, indecision, unpleasant changes, difficulties with
matters of domicile, change of coworkers, failures, trouble with the
law, inclination to illness.

73. Jupiter to Uranus

   + New and fortuitous perceptions, new ideas and plans,
inventions, reforms, desire to alter everything, desire to travel,
happy (temporary) associations, quick comprehension of a
situation; at times, profits through speculations or lottery, sudden
recognition.

  - (C) Love of freedom and independence, revolutionary ideas,
opposition, tactlessness, exaggeration, exceptional inner tension but
which can be released (``Thank-the-Lord Constellation’’), hasty acts,
passing up good opportunities, philosophical, religious or political
conflicts.

74. Jupiter to Neptune

   + Idealistic tendencies, receptivity to ethical and social ideas,
receiving impulse from others or through change of sense, travel,
far reaching plans, generosity, gaining advantage or profit without
great strain, travel to faraway places.

   - Impressionability, susceptibility, daydreaming, cleft between
ideal and reality, disappointments, speculative failures, being
misunderstood, enmities, insults, undermining of reputation or
position, political conflicts, losses; beware of confidence men and
swindlers!

  (C) Human kindness, idealism, interest in the arts.

75. Jupiter to Pluto

   + (C) Far reaching and fanatic endeavor, pronounced desire to
assert oneself, desire to be at the top, to lead, to become rich.

   - Tendency to exploit others, great failures, consequences from
guilt of the past, loss of everything, loss through state, through law
proceedings.

76. Jupiter to Moon’s Node

   + (C) Ability to adapt, desire to enter into good relations,
successful negotiations, gain of business advantages with others,
partnership, engagement, marriage.

  - Disharmonious or unsocial attitude, conflicts.

77. Jupiter to Ascendant

   + (C) Picking up good connection, new acquaintanceships, good
cooperation, success and recognition, creating for oneself an
attractive environment or home.

   - Small differences, conflicts with others, opposition to ideas of
others.

78. Jupiter to Midheaven
   + (C) Beginning of a harmonious and spiritual relationship, being
in good humor, achievement of a new position, happy change in life,
love’s joy, success in life.

   - Insecure relationships, changes in conditions of life and
profession.

Practical Examples

    Despite the fact that Jupiter has always been designated the
planet of good fortune, by no means may one expect too much of its
transits. Due to its relatively fast motion, Jupiter’s influence will
never be as strong as that of Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, or even Pluto.
It is also not absolutely sure that sextiles and trines will bring about
any special advantages. Rather, these are usually significant only of
a harmonious state, while self-assertion is often more likely under a
Jupiter square, e.g. to Mars or Sun. Some cases have demonstrated
that under Jupiter opposition or square Sun or Venus, for example,
especially pleasant experiences could be had, or the table was more
richly beladen than usual, but where the danger existed of even
greater fastidiousness or of illness through some nutritional error.
However, those who are well in control of themselves, will gain
more under square and opposition than under trine and sextiles.
Here, some extracts from correspondence:

   “Jupiter in Taurus trine Mercury brought me small gifts, for
example, a little Mignon-Typewriter, which I only have to do a little
repair work on.” “Jupiter over Mercury brought me two professional
successes.” “Under Jupiter sextile Venus Mr. M. met a young widow,
a millionaire, at a ball. They will be getting married soon.” “After a
long period of uncertainty I finally received a patent on my
invention at the beginning of February under Jupiter sextile Jupiter.
At this time, I was happier than usual. Suddenly, I comprehended
many a problem and riddle of life, the meaning and actual point of
living.” “Jupiter trine Mercury was due on April 1; at this time I
obtained approval from the post office director for my transfer to Z.;
it became effective on May 1, under Jupiter trine Venus.”

   “Jupiter square Neptune: Just as I received your letter and was
reading about this constellation, a pupil and her mother came to pay
a bill, whereby she deducted, without a by-your-leave, 5 RM. It is
peculiar that such people can never stop thinking of their own profit
and gain. I was so very indignant at his impertinence that I felt like
throwing her out. I can become very much angered when an honest
person cannot assert his rights and the swindler is triumphant.”

   “Jupiter conjunct Sun: optimism, improvement in living
conditions, periodic good and unusually luxurious living.” “Jupiter
conjunct Ascendant: receipt of a valuable gift from a lady, gain from
acquaintanceship with a woman. Visit with mother with ensuing
advantages, receipt of many groceries.” “Jupiter opposite Ascendant
trine Venus: the principal month of the whole year, success in legal
disputes, making peace with the neighbors, marriage, fulfillment of
hopes and dreams, move to home of own. Receipt of large
remittance and a parcel of valuable books.”
         Chapter 20: Basic Interpreta on, Saturn

S                                          ,                 onward
through his various experiences, but which also can inhibit him and
render him incapable.

Psychological Correspondence

   + Powers of concentration, steadiness, constancy, earnestness,
profundity, thriftiness.

    - Inhibition, melancholy, taciturnity, loneliness, isolation,
separation, fear, mistrust, envy, stinginess, avarice, lack of adaptive
ability.

Biological Correspondence

   Frame, skin, spleen. Mental disorders, paralyses, lingering and
slow-healing illness, leprosy, blood impurities, colds.

Sociological Correspondence

   Hardworking, inhibited and melancholy persons, elderly persons,
father, farmers, miners, property owners.

Duration of Transit influence

    Eight to fourteen days; up to eight weeks in stationary position.

Transits of Saturn

79. Saturn to Sun
   + Perseverance, powers of concentration, indefatigability, self-
assertion, improvement of health, recognition for diligence, support
through older persons, simple life.

   - (C) Reduced mental faculties and physical development,
pessimistic attitude, mental suffering, illness, estrangement,
separation, grief, family, troubles, professional difficulties.

80. Saturn to Moon

  + Inner calm, content, self-control, circumspection, sense of duty,
success through diligence and activity, good relations with older
women, sincere relationships, desire to travel.

   - (C) Inhibitions, fluctuating moods, inferiority complex,
melancholy, obstinacy, unstableness of character, illness (due to
mental suffering), lack of self-confidence, fear of exposure,
difficulties ensuing from change or travel, estrangement, separation
(possibly through death).

81. Saturn to Mercury

   + Powers of concentration, careful thinking, diligence, logical
thinking, objectivity, love of order and thoroughness, patience,
success in scientific work, long trips, business enterprises.

   - (C) Mental and spiritual backwardness, occupational
difficulties, tedious     work,     estrangement,       separation,
disadvantageous news, tendency to illness (especially in respect to
head and nerves, and according to disposition, also inclination to
speech defects and hearing disorders).

82. Saturn to Venus
  + Sense of reality, soberness, sense of duty, faithfulness, self-
control, earnestness and sincerity, relationships with mature
women, genuine artistic activity.

   - (C) Discontent, hard-heartedness, disillusionment, isolation,
estrangement, conflicts arising from jealousy, separation, having to
make sacrifices, financial difficulties, immoral acts, inclination to
illness, disappointment in matters of love.

83. Saturn to Mars

  +   Perseverance,     power   of   resistance,   indefatigability   in
overcoming difficulties.

   - (C) Dissatisfaction or displeasure stemming from great
difficulties and antagonisms, severity, harshness, insubmissiveness,
weakness, inclination to illness, danger of injuries or mishaps,
mental and emotional pain, sorrow, harm from others.

84. Saturn to Jupiter

   + Achievement of goals through perseverance, earnest endeavors,
tendency to changes in residence, persistent pursuance of aims,
success in negotiations with superiors or authorities, favorable
settlement of legal disputes, self-confidence, philosophic thinking,
desire for possessions, separations seen in a favorable light, feeling
of well-being when alone.

   - (C) Dissatisfaction with one’s self and others, quick irritability,
indecisiveness, opposition and protest, conflicts, lack of self-
confidence, pessimism, inclination to illness, occupational
difficulties owing to financial worries.
85. Saturn to Saturn

   + Patience, perseverance, powers of concentration, success
through effort and industry, earnest endeavors.

   - (C) Developmental crisis mentally or in terms of health,
beginning of new phase of life, illness, depression, displeasure,
inefficiency, sorrow.

86. Saturn to Uranus

   + Calm and collected thinking, methodical carrying out of new
undertakings or changes, powers of perseverance, mastering of
every situation, success in technical affairs or with inventions,
extensive travel.

   - (C) Use of force or suffering of violence, nonsubmission,
struggle for existence, backlash from past mistakes, disputes,
resistance, losses, mental and emotional pain, sudden estrangement
or separation, sorrow, danger of accidents, mishaps, or machine
damage.

87. Saturn to Neptune

   + Engrossment in difficult problems, unusual             spiritual
experiences, interest in the occult, out of the             ordinary
acquaintanceships, longing for faraway places, travel.

   - (C) Agonizing mental and emotional inhibitions, enervating
circumstances, illness (neuroses) whose causes are difficult to find,
troubles in public, in occupation or the family, secret enmities,
deception, danger or infection (poisoning), sorrow, loss, making
sacrifices.
88. Saturn to Pluto

   + Working hard to achieve success, participation in mass efforts,
inclination more towards action than to words, fanatic and toiling
endeavor,

  - (C) Being cheated of success from work done, loss through force
majeure, suffering from violence or committing violent acts
(murder).

89. Saturn to Moon’s Node

  + Connection or cooperation with older or experienced persons,

   - (C) Feeling of being repressed by others, estrangement,
inhibitions, separation (bereavement), disadvantage or loss due to
others, mutual sorrow.

90. Saturn to Ascendant

  + Perseverance, ability to overcome many difficulties, gaining of
experience, being together with older persons.

   - (C) Depressed surroundings, sharing sorrow with others,
bereavement, estrangement, separation, living in straightened or
impoverished circumstances, illness, hospital stay.

91. Saturn to Midheaven

  + Clinging to hopes, gaining of experience, change of aim and its
untiring pursuance, ability to persevere.

   - (C) Checks in development, necessity to fight against
difficulties, estrangement, separation, sorrow, mental suffering
through mother or wife, mourning of these persons.

Practical Examples

  The transits of Saturn over its own radical position, or in
opposition or square to this position, usually correspond to
developmental crises signifying the end of one phase and the
beginning of a new one, which in the main has a duration of roughly
seven years. Those who look back upon their lives will usually be
able to ascertain several such seven year periods, which, however,
do not necessarily have to be connected with Saturn transits over
the radical position, but rather can be connected with Saturn
transits over the solar position or over planet clusters in one sign as
well. Saturn transits can only then be termed critical when Saturn is
moving very slowly or is stationary and makes a mutual appearance
with other critical constellations. Therefore, the tendency to give
every Saturn transit a fateful interpretation is completely
unfounded; many Saturn transits are harmless.

  Below are some examples from reports sent to us:

   “I have had various experiences with Saturn transits, Saturn
conjunct Sun, Mercury square Moon: my last and not very happy
year of childhood filled with trouble and worries about vocation, my
childish joy destroyed. Saturn conjunct Venus: separation from
loved ones. Saturn conjunct Moon square Sun, Mercury: death of
both grandparents, much sadness, unpleasant and bleak home with
mother, difficulties, dependency, poverty, depression. Saturn square
Moon, Moon’s Node opposite Sun, Mercury: unsuccessful attempts
at getting ahead, uncertain circumstances, deceit and loss of money
through partners in business, difficulties away from home. Saturn
square Saturn: futile efforts, many obstacles, useless work, lack of
income. Saturn conjunct Mars and Midheaven opposite Jupiter:
deterioration and subsequent destruction of my own home life,
despondent and lonely member of household, taking over of great
obligations. After surviving the hard times, creation of my own
respectable home.”

   “Due on the day of dear mother’s death were: Saturn conjunct
Moon and Sun opposite Sun.” “Saturn square Sun (in tenth)
brought unemployment of husband, family worries and illness.”

   “During the day I was very upset and nervous under Saturn
conjunct Jupiter, and in the evening I got into an argument with my
boss where I gave notice. Through mediation, my giving notice
could be revoked. However, the repetition of this constellation had
again as a consequence giving of notice and serious conflicts.”
        Chapter 21: Basic Interpreta on, Uranus

U                                                           can make
its appearance suddenly and intensely.

Psychological Correspondence

   + Originality, love of freedom, self-will, sense of rhythm,
intuition.

  - Extravagant behavior, inconsistency, revolutionary character,
contrariness, erratic character.

Biological Correspondence

  Nervous system, the meninges, pituitary gland, spinal marrow,
nerve and cerebral disorders, injuries, operations, accidents.

Sociological Correspondence

    Reformers, inventors, technicians, anarchists, revolutionaries.

Duration of Transit Influence

    Two to ten weeks depending on orbiting or stationary condition.

Transits of Uranus

92. Uranus to Sun

   + Originality, foresight, organizational flair, tendency to sudden
changes, alteration and travel, improvement of life position,
betterment of health through new methods of treatment, sudden
recognition, professional advancement, in the case of women, often
a sudden involvement with a man.

   - (C) Sudden urge or compulsion to change, critical effects,
sudden disposition to illness, in the case of illness possibility of
surgery, times of upset or crisis in partnership or marriage, upset
through influence of male persons.

93. Uranus to Moon

   + Intensified intellectual stimulation, wealth of plans, urge to
change, alteration, travel, sudden acquaintanceship with female
persons, sudden love-links, but which are seldom of long duration,
special scientific knowledge, inventions.

   - (C) Sudden mental and emotional upsets, lack of inner calm,
nervousness, tendency towards extravagance, confusion of feelings
and thoughts, impractical ideas, sudden failures, upsets in matters
of love or marriage, births, danger in surgical operations.

94. Uranus to Mercury

   + Inventive spirit, desire for change of pace or alteration,
organizational talent, good intuition, good critical faculty, invention,
new plans and stimuli, intellectual flexibility, new connections,
sudden journeys. Interest in cosmobiology.

   - (C) Wasting one’s energy, nervous haste, errors, mistakes,
moodiness, obstinacy failures, upsetting of plans, upsets through
letters or gossip, nervous disorder (in rare cases, thoughts of
suicide).

95. Uranus to Venus
   + Great excitability in love-life, sudden intensification of
emotional feelings, sudden and strong attraction (but rarely of any
duration), new acquaintanceships, new stimuli for artistic work,
sense of form and rhythm, creativity, (with impulsive persons)
tendency to amorous adventures and infidelity.

   - (C) Egotistical attitude to love, inclination to perversity,
tendency to be guided by emotion, hypersensitivity, moodiness,
nervousness owing to suppressed desires, pronounced sexual
motivation, aberration, discontent because of excess, danger of
sexual assault.

96. Uranus to Mars

  + Extraordinary energy, desire for freedom and independence,
non-submissiveness, technical skill, tendency to hastiness.

   - (C) Restlessness, nervousness, obstinacy, stubbornness,
brutality, intolerance, danger of accident, injury, or separation,
harm through machines, fire, explosion, turbulent change in life,
placed under compulsion, mistakes due to haste. If possible, avoid
travel!

97. Uranus to Jupiter

  + Ideas, inventions, striving for knowledge, good at negotiating,
changes, organizational matters, sudden and advantageous
connections with prominent persons, sudden recognition or
success.

  - (C) Love of freedom, desire for independence, opposition, non-
submission, insistence on one’s own principles purely for the sake
of opposition, tactlessness, lack of adaptability, conflicts, in
marriage as well, legal disputes, great psychological tensions and
upsets leading to sudden changes.

98. Uranus to Saturn

   + Being in control of every situation, strong resistance,
perseverance, indefatigability, success in coping with demands of
life, occupational changes, change of residence.

   - (C) Great psychological tension, inflexibility, provoking
behavior, contradiction, dispute, animosity, estrangement,
separation, bereavement, illness, hardships, formative interference
in destiny (prison).

99. Uranus to Uranus

   + Spirit of enterprise, creativity, change in life after period of
crisis, multitude of plans, tendency to reform and change, end of
one and beginning of another phase of life.

  - (C) Hard conditions of life which are usually followed by
change, danger of catastrophes, nervous crisis (thoughts of suicide).

100. Uranus to Neptune

  + Peculiar emotional states, impressionable and receptive,
inspiration, spiritual perception, interest in religious and spiritual,
and mystical problems, longing for faraway places, travel,
inclination to delve into the occult.

  - (C) Inner tension and obscurity lead to the forming of extreme
goals, instability, mental and emotional conflict, deplorable
conditions, harm from others due to lack of resistance, undermining
of reputation, losses, illness (including danger of poisoning).

101. Uranus to Pluto

   + Indefatigability, untiring resolve, struggle for reform and
innovation, fanatic striving for transformation, strong sense of
goals, creation of new conditions of life.

   - (C) Life crisis, suffering under acts of violence or force majeure,
heavy losses, being placed in a serious dilemma, great agitation,
involvement in mass catastrophes.

102. Uranus to Moon’s Node

  + Joint experiences with others, sudden acquaintanceships and
connections possibly resulting in a change of situation.

  - (C) Unexpected incidents in community or family life,
unsettling experiences with others, mourning with others.

103. Uranus to Ascendant

   + Quick reaction to environmental influences, sudden
acquaintanceships, transformation of environment, moving to
another place.

   - (C) Unsettling experiences with others, danger of accident or
injury, unexpected incidents, sudden threat, bereavement.

104. Uranus to MC

   + Determination, bringing about changes, change of profession,
rapid progress, change of residence,
   - (C) Hastiness, incidents, turning points of destiny, isolation
from others, vacillation in aims of life, decisive events.

Practical Examples

   Uranus is the great instigator of change, and whose course
through the zodiac corresponds to certain periods of life. Every
seven years or so, Uranus changes signs; at twenty-two years, it
enters square and at twenty-eight years trine to its radical position,
and thus corresponds in the main to the decisive events in life. At
forty-two to forty-five years, Uranus in opposition to the radical
position represents the high point of life with its various crises and
the beginning of the decline. Therefore, the Uranus constellation
need not always evoke extraordinary events, but rather can reflect
the inner development manifested in a lifetime.

   A few reports: “One lady acquaintance tells of a sexual assault
under Uranus square Moon, also due were: Moon opposite Mars
sextile Jupiter, Neptune square Ascendant, Mars square Moon,
Venus sextile Mercury.” “As you very correctly mentioned, the
square of Uranus to Neptune brought me into difficulties with the
management of where I work, which, in order to humiliate me, I
suppose, approached me in a very ill-bred manner.”

   “On Saturday an acquaintance of mine, a very kindhearted man,
suddenly shot himself in the train. On the previous evening, I had
gone for a walk with him until 11:00 p.m. He gave no sign of
anything wrong or of what he intended to do. The reason for his
suicide was a court decision lost in a matter of alimony and poor
earnings. The suicide had in his radical chart Neptune in the eighth
house in opposition to Uranus, which does indicate this kind of
death (but not always, only in special cases! R.E.). In addition,
Uranus square Uranus were due on the day of his death: Sun
conjunct Ascendant, Moon square Sun, Mars, Neptune opposite
Sun, Mars conjunct Venus, Jupiter square Mercury.”

   “Uranus (Pisces) opposite Venus (Virgo) gave me a bad
reputation; I had an accident, inflammation of the ankle joint, and
pain in the intestines.” “Uranus opposite Mars leads to animosity,
conflict and upset.” “Uranus square Saturn was manifest on the due
date through fever, shivering and weakness, and also through
fainting. The examination on the following day showed irritation of
the appendix, gall bladder, liver and kidneys, nervous strain,
stomach and intestinal disorder.”
       Chapter 22: Basic Interpreta on, Neptune

N                                ,                                . It
greatly influences our spiritual life, in the positive and in the
negative sense.

Psychological Correspondence

  + Receptivity, sensibility, inspiration contemplativeness,
empathy, tendency to mysticism, all-encompassing love.

  - Impressionability, hypersensitivity,      obscurity,   confusion,
deception, aimlessness, lies, deceit.

Biological Correspondence

   Pineal glad, solar plexus, aura. Illnesses difficult in their
diagnosis and often psychosomatic, mental disease, poisoning,
infections, paralyses.

Sociological Correspondence

    Those with negative attitude, impressionable persons, mediums,
dubious persons, tricksters, practitioners of slight-of-hand, but also
prominent, spiritually oriented personalities.

Duration of Transits Influence

   Four to eight weeks; in stationary positions up to three months;
frequent repetition of the same aspects within two years’ time.

Transits of Neptune
105. Neptune to Sun

   + Receptivity for all impressions, inspiration, enthusiasm,
inclination to mysticism and profundity, stimulation of intellectual
work, intellectual and spiritual experience, peace of mind,
companionship of souls.

   - (C) Impressionability, negative character, tendency to alcohol
and nicotine, etc., physical weakness and susceptibility for illnesses,
lack of determination, confusion in mental processes, unpleasant
dreams, self-delusion, damage to reputation, disappointment
through others, undermining of relationships, caution when taking
toxic medications which may only be administered in small doses.

106. Neptune to Moon

   + Sensitivity, empathy, introspection, far-ranging wishes, active
dream life, longing for faraway places, extensive travel, plans for
change, spiritual relationships with women.

   -    (C)    Illusions,    disappointments,       instability,  being
misunderstood, danger from occult experiences, disappointment in
friendship or marriage, extravagances, dissipation, danger of
infection, trouble in public life or in profession, mental suffering.

107. Neptune to Mercury

   + Imagination, rich fantasy, intuitive thinking, perception of the
most intricate and profound interrelations, creativity, stimulating
exchange of ideas, acquaintanceship with those of the same way of
thinking, extensive travel.
   - (C) False thinking, poor judgment, confused ideas,
hypersensitivity, overactive fantasy, insincerity, inclination to lies
and pretense, uncontrolled emotional life, nervous disorders,
undermining of reputation, defamation, danger of swindle. Caution
with contracts and documents!

108. Neptune to Venus

  + Sensitivity in love life, devotion, impressionability. Sense of
beauty and art, good taste, profound relationship to loved ones,
stimulation of artistic activity, pleasurable travels, interest in poetry
and the romantic.

  - (C) False feelings of love, bad taste, susceptibility, erotic
aberration, eccentric habits, danger of infection, illness due to
excess, disappointment in love, renunciation, jealousy.

109. Neptune to Mars

  + Desire to fulfill wishes and realize plans, urge to travel far,
intellectual perception, receiving and giving stimulation, receiving
good advice. Disappointment will often be experienced because of
ventures into fields removed from reality, leaving the practicalities
of life aside.

  - (C) Wishes not followed up by action, inability to develop
energy, misuse of energy, inclination to take sedatives, or alcohol,
nicotine, etc., moodiness, physical weakness and susceptibility for
illness, disappointments, deceit, disagreeable matters, criminal
occurrences. Initiative and working energy are paralyzed.

110. Neptune to Jupiter
  + Hopefulness, trust in the future, high ideals, spiritual and
intellectual relations, social understanding, generosity, favorable
disposition, extensive and pleasurable travel, recognition and
success, acquaintanceship with prominent personalities, at times
profits or advantages without any effort on one’s own part.

   - (C) False hopes, disposition toward illegal acts, injudicious
speculation, susceptibility, losses, disadvantages from political
affairs, damage to reputation, undermining of relationships through
deceit, defamation, harassed legal situation. Pecuniary loss through
extortioners, swindlers, and confidence men.

111. Neptune to Saturn

  + Gaining of experience, engrossment, getting ahead gradually by
effort and perseverance, working methodically.

   - (C) Suffering, sacrifice, being in conflict with one’s own self,
feeling of insecurity, going through enervating circumstances,
tendency to illness especially nervous disorders with psychosomatic
causes, difficulties, inhibitions, separation, sorrow.

112. Neptune to Uranus

  + Interest in intellectual problems, new problems, new ideas and
views, peculiar mental states, inspiration, broadening of points of
view, travel. Foreign relations, turning points of life, relationship to
the occult.

  - (C) Impressionability, lack of resistance and energy, confused
mental and emotional state, eccentric inclinations, unconscious
actions,   difficult   circumstances,    professional    disadvantages,
concealed attacks, undermining of good reputation, chaotic
relations, illness due to infection or poisoning, heavy losses,
catastrophe. (These latter effects only come about when they are
indicated by other constellations.)

113. Neptune to Neptune

   + Period of spiritual development, intellectual perception, travel.

  - (Conjunction not possible!) Change in life, life crisis in
consequence of disappointment or illness.

114. Neptune to Pluto

  + Coping with unusual problems, unusual interests and
endeavors, spiritual orientation, far-ranging connections, extensive
travel.

   - (C) Peculiar mental states, possessed by fantastic ideas, collapse
of an idea, self-torture, heavy losses, strange illness.

115. Neptune to Moon’s Node

  + Expecting much of a relationship, joining a peculiar or mystical
community.

  - (C) Expecting too much or the wrong thing of an association or
community leading to mutual disappointment, experiencing joint
disappointments, lack of fellowship, damage suffered because of
being member of a community.

116. Neptune to Ascendant
  + Susceptibility to environmental influence, entering into
peculiar associations, intellectual affinity with others, indulgence of
certain illusions.

   - (C) Depression due to others, disappointment through others,
breach of trust, falseness, deceit, dealings with swindlers or
calumniators, illness stemming from mental suffering.

117. Neptune to Midheaven

   + Devotion to peculiar aims, resorting to pretence or having to
play a role, many ideas or plans without realization.

   - (C) Pursuance of false ideas, self-delusion, failures, losses,
professional disadvantages, losses due to deceit or false friends.

Practical Examples

   Neptune    transits   are   most   usually   connected with       the
intensification of imagination and the formation of ideas and plans
and also lead to daydreaming, and hence to loss of sense of reality.
Therefore, in its negative effects, Neptune can bring about false
ideas, confusion and illusions which are particularly detrimental to
mental and emotional stability, and indeed, can possibly lead to
psychoses. Extraordinary events are not always the result of
Neptune transits, but rather these constellations reflect exalted or
depressed emotional states. The following were featured in a female
horoscope:

   Neptune conjunct Moon square Sun, Mercury: Time of
confusion, misunderstandings, errors, failure in all endeavors, self-
delusion, self-torture, poor social conditions, in the company of
unstable or rootless persons, insecure financial circumstances, loss
of reputation, loss through theft, estrangement from parents, stay in
hospital.

  Neptune conjunct Moon, trine Saturn: help through older
persons, engrossment in mystical or religious problems, extensive
spiritual development, travel books based on own experiences.
Neptune trine Sun and Mercury: serene or stable conditions, activity
in seclusion, reading and study. Neptune square Saturn: loss of
income, straightened circumstances, difficulties, failure, time of
desolation due to rival in love and the dissolution of a love
relationship, secret rival, slander, mental suffering, illness due to
nutritional poisoning and overenjoyment. “For weeks, I felt the
trine of Neptune to Venus to be very beneficial, just as if a warm
and friendly light had spread itself over everything and had bound
me with everything under the Sun. As the transit became exact, I
met many people connected with the anthroposiphical movement; it
was a very strange and peculiar meeting.”

  “I feel the effect of Neptune especially strong since it brings to
mind very unpleasant things, things that one has done without
thinking and which cannot be undone. This is when Neptune tries
to tempt me into making backhanded attacks, e.g. to denounce
someone, to write anonymous letters or make anonymous reports
on someone. Through willpower, I have always been able to
suppress such disgusting and mean urges, and on the other hand I
receive the good emanations all the more strongly.”

  The following report was made about Neptune square Mars and
Uranus conjunct Neptune: “I had told my sister and nurses of your
letter and asked them by no means to give an injection during the
critical weeks. I myself only found this out three days later.
However, my sister wrote these lines at the conclusion of her report:
‘After Mother had told me of the change in blood it occurred to me
that we shouldn’t give any injection because of possible blood
poisoning. Now it has all come about, just as you were told by Mr.
E.; since her injection, Mother has been feeling worse from day to
day.’” Of significance in this case is that there was a New Moon on
the day of the injection. “As Uranus conjunct Neptune became exact,
death came after another morphine injection had been given.”
         Chapter 23: Basic Interpreta on, Pluto

P                                                      . Even though
there have been many examples of Plutonian influence during the
past years, general experience is still relatively small. The
catchwords for Pluto, power and mass, have proven on the whole to
be applicable, as the practical examples will show.

Psychological Correspondence

   + Desire for power, ruthless frankness, striving for influence over
the masses, propagandistic efforts, sympathy with the masses.

    - Ruthless use of force, fanatic proselytism, agitating efforts,
narrow-mindedness.

Biological Correspondence

    The subconscious.

Sociological Correspondence

    Persons who have hypnotic influence over the masses, such as
propagandists, orators, actors, and politicians of definite and one-
sided opinion.

Duration of Transit Influence

    Several months. Influence usually shows up suddenly and with a
very lasting effect.

Transits of Pluto
118. Pluto to Sun

   + Striving for power through physical strength or mental effort,
unusual creative energy, concentration on goals, self-assertion,
taking command, realization of new ideas.

   - (C) Disadvantages due to overambition or arrogance, exposure
to great danger, physical suffering, martyrdom, lingering illness
(heart trouble), separation from a man, marriage dissolved through
superior force.

119. Pluto to Moon

   + Rich but one-sided emotional life, great emotional excitability,
ruthless pursuit of goals.

   - (C) Strong outbursts of feeling, e.g. jealousy, wounded vanity,
insult to honor, etc., emotional shock, unusual disease, separation,
grief.

120. Pluto to Mercury

   + Desire for public acclamation, professional ambition, success as
orator, writer, advertising executive, unceasing pursuit or aim.

  - (C) Overestimation of capabilities and overeagerness leading to
nervous disorders, propensity for swindle, professional crisis.

121. Pluto to Venus

   + Exceptional power of attraction, intense need for love, active
sexual life, ``madly in love’’ with partner, strong feeling of attraction
to a person as if under inner compulsion, artistic creativity.
  - (C) Overaccentuated sex life, sensual desires, tensions in love
life, immorality, adultery.

122. Pluto to Mars

  + Show of unusual energy, great self-confidence, working fever,
ambition, achievement of great success.

  - (C) Use of brutal means, disregard of others, to have to suffer
violence, accidents with long lasting consequences.

123. Pluto to Jupiter

  + Desire for great influence in spiritual or material fields, desire
to lead the masses, to bring about social or religious reform,
brilliant organizational talent, achievement of great success,
attainment of wealth.

   - (C) Pursuit of fanatic goals, desire to exploit others,
extravagance, loss of everything, conflict with authorities, arrest.

124. Pluto to Saturn

   + Advance through tenacity, perseverance and untiring effort,
self-discipline, sacrifice, participation in public efforts, to be silent
and act.

  - (C) Severity, violent acts, fanatic vandalism, suffering under
hard-heartedness or brutality, to be cheated of hard work’s success.
(In rare cases, death, murder.)

125. Pluto to Uranus
   + Indefatigable work, achievement through immense effort,
carrying out of innovations or changes, building anew, setting up of
a new life.

  - Violence, excitement, subversive plans, confrontation with the
question of “either-or,” difficult decisions, unforeseen and vitally
important crisis, sudden separation, death.

126. Pluto to Neptune

   + Refined spiritual life, great sensitivity, active imagination,
subject to illusion, unusual          experiences,    transcendental
inclinations, spirituality.

   - (C) Obscurity in inner life, peculiar circumstances, pursuit of
fantastic ideas with subsequent disappointment, self-torture,
craving for alcohol, nicotine, caffeine, etc., possessed with an idea,
severe loss, danger through forces of nature.

127. Pluto to Pluto

  + and - Hardly ever occurs due to Pluto’s slowness; no experience
has been gathered as yet.

128. Pluto to Moon’s Node

  + Personal connections have decisive influence on fate, contact
and common experience with many persons, mass gatherings.

   - (C) Sharing of tragic fate in common with others, separation
through superior force, grief.

129. Pluto to Ascendant
  + Desire to rule over those in environment, getting one’s own
way, coming into an unaccustomed situation, including new
acquaintances and associations.

  - (C) Fateful disputes, mishap, injury, separation, forceful change
of residence, arrest.

130. Pluto to Midheaven

   + Urge for recognition, power of self-assertion, to feel called upon
to function as organizer or leader, to obtain recognition, desire to
plan one’s own future life, to seek professional acknowledgement,
attainment of a position of power.

  - (C) Foolhardiness, licentiousness, abuse of power, triggering or
experiencing resistance and revenge, professional crisis, fall from
the top.

Practical Examples

   Experience has shown that the transits of Pluto do not need
always exercise an influence; they often pass over without a trace.
They do play an important role, however, when an individual is
involved in some mass fate, for example, war, air raids,
concentration camps, or mass escapes.

  Under Sun square Pluto separation from spouse through superior
force has often been noted, for example, through imprisonment or
consequences of war. Pluto over Neptune in Leo brought about a
heart ailment lasting many years, as long as Pluto remained in this
position. Under Pluto conjunct Mars a man was buried alive and as a
consequence lost his memory to the extent that he could not even
remember his own name over a long period of time. Under Pluto
square or opposite Jupiter, several persons were arrested, came into
conflict with the authorities, or lost job and fortune.

  In one case, Pluto over Saturn brought about violent death; in
another case, total loss of fortune. Pluto conjunct Neptune in one
case gave cause to forebodings, and in another, to emotional
confusion. Pluto over the Ascendant had as a consequence loss of
job and change of life. Pluto over the Midheaven led to great losses.
Pluto opposite the Ascendant caused complete change of life
including suffering due to stepmother and leaving home.

  Pluto opposite Jupiter led to serious disputes within the family.
Under Pluto trine the Midheaven, one young man took his fate into
his own hands and went his way to build up a new existence under
his own power. Pluto opposite Moon resulted in separation and
breaking up of a relationship, and as this position was due again,
another relationship failed. Pluto square the Midheaven brought
about a complete change of vocation after a period of uncertainty
and insecurity.
     Chapter 24: Basic Interpreta on, Moon’s Node

T      M      ’ N                                             celestial
body, but rather, it is the intersecting point of the lunar orbit with
the ecliptic. A differentiation is made between an ascending
(Dragon’s Head) and a descending (Dragon’s Tail) lunar Node.

    For the purposes of simplification, the ascending Moon’s Node
will be under discussion here, the descending Node always being
directly opposite in the zodiac. Only the ascending Node is given in
the ephemerides. The Moon’s Node is indicative of “knots and ties,”
meetings. Up to now, these transits had hardly been given notice in
textbooks. The following compilation, therefore, represents an
entirely new study.

Psychological Correspondence

    + Ability to adapt, seeking of relationships, sociability, fellowship,
friendly personality.

    - Lack of adaptive ability, unsociability, unsocial behavior,
incompatibility.

Sociological Correspondence

    Gatherings,     associations,     contacts,     mediators,     blood
relationships, relatives.

Durations of Transit Influence

    Two to three weeks.
Transits of the Ascending Moon’s Node

131. Moon’s Node to Sun

  + (C) Spiritual or physical relationships, relationship with spouse,
public affairs.

  - Breaking off of relationships, estrangement from male persons,
separation.

132. Moon’s Node to Moon

  (C) Spiritual attitude in relationships with others, relationship
with women or migratory folk.

  - Lack of adaptive ability, breaking off relations with women.

133. Moon’s Node to Mercury

   + (C) Liking for exchange of ideas with others, social or business
ties.

  - Unpopularity, breaking off of relations, retirement of partner or
fellow worker.

134. Moon’s Node to Venus

  + (C) Adaptable, obliging, attractive personality, object of
affection, love link, engagement, spiritual relationship, artistic
connections.

  - Disharmonious love relationship, estrangement, separation,
unpleasant personality.

135. Moon’s Node to Mars
  + Cooperation, sexual relationship, fellowship, desire of children,
joint successes.

  -   (C)   Destruction   of   collaboration, upset in      household,
estrangement through dispute.

136. Moon’s Node to Jupiter

  + (C) Harmonious relationship to others, joyful experience shared
with others, happiness as couple, gaining of a good partner,
engagement or marriage.

  - Disharmonious or unsocial behavior, conflicts.

137. Moon’s Node to Saturn

   + Relationships with older persons or protection through them,
earnest cooperation.

  - (C) Obstacles and difficulties in relationships, isolation of self or
separation, disadvantages or loss through others, dissolution of
blood relations, bereavement.

138. Moon’s Node to Uranus

  + Sudden relations and acquaintanceships, common experience
with others, temporary acquaintanceships.

  - (C) Sudden incidents in communal life, upsets with others,
conflicts.

139. Moon’s Node to Neptune

   + Great expectations from a cooperative effort, placing of hopes
in others, spiritual contact, secret relationships.
   - (C) Lack of community sense, delusions about relations with
others, self-disappointment, separation due to intrigues.

140. Moon’s Node to Pluto

  + Relationships, possibility with fateful turn.

  - (C) Common and severe fate, estrangement, separation.

141. Moon’s Node to Moon’s Node

  + (C) Possibilities for connections or approach.

  - Estrangement, also bereavement.

142. Moon’s Node to Ascendant

   + (C) Good relation to environment, pleasant collaboration,
acquaintanceships, relationships.

  - A life together made difficult, estrangement, separation, grief.

143. Moon’s Node to Midheaven

  + (C) Personal ties, coming together with those of the same mind
and common endeavors, forming an association to pursue common
aims, spiritual relationships, friendship, engagement, marriage.

  - Difficulties in joint endeavors, professional difficulties,
withdrawal from an association.

Practical Examples

   “Moon’s Node trine Saturn brought me protection through an
elderly gentleman.” “Moon’s Node trine Jupiter made possible for
me a particularly joyful Christmas in the company of others.”
“Under Moon’s Node trine Moon I met my future wife at a
convention.” “It was possible under Moon’s Node conjunct Sun
again to start publishing a newspaper after a half-year’s injunction,
and thereby again be active in the public light.”

  “Moon’s Node square Saturn corresponded to my separation
from the family when inducted.” “Moon’s Node square Neptune
brought me in the company of criminals during protective custody.”
“Moon’s Node opposite Mercury corresponded to difficulties in
working with others in my profession as well as in the household.”
“Under Moon’s Node conjunct Mars trine Jupiter I finally
succeeded in getting a decision on my attaining a very lovely
apartment. At the same time I could let my family know they could
immediately set off for the new city of residence.”

  “Under Moon’s Node opposite Saturn I was temporarily
separated from my family due to circumstances beyond my control.”
“You wrote me that Saturn in conjunction with the ascending Lunar
Node could bring about a death. This has now come to pass. My dear
mother has just passed away.” “Moon’s Node trine Venus brought
me a new and advantageous acquaintanceship and enlivened
business activity for me.”

  “A few days after receiving the chart from you would be the time
when he should experience his fatal car accident. This upset me
greatly, since I was unable to warn him. At the hour of the mishap,
Moon transited the point for illness and death on the cusp of the
eighth house. Simultaneously, Uranus reached the Moon’s Node.
This is most probably the position which brought him death.”
                             Appendix

T                                                                   as
the edition of 1952. This fulfills the wish of the many readers of this
popular book. It is necessary, however, to discuss certain problems
in detail and to supplement the work done in the past in order to
come up to the present standard of cosmobiological research.

  As already stated in Chapter 2, Aspects in the Cosmogram, the
angles (aspects) of the stellar bodies are of greater importance than
the signs and houses. The author has in the meanwhile completely
discarded any interpretation based on the houses, or better yet,
fields, and now only applies those points consistent in every system
of houses, namely the medium coeli (Midheaven) and the
Ascendant. Other authors on the subject now have also rejected the
traditional interpretations according to houses. The various systems
of houses have among themselves deviations so great that in one
case a planet will be a particular house according to the one system,
but in an entirely different house according to the other system.
This results in uncertainty which can only lead to error in
interpretation.

    The orbs of the aspects have today been much reduced. The
following rule has been set up:

    The orb amounts to a maximum five degrees with the personal
points (Midheaven, Ascendant, Sun, Moon), to a maximum four
degrees with the fast moving planets (Mercury, Venus, Mars), to a
maximum three degrees with the slow moving planets (Jupiter,
Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, Pluto) and the ascending Moon’s Node.

   According to this rule, the individual importance increases with
the rate of speed. Whole generations are encompassed in the
positions of the slow moving planets, whereas the positions of the
fast moving planets relate to the same birth dates within a year, and
the individual points to day, hour, minute.

  An important factor in the interpretation of the transits is that
those aspects are significant which result from the progressive
division of the circle, i.e. conjunction-opposition (bisection), square
and semisquare or sesquiquadrate (division of the circle by eighths).
One can generally assume that when transits form such aspects,
something is “happening,” whereas the sextiles and trines are more
expressive of a state or condition: an individual is healthy, happy, or
discontent and in bad humor. Therefore, especially the hard angles
come into consideration for a prognostication. The semisquares and
the sesquiquadrates should not be neglected since their importance
has been variously proven by statistics.

  According to the international nomenclature, instead of the
abbreviation “p” for progressing, “t” for transiting may also be used.
Accordingly, Sun-90-Jupiter means that transiting Sun is in
conjunction with Jupiter, or Mars-90-Uranus designates a square of
Mars to Uranus. This method of writing is of advantage in that it can
also be written on word processing equipment.

  Nowadays we no longer write the aspect points in the outer
margin of the cosmogram, since it is possible using the forty-five
degree ephemerides to gain within a few minutes’ time a quick
overall view of the year’s most important transits. This method of
work will be explained a bit later on.

  Here, we might add, the effect of a transit is usually already past
by the time it is actually due. The due date, therefore, cannot be
taken to determine the middle, but rather the end point of the
effect. This fact becomes especially apparent in the examination of
the yearly diagrams with the graphic ephemerides. The rule set up
by the author to the effect that a transit is influential only for the
time it takes the progressing star to move one degree of the zodiac,
has time and time again been borne out. The important thing to
remember is that the falling due means practically the end of the
effect.

  In past decades, the parallels have been neglected because the
expected influence could be ascertained.

   For many readers, the evaluation of the transits presents a
particular problem. The table on page twenty-eight provides some
help, but for the correct evaluation, the ``cosmic state’’ of a stellar
body is always conclusive. This state is apparent when the half-
sums are also considered and a structural picture of the cosmogram
is set up. Since this method cannot be explained in a few words,
please refer to the author’s book Mensch im All.

   In the chapter on monthly prognostication, reference is made to
an evaluation according to the position in the house. As has been
stated previously, an interpretation based on houses can be easily
misleading.
  The sensitive points are dubious in their value. In most cases
they will not work out because they are calculated according to the
Ascendant, and this is usually not precise, since the Ascendant and
Midheaven move at an average rate of one degree in four minutes of
time, and two degrees in eight minutes. These points, therefore, are
only reliable if the chart has been rectified according to life events.
But even here, it is evident that the half-sums of the stellar bodies
are more important.

  The bases for interpretation are treated in detail in The
Combination of Stellar Influences.

  Please note that the practical examples come from times in
which things were different from the conditions of the present day.

   Question: What will the coming year bring? Up to now, a
prognostication was attempted by using the solar horoscope and the
transits. More than twenty years ago I introduced the graphic forty-
five degree ephemeris, and in the beginning, with little success.
Today, many thousands in Germany alone are using this method,
which in the meantime has excited interest in England, America,
and Australia as well. This method enables you to obtain, within a
few minutes’ time, a survey on the year to come by writing the
positions from the natal chart in the margin and then drawing
straight lines through the graphic ephemeris form.

  The forty-five degree ephemeris was developed from the ninety
degree system, which was introduced in Germany more than fifty
years ago. The great advantage of the ninety degree circle is that the
aspects derived from the progressive division of the circle coincide
in this diagram, i.e. conjunctions, squares and oppositions can be
seen on the same spot, and it is not necessary first to check whether
two stellar bodies form an angle of ninety degrees or 180 degrees.
The semisquares and sesquiquadrates, angles of forty-five degrees
and 135 degrees, are always opposite one another.

  If you want to observe several diagrams, for example of the
members of your family, you need only line them up one after
another, enabling you to spot the transits very quickly. If you know,
for instance, that Pluto is at twenty-nine degrees Virgo, you only
need to look up the eighty-ninth degree in each of the charts to
know immediately that, in this case, Pluto is conjunct Mars and in
other cases perhaps is conjunct other planets.

   The forty-five degree ephemeris is more or less the same as the
ninety degree circle, but in linear form, which only goes to forty-five
degrees, since the semisquares and sesquiquadrates also have to be
encompassed.

Richard Nixon

  We will take the annual diagram for Nixon for the year 1968. As
you know, the race for the presidency was run between Nixon and
Humphrey in that year. Throughout the year, Nixon had less
favorable   and    Humphrey     considerably  more   favorable
configurations. This led to the assumption of many that Nixon
would most likely be the loser. However, I had made an exact check
to the effect that at the beginning of November, just when the
polling was due to start, favorable constellations for Nixon and
unfavorable ones for Humphrey resulted. On this ground I could
prognosticate that with all probability Nixon would be the next
president of the United States.




  In this graphic ephemeris, then, we see that throughout the
summer Saturn was square Neptune, so that there was little hope of
any great gain of votes. It was only in October that the situation
changed, where Jupiter and Uranus formed good aspects almost
simultaneously. In succession, Jupiter entered into conjunctions
with Pluto, Mars, Mercury and Jupiter, and then Uranus at first with
Mercury and Jupiter.
   On November 9, as voting took place, Mars, Venus and Sun also
transited Jupiter, so that there could hardly be any doubt of a
victory, especially since the constellations for Humphrey were pretty
negative.




  There are other and numerous confirmations to be found in
Nixon’s annual diagram 1970, factors which the reader may
remember. Around April 15, the astronauts returned from the
Moon, and Nixon flew to welcome them in Hawaii on April 18. As
we know, this flight was considered an event of some significance
which added to Nixon’s prestige as well. We see that in April,
Jupiter first transited Uranus and then the Ascendant and
Midheaven.

  At the beginning of May, Nixon sent troops to Cambodia to
occupy the country. This aroused a wave of criticism against Nixon’s
tactics; the press placed him in a very negative light. Here, Saturn in
progression transits Pluto and Mars; these are semisquares and
sesquiquadrates.
  In addition, Uranus approached a sesquiquadrate to the Moon,
where an influence of long duration was present from May to July,
at which time Nixon experienced great agitation and personal
attacks. These attacks were strongest on May 26, when Saturn
entered sesquiquadrate to Mercury. This should serve as one
example of many of        how    decisive   the   semisquare   and
sesquiquadrate can be.

  On June 4, he experienced a defeat in that his strategy for the
American South had failed, just as Saturn reentered sesquiquadrate
to Jupiter. He underwent a renewed defeat on June 11, when a
deposition of further troops to Cambodia was refused. It was
pointed out in various prognostications that in midsummer greater
tension was to be expected because at this point Saturn and Uranus
were conjunct.

  Here we should take note of the orbits of Uranus and Saturn,
which meet in July and September. The crisis in the Near East also
arose in the period at the end of August to September. During this
time, several airplanes were skyjacked and the passengers retained
as hostages. And subsequently, the civil war in Jordan broke out,
but Nixon was given no freedom of movement since he otherwise
would have become involved in conflicts with Soviet Russia.
