YOUR	MAYAN	DAY	SIGN

Shay	Addams

	
	
	
	
	
Casa	Chaos

Copyright	©	2011-2012	Shay	Addams	All	Rights	Reserved
No	 part	 of	 this	 book	 may	 be	 reproduced	 or	 utilized	 in	 any	 form	 or	 by	 any	 means,
electronic	 or	 mechanical,	 including	 photocopying,	 recording	 or	 by	 any	 information
storage	and	retrieval	system,	without	permission	in	writing	from	the	publisher.
Published	 in	 a	 parallel	 universe	 by	 machine	 elves	 on	 13	 Aq'ab'al/Akabal	 (Night),
March	2012.
This	book	was	typeset	in	Long	Count	Condensed,	Akkadian	Archaic,	and	Alexander
the	Great	Bold,	though	elements	of	Dunwich	Horror	and	Rod	Serling	Medium	served
as	inspiration	and	may	have	unintentionally	been	woven	into	the	overall	design.Cover
photograph	 of	 a	 monument	 at	 the	 Tonina	 Acropolis	 in	 Chiapas,	 Mexico,	 copyright
Shay	Addams	2012.

Dedication
For	Ann	Comtois

	
Acknowledgements
	
	
	
	
	
	
I	 would	 like	 say	 thanks	 to	 Quetzalcoatl,	 also	 known	 as	 Kukulkan,	 for
giving	 us	 the	 basis	 for	 the	 Mayan	 Sacred	 Calendar,	 without	 which	 I	 would
have	had	a	difficult	time	writing	a	book	about	the	Mayan	Sacred	Calendar.
Special	 thanks	 go	 out	 to	 Ann	 Comtois,	 my	 editor;	 to	 Cody	 Stow	 for	 the
drawings	of	the	hieroglyphs;	to	Mark	Elmy	and	Kenneth	Johnson,	for	sharing
their	 insights;	 to	 Richard	 Morgan	 Szybist	 for	 his	 contributions	 about
ceremonies	 and	 medicinal	 plants—and	 especially	 to	 Don	 Rigoberto	 Itzp
Chanchavac	 of	 Momostenango,	 Guatemala,	 for	 his	 years	 of	 dedication	 to
preserving	and	promoting	the	Mayan	Sacred	Calendar	and	Mayan	culture.

Table	of	Contents
	
	
	
	
	
Introduction
How	to	Find	a	Mayan	Day	Sign
The	Nahuales,	or	Lords	of	the	Day
The	Calendar	Board	and	Your	Path	of	Destiny
How	to	Pronounce	Mayan	Day	Signs
Personal	Readings	by	the	Author
Bibliography

Introduction
	
	
	
	
	
I	did	not	set	out	to	write	a	book	about	the	Mayan	Sacred	Calendar,	only	to
learn	about	it.	But	while	crossing	Lake	Atitlán,	the	most	magical	lake	in	the
world,	I	realized	that	others	could	benefit	from	a	book	describing	what	I	had
learned	in	over	two	years	of	research,	study	and	first-hand	experience	in	the
Guatemalan	highlands	while	living	in	an	all-Maya	barrio	where	my	neighbors
chop	 firewood	 and	 cook	 over	 a	 three-stone	 hearth	 as	 their	 ancestors	 did
3,000	years	ago.
The	 secrets	 of	 the	 Sacred	 Calendar	 are	 scattered	 throughout	 dozens	 of
Mayan	communities	and	books	written	by	Mayan	researchers	and	scholars	in
Guatemala.	No	individual	Mayan	shaman,	nor	any	one	book	or	other	source,
holds	all	the	answers	.	Whenever	I	needed	information	on	a	nahual,	I	had	to
talk	with	several	people	and	look	through	a	dozen	or	more	books.	So	I	began
putting	everything	I	learned	into	a	notebook—along	with	my	own	insights—
and	 sorting	 things	 out.	 When	 in	 doubt,	 I	 relied	 on	 the	 core	 sources:	 the
symbolism	 of	 the	 hieroglyphs	 the	 mythology.	 By	 looking	 up	 the	 symbols	 of
the	 glyphs	 in	 the	 Popul	 Vuh,	 I	 was	 able	 to	 uncover	 hidden	 meanings	 and
nuances	for	many	of	the	nahuales.
Along	 the	 way,	 I	 began	 to	 “live	 the	 calendar”	 by	 scheduling	 my	 activities
around	the	appropriate	days	of	the	Sacred	Calendar,	by	observing	important
ceremonies,	and	by	getting	in	touch	with	the	heartbeat	of	Mother	Earth.	This
book	was,	in	fact,	written	in	harmony	with	the	calendar.	Each	section	about
the	 nahuales,	 for	 example,	 was	 written	 on	 the	 corresponding	 day	 of	 the
calendar.	Most	of	the	editing	was	done	on	a	Knife	(Tijax/Etznab)	day,	one	of
whose	meanings	is	“to	cut.”
In	less	than	a	year,	my	life	was	transformed	on	many	levels.	For	one,	my
timing	improved.	“Coincidence”	and	synchronicity	began	to	work	in	my	favor.
After	 years	 of	 research,	 study	 and	 experimentation,	 I	 am	 convinced	 that	 it
will	prove	beneficial	for	anyone	to	apply	Mayan	astrology	to	their	daily	lives
and	“walk	the	path”	of	the	Sacred	Calendar.
After	 a	 year	 in	 print,	 the	 original	 book	 has	 been	 revised	 for	 people	 who
want	 to	 know	 more	 about	 their	 Mayan	 day	 sign	 but	 do	 not	 plan	 to	 become

practicing	 astrologers.	 Information	 and	 insights	 on	 all	 of	 the	 nahuales	 has
been	 updated	 based	 on	 the	 past	 year	 of	 research	 in	 Guatemala	 and	 Mexico.
Rather	than	providing	information	only	from	one	or	two	Mayan	sources,	this
book	synthesizes	a	vast	amount	of	knowledge	from	Mayan	and	other	sources
to	create	an	astrological	system	that	works	on	several	levels.
Shay	Addams
Lake	Atitlán,	Guatemala
10	Sun	(Ajpu/Ahau),	March	2012

How	to	Find	a	Mayan	Day	Sign
	
	
	
	
	
There	are	many	Web	sites	with	day	sign	calculators.	These	are	the	most	accurate
at	the	time	this	book	was	published.
Geoff	Stray's	Dire	Gnosis:	www.diagnosis2012.co.uk/mlink.htm
Like	many	Web	sites	and	books,	this	one	uses	the	Yucatecan	Maya	names.
To	translate	them	into	Ki’che’	Maya	and	English,	use	the	table	in	the	section
The	Twenty	Nahuales,	which	also	provides	the	key	cosmic	meanings	of	each
nahual.	It	also	provides	many	other	tools	for	working	with	the	260-day	calendar	and
other	ancient	calendrical	systems.
Sabiduria	Maya:	www.Sabiduriamaya.com
A	Spanish-language	site,	Sabiduria	Maya	presents	a	wide	variety	of
information	as	well	as	a	method	of	looking	up	Mayan	day	signs.	Sabiduria
means	wisdom.
Mayan	Astrology	I:	www.dearbrutus.com
This	free	software,	developed	in	Guatemala	by	Bob	Makransky,	can	be	downloaded
for	Windows-based	computers.
Keep	 in	 mind	 that	 people	 born	 between	 sunset	 and	 10	 PM	 are	 strongly
influenced	 by	 the	 preceding	 day	 sign,	 which	 can	 be	 found	 on	 the	 calendar
board.
	

Other	Online	Sources
Jaguar	Wisdom:	www.jaguarwisdom.org
This	 is	 the	 site	 of	 Kenneth	 Johnson,	 author	 of	 Jaguar	 Wisdom	 and
Mayan	Calendar	Astrology.	It	presents	a	variety	of	information	based	mainly
on	the	Ki'che'	of	Momostenango,	Guatemala.
Mayan	Calendar	Users	Guide:	www.mayancalendarusersguide.com
The	official	site	for	this	book	and	others	by	Shay	Addams.	In	addition	to
updates	to	the	books,	it	provides	much	information	not	available	from	other
sources.
	
	

	

Mayan	Astrology	and	You
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
At	 the	 most	 fundamental	 level	 of	 Mayan	 cosmovision	 is	 the	 idea	 that	 a
spiritual	world	exists	alongside	the	material	world,	and	that	certain	spirits	in
that	 world	 directly	 influence	 what	 happens	 here.	 By	 keeping	 track	 of	 the
nahuales,	the	twenty	spirits	whose	energy	is	the	main	influence	of	each	day,
the	Sacred	Calendar	enables	people	to	harmonize	their	own	energy	with	the
energy	and	rhythm	of	a	particular	day	to	make	better	informed	choices.
Unlike	Western	astrology,	which	is	based	on	the	positions	of	the	planets,
sun	and	moon	on	one’s	birth	date,	Mayan	astrology	is	based	on	which	of	the
twenty	nahuales,	powerful	spirits,	influenced	people	and	events	on	that	date.
Both	systems	work	and	can	be	used	together,	though	little	research	has	been
done	in	this	area.
This	book,	based	on	four	years	of	research	and	practice	in	the	Guatemalan
highlands	and	Mexico,	explains	the	basis	of	the	Mayan	Sacred	Calendar	best
known	 as	 the	 tzolkin	 and	 reveals	 the	 cosmic	 meanings	 and	 astrological
attributes	of	the	twenty	nahuales.	A	guide	to	the	material	plane	as	well	as	the
spiritual,	it	can	be	used	to	learn	more	about	one’s	own	nahual	and	personal
energy	 and	 those	 of	 other	 people.	 Astrological	 attributes	 and	 other
information	is	also	provided.

Meaning	of	the	Numbers
Each	 nahual	 is	 combined	 with	 the	 numbers	 1-13	 to	 create	 260	 different
day	 signs.	 The	 numbers	 indicate	 the	 intensity	 of	 the	 nahual’s	 energy	 and
astrological	 attributes.	 People	 with	 higher	 numbers	 tend	 to	 be	 more
extroverted	than	others,	or	would	be	more	in	harmony	with	the	universe	and
their	own	energy	if	they	acted	in	this	manner.

Lovers,	Friends	and	Business	Partners
Each	 of	 the	 twenty	 nahuales	 falls	 into	 a	 group	 ruled	 by	 one	 of	 the	 four
cardinal	 directions:	 East,	 North,	 West	 and	 South.	 People	 of	 the	 same
direction	 get	 along	 best	 and	 make	 the	 most	 natural	 and	 comfortable
relationships.	When	one	meets	someone	and	they	hit	it	off	right	away,	they
are	usually	of	the	same	direction.

Nahuales	Grouped	by	Cardinal	Direction
East:	Crocodile,	Snake,	Water,	Corn,	Earth	
West:	Night,	Deer,	Monkey,	Eagle,	Storm	
North:	Wind,	Death,	Tz’ikin,	Jaguar,	Knife	
South:	Net,	Seed,	Road,	Vulture,	Sun

Cosmic	Meaning	of	the	Cardinal	Directions								
Direction	Meaning							Activity	
East									Originate									Create															
West								Cooperate								Adjust
North						Decrease										Reduce/Minimize
South							Increase										Gain		

	
By	knowing	the	Mayan	day	sign	of	other	people,	one	can	discover	how	to
best	get	along	with	them.	An	advanced	Mayan	astrological	technique	can	be
used	 to	 create	 composite	 charts	 that	 combine	 day	 signs	 of	 two	 or	 more
people.	Composite	charts	reveal	the	energy	of	them	as	a	whole.

Your	Path	of	Destiny
In	 addition	 to	 the	 main	 nahual,	 which	 is	 in	 effect	 throughout	 life,
everyone	 has	 nine	 other	 nahuales	 whose	 energy	 influences	 them	 through
Youth,	 Adulthood	 and	 Future.	 These	 signs	 and	 charts	 are	 explained	 in	 The
Mayan	Calendar	Users	 Guide:	How	to	 Apply	Mayan	Astrology	 to	Your	Daily
Life.	 This	 book	 is	 recommended	 for	 those	 who	 want	 to	 study	 and	 practice
authentic	Mayan	astrology	as	practiced	by	contemporary	Maya	in	Guatemala.

Mayan	Astrology
The	 twenty	 spirits	 called	 nahuales,	 or	 Lords	 of	 the	 Day,	 comprise	 the
heart	and	soul	of	the	Sacred	Calendar	upon	which	Mayan	astrology	is	based.

A	 person’s	 main	 day	 sign,	 the	 combination	 of	 a	 number	 from	 1-13	 and	 the
nahual,	or	Lord	of	the	Day,	on	the	person’s	birth	date,	is	the	most	powerful
influence	on	his	or	her	character	traits.
When	a	day	sign	refers	to	a	specific	date	rather	than	a	birth	date,	it	reveals
the	energy	and	rhythm	of	that	day,	enabling	people	to	align	their	own	energy
and	rhythm	with	that	of	the	ruling	nahual.
This	 chapter	 provides	 each	 glyph’s	 symbolism,	 related	 mythology,
cosmological	 and	 astrological	 significance,	 ceremonies	 and	 other
information.	 Researched	 and	 written	 in	 Guatemala	 over	 several	 years,	 it
synthesizes	 data	 from	 many	 sources,	 both	 indigenous	 and	 Western,	 and
lends	 original	 insights,	 observations	 and	 discoveries	 made	 in	 Guatemala.
Table	 2	 summarizes	 the	 key	 meanings,	 directions	 and	 colors,	 and	 provides
the	nahuales’	names	in	English,	Ki’che’	and	Yucatecan.

Clarifying	the	Day	Names
One	 source	 of	 confusion	 for	 people	 learning	 the	 Sacred	 Calendar	 is	 that
the	 English-language	 names	 of	 the	 nahuales	 vary	 from	 one	 source	 to
another.	 Often	 the	 problem	 lies	 in	 mixing	 Aztec	 and	 Mayan	 mythology	 and
day	 sign	 meanings	 into	 the	 same	 spiritual	 system.	 For	 example,	 Kej’/Manik
means	Deer	to	the	Maya,	but	to	the	Aztecs,	it	meant	Hand.

Net	versus	Lizard
K’at/Kan	 is	 called	 Lizard	 by	 more	 than	 a	 few	 authors.	 But	 a	 look	 at	 the
most	ancient	sources—the	glyphs,	the	codices	and	the	Popul	Vuh—shows	that
this	 day	 actually	 is	 named	 after	 a	 net.	 Some	 Kaqchikel	 Maya	 in	 Guatemala
still	call	it	lizard,	though	the	Tz’utujil	at	Lake	Atitlán	and	in	Momostenango
translate	 it	 as	 Net.	 There	 is	 evidence	 from	 Mayan	 calendar	 wheels	 that
though	it	was	called	Net,	its	meaning	was	lizard.
However,	 the	 name	 “Lizard”	 was	 primarily	 used	 by	 the	 Aztecs,	 whose
glyph	 for	 this	 nahual	 portrays	 a	 lizard.	 One	 subset	 of	 Ki’che’	 Maya	 was
reported	 as	 having	 called	 this	 day	 lagarto	 (Spanish	 for	 lizard)	 by	 K.	 H.
Berendt	 in	 Calendario	 de	 los	 Indios	 de	 Guatemala,	 Kiché,	 1722.	 (Goméz,
Felipe	 and	 Cales,	 Melchor	 Aguare:	 75)	 But	 this	 group	 also	 used	 a	 nonstandard	set	of	Year	Bearers:	Seed	(Q’anil/Lamat),	Earth	(Toj/Caban),	Knife
(Tijax/Etznab),	and	Aq’ab’al/Akbal	(Night).
Another	 problem	 is	 that	 many	 researchers	 say	 its	 main	 characteristic	 is
sensuality	 and	 sex.	 (Clow,	 248)	 This	 makes	 little	 sense,	 because	 lizards	 are
cold-blooded,	while	sex	and	sensuality	are	in	the	realm	of	the	hot-blooded.	It
is	likely	that	this	sign’s	meaning	of	fertility	was	confused	with	sexuality	over
the	 years.	 (Johnson,	 his	 latest	 book,	 Mayan	 Calendar	 Astrology,	 calls	 this
sign	Net,	not	Lizard	as	he	did	in	Jaguar	Wisdom.)
Monkey,	the	English-language	translation	of	the	Yucatecan	Mayan	name

for	 B’atz/Chuen,	 is	 accepted	 by	 Guatemalan	 Maya	 and	 is	 used	 in	 this	 book.
But	the	Ki’che’	name	for	B’atz	translates	best	as	Thread.	Mythologically	this
makes	 sense,	 because	 B’atz	 invented	 weaving,	 and	 with	 his	 twin	 brother,
Chuen,	 invented	 the	 other	 arts	 according	 to	 Mayan	 mythology	 recorded	 in
the	Popul	Vuh.
And	 for	 the	 Ki’che’	 Maya	 in	 particular,	 it	 contributes	 another	 layer	 of
symbolism,	the	thread	or	patterns	of	life,	of	time	itself.	The	Maya	may	have
been	 aware	 of	 the	 string	 theory	 of	 quantum	 physics,	 for	 they	 viewed	 the
fundamental	structure	of	reality	as	being	tied	together	with	long,	thread-like
cords.

Seed	versus	Rabbit
Seed	 (Q’anil/Lamat)	 was	 called	 Tochtli	 in	 the	 Nahuatl	 language	 of	 the
Aztecs,	 which	 means	 Rabbit	 in	 English.	 Many	 people	 persist	 in	 calling	 this
sign	 Rabbit	 or	 Star,	 even	 though	 Seed	 is	 the	 symbolism	 of	 the	 glyph	 and
myths.	 One	 thing	 linking	 rabbit	 with	 seed	 is	 the	 rabbit’s	 propensity	 to
multiply	 rapidly,	 but	 this	 is	 not	 enough	 to	 make	 it	 the	 most	 accurate
translation	for	the	name	of	this	nahual.
In	Yucatecan,	Lamat	means	Venus;	in	Ki’che’,	Q’anil	means	“bright	star.”
(Stanzione:	17)	Four	seeds	and	a	big	star	(“heavenly	seed”)	that	depicts	Venus
are	 definitely	 seen	 in	 the	 glyph,	 though	 they	 have	 other	 meanings.	 The
ancient	 Aztecs	 and	 Ki’che’	 Maya	 of	 the	 18th	 Century,	 in	 addition	 to	 some
contemporary	 Kaqchikel	 in	 Guatemala,	 dub	 the	 sign	 conejo,	 or	 rabbit.
(Goméz	and	Cales,	75)
The	 most	 frequently	 word	 used	 today	 for	 this	 nahual	 is	 semilla,	 Spanish
for	 seed.	 Perhaps	 this	 association	 with	 fertility	 was	 confused	 with	 sexuality
over	 the	 years,	 as	 with	 Lizard	 versus	 Net.	 Star	 or	 yellow	 shining	 are	 other
names	encountered	in	Guatemala.

Vulture	versus	Owl
Owl	 is	 more	 associated	 with	 the	 mythology	 of	 the	 Southwestern	 United
States	 and	 the	 Sonora	 Desert	 of	 Mexico	 than	 with	 Mayan	 myths,	 therefore
this	book	uses	Vulture	as	the	name	of	this	nahual.

Good	Days,	Bad	Days?
Certain	 days	 are	 considered	 “bad”	 by	 Mayan	 shamans	 and	 Western
academics.	 Some	 contemporary	 Maya,	 for	 example,	 will	 not	 travel	 on
Crocodile	 (Imox/Imix),	 because	 it	 is	 associated	 with	 instability.	 Others	 will
travel	 on	 Imox,	 but	 take	 precautions	 and	 stay	 alert	 for	 trouble.	 Barbara
Tedlock	makes	an	that	there	is	no	such	thing	as	good	and	bad	days,	and	it	is
wrong	to	characterize	any	specific	day	as	bad	or	good.	(Tedlock,	Barbara:	98,
127)
All	the	same,	four	signs	are	usually	thought	to	pose	the	most	potential	for

trouble	 and	 challenges:	 Dog	 (T’zi/Oc),	 Knife	 (Tijax/Etznab),	 Vulture
(Ajmaq/Cib)	 and	 Storm	 (Kawoq/Cauac).	 The	 Ixil	 linguistic	 group	 of
Guatemala	 calls	 Night	 (Aq’ab’al/Akbal)	 a	 bad	 day,	 a	 time	 to	 do	 harm	 to
others,	especially	through	witchcraft	(Alvarado-Akabal:	111),	and	this	is	true
for	 several	 of	 the	 other	 signs	 for	 various	 Mayan	 linguistic	 groups.	 At	 the
same	time,	the	Ki’che’	Maya	call	this	a	good	day	for	romance.
To	summarize	the	argument	for	these	up-to-date	English-language	names
for	certain	nahuales,	a	spiritual	system	must	either	Aztec-	or	Maya-based	in
order	to	be	pure.	For	maximum	purity,	the	Guatemalan	system	is	preferable
to	the	Yucatecan,	because	it	is	still	practiced	far	more	of	the	living	Maya.	And
one	does	not	just	toss	in	a	Rabbit	with	a	Crocodile,	as	any	nature	show	host
on	cable	TV	can	attest.

	

	
The	Twenty	Nahuales
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
The	 following	 passages	 reveal	 the	 secrets	 of	 the	 nahuales	 and	 how	 they
affect	 lives	 and	 events	 on	 the	 physical	 plane.	 First	 the	 symbolism	 of	 the
nahual's	 glyph	 is	 explained.	 Then	 the	 mythological	 background	 and	 related
legends	are	discussed.
Cosmic	 meanings	 of	 each	 nahual	 deliver	 the	 key	 meanings	 of	 each
nahual.	 An	 astrological	 overview	 describes	 the	 personality	 traits	 and	 other
attributes.
Related	 Mayan	 ceremonies,	 personal	 totems,	 power	 points	 and	 much
more	 detailed	 information	 will	 enable	 you	 to	 harmonize	 with	 the	 energy	 of
your	nahual	and	"walk	the	path"	of	the	Sacred	Calendar	for	a	more	fulfilling
and	happier	life.
On	 the	 next	 page,	 a	 table	 shows	 the	 names	 of	 the	 nahuales	 in	 three
languages,	with	their	cosmic	meanings.

Ki’che’

Yucatecan

English

Meanings

Imox

Imix

Crocodile

Turbulence,	Nurturing

Iq'

Ik

Wind

Breath	of	Life,	Imagination

Aq'ab'al

Akabal

Night

Darkness,	Dawn

K'at

Kan

Net

Gather,	Abundance

Kan

Chicchan

Snake

Truth,	Wisdom,	Justice

Kame

Cimi

Death

Transformation,	Change

Kej'

Manik

Deer

Balance,	Support

Q'anil

Lamat

Seed

Planting,	Beginning

Toj

Muluc

Water

Payment,	Emotions

Tzi'

Oc

Dog

Guidance,	Protection

B'atz

Chuen

Monkey

Creativity,	Thread	of	Life

E

Eb

Road

Travel,	Destiny

Aq

Ben

Corn

Growth,	Maturity

Ix

Ix

Jaguar

Female	Energy,	Strength

Tzi'kin

Men

Eagle

Flying,	Vision

Ajmaq

Cib

Vulture

Patience,	Relaxation

Noj'

Caban

Earth

Thought,	Idea

Tijax

Etznab

Knife

Loss,	Sacrifice,	Heal,	Cut

Kawoq

Cauac

Storm

Trouble,	Strong	Woman

Ajpu

Ahau

Sun

Illumination,	Creation

Crocodile	(Imox/Imix)

Meaning	of	the	Hieroglyph
Lines	 at	 the	 bottom	 represent	 the	 back	 of	 a	 crocodile,	 symbolizing	 the
surface	of	the	planet,	while	a	water	lily	is	seen	at	the	top.	Another	view	is	that
the	 glyph	 represents	 a	 turtle,	 which	 ancient	 Maya	 deemed	 the	 planet	 and
Indians	of	the	United	States	think	of	as	North	America.

Mythological	Background
In	the	glyph	and	mythology,	the	crocodile	is	linked	to	the	creation	of	the
world,	 its	 back	 symbolizing	 the	 surface	 of	 the	 planet	 floating	 in	 the
primordial	 sea.	 A	 story	 in	 the	 Popul	Vuh	relates	 that	 until	 Heart	 of	 Sky	 and
Feathered	Serpent	agreed	to	create	the	world,	there	was	only	sky	and	water.
“Then	 the	 mountains	 were	 separated	 from	 the	 water,	 all	 at	 once	 the
mountains	came	forth.”	(Tedlock,	Dennis:	73)
A	 crocodile	 appears	 as	 the	 World	 Tree	 on	 Stela	 25	 and	 Stela	 26	 at	 Izapa,
Mexico,	 its	 snout	 at	 the	 roots	 to	 indicate	 it	 is	 the	 foundation	 of	 the	 World
Tree.	In	the	Milky	Way,	the	head	and	jaws	of	a	crocodile	are	depicted	as	the
World	 Tree	 between	 Sagittarius	 and	 Scorpio.	 Its	 mouth	 is	 the	 dark	 rift—the
portal	 to	 Xibalba,	 near	 Galactic	 Center.	 The	 Books	 of	 Chilam	 Balam	 call
Crocodile	the	“corn	of	the	bread,”	the	basic	element	of	anything.

Cosmic	Meaning
The	 creation	 myth	 of	 the	 Popul	 Vuh	 shows	 that	 Imox/Imix	 is	 linked	 to
the	 creation	 of	 the	 world.	 Immediately	 after	 the	 continents	 emerged	 as	 the
foundation	of	Earth,	they	were	rocked	by	the	still-surging	seas,	leading	to	the
core	meanings	of	turbulence	and	instability,	especially	on	a	global	level	(The
9/11	attack	on	the	World	Trade	Center	occurred	on	6	Crocodile.)	Following	an
uprising	 in	 Egypt	 in	 2011,	 President	 Mubarak	 fled	 the	 country	 on	 1	 Imox.
Osama	bin	Laden	died	on	3	Crocodile.	Associated	with	the	primal	powers	of
creation,	 this	 nahual	 can	 also	 mean	 nurturing,	 indicated	 by	 the	 bodies	 of

water	where	the	water	lily	and	crocodile	live,	and	creativity.

Astrological	Meaning
Crocodile’s	 positive	 traits	 are	 derived	 from	 its	 watery	 aspects.	 These
natives	 are	 intuitive,	 creative	 and	 visionary.	 Emotion	 plays	 a	 major	 role	 in
their	 lives.	 Caring	 people,	 they	 nurture	 life	 and	 care	 for	 family	 and	 friends.
But	the	crocodile	lurks	just	below	the	surface	of	the	water,	hidden	to	all	but
the	most	observant.	This	implies	cunning	and	stealth,	even	trickiness	to	the
point	 of	 maliciousness.	 Some	 are	 thought	 of	 as	 being	 ahead	 of	 their	 time.
Crocodiles	 fulfill	 their	 goals	 by	 working	 with	 others.	 They	 are	 greatly
influenced	 by	 the	 Year	 Bearer,	 far	 more	 so	 than	 other	 nahuales.	 Good
vocations	 for	 Crocodile	 people	 are	 as	 musicians,	 artists,	 writers,	 psychics,
therapists	and	as	business	owners	and	any	kind	of	self-employment.

The	Dark	Side	of	Crocodile
Tricky,	 stubborn,	 indecisive,	 inefficient	 and	 sexually	 sinful	 are	 Ki’che’
terms	 for	 the	 negative	 potential	 of	 Crocodile.	 They	 can	 be	 led	 astray	 or
deceived	 by	 evil	 influences	 or	 bad	 advice,	 and	 are	 often	 called	 eccentric	 or
sometimes	even	crazy,	due	to	the	sign’s	association	with	occult	forces.
To	minimize	this,	they	should	be	open	and	sincere,	shun	secrets	and	black
magic,	 and	 stay	 away	 from	 witchcraft	 and	 sorcery.	 The	 Ki’che’	 specifically
mention	 avoiding	 San	 Simon,	 one	 face	 of	 Maximón,	 the	 “evil	 saint”
worshipped	 in	 Guatemala	 and	 Chiapas,	 Mexico.	 (Thompson:	 297-298)	 They
can	get	emotional	and	"fly	off	the	handle"	at	times.

Notable	Crocodile	People
Thomas	Edison,	Walt	Disney:	5
Bruce	Springsteen:	6	
Sean	Penn:	8
Janis	Joplin,	Sarah	Bernhardt,	Edgar	Winter,	Prince	Andrew:	10

Things	to	Do	on	a	Crocodile	Day
These	days	are	filled	with	raw	creative	power	that	can	lead	to	establishing
a	new	foundation	or	sweeping	changes	across	the	board.	But	it	can	be	a	rocky
start,	so	stay	aware	of	the	potential	for	instability	and	wild	ideas	or	actions.
During	 the	 day,	 it	 is	 	 important	 to	 remain	 open	 and	 sincere	 in	 order	 to
avoid	the	otherwise	negative	energy	implied	by	secrets	and	occult	influences.
This	should	be	applied	to	anything	one	does	on	Imox/Imix,	which	is	also	is	a
beneficial	 day	 for	 developing	 one’s	 powers	 of	 intuition	 and	 for	 meditation.
Grounding	exercises	are	a	solid	way	to	start	the	day.

Cardinal	Direction	and	Colors
East.	Red	is	the	direction	color.	Personal	colors:	blue,	green	and	yellow.

Power	Places

Lakes,	lagoons,	other	inland	bodies	of	water

Body	Part	Ruled
Blood

Ceremonies
One	should	ask	for	protection	from	negative	energies	and	influences,	and
for	rain	or	whatever	will	nourish	one’s	work	or	life.	Give	thanks	to	the	Earth
Mother	for	home	and	possessions.	On	1,	6	and	8	Crocodile,	Guatemalan	day
keepers	visit	the	mountains	and	ask	for	protection	from	the	influence	of	the
Year	Bearer,	which	might	otherwise	drive	them	crazy.	(Tedlock,	Barbara:	125)

Totems,		Things	to	Wear
A	 crocodile,	 alligator	 or	 lotus	 blossom,	 amulet	 with	 glyph,	 ocean	 or	 searelated	jewelry	and	crystals

Wind	(I’q/Ik)

Meaning	of	the	Hieroglyph
The	 “T”	 symbolizes	 a	 tree	 whose	 moving	 branches	 demonstrate	 the
presence	of	the	otherwise	invisible	wind.	Associated	with	the	World	Tree	and
the	maize	“tree,”	this	symbol	appears	inverted	at	the	top	of	some	glyphs	for
Deer	(Kej’/Manik).

Mythological	Background
Pacal	 Votan,	 who	 ruled	 Palenque	 in	 Mexico	 and	 whose	 famous
sarcophagus	was	discovered	beneath	the	Pyramid	of	Inscriptions,	wears	this
glyph	on	an	amulet	in	a	carving	that	depicts	his	ascension	to	the	throne.	The
Palace	 and	 other	 buildings	 there	 have	 T-shaped	 windows.	 Monument	 6	 at
Tortuguero,	Mexico	(the	only	ruins	with	the	date	December	21,	2012	carved
into	 stone)	 is	 shaped	 like	 a	 huge	 T.	 Quetzalcoatl/Kukulkan	 (Sovereign
Plumed	 Serpent)	 is	 a	 wind	 god.	 Revered	 for	 hundreds	 of	 years	 before
manifesting	in	human	form	in	Teotihuacan,	he	traveled	through	Mitla,	near
Oaxaca,	 and	 eventually	 founded	 Chichen	 Itza	 in	 the	 Yucatan.	 Quetzalcoatl
gave	the	magic	mushroom	to	humans.	(Stanzione:	7)	According	to	the	Books
of	 Chilam	 Balam	 prophecies,	 Quetzalcoatl	 will	 return	 in	 this	 katun,	 which
ends	December	21,	2012.	In	spirit,	he	returns	every	spring	equinox,	appearing
in	shadows	that	look	like	a	snake	descending	the	Pyramid	of	Quetzalcoatl	at
Chichen	Itza,	Mexico.	On	the	autumnal	equinox,	the	snake	appears	to	ascend
the	pyramid	and	return	to	the	heaves.
At	 Lake	 Atitlán,	 Guatemala,	 I’q/Ik	 is	 associated	 with	 the	 northern	 wind
called	Xocomil,	which	Tz’utujil	and	Kaqchikel	legends	says	carries	away	sin.

Cosmic	Meaning
Breath	of	life,	both	physical	and	spiritual,	imagination	and	change	are	the
key	 ideas	 for	 this	 nahual.	 It	 brings	 life	 to	 the	 mind	 and	 the	 emotions,
stimulating	creativity	and	inspiration.	Wind	delivers	the	rain	that	nourishes
crops.	It	can	carry	news,	bad	news	in	particular,	as	Wind	also	represents	the
destructive	forces	of	the	universe.

Wind	as	Year	Bearer
Wind	 years	 often	 bring	 natural	 disasters	 such	 as	 violent	 storms,
hurricanes,	 earthquakes,	 floods	 and	 obstacles	 to	 progress	 and	 growth	 for
both	 individuals	 and	 society	 at	 large.	 Imagination	 is	 the	 key	 to	 getting
through	 such	 a	 year.	 The	 preceding	 also	 applies	 to	 a	 lesser	 degree	 to	 Road
(E/Eb)	years.

Astrological	Overview
Wind	 people	 are	 imaginative,	 creative	 and	 clever.	 They	 are	 sociable,
sentimental,	 dreamers—romantics	 who	 can	 be	 great	 conversationalists	 and
articulate	 writers.	 Fun	 to	 be	 around,	 they	 may	 be	 idealistic	 and	 brave,	 or
timid	 and	 indecisive.	 They	 are	 nature-lovers	 who	 find	 inspiration	 and	 peace
of	mind	in	the	outdoors.	Wind	people	are	intensely	spiritual,	so	much	so	that
they	may	lose	touch	with	reality.	To	alleviate	this,	they	should	do	breathing
exercises	 that	 focus	 on	 grounding.The	 current	 trecena	 influences	 Wind
people	more	than	most	day	signs,	because	Wind	is	affected	by	the	moon,	and
the	 trecena	 is	 based	 on	 a	 13-day	 sub-cycle	 of	 the	 lunar	 cycle.	 Illness	 may
result	 from	 their	 being	 overly	 passionate,	 but	 overall	 Wind	 people	 lead
strong,	long	lives.
Wind	 natives	 succeed	 best	 as	 artists,	 musicians,	 writers,	 inventors,
electricians,	 gamblers,	 spiritual	 guides	 and	 psychics.	 Men	 may	 become
powerful	 military	 leaders;	 both	 genders	 can	 become	 leaders	 in	 the
community.

The	Dark	Side	of	Wind
The	 negative	 traits	 are	 impulsiveness,	 moodiness	 and	 indecisiveness	 to
the	 point	 of	 being	 fickle.	 They	 can	 be	 rogues	 who	 are	 dishonest	 and
lascivious.	 At	 their	 worst,	 they	 can	 turn	 on	 friends	 suddenly	 in	 a	 fit	 of	 rage
that	can	lead	to	violence.

Notable	Wind	People
Quetzalcoatl/Kukulkan:	3	
Michael	Jackson,	Richard	Garriott,	Howard	Hughes:	4
Hillary	Clinton:	9
Billy	Graham,	Colonel	Oliver	North:	11

Things	to	Do	on	a	Wind	Day
Wind	days	are	ideal	for	conversations	and	speeches,	for	writing,	painting
and	 other	 creative	 activities.	 Spiritual	 growth	 and	 seeking	 inspiration	 are
worthy	pursuits.	They	are	excellent	days	to	go	on	a	picnic	or	hike,	to	fly	a	kite
or	enjoy	other	outdoor	pastime	or	do	gardening	and	yard	work.

Cardinal	Direction	and	Color
North.	White	is	the	directional	color.	Personal	color:	white

Power	Places
Canyons,	mountains,	valleys,	forests

Body	Parts	Ruled
Lungs	and	throat

Ceremonies
On	Wind	days,	one	should	give	thanks	for	all	of	creation	and	for	life,	and
ask	for	the	wind	to	carry	illness,	suffering	and	sins,	and	for	protection	for	all.
Burn	 pine	 tree	 incense	 as	 well	 as	 copal.	 This	 is	 a	 sacred	 day	 of	 altars	 and
stone	idols.

Totems,	Things	to	Wear
Quetzal	 bird,	 tree	 or	 branch,	 effigy	 of	 Quetzalcoatl	 (Kukulkan)	 or	 Pacal;
hang	wind	chimes	around	the	house	or	garden

Night	(Aq’ab’al/Akbal)

Meaning	of	the	Hieroglyph
The	 eyes	 and	 lower	 jar	 or	 teeth	 of	 the	 jaguar	 make	 up	 this	 glyph.	 In	 the
lower	 center,	 the	 triangular	 object	 is	 a	 pyramid,	 mountain,	 house	 or	 cave
entrance.

Mythological	Background
The	 Popul	 Vuh	 tells	 how	 the	 final	 set	 of	 Hero	 Twins	 ventured	 into	 the
Underworld	 to	 challenge	 the	 Lords	 of	 Death.	 In	 one	 test,	 they	 had	 to	 spend
the	 night	 in	 the	 “dark	 house”	 while	 smoking	 cigars	 and	 emerge	 with	 them
still	 burning	 at	 dawn.	 They	 did	 so	 by	 placing	 fireflies	 on	 the	 tips	 of	 their
cigars.	 This	 is	 the	 source	 of	 one	 meaning	 of	 Night,	 which	 is	 to	 enter	 the
darkness	to	find	solutions.
Caves	are	deemed	portals	to	the	Underworld;	this	image	also	refers	to	the
temple	within	a	pyramid	where	Mayan	shaman	kings	would	go	to	consult	the
ancestors.	The	mouth	of	the	jaguar,	a	totem	animal	of	Night,	like	that	of	the
toad	and	snake,	is	considered	a	portal	to	the	Otherworld	by	the	Maya.

Cosmic	Meaning
Darkness	 and	 dawn	 are	 the	 chief	 meanings	 of	 this	 sign.	 They	 refer	 to	
looking	 within	 for	 knowledge	 and	 entering	 the	 dark	 to	 confront	 one’s
challenges.	 With	 its	 link	 to	 the	 jaguar,	 one	 of	 the	 most	 powerful	 nahuales,
this	 is	 a	 potent	 day	 sign.	 The	 jaguar	 hunts	 at	 night,	 relying	 on	 stealth	 more
than	 force.	 The	 night	 sun	 is	 carried	 through	 the	 Underworld	 by	 the	 jaguar,
who	brings	it	into	the	dawn.
Dawn	 has	 as	 much	 significance	 as	 night	 for	 the	 Ki’che’	 Maya.	 The	 night
leads	 to	 the	 rising	 sun	 at	 dawn.	 This	 gives	 Night	 people	 their	 powers	 of
intuition	and	the	ability	to	visit	other	worlds	and	return	with	knowledge	and
wisdom,	to	work	in	the	past	and	future	while	living	in	the	present.

Astrological	Overview
Hunters	 and	 seekers	 of	 truth,	 Night	 people	 like	 to	 investigate	 and
discover.	Soft-spoken	and	diplomatic,	they	display	a	feminine	aspect	to	their

character.	 They	 speak	 and	 write	 eloquently,	 enjoy	 travel	 and	 are	 strong
influences	in	their	community	and	among	friends.
Intelligent	and	charming,	they	are	attractive	to	the	opposite	sex.	They	are
not	afraid	of	a	fight	and	won’t	back	down.	Well-organized,	logical	and	lucky,
Night	people	see	their	goals	through	to	the	end,	especially	long-term	projects.
Their	curiosity	leads	them	to	acquire	wisdom	and	knowledge.	A	Night	person
can	 do	 well	 as	 a	 shaman,	 diviner,	 investigator,	 analyst,	 hunter/warrior,
musician,	writer	or	artist.

The	Dark	Side	of	Night
Turning	 words	 into	 weapons,	 they	 can	 be	 caustic	 and	 hurt	 others	 with
their	comments.	A	Night	person	gone	bad	may	use	his	or	her	intelligence	and
communication	skills	to	become	an	effective	liar,	cheat	or	con	artist.

Notable	Night	People
Walt	Whitman:	1
Donald	Trump:	4
Dave	Brubeck,	Jack	Nicholson,	Jean-Claude	Van	Damme,	5
Bruce	Willis:	6
T.	E.	Lawrence,	Martin	Sheen:	9
Roy	Rogers:	13

Things	to	Do	on	a	Night	Day
This	 is	 a	 time	 for	 seeking	 anything	 from	 knowledge	 or	 employment	 to
lovers	 and	 friends.	 The	 association	 with	 dawn	 implies	 new	 beginnings,	 a
fresh	start	and	hope.	The	Hero	Twins	myth	and	the	cave	metaphor	mean	this
is	 a	 time	 to	 go	 into	 the	 darkness	 and	 confront	 personal	 challenges	 by	 using
intuition	and	intelligence	rather	than	strength.
These	are	lucky	days,	especially	in	love	and	romance.	Planning	a	marriage
or	proposing	are	timely	actions;	days	1-9,	even	more	so.	Additionally,	this	is	a
good	 time	 to	 seek	 justice,	 in	 court	 or	 otherwise.	 These	 days	 are	 generally
tranquil	and	happy.

Cardinal	Direction	and	Colors
West.	Black	is	the	directional	color.	Personal	colors:	dark	blue,	purple.

Power	Places
Mountains,	pyramids,	caves,	particularly	at	night	and	dawn

Body	Parts	Ruled
Kidneys,	stomach

Ceremonies
Rituals	 should	 focus	 on	 giving	 thanks	 for	 the	 dawn	 and	 the	 sun	 that	 it
brings.	One	should	ask	for	peace	in	the	world	and	one’s	life,	for	intuition	to
see	things	not	normally	visible	and	to	uncover	the	truth,	for	illumination.

It	is	also	the	time	to	ask	for	protection	from	people	who	talk	about	others
behind	their	backs,	and	for	success	in	business.	13	Night	is	a	day	to	ask	to	be
protected	from	negative	influences.	Incense	burners	should	be	cleaned	on	1,
8	and	9	Night.	(Alvarado:	111)

Totems,		Things	to	Wear
Jaguar,	pyramid,	bat,	amulet	with	glyph

Net	(K’at/Kan)

Meaning	of	the	Hieroglyph
In	 the	 codices,	 the	 glyph	 is	 usually	 yellow—the	 color	 of	 corn	 ready	 to	 be
harvested	 and	 collected	 in	 a	 net.	 Some	 glyphs	 show	 the	 young	 Maize	 God.
The	Aztec	glyph	displays	a	lizard,	and	Kan	is	sometimes	called	by	this	name.

Mythological	Background
The	Popul	Vuh	tells	us	that	Blood	Woman	had	to	prove	she	was	pregnant
with	Hunajpu	and	Xbalanque,	the	offspring	of	Ixmucane’s	son,	One	Hunajpu.
To	do	so,	she	had	to	bring	a	net	full	of	corn	from	the	field,	which	had	already
been	 harvested.	 Blood	 Woman	 miraculously	 returned	 bearing	 a	 net	 loaded
with	corn,	and	Ixmucane	accepted	her	as	daughter-in-law	and	mother	of	the
soon-to-be-born	second	set	of	Hero	Twins.
The	 Books	 of	 Chilam	 Balam	 say	 this	 glyph	 represents	 the	 Lord	 of	 Corn
and	associate	it	with	the	ceiba	tree,	which	is	associated	with	the	World	Tree.

Cosmic	Meaning
The	 fundamental	 ideas	 are	 to	 gather,	 collect	 and	 harvest,	 all	 symbolized
by	the	net	in	which	things	are	collected.	Contemporary	Maya	still	carry	corn,
other	vegetables	and	items	in	nets.	This	can	indicate	an	abundant	harvest	of
crops	 or	 fish—or	 success	 in	 any	 kind	 of	 business.	 A	 full	 net	 also	 suggests
fertility,	without	which	there	would	be	no	corn	to	collect	in	the	net.	The	net
can	represent	entanglement,	imprisonment	and	other	situations	in	which	the
threads	of	life	have	become	tangled.	It	can	also	mean	debt.

Astrological	Overview
Curious,	perceptive	and	artistic,	Net	people	are	fiery	individuals	who	can
use	or	misuse	laws	and	rules.	Problem-solving	is	their	forte,	but	more	so	for
their	friends	or	the	community	than	for	themselves.	They	can	collect	several
points	 of	 view,	 for	 example,	 and	 merge	 or	 reduce	 them	 into	 a	 unified
perspective.	 They	 are	 often	 non-conformists.	 The	 fire	 in	 their	 hearts	 can	 be
expressed	 sexually	 as	 well	 as	 idealistically.	 As	 collectors,	 they	 must	 learn	 to
be	selective	and	avoid	overloading	their	net.

This	 sign	 makes	 excellent	 farmers,	 criminal	 attorneys,	 hunters,
performers	 and	 gatherers	 of	 anything.	 They	 should	 not	 seek	 public	 office,
whether	religious,	political	or	military.

The	Dark	Side	of	Net
People	 with	 this	 nahual	 are	 easily	 caught	 up	 in	 the	 snares	 of	 life.
Emotional	instability	is	their	main	obstacle.	They	may	become	promiscuous
and	mismanage	money	or	resources	to	the	point	of	excessive	debt.	Some	are
manipulative.

Notable	Net	People
Jennifer	Lopez,	Chuck	Berry:	1	
Martin	Luther	King:	2
Jim	Morrison:	4
Charlie	Sheen:	5
Bill	Cosby:	8
T.	S.	Eliot,	Ivan	the	Terrible:	11

Things	to	Do	on	a	Net	Day
This	 is	 a	 day	 for	 gathering	 or	 collecting	 anything,	 from	 crops,	 to	 antique
cars,	 to	 thoughts,	 and	 for	 reaping	 the	 rewards	 of	 a	 project	 or	 plan.	 An
abundant	 harvest	 is	 indicated,	 but	 a	 net	 or	 other	 tool	 or	 skill	 is	 required	 in
order	to	claim	it.	Net	is	a	propitious	day	for	forming	a	group	or	association.
(Jesus	 told	 his	 disciples-to-be,	 who	 fished	 with	 nets,	 that	 he	 would	 make
them	“fishers	of	men.”)	Since	1990,	it	has	been	associated	with	the	Internet,
making	this	a	good	day	for	related	activities	such	as	launching	a	Web	site.
It	is	a	day	to	seek	freedom	from	imprisonment	or	other	restrictions	that
are	holding	one	back,	to	untangle	the	knots	in	the	threads	of	life.	(For	some,
it	would	be	a	good	day	to	stage	a	jail-break.)	On	the	negative	side,	this	day	is
the	 “season	 of	 the	 witch,”	 a	 good	 time	 for	 casting	 spells	 and	 harming	 other
people.

Cardinal	Direction	and	Colors
South.	Personal	colors:	beige,	brown.

Power	Places
Mountain,	fields,	jungle

Body	Parts	Ruled
Ribs	and	abdomen

Ceremonies
Say	thanks	for	the	results	of	efforts	to	grow	and	nourish,	both	materially
and	 physically.	 Ask	 for	 fertility	 in	 all	 things,	 for	 collective	 harmony	 and	 for
resolution	 of	 emotional	 distress	 and	 its	 causes.	 Ensnared	 by	 many	 things,
Net	 people	 can	 free	 themselves	 with	 a	 ceremony	 that	 uses	 fire	 to	 send
prayers	to	the	Heart	of	Sky	on	each	Net	day	of	the	calendar.	Otherwise,	they
may	forfeit	their	harvest	and	freedom.

Totems,	Things	to	Wear
Net,	corn,	amulet	with	glyph

Snake	(Kan/Chicchan)

	
Meaning	of	the	Hieroglyph
The	head	of	the	snake	and	scales	in	the	top	right	corner	are	seen	in	some
glyphs.	Others	have	four	dots	that	depict	the	four	celestial	serpents	and	may
illustrate	the	four	cardinal	directions	on	Earth	and	symbolize	the	cross	in	the
Heavens	formed	by	the	Milky	Way	and	the	ecliptic.	The	glyph	shown	here	is	a
variation	 from	 the	 Guatemalan	 highlands	 with	 two	 diagonal	 slashes	 that
represent	the	fangs	of	a	serpent.

Mythological	Background
Appearing	on	Earth	as	four	serpents	that	guard	the	corners	of	the	world,
the	 celestial	 snake	 links	 Heart	 of	 Sky	 with	 Heart	 of	 Earth.	 It	 is	 a	 symbol	 of
the	 feathered	 serpent	 called	 Quetzalcoatl,	 Kukulkan	 and	 Sovereign	 Plumed
Serpent.	 In	 the	 Popul	 Vuh,	 Sovereign	 Plumed	 Serpent,	 along	 with	 Heart	 of
Sky,	 created	 the	 world.	 The	 serpent	 was	 one	 of	 the	 first	 five	 animals	 they
made,	after	the	deer,	birds,	puma	and	jaguar.	(Tedlock,	Dennis:	78)	Like	the
jaguar	and	toad,	the	mouth	of	the	snake	is	a	portal	that	links	this	world	with
the	Otherworld.	Quetzalcoatl	brought	the	calendar,	writing	and	other	aspects
of	 civilization	 to	 ancient	 Mesoamerica.	 The	 serpent	 bar,	 held	 by	 the	 local
ruler,	was	the	sign	of	ancient	Mayan	royalty	and	power.	Many	statues	show	a
Mayan	 ruler,	 who	 represents	 the	 Milky	 Way,	 holding	 a	 serpent	 that
represents	the	ecliptic	and	depicting	the	cross	they	form	in	the	sky.	Cherokee
Indians	in	North	America	call	the	Milky	Way	the	“snake	in	the	sky”	and	say	it
turns	 into	 a	 feathered	 snake	 in	 2012,	 which	 marks	 the	 end	 of	 the	 Cherokee
calendar	 as	 well	 as	 the	 completion	 of	 the	 current	 cycle	 of	 the	 Mayan	 Long
Count.
The	 canamayte	 pattern	 of	 the	 Yucatecan	 rattlesnake	 discovered	 by	 Bolio
appears	on	pyramids	and	buildings	in	Uxmal,	Chichen	Itza	and	other	Mayan
cities	 and	 can	 be	 seen	 in	 the	 Aztec	 Sun	 Stone.	 This	 rattlesnake	 has	 thirteen
scales	on	the	upper	jaw	and	thirteen	on	the	lower	jaw.	The	canamayte	symbol
matches	the	quincunx	of	the	four	cardinal	directions	and	the	center;	the	four

corners	of	the	world	are	also	depicted.

Cosmic	Meaning
Truth,	 wisdom	 and	 justice	 are	 the	 key	 ideas	 for	 Snake,	 an	 extremely
powerful	 sign.	 It	 is	 the	 fire	 at	 the	 base	 of	 the	 spine,	 like	 the	 kundalini,	 or
serpent	force	of	the	Hindu.	This	sign	is	associated	with	sexual	magic	and	the
rain	gods.

Astrological	Overview
Snake	 people	 are	 powerful.	 Intensity,	 intelligence	 and	 intuitiveness	 that
can	lead	to	clairvoyance	are	the	hallmarks	of	Snake.	Highly	sexual	and	with	a
magnetic	 personality,	 they	 are	 wise	 and	 can	 attain	 material	 wealth	 as	 well
spiritual	 knowledge.	 Their	 best	 careers	 are	 as	 an	 actor,	 politician,	 doctor,
shaman	or	magician.

The	Dark	Side	of	Snake
Snakes	can	lose	their	tempers	quickly	and	become	enraged.	They	may	be
controlling,	manipulative	and	can	go	to	extremes.	Witchy	is	another	negative
aspect.	Of	all	the	nahuales,	they	have	the	greatest	potential	for	turning	evil,
especially	in	the	pursuit	of	power	or	of	domination	over	others.	This	sign	has
been	compared	to	a	fire	hose:	surging	with	power,	the	Snake	can	easily	lose
control.

Notable	Snake	People
David	Cameron:	3
Angelina	Jolie,	Joseph	Goebbels:	4	
Marilyn	Monroe,	J.	Paul	Getty:	5
Clint	Eastwood,	Moamar	Muhammad	al-Gaddafi:	9
Steven	Hawking:	11
Osama	Bin	Laden,	George	W.	Bush:	13

Things	to	Do	on	a	Snake	Day
This	 is	 the	 day	 to	 pursue	 or	 deliver	 truth	 and	 knowledge,	 justice	 and
balance.	Inner	peace	is	another	suitable	goal.	Sex	works	too!	But	beware	that
a	Snake	day	may	also	turn	violent	and	bite—suddenly	and	deadly.	It	is	a	day
of	 fast	 and	 direct	 action	 that	 allows	 no	 room	 for	 subtlety.	 Stay	 alert	 for
potential	power	struggles.

Cardinal	Direction	and	Colors
East.	Red	is	the	directional	color.	Personal	color:	green.

Power	Places
Mountain	peaks	and	beaches

Ceremonies
One	 should	 thanks	 for	 the	 celestial	 serpents	 that	 connect	 humans	 on
Earth	with	the	gods	in	the	heavens.	Ask	for	justice,	wisdom	and	knowledge,

and	for	protection	from	natural	disasters	such	as	earthquakes	and	lightning,
and	to	ask	for	and	give	thanks	for	strength	and	balance.	Fire	is	important	in
all	Mayan	ceremonies,	but	especially	those	on	Snake	days.
Snake	 days	 are	 an	 effective	 time	 to	 visit	 and	 commune	 with	 mountains
and	 volcanoes.	 On	 days	 11-13,	 diviners	 visit	 the	 sacred	 mountains	 of
Momostenango,	 Guatemala,	 as	 well	 as	 distant	 volcanoes,	 and	 speak	 directly
with	the	Mundo,	or	the	planet	as	a	whole,	to	cure	or	cause	certain	illnesses.
(Tedlock,	Barbara:	111)
	

Body	Part	Ruled
Genitals

Totems,	Things	to	Wear
Snake	effigy	or	amulet,	rattle	from	a	rattlesnake,	snakeskin	boots	or	belt,
a	jade	pyramid	of	the	Pyramid	of	Kukulkan	at	Chichen	Itza	or	the	Pyramid	of
Quetzalcoatl	at	Teotihuacan

Death	(Kame/Cimi)

Meaning	of	the	Hieroglyph
The	closed	eye	and	clenched	jaw	of	the	skull	show	the	face	of	death.

Mythological	Background
In	 a	 myth	 from	 the	 Popul	 Vuh,	 the	 final	 set	 of	 Hero	 Twins	 defeated	 the
Lords	 of	 Death	 in	 Xibalba,	 the	 Underworld,	 to	 save	 the	 planet	 from	 an
ultimate	death	and	end	human	sacrifice.	Xibalba	was	ruled	by	Lords	1	Death
and	7	Death.El	Rey	Pascual,	a	“saint”	still	revered	in	Guatemala	and	Chiapas,
Mexico,	is	portrayed	as	a	skeleton	that	wears	a	crown	and	carries	a	sickle.	If
he	cannot	spare	a	seriously	ill	or	wounded	person	from	dying,	he	grants	them
a	painless	death.	The	seed	of	corn	is	sometimes	called	the	“little	skull”	by	the
Maya,	 for	 whom	 it	 is	 a	 symbol	 for	 life.	 According	 to	 Ki’che’	 legend,	 human
beings	in	the	current	world	age	were	made	of	corn.	Mysterious	crystal	skulls
of	unknown	origin,	 reputed	to	possess	 psychic	and	other	 powers,	have	been
found	throughout	Mesoamerica.
Across	 Guatemala,	 other	 parts	 of	 Central	 America,	 and	 in	 Mexico,	 	 the
Day	 of	 the	 Dead	 is	 celebrated	 on	 November	 1-2.	 People	 visit	 the	 graves	 of
family	 and	 friends	 to	 share	 food,	 drink	 and	 sweets	 with	 them,	 and	 to	 pay
their	respects.

Cosmic	Meaning
The	 key	 meanings	 are	 transformation	 and	 change—the	 process	 that
occurs	 after	 the	 end	 of	 a	 cycle	 or	 death.	 This	 can	 refer	 to	 a	 job,	 an	 object,	 a
way	of	life	 or	a	relationship.	 (But	sometimes	Death	 literally	means	 physical
death.)

Astrological	Overview
Death	 is	 a	 very	 lucky	 day	 on	 which	 to	 be	 born.	 These	 individuals	 enjoy
peace	 of	 mind,	 patience,	 discipline	 and	 physical	 strength.	 They	 show	 a
feminine	demeanor	(often	in	appearance),	are	conservative	and	in	touch	with
the	past.	This	makes	them	more	intuitive	than	logical,	more	likely	to	follow
their	feelings	through	life	than	to	form	a	logical	plan.	Their	focus	on	material

things	 may	 lead	 to	 them	 becoming	 wealthy.	 Death	 natives	 are	 responsible,
helpful	and	have	magnetic	personalities.	They	are	eloquent	and	can	become
excellent	speakers.	Concerned	with	the	community,	they	go	out	of	their	way
to	 help.	 Versatile	 individuals,	 they	 have	 great	 potential	 as	 actors,	 writers,
politicians,	prophets,	philosophers	and	psychics.

The	Dark	Side	of	Death
The	 Kame/Cimi	 individual	 who	 does	 not	 look	 within	 and	 seek	 counsel
from	 his	 or	 her	 past	 and	 ancestors	 may	 turn	 to	 lying	 and	 cheating	 in
relationships	 and	 business.	 Vengefulness	 and	 violence	 are	 the	 most	 drastic
negative	attributes	that	can	emerge.

Notable	Death	People
George	Bush	Sr.,	Jane	Fonda:	1
Paul	McCartney,	Martin	Bormann,	Mae	West:	3
Sirhan	Sirhan:	6
Sid	Vicious:	9
Willie	Mays,	Herman	Melville,	Bonnie	Raitt:	12

Things	to	Do	on	a	Death	Day
On	 these	 days,	 consider	 changes	 one	 might	 make	 in	 life	 and	 think	 them
through;	Death	is	also	a	good	day	to	make	changes.	It	is	favorable	for	ending
a	relationship,	whether	it	be	social,	romantic	or	business.	Marriage	proposals
can	be	made	on	low-numbered	days.	(Tedlock,	Barbara:	112)	It	is	a	good	time
to	 reflect	 on	 the	 past	 and	 seek	 counsel	 from	 the	 ancestors,	 and	 a	 day	 of
tranquil	energy	when	would	should	be	patient	and	conservative.

Cardinal	Direction	and	Colors
North.	White	is	the	directional	color.	Personal	colors:	black,	yellow.

Power	Spots
Pyramids,	sacred	and	ceremonial	sites

Body	Parts	Ruled
Head,	brain

Ceremonies
Death	is	a	good	day	to	say	thanks	for	the	ancestors	whose	spirits	continue
to	give	guidance,	and	to	ask	for	peace	and	love,	for	money,	to	be	forgiven,	for
good	 health	 and	 that	 the	 ancestors	 rest	 peacefully.	 On	 11	 Death,	 priestshamans	 in	 Guatemala	 visit	 a	 sacred	 mountain	 to	 ask	 for	 peace	 and
tranquility	for	all	people,	nations	and	the	planet.

Totems,	Things	to	Wear
Skull,	corn	seed,	El	Rey	Pascual,	skeleton,	amulet	with	glyph

	Deer	(Kej’/Manik)

Meaning	of	the	Hieroglyph
The	hand	represents	a	hunter’s	grip	on	his	spear	as	he	hunts	the	deer	in
the	 forests.	 On	 some	 glyphs,	 the	 hunter’s	 grip	 looks	 like	 an	 inverted	 T,	 the
symbol	of	the	Wind	(Iq’/Ik).

Mythological	Background
The	 first	 animal	 created	 at	 the	 beginning	 of	 the	 world	 was	 the	 deer,
according	 to	 the	 Popul	 Vuh.	 (Tedlock,	 Dennis:	 78)	 The	 Books	 of	 Chilam
Balam	 associate	 Kej’/Manik	 with	 the	 cacao	 tree,	 whose	 beans	 were	 used	 as
currency.	 The	 Mayan	 Books	 of	 Chilam	 Balam	 and	 other	 documents	 were
painted	on	deerskin.
Cosmic	Meaning
Support,	 balance	 and	 the	 hunt	 as	 the	 game	 of	 life	 are	 the	 key	 meanings.
The	 deer’s	 long	 legs	 represent	 the	 four	 pillars	 that	 support	 the	 sky	 at	 the
cardinal	directions	on	Earth.	Without	balance,	there	is	no	stability	to	provide
support.	 Mayan	 hunters	 worked	 together	 to	 pursue	 the	 deer	 in	 the	 forests
and	to	set	traps	for	it	in	corn	fields,	supporting	each	other	and	working	in	a
balanced	manner	as	a	team.
Deer	 is	 another	 very	 powerful	 day	 with	 positive	 energy.	 But	 the	 energy
can	be	so	strong	as	to	make	some	people	weak	or	even	ill.	This	animal’s	four
powerful	legs	indicate	the	ability	to	travel	vast	distances.	The	deer	is	related
to	divinity,	because	the	sacred	psilocybin	mushroom	grew	only	on	deer	dung
before	the	Spanish	brought	cattle	to	Mesoamerica.

Deer	as	Year	Bearer
Deer	 years	 can	 be	 earthshaking	 and	 even	 violent	 if	 society	 becomes
unbalanced.

Astrological	Overview
This	deer	is	no	Bambi!	Among	the	mightiest	of	all	nahuales,	Deer	people
are	strong	physically,	spiritually	and	mentally.	A	Mayan	saying	is	that	“…the

Deer	stamps	his	hoof	as	a	sign	of	authority.”	Men	are	very	masculine;	women
may	display	masculine	traits	and	have	powerful	voices.
Both	genders	are	dominating	and	make	excellent	communicators	who	are
convincing	 and	 inspire	 confidence.	 Tenacious	 and	 independent,	 they
accomplish	their	goals.	Deer	people	enjoy	travel	and	the	outdoors.	They	can
become	leaders	of	the	community	or	church,	sportsmen	or	women,	business
people,	hunters,	priests,	day	keepers	or	diviners.

The	Dark	Side	of	Deer
Those	born	on	this	day	may	be	demanding	or	overbearing.	Other	negative
attributes	 include	 meddling	 in	 people’s	 affairs,	 bursts	 of	 anger	 and
selfishness.	 Their	 verbal	 skills	 can	 lead	 them	 into	 running	 con	 games	 and
scams,	 or	 into	 manipulating	 others.	 Deers	 often	 crash	 through	 the	 forest,
unintentionally	smashing	anything	in	their	way,	and	people	of	this	sign	may
do	the	same	in	life	unless	they	are	aware	of	this	potential.

Notable	Deer	People
John	McCain:	3
Mother	Teresa,	Timothy	McVeigh:	6
Kurt	Vonnegut,	Jr.:	7
Vin	Diesel:	12
Stephen	King:	13

Things	to	Do	on	a	Deer	Day
This	is	a	day	for	activities	that	involve	teamwork	and	cooperation,	balance
and	 support.	 Highlighted	 activities	 are	 the	 pursuit	 of	 sustenance	 and
strength,	and	active	participation	in	the	game	of	life.	It	is	a	good	day	to	go	on
the	hunt.	Its	correspondence	with	cacao	beans	makes	Deer	a	profitable	time
for	conducting	business.	It	can	be	a	successful	time	to	get	out	in	the	field	and
talk	with	people,	especially	potential	customers	or	business	associates.	Longrange	 travel	 is	 favored.	 One	 should	 stay	 alert	 for	 traps	 in	 business	 and	 the
game	of	life,	the	way	the	deer	watches	for	traps	in	the	corn	field.
Spiritually,	 it	 is	 an	 excellent	 day	 for	 day	 keepers	 and	 diviners.	 Most	 new
ones	in	Guatemala	are	initiated	on	8	B’atz/Chuen.	But	1	and	8	Deer	are	the
days	that	teachers	of	the	calendar	tell	the	spirits	the	names	of	their	students
and	ask	permission	for	them	to	follow	this	calling.

Cardinal	Direction	and	Colors
West.	Black	is	the	directional	color.	Personal	color:	yellow.

Power	Places
Fields,	hills,	forests

Body	Part	Ruled
Feet

	Ceremonies
This	 is	 a	 fitting	 time	 to	 perform	 rituals	 on	 all	 levels,	 from	 personal	 and
familial,	 to	 community,	 to	 global	 and	 universal	 and	 to	 give	 thanks	 for	 all
possessions	and	for	the	rituals	and	wisdom	of	the	ancestors.	Ask	for	and	give
thanks	for	success	in	business	and	travel.	The	most	powerful	and	sacred	day
for	 ceremonies	 is	 8	 Kej’/Manik,	 when	 one	 should	 honor	 the	 ancestors.
Chocolate	 or	 cacao	 is	 the	 best	 offering	 and	 should	 be	 thrown	 into	 the	 fire.
Sesame	seeds	are	effective.

Totems,	Things	to	Wear
Deer,	deer	horn,	deerskin,	amulet	with	glyph

Seed	(Q’anil/Lamat)

Meaning	of	the	Hieroglyph
The	four	dots	represent	seeds	of	the	four	kinds	of	corn—red,	yellow,	black
and	 white—used	 by	 the	 gods	 to	 create	 the	 human	 races	 in	 each	 of	 the	 four
world	 ages	 described	 in	 the	 Popul	 Vuh.	 They	 denote	 the	 four	 seasons,	 the
four	pillars	at	the	corners	of	the	world,	the	four	cardinal	directions,	the	four
Hero	Twins	and	the	four	cycles	of	Venus.	The	four	dots	and	the	star	form	a
quincunx.	In	the	center	of	most	glyphs	for	this	nahual,	Venus	is	depicted	as	a
“great	 star,”	 an	 ancient	 Mayan	 name	 for	 this	 planet.	 Others	 are	 “golden,”
"yellowing"	 and	 “great	 shining,”	 referring	 to	 the	 color	 of	 ripe	 corn.
(Stanzione:	15)

Mythological	Background
The	name	is	based	on	one	of	the	guardians	of	the	fields	who	helped	Blood
Woman	gather	corn	into	a	net	to	prove	she	was	pregnant	with	the	final	set	of
Hero	Twins.	His	name	was	Semilla,	which	means	seed	in	Spanish.	(Alvarado:
127)	This	story	is	found	the	Popul	Vuh,	which	contains	many	metaphors	for
the	Venus	cycle,	as	well	as	other	astronomical	associations.
Venus	 is	 the	 star	 of	 Quetzalcoatl/Kukulkan,	 who	 manifested	 on	 Earth
when	Venus	first	appeared	as	the	morning	star.	The	Pyramid	of	Kukulkan	at
Chichen	 Itza	 is	 linked	 to	 Venus,	 and	 the	 structures	 of	 thee	 Maya	 city	 of
Uxmal	are	oriented	in	reference	to	Venus.

Cosmic	Meaning
Key	 ideas	 are	 seed,	 planting,	 ripening	 and	 fertility.	 The	 most	 successful
course	of	action	in	life	for	Seed	is	to	plant	things,	from	actual	plants,	to	ideas,
to	any	sort	of	new	project	or	plan.	A	Ki’che’	name	for	this	sign	is	corn	seed,
symbolizing	 the	 seed,	 or	 semen,	 of	 all	 living	 things.	 The	 Yucatecan	 Maya
scheduled	 wars	 around	 the	 Venus	 cycle,	 giving	 it	 a	 political	 aspect.	 In
Guatemala,	it	can	also	mean	to	possess	money.
The	 Aztecs	 called	 this	 day	 Rabbit,	 as	 do	 many	 English-language	 books.
But	 the	 Ki’che’	 make	 scarce	 reference	 to	 the	 rabbit	 in	 their	 ancient	 or

contemporary	 literature	 (some	 Kaqchikel	 still	 call	 it	 conejo,	 Spanish	 for
rabbit).	The	links	 between	Aztec	and	 Mayan	beliefs	that	 concern	rabbits	are
that	 this	 animal,	 like	 Venus,	 appears	 in	 the	 morning	 and	 evening,	 and	 that
both	 cultures	 associate	 this	 nahual	 with	 drunkenness.	 Another	 reason	 the
Aztecs	 may	 have	 called	 it	 Rabbit	 is	 that	 seed	 can	 mean	 semen,	 and	 rabbits
breed	quickly	and	often.	It	is	the	sign	of	masculine	fertility.

Astrological	Overview
Seed	 individuals	 are	 friendly,	 emotional	 and	 sensitive.	 Their	 diligence,
patience,	creativity,	hard	work	and	good	luck	can	lead	to	wealth.	They	fall	ill
often.	 Intuitive,	 they	 rely	 more	 on	 feelings	 than	 logic.	 To	 feel	 secure	 and
whole,	they	must	share	their	emotions	and	love.	They	will	see	many	changes
throughout	their	lives.
Moving	 slowly,	 they	 are	 almost	 always	 successful	 in	 the	 end.	 They	 can
become	successful	as	farmers	(or	any	vocation	that	involves	growing	things),
musicians,	 actors	 and	 other	 kinds	 of	 performers,	 counselors	 and
philosophers.

The	Dark	Side	of	Seed
Egotistical,	 arrogant	 and	 internally	 conflicted,	 this	 sign	 easily	 becomes
addicted	to	alcohol	and	drugs	and	is	attracted	to	all	kinds	of	vice.	Selfishness
is	 another	 negative	 trait.	 A	 fondness	 for	 gossip	 can	 lead	 to	 slander.	 Their
cautiousness	can	turn	into	paranoia.

Notable	Seed	People
Tobey	Maguire:	1
Elvis	Presley:	2
Jackie	Robinson,	Sally	Field:	6
Jimi	Hendrix:	9
G.	Gordon	Liddy:	10
Halle	Berry,	Mickey	Rooney:	11
George	Orwell,	David	Carradine:	13	

Things	to	Do	on	a	Seed	Day
This	is	a	day	of	abundant	positive	energy,	a	good	time	to	plant	the	seed	of
a	new	undertaking	or	any	sort	of	crop,	or	to	visit	a	corn	field	and	think	about
the	story	of	the	Hero	Twins’	mother,	Xmucane.	As	the	sign	of	masculine
fertility,	this	could	be	a	good	day	for	starting	a	pregnancy	(or	a	reminder	to
use	a	condom	if	having	a	child	is	not	on	one’s	agenda).	At	night,	one	might
observe	the	stars	and	planets,	especially	when	Venus	is	visible.

Cardinal	Direction	and	Colors
South.	Yellow	is	the	directional	color.	Personal	colors:		green,	gray,	white.

Power	Places

Fields,	 forests,	 rivers,	 lakes,	 especially	 those	 in	 the	 mountains	 or	 on
plateaus

Body	Parts	Ruled
Genitals,	testicles,	ovaries

Ceremonies
Seed	 is	 the	 time	 to	 give	 thanks	 for	 a	 successful	 planting,	 be	 it	 of	 an
agricultural,	social	or	working	nature,	and	for	all	possessions.	It	is	also	a	good
day	to	ask	for	fertility	and	a	bountiful	harvest.

Totems,	Things	to	Wear
Image	of	Venus	or	a	star,	corn	or	other	seeds,	amulet	with	the	glyph

Water	(Toj’/Muluc)

Meaning	of	the	Hieroglyph
This	is	an	enigmatic	glyph.	The	Ki’che’	say	it	represents	a	giant	shark	or	a
whale,	 but	 the	 dot	 in	 the	 center	 of	 many	 variations	 on	 this	 glyph	 does	 not
appear	related	to	any	kind	of	aquatic	creature	and	most	likely	depicts	a	drop
of	 water.	 It	 could	 represent	 the	 moon,	 as	 it	 is	 associated	 with	 the	 ancient
Moon	 Goddess.	 The	 dot	 may	 symbolize	 a	 drop	 of	 menstrual	 blood	 that
women	 “pay”	 for	 giving	 birth.	 It	 is	 also	 a	 symbol	 for	 jade,	 the	 most	 magical
stone	of	the	Maya.

Mythological	Background
The	Books	of	Chilam	Balam	say	Toj’/Muluc	was	one	of	the	guardians	of
the	 corn	 field	 who	 helped	 Blood	 Woman	 gather	 corn	 to	 prove	 she	 was
pregnant	 with	 the	 Hero	 Twins.	 His	 name	 was	 “to	 pay.”	 (Alvarado:	 127;
Ch’umil,	Alvarado,	Coz:	70)

Cosmic	Meaning
The	key	meaning	is	payment.	Payment	can	mean	paying	monetary	debts,
parking	fines,	one’s	debt	to	society,	or	for	the	bad	things	one	has	done.	It	may
even	call	for	paying	karmic	debt.	Another	way	of	paying	is	to	make	offerings
to	 the	 spirits	 in	 a	 ceremony.	 Sacrifice	 is	 yet	 another	 meaning.	 Note	 that	 a
sacrifice	can	lead	to	positive	results,	as	when	sacrificing	a	Rook	for	a	Queen
in	 chess.	 Water	 also	 indicates	 activity	 on	 the	 emotional	 level	 and	 can
emphasize	 feelings,	 the	 subconscious,	 dreaming	 and	 intuition.Some
researchers,	 writers	 and	 astrologers	 continue	 to	 go	 astray	 with	 the	 basic
meaning	of	this	sign	by	focusing	on	the	watery,	emotional	aspects	of	the	sign
and	ignoring	its	core	meaning	of	payment.	(Clow:	250;	Scofield	and	Orr:	26)
Even	so,	Toj’	is	associated	with	the	moon,	so	feelings	and	intuition	are	indeed
valid	meanings.

Astrological	Overview
People	of	this	day	sign	are	dreamers	who	are	imaginative,	intellectual	and

willing	to	take	risks	and	make	sacrifices.	These	people,	linked	with	the	moon
and	 with	 water,	 are	 sensitive,	 emotional	 and	 sincere.	 Water	 people	 can	 be
helpful,	 warm	 and	 sociable.	 Some	 have	 psychic	 powers,	 and	 most	 find	 it
easier	to	solve	problems	intuitively	rather	than	with	logic	alone.
Water	can	be	a	challenging	day	sign	that	brings	suffering	and	obstacles.	A
Constellation	 chart	 will	 point	 out	 ways	 to	 avoid	 these	 problems.	 But	 such
struggles	 ultimately	 make	 them	 stronger.	 Toj’/Muluc	 people	 tend	 to	 fall
chronically	ill.	Water	people	make	good	farmers,	performers,	musicians,	midwives,	mathematicians,	spiritual	guides,	psychics	and	priests.

The	Dark	Side	of	Water
These	 natives	 can	 go	 too	 far	 in	 their	 acts	 and	 words,	 even	 in	 their
lifestyles,	and	take	risks	in	business	and	relationships.	They	may	have	short
tempers,	be	mean	and	overly	possessive.

Notable	Water	People
John	Travolta:	2
Mick	Jagger:	3
Madonna:	4
Bill	Clinton:	5
Dick	Cheney:	6
Oprah	Winfrey;	Prince	William,	Duke	of	Cambridge:	8
John	Lennon:	10
Neil	Young,	Saddam	Hussein:	11
Beyonce	Knowles:	13

Things	to	Do	on	a	Water	Day
On	 these	 days,	 one	 should	 pay	 debts	 and	 ask	 for	 payment	 from	 others.	
The	 energy	 of	 the	 day	 is	 languid	 and	 could	 turn	 negative,	 especially	 for	 a
person	 of	 this	 nahual	 who	 does	 not	 pay	 his	 or	 her	 debts.	 It	 can	 be	 a	 day	 of
healing	or	seeking	medical	or	emotional	advice.

Cardinal	Direction	and	Colors
East.	Red	is	the	directional	color.	Personal	colors:	blue-green,	jade,	white.

Power	Places
Seas	or	oceans,	rivers,	beaches,	lakes

Body	Parts	Ruled
Ears,	brain

Ceremonies
Water	 days	 are	 the	 time	 to	 ask	 for	 justice	 and	 balance,	 for	 protection
from	 disease,	 negative	 energy,	 suffering,	 accidents	 and	 obstacles,	 to	 be	 paid
what	 one	 deserves,	 and	 to	 be	 healed.	 In	 addition	 to	 asking	 that	 one’s

sacrifices	 are	 effective,	 this	 is	 the	 time	 to	 pay	 back	 Creation	 for	 everything
one	has	received,	to	give	thanks	for	equality,	fairness,	love	and	for	relief	from
suffering.

Totems,	Things	to	Wear
A	 shark,	 dolphin,	 whale	 or	 other	 large	 aquatic	 creature,	 a	 shark	 tooth,
jade,	amulet	with	glyph

Dog	(T’zi/Oc)

Meaning	of	the	Hieroglyph
Some	 glyphs	 clearly	 portray	 a	 dog’s	 head,	 while	 others	 depict	 only	 the
ears	with	two	black	dots.

Mythological	Background
The	names	comes	from	Tepsquintla,	a	guardian	of	the	corn	field	who,	in	a
story	from	the	Popul	Vuh,	helped	Blood	Woman	gather	corn	to	prove	she	was
pregnant	with	the	last	set	of	Hero	Twins.	(Alvarado:	133)

Cosmic	Meaning
Key	ideas	for	Dog	are	authority,	guidance,	loyalty	and	protection.	T’zi/Oc
represents	 law	 and	 justice—both	 material	 and	 spiritual—and	 the	 systems
upon	 which	 they	 are	 founded.	 Its	 authority	 is	 the	 source	 of	 the	 ability	 to
provide	guidance.
Man’s	best	friend	eagerly	leads	one	down	the	road,	is	faithful	and	guards
the	home.	But	the	dog	occasionally	bites	its	master	as	well	as	strangers,	and
fornicates	 shamelessly	 in	 the	 street,	 demonstrating	 the	 unbridled	 lust	 and
raw	sexual	power	of	Dog.

Astrological	Overview
Friendly	and	respected,	balanced	and	brave—T’zi/Oc	people	are	also	loyal,
sensitive	and	romantic,	sensual	and	attractive.	They	are	good	at	strategy	and
games,	especially	the	game	of	life,	and	can	be	as	creative	at	games	as	they	are
in	 making	 music	 and	 other	 arts	 and	 crafts.	 Dog	 people	 succeed	 as
bodyguards,	 teachers,	 mathematicians,	 tour	 guides,	 investigators,	 managers,
artists,	musicians,	analysts	and	strategists.

The	Dark	Side	of	Dog
Weak	 and	 easily	 confused,	 Dogs	 can	 be	 overly	 ambitious	 and	 downright
mean.	 They	 may	 try	 to	 apply	 their	 own	 law	 to	 situations	 and	 impose	 it	 on
others.	 Lacking	 self-control,	 they	 may	 become	 confused	 and	 overindulge	 in

or	become	addicted	to	drugs	and	alcohol.
Stubbornness	 and	 manipulating	 or	 cheating	 on	 their	 lovers	 or	 business
partners	 are	 other	 negative	 traits.	 Emotional	 instability	 and	 pride	 can	 pose
problems.	 At	 its	 worst,	 T’zi/Oc,	 like	 the	 dog	 in	 the	 street,	 can	 be	 sexually
degenerate	and	depraved.

Notable	Dog	People
Henry	Miller,	Hunter	S.	Thompson:	1
Bob	Marley:	5
Al	Capone:	7
Willie	Nelson:	8
Adolf	Hitler,	Mark	Twain:	9
Florence	Nightingale,	Indira	Gandhi:	10
Russell	Crowe:	11
Jimmy	Hoffa,	Sammy	Davis	Jr.:	12

Things	to	Do	on	a	Dog	Day
This	is	the	time	to	ask	for	guidance	and	advice	or	to	give	it	if	requested.
As	 a	 sign	 of	 authority,	 it	 is	 an	 auspicious	 day	 for	 settling	 legal	 matters	 or
contracts.The	dog’s	short	 legs	mean	T’zi/Oc	 is	a	good	 day	for	short-distance
travel,	such	as	around	the	neighborhood	or	town.	It	is	a	time	to	be	alert	for
dangers	 along	 the	 way.	 Home	 security	 and	 safety	 measures	 could	 be
reviewed.	 Dog	 is	 among	 the	 most	 carnal	 of	 signs,	 so	 while	 it	 can	 be	 a	 great
day	for	enthusiastic	sex,	one	should	avoid	going	overboard.

Cardinal	Direction	and	Colors
North.	White	is	the	directional	color.	Personal	color:	yellow.

Power	Places
Mountains	and	beaches

Body	Parts	Ruled
Nose,	brain

Ceremonies
On	a	Dog	day,	one	should	give	thanks	for	balance,	harmony	and	justice,
and	ask	for	protection	from	temptation	and	negative	energy,	and	for	good	to
triumph	over	evil,	both	in	one’s	personal	life	and	for	the	world	at	large.	Other
things	to	ask	for	are	peace	and	liberty,	vision	and	insight	for	those	who	make
decisions,	for	justice	and	for	the	security	of	one’s	home.

Totems,	Things	to	Wear
Dog	effigy,	Snoopy	or	Snoop	Doggy	Dog	t-shirt,	amulet	with	glyph

Monkey	(B’atz/Chuen)

Meaning	of	the	Hieroglyph
The	 glyph	 shows	 the	 stylized	 eyes	 and	 mouth	 of	 a	 howler	 monkey,	 first
recognized	by	classic	Mayanologist	John	Thompson.

Mythological	Background
B’atz	 and	 Chuen,	 called	 1	 Monkey	 and	 1	 Artisan	 in	 the	 Popul	 Vuh,	 were
the	 older	 twin	 step-brothers	 of	 the	 two	 sets	 of	 Hero	 Twins	 who	 fought	 the
Lords	of	Death	in	Xibalba.	They	represent	creativity	and	the	arts	because	they
invented	music,	literature,	painting	and	weaving.

Cosmic	Meaning
Key	 ideas	 are	 creativity	 and	 thread.	 The	 energy	 of	 days	 ruled	 by	 the
monkey	 is	 highly	 positive,	 cheerful,	 friendly	 and	 active.	 The	 Ki’che’	 Maya
consider	 B’atz	 the	 thread	 of	 life	 with	 which	 reality	 is	 created,	 and	 they
associate	 it	 with	 spinning	 and	 winding,	 therefore	 with	 weaving.	 It	 is	 the
thread	 of	 life	 that	 symbolizes	 time	 and	 the	 connection	 between	 people	 and
the	 past	 and	 future.	 The	 umbilical	 cord	 is	 another	 meaning.	 B’atz/Chuen
rules	marriage.

Astrological	Overview
Monkey	 are	 creative,	 intelligent	 and	 clever.	 Fast	 learners,	 they	 often
succeed	 in	 business,	 marriage	 and	 life	 without	 even	 trying.	 Problem-solving
comes	 naturally	 to	 them.	 Born	 lucky,	 the	 Monkey	 is	 sociable,	 fun	 to	 be
around	and	enjoys	the	outdoors.	They	love	to	be	the	center	of	attention.	Calm
and	 self-assured,	 just	 and	 cautious,	 the	 Monkey	 has	 strong	 character	 and
charisma	and	is	a	natural	leader.	They	excel	at	getting	people	to	follow	them.
(Sometimes,	 however,	 they	 lead	 them	 off	 a	 cliff	 or	 down	 the	 wrong	 dark
street.)	 If	 not	 leading	 the	 way,	 Monkey	 remains	 independent	 rather	 than
following	 others.	 This	 nahual	 is	 better	 at	 solving	 the	 problems	 of	 other
people	than	their	own.
Actors,	 musicians,	 writers,	 artisans	 and	 weavers	 are	 excellent	 vocations

for	 Monkey.	 Coupled	 with	 a	 number	 from	 8-13,	 B’atz	 natives	 can	 make
amazing	spiritual	guides	and	day	keepers.

The	Dark	Side	of	Monkey
A	successful	B’atz/Chuen	person	can	be	proud	to	the	point	of	arrogance.
Insensitivity	 to	 people	 who	 are	 not	 as	 creative	 is	 another	 flaw.	 They	 may
suffer	 from	 emotional	 distress	 and	 melancholy,	 and	 can	 be	 distant	 in
relationships.	 Trickery	 is	 another	 negative	 attribute,	 even	 though	 it	 is	 done
for	fun	rather	than	for	malicious	purposes.

Things	to	Do	on	a	Monkey	Day
This	 is	 a	 propitious	 time	 to	 start	 a	 new	 project,	 to	 write,	 paint,	 sing	 and
dance.	 Parties	 and	 celebrations	 are	 favored,	 as	 are	 marriage	 proposals	 and
weddings.	 The	 Sacred	 Calendar	 should	 be	 studied.	 It	 is	 a	 day	 to	 think	 about
time,	 especially	 time	 as	 the	 thread	 of	 life	 unwinding	 from	 the	 beginning	 of
the	 world	 through	 today	 and	 into	 the	 future;	 to	 look	 for	 patterns,	 the
common	thread	that	connects	the	elements	of	a	tapestry	and	reveals	a	clue	to
its	meaning.

Notable	Monkey	People
Jerry	Garcia,	David	Bowie,	Patty	Hearst:	4	
Buffalo	Bill	Cody:	6
Lindsay	Lohan:	7
Charles	Manson	:	10
Robert	De	Niro:	12
Barbara	Streisand,	James	Woods:	13

Cardinal	Direction	and	Colors
West.	 Black	 is	 the	 directional	 color.	 Personal	 colors:	 dark	 blue,	 purple,
red.

Power	Places
Outdoors	near	lakes,	in	forests

Body	Parts	Ruled
Eyes,	veins

Ceremonies
On	 Monkey	 days,	 one	 should	 give	 thanks	 for	 possessions	 and	 the
knowledge	 from	 the	 ancestors.	 It	 is	 the	 time	 to	 ask	 for	 success	 in	 new
beginnings	 and	 one’s	 daily	 work,	 and	 that	 there	 be	 no	 impediments	 to
realizing	goals.	Lots	of	copal	incense	and	black	candles	should	be	burned,	and
fireworks	 are	 appropriate	 at	 the	 fiesta.The	 Ki’che’	 celebrate	 their	 260-day
calendar	 on	 8	 B’atz/Chuen,	 when	 Guatemalan	 day	 keepers	 and	 diviners	 are
initiated	in	a	major	ceremony	atop	a	mountain	in	Momostenango.	It	is	a	day

to	focus	on	the	Sacred	Calendar	and	to	ask	for	protection	for	humanity.	(See
Chapter	 Seven	 for	 more	 about	 8	 B’atz.)	 	 A	 special	 day	 for	 communing	 with
the	Creator	of	the	Earth	and	Sky	is	7	B’atz/Chuen.

Totems,	Things	to	Wear
Monkey,	Mayan	textile,	cloth	wrist	band

Road	(E/Eb)	

Meaning	of	the	Hieroglyph
The	line	of	dots	illustrates	a	road	or	path,	or	perhaps	two	roads	that	meet
at	the	point.	Not	seen	in	all	glyphs,	a	tooth	warns	of	dangerous	animals	along
the	road.

Mythological	Background
A	tale	from	the	Books	of	Chilam	Balam	tells	how	the	ladder	was	created
on	 2	 E/Eb	 to	 facilitate	 travel	 between	 Heaven	 and	 Earth.	 The	 stairs	 of	 a
pyramid	 lead	 from	 its	 base	 and	 peak,	 like	 a	 ladder.	 The	 Milky	 Way	 is
considered	 a	 road	 or	 path	 in	 the	 sky	 by	 the	 Maya,	 and	 the	 Road	 to	 Xibalba,
which	 is	 near	 Galactic	 Center	 and	 the	 dark	 rift,	 was	 the	 path	 that	 the	 Hero
Twins	traveled	to	challenge	the	Lords	of	Death.

Cosmic	Meaning
Key	 concepts	 are	 travel	 and	 destiny,	 the	 latter	 referring	 to	 one’s	 path
through	life.	It	can	also	mean	following	the	path	of	the	Sacred	Calendar.

Road	as	Year	Bearer
A	 Road	 year	 is	 more	 emotional	 than	 rational	 on	 a	 social	 and	 political
level,	 and	 people	 born	 in	 this	 year	 show	 the	 same	 tendency.	 It	 indicates	 a
year	of	good	fortune	and	travel.	Like	Wind	years	but	to	a	lesser	degree,	Road
can	bring	violent	storms	and	other	catastrophes	(see	page	27).	2011	is	a	Road
Year.

Astrological	Overview
Road	people	are	goal-oriented,	practical,	organized	and	industrious.	They
will	see	a	job	through	to	the	end.	Though	they	may	become	leaders	in	their
community	or	at	higher	levels	of	government,	they	are	often	non-conformists
or	 radicals.	 Like	 Dog,	 they	 lead	 the	 way	 for	 others	 to	 follow.	 While	 sociable
and	 friendly,	 they	 can	 be	 introspective	 and	 even	 solitary	 people.	 E/Eb
individuals	 are	 more	 likely	 to	 share	 possessions	 and	 information	 than

feelings	or	emotions.	They	have	good	health	but	are	prone	to	accidents.
Happy	go	lucky,	Road	people	are	even	happier	when	in	motion,	whether
traveling	long	distances	or	just	moving	around	the	house	or	neighborhood.	If
stationary	for	too	long,	they	become	restless	and	fidgety.	Road	people	make
good	 teachers,	 merchants,	 engineers,	 midwives,	 diplomats,	 leaders,
surveyors,	sailors	and	tour	guides.

The	Dark	Side	of	Road
A	tendency	to	suppress	anger	and	other	negative	emotions	is	the	key	trait
that	 Road	 people	 must	 overcome.	 They	 often	 suppress	 their	 feelings	 and
sublimate	 their	 anger	 and	 hurt	 feelings	 into	 their	 work.	 Restlessness,
insecurity,	indecisiveness	and	infidelity	are	also	in	the	cards	for	E/Eb	people,
who	at	their	worst	can	be	disloyal,	scheming	or	manipulative.

Notable	Road	People
Stevie	Wonder:	3
Jerry	Lee	Lewis:	6
Robert	Kennedy,	Joanne	Woodward,	Hugh	Hefner:	7
Franz	Kafka,	Ross	Perot:	10

Things	to	Do	on	a	Road	Day
The	energy	of	days	ruled	by	E/Eb	is	social,	inviting	one	to	get	along	with
others	 and	 to	 share.	 It	 is	 a	 time	 to	 ponder	 the	 path	 through	 life	 on	 a	 longterm	 basis	 by	 either	 choosing	 a	 path	 or	 evaluating	 current	 goals	 or
milestones.
Specific	things	to	do	include	planning	or	starting	a	journey,	a	vacation,	or
business	 travel.	 It	 may	 also	 indicate	 spiritual	 advancement.	 This	 is	 a	 good
time	 to	 get	 out	 and	 meet	 with	 clients	 or	 seek	 new	 ones,	 as	 is	 Deer.	 The
protector	of	merchants,	E/Eb	is	propitious	for	embarking	on	a	business	trip.
The	tooth	suggests	staying	alert	for	dangers	that	lie	in	one’s	path.

Cardinal	Direction	and	Colors
South.	Yellow	is	the	directional	color.	Personal	colors:	blue,	white.

Power	Places
Mountains	and	woods

Body	Parts	Ruled
Soles	of	feet,	taste	buds

Ceremonies
On	 a	 Road	 day,	 give	 thanks	 for	 or	 ask	 for	 employment,	 protection	 of
crops,	 which	 can	 refer	 to	 projects	 or	 activities	 unrelated	 to	 agriculture.	 All
Road	days	should	be	celebrated	with	parties	that	feature	fireworks	and	copal
incense.

Totems,	Things	to	Wear
Pyramid,	ladder,	compass,	tooth,	globe,	Rand	McNally	atlas,	amulet	with
glyph

Seed	(Q’anil/Lamat)

Meaning	of	the	Hieroglyph
The	four	dots	represent	seeds	of	the	four	kinds	of	corn—red,	yellow,	black
and	white—used	by	the	gods	to	create	the	human	races.	They	denote	the	four
seasons,	 the	 four	 pillars	 at	 the	 corners	 of	 the	 world,	 the	 four	 cardinal
directions,	 the	 four	 Hero	 Twins	 and	 the	 four	 cycles	 of	 Venus.	 The	 four	 dots
and	 the	 star	 form	 a	 quincunx.	 In	 the	 center	 of	 most	 glyphs	 for	 this	 nahual,
Venus	 is	 depicted	 as	 a	 “great	 star,”	 an	 ancient	 Mayan	 name	 for	 this	 planet.
Others	 are	 golden,	 yellow	 and	 great	 shining,	 referring	 to	 the	 color	 of	 ripe
corn.	(Stanzione:	15)

Mythological	Background
The	name	is	based	on	one	of	the	guardians	of	the	fields	who	helped	Blood
Woman	gather	corn	into	a	net	to	prove	she	was	pregnant	with	the	final	set	of
Hero	Twins.	His	name	was	Semilla,	which	means	seed	in	Spanish.	(Alvarado:
127)	 This	 is	 from	 the	 Popul	 Vuh,	 which	 contains	 many	 metaphors	 for	 the
Venus	cycle,	as	well	as	other	astronomical	associations.
Venus	 is	 the	 star	 of	 Quetzalcoatl/Kukulkan,	 who	 manifested	 on	 Earth
when	Venus	first	appeared	as	the	morning	star.	The	Pyramid	of	Kukulkan	at
Chichen	Itza	is	linked	to	Venus.

Cosmic	Meaning
Key	 ideas	 are	 seed,	 planting,	 ripening	 and	 fertility.	 The	 most	 successful
course	of	action	in	life	for	Seed	is	to	plant	things,	from	actual	plants,	to	ideas,
to	any	sort	of	new	project	or	plan.	A	Ki’che’	name	for	this	sign	is	corn	seed,
symbolizing	 the	 seed,	 or	 semen,	 of	 all	 living	 things.	 The	 Yucatecan	 Maya
scheduled	 wars	 around	 the	 Venus	 cycle,	 giving	 it	 a	 political	 aspect.	 In
Guatemala,	it	can	also	mean	to	possess	money.
The	 Aztecs	 called	 this	 day	 Rabbit,	 as	 do	 many	 English-language	 books.
But	 the	 Ki’che’	 make	 scarce	 reference	 to	 the	 rabbit	 in	 their	 ancient	 or
contemporary	 literature	 (some	 Kaqchikel	 still	 call	 it	 conejo,	 Spanish	 for

rabbit).	The	links	 between	Aztec	and	 Mayan	beliefs	that	 concern	rabbits	are
that	 this	 animal,	 like	 Venus,	 appears	 in	 the	 morning	 and	 evening,	 and	 that
both	 cultures	 associate	 this	 nahual	 with	 drunkenness.	 Another	 reason	 the
Aztecs	 may	 have	 called	 it	 Rabbit	 is	 that	 seed	 can	 mean	 semen,	 and	 rabbits
breed	quickly	and	often.	It	is	the	sign	of	masculine	fertility.

Astrological	Overview
Seed	 individuals	 are	 friendly,	 emotional	 and	 sensitive.	 Their	 diligence,
patience,	creativity,	hard	work	and	good	luck	can	lead	to	wealth.	They	fall	ill
often.	 Intuitive,	 they	 rely	 more	 on	 feelings	 than	 logic.	 To	 feel	 secure	 and
whole,	they	must	share	their	emotions	and	love.	They	will	see	many	changes
throughout	their	lives.
Moving	 slowly,	 they	 are	 almost	 always	 successful	 in	 the	 end.	 They	 can
become	successful	as	farmers	(or	any	vocation	that	involves	growing	things),
musicians,	 actors	 and	 other	 kinds	 of	 performers,	 counselors	 and
philosophers.

The	Dark	Side	of	Seed
Egotistical,	 arrogant	 and	 internally	 conflicted,	 this	 sign	 easily	 becomes
addicted	to	alcohol	and	drugs	and	is	attracted	to	all	kinds	of	vice.	Selfishness
is	 another	 negative	 trait.	 A	 fondness	 for	 gossip	 can	 lead	 to	 slander.	 Their
cautiousness	can	turn	into	paranoia.

Notable	Seed	People
Tobey	Maguire:	1
Elvis	Presley:	2
Jackie	Robinson,	Sally	Field:	6	
Jimi	Hendrix:	9
G.	Gordon	Liddy:	10	
Halle	Berry,	Mickey	Rooney:	11	
George	Orwell,	David	Carradine:	13	

Things	to	Do	on	a	Seed	Day
This	is	a	day	of	abundant	positive	energy,	a	good	time	to	plant	the	seed	of
a	new	undertaking	or	any	sort	of	crop,	or	to	visit	a	corn	field	and	think	about
the	 story	 of	 the	 Hero	 Twins’	 mother,	 Xmucane.	 As	 the	 sign	 of	 masculine
fertility,	 this	 could	 be	 a	 good	 day	 for	 starting	 a	 pregnancy	 (or	 a	 reminder	 to
use	 a	 condom	 if	 having	 a	 baby	 soon	 is	 not	 on	 one’s	 agenda).	 At	 night,	 one
might	observe	the	stars	and	planets,	especially	when	Venus	is	visible.

Cardinal	Direction	and	Colors
South.	Yellow	is	the	directional	color.	Personal	colors:		green,	gray,	white.

Power	Places

Fields,	 forests,	 rivers,	 lakes,	 especially	 those	 in	 the	 mountains	 or	 on
plateaus

Body	Parts	Ruled
Genitals,	testicles,	ovaries

Ceremonies
Seed	 is	 the	 time	 to	 give	 thanks	 for	 a	 successful	 planting,	 be	 it	 of	 an
agricultural,	social	or	working	nature,	and	for	all	possessions.	It	is	also	a	good
day	to	ask	for	fertility	and	a	bountiful	harvest.

Totems,	Things	to	Wear
Image	of	Venus	or	a	star,	corn	or	other	seeds,	amulet	with	the	glyph

Corn	(Aj/Ben)

Meaning	of	the	Hieroglyph
Corn	 stalks	 are	 rising	 from	 the	 bottom	 of	 the	 glyph.	 The	 lord	 who
promotes	the	growth	of	corn	is	depicted	in	some	variations.

Mythological	Background
Many	 Mayan	 myths	 and	 tales	 feature	 corn.	 One	 of	 the	 earliest	 stories	 in
the	 Popul	 Vuh	 tells	 how	 Sovereign	 Plumed	 Serpent	 and	 Heart	 of	 Sky,	 after
failing	three	times	to	create	human	beings,	succeeded	by	making	them	from
corn.	 Four	 kinds	 of	 corn	 were	 used:	 red,	 white,	 black	 and	 yellow,	 which
symbolize	the	four	races	of	humanity	as	well	as	the	cardinal	directions.	Four
corn	 seeds	 appear	 in	 the	 glyph	 for	 Seed	 (Q’anil/Lamat).Hunajpu	 and
Xbalanque,	the	second	set	of	Hero	Twins,	placed	ears	of	corn	in	the	center	of
their	grandmother’s	home	before	leaving	to	challenge	the	Lords	of	Death	in
Xibalba.	They	told	her	that	if	the	corn	dries	out,	they	have	died;	if	it	sprouts,
they	have	survived.
An	 often	 overlooked	 interpretation	 of	 Corn	 that	 it	 is	 used	 to	 make
whiskey;	its	association	with	cane	links	it	to	sugar	and	rum.

Cosmic	Meaning
Key	 ideas	 are	 growth,	 abundance,	 success	 and	 harvest.	 The	 energy	 of
growing	corn	is	not	only	positive	but	also	surging,	the	way	a	corn	stalk	climbs
high	after	the	first	heavy	rainfall.	Corn	can	represent	success	at	any	project	or
relationship	that	involves	growing,	ripening	or	maturing.
Because	 the	 Hero	 Twins	 planted	 corn	 in	 their	 grandmother’s	 house,	 this
sign	is	linked	with	the	home.	The	four	corners	of	the	house	with	the	corn	in
the	center	also	form	a	quincunx,	the	basis	of	Mesoamerican	cosmology.

Astrological	Overview
To	be	born	on	a	Corn	day	is	deemed	very	fortunate.	Lucky,	calm,	creative
and	good	at	managing	money	are	some	of	the	positive	attributes	of	this	day
sign.	 As	 would	 be	 expected	 from	 a	 plant	 that	 grows	 in	 the	 soil,	 Corn	 people
are	earthy	and	practical.	They	fight	for	their	beliefs	and	will	not	back	down.
Corn	people	tend	to	be	conservative,	opinionated	and	slow	to	change	in	their
ways,	 and	 can	 be	 hard	 to	 understand	 and	 argumentative.	 As	 children	 and
teenagers,	they	fall	ill	more	often	than	others,	but	lead	healthier	lives	as	they
mature.
This	 is	 a	 sign	 of	 authority,	 both	 in	 the	 spiritual	 world	 as	 well	 on	 the
material	 plane.	 The	 stalk	 of	 corn	 is	 tantamount	 to	 the	 staff	 of	 authority
carried	by	Mayan	elders.	They	are	natural	leaders	who	are	active	and	have	a
strong	 influence	 on	 people	 around	 them.	 They	 excel	 at	 careers	 that	 involve
growing	things.	This	can	mean	as	a	teacher	or	head	of	a	family,	for	example,
in	addition	to	growing	plants.

The	Dark	Side	of	Corn
Inflexibility	 and	 stubbornness	 may	 pose	 problems.	 These	 natives	 can
quickly	 change	 moods	 from	 happy	 to	 sad.	 Vanity	 and	 pride	 can	 be	 the
downfall	of	Corn.	It	is	also	a	good	sign	for	clairvoyants	and	astrologers,	as	the
Hero	 Twins	 used	 corn	 to	 send	 a	 telepathic	 message	 to	 their	 grandmother
from	Xibalba.

Notable	Corn	People
O.	J.	Simpson:	4
E.	Howard	Hunt:	8
Baraka	Hussein	Obama:	9
Ralph	Nader:	12
Mia	Farrow,	Aldous	Huxley:	13

Things	to	Do	on	A	Corn	Day
Growing,	maturing,	purification	and	transformation	are	the	key	thoughts

for	a	Corn	day.	It	is	a	day	to	harvest	crops	or	the	results	of	projects,	to	devote
time	 to	 family	 and	 friends,	 and	 focus	 on	 understanding	 friends,	 family	 and
associates	and	not	taking	them	for	granted.	

Cardinal	Direction	and	Colors
East.	Red	is	the	directional	color.	Personal	colors:	blue,	green	and	yellow.

Power	Places
Beaches	and	warm	meadows,	forests

Body	Parts	Ruled
Heart,	spine

Ceremonies
On	these	days,	one	should	ask	for	help	from	the	ancestors,	or	for	money
and	 success	 in	 business.	 8	 Corn	 is	 the	 day	 to	 pray	 for	 protection	 for	 infants
and	the	destiny	of	humanity.	7	Corn	is	good	for	communing	with	mountain
tops	and	the	peaks	of	volcanoes.

Totems,	Things	to	Wear
Corn	 seeds,	 a	 small	 stone	 metate	 (used	 to	 grind	 corn),	 bottle	 of	 rum,
Bourbon	 or	 other	 whiskey	 made	 from	 corn,	 sack	 of	 sugar,	 yellow	 clothes	 or
jewelry,	amulet	with	glyph

Jaguar	(I’x/Ix)

Meaning	of	the	Hieroglyph
The	circles	represent	the	spots	of	the	jaguar.
Mythological	Background
The	mythology	of	the	jaguar	made	it	one	of	the	most	important	and
powerful	totem	animals	for	the	Olmec	and	Aztec,	as	well	as	for	other
Mesoamerican	civilizations.	In	the	Popul	Vuh	creation	myth,	it	was	one
of	the	first	five	animals	created	by	the	gods.	It	appears	on	an	ancient
bone	 carving	 as	 the	 Jaguar	 Paddler,	 in	 stone	 at	 Palenque	 and	 other
ancient	 ruins,	 and	 in	 the	 codices	 as	 GIII,	 one	 of	 the	 triad	 of	 creation
gods.	 The	 jaguar’s	 pelt	 is	 still	 highly	 prized	 by	 shamans.	 I’x/Ix	 is	 the
Heart	of	Mountain;	her	domain	is	darkness.
One	 of	 the	 Books	 of	 Chilam	 Balam	 says	 Jaguar	 was	 the	 day	 the
entire	 world	 was	 created.	 It	 represents	 the	 creative	 spirit	 of	 Mother
Earth	and	the	feminine	energies	of	the	world.	The	jaguar’s	mouth,	like
that	of	the	toad	and	snake,	is	considered	a	portal	to	the	Otherworld.
Its	head,	according	to	John	Major	Jenkins	in	Maya	 Cosmogenesis
2012,	 symbolizes	 the	 dark	 rift	 of	 the	 Milky	 Way,	 which	 the	 Maya
thought	 of	 as	 a	 portal	 to	 the	 Underworld	 due	 to	 its	 proximity	 to	 the
Xibalba	 Be,	 or	 Road	 to	 Xibalba.	 Because	 the	 jaguar	 hunts	 at	 night,	 it
shares	 a	 bond	 with	 Night	 (Aq’ab’al/Akbal).	 The	 Maya	 associate	 this
creature	with	the	night-time	sun,	which	the	jaguar	carries	through	the
darkness	and	into	the	dawn	of	the	next	day.
Cosmic	Meaning
Key	concepts	are	feminine	energy,	forces	of	the	Earth,	strength	and
vitality.	 Jaguar	 is	 a	 day	 of	 high	 energy	 and	 all	 things	 related	 to	 the

Earth.	It	represents	the	creative	forces	of	the	universe	and	the	world.
Because	 adobe	 bricks	 are	 made	 from	 earth,	 it	 is	 associated	 with	 the
home.
It	 is	 linked	 to	 everything	 that	 comes	 from	 the	 Earth:	 food,	 wood,
life	itself.	Jaguar	rules	the	altars	in	the	mountains	of	the	Guatemalan
highlands,	each	devoted	to	a	specific	purpose.	In	close	contact	with	the
rhythms	of	the	Earth,	Jaguars	are	endowed	with	the	raw	power	of	the
jungle.	This	is	the	sign	of	feminine	fertility.
Astrological	Overview
The	 traits	 of	 the	 jaguar	 apply	 to	 I’x/Ix	 people:	 vitality,	 courage,
intelligence,	curiosity,	cunning	and	physical	power.	They	make	shrewd
fighters	who	won’t	back	down.	Jaguars	can	become	wealthy	with	riches
that	come	from	the	Earth,	such	as	gold,	jewels,	crops	and	oil.	They	are
generous	and	amiable.
With	 their	 powers	 of	 the	 night,	 they	 make	 excellent	 psychics,
shamans,	 priests,	 astrologers	 and	 spiritual	 guides.	 Jaguars	 have	 the
capacity	 to	 become	 powerful	 magicians,	 and	 this	 is	 the	 nahual	 most
likely	to	rise	to	higher	levels	of	consciousness.	They	can	become	strong
political	 leaders,	 doctors	 and	 healers,	 investigators,	 shamans	 and,	 of
course,	hunters.
The	Dark	Side	of	Jaguar
I’x/Ix	people	can	be	too	solitary,	the	way	the	jaguar	hunts	alone	at
night.	They	prefer	to	attack	from	the	shadows	and	will	fight	dirty.	They
are	 not	 the	 best	 at	 completing	 tasks	 or	 assignments	 unless	 working
with	 others.	 Strong,	 even	 immoral,	 sexual	 desires	 and	 arrogance	 can
lead	them	astray.	They	fall	ill	more	often	than	others.
Notable	Jaguar	People
Shakira,	Richard	Nixon:	2
Joseph	Stalin:	3	Tiger	Woods:	5
Sarah	Palin:	7
Buzz	 Aldrin,	 Margaret	 Thatcher,	 Julie	 Andrews,	 Arnold
Schwarzenegger:	12
Things	to	Do	on	a	Jaguar	Day
This	is	a	day	to	meditate	actively	on	Earth	as	our	home	and	on	how
to	live	in	harmony	with	Mother	Nature	rather	than	oppose	Her.	Jaguar
is	the	day	to	focus	on	the	feminine	aspects	of	the	Earth	and	all	living

things.	As	the	sign	of	feminine	fertility,	it	is	be	a	good	time	for	a	woman
to	become	pregnant.
It	 is	 also	 a	 good	 day	 to	 build,	 repair	 or	 improve	 one’s	 home,
perhaps	 by	 getting	 rid	 of	 things	 no	 longer	 used.	 Other	 activities	 that
work	well	on	Jaguar	days	are	buying	land	or	a	house,	hunting	for	things
such	as	truth,	knowledge,	and	participation	in	ecological	projects.
Cardinal	Direction	and	Colors
North.	 White	 is	 the	 directional	 color.	 Personal	 colors:	 brown	 and
yellow.
Power	Places
Mountains,	pyramids,	ceremonial	sites
Body	Parts	Ruled
Feet,	muscles,	nerves
Ceremonies
I’x/Ix	is	the	day	to	give	thanks	to	the	ancestors	for	all	that	comes
from	the	Earth,	such	as	food,	home	and	minerals,	and	for	the	work	of
women.	One	can	ask	for	things	related	to	home	and	family.	On	6,	7	or	8
I’x/Ix,	ask	for	money	to	buy	land	or	to	build	a	home,	or	for	protection
from	negative	energy	and	for	protection	of	home	from	the	elements.
Totems,	Things	to	Wear
Jaguar	or	pyramid,	jaguar	pelt	or	clothes	with	similar	design

Eagle	(Tz’ikin/Men)

Meaning	of	the	Hieroglyph
A	 bird’s	 beak	 is	 clearly	 seen	 in	 some	 glyphs.	 Feathers	 depicted	 with
horizontal	or	vertical	lines	of	others	associate	this	glyph	with	birds.

Mythological	Background
In	the	Books	of	Chilam	Balam,	this	nahual	is	called	pájaro,	Spanish
for	 bird.	 Birds	 were	 the	 second	 of	 the	 first	 five	 animals	 created,
according	to	the	Popul	Vuh.	(Tedlock,	Dennis:	78)	Some	sources	say	it
refers	to	the	sacred	quetzal	bird.	Eventually	it	came	to	be	called	eagle
because	this	is	the	mightiest	of	all	birds.
One	 Mayan	 legend	 says	 an	 eagle	 showed	 them	 where	 to	 find	 the
first	 corn.	 At	 Lake	 Atitlán,	 Guatemala,	 the	 Tz’utujil	 Maya	 start	 their
260-day	calendar	on	an	Eagle	day	because	they	were	originally	known
as	the	Bird	House	people.	A	Ki’che’	legend	tells	how	the	eagle	was	the
bird	 that	 served	 as	 messenger	 between	 Heart	 of	 Sky	 and	 Heart	 of
Earth,	signifying	the	link	between	the	gods	and	humanity.	In	Mexico,
the	Aztec	Eagle	Knights	were	the	most	fearsome	military	force	of	their
time.
The	main	role	of	the	shaman	kings	in	ancient	Mesoamerica	was	to	travel
to	 other	 dimensions	 by	 manifesting	 the	 World	 Tree	 and	 climbing	 it	 to
commune	 with	 their	 ancestors	 and	 return	 with	 knowledge	 to	 help	 their
people.	Accordingly,	men	means	shaman	in	Yucatecan	Maya.

Cosmic	Meaning
Key	meanings	for	Eagle	are	flying	high,	vision	and	ambition.	The	spirit	of
the	high-flying	eagle	makes	this	a	day	of	good	fortune,	a	time	to	soar	and	rise
above	the	troubles	of	daily	life	and	communicate	with	the	Heart	of	Sky,	the
center	 of	 our	 galaxy,	 home	 of	 Hunab	 Ku.	 Spiritual	 advancement	 is	 another
interpretation	of	flying.

Among	 the	 most	 powerful	 of	 all	 nahuales,	 the	 ambitious	 eagle
aggressively	 pursues	 its	 prey	 or	 goal	 and	 ultimately	 gets	 it.	 This	 makes	 it	 a
good	for	business-related	activities.	Freedom	is	another	meaning.

Astrological	Overview
Spiritually	 and	 materially	 balanced,	 Eagles	 are	 good,	 friendly	 and	 kind
individuals	 who	 can	 create	 their	 own	 reality.	 They	 are	 independent,
ambitious,	smart,	outgoing,	intuitive,	lucky,	spiritual	and	sociable.	From	high
above,	the	Eagle	can	see	the	big	picture	better	than	most	people.
Eagles	 are	 perfectionists	 with	 a	 sharp	 eye	 for	 detail	 and	 a	 talent	 for
analyzing	 things	 and	 situations,	 so	 they	 excel	 at	 technical	 tasks.	 They	 often
become	wealthy	and	wise.	Aggressive	and	assertive,	they	are	willing	to	listen,
and	 succeed	 by	 working	 with	 a	 team	 to	 bring	 the	 talents	 and	 skills	 of	 its
members	 to	 fruition.	 They	 make	 good	 business	 people,	 planners,	 analysts,
proofreaders,	technicians,	mystics	and	artists.

The	Dark	Side	of	Eagle
Sometimes	the	Eagle	flies	too	high,	which	can	translate	into	excessive	use
of	drugs	and	alcohol.	Striving	for	more	than	they	can	accomplish	may	result
in	 their	 downfall.	 They	 should	 avoid	 excessive	 escapism	 and	 flights	 from
reality.	 An	 Eagle	 gone	 bad	 can	 be	 irresponsible	 and	 overly	 ambitious,
resorting	to	manipulation	and	cheating	to	get	what	they	want.

Notable	Eagle	People
George	Patton,	Lady	Gaga,	Antonio	Banderas,	Raquel	Welch:	2
John	F.	Kennedy:	4
Ringo	Starr:	7
Muhammed	Ali:	8
Adam	Sandler,	Donald	Rumsfeld:	12

Things	to	Do	on	an	Eagle	Day
This	is	a	time	to	consider	the	big	picture,	focus	on	one’s	goals,	and	pursue
goals	that	have	been	already	set.	Then	zero	in	on	the	details	of	realizing	those
ambitions.	 It	 is	 a	 positive	 time	 to	 work	 with	 others	 to	 make	 things	 happen.
Business	matters	are	highlighted,	and	it	is	a	good	time	for	travel.
This	is	a	day	of	an	abundance	of	things	that	do	not	come	from	the	Earth,
such	as	money	earned	in	business.	It	is	a	day	for	spiritual	elevation	as	well	as
flying	high	on	the	material	plane.	Eagle	is	a	day	of	increase	and	abundance,
the	season	for	self-improvement.	But	it	can	be	a	bad	day	for	people	who	don’t
give	 thanks	 for	 what	 they	 have	 received	 or	 have	 not	 been	 performing
ceremonies	on	Deer	days.

Cardinal	Direction	and	Colors

West.	 Black	 is	 the	 directional	 color.	 Personal	 colors:	 dark	 blue,	 sky	 blue,
purple.

Power	Places
Mountains,	volcanoes,	forests

Body	Part	Ruled
Eyes

Ceremonies
On	Eagle	days,	one	should	give	thanks	for	money	and	success	in	business,
and	 ask	 for	 the	 same.	 A	 sacrifice	 may	 be	 in	 order	 if	 one	 has	 not	 been
expressing	 gratitude	 for	 what	 has	 already	 been	 received.	 This	 is	 most
effective	 on	 8	 Eagle,	 celebrated	 by	 the	 Tzu’tujil	 Maya	 as	 the	 first	 day	 of	 the
Sacred	 Calendar.	 Chocolate	 is	 an	 appropriate	 offering,	 as	 cacao	 beans	 were
the	currency	of	the	ancient	Maya	and	Aztec,	and	Eagle	is	a	day	of	money	and
business.

Totems,	Things	to	Wear
Eagle,	quetzal	or	any	bird	effigy,	bird	feathers,	dream	catcher,	amulet	with
glyph

Vulture	(Ajmaq/Cib)

Meaning	of	the	Hieroglyph
Most	 Ajmaq/Cib	 glyphs	 show	 a	 conch	 shell,	 though	 some	 variations	 are
illustrated	with	a	jaguar’s	head.

Mythological	Background
The	conch	shell	was	worn	by	the	bacabs,	the	four	gods	at	the	four	corners
of	 the	 world	 who	 bear	 the	 pillars	 that	 hold	 up	 the	 sky.	 It	 was	 used	 in
ceremonies	 in	 Teotihuacan	 and	 other	 inland	 cities	 far	 from	 the	 sea.	 An
ancient	ceramic	known	as	the	Cámara	vase	shows	a	king	vulture	flying	down
while	 someone	 blows	 a	 conch	 shell.	 (Thompson:	 368)	 The	 Dresden	 Codex
depicts	a	vulture	perched	in	a	tree.

Cosmic	Meaning
Key	 meanings	 for	 Vulture	 are	 taking	 it	 easy,	 relaxation,	 patience	 and
timing.	 The	 vulture	 sails	 along	 on	 the	 breeze	 and	 rarely	 flaps	 its	 wings	 as	 it
circles	 overhead.	 Vulture	 is	 a	 day	 to	 coast	 along	 and	 go	 with	 the	 flow,	 the
opposite	 of	 how	 the	 Eagle	 catches	 its	 prey.	 Vulture	 also	 has	 occult
connotations	and	excels	at	communicating	with	the	ancestors.

In	many	countries,	vultures	carry	away	or	eat	the	dead,	a	metaphor
for	 sin	 to	 the	 Maya,	 some	 of	 whom	 deem	 this	 a	 day	 of	 sin	 and
confession,	 or	 to	 forgive	 others	 for	 their	 sins.	 In	 this	 case,	 sin	 often
refers	 to	 sexual	 misdeeds	 such	 as	 infidelity,	 lasciviousness	 and
accidentally	uploading	one’s	latest	sex	video	to	You	Tube.
Astrological	Overview
Vulture	people	are	introspective	and,	though	intense	thinkers,	often	slow
to	 act.	 But	 once	 in	 action,	 they	 follow	 through	 tenaciously.	 This	 sign	 is
intelligent,	patient	and	cautious.	These	people	are	good	at	detecting	lies	and
exaggeration	 and	 are	 lucky	 in	 business.	 Due	 to	 their	 serious	 and	 practical
nature,	they	make	good	detectives,	judges,	analysts,	politicians	and	business

people.	They	can	also	become	good	mystics	and	psychics.

The	Dark	Side	of	Vulture
Envy,	jealousy	and	covetousness	are	hallmarks	of	a	Vulture	gone
bad.	They	can	be	detached	and	aloof,	lazy	and	irresponsible.
Notable	Vulture	People
Jimmy	Page,	Harry	Houdini,	Michael	Douglas:	1
Orville	Wright,	Stevie	Ray	Vaughan:	3	
Oliver	Stone:	6
Hillary	Swank:	7
Catherine,	Duchess	of	Cambridge:	10

Things	to	Do	on	a	Vulture	Day
It	is	a	day	to	reflect	on	past	transgressions	and	focus	on	avoiding	them	in
the	future	as	well	as	asking	forgiveness	for	them,	or	to	consult	with	a	priest,
day	keeper	or	a	psychic	for	guidance.	One	should	ask	people	to	forgive	one’s
mistakes.	This	is	a	good	time	to	commune	with	the	ancestors	for	counsel.
Ajmaq/Cib	is	not	the	best	time	for	starting	a	new	project,	because	it	is	a
day	of	low,	or	at	least	conservative,	energy,	indicated	by	the	laid	back	nature
of	 the	 vulture.	 On	 the	 positive	 side,	 this	 provides	 a	 good	 excuse	 for
procrastination!

Cardinal	Direction	and	Colors
South.	Yellow	is	the	directional	color.	Personal	colors:	gray,	black,	white.

Power	Places
Caves,	trees

Body	Parts	Ruled
Eyes,	genitals

Ceremonies
On	Vulture	days,	one	should	ask	for	forgiveness	for	sins	and	crimes,	and
say	 thanks	 for	 health	 and	 for	 money.	 1	 Ajmaq/Cib	 is	 a	 very	 good	 day	 to	 ask
for	protection,	good	health	and	money.

Totems,	Things	to	Wear
Conch	 or	 other	 seashell,	 effigy	 of	 a	 buzzard,	 owl,	 quetzal	 or	 other	 bird,
feathers

Earth	(No’j/Caban)

Meaning	of	the	Hieroglyph
Various	glyphs	depict	either	the	young	Earth	Goddess,	the	Moon	Goddess
or	the	Maize	God.	The	strand	of	wavy	hair	is	a	common	thread	in	all	glyphs.

Mythological	Background
In	 the	 Popul	 Vuh,	 Heart	 of	 Sky	 and	 Sovereign	 Plumed	 Serpent
commenced	 the	 creation	 of	 this	 world	 by	 saying,	 “Earth.”	 Cabracan,	 in	 the
same	 book,	 is	 a	 god	 associated	 with	 earthquakes.	 Mesoamerican	 pyramids
were	 meant	 to	 represent	 mountains	 or	 volcanoes,	 and	 one	 of	 the	 most
ancient	 pyramids	 in	 Mesoamerica,	 built	 by	 the	 Olmec	 at	 La	 Venta,	 Mexico,
was	made	of	earth	rather	than	stone.

Cosmic	Meaning
Primary	ideas	are	thought,	idea	and	movement.	The	earthly	aspect	brings
knowledge	 and	 wisdom	 through	 experience	 and	 thought;	 the	 lunar	 aspect,
through	 intuition.	 The	 wavy	 strand	 of	 hair	 in	 the	 glyph	 suggests	 a	 moving
wave,	 which	 indicates	 movement	 or	 earthquake.	 Movement	 can	 mean
spiritual	 or	 other	 kinds	 of	 growth	 or	 advancement	 as	 well	 as	 travel	 on	 the
material	plane.
The	 earthquake,	 which	 is	 this	 nahual’s	 Aztec	 name,	 may	 be	 a	 sudden
revelation	or	insight	that	shakes	one’s	foundation.	(But	sometimes,	it	really
means	 “Earthquake!”)	 This	 strand	 might	 also	 be	 a	 thread.	 This	 would	 link
Earth	to	Monkey,	which	is	called	Thread	by	the	Ki’che’	Maya.

Earth	as	Year	Bearer
As	the	first	day	of	the	solar	year,	Earth	brings	thought	to	the	forefront	for
society	 and	 individuals.	 Leaders	 are	 expected	 to	 come	 up	 with	 new	 ideas.
Meetings	are	in	order	on	all	levels	of	government.	The	current	year,	2012,	is	a
Noj’/Caban	year—which	can	be	interpreted	as	the	Year	of	the	Earthquake,	as
the	Aztecs	believed.

Astrological	Overview
These	 individuals	 are	 intelligent,	 creative,	 talented,	 wise,	 analytical	 and
inquisitive;	 some	 can	 be	 visionary.	 Like	 Deer	 (Kej’/Manik),	 this	 is	 a

masculine	 sign,	 and	 women	 of	 this	 nahual	 also	 exhibit	 masculine	 traits.
Courageous	and	fair,	they	make	strong	leaders	who	are	movers	and	shakers.
Friendly	 and	 extroverted,	 they	 are	 natural	 problem-solvers	 who	 excel	 at
strategic	 planning	 and	 managing	 resources.	 Earth	 people	 are	 in	 close	 touch
with	 the	 rhythm	 of	 Mother	 Earth.	 They	 are	 concerned	 with	 the	 global
community	as	well	with	as	their	neighborhood,	and	strive	to	heal	the	planet
by	 recycling,	 planting	 trees	 and	 helping	 others	 to	 become	 aware	 of	 the
benefits	of	ecology.
Good	 careers	 for	 this	 sign	 are	 counselor	 (civil	 or	 religious),	 manager,
business	 person,	 lawyer,	 doctor,	 writer,	 poker	 player,	 philosopher,	 ecologist,
musician,	spiritual	guide	or	day	keeper.

The	Dark	Side	of	Earth
Leaping	to	conclusions	is	a	potential	problem	for	those	who	do	not	think
things	through	and	review	their	ideas	and	plans.	Other	character	flaws	can	be
arrogance,	pride	and	stubbornness.

Notable	Earth	People
Hank	Williams,	Natalie	Wood:	4
Demi	Moore:	5
50	Cent,	Marlon	Brando,	Heinrich	Himmler:	10
Timothy	Leary:	11
Benjamin	Franklin:	13

Things	to	Do	on	an	Earth	Day
An	 Earth	 day	 is	 best	 devoted	 to	 thinking,	 to	 new	 ideas,	 and	 to	 gaining
wisdom	 and	 knowledge.	 This	 is	 a	 day	 of	 positive	 action	 and	 a	 day	 of	 the
Earth.	It	is	a	beneficial	time	to	look	for	unique	ways	to	solve	a	problem.	One
can	 often	 think	 things	 through	 more	 clearly	 and	 find	 the	 optimal	 answers
and	 solutions.	 Logic	 will	 prove	 more	 effective	 than	 reflection	 or	 intuition.
Earth	 is	 one	 of	 the	 best	 days	 to	 visit	 the	 mountains	 and	 commune	 with
Mother	Earth	to	harmonize	with	her	rhythms.

Cardinal	Direction	and	Colors
East.	The	directional	color	is	red.	Personal	color:	blue.

Power	Places
Mountains,	tropical	forests,	lakes

Body	Part	Ruled
Brain

Ceremonies
One	should	say	thanks	for	the	wisdom	of	the	ancestors	and	for	one’s	own
intelligence	 and	 ideas,	 and	 ask	 for	 guidance	 from	 the	 ancestors,	 for	 the
wisdom	and	insight	to	make	correct	choices,	and	to	ask	that	knowledge	will
evolve	 into	 wisdom.	 Earth	 days	 with	 a	 number	 from	 1-6	 are	 a	 time	 to	 seek
guidance	from	the	ancestors	at	the	community	altars.

Totems,	Things	to	Wear
Pyramid,	any	crystal	or	stone,	amulet	with	glyph

Knife	(Tijax/Etznab)

Meaning	of	the	Hieroglyph
The	 point	 in	 the	 center	 symbolizes	 the	 tip	 of	 the	 obsidian	 or	 flint	 knife
used	 by	 Mesoamerican	 priests	 for	 sacrifices.	 It	 has	 been	 called	 Flint	 or
Obsidian	by	English-language	authors	who	apparently	prefer	to	downplay	its
somber	imagery.	The	glyph	also	shows	an	aerial-view	image	of	a	pyramid,	the
place	of	sacrifice.
With	 the	 point	 at	 the	 center	 of	 the	 four	 corners,	 this	 glyph	 describes	 a
quincunx.	This	can	be	interpreted	as	the	heavenly	cross	formed	by	the	Milky
Way	and	the	ecliptic,	with	Galactic	Center	as	the	tip	of	the	knife.

Mythological	Background
The	 Books	 of	 Chilam	 Balam	 refer	 to	 Tijax/Etznab	 as	 a	 blood-letter	 and
healer,	specifically	of	fever.

Cosmic	Meaning
Key	meanings	are	sacrifice,	loss,	cutting,	suffering	and	healing.	Sacrifice	is
not	 necessarily	 a	 negative	 thing,	 as	 one	 can	 gain	 in	 chess	 by	 sacrificing	 a
Pawn	for	a	Bishop,	for	example.	Loss	can	mean	losing	things	or	even	memory
loss.	 But	 the	 doctor’s	 scalpel	 is	 used	 for	 healing,	 so	 Knife	 is	 associated	 with
physical	and	spiritual	healing.	The	intense	opposite	meanings	of	this	nahual
make	it	exceptionally	intense.
Cutting,	 besides	 cutting	 with	 a	 sharp	 instrument,	 can	 mean	 reducing
things	to	basics,	“cutting	to	the	chase,”	or	cutting	someone	loose.	Knife,	like
Vulture	(Ajmaq/Cib),	is	known	by	some	Maya	as	the	“day	of	the	sinner.”	

Astrological	Overview
These	 people	 face	 more	 challenges	 in	 life	 than	 any	 other	 nahual.	 As	 a
result,	 they	 grow	 strong	 and	 can	 make	 it	 on	 their	 own.	 They	 are	 active	 and
intelligent	 people	 who	 are	 early	 risers	 and	 sharp	 conversationalists.	 Knife
people	 can	 penetrate	 the	 mysteries	 of	 life	 and	 open	 a	 portal	 to	 other
dimensions.	Their	most	positive	attribute	is	the	ability	to	heal.

Knife	people	who	are	aware	of	their	sign’s	potential	for	problems	can	use
the	 knowledge	 to	 anticipate	 them,	 as	 well	 as	 to	 cut	 through	 obstacles	 and
simplify	 their	 lives.	 Knife	 natives	 may	 fall	 ill	 for	 short	 periods	 of	 time.	 Best
careers	 are	 as	 doctors,	 nurses,	 politicians,	 jewelers,	 technical	 writers,
warriors,	proofreaders,	editors	and	analysts.

The	Dark	Side	of	Knife
Suppressed	 anger	 can	 erupt	 into	 emotional	 outbursts	 and	 even	 violence.
They	 hold	 grudges	 for	 too	 long	 and	 can	 be	 devious,	 impulsive	 and	 accidentprone.	 Because	 Knife	 is	 one	 of	 the	 most	 challenged	 day	 signs,	 a	 nine-sign
Constellation	 chart	 is	 recommended	 to	 find	 insights	 into	 how	 to	 best	 deal
with	the	challenges	and	losses,	and	to	make	the	most	effective	sacrifices.

Notable	Knife	People
Jude	Law,	Jacqueline	Kennedy	Onassis:	1
Napoleon	Bonaparte,	Che	Guevara:	3
George	Harrison,	Marcel	Marceau:	8
Benito	Mussolini,	Donald	Sutherland:	10
Britney	Spears,	Miles	Davis:	11

Things	to	Do	on	a	Knife	Day
This	is	a	good	time	to	sort	things	out,	get	rid	of	unused	possessions	and
ideas,	 even	 to	 cut	 the	 bonds	 of	 a	 relationship.	 Editing	 a	 manuscript	 or	 song
lyrics	 is	 a	 positive	 example	 of	 cutting.	 Another	 is	 to	 cut	 one’s	 self	 free	 from
oppression,	 liberate	 others	 or	 start	 a	 revolution.	 The	 knife	 suggests	 it	 is
favorable	for	surgery	or	visiting	a	doctor.	Knife	is	a	good	day	for	a	business	to
have	 a	 sale,	 or	 for	 individuals	 to	 organize	 a	 garage	 sale.	 In	 relationships,
compromise	is	indicated;	it	can	also	mean	a	couple	should	spend	more	time
apart	than	other	couples.
It	 is	 not	 a	 good	 time	 for	 travel,	 as	 flights	 may	 be	 missed	 or	 luggage	 lost.
Even	a	short	hike	through	a	forest	can	result	in	getting	lost.	Things	that	tend
to	get	lost	should	be	carefully	secured.	Tijax/Etznab	is	not	the	time	to	begin
anything	new.	One	should	not	send	messages	of	any	sort	regarding	money	or
sex,	 particularly	 to	 family	 or	 friends.	 Some	 Maya	 say	 this	 is	 the	 day	 to	 ask
forgiveness	for	your	sins.

Cardinal	Direction	and	Colors
North.	White	is	the	directional	color.	Personal	colors:	black,	red,	white.

Power	Places
Cliffs	and	waterfalls,	lightning	storms

Body	Parts	Ruled
Fingernails,	teeth,	nerves

Ceremonies
Ceremonies	 should	 not	 be	 performed	 on	 a	 Knife	 day,	 except	 to	 ask
protection	 from	 accidents	 and	 disease,	 to	 ask	 forgiveness	 for	 sins,	 or	 if	 it	 is
one’s	 main	 day	 sign	 of	 Adulthood	 or	 the	 current	 stage	 of	 life	 (Youth	 or
Future).	One	should	also	perform	a	ceremony	on	Knife	days	during	one’s	the
Path	of	the	Plumed	Serpent.

Totems,	Things	to	Wear
An	obsidian,	flint	or	jade	knife,	a	pyramid,	amulet	with	glyph

Storm	(Kawoq/Cauac)

Meaning	of	the	Hieroglyph
Storm	 clouds	 are	 symbolized	 by	 the	 cluster	 of	 grape-like	 orbs.	 Inverted,
this	cluster	resembles	a	pyramid.	Some	glyphs	hint	that	it	refers	to	celestial
dragons.

Mythological	Background
In	the	Popul	Vuh,	the	god	called	Hurricane	is	also	manifested	as	Newborn
Thunderbolt	and	Raw	Thunderbolt.	He	was	one	of	the	gods	that	created	the
world.	 Later,	 he	 caused	 the	 flood	 that	 wiped	 out	 the	 race	 of	 wooden	 people.
Hurakan	was	also	the	hurricane	god	of	the	Arawak	and	Carib	Indians	in	the
Caribbean	Sea,	Central	America	and	South	America.
The	 key	 ideas	 for	 this	 powerful	 day	 are	 trouble,	 problems,	 bad	 news,
nurturing	and	powerful	woman,	and	family	life	and	the	home.	Kawoq/Cauac
is	 the	 lightning-filled	 thunderstorm	 that	 can	 damage	 the	 crops	 but	 which
nourishes	 those	 that	 survive.	 It	 is	 the	 woman	 whose	 love	 warms	 the	 home
and	 nurtures	 the	 children.	 The	 lightning	 in	 a	 storm	 may	 be	 an	 allusion	 to	 a
flash	of	inspiration,	while	the	rain	signifies	cleansing	or	purification.	Storm	is
the	nahual	of	women	and	of	strength.	(Alvarado:	99).

Astrological	Overview
Homebodies	 who	 are	 sensitive	 and	 often	 affected	 by	 the	 weather,	 Storm
natives	 are	 nurturing,	 tender	 and	 affectionate.	 They	 can	 be	 diligent	 and
dedicated	 humanitarians.	 Men	 born	 on	 this	 day	 lean	 toward	 the	 effeminate
and	 frivolous.	 Storm	 natives	 may	 face	 challenges	 or	 troubles	 in	 their	 early
years,	 but	 rarely	 get	 sick.	 Kawoq/Cauac	 people	 make	 good	 nurses,	 doctors
and	caretakers,	meteorologists,	attorneys	and	musicians.

The	Dark	Side	of	Storm
Without	 a	 loved	 one	 or	 a	 home	 to	 care	 for,	 they	 can	 lapse	 into	 heavy
drinking	and	hard	drugs.	A	bad	temper	is	another	pitfall	for	Kawoq/Cauac.

Notable	Storm	People

John	Wayne:	1
Little	Richard,	Yoko	Ono:	2	
Sting:	3
Brad	Pitt:	4
Marlene	Dietrich:	5	
Leonard	Cohen,	Al	Gore,	Peter	O’Toole,	J.	R.	R.	Tolkien:	10
Prince,	Peter	Sellers:	12

Things	to	Do	on	a	Storm	Day
On	these	days,	it	is	important	to	be	sensitive	to	the	needs	of	others.	It	is	a
time	 to	 attend	 to	 children	 and	 the	 home	 or	 perform	 volunteer	 work,	 or	 to
reflect	 on	 the	 deeper	 meaning	 of	 life.	 A	 good	 day	 for	 lawyers	 and	 judges,
Kawoq/Cauac	 is	 a	 suitable	 day	 for	 settling	 legal	 matters.	 One	 should
anticipate	bad	news	and	trouble	and	be	prepared.

Cardinal	Direction	and	Colors
West.	Black	is	the	directional	color.	Personal	color:	dark	blue.

Power	Places
Pine	forests

Body	Parts	Ruled
Nerves,	eyes

Ceremonies
On	 Storm	 days,	 one	 should	 give	 thanks	 for	 the	 women	 in	 one’s	 life,	 for
the	contributions	of	women	to	the	world	and	humanity,	and	for	the	rain.	It	is
a	day	to	ask	to	be	healed	or	cured,	for	success	in	business	and	business	trips,
and	protection	for	the	elements	for	one’s	home,	projects	or	crops.	

Totems,	Things	to	Wear
Storm	cloud,	lightning,	image	or	effigy	of	a	Mayan	goddess,	a	pyramid

Sun	(Ajpu/Ahau)

Meaning	of	the	Hieroglyph
This	 glyph	 depicts	 the	 face	 of	 Hunajpu,	 the	 first	 set	 of	 Hero	 Twins	 (who
were	 step-brothers	 of	 the	 older	 twins,	 One	 Monkey	 and	 One	 Artisan).
Hunajpu	 and	 his	 brother,	 Xbalenque,	 hunted	 with	 blowguns.	 According	 to
Kenneth	Johnson	in	Mayan	Calendar	Astrology,	Ki’che’	Maya	spiritual	guide
Don	 Rigoberto	 in	 Momostenango	 says	 the	 circular	 mouth	 in	 the	 glyph
depicts	 Hunajpu’s	 mouth	 when	 using	 the	 blowgun.	 Other	 glyphs	 show	 a
profile	of	the	nahual	and	a	flower	with	four	petals	in	place	of	an	ear.

Mythological	Background
After	 the	 Hero	 Twins	 defeated	 the	 Lords	 of	 Death	 in	 Xibalba,	 Hunajpu
was	lifted	into	the	sky	and	became	the	sun.	The	Aztecs	recorded	their	sacred
calendar	 in	 the	 Aztec	 Sun	 Stone,	 which	 is	 on	 exhibit	 in	 a	 Mexico	 City
museum.	His	face	was	also	seen	in	the	Ki’che’	Sun	Stone	Calendars	found	in
Guatemala.	 The	 Kaqchikel	 Maya	 around	 Antigua,	 Guatemala,	 call	 Volcan
Agua	"Volcan	Ajpu."

Cosmic	Meaning
Key	 ideas	 for	 Ajpu/Ahau	 are	 illumination,	 sun,	 flower,	 day,	 lord	 and
warrior.	Sunlight	creates	the	day	and	causes	the	flower	and	all	things	to	grow
and	blossom.	The	flower	with	four	petals	symbolizes	the	cardinal	directions
and	the	cross	in	the	sky.	Yucatecan	shaman	kings	were	called	Ahauobs.
Sun	is	the	most	powerful	and	beneficial	nahual,	radiating	positive	energy
on	 all	 levels.	 While	 the	 basic	 definition	 of	 illumination	 means	 light,	 it	 also
means	enlightenment	that	leads	to	vision.	It	is	associated	with	the	ancestors
and	 communication	 with	 them,	 which	 was	 a	 major	 role	 of	 Mayan	 shaman
kings.

Astrological	Overview
Physically	strong	and	healthy,	this	nahual—which	radiates	positive	energy

and	enthusiasm—is	the	most	powerful	of	all.	The	Ajpu/Ahau	person	is	brave,
amiable,	 warm,	 romantic	 and	 outgoing.	 Writers,	 musicians,	 mediums,
psychics,	 politicians,	 warriors,	 hunters,	 farmers,	 spiritual	 guides	 and	 day
keepers	are	excellent	careers	for	Ajpu/Ahau.

The	Dark	Side	of	the	Sun
Ajpu/Ahau	 can	 be	 short-tempered	 and	 easily	 angered	 to	 the	 point	 of
revenge.	Natives	may	be	idealistic	to	the	point	of	stubbornness.

Notable	Sun	People
Tom	Wolfe:	1	
Abbie	Hoffman,	Bruce	Springsteen,	H.	Rider	Haggard:	5	
Gloria	Steinem:	13

Things	to	Do	on	a	Sun	Day
This	 is	 an	 excellent	 time	 to	 start	 or	 continue	 creative	 projects,	 and	 to
begin	construction	on	a	home	or	move	into	one.	It	is	a	great	day	for	a	party.
One	 should	 place	 flowers	 on	 the	 graves	 of	 ancestors,	 reflect	 on	 the	 positive
things	in	life	and	seek	illumination	on	a	spiritual	level.

Cardinal	Direction	and	Colors
South.	Yellow	is	the	directional	color.	Personal	color:	red.

Power	Places
Any	place	with	a	vista	of	the	rising	or	setting	sun,	particularly	at	a	beach,
in	the	woods,	a	jungle,	or	a	field	of	flowers

Body	Parts	Ruled
Heart,	breast,	lungs

Ceremonies
On	these	days,	one	should	give	thanks	for	all	that	one	has	received,
and	ask	for	happiness	in	the	home,	for	money,	for	strength	and	power,
and	 for	 the	 ability	 to	 comprehend	 and	 apply	 lessons	 of	 the	 ancestors
and	the	past.	7	Sun	is	a	time	to	ask	for	protection	for	land.
	Totems,	Things	to	Wear
Any	 object	 or	 graphic	 that	 depicts	 the	 sun;	 flowers	 (especially
yellow),	snail,	amulet	with	glyph

The	Calendar	Board

The	calendar	board	is	used	to	keep	track	of	the	days	in	the	Sacred
Calendar.	This	is	used	to	schedule	ceremonies	and	mundane	activities.
It	is	also	used	in	Mayan	astrology.
The	Path	of	Life
One	 a	 person's	 day	 sign	 is	 known,	 it	 is	 possible	 to	 find	 their	 day	 sign	 of
Youth	and	of	their	Future,	or	destiny.	These	three	nahuales	form	a	person's
path	of	life.	The	main	nahual	is	in	effect	throughout	life,	but	the	day	sign	of
Youth	 is	 also	 an	 influence	 through	 around	 the	 age	 of	 26,	 when	 it	 fades	 out.
Around	52,	the	Future	nahual	begins	to	fade	in.	So	it	is	important	for	people
around	26	or	52	to	be	aware	of	the	changing	influences	in	their	lives	and	to
prepare	 for	 them.To	 find	 a	 person's	 nahual	 for	 Youth,	 count	 nine	 cells	 up
from	the	main	day	sign,	making	that	the	first	of	the	nine.	For	the	day	sign	of
the	Future,	count	9	cells	down.	If	the	top	of	the	column	is	reached,	continue
counting	from	the	bottom	of	the	one	in	the	column	to	the	right.	If	the	bottom
is	 reached,	 continue	 from	 the	 top	 of	 the	 column	 to	 the	 left.	 Example:	 A

person	 whose	 main	 day	 sign,	 the	 one	 on	 which	 he	 or	 she	 was	 born,	 is	 10
Deer,	 then	 the	 Future	 sign	 will	 be	 5	 Eagle.	 The	 sign	 of	 Youth	 would	 be	 2
Storm.

How	to	Pronounce	Mayan	Day	Signs
The	’	in	Ki’che’	names	indicates	a	glottal	stop	performed	by	briefly
closing	the	glottis.	It	is	impossible	to	convey	this	sound	in	print;	a	basic
way	 to	 pronounce	 it	 is	 to	 add	 a	 K	 to	 the	 end,	 which	 is	 done	 here.
Tzu’tujil	 and	 Kaqchikel	 pronunciations	 vary,	 even	 between	 different
villages	today.	The	following	table	is	based	on	Ki'che'	Mayan.

Nahual

Pronunciation

Imox

Ee-MOSH

Iq

Eek

Aq’ab’al

AHK-ahb-AHL

K’at

KAHT

Kan

KAHN

Kame

KAH-may

Kej’

KAYK

Q’anil

Kahk-NEEL

Toj

TOHK

Tzi'

ZEE

B’atz

BAHTZ

E

Ay

Ix

Eesh

Aj

AHK

Tz’ikin

zeek-EEN

Ajmaq’

Ahk-MAHK

Noj

NOHK

Tijax

tee-HASH

Kawoq

Kah-WOHK

Ajpu

Ahk-POO

Personal	Readings	by	the	Author
Shay	Addams	performs	personal	Mayan	astrological	readings	on	a
limited	 basis	 from	 Guatemala	 and	 Mexico.	 These	 are	 full	 nine-sign
Constellations	 with	 a	 color	 chart	 of	 the	 glyphs	 and	 a	 1,500+	 word
report	 for	 individuals,	 relationships	 or	 businesses.	 Reports	 are
provided	 in	 PDF	 and	 other	 formats	 by	 e-mail.	 For	 information,	 see
Mayan	Calendar	Users	Guide.

Bibliography
Alvarado,	Walburga	Rupflin
El	 Tzolkin	 es	 Mas	 Que	 un	 Calendario,	 Guatemala:	 Fundacion	 Cedim,
199
Bolio,	Jose	Diaz
Le	Serpiente	Emplumada:	Eje	de	Culturas,	Mexico	1964
Ch’umil,	Saq;	,	Blanca	Estela;	Coz,	Carlos	Jacinto
Usaqil	 K’olem:	 Tiempo	 y	 Ser	 Humano	 en	 la	 Cosmovisión	 Maya,
Guatemala:	 Projecto	 Movilizador	 de	 Apoyo	 a	 La	 Educacíon	 Maya
UNESCO/PROMEM,	2003
Goméz,	Felipe	and	Cales,	Melchor	Aguare
Usolixik	 le	 Chol’qi:	 Investigación	 sobre	 el	 Calendario	 Maya,
Guatemala:	Acadameia	de	Lenguas	Mayas	de	Guatemala,	2006
Jenkins,	John	Major
Maya	Cosmogenesis	2012,	Rochester	NY:	Bear	&	Company,	1998
Johnson,	Kenneth
Jaguar	 Wisdom:	 An	 Introduction	 to	 the	 Mayan	 Calendar,	 Boulder
CO:	Archive	Press,	2009	(original	edition,	1997)	
Molesky-Poz,	Jean
Contemporary	 Maya	 Spirituality,	 Texas:	 University	 of	 Texas	 Press,
2006
Stanzione,	Vincent	James
The	Sacred	Count	of	Days,	Guatemala:	Igualito,	2006
Stray,	Geoff
The	 Mayan	 and	 Other	 Ancient	 Calendars,	 Glastonbury	 England:
Wooden	Books	LTD,	2007

Tedlock,	Barbara
Time	 and	 the	 Highland	 Maya,	 Albuquerque	 NM:	 University	 of	 New
Mexico	Press,	1982
Tedlock,	Dennis
Popul	Vuh:	The	Mayan	Book	of	the	Dawn	of	Life,	New	York:	Simon	&
Schuster,	1985
Thompson,	John	Eric	S.
Maya	 History	 and	 Religion,	 Norman	 OK:	 University	 of	 Oklahoma
Press,	1970
	

	

Review	of	the	Nahuales
The	 following	 pages	 can	 be	 used	 to	 test	 your	 ability	 to	 recognize	 the	 20
nahuales	by	the	glyphs	and	to	study	the	symbolisim	of	the	designs.

