https://t.me/MBS_MedicalBooksStore
 i




     The Interoceptive Mind
ii
 iii




       The Interoceptive Mind
       From Homeostasis to
       Awareness
       Edited by

       Manos Tsakiris
       Helena De Preester




       1
iv




     1
     Great Clarendon Street, Oxford, OX2 6DP
     United Kingdom
     Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
     It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
     and education by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark of
     Oxford University Press in the UK and in certain other countries
     © Oxford University Press 2019
     The moral rights of the authors‌have been asserted
     Impression: 1
     First Edition published in 2019
     All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
     a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the
     prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted
     by law, by licence or under terms agreed with the appropriate reprographics
     rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the
     above should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the
     address above
     You must not circulate this work in any other form
     and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer
     Published in the United States of America by Oxford University Press
     198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016, United States of America
     British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
     Data available
     Library of Congress Control Number: 2018945622
     ISBN 978–​0–​19–​881193–​0
     Printed and bound by
     CPI Group (UK) Ltd, Croydon, CR0 4YY
     Oxford University Press makes no representation, express or implied, that the
     drug dosages in this book are correct. Readers must therefore always check
     the product information and clinical procedures with the most up-​to-​date
     published product information and data sheets provided by the manufacturers
     and the most recent codes of conduct and safety regulations. The authors and
     the publishers do not accept responsibility or legal liability for any errors in the
     text or for the misuse or misapplication of material in this work. Except where
     otherwise stated, drug dosages and recommendations are for the non-​pregnant
     adult who is not breast-​feeding
     Links to third party websites are provided by Oxford in good faith and
     for information only. Oxford disclaims any responsibility for the materials
     contained in any third party website referenced in this work.
 v




                Preface


     Interoception is the body-​to-​brain axis of signals originating from the internal body and
     visceral organs (such as gastrointestinal, respiratory, hormonal, and circulatory systems).
     It plays a unique role in ensuring homeostasis. Interoception therefore refers to the sensing
     of the state of the inner body and its homeostatic needs, to the ever-​fluctuating state of
     the body beneath its sensory (exteroceptive) and musculoskeletal sheath. By bringing
     together the perspectives of experimental psychology and cognitive neuroscience, psy-
     chophysiology, psychiatry, clinical psychology, and philosophy, this volume aims to go
     beyond the known role of interoception for homeostasis in order to ask, and hopefully
     provide, important insights on the role that interoception plays for our mental life and
     lived experience, for awareness, affect, and cognition.
        The perspectives in the ensuing 17 chapters largely fall within the embodied cognition
     approach that attempted to ground cognition and the self in the body. Over the last three
     decades, modern psychology and cognitive neurosciences have focused on the impor-
     tance of the body as the starting point for a science of the self and the subject. However,
     this focus concerned the body as perceived from the outside, as, for example, when we
     recognize ourselves in the mirror, or when the brain integrates sensorimotor information
     to create our sense of body ownership and agency, or even when we perceive other people’s
     bodies and thereby their mental states via processes of embodied simulation. A first step
     toward that direction was to consider the role that sensorimotor signals play for the expe-
     rience and the awareness of one’s self, which goes beyond their well-​known role in motor
     control and sensory perception. For example, research on the sense of agency over one’s
     actions and the sense of ownership of one’s body demonstrates how these fundamental
     experiences rely on specific processes of sensorimotor interaction and multisensory inte-
     gration, respectively (Haggard, 2005; Tsakiris, 2010). Another, closely related step in that
     direction was the recognition of the proprioceptive dimension of the body for agency,
     ownership, and the embodied self (Gallager & Cole, 1995; Bermúdez, Marcel, & Eilan,
     1995). In the prolific field of social cognitive neuroscience, similar considerations re-
     garding the role of observable sensorimotor events have been extended to social cogni-
     tion and our understanding of other minds (Gallese, Keysers, & Rizzolatti, 2004). Such
     theoretical advances have been instrumental in explaining key aspects of the bodily self
     and its social cognition.
        Notwithstanding the influential research that accumulated in this area, it is clear that
     our fields have neglected another important dimension of the body, namely the inter-
     oceptive body, which is the body as perceived from the inside. This visceral dimension
     of embodiment has, of course, a long-​standing history of predominantly physiological
     investigations during the last century, but it was only relatively recent that interoception
vi




     vi   Preface


          has gained a rapidly expanding interest in the study of human mind. The seminal work of
          Bud Craig (2009) and Antonio Damasio (1999), despite their differences, placed the vis-
          ceral milieu, its homeostatic functioning, and our interoceptive awareness thereof at the
          center stage of self-​awareness. In parallel, the development of new methods to measure,
          not simply interoceptive signaling but our awareness thereof opened up the field of in-
          teroceptive research to psychologists and cognitive neuroscientists. In parallel with the
          exponential increase in the number of publications on the topic, researchers and scholars
          across physiology, cognitive neuroscience, psychology, philosophy, and medicine are
          working on interoception without necessarily sharing the same conceptual base or nec-
          essarily realizing how their investigations link with the findings and insights of other
          disciplines and methodologies.
             Despite recent advances (Garfinkel et  al., 2015; Kleckner et  al., 2015), there is con-
          sensus that interoception research must develop psychologically relevant and philosoph-
          ically sound theoretical foundations, a wider and more grounded measurement model
          and a fuller characterization of the links between different interoceptive dimensions
          and systems if it is to achieve its appropriate place within the life and mind sciences.
          This ambitious aim necessitates wide-​ranging, dedicated, and systematic theoretical and
          methodological enquiries into the hierarchical relations in interoceptive processing, the
          horizontal relations across interoceptive modalities, and the causal relations between
          interoception and awareness. For example, psychological research into interoceptive
          awareness has mainly used tasks that quantify our accuracy in detecting single heartbeats.
          However, as the influential work of Garfinkel, Seth, Barrett, Suzuki, and Critchley (2015)
          shows, we must be aware of the hierarchical levels of interoception, from interoceptive
          sensibility, to accuracy and eventual awareness, and how these may impact cognition in
          health and in illness. Similarly, in relation to horizontal relations, classic approaches to
          interoception focus on four systems—​the cardiovascular, respiratory, gastrointestinal,
          and urogenital (Adam, 1998; Cameron, 2002), but a fundamental question concerns
          the interrelation of awareness across different interoceptive systems and the potentially
          distinctive role that each system plays for cognition. Finally, unlike exteroception, it is
          particularly difficult to have experimental control over the inputs to the interoceptive
          system and/​or to interfere causally with it, and therefore developing paradigms and the-
          oretical approaches that can probe the causal links between interoception and cognition
          will accelerate our knowledge.
             The contributions collected in this multidisciplinary volume represent an attempt to
          provide a reference for the conceptualization of this excitingly deep connection between
          our body and mind. As such it offers an overview of the state-​of-​art in psychological
          and neuroscience research, of recent developments in clinical-​psychological models for
          normal and pathological functioning, and of new theories that frame interoception at the
          intersection between philosophy of mind and the broader context of embodied cognition.
          To that end, its scope ranges from the psychology and neuroscience of interoception (Part
          I), to clinical implications of recent research taking into account interoception (Part II),
          and to theoretical-​philosophical frameworks and models of interoception (Part III).
 vi




                                                                                           Preface    vii


         The introductory chapter by Berntson, Gianaros, and Tsakiris goes straight into the
      heart of the matter by providing the historical context that led to the development of a
      science of interoception and a state-​of-​the-​art overview of the organizational principles
      of the interoceptive system. First, it is explained that the autonomic nervous system is
      not only or even primarily an efferent motor system (historically the predominant view)
      but constitutes an elaborate afferent system. Second, the authors explain that the intero-
      ceptive system does not operate independently of higher brain functions. By addressing
      the top-​down and bottom-​up organizational principles that underpin interoception, this
      introductory chapter sets the stage for the subsequent chapters in the volume.
         Part I, Mentalizing interoception: Advances and challenges focuses on recent advances
      in experimental psychology and cognitive neuroscience that highlight the role that inter-
      oceptive signals and awareness thereof play for our mental life, beyond their known role
      for homeostasis. Allen and Tsakiris consider the implications of the embodied predictive
      processing account for the conceptualization of interoceptive signals as “first priors” and
      their role in providing the mind with a biologically plausible model of one’s body and
      self. Babo-​Rebelo and Tallon-​Baudry review recent electrophysiological studies that ex-
      tend the role of interoception to show how the cortical processing of cardiac signals may
      generate a subject-​centered reference frame that may underlie different and perhaps dis-
      tinct facets of the self, such as thought generation and visual consciousness. Wittmann
      and Meissner discuss the embodiment of subjective time and present evidence to show
      how the accumulation of physiological signals forms the basis for the subjective impres-
      sion of time. Aziz and Ruffle delve deeper into the viscera to describe the bi-​directional
      brain−gut axis whose function underpins the generation of “gut-​feelings.” Such feeling
      states are important for sensations but also the experience of distinct and often salient
      experiences such as pain, nausea, and appetite. The last chapter of this first part by Von
      Morh and Fotopoulou focuses on the homeostatically relevant experiences of pain and
      pleasure, in particular affective touch, and discuss their peripheral neurophysiological
      specificity (i.e. bottom-​up) and their top-​down social modulations within a predictive
      coding framework.
         Part II: From health to disease: Interoception in physical and mental health considers
      the role of interoceptive processes and their corresponding psychological concepts across
      a range of clinical conditions, from aberrant emotional processing to anxiety, eating
      disorders, symptom perception and overall well-being. Recent experimental findings are
      presented and reviewed in the context of hypotheses about the integration of peripheral
      afferent signals with central cognitive operations and their role in shaping subjective ex-
      perience in health and disease.
         Quadt, Critchley, and Garfinkel provide an overview of the influence of internal bodily
      states on emotion. By presenting a predictive coding account of interoceptive predictions
      errors, they highlight the distinct ways in which deficits in interoceptive abilities may un-
      derpin aberrant emotional processes characteristic of several clinical conditions. Khalsa
      and Feinstein focus on the regulatory battle for control that ensues in the central nervous
      system when there is a discrepancy between predicted and current bodily states (i.e. when
vi




     viii   Preface


            somatic error signals are present). They argue that anxiety disorders are driven by so-
            matic errors that chronically fail to be adaptively regulated. Herbert and Pollatos use a
            predictive coding framework analogous to the one introduced by Quadt, Critchley, and
            Garfinkel, and apply it to our understanding of eating behavior. They characterize an-
            orexia and bulimia nervosa as a profound impairment of the “self,” with dysfunctional
            interoception at its core. Yoris and colleagues explore the interoceptive dysfunctions
            following neurological damage or neurodegeneration and emphasize the significance of
            interoception to promote a hitherto missing synthesis of simultaneous autonomic, emo-
            tional, and social cognition deficits in neurology. Van den Bergh, Zacharioudakis, and
            Petersen focus on interoception and the perception of bodily sensations in the context
            of symptom perception, and spell out the consequences of the highly variable relation-
            ship between symptoms and physiological dysfunction for the disease model. Farb and
            Logie focus on the appraisal of interoceptive signals and its consequences for subjective
            well-​being. The modifying role of attention for habitual appraisals of interoceptive sig-
            nals is presented, along with a novel breathing-​focused task for measuring interoceptive
            awareness.
               Part III Toward a philosophy of interoception:  subjectivity and experience approaches
            interoception from a theoretical and philosophical perspective. Because until now the
            field of interoception has been driven mainly by scientists rather than philosophers, this
            part represents a highly novel departure for philosophy of mind and subjectivity, often
            starting from a phenomenological point of view. The relation between subjective expe-
            rience and physiological processes is an intricate and complicated one. Both the notion
            of “arousal” in emotion and the experiential dimension of interoception more generally
            stand in need of descriptive analysis and theoretical framing.
               Colombetti and Harrison disentangle the physiology and the experience of “arousal” in
            emotion and argue for the recognition of the multiple systems and pathways involved in
            emotional arousal, including not only the autonomic nervous system but also pathways
            of the endocrine and immune system, somatic sensations, and “background” bodily
            feelings. Empirical studies in interoception have profound consequences for the way
            the self or subjectivity is conceived of and conceptualized. The interoceptive dimension
            of the embodied subject forces us to rethink phenomena such as body ownership and
            the self, the relation between interoception and exteroception, and the coming about of
            subjectivity itself. De Vignemont discusses the many ways the notion of interoception is
            understood, and considers the contribution of interoception for the awareness of one’s
            body as one’s own. She approaches body ownership in affective terms and as rooted in
            self-​regulatory interoceptive feelings such as hunger and thirst. Corcoran and Hohwy
            consider the limitations of homeostasis and favor a reconciliatory position in which ho-
            meostasis and allostasis are conceived as equally vital but functionally distinct modes of
            physiological control to account for the sophisticated regulatory dynamics observed in
            complex organisms. De Preester focuses on a basis form of subjectivity and its origin in
            interoceptive processes. She argues that the topographic representation of interoceptive
            body states in the brain is unfit for explaining the coming about of subjectivity, and offers
 ix




                                                                                                      Preface     ix


      directions for another model that takes into account the inherent characteristics of sub-
      jectivity. Leder closes the volume, offering a phenomenology of inner-​body experience
      and explaining how this experience is influenced by models drawn from the outer world.
      In line with insights gained in the first and the second part, he points out the importance
      of inner-​body experience for health and well-​being.
        The different chapters included across the three parts are interrelated in various
      ways, and the synergy between the chapters crosses the boundaries of the disciplines,
      opening up opportunities for fruitful dialog between fields that otherwise remain too
      often separate. For example, attention to subjectivity and subjective experience, to self-​
      awareness and the experience of self, are common threads throughout the volume, to-
      gether with the intricate role of emotions and their relation to interoception. Similarly,
      several chapters are motivated by recent predictive coding accounts (Clark, 2013;
      Friston, 2010) that have been extended from cognition and attention to affect (Critchley
      & Garfinkel, 2017), bodily self-​awareness (Apps & Tsakiris, 2014; Seth, 2013), and
      mental disorders (Feldman Barrett & Simmons, 2015). A  concern for human well-​
      being and human health and suffering is also noticeable in all the chapters, and the
      capacity to contribute to one’s own well-​being by paying attention to in-​depth bodily
      signals is a recurrent theme. The chapters thus share a common concern for what it
      means to experience oneself, for the crucial role of emotions, and for issues of health
      and well-​being, discussed on the joint basis of our bodily existence and interoception,
      resulting in a more than usual attention for the phenomenology of subjective experi-
      ence in disciplines outside philosophy. Together, the chapters show that disciplinary
      specialization is not a hindrance for dialogue but can result into mutual enrichment.
      We hope that the scholarly research presented in this volume will further motivate
      the much-​anticipated coming of age of interoceptive research in psychology, cognitive
      neurosciences, and philosophy.
                                                                               Helena De Preester
                                                                                   Manos Tsakiris

      References
      Adam, G. (1998). Visceral Perception, Understanding Internal Cognition. New York, NY: Springer.
      Apps, M. A. J. and Tsakiris, M. (2014). The free-​energy self: A predictive coding account of self-​
         recognition. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 41, 85–​97. <https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​
         j.neubiorev.2013.01.029>
      Bermúdez, J. L., Marcel, A. J., and Eilan, N. (eds) (1995). The Body and the Self. Cambridge,
         MA: MIT Press.
      Cameron, O. (2002). Visceral Sensory Neuroscience: Interoception. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
      Clark, A. (2013). Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and the future of cognitive science.
         Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 36, 181–​204. <https://​doi.org/​10.1017/​S0140525X12000477>
      Craig, A. D. B. (2009). How do you feel—​now? The anterior insula and human awareness. Nature
         Reviews. Neuroscience, 10(1), 59–​70. <https://​doi.org/​10.1038/​nrn2555>
      Critchley, H. D. and Garfinkel, S. N. (2017). Interoception and emotion. Current Opinion in Psychology,
         17, 7–​14. doi: 10.1016/​j.copsyc.2017.
x




    x   Preface


        Damasio, A. (1999). The Feeling of What Happens: Body, Emotion and the Making of Consciousness.
            New York, NY: Harcourt.
        Feldman Barrett, L. and Kyle Simmons, W. (2015). Interoceptive predictions in the brain. Nature
            Publishing Group, 16, 419–​29. <https://​doi.org/​10.1038/​nrn3950>
        Friston, K. (2010). The free-​energy principle: a unified brain theory? Nature Reviews. Neuroscience,
            11(2), 127–​38. <https://​doi.org/​10.1038/​nrn2787>
        Gallagher, S. and Cole, J. (1995). Body image and body schema in a deafferented subject. Journal of
            Mind and Behavior, 16(4), 369–​89.
        Gallese, V., Keysers, C., and Rizzolatti, G. (2004). A unifying view of the basis of social cognition.
            Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 396–​403.
        Garfinkel, S. N., Seth, A. K., Barrett, A. B., Suzuki, K., and Critchley, H. D. (2015). Knowing your own
            heart: Distinguishing interoceptive accuracy from interoceptive awareness. Biological Psychology,
            104, 65–​74. <https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​j.biopsycho.2014.11.004>
        Haggard, P. (2005). Conscious intention and motor cognition. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9(6), 290–​5.
            <https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​j.tics.2005.04.012>
        Kleckner, I. R., Wormwood, J. B., Simmons, W. K., Barrett, L. F., and Quigley, K. S. (2015).
            Methodological recommendations for a heartbeat detection-​based measure of interoceptive
            sensitivity. Psychophysiology, 52, 1432–​40. <https://​doi.org/​10.1111/​psyp.12503>
        Seth, A. K. (2013). Interoceptive inference, emotion, and the embodied self. Trends in Cognitive
            Sciences, 17(11), 565–​73. <https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​j.tics.2013.09.007>
        Tsakiris, M. (2010). My body in the brain: A neurocognitive model of body-​ownership.
            Neuropsychologia, 48(3), 703–​12. <https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​j.neuropsychologia.2009.09.034>
 xi




                 Acknowledgments


      We would like to thank our colleague and friend Ophelia Deroy who introduced us to
      Martin Baum, Senior Commissioning Editor for Psychology and Neuroscience at Oxford
      University Press. We are grateful to Martin for supporting and selecting our proposal
      for this volume among the many high-​quality proposals that OUP receives. We are also
      grateful to April Peake for her assistance during the early stages of preparation and to
      Charlotte Holloway for her assistance during the final production stages. We would also
      like to acknowledge the NOMIS Foundation Distinguished Scientist Award to Manos
      Tsakiris and a research grant from the University College Ghent to Helena De Preester
      that provided the editors with the time and space of mind needed for the timely develop-
      ment of this volume.
         Of course, this volume wouldn’t exist without the excellent and timely contributions
      made by all the authors who fully engaged with our vision for this volume and its multi-​
      and cross-​disciplinary emphasis. We also thank the authors for acting as referees for
      each other’s chapters along with Vivien Ainley, Laura Crucianelli, Chris Dijkerman,
      Karl Friston, Philip Gerains, Rebekka Hufendiek, Peter Reynaert, Roy Salomon, Stefan
      Sütterlin, and Dan Zahavi who generously devoted their precious time in reviewing sev-
      eral chapters.
         Last, but not least, the co-​editors would like to thank each other for a seamless mutually
      enriching and supportive collaboration over the last two years.
xi
 xi




          Contents


          List of Contributors  xv

          Part I Introduction
      	 1	 Interoception and the autonomic nervous system: Bottom-​up
           meets top-​down  3
          Gary G. Berntson, Peter J. Gianaros, and Manos Tsakiris

          Part II  Mentalizing interoception: Advances and challenges
      	 2	 The body as first prior: Interoceptive predictive processing and the
           primacy of self-​models  27
          Micah Allen and Manos Tsakiris
      	 3	 Interoceptive signals, brain dynamics, and subjectivity  46
          Mariana Babo-​Rebelo and Catherine Tallon-​Baudry
      	 4	 The embodiment of time: How interoception shapes the
           perception of time  63
          Marc Wittmann and Karin Meissner
      	 5	 The neurobiology of gut feelings  80
          Qasim Aziz and James K. Ruffle
      	 6	 The cutaneous borders of interoception: Active and social inference of
           pain and pleasure on the skin  102
          Mariana von Mohr and Aikaterini Fotopoulou

          Part III  From health to disease: Interoception
          in physical and mental health
      	 7	 Interoception and emotion: Shared mechanisms and
           clinical implications  123
          Lisa Quadt, Hugo D. Critchley, and Sarah N. Garfinkel
      	 8	 The somatic error hypothesis of anxiety  144
          Sahib S. Khalsa and Justin S. Feinstein
      	 9	 The relevance of interoception for eating behavior
           and eating disorders  165
          Beate M. Herbert and Olga Pollatos
xvi




      xiv   Contents


                 	 10	 Cardiac interoception in neurological conditions and its relevance for
                       dimensional approaches  187
                       Adrián Yoris, Adolfo M. García, Paula Celeste Salamone, Lucas Sedeño, Indira
                       García-​Cordero, and Agustín Ibáñez
                 	 11	 Interoception, categorization, and symptom perception  212
                       Omer Van den Bergh, Nadia Zacharioudakis, and Sibylle Petersen
                 	 12	 Interoceptive appraisal and mental health  227
                       Norman A. S. Farb and Kyle Logie

                       Part IV  Toward a philosophy of interoception:
                       Subjectivity and experience
                 	 13	 From physiology to experience: Enriching existing conceptions of
                       “arousal” in affective science  245
                       Giovanna Colombetti and Neil Harrison
                 	 14	 Was Descartes right after all? An affective background for bodily
                       awareness  259
                       Frédérique de Vignemont
                 	 15	 Allostasis, interoception, and the free energy principle:
                       Feeling our way forward  272
                       Andrew W. Corcoran and Jakob Hohwy
                 	 16	 Subjectivity as a sentient perspective and the role of interoception  293
                       Helena De Preester
                 	 17	 Inside insights: A phenomenology of interoception  307
                       Drew Leder

                       Author Index  323
                       Subject Index  333
 xv




                Contributors


      Micah Allen                                Helena De Preester
      Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience,       School of Arts, University College Ghent,
      University College London, United          Belgium
      Kingdom                                    Department of Philosophy and Moral
      Wellcome Centre for Human                  Sciences, Faculty of Arts and Philosophy,
      Neuroimaging, University College           Ghent University, Belgium
      London, United Kingdom
                                                 Frédérique de Vignemont
      Qasim Aziz                                 Institut Jean Nicod, ENS-​CNRS-​EHESS,
      Barts and the London School of Medicine    Department of cognitive studies, École
      & Dentistry, Queen Mary University of      Normale Supérieure, PSL, Paris, France
      London, United Kingdom
                                                 Norman A. S. Farb
      Mariana Babo-​Rebelo                       Department of Psychology, University of
      Laboratoire de Neurosciences Cognitives,   Toronto Mississauga, Mississauga, Canada
      Département d’Etudes Cognitives, Ecole     Justin S. Feinstein
      Normale Supérieure (ENS), PSL Research     Laureate Institute for Brain Research,
      University, INSERM, Paris, France          Tulsa, Oklahoma, United States
      Gary G. Berntson                           Oxley College of Health Sciences,
      Department of Psychology, Ohio State       University of Tulsa, Tulsa, Oklahoma,
      University, United States                  United States
      Giovanna Colombetti                        Aikaterini Fotopoulou
      Department of Sociology, Philosophy        Research Department of Clinical,
      and Anthropology, University of Exeter,    Educational and Health Psychology,
      United Kingdom                             Faculty of Brain Sciences, University
                                                 College London, United Kingdom
      Andrew W. Corcoran
      Cognition & Philosophy Laboratory,         Adolfo M. García
      Department of Philosophy, Faculty of       Laboratory of Experimental Psychology
      Arts, Monash University, Melbourne,        and Neuroscience (LPEN), Institute of
      Australia                                  Cognitive and Translational Neuroscience
                                                 (INCYT), INECO Foundation, Favaloro
      Hugo D. Critchley
                                                 University, Buenos Aires, Argentina
      Department of Neuroscience, Brighton
                                                 National Scientific and Technical Research
      and Sussex Medical School (BSMS),
                                                 Council (CONICET), Buenos Aires,
      University of Sussex, Brighton, United
                                                 Argentina
      Kingdom
                                                 Faculty of Education, National University
                                                 of Cuyo (UNCuyo), Mendoza, Argentina
xvi




      xvi   Contributors


            Indira García-​Cordero                       Agustín Ibáñez
            Laboratory of Experimental Psychology        Laboratory of Experimental Psychology
            and Neuroscience (LPEN), Institute of        and Neuroscience (LPEN), Institute of
            Cognitive and Translational Neuroscience     Cognitive and Translational Neuroscience
            (INCYT), INECO Foundation, Favaloro          (INCYT), INECO Foundation, Favaloro
            University, Buenos Aires, Argentina          University, Buenos Aires, Argentina
            National Scientific and Technical Research   National Scientific and Technical Research
            Council (CONICET), Buenos Aires,             Council (CONICET), Buenos Aires,
            Argentina                                    Argentina
                                                         Universidad Autónoma del Caribe,
            Sarah N. Garfinkel
                                                         Barranquilla, Colombia
            Psychiatry, Department of Neuroscience,
                                                         Center for Social and Cognitive
            Brighton and Sussex Medical School
                                                         Neuroscience (CSCN), School of
            (BSMS), University of Sussex, Brighton,
                                                         Psychology, Universidad Adolfo Ibañez,
            United Kingdom
                                                         Santiago, Chile
            Sackler Centre for Consciousness Science,
                                                         Centre of Excellence in Cognition and its
            University of Sussex, Brighton, United
                                                         Disorders, Australian Research Council
            Kingdom
                                                         (ACR), Sydney, Australia
            Sussex Partnership NHS Foundation
            Trust, United Kingdom                        Sahib S. Khalsa
                                                         Laureate Institute for Brain Research,
            Peter J. Gianaros
                                                         Tulsa, Oklahoma, United States
            Department of Psychology, University of
                                                         Oxley College of Health Sciences,
            Pittsburgh, United States
                                                         University of Tulsa, Tulsa, Oklahoma,
            Neil Harrison                                United States
            Department of Neuroscience, Brighton
                                                         Drew Leder
            & Sussex Medical School, University of
                                                         Department of Philosophy, Loyola
            Sussex, United Kingdom
                                                         University Maryland, Baltimore,
            Sussex Partnership NHS Foundation
                                                         United States
            Trust, Swandean, United Kingdom
                                                         Kyle Logie
            Beate M. Herbert
                                                         Department of Psychology, University of
            Clinical Psychology & Psychotherapy,
                                                         Toronto Mississauga, Mississauga, Canada
            Department of Psychology, Eberhard
            Karls University of Tübingen, Germany        Karin Meissner
                                                         Institute of Medical Psychology, Ludwig-​
            Jakob Hohwy
                                                         Maximilian University, Munich, Germany
            Cognition & Philosophy Laboratory,
                                                         Division Integrative Health Promotion,
            Department of Philosophy, Faculty of
                                                         University of Applied Sciences, Coburg,
            Arts, Monash University, Melbourne,
                                                         Germany
            Australia
                                                         Sibylle Petersen
                                                         Health Psychology, KU Leuven–​University
                                                         of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
 xvi




                                                                                  Contributors   xvii


       Olga Pollatos                                Manos Tsakiris
       Clinical & Health Psychology, Institute      Lab of Action & Body, Department of
       of Psychology and Education, Ulm             Psychology, Royal Holloway University of
       University, Germany                          London, United Kingdom
                                                    The Warburg Institute, School of
       Lisa Quadt
                                                    Advanced Study, University of London,
       Psychiatry, Department of Neuroscience,
                                                    United Kingdom
       Brighton and Sussex Medical School
       (BSMS), University of Sussex, Brighton,      Omer Van den Bergh
       United Kingdom                               Health Psychology, KU Leuven–​University
                                                    of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
       James K. Ruffle
       Centre for Neuroscience and Trauma,          Mariana von Mohr
       Blizard Institute, Wingate Institute of      Research Department of Clinical,
       Neurogastroenterology, Barts and the         Educational and Health Psychology,
       London School of Medicine & Dentistry,       Faculty of Brain Sciences, University
       Queen Mary University of London,             College London, United Kingdom
       London, United Kingdom
                                                    Marc Wittmann
       Paula Celeste Salamone                       Institute for Frontier Areas of Psychology
       Laboratory of Experimental Psychology        and Mental Health, Freiburg, Germany
       and Neuroscience (LPEN), Institute of        Institute of Medical Psychology, Ludwig-​
       Cognitive and Translational Neuroscience     Maximilian University, Munich, Germany
       (INCYT), INECO Foundation, Favaloro          Adrián Yoris
       University, Buenos Aires, Argentina
                                                    Laboratory of Experimental Psychology
       National Scientific and Technical Research   and Neuroscience (LPEN), Institute of
       Council (CONICET), Buenos Aires,
                                                    Cognitive and Translational Neuroscience
       Argentina
                                                    (INCYT), INECO Foundation, Favaloro
       Lucas Sedeño                                 University, Buenos Aires, Argentina
       Laboratory of Experimental Psychology        National Scientific and Technical Research
       and Neuroscience (LPEN), Institute of        Council (CONICET), Buenos Aires,
       Cognitive and Translational Neuroscience     Argentina
       (INCYT), INECO Foundation, Favaloro
                                                    Nadia Zacharioudakis
       University, Buenos Aires, Argentina          Health Psychology, KU Leuven–​University
       National Scientific and Technical Research   of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
       Council (CONICET), Buenos Aires,
       Argentina
       Catherine Tallon-​Baudry
       Laboratoire de Neurosciences Cognitives,
       Département d’Etudes Cognitives, Ecole
       Normale Supérieure (ENS), PSL Research
       University, INSERM, Paris, France
xvi
 1




     PART I

     Introduction
2
 3




                Chapter 1

                Interoception and the autonomic
                nervous system: Bottom-​up meets
                top-​down
                Gary G. Berntson, Peter J. Gianaros,
                and Manos Tsakiris



     1.1 Introduction
     Interoception is a multidimensional construct, broadly encompassing the processing of
     afferent (sensory) information arising from internal organs, tissues, and cells of the body.
     This afference contributes to the regulation of homeostatic reflexes, and, as we will see in
     this chapter and throughout this volume, more broadly to the generation and regulation
     of cognitive and emotional behaviors.
        Interoception can be encompassed by the broader construct of bodily afference.
     The latter includes both visceral afference and somatic afference. We use the term vis-
     ceral afference to refer to the processing of internal sensory information derived from
     interoceptors that are located in the organs and tissues of the main cavities of the body
     (i.e. the viscera), as well as from olfactory and gustatory receptors, all being generally
     associated with the limbic system and the autonomic nervous system. We use the term
     somatic afference to refer to the processing of sensory information (e.g. proprioceptive
     input and tactile sensitivity) derived from components of the somatic system (e.g. mus-
     cles, joints, skin). This distinction between somatic and visceral afference does not imply a
     complete independence. Indeed, in many cases, there is an integration of multiple modes
     of bodily or somatosensory information derived, for example, from metabolic changes
     in active muscle tissue. Hence, the term somatovisceral afference is more appropri-
     ately applied to integrated, multimodal, or otherwise nonspecific internal sensory input
     from within the body (e.g. see Yates & Stocker, 1998). In these regards, the construct of
     interoception itself is more specifically aligned with that of visceral afference, referring to
     the processing of sensory information from interoceptors that are located within the vis-
     ceral organs and from interoceptors located elsewhere in the body that provide for local
     energy needs. Thus, in contrast to exteroceptors, interoceptors are tuned to sense internal
     events (Cameron, 2002).
        The so-​called general visceral afferents (GVAs) that relay internal sensory information
     from interoceptors are carried by several cranial nerves, the most notable being the vagus
4




    4   Interoception and the autonomic nervous system


        nerve. These afferents carry information (e.g. pressor receptor activity from blood vessels)
        originating from the gut and the viscera more generally (i.e. organs and tissues located
        in the thoracic, abdominal, and pelvic cavities, as well as blood vessels and muscles).
        By comparison, special visceral afferents (SVAs) convey gustatory senses (i.e. taste) and
        olfaction (i.e. smell and pheromonal senses). Although the SVAs detect environmental
        stimuli, they do so by virtue of those stimuli impinging on the internal bodily environ-
        ment. Hence, they differ from exteroceptors; for example, conveying information related
        to touch or audition. Furthermore, the visceral senses have common central projections
        to cell groups in the brainstem, including the nucleus tractus solitarius (NTS), midbrain,
        and thalamus, that are distinct from those of somatic exteroceptors, and they link an-
        atomically and functionally with a distinct set of central neural systems and processes
        (Craig, 2014; Saper, 2002). Moreover, they share biochemical markers in common with
        GVAs and with autonomic neurons (see Squire et al., 2012). There are other classes of sen-
        sory systems, such as proprioceptors, that sense joint position, and vestibuloceptors, that
        sense body orientation in gravitational space. These might be considered interoceptors
        as they are internal to the body. Yet, they are closely linked with somatic motor systems
        anatomically and functionally, and they have biochemical markers more in concert with
        somatic motor systems. Hence, they are sometimes considered within the unique class of
        proprioceptors, or otherwise just included within the general class of exteroceptors.
           What is important to consider is that both exteroceptive and interoceptive informa-
        tion can powerfully influence cognitive and emotional processes, and, importantly, vice
        versa. Moreover, as will be developed later in this chapter, visceral afferents carrying in-
        teroceptive information have a constitutional link with central neural systems underlying
        cognitive and emotional processes, and they thus impact these behavioral processes (e.g.
        Tsakiris & Critchley, 2016a; see also the entire Theme issue, Tsakiris & Critchley, 2016b).
        This is clearly apparent in the positive and negative (e.g. disgust) hedonic effects of tastes
        and smells. As detailed in the remaining chapters of this volume, it is thus doubtful that
        interoception can be meaningfully parsed or dissociated from cognitive, emotional, and
        behavioral processes. Indeed, a recent meta-​analysis of fMRI (functional MRI) studies
        revealed considerable overlap in systems co-​activated by interoceptive signaling, emo-
        tional regulation and low-​level social cognition, and convergent results were found for the
        effects of lesions (Adolfi et al., 2017).

        1.2  Historical perspectives
        Claude Bernard is generally credited with developing the concept of the “fixity” or rel-
        ative stability of the internal fluid matrix (milieu intérieur) as a necessary condition for
        what he termed the free and independent life (Bernard, 1878). Walter Cannon, chair
        of the Department of Physiology at Harvard around the turn of the twentieth century,
        further elaborated on this concept and coined the term homeostasis (Cannon, 1932/​
        1939). He believed that the autonomic nervous system (ANS) plays an important part
        in maintaining this homeostatic stability. Although Cannon recognized the importance
        of visceral afferents in homeostatic reflexes, the predominant view of the ANS was as an
 5




                                                                                          Historical perspectives     5


     efferent, lower-​level, reflexive motor system. Cannon further asserted that the ANS is
     termed “ ‘autonomic’ because it acts automatically, without direction from the cerebral
     cortex” (Cannon, 1939, p.  250). This misconception was perhaps understandable, as it
     would be another half century before the existence of direct, monosynaptic projections
     from cortical and other telencephalic areas to lower brainstem autonomic source nuclei
     and reflex substrates would be documented (e.g. Barbas et al., 2003; Cechetto & Saper,
     1990; Dum, Levinthal, & Strick, 2016; Neafsey, 1990).
        In retrospect, this misconception is also somewhat surprising in view of the work of
     Cannon’s friend, contemporary, and Nobel Laureate, Ivan Pavlov (see Figure 1.1). Here, it
     is often underappreciated that much of Pavlov’s work on learning centered on the modifi-
     cation of an autonomic and homeostatic reflex that involves the processing of interocep-
     tive information in preparation for digestion—​the cephalic vagal reflex, or the cephalic
     phase insulin release to a stimulus which had previously been paired with food. Indeed,
     this work contributed to a foundation for understanding how interoceptive phenomena
     can be powerfully related to learning and other processes instantiated in higher brain
     systems that can jointly influence visceral control, including systems within the cere-
     bral cortex. This includes experience-​based acquired responses that can both modulate




     Figure 1.1  Walter B. Cannon with Ivan Pavlov at the 1929 International Physiological Congress.
     Photograph reproduced with the acquiescence of the curator (Harvard Medical Library in the Francis A. Countway
     Library of Medicine).
6




    6   Interoception and the autonomic nervous system


        ongoing visceral processes as well as anticipate and prospectively guide adaptive auto-
        nomic, cognitive, and emotional responses (Cameron, 2002; Dworkin, 1993).
           Well before the existence of long descending pathways linking brain and viscera had been
        established, functional studies revealed autonomic representations in multiple higher-​
        level diencephalic and telencephalic areas of the forebrain. The 1949 Nobel Laureate,
        Walter Hess, for example, had reported striking autonomic responses elicited by stim-
        ulation of telencephalic (e.g. the amygdala and septal area) and diencephalic structures,
        including the hypothalamus, which Hess considered the head-​ganglion of the autonomic
        nervous system (Hess, 1954; see also Ranson, Kabat, & Magoun, 1935). The Canadian
        neurosurgeon, Wilder Penfield, also reported autonomic responses to cortical stimulation
        in conscious human patients (Penfield & Jasper, 1954). At this point, we recognize a broad
        central autonomic network comprising a number of forebrain areas, including the insular
        cortex, cingulate cortex, medial prefrontal cortex, amygdala, and hippocampus, as well as
        caudal cell groups in the midbrain periaqueductal gray, pons, cerebellum, and medulla
        (Benarroch, 1993; Cechetto & Saper, 1990; Critchley, 2005; Dampney, 2015; Loewy, 1991;
        Neafsey, 1990; Saper, 2002; Shoemaker & Goswami, 2015). This network highly overlaps
        and interacts with systems implicated in complex cognitive, skeletomotor, and affective
        processes (Annoni et al., 2003; Critchley, 2005; Myers, 2017; Saper, 2002).
           Another legacy from the Cannon era that did not survive the test of time is the view that
        the ANS is primarily an efferent motor system, with minimal visceral afferents necessary
        to support homeostatic reflex functions. In his influential book, The Wisdom of the Body,
        Cannon stated:  “The nerve fibers of the autonomic nervous system, which are mostly
        efferent, pass out of the central nervous system” (Cannon, 1939, p. 252). Similarly, John
        Newton Langley, who coined the term autonomic nervous system1 (Langley, 1898) viewed
        the ANS largely as a motor system, although he recognized that one might “consider as
        afferent autonomic fibers those which give rise to reflexes in autonomic tissues . . . [but
        are] . . . incapable of directly giving rise to sensation” (Langley, 1903, p. 2). As early as the
        mid-​1930s, however, there were quantitative studies demonstrating that the majority of
        fibers in the vagus are sensory (Foley & DuBois, 1937; Heinbecker & O’Leary, 1933). This
        is consistent with contemporary estimates that 70–​90% of vagal fibers, about 2–​20% of
        fibers in the splanchnic (sympathetic) nerves, and about 2% in spinal nerves are visceral
        afferents2 (Berthoud & Neuhuber, 2000; Cameron, 2002; Jänig & Morrison, 1986).
           Historically, there were also notable conceptual challenges to the notion that the ANS
        is primarily a motor system. In contrast to the view that emotions precede and trigger
        bodily reactions, William James (1884) proposed that exciting events induce bodily


        	 “We propose the term ‘autonomic nervous system,’ for the sympathetic system and the allied nervous
        1

          system of the cranial and sacral nerves, and for the local nervous system of the gut” (p. 270).
        	 Although some of these afferents run with parasympathetic and sympathetic efferents, it is not appro-
        2

          priate to consider them “parasympathetic” and “sympathetic” afferents (Freire-​Maia & Azevedo,1990;
          Jänig & Häbler, 1995). They are general visceral afferents that are not strictly coupled to an autonomic
          branch.
 7




                                                                                             A case report    7


     changes (including autonomic responses) and that our subsequent feeling of these
     changes constitutes the emotion. Shortly thereafter, Carl Lange (1885) independently
     proposed a vascular theory of emotion, which held that vasomotor responses are the pri-
     mary effects of affectations, and subjective sensations of emotion arise secondarily. Both
     of these perspectives converged into a view of visceral afference as fundamental for the
     generation and experience of emotion.
        This view came under severe assault from two notable figures: Walter Cannon (1927,
     1931), often considered the “father of the autonomic nervous system” and Sir Charles
     Sherrington (1900)—​a notable turn-​of-​the-​century physiologist and a recipient of the
     Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine (1932) for “discoveries regarding the functions of
     neurons.” At least the strong form of the James–​Lange concept (emotions as the mere per-
     ception of visceral feedback) was largely discredited at that time. There were a number
     of arguments against the James–​Lange perspective. Cannon, for example, argued that the
     viscera have few afferents and are relatively insensate. However, it is now recognized that
     visceral afferents in fact outnumber efferents. Additionally, it was argued that (a) visceral
     responses are too slow to underlie emotion; (b) similar visceral changes may occur across
     different emotions and even non-​emotional states; (c) inducing autonomic responses does
     not necessarily invoke emotions; and (d) that autonomic denervations of various types do
     not prevent emotional reactions. None of those are particularly telling arguments unless
     one wants to assert an identity relationship between visceral afference and emotion. James
     (1884), in fact, viewed emotions as being multiply determined, and to include cognitive
     contributions. He stipulated in his 1884 article that the only emotions that he will “con-
     sider here are those that have a distinct bodily expression” (p. 189)—​the so-​called coarser
     emotions. It is well established that there are multi-​level hierarchical and heterarchical
     representations in neurobehavioral systems and central autonomic networks (see Berntson,
     Cacioppo, & Bosch, 2016; Norman, Berntson, & Cacioppo, 2014), and there are multiple
     determinants of affective processes. What will become apparent through the chapters
     of this volume is that there are powerful interactions between cognitive and emotional
     processes, somatic and autonomic outflows, and interoceptive feedback. Consequently, the
     effects of interoceptive feedback would not be expected to be invariant but to show notable
     brain-​state and context dependencies (e.g. see Cacioppo, Berntson, & Klein, 1992).


     1.3  A case report
     Visceral afference can powerfully modulate cognitive and emotional processes, as illus-
     trated by the following case report on MM (personal communication). MM is a graphic
     artist and videographer who was working on a documentary about a historical kidnapping
     and murder. She had extensively researched and documented the story and had located
     and interviewed most of the characters involved (except for the perpetrator, who had killed
     himself). The story was ready for filming (January 2007), but, alas, filming never happened:
        I handed the story back to the producer when it became clear that I could not work the script (kept
        repeating the same scenes), as I was able to keep it all in my head for only about 3 pages—​few
8




    8   Interoception and the autonomic nervous system


            minutes, and no amount of colour coordinated storylines and Post-​It notes were going to save me
            when I was not able to make a simple decision on spot (calculating what days we had available for
            shooting whom . . . etc.).

        What led to this transformation (February 2007)? It was endoscopic thoracic sympathec-
        tomy (ETS), the surgical destruction or disabling of the upper spinal sympathetic (auto-
        nomic) nerve trunk, for hyperhidrosis (excessive sweating). Thereafter, MM’s life (she was
        39 years old at the time) was dramatically changed3:
            It is my experience that following this surgery there is a shift in personality and how emotions are
            experienced. It is, however, not only emotional blunting but also an impaired impulse control and
            disinhibition (as if a grown-​up brain has been replaced by a primitive, and at times manic brain,
            that affects higher functioning). I am not sure how to describe it really . . . There is an indifference
            and striking lack of fear . . . I witnessed within myself once I got into my car and started driving
            around, or in general danger situations any urbanite encounters. My emotions are blunted, and
            there is an unsettling deadness and indifference towards my prior life and aspirations, goals. This
            indifference and emotional blunting was present as soon as I woke up from the surgery and has
            not left me since.
             . . . 
            In general, the procedure led to a personality change, in some aspects subtle, in others a profound
            shift that I find exceedingly difficult to accept—​a kind of physiological expression of how I was
            feeling, zombie-​like.
             . . . 
            I was described by one (video) critic as a human seismograph, recording the finest shifts in mood/​
            tone . . . (now) I have problems in social settings, where I generally might appear antisocial. I force
            myself to ask questions and engage in “banter”, but more often I  forget. I  would say that it has
            changed how I relate to people: I do not relate.

        Tragically, this outcome was not unique to MM. There is a considerable literature
        documenting a range of post-​     sympathectomy complications including cognitive
        deficits, altered mood, emotional blunting, fatigue, and neuropathic complications (e.g.
        Furlan, Mailis, & Papagapious, 2000; Goldstein, 2012; Mailis & Furlan, 2003). Indeed,
        a support group, the Sympathetic Association (FfSo), was formed in Karlstad, Sweden,
        by people who found themselves disabled by serious side effects of sympathectomies
        (<http://​home.swipnet.se/​sympatiska/​index3.htm>). We will return to the case of MM
        in section 1.4.2.

        1.4  Central visceral pathways and the visceral cortex
        An important integrative site in the forebrain for visceral afference is the insular cortex,
        which could be considered a primary visceral cortical site. The insula, in turn, is highly
        interconnected with cortical and subcortical areas involved in cognition, emotion, and


        	 There was no pre-​surgical history of psychopathology. The patient elected the procedure to reduce ex-
        3

          cessive sweating, and to some extent, this was achieved. However, as is common with ETS (Furlan et al.,
          2000), she did experience periodic “compensatory” sweating.
 9




                                              Central visceral pathways and the visceral cortex        9


     motivation, including the prefrontal cortex, the cingulate cortex, and the amygdala (Allen
     et  al., 1991; Augustine, 1996; Nieuwenhuys, 2012; Oppenheimer & Cechetto, 2016).
     The insula receives input from all visceral afference and, as will be seen throughout this
     volume, contributes to the integration of this afference with neurobehavioral processes
     (Tsakiris & Critchley, 2016a), and anomalies in insular function are associated with a
     wide range of cognitive, emotional, and behavioral disturbances (Gasquoine, 2014).

     1.4.1  Special
                 visceral afferents: The chemical senses—​Olfaction
     and gustation
     Olfaction is a special visceral sense closely linked with both positive and negative
     hedonics. This is especially true in lower animals where it plays a central role in guiding
     behavior. The olfactory system is closely linked with a medial central brain network that
     was historically referred to as the rhinencephalon (nose brain). Paul Broca (1878) re-
     ferred to the medial central components of the brain as the great limbic lobe (le grand
     lobe limbique) because they arch around the central encephalon (“limbique” in French
     translates as “hoop” or “curve”). Papez (1937) proposed that limbic areas and associated
     structures are an important central network in emotion (often referred to as Papez cir-
     cuit). This concept was further developed by Paul MacLean (1954) who coined the term
     “limbic system” and viewed this system as an evolutionary heritage (the paleomammalian
     brain) that regulates emotion, motivation, and survival-​related behaviors, as well as links
     these phenomena with vulnerability to chronic health conditions (e.g. hypertension,
     asthma). Olfactory afferents play an important role in emotion, motivation, and survival-​
     related behavioral processes. Although the olfactory system more directly projects to a
     number of cortical areas, olfactory information is also relayed via the thalamus and other
     cortical areas to the insular cortex (which itself is often considered to be a part of the
     limbic system). Odors can modulate mood, cognition, and behavior, and many of these
     effects appear to be mediated by the insula (for reviews see Miranda, 2012; Saive, Royet,
     & Plailly, 2014; Soudry et al., 2011).
        The primary gustatory cortex lies in the anterior insula. Gustatory afferents (cranial
     nerves VII, IX, and X) terminate in a medullary nucleus, the NTS, and then are relayed via
     the midbrain parabrachial nucleus to the ventroposteromedial thalamus, which issues di-
     rect projections to the anterior insula (Saper, 2002). A similar functional pattern emerges
     in the literature to that of olfaction (Rolls, 2015). There are potent insular contributions to
     the processing of taste hedonics and attentional and memorial processes associated with
     taste, and insular cortex abnormalities are associated with disturbances in these processes
     (Frank, Kullmann, & Veit, 2013; Maffei, Haley, & Fontanini, 2012).

     1.4.2  General    visceral afferents
     As is the case with gustatory afferents, all GVAs in cranial nerves project to the NTS
     in the brainstem, to the parabrachial nucleus in the midbrain, and then via the
     ventroposteromedial (VPM) nucleus of the thalamus to the insular cortex. In his classic
     studies, Wilder Penfield reported that electrical stimulation of the insula induced a
10




     10   Interoception and the autonomic nervous system


          variety of visceral sensory experiences (Penfield & Jasper, 1954; Penfield & Faulk, 1955).
          In addition to cranial nerves, GVAs carrying nociceptive, temperature, and chemosen-
          sory information from the body enter the spinal cord via dorsal spinal roots and termi-
          nate in the dorsal horn (especially in lamina I). Until around the turn of the twenty-​first
          century, the general belief was that small-​diameter nociceptive (i.e. sensory information
          about tissue damage)/​temperature afferents were part of the somatosensory system and
          were ultimately relayed to the somatosensory cortex in the parietal lobe. Indeed, this view
          persists. In their 2016 textbook on neuroscience, Bear, Connors, and Paradiso assert that
          the “spinothalamic pathway is the major route by which pain and temperature informa-
          tion ascend to the cerebral cortex” (2016, p. 444). In fact, it is now well established that the
          small diameter fibers carrying nociceptive, temperature, and chemical senses project from
          the VPM not to the somatosensory cortex but to the insula (Craig, 2014; Saper, 2002).
          This accounts for the fact that in Wilder Penfield’s studies, patients never reported pain on
          stimulation of the somatosensory cortex (Penfield & Jasper, 1954; Penfield & Faulk; 1955).
          Moreover, surgeons do not extirpate the somatosensory cortex for pain syndromes. In
          contrast, however, Mazzola and colleagues (2012) report induced pain with stimulation
          of the insular cortex, and painful “somatosensory” seizures appear to arise not from the
          somatosensory cortex but from the opercular-​insular cortex (Montavont et al., 2015).
             This general visceral afference, and the top-​down and bottom-​up integration of insular
          cortical systems, underlie the cognitive-​emotional processes that reflect the broad inte-
          grative contributions of the insula (Tsakiris & Critchley, 2016a). Insula lesions, for ex-
          ample, result in diminished emotional arousal to affective pictures, and a reduced ability
          to even recognize the affective picture content (Berntson et al., 2011). Although the lit-
          erature on insular involvement in emotion and emotional processing is quite consistent
          (Uddin, Nomi, & Hébert-​Seropian, 2017), there appears to be some diversity in the effects
          of insular lesions.4 In addition to its role in emotion and motivation, the insula appears
          to play a pivotal role in the sense of self, agency, and indeed, consciousness (Craig, 2014;
          Strigo & Craig, 2016; Tsakiris & Critchley, 2016a, b; see also Chapters 2, 3, and 16 in the
          present volume). Thus, insula activation is correlated with the sense of body ownership
          and agency (Farrer, Franck, & Georgieff, 2003; Tsakiris et al., 2007). In accord, lesions of
          the insula can lead to a disturbed sense of body ownership, including somatoparaphrenia
          or the denial of body ownership (Cogliano et al., 2012; Gandola et al., 2012; Karnath &
          Baier, 2010; Moro et al., 2016).
             These findings and further results addressed in the present volume indicate that visceral
          afferent input to the insula appears to be critical in cognitive and emotional processes.


          	 Garcia and colleagues (2016) report minimal cognitive or socio-​emotional deficits in a single case
          4

            report after extensive vascular lesion damage, including the insular cortex. The authors, however, em-
            phasize how unusual this case was as there were also minimal disturbances in sensorimotor and other
            functions. The literature on disgust, especially, is quite variable, but Uddin and colleagues (2017) report
            consistent socio-​emotional deficits with insular lesions, but they also emphasize the considerable func-
            tional heterogeneity in this brain region.
 1




                                                            Current applications and implications        11


     However, one may see similar deficits with disrupted visceral afference in the absence
     of frank insular impairments. Patients with pure autonomic failure, and the associated
     blunting of autonomic activity and visceral afference, have been reported to show deficits
     in cognitive processing, empathy and emotional reactivity (Chauhan, Mathias, & Critchley,
     2008; Critchley, Mathias, & Dolan, 2001; Tsakiris et al., 2006). In this regard, returning to
     our case study, although MM did not have a direct insular insult, the surgical sympath-
     ectomy would have as a necessary consequence a diminution of both sympathetic and
     parasympathetic visceral afference, and this may have contributed to the cognitive and
     emotional sequelae she experienced. Critchley and colleagues (2001, p. 207) asserted that
     “body state changes, particularly those mediated by the autonomic nervous system, are
     crucial to the ongoing emotional experience of emotion,” and Goldstein (2012) reported
     that partial cardiac denervation was associated with fatigue, altered mood, blunted emo-
     tion, and decreased ability to concentrate. The findings that meditation can increase in-
     sular activity, connectivity, gray and white matter volume raise a question as to a potential
     therapeutic strategy in visceral denervation syndromes (Gotink et al., 2016; Hernandez
     et al., 2016; Laneri et al., 2016).

     1.5  Current applications and implications
     The central autonomic network (CAN) and neurobehavioral substrates more generally
     become re-​represented and elaborated with the evolutionary development of higher-​
     level neural systems (Jackson, 1884). This has significant implications for the functional
     understanding of the autonomic nervous system, visceral afference, and the multi-​level
     representations in the CAN. To elaborate, lower-​level autonomic reflexes, such as those
     studied by Cannon, are relatively hardwired and highly regulated by local visceral afference
     contributing to the feedback regulation of homeostasis. The baroreceptor reflexes, for
     example, are visceral homeostatic control loops that constrain short-​term variations in
     blood pressure via rapid autonomic adjustments. The afferent limb of the baroreflexes
     encompasses interoceptors positioned in the heart and great arteries. Increases in blood
     pressure cause a distortion of their free nerve endings, leading to an increase in afferent
     firing and associated afferent input to the NTS. Via relays in the rostral and caudal ven-
     trolateral medulla, this NTS afferent input results in a subsequent reflexive reduction
     in sympathetic and an increase in parasympathetic control of the heart and cardiovas-
     cular system, culminating in an associated compensatory reduction in blood pressure.
     The sensitivity of the homeostatic baroreceptor heart rate reflex can be quantified by the
     slope of the function relating heart rate to blood pressure. This slope reflects in part the
     servocontrol of blood pressure by heart rate decreases with increasing blood pressure
     (decreasing cardiac output) and heart rate increases with decreasing blood pressure
     (increasing cardiac output). It was Cannon’s student, Philip Bard, however, who noted
     that the slope of the baroreflex function could be decreased (flattened) by a typical labora-
     tory stressor (reflecting a decrease in sensitivity of the baroreflex). That is to say, stressors
     “inhibit” the homeostatic control over blood pressure by the baroreflex, which presum-
     ably enables heart rate and blood pressure to rise simultaneously and rapidly to provide
12




     12   Interoception and the autonomic nervous system


          hemodynamic and metabolic support for adaptive action or stressor coping. Although
          stressor-​evoked effects on the baroreflex have been widely seen across species, such effects
          raise a number of basic questions insofar as they reflect “anti-​homeostatic” actions that
          appear to be implemented by higher levels of the CAN. That is, while homeostasis is an
          important contribution of the ANS, ANS effects are not always homeostatic across behav-
          ioral states (see Berntson, Cacioppo, & Bosch, 2016). Indeed, it may be maladaptive to
          maintain a “fixity” of the internal milieu by lower reflex substrates of the CAN. In this way
          and in the face of adaptive challenges, higher levels of the CAN may modulate or “reset”
          lower substrates for reflex control to implement contextually appropriate, anticipatory, or
          otherwise “adaptive” increases in both blood pressure and heart rate (Dampney, 2017).
             Sterling and Eyer (1988) and later Schulkin (2003) introduced the concept of allostasis
          to reflect the fact that homeostasis is not necessarily static, but can assume different regu-
          latory levels (setpoints), to adapt to survival challenges. An example of this is fever, which
          unlike the “anti-​homeostatic” baroreflex effects of stress, represents a true adoption of
          a higher regulatory setpoint, which is monitored and actively defended both physio-
          logically and behaviorally. Bruce McEwen (2012) subsequently introduced the concept
          of allostatic load to reflect the fact that while short-​term allostatic adjustments may be
          adaptive, sustained, long-​term allostatic adjustments may have cumulative and delete-
          rious health consequences. However, deviations from homeostasis may not always en-
          tail simply an altered setpoint level. Berntson, Cacioppo, and Bosch (2016) advanced the
          concept of heterodynamic regulation in which higher level CAN and neurobehavioral
          substrates, integrating somatovisceral afference, cognitive and emotional processing, can
          dynamically regulate autonomic outflows and therefore somatovisceral afference in a flex-
          ible, dynamic fashion to achieve more optimal adaptive outcomes that are appropriate to
          given behavioral contexts.
             These considerations suggest that classical concepts of the autonomic nervous system,
          which focus on autonomic reflexes and homeostasis, are inadequate for a full under-
          standing of the contributions of the ANS and its afference to neurobehavioral processes.
          An illustration of the latter point is evident in contemporary perspectives on the role
          of interoceptive processes in physiological stress reactivity and recovery. More precisely,
          physiological stress reactivity and recovery have received widespread and long-​standing
          attention because of their presumptive relationships with aspects of physical and mental
          health across the lifespan (Cohen , Gianaros, & Manuck, 2016). For example, people with
          phenotypes to exhibit exaggerated and prolonged rises in heart rate and blood pressure
          that are mediated by the autonomic nervous system are at elevated risk for hypertension,
          stroke, myocardial infarction, and early death (Ginty, Kraynak, Fisher,et al., 2017).
             The central substrates for such patterns of stressor-​evoked physiological reactivity and
          recovery have been studied for over a century in human and non-​human animal studies.
          Notwithstanding, a historically neglected dimension of these substrates is how they are
          influenced by stressor-​evoked interoceptive information encoded in peripheral physi-
          ology (Gianaros & Wager, 2015). To elaborate, stressors are thought to engage higher
          neural substrates of the CAN, including the insula and anterior cingulate cortex (ACC),
 13




                                                            Current applications and implications     13


      which may appraise stressors and in turn issue descending visceral motor commands
      for rapid autonomic adjustments to cardiovascular physiology. These centrally deter-
      mined and stressor-​evoked adjustments may entail simultaneous rises in blood pressure
      and heart rate, with accompanying modifications to the baroreflex, to provide metabolic
      support for behavioral action and stressor coping (Gianaros et  al., 2012). This central
      linkage of behavior with metabolically supportive changes in cardiovascular physiology is
      exemplified in the cardiac-​somatic coupling hypothesis of Obrist (1981) and the “central
      command hypothesis” within the field of exercise physiology (Fisher et al., 2015). More
      recent perspectives on this linkage now emphasize that central substrates for periph-
      eral stress reactivity most likely issue visceral motor commands in a predictive fashion,
      providing metabolic support for behavior that is anticipated in the future (Ginty et al.,
      2017; Gianaros & Jennings, 2018). Moreover, these substrates may also predict patterns
      of expected visceral (interoceptive) feedback in a way that serves to calibrate periph-
      eral physiology with behavior and the metabolic demands of a given context (Barrett &
      Simmons, 2015).
         Understood in this way, “mismatches” between actual and predicted metabolic demands
      can be viewed as visceral prediction errors. These errors may manifest in the magnitude
      or patterning of stressor-​evoked changes in peripheral physiology. For example, a rise in
      blood pressure in excess of 40 mmHg in preparing for a public speech can be seen as a
      visceral prediction error—​insofar as it is a hemodynamic change that is disproportionate
      to the actual metabolic needs of the context. Likewise, sustained or prolonged changes in
      cardiovascular physiology that far outlast the ending of a given stressor can be viewed as
      metabolically disproportionate or otherwise contextually unnecessary and inappropriate.
      Visceral prediction errors of these types may be quantified by integrating laboratory stress
      reactivity testing with methods of exercise physiology, wherein changes in cardiovascular
      physiology that are in excess of oxygen consumption and metabolic requirements of a
      context can be computed (see Ginty et al., 2017; Gianaros & Jennings, 2018).
         The presumptive bases for visceral prediction errors may partly involve the resetting
      or modulation of homeostatic functions by substrates of the central autonomic network,
      allowing for context-​dependent changes in visceral control via the autonomic nervous
      system. Visceral prediction errors underlying observable patterns of stress physiology
      may also involve insensitivity to interoceptive and visceral feedback as well (Ginty et al.,
      2017; Gianaros & Jennings, 2018; see also Chapter 17 in the present volume). For example,
      as a result of such insensitivity, the visceral feedback provided by baroreceptors about
      “exaggerated” and stressor-​evoked rises in blood pressure may not serve to minimize fu-
      ture visceral prediction errors that manifest as exaggerated stress reactivity. Moreover, in-
      teroceptive information from stressor-​evoked changes in cardiovascular physiology (e.g.
      relayed by the baroreceptors) is capable of powerfully shaping the appraisal of threatening
      and painful information (Garfinkel & Critchley, 2016; see also Chapter 7 in this volume).
      Put simply, stressor-​evoked changes in peripheral physiology do not happen in a vacuum,
      having “bottom-​up” effects on higher neural substrates. Open questions in this domain
      extend to other parameters of physiology beyond the cardiovascular system that change
14




     14   Interoception and the autonomic nervous system


          with stress (e.g. immune and neuroendocrine functions), as well as how visceral feed-
          back from multiple physiological parameters are integrated by higher neural substrates to
          shape behavioral states as they unfold across contexts.

          1.6  From interoception to interoceptive awareness
          The multiple reciprocal links between interoception and psychological function, as
          highlighted in the preceding sections, do not necessarily imply a conscious awareness or
          intervention. However, several research strands across psychological sciences and cog-
          nitive neuroscience have recently focused on our ability to become aware of interocep-
          tive states and the importance that such states of interoceptive awareness have for the
          awareness of the self and of others. Earlier psychological research has shown how higher
          levels of interoceptive accuracy that is typically quantified in behavioral tasks that re-
          quire participants to pay attention to interoceptive states such as heartbeats (Schandry,
          1981), respiration (Daubenmier et al., 2013), or feelings of fullness and gastric sensitivity
          (Herbert et al., 2012) influence emotional processing. For example, higher levels of in-
          teroceptive accuracy are associated with more intense emotional experiences and better
          emotion regulation (see Critchley & Harrison, 2013)
             Capitalizing on such findings, more recent studies have expanded their focus to ask
          questions about the role that interoceptive awareness may play for body representations
          (for reviews see Craig, 2009; Tsakiris, 2010). Historically, the perception of one’s own
          body from the outside (e.g. self-​recognition) and the perception of the body from within
          (e.g. of signals coming from the visceral organs) have largely been studied independently.
          For example, the question of how the brain produces the experience of body ownership
          has focused mainly on multisensory integration. In the Rubber Hand Illusion (RHI), one
          of the most influential experimental models of embodiment, watching a rubber hand
          being stroked synchronously with one’s own unseen hand causes the rubber hand to be
          experienced as part of one’s body (Botvinick & Cohen, 1998; Tsakiris, 2010). These results
          speak in favor of an exteroceptive model of the self within which self-​awareness is highly
          malleable, subject to the perception of the body from the outside. However, exteroceptive
          input represents only one set of channels of information available for body awareness. We
          are also interoceptively aware of our body.
             To address how interoceptive signals are integrated with exteroceptive signals to create
          an integrated sense of the bodily self, Tsakiris, Tajadura-​Jiménez, and Costantini (2011)
          measured and quantified Interoceptive Accuracy (IAcc) with the heartbeat-​counting task
          and compared this with the change in body ownership caused by multisensory stimu-
          lation, using the RHI as a paradigmatic case of the exteroceptive self. Participants with
          lower IAcc experienced a stronger illusory sense of body ownership, suggesting that in
          the absence of accurate interoceptive representations one’s model of self is predominantly
          exteroceptive. While others had shown how a change in the body ownership during
          RHI affects homeostatic regulation (Moseley et al., 2008), we now had evidence showing
          that both the experience of body ownership, and subsequent changes in homeostatic
 15




                                                                                 Future perspectives     15


      regulation, depend partly on levels of IAcc. Consistent with these behavioral findings,
      neuroimaging and neuropsychological observations on the critical role of the insular
      cortex for body awareness support the view that the ways in which we perceive our body
      from the inside interact with our perception of the body from the outside. Right ante-
      rior insula activity correlates with performance in interoceptive accuracy tasks (Critchley
      et al., 2004). A rare single-​case study shows that heartbeat awareness decreased after in-
      sular resection (Ronchi et al., 2015), and Couto and colleagues (2015) report impaired
      interoceptive awareness with insular cortical or white matter lesions. Right mid-​posterior
      insula activity correlates with the body ownership experienced during the Rubber Hand
      Illusion, a paradigm that uses exteroceptive input (e.g. vision and touch) to study, in a
      controlled way, the bodily self (Tsakiris et al., 2007). This same area seems to be the critical
      lesion site for somatoparaphrenia—​a striking loss of body ownership (Karnath & Baier,
      2010). These findings suggest that the interoceptive and the exteroceptive representations
      of the body are integrated from the posterior to anterior subregions across the insular
      cortex (Farb, Segal, & Anderson, 2013; Simmons et al., 2013). Moreover, this integration
      appears to underpin the experience of my body as mine—​an experience that is the hall-
      mark of the bodily self (Gallagher, 2000).
         Such approaches paved the way for a large number of psychophysiological and neu-
      roimaging studies (Aspell et al., 2013; Blefari et al., 2017; Crucianelli et al., 2017; Park
      et  al., 2017; Ronchi et  al., 2017; Schauder et  al., 2015; Sel, Azevedo, & Tsakiris, 2016;
      Shah, Catmur, & Bird, 2017; Suzuki et al., 2013; Tajadura-​Jiménez & Tsakiris, 2014) that
      corroborate the basic hypothesis about the crucial psychological role that interoception
      plays for self-​awareness and awareness of other people (see also Chapter 2 in the present
      volume). Across different domains, from emotion processing (Dunn et al., 2010; Pollatos
      et al. 2007) to body image (see Badoud & Tsakiris, 2017 for a review), and social cogni-
      tion (Shah et al. 2017), the representation that one has of her internal body seems to be
      crucial for the representation of the “material me”, as Sherrington would put it, in relation
      to others (Fotopoulou & Tsakiris, 2017).

      1.7  Future perspectives
      The complexity of the central autonomic network, its vast interconnectivity with other
      brain systems, and the broad functional impact of visceral afference all pose challenges to
      progress in the interoceptive canon. Although there may certainly be a place for studies
      of single interoceptive dimensions or measures, a full understanding is most likely to re-
      quire the consideration of multiple parameters and physiological patterns, from a multi-​
      system, multi-​level interacting (top-​down and bottom-​up) perspective. Thus, important
      directions for the future include a focus on multiple interoceptive dimensions, interdis-
      ciplinary perspectives (cognitive/​behavioral, neural, physiological, etc.) and interactions
      among interoceptive processes and a broader range of affective-​cognitive processes. An
      illustration of this point comes from the literature on autonomic specificity of emotions
      and the role of visceral afference.
16




     16   Interoception and the autonomic nervous system


             Consider Cannon’s arguments against the James–​Lange view, that: (a) visceral responses
          are too slow to underlie emotion; (b) similar visceral changes may occur across different
          emotions and even non-​emotional states; (c)  inducing autonomic responses does not
          necessarily invoke emotions; and (d) that autonomic denervations of various types do not
          prevent emotional reactions. There clearly is not a simple isomorphism between auto-
          nomic responses and emotions, but that really should not be expected; there are multiple
          determinants of emotion and multiple levels of organization in affective substrates and
          the central autonomic network. Emotions can be triggered cognitively, as well as from
          external stimuli and context. These may well have different patterns of activation within
          central networks. The arguments that visceral responses are too slow and that autonomic
          denervations do not eliminate emotions would only be arguments against the view that
          visceral afference is the only determinant of emotion. We now know this not to be the case.
          Moreover, visceral afference is also likely to be “fast” enough to exert influences along the
          lines of what James and Lange envisioned. Neurally mediated baroreflex influences on
          heart rate and blood pressure control, for example, happen within milliseconds. These
          influences extend to the processing of and reactivity to affective and nociceptive stimuli
          on a heartbeat-​to-​heartbeat basis (Garfinkel and Critchley, 2016).
             Canon’s two remaining arguments, that autonomic arousal may not lead to emotional
          states and that similar autonomic responses may be associated with different emotions,
          are also not compelling. As noted earlier, the effects of visceral afference are likely to
          be varied and brain-​state dependent (e.g. see also Chapter  10 in the present volume).
          A given pattern of visceral afference in one context (be that environmental, psychological,
          or neurophysiological) may well have quite distinct effects. How we perceive a stimulus
          or context is very much determined by expectations, goals, and attentional focus, in the
          same way that classic visual illusions (e.g. the old woman/​young woman illusion; Boring,
          1930) depend on attentional focus, expectations, priming, or other variables.
             A given pattern of visceral afference, for example, may be functionally perceived, and
          have different outcomes depending on the context or neurobiological or neurobehavioral
          (brain) state. This has been termed the somatovisceral model of emotion (SAME)
          wherein the same pattern of visceral afference may be associated with different emotions
          (see Cacioppo et al., 1992; Norman et al., 2014). As with research on interoception, there
          is consensus that research on interoceptive awareness must develop a wider and more
          grounded measurement model, a richer theoretical framework that is at the same time
          biologically plausible and psychologically meaningful, and a fuller characterization of
          the links between different interoceptive systems and across interoceptive and extero-
          ceptive systems. This contextual and brain-​state dependency needs to be considered in
          interpreting and understanding visceral afference and our awareness of it, across different
          fields, from basic research to clinical applications and from theoretical and computa-
          tional perspectives. The chapters included in this volume intend to address at least some
          of these aims.
 17




                                                                                                       References      17


      References
      Adolfi, F., Couto, B., Richter, F., Decety, J., Lopez, J., Sigman, M., et al. (2017). Convergence of
          interoception, emotion, and social cognition: A twofold fMRI meta-​analysis and lesion approach.
          Cortex, 88, 124–​42. doi:10.1016/​j.cortex.2016.12.019.
      Allen, G. V., Saper, C. B., Hurley, K. M., and Cechetto, D. F. (1991). Organization of visceral and limbic
          connections in the insular cortex of the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 311,  1–​16.
      Annoni, J. M., Ptak, R., Caldara-​Schnetzer, A. S., Khateb, A., and Pollermann B. Z. (2003).
          Decoupling of autonomic and cognitive emotional reactions after cerebellar stroke. Annals of
          Neurology, 53,  654–​8.
      Aspell, J. E., Heydrich, L., Marillier, G., Lavanchy, T., Herbelin, B., and Blanke, O. (2013). Turning
          body and self inside out: Visualized heartbeats alter bodily self-​consciousness and tactile perception.
          Psychological Science, 24, 2445–​53. <https://​doi.org/​10.1177/​0956797613498395>
      Augustine, J. R. (1996). Circuitry and functional aspects of the insular lobe in primates including
          humans. Brain Research Reviews, 22, 229–​44.
      Badoud, D. and Tsakiris, M. (2017). From the body’s viscera to the body’s image: Is there a link between
          interoception and body image concerns? Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 77, 237–​46.
          doi:10.1016/​j.neubiorev.2017.03.017.
      Barbas, H., Saha, S., Rempel-​Clower, N., and Ghashghaei, T. (2003). Serial pathways from primate
          prefrontal cortex to autonomic areas may influence emotional expression. BMC Neuroscience, 4, 25.
      Barrett, L. F. and Simmons, W.K. (2015). Interoceptive predictions in the brain. Nature Reviews
          Neuroscience, 16, 419–​29.
      Bear, M.F., Connors, B.W., and Paradiso, M. A. (2016). Neuroscience: Exploring the Brain. Philadelphia,
          PA: Wolters Kluwer.
      Benarroch, E. E. (1993). The central autonomic network: Functional organization, dysfunction, and
          perspective. Mayo Clinic Proceedings, 68(10), 988–​1001.
      Bernard, C. (1878). Les Phénomènes de la Vie. Paris: Ballière.
      Berntson, G. G., Bechara, A., Damasio, H., Tranel, D., Norman, G.J., and Cacioppo, J.T. (2011). The
          insula and evaluative processes. Psychological Science, 22,  80–​6.
      Berntson, G. G., Cacioppo, J. T., and Bosch, J. A. (2016). From homeostasis to allodynamic regulation.
          In J. T. Cacioppo, L. G. Tassinary, and G. G. Berntson (eds). Handbook of Psychophysiology, 4th edn.
          Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 401–​26.
      Berthoud, H. R. and Neuhuber, W. L. (2000). Functional and chemical anatomy of the afferent vagal
          system. Autonomic Neuroscience, 85,  1–​17.
      Blefari, M. L., Martuzzi, R., Salomon, R., Bello-​Ruiz, J., Herbelin, B., Serino, A., et al. (2017). Bilateral
          Rolandic operculum processing underlying heartbeat awareness reflects changes in bodily self-​
          consciousness. European Journal of Neuroscience, 45(10), 1300–​12. <https://​doi.org/​10.1111/​
          ejn.13567>
      Boring, E. G. (1930). A new ambiguous figure. The American Journal of Psychology, 42, 444.
      Botvinick, M. and Cohen, J. (1998). Rubber hands “feel” touch that eyes see. Nature, 391, 756.
          doi:10.1038/​35784.
      Boucher, O., Rouleau, I., Lassonde, M., Lepore, F., Bouthillier, A., and Nguyen, D. K. (2015). Social
          information processing following resection of the insular cortex. Neuropsychologia, 71, 1–​10.
          doi:10.1016/​j.neuropsychologia.2015.03.008.
      Broca, P. (1878). Anatomie comparée des circonvolutions cérébrales: Le grand lobe limbique et la
          scissure limbique dans la série des mammifères. Revue d’Anthropologie, 1, 385–​498.
18




     18   Interoception and the autonomic nervous system


          Cacioppo, J. T., Berntson, G. G., and Klein, D.J. (1992). What is an emotion? The role of somatovisceral
             afference, with special emphasis on somatovisceral “illusions”. Review of Personality and Social
             Psychology, 14,  63–​98.
          Cameron, O. G. (2002). Visceral Sensory Neuroscience: Interoception. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
          Cannon, W. B. (1927). The James–​Lange theory of emotions: A critical examination and an alternative
             theory. American Journal of Psychology, 39, 106–​24.
          Cannon, W. B. (1931). Again, the James–​Lange and the thalamic theory of emotion. Psychological
             Review, 38, 281–​95.
          Cannon, W. B. (1932/​1939). The Wisdom of the Body. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co.
          Cechetto, D. F. and Saper, C. B. (1990). Role of the cerebral cortex in autonomic function. In: A. D.
             Loewy and K. M. Spyer (eds), Central Regulation of Autonomic Functions. New York, NY: Oxford
             University Press, pp. 208–​33.
          Chauhan, B., Mathias, C. J., and Critchley, H. D. (2008). Autonomic contributions to
             empathy: Evidence from patients with primary autonomic failure. Autonomic Neuroscience, 140,
             96–​100.
          Cogliano, R., Crisci, C., Conson, M., Grossi, D., and Trojano, L. (2012). Chronic
             somatoparaphrenia: A follow-​up study on two clinical cases. Cortex, 48,  758–​67
          Cohen, S., Gianaros, P.J., and Manuck, S.B. (2016). A stage model of stress and disease. Perspectives on
             Psychological Science, 11, 456–​63.
          Couto, B., Adolfi, F., Sedeño, L., Salles, A., Canales-​Johnson, A., Alvarez-​Abut, et al. (2015).
             Disentangling interoception: Insights from focal strokes affecting the perception of external and
             internal milieus. Frontiers in Psychology, 6, 503. doi:10.3389/​fpsyg.2015.00503.
          Craig, A. D. (2009). How do you feel-​now? The anterior insula and human awareness. Nature Reviews
             Neuroscience, 10,  59–​70
          Craig, A. D. (2014). How Do You Feel? An Interoceptive Moment with Your Neurobiological Self.
             Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
          Critchley, H. D., Mathias, C. J., and Dolan R. J. (2001). Neuroanatomical basis for first-​and second-​
             order representations of bodily states. Nature Neuroscience, 4, 207–​12.
          Critchley, H. D. (2005). Neural mechanisms of autonomic, affective, and cognitive integration. Journal
             of Comparative Neurology, 493, 154–​66.
          Critchley, H. D., Wiens, S., Rotshtein, P., Ohman, A., Dolan, R. J., Öhman, A., et al. (2004). Neural
             systems supporting interoceptive awareness. Nature Neuroscience, 7(2), 189–​95. <https://​doi.org/​
             10.1038/​nn1176>
          Critchley, H. D. and Harrison, N. A. (2013). Visceral influences on brain and behavior. Neuron, 77,
             624–​38. <https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​j.neuron.2013.02.008>
          Crucianelli, L., Krahé, C., Jenkinson, P. M., and Fotopoulou, A. (2017). Interoceptive ingredients of
             body ownership: Affective touch and cardiac awareness in the rubber hand illusion. Cortex. <https://​
             doi.org/​10.1016/​j.cortex.2017.04.018>
          Daubenmier, J., Sze, J., Kerr, C. E., Kemeny, M. E., and Mehling, W. (2013). Follow your
             breath: Respiratory interoceptive accuracy in experienced meditators. Psychophysiology, 50(8), 777–​
             89. <https://​doi.org/​10.1111/​psyp.12057>
          Dampney, R. A. (2015). Central mechanisms regulating coordinated cardiovascular and respiratory
             function during stress and arousal. American Journal of Physiology. Regulatory, Integrative and
             Comparative Physiology, 309, R429–​43.
          Dampney, R. A. (2017). Resetting of the baroreflex control of sympathetic vasomotor activity
             during natural behaviors: Description and conceptual model of central mechanisms. Frontiers in
             Neuroscience, 11, 461. <https://​doi.org/​10.3389/​fnins.2017.00461>
 19




                                                                                                      References      19


      Dum, R. P., Levinthal, D. J., and Strick, P. L. (2016). Motor, cognitive, and affective areas of the cerebral
          cortex influence the adrenal medulla. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113(35),
          9922–​7.
      Dunn, B. D., Galton, H. C., Morgan, R., Evans, D., Oliver, C., Meyer, M., et al. (2010). Listening
          to your heart. How interoception shapes emotion experience and intuitive decision making.
          Psychological Science, 21(12), 1835–​44. <https://​doi.org/​10.1177/​0956797610389191>
      Dworkin, B. R. (1993). Learning and Physiological Regulation. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
      Farb, N. A. S., Segal, Z. V., and Anderson, A. K. (2013). Attentional modulation of primary interoceptive
          and exteroceptive cortices. Cerebral Cortex, 23(1), 114–​26. <https://​doi.org/​10.1093/​cercor/​bhr385>
      Farrer, C., Franck, N., Georgieff, N., Frith, C. D., Decety, J., and Jeannerod M. (2003). Modulating the
          experience of agency: A positron emission tomography study. Neuroimage, 18, 324–​33.
      Fisher, J. P., Young, C. N., and Fadel, P. J. (2015). Autonomic adjustments to exercise in humans.
          Comprehensive Physiology, 5, 475–​512.
      Foley, J. O. and DuBois, F. S. (1937). Quantitative studies of the vagus nerve in the cat. I. The ratio of
          sensory to motor fibers. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 67,  49–​64.
      Fotopoulou, A. and Tsakiris, M. (2017). Mentalizing homeostasis: The social origins of interoceptive
          inference. Neuropsychoanalysis, 19,  3–​28
      Frank, S., Kullmann, S., and Veit, R. (2013). Food related processes in the insular cortex. Frontiers in
          Human Neuroscience, 7, 499.
      Freire-​Maia, L. and Azevedo, A. D. (1990). The autonomic nervous system is not a purely efferent
          system. Medical Hypotheses, 32,  91–​9.
      Furlan, A. D., Mailis, A., and Papagapiou, M. (2000). Are we paying a high price for surgical
          sympathectomy? A systematic literature review of late complications. Journal of Pain, 1, 245–​57.
      Gandola, M., Invernizzi, P., Sedda, A., Ferrè, E.R., Sterzi, R., Sberna, M., et al. (2012). An anatomical
          account of somatoparaphrenia. Cortex, 48, 1165–​78.
      Gallagher, S. (2000). Philosophical conceptions of the self: Implications for cognitive science. Trends in
          Cognitive Sciences, 4,  14–​21.
      García, A. M., Sedeño, l., Murcia, E. H., Couto, B., and Ibáñez, A. (2016). A lesion-​proof brain?
          Multidimensional sensorimotor, cognitive, and socio-​affective preservation despite extensive
          damage in a stroke patient. Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience, 8, 335.
      Garfinkel, S. N. and Critchley, H. D. (2016). Threat and the body: How the heart supports fear
          processing. Trends in Cognitive Science, 20,  34–​46.
      Gasquoine, P. G. (2014). Contributions of the insula to cognition and emotion. Neuropsychology Review,
          24,  77–​87.
      Gianaros, P. J., Onyewuenyi, I. C., Sheu, L. K., Christie, I. C., and Critchley, H. D. (2012). Brain
          systems for baroreflex suppression during stress in humans. Human Brain Mapping, 33, 1700–​16.
      Gianaros, P. J. and Wager, T. D. (2015). Brain–​body pathways linking psychological stress and physical
          health. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 24, 313–​21.
      Gianaros, P. J. and Jennings, J. R. (2018). Host in the machine: A neurobiological perspective on
          psychological stress and cardiovascular disease. American Psychologist. doi:10.1037/amp0000232.
      Ginty, A. T., Kraynak T. E., Fisher J. P., and Gianaros P. G. (2017). Cardiovascular and autonomic
          reactivity to psychological stress: Neurophysiological substrates and links to cardiovascular disease.
          Autonomic Neuroscience. doi:10.1016/​j.autneu.2017.03.003.
      Goldstein, D. S. (2012). Neurocardiology. Cardiovascular Therapeutics, 30, e89–​e106.
      Gotink, R. A., Meijboom, R., Vernooij, M. W., Smits, M., and Hunink, M. G. (2016). 8-​week
          mindfulness based stress reduction induces brain changes similar to traditional long-​term
          meditation practice—​A systematic review. Brain and Cognition, 108,  32–​41.
20




     20   Interoception and the autonomic nervous system


          Heims, H. C., Critchley, H. D., Martin, N. H., Jäger, H. R., Mathias, C. J., and Cipolotti, L. (2006).
              Cognitive functioning in orthostatic hypotension due to pure autonomic failure. Clinical Autonomic
              Research, 16, 113–​20.
          Heinbecker, P. and O’Leary, J. (1933). The mammalian vagus nerve—​afunctional and histological study.
              American Journal of Physiology, 106, 623–​46.
          Herbert, B. M., Muth, E. R., Pollatos, O., and Herbert, C. (2012). Interoception across modalities: On
              the relationship between cardiac awareness and the sensitivity for gastric functions. PLoS One, 7(5),
              e36646.
          Hernández, S. E., Suero, J., Barros, A., González-​Mora, J. L., and Rubia, K. (2016). Increased grey
              matter associated with long-​term sahaja yoga meditation: A voxel-​based morphometry study. PLoS
              One, 11(3).
          Hess, W. R. (1954). Diencephalon: Autonomic and Extrapyramidal Functions. New York, NY: Grune &
              Stratton.
          Jackson, J. H. (1884). On the evolution and dissolution of the nervous system. Croonian Lectures 3, 4
              and 5 to the Royal Society of London. Lancet, 1, 555–​739.
          James, W. (1984). What is emotion. Mind, 9, 188–​205.
          Jänig, W. and Morrison, J. F. B. (1986). Functional properties of spinal visceral afferents supplying
              abdominal and pelvic organs with special emphasis on visceral nociception. In: F. Cervero and J.
              F. B. Morrison (eds). Visceral sensation. Progress in Brain Research, 67, 87–​114.
          Jänig W. and Häbler, H.-​J. (1995). Visceral-​autonomic integration. In: G. F. Gebhart (ed.). Visceral pain.
              Progress in Pain Research and Management, Vol. 4. Seattle, WA: IASP Press, pp. 311–​48.
          Karnath, H.-​O. and Baier, B. (2010). Right insula for our sense of limb ownership and self-​
              awareness of actions. Brain Structure and Function, 214(5–​6), 411–​17. <https://​doi.org/​10.1007/​
              s00429-​010-​0250-​4>
          Lange, C. G. (1885). Om sindsbevaegelser: et psycho-​fysiologisk studie. Copenhagen: Jacob Lunds.
          Laneri, D., Schuster, V., Dietsche, B., Jansen, A., Ott, U., and Sommer, J. (2016). Effects of long-​term
              mindfulness meditation on brain’s white matter microstructure and its aging. Frontiers in Aging
              Neuroscience, 7, 254.
          Langley, J. N. (1898). On the union of cranial autonomic (visceral) fibers with the nerve cells of the
              superior cervical ganglion. The Journal of Physiology, 23, 240–​70.
          Langley, J. N. (1903). The autonomic nervous system. Brain, 26,  1–​26.
          Loewy, A. D. (1991). Forebrain nuclei involved in autonomic control. Progress in Brain Research, 87,
              253–​68.
          MacLean, P. D. (1954). Psychosomatic Medicine. Alphen aan den Rijn: Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.
          Maffei, A., Haley, M., and Fontanini, A. (2012). Neural processing of gustatory information in insular
              circuits. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 22, 709–​16.
          Maffei, A. M., Haley, M., Fontanini, A., and Miranda, M. I. (2012). Taste and odor recognition
              memory: The emotional flavor of life. Review of Neuroscience, 23, 481–​99.
          Mailis, A. and Furlan, A. (2003). Sympathectomy for neuropathic pain. The Cochrane Database of
              Systematic Reviews, 2, CD002918.
          Mazzola, L., Isnard, J., Peyron, R., and Mauguière, F. (2012). Stimulation of the human cortex and the
              experience of pain: Wilder Penfield’s observations revisited. Brain, 135, 631–​40.
          McEwen, B. S. (2012). Brain on stress: How the social environment gets under the skin. Proceedings of
              the National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 16, 109 Suppl 2, 17180–​5.
          Montavont, A., Mauguière, F., Mazzola, L., Garcia-​Larrea, L., Catenoix, H., Ryvlin, P., et al. (2015). On
              the origin of painful somatosensory seizures. Neurology, 84, 594–​601.
 21




                                                                                                    References      21


      Moro, V., Pernigo, S., Tsakiris, M., Avesani, R., Edelstyn, N. M., Jenkinson, P.M., et al. (2016).
          Motor versus body awareness: Voxel-​based lesion analysis in anosognosia for hemiplegia and
          somatoparaphrenia following right hemisphere stroke. Cortex, 83,  62–​77.
      Moseley, G. L., Olthof, N., Venema, A., Don, S., Wijers, M., Gallace, A., et al. (2008). Psychologically
          induced cooling of a specific body part caused by the illusory ownership of an artificial counterpart.
          Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 105(35), 13169–​73. <https://​doi.org/​
          10.1073/​pnas.0803768105>
      Myers, B. (2017). Corticolimbic regulation of cardiovascular responses to stress. Physiology & Behavior,
          172,  49–​59.
      Neafsey, E. J. (1990). Prefrontal cortical control of the autonomic nervous system: Anatomical and
          physiological observations. Progress in Brain Research, 85, 147–​65.
      Nieuwenhuys, R. (2012). The insular cortex: A review. Progress in Brain Research, 195, 123–​63.
      Norman, G. J., Berntson, G. G., and Cacioppo, J. T. (2014). Emotion, somatovisceral afference and
          autonomic regulation. Emotion Review, 6, 113–​23.
      Obrist, P. A. (1981). Cardiovascular Psychophysiology: A Perspective. New York, NY: Plenum Press.
      Oppenheimer, S. M. and Cechetto, D. F. (2016). Insular cortex and the regulation of cardiac function.
          Comprehensive Physiology, 6, 1081–​133.
      Papez, J. (1937). A proposed mechanism of emotion. Reprinted in Journal of Neuropsychiatry and
          Clinical Neuroscience (1995) 7, 103–​12.
      Park, H.-​D., Bernasconi, F., Salomon, R., Tallon-​Baudry, C., Spinelli, L., Seeck, M., et al. (2017).
          Neural sources and underlying mechanisms of neural responses to heartbeats, and their role in
          bodily self-​consciousness: An intracranial EEG Study. Cerebral Cortex, 116, 1–​14. <https://​doi.org/​
          10.1093/​cercor/​bhx136>
      Penfield, W. and Jasper, H. (1954). Epilepsy and the Functional Anatomy of the Human Brain. New York,
          NY: Little, Brown & Co.
      Penfield, W., and Faulk, M. E. (1955). The insula; further observations on its function. Brain, 78,
          445–​70.
      Pollatos, O., Gramann, K., and Schandry, R. (2007). Neural systems connecting interoceptive
          awareness and feelings. Human Brain Mapping, 28(1), 9–​18. <https://​doi.org/​10.1002/​hbm.20258>
      Ranson, S. W., Kabat, H., and Magoun, H. W. (1935). Autonomic responses to electrical stimulation of
          hypothalamus, preoptic region and septum. Archives of Neurology & Psychiatry, 33, 467–​77.
      Rolls, E. T. (2015). Taste, olfactory, and food reward value processing in the brain. Progress in
          Neurobiology, 127–​8,  64–​90.
      Ronchi, R., Bello-​Ruiz, J., Lukowska, M., Herbelin, B., Cabrilo, I., Schaller, K., et al. (2015).
          Right insular damage decreases heartbeat awareness and alters cardio-​visual effects on bodily
          self-​consciousness. Neuropsychologia, 70, 11–​20. <https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​j.neuropsycholo
          gia.2015.02.010>
      Ronchi, R., Bernasconi, F., Pfeiffer, C., Bello-​Ruiz, J., Kaliuzhna, M., and Blanke, O. (2017).
          Interoceptive signals impact visual processing: Cardiac modulation of visual body perception.
          NeuroImage, 158, 176–​85. <https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​j.neuroimage.2017.06.064>
      Saive, A-​L, Royet, J-​P, and Plailly, J. (2014). A review on the neural bases of episodic odor
          memory: From laboratory-​based to autobiographical approaches. Frontiers in Behavioral
          Neuroscience, 8, 240.
      Saper, C. B. (2002). The central autonomic nervous system: Conscious visceral perception and
          autonomic pattern generation. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 25, 433–​69.
      Schandry, R. (1981). Heart beat perception and emotional experience. Psychophysiology, 18(4),  483–​8.
2




    22   Interoception and the autonomic nervous system


         Schauder, K. B., Mash, L. E., Bryant, L. K., and Cascio, C. J. (2015). Interoceptive ability and body
             awareness in autism spectrum disorder. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 131, 193–​200.
             <https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​j.jecp.2014.11.002>
         Schulkin, J. (2003). Rethinking Homeostasis: Allostatic Regulation in Physiology and Pathophysiology.
             Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
         Sel, A., Azevedo, R. T., and Tsakiris, M. (2016). Heartfelt self: Cardio-​visual integration affects self-​face
             recognition and interoceptive cortical processing. Cerebral Cortex. <https://​doi.org/​10.1093/​cercor/​
             bhw296>
         Shah, P., Catmur, C., and Bird, G. (2017). From heart to mind: Linking interoception, emotion, and
             theory of mind. Cortex. April 28. Pii, S0010-​9452(17)30060-​6. doi:10.1016/​j.cortex.2017.02.010.
         Sherrington, C. S. (1900). Experiments on the value of vascular and visceral factors for the genesis of
             emotion. Proceedings of the Royal Society (London) B, 66, 390–​403.
         Shoemaker, J. K. and Goswami, R. (2015). Forebrain neurocircuitry associated with human reflex
             cardiovascular control. Frontiers in Physiology, 6, 240. doi:10.3389/fphys.2015.00240. <https://www.
             frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fphys.2015.00240/full>
         Simmons, W. K., Avery, J. A., Barcalow, J. C., Bodurka, J., Drevets, W. C., and Bellgowan, P. (2013).
             Keeping the body in mind: Insula functional organization and functional connectivity integrate
             interoceptive, exteroceptive, and emotional awareness. Human Brain Mapping, 34, 2944–​58.
             <https://​doi.org/​10.1002/​hbm.22113>
         Soudry, Y., Lemogne, C., Malinvaud, D., Consoli, S.-​M., and Bonfils, P. (2011). Olfactory system and
             emotion: Common substrates. European Annals of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Diseases,
             128(1),  18–​23.
         Squire, L., Berg, D., Bloom, F. E., du Lac Anirvan, S., Nicholas, G., and Spitzer, C. (2012).
             Fundamental Neuroscience. Oxford: Elsevier.
         Sterling, P. and Eyer, J. (1988). Allostasis: A new paradigm to explain arousal pathology. In: S. Fisher
             and J. Reason (eds), Handbook of Life Stress, Cognition and Health. New York, NY: John Wiley &
             Sons, pp. 629–​49.
         Strigo, I. A. and Craig, A. D. (2016). Interoception, homeostatic emotions and sympathovagal balance.
             Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences, 371, 1708.
         Suzuki, K., Garfinkel, S. N., Critchley, H. D., and Seth, A. K. (2013). Multisensory integration across
             exteroceptive and interoceptive domains modulates self-​experience in the rubber-​hand illusion.
             Neuropsychologia, 51, 2909–​17. <https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​j.neuropsychologia.2013.08.014>
         Tajadura-​Jiménez, A. and Tsakiris, M. (2014). Balancing the “inner” and the “outer” self: Interoceptive
             sensitivity modulates self-​other boundaries. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 143(2).
             <https://​doi.org/​10.1037/​a0033171>
         Tsakiris, M., Hesse, M. D., Boy, C., Haggard, P., and Fink, G. R. (2007). Neural signatures of body
             ownership: A sensory network for bodily self-​consciousness. Cerebral Cortex, 17, 2235–​44.
         Tsakiris, M. (2010). My body in the brain: A neurocognitive model of body-​ownership.
             Neuropsychologia, 48(3), 703–​12. <https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​j.neuropsychologia.2009.09.034>
         Tsakiris, M., Tajadura-​Jiménez, A., and Costantini, M. (2011). Just a heartbeat away from one’s
             body: Interoceptive sensitivity predicts malleability of body-​representations. Proceedings. Biological
             Sciences/​The Royal Society, 278, 2470–​6. <https://​doi.org/​10.1098/​rspb.2010.2547>
         Tsakiris, M. and Critchley, H. (2016a). Interoception beyond homeostasis: Affect, cognition and
             mental health. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences,
             371,  1–​6.
         Tsakiris, M. and Critchley, H. (eds) (2016b). Theme issue: “Interoception beyond homeostasis: Affect,
             cognition and mental health”. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, 371,
             issue 1708.
 23




                                                                                                  References   23


      Uddin, L. Q., Nomi, J. S., Hébert-​Seropian, B., Ghaziri, J., and Boucher O. (2017). Structure and
         function of the human insula. Journal of Clinical Neurophysiology, 34, 300–​6. doi:10.1097/​
         WNP.0000000000000377.
      Yates, B. J. and Stocker, S. D. (1998). Integration of somatic and visceral inputs by the
         brainstem: Functional considerations. Experimental Brain Research, 119, 269–​75.
24
 25




      PART II

      Mentalizing interoception
      Advances and challenges
26
 27




                Chapter 2

                The body as first prior: Interoceptive
                predictive processing and the primacy
                of self-​models
                Micah Allen and Manos Tsakiris



      2.1 Introduction
      Behind every human experience lies a tapestry of embodied sensations; the beating of
      the heart, air filling the lungs, or the skin of the chest pulling taught with each breath
      are all instances of such sensations. Fascinatingly, although the sensations of the living,
      moving body are ever-​available, they can also go easily unnoticed; in reading the pre-
      vious sentence, you probably became more aware of them. Our heartbeat is usually silent
      unless we have exerted physical effort; in which case, its thrumming beat comes to dom-
      inate, however briefly, our self-​awareness. In this sense, one can characterize our embod-
      iment as a kind of ever-​present, yet just behind-​the-​scenes kind of experience. What can
      cognitive neuroscience reveal about this special relationship between the body and our
      conscious mind?
        Phenomenologists typically describe the transparency of the body as a preconditioning
      factor for awareness of the self, world, and others, emphasizing that all experience takes
      place from within this embodied subjective frame (Gallagher & Zahavi, 2013; Heidegger,
      1996; Merleau-​Ponty, 1996). Until recently however, the foundational role of embodied
      sensations in shaping our perceptual, cognitive, and socio-​affective activity has been
      largely neglected by cognitive and computational neuroscience. This neglect may be in
      part due to a paucity of mechanistic theories equipped to generate testable hypotheses
      concerning the neural integration of visceral and exteroceptive bodily sensations. Now,
      resurgent interest in Bayes-​inspired neuroscience is driving an explosion of empirical
      data and theoretical models which places the visceral milieu, its homeostatic functioning,
      and our interoceptive awareness thereof back on center stage. In this chapter, we provide
      an overview of the latest developments in this area, considering the developing notions
      of bodily precision and computational “self-​models.” At the core of our approach is the
      hypothesis that homeostatic priors are “first priors” in the sense that, given the impetus
      for the organism to maintain homeostasis, they are afforded a privileged status within
      the cortical hierarchy. Having explained their privileged status for ensuring the stability
      of organism, we then turn to the psychological importance that interoceptive priors and
28




     28   The body as first prior


          precision have for self-​awareness, in particular for our understanding of domain-​specific
          (i.e. body-​awareness) as well as more global self-​models (i.e. metacognition).

          2.2  Predictive processing and the hierarchical
          optimization of precision
          New developments in computational and cognitive neuroscience drive an increased em-
          phasis on top-​down, prediction-​based theories of mind and brain function. These col-
          lectively describe the brain as a “prediction engine” which embodies or implements a
          statistically generative model describing the hidden causes of sensory inputs (Clark, 2013;
          Friston, 2010; Hohwy, 2013). Although so-​called predictive processing (PP) approaches
          have a long history in neuroscience, beginning with early models of motor control (for
          review, see Miall & Wolpert, 1996), this renewed interest is driven in part by their recent
          generalization to domains such as social (Friston & Frith, 2015; Gallagher & Allen, 2016;
          Koster-​Hale & Saxe, 2013), affective (Barrett & Simmons, 2015; Joffily & Coricelli, 2013;
          Seth, 2013), and embodied cognition (Ainley et al., 2016; Allen & Friston, 2016; Apps &
          Tsakiris, 2014). In particular, this new wave emphasizes the role of the visceral body in
          maintaining homeostasis as a fundamental aspect of the predictive mind.
             The essential elements of the PP framework have been elaborated in numerous arti-
          cles (Clark, 2013; Friston, 2005, 2010; Hohwy, 2014; see also Chapter  15 in the present
          volume); here we rehearse the basic elements to inform a discussion of their applica-
          tion to interoception and embodiment. The most general, formally articulated theory of
          predictive processing is found in the Free Energy Principle (FEP) as developed by Karl
          Friston (Friston, 2009, 2010, 2013). The FEP dictates that an organism can only survive
          by minimizing the entropy of internal states. That is, an entity which is subject to un-
          bounded entropy—​such as a snowflake—​will not survive for very long. In contrast to the
          snowflake, which can only increase in entropy over time, a living organism like you and
          me, or an amoeba, can take self-​sustaining (or autopoietic) actions which, for a time, resist
          entropy. This entails that an organism is fundamentally comprised of a Markov Blanket,
          constituted by an interlocking causal web of self-​sustaining actions, new sensations, and
          an internal model interlinking the two. The Markov Blanket thus demarcates internal from
          external states and enables an organism to resist entropy both by acting on the world so as
          to render it closer to one’s predictions (active inference) or through updating one’s internal
          states (perceptual inference). In this way, the FEP furnishes a basic normative principle by
          which to guide our understanding of the embodied mind; biological organisms persist by
          virtue of their ability to maintain a stable autopoietic self, and to predict the impact of fu-
          ture actions on that homeostatic imperative. However, understanding how this normative
          principle plays out in specific neurobiological process theories requires specifying a partic-
          ular architecture; for example, at what level of the cortical hierarchy do signals conveying
          successful homeostasis exert their influence on cognition, and in what manner, precisely?
             Here it is useful to appeal to the varieties of Bayesian Predictive Coding (BPC) found in
          the predictive processing literature. As a general process theory, BPC-​based approaches
 29




                                 Predictive processing and the hierarchical optimization of precision                  29


      describe the brain as a hierarchical network implementing a distributed Bayesian infer-
      ence scheme. Within this network, “top-​down” signals encode a prior probability dis-
      tribution (prediction); incoming sensory data are understood as a statistical likelihood,
      and the precision-​weighted posterior difference between these two inputs—​the predic-
      tion error—​is passed upward to the next level of the hierarchy.1 Neurobiologically, this
      scheme is thought to be accomplished by a canonical microcircuit motif, in which deep
      (infra-​granular) pyramidal cells receive prediction errors from lower levels and superfi-
      cial (agranular) cells encode predictions. This motif is assumed to be replicated across
      the brain2 such that the prediction error originating from the deep layer of, for example,
      primary visual cortex (V1) will be integrated with a prediction originating from the su-
      perficial layer of secondary visual cortex (V2), and so on. As higher-​order circuits must in-
      tegrate increasingly multimodal and abstract inputs (e.g. multisensory parietal areas), the
      predictions and prediction errors at each level become subsequently more removed from
      the fast temporal dynamics of sensory stimulation, and more intrinsically self-​related.3
         Thus, each canonical microcircuit integrates top-​down expectations and bottom-​up
      sensory prediction errors according to a cascading application of approximate Bayesian
      inference. This entails that top-​down predictions and bottom-​up prediction errors are
      neurobiologically encoded in such a way as to reflect their precision (i.e. confidence or
      inverse variance), with the interaction between the two governed by whichever input is
      more precise (Feldman & Friston, 2010; Kanai et al., 2015; Moran et al., 2013). As an in-
      tuitive example of how precision-​weighting works, consider a scientist, Daisy, who sets
      out to test the hypothesis that the average height of Dutch people is 182 cm (6 ft). If Daisy
      is unsure about her prediction—​perhaps previous studies have had divergent results, or
      there is a lack of prior data—​then she will assign a lower prior precision.4 Conversely, if
      Daisy visits Holland and only manages to sample very few individuals, or perhaps uses
      an unreliable measurement device, then the precision of the sensory data (or likelihood)
      will be very low. Bayes’ law captures the intuitive notion then that one should update one’s
      theory or belief according to whichever aspect of inference—​prior knowledge or empir-
      ical observations—​is more reliable.
         The hierarchical optimization of precision naturally motivates an account of both
      endogenous and exogenous attentional spotlight effects (Fardo et  al., 2017; Feldman
      & Friston, 2010). For example, the classical Posner cueing task has been modeled as
      inducing an expectation of enhanced expected precision on the right versus left visual
      hemifield (Feldman & Friston, 2010). Here, descending neuromodulation encoding

      1
       	 The distinction of likelihood vs prediction error is here relative to the hierarchical level one describes;
         the prediction error at level 1 becomes the inferential likelihood at level 2, and so on (see Figure 2.1).
      2
       	 Or plausibly, within a particular hierarchy if one does not subscribe to radically predictive processing
         (i.e. the notion that all systems everywhere in the brain are predictive).
      3
       	 In the sense of describing increasingly intrinsic (as opposed to extrinsic) processes: level B describes
         Level A, level C describes levels A and B, and so on.
      4
       	 Statistically, the prior probability distribution will have a wider variance or standard deviation.
30




     30   The body as first prior


          expected precision enhances the precision of sensory prediction errors on the expected
          field, causing them to dominate in perception, while simultaneously reducing the preci-
          sion of stimuli presented to the unattended visual field, weakening their ability to attract
          attention. Similarly, exogenous attentional effects, or “salience,” are also well-​captured by
          the model, as bottom-​up changes in stimulus intensity will drive stronger post-​synaptic
          depolarization, increasing bottom-​up gain to result in highly precise prediction errors
          which can override top-​down predictions. Thus, according to most BPC-​related schemes,
          both expected (top-​down) and sensory precision play a crucial role in dictating the pri-
          ority of information processing in the brain.
             These computational tools give us a fresh window into understanding both visceral
          perception itself and the integration of visceral signals within a more general self-​model.
          For example, respiratory or cardiac control, awareness, and disruptions thereof can be re-
          lated to various levels of a predictive coding hierarchy in visceromotor brain areas (Faull,
          Hayen, & Pattinson, 2017; Stephan et al., 2016). Visceral awareness in general has been
          proposed to depend upon the precision (or confidence, more on this later) of the inter-
          oceptive hierarchy (Ainley et al., 2016). As any hierarchical network will necessarily en-
          code more abstract, supramodal representations at higher levels, others have emphasized
          a more general role of interoceptive predictions in emotion, self-​awareness, and motor
          control (Seth, 2013; Seth, Suzuki, & Critchley, 2012). The homeostatic axioms of the FEP
          have further led to increased emphasis on the global priority of visceral predictive codes
          in conditioning cortical representations and self-​awareness (Allen & Friston, 2016; Barrett
          & Simmons, 2015). To improve our understanding of these views, we now introduce the
          concept of “embodied precision” (see also Ainley et al., 2016; Fotopoulou, 2013) and the
          related notion of homeostasis in predictive processing.

          2.3  Embodied precision and homeostatic “first priors”
          The FEP sets homeostatic and allostatic function as the defining core of organismic life
          (Friston, 2013). This emphasis on an imperative to maintain internal states in the face of
          uncertainty renders FEP-​based process theories embodied in the first order. For the free-​
          energy minimizing agent, “value” or “optimality” should be understood as an imperative
          to maintain homeostasis (Friston et  al., 2015). This is accomplished not by subserving
          some external economic principle but instead through modelling the self, the world, and
          their interaction in such a way as to maximize the chance of survival. In this sense, it
          might be said that the autopoetic principle at the basis of FEP acts as a kind of “first prior”;
          Bayesian inference is always bootstrapped from within the subjective needs of the agent
          and its embodied econiche within the world (Bruineberg, Kiverstein, & Rietveld, 2016;
          Bruineberg & Rietveld, 2014).
            In terms of a more specific process theory, there are multiple ways in which visceral,
          tactile, and proprioceptive bodily signals might be afforded some privileged status within
          the cortical hierarchy. The FEP dictates that organisms are themselves “models of the
          world” (in the cybernetic sense); those models are then passed on through phylogenetic
          evolution as genetic “priors” which constrain every aspect of biological function from
 31




                                                     Embodied precision and homeostatic “first priors”              31


      the DNA-​driven development of synaptic weights and cortical networks to the very mor-
      phology of the agent itself. In this sense, the priors one is born with5 are also imbued
      with an inherited prior precision.6 Interoceptive signaling, perception, and control are
      perhaps the phylogenetically oldest of all sensory motor systems; all vertebrates possess
      the basic homeostatic biomechanics of pumping blood, respiratory oxygenation, and so
      on. Further, in terms of importance for organism survival, the stability and reliability of
      our visceral function is vital. Quite literally, if our internal organs become unreliable, the
      immediate result is death. It makes sense then that evolutionarily speaking, the afferents
      of the interoceptive hierarchy are likely to be afforded the highest expected precision of
      any sensorimotor channel.
         There are several rather profound implications of this observation. Recall that the opti-
      mization of precision across the hierarchy can be unpacked as a mechanism for both top-​
      down, endogenous attention and bottom-​up saliency (Feldman & Friston, 2010). Here,
      salience is nothing more than the relative precision of incoming prediction errors. If the
      visceral body is afforded, a priori, the highest expected precision then interoceptive pre-
      diction errors should dominate the perceptual hierarchy (see Figure 2.1). This means that
      perceptual and value-​based salience are, for the homeostatic organism, always relative to
      the impact some stimulus or decision has on the organisms’ visceral prediction.
         Note that this account goes much further than previous theories such as the somatic
      marker hypothesis (Damasio, 1999). The somatic marker hypothesis states in essence
      that subjective value is determined by adding or weighting some bodily representation
      to a value computation. Instead, according to our account, salience is literally defined
      by whatever has the most (or least) impact on visceral and autonomic homeostasis.
      Visceral sensations here are the dominant basis to which perceptual-​and value-​based
      computations are added; through active inference, cognition is enslaved to embodiment,
      rather than the other way around. In the perceptual domain, the implication is that un-
      expected deviations in heart rate, gut response, or other systems may literally change
      the way we perceive the world and our metacognitive uncertainty about such percepts.
      Indeed, it has recently been shown that unexpected disgust signals can reverse the impact
      of sensory precision on the exteroceptive perception of uncertainty itself (Allen et  al.,
      2016), demonstrating the priority of visceral surprise as dictated by homeostatic prior
      precision.
         The presumed a priori hyper-​precision of visceral channels may explain a variety of
      classical cognitive phenomenon, beginning with substantive work done by mid-​century
      Soviet psychologists who, inspired by the pioneering work of Pavlov and Sokolov, exhaus-
      tively investigated “interoceptive conditioning” and its relationship to the orienting reflex
      (Razran, 1961; Sokolov, 1963). In an impressive body of work combining various means of
      stimulating cardiac, respiratory, and enteric nervous systems with classical conditioning

      5
       	 For example, consider the tendency to perceive certain conjunctions of circles as “faces” with an inher-
         ently social meaning, or to inhabit certain environments.
      6
       	 Also known as “hyper-​priors,”—​priors dictating an expected level of sensory precision.
32




     32   The body as first prior


                                                                                      Key
              (a)      Precision-Weighted Inference
                                                                                               Tactile
                                                                        Prior
                                                                                               Likelihood

                                                                                               Visual
                                                                        Likelihood
                                                                                               Likelihood

                                                                        Posterior
                                                                                               Visceral Input
                                                                        (Prediction Error)



              (b)     Accumulated Visceral Precision             (c)        Expected Visceral Precision
                           (sensory-weighted)                                   (prior-weighted)




          Figure 2.1  Visceral influences on precision-​weighted inference. (a) Under the principles of
          Bayesian Inference, prediction errors are weighted by their statistical confidence (i.e. inverse
          variance or precision). Both “top-​down” predictions and “bottom-​up” prediction errors can be
          more or less precise. In this example, a precise prior belief (in red, relative to likelihood or sensory
          precision, in blue) has shifted a perceptual prediction error (dotted black line) towards the
          prediction. Note that the precision of the prediction error itself is the product of both prior and
          sensory precision; some models posit that an additional system must read out the precision of
          prediction errors to guide subjective sensitivity and/​or confidence. (b) This example is expanded
          to consider how visceral information may enter a low-​level multisensory “self-​model” combining
          prior beliefs (red) with visual (green) and tactile (blue) sensory inputs. In this example, visceral
          signals are inherently more precise than other signals (see text), causing sensory signals to
          overwhelm prior expectations. (c) Here, highly precise visceral signals strengthen the influence
          of prior beliefs rather than feed-​forward prediction errors. Note that in both examples, the
          hypothetical hyper-​precision of visceral signals causes the prediction error to be highly stable,
          regardless whether prior or likelihood are weighted.


          paradigms and biophysiological recording, these scientists sought to understand how vis-
          ceral processes contribute to both implicit and explicit cognitive processes. This approach
          enabled them to study how exteroceptive unconditioned stimuli could be transferred to
          conditioned interoceptive responses, and vice versa. This revealed not only that subjects
          could quickly learn to associate internal sensations with exteroceptive phenomena but
          also that interoceptive learning itself was much faster to acquire and harder to extinguish
          than purely external learning.
             This is exactly what one would expect if the brain affords higher a priori precision to
          internal changes than to external stimuli. This enhanced precision would lead to predic-
          tion errors on the interoceptive channel dominating how we learn about various cues,
          particularly when those highly precise prediction errors are integrated with other sen-
          sory channels. In a sense, this can be recast as an account of how interoceptive signals
          themselves provide a source of reliability in our self-​perception and conscious awareness.
 3




                                                       Self-models and interoceptive predictions     33


     Interoceptive signals rise and fall according to a highly predictable pattern of slowly
     oscillating circadian and hormonal biorhythms. This low volatility, high precision stream
     of prediction errors may therefore provide a natural kind of “pacemaker” by which the
     brain can bind together a more coherent, potentially conscious stream of experience from
     the more noisy, unpredictable exteroceptive senses (see also Chapter  3 in the present
     volume).
        In the brain, this mechanism of enhanced interoceptive precision neatly explains
     both phenomena within the laboratory, such as the interoceptive conditioning findings
     outlined earlier, but also more relatable real-​world experiences. Nearly everyone has had
     the unfortunate experience of eating some food which has gone off, and then suffered
     through a day of food poisoning. Typically, this will result in a strong, lasting preference
     never to eat that food again—​a form of highly precise learning which is often quite gen­
     eral as well. For example, if a bad bit of venison burger makes you sick, you are likely
     never to look at any burger (even a veggie one) in quite the same way again.
        From the brain’s point of view, this sudden surge in highly precise interoceptive pre-
     diction errors represents a potentially fatal event and affords for an equally precise alter-
     ation of internal models. To overwhelm the precise interoceptive prediction errors, the
     brain must essentially engage in “one-​shot learning,” sending an equally precise cascade
     of predictions to alter the global neural networks governing appetite, aversion, and eating
     behavior. Through interoceptive active inference, the brain thus ensures that the next time
     you see a burger, or anything even closely related to it, you immediately feel some revul-
     sion or perhaps even “see” the meat as green.
        Interoceptive signals thus play a very important role in regulating the cortical hier-
     archy and how we learn from aversive, potentially life-​threatening events. However, not
     all is bad within the domain of the viscera. Indeed, highly pleasurable sensations can be
     obtained from the interoceptive encoding of social touch and sexual intercourse. It is
     interesting to note here the parallel between how the precision of visceral pain or dis-
     tress may subserve the evolutionary priority to stay alive, and a potentially equal a priori
     precision for affective or sexual sensations may subserve the principle of doing whatever
     makes one more likely to reproduce, and therefore ensure the survival of one’s “species
     model” (see Chapter 6 in the present volume). Also, of course, beyond aversive or affective
     interoceptive prediction errors associated with specific experiences, interoceptive signals,
     as first priors, may provide, as we explain in the following sections, the necessary basis
     for the experience of “the same body always there” as James aptly put it, the experience,
     in other words, of body ownership which seems to be central feature of the bodily self.

     2.4  Self-​models and interoceptive predictions
     An important emerging extension of the predictive coding literature is its application to
     the notion of a predictive self-​model (Allen & Friston, 2016; Apps & Tsakiris, 2014) that
     can explain fundamental aspects of selfhood such as body ownership and agency. At least
     two predominant self-​model process theories can be motivated from EPP approaches;
     a more domain-​constrained model which specifies how exteroceptive and interoceptive
34




     34   The body as first prior


          sensations are bound together to identify a sensation as originating from “me” (i.e.
          having to do with body ownership and agency), and a more global or emergent concept
          emphasizing the role of the hierarchical brain in iteratively predicting its own neural ac-
          tivity. We discuss these in turn.

          2.4.1  The   multisensory self and body ownership
          One of the first attempts towards a predictive coding self-​model focused strictly on the
          domain of body awareness, namely the sense of body ownership (Apps & Tsakiris, 2014).
          This model is posited entirely within the multisensory integration of bodily and extero-
          ceptive sensations and thus describes a lower-​order self-​model situated between the in-
          tegrative and sensori-​motor layers. The Rubber Hand Illusion (RHI), one of the most
          influential and well-​studied experimental paradigms of body ownership of embodiment,
          illustrates how predictions and predictions errors are used to compute the probability that
          a body part belongs to me. In the RHI, watching a rubber hand being stroked synchro-
          nously with one’s own unseen hand causes the rubber hand to be experienced as part of
          one’s body (Tsakiris, 2010 for a review). The illusion and its striking effects (for review see
          Tsakiris, 2010) illustrate how multisensory stimulation can lead to changes in how one’s
          body is processed, leading to an update of what is experienced as “my body.”
             How can a predictive coding account of the self explain changes in body ownership
          that are driven by multisensory stimulation? During the induction of the illusion there
          is considerable bottom-​up sensory surprise evoked in one’s sensory system. The somat-
          osensory experience of touch on one’s hand that is temporally congruent with the vision
          of touch on the rubber hand is surprising, as prior to stimulation participants cannot
          see the touch on their own hand and would not predict that touch on the rubber hand
          would evoke a sensation of touch. Instead they would predict that the vision of touch and
          felt touch should come from the same single body part. This surprise will be explained
          away by top-​down effects from multisensory areas where the relative precision weighting
          of vision over touch may explain away the prediction error, updating the prediction of
          what and where my “real” hand now is. In turn, perceptual learning processes will update
          representations of one’s body, such that the probabilistic representation of one’s body is
          different after synchronous multisensory stimulation. Therefore, one’s body, at least as
          perceived exteroceptively, seems to be processed in a probabilistic manner as “the most
          likely to be me” (Apps & Tsakiris, 2014). Such probabilistic representations are created
          through the integration of top-​down predictions about the body with bottom-​up pre-
          diction errors from unimodal sensory systems that are explained away by priors. These
          results speak in favor of an exteroceptive model of the self, within which body ownership,
          a key aspect of self-​awareness, is highly malleable, subject to the perception of the body
          from the outside. However, exteroceptive input represents only one set of channels of
          information available for self-​awareness. We are also interoceptively aware of our body
          (Craig, 2002).
             What is then the role of the interoceptive and bodily hierarchies in such predic-
          tive self-​models? As one’s body is not simply perceived exteroceptively but is also felt
 35




                                                         Self-models and interoceptive predictions       35


      interoceptively, a unifying model of the self must account for the integration of these
      modalities. For example, during the RHI, the exteroceptive evidence suggests that what
      I am looking at (i.e. the rubber hand) is my hand. However, if this is my hand, then there
      are interoceptive prediction errors between how my true hand feels (i.e. interoceptive
      prediction) and the fact that I cannot feel the rubber hand interoceptively. Therefore, ex-
      teroceptive and interoceptive streams must be integrated to explain away these prediction
      errors before the body can be represented as “self.”
         Beyond the domain of predictive processing, numerous theorists have emphasized a
      foundational role of visceral-​sensory integration in providing a basis for the “embodied
      subjective frame” in the notion of interoceptive first priors (see section 2.3). In an
      attempt to address the apparent dichotomy that existed in the field between a purely
      exteroceptively driven model of the self (Apps & Tsakiris, 2014; Tsakiris, 2010) and an
      interoceptively focused model (Seth, 2013), an FEP-​inspired model of the bodily self is
      needed in which exteroceptive (tactile and visual) prediction errors are bound together
      with interoceptive prediction errors. Indeed, the renewed focus on the potential role of
      interoception for self-​awareness, beyond emotional processing, resulted in new lines of
      research that attempted to study in parallel the integration of exteroceptive with intero-
      ceptive predictions errors, thereby adding the important interoceptive element of how
      “my body feels” to exteroceptive evidence (Aspell et al., 2013; Blefari, Martuzzi, Salomon
      et al., 2017; Filippetti & Tsakiris, 2017; Ronchi et al., 2015; Sel et al., 2017; Suzuki et al.,
      2013; Tsakiris, Jimenez, & Costantini, 2011).
         Cardiac interoceptive signals and their cortical signatures have been related to bodily
      self-​awareness in several recent studies. Inspired by classic bodily illusions, such as the
      RHI (Botvinick & Cohen, 1998), the Full-​Body Illusion (Lenggenhager et al., 2007) and
      the Enfacement Illusion (Tsakiris, 2008) that rely on multisensory (e.g. visuo-​tactile) stim-
      ulation to induce transient yet striking changes in body ownership, body identification,
      and self-​face recognition, several studies have focused on the potential impact of cardiac
      interoceptive signals for these dimensions of self-​awareness. Early studies focused on cor-
      relational designs to show that levels of explicit interoceptive accuracy were negatively
      correlated with the strength of the illusory experience of alterations in self-​awareness
      such that individuals with lower interoceptive accuracy tend to experience a stronger
      RHI (Schauder et al., 2015; Tsakiris et al., 2011). These studies highlighted the dynamic
      balance between exteroceptive and interoceptive influences for self-​awareness. The obser-
      vation that participants with lower interoceptive accuracy experienced a stronger illusory
      sense of body ownership in the Rubber Hand Illusion suggested that in the absence of
      accurate interoceptive representations one’s model of self is predominantly exterocep-
      tive. Importantly, this finding suggested an antagonism between interoceptive and ex-
      teroceptive cues in bodily self-​awareness. More recent studies have used cardiac signals
      as inducers of such changes in body ownership. In particular, the substitution of purely
      exteroceptive visuo-​tactile stimulation by cardio-​visual stimulation (i.e. a combination of
      interoceptive and exteroceptive signals) allowed researchers to probe a more active and
      potentially causal role of interoceptive signals for body-​awareness. For example, Suzuki,
36




     36   The body as first prior


          Garfinkel, Critchley, and colleagues (2013) showed that looking at a virtual hand that
          pulsates in synchrony with one’s heartbeat can lead to the same changes in body owner-
          ship as the ones reported in the classic version of the Rubber Hand Illusion. Such findings
          were soon extended to the Full Body Illusion (Aspell et al., 2013) and the Enfacement
          Illusion (Sel, Azevedo, & Tsakiris, 2016). The effect of the synchronicity between cardiac
          and visual events that induce the illusory changes in self-​awareness was also reflected
          in the attenuated amplitude of the neural response to heartbeats (i.e. Heartbeat Evoked
          Potentials; HEP), an effect that also correlated with explicit interoceptive accuracy. More
          excitingly, Park and colleagues confirmed the insula as the neural source of HEPs and
          demonstrated HEP modulations in the insula during self-​identification using intracranial
          electroencephalography (EEG) (Park Bernasconi et al., 2017).
             Taken together, these findings suggest that if exteroceptive influences highlight the
          malleability of body awareness, interoceptive signals seem to serve the stability of body
          awareness in response to exteroceptive stimulation, reflecting a psychological conse-
          quence of the biologically necessary function of homeostasis. Therefore, this attempt to
          unify the two sides of embodiment concerns equally the physiological and psycholog-
          ical basis of selfhood. At the physiological level, it is interoceptive autonomic signaling
          that ensures the stability (homeostasis) of the organism. At the psychological level, as
          visceral information can be in some sense described as inherently self-​related (unlike ex-
          teroceptive sensations, which are externally caused), both predictive and non-​predictive
          accounts suggest that the feed-​forward integration of visceral with exteroceptive infor-
          mation provides some inherent selfhood and affect to conscious experiences. In other
          words, the high expected precision of visceral signals make them ideal for providing a
          continuous estimate of “self-​stability.”

          2.4.2  The   metacognitive self-​model and visceral precision
          The notion of a more global or emergent concept emphasizing the role of the hierar-
          chical brain in iteratively predicting its own neural activity emerges naturally from con-
          sidering the predictive brain as a whole, rather than as a single hierarchy or collection
          of hierarchies (auditory, visceral, etc.). Although cortical hierarchies are often depicted
          as a “pyramid,” with one executive homunculus sitting atop relatively few inputs, recent
          advances in human tractography, functional connectivity, and monkey tracing studies
          challenge the plausibility of such a view. Instead, increasing evidence suggests that the
          global topology of brain connectivity is best described as a kind of centrifugal hierarchy
          (Figure 2.2).
            From this global or bird’s-​eye view of the predictive brain, it is clear that a variety of
          models can be spun to explain how visceral sensations are propagated throughout the
          hierarchy. For example, in the model architecture depicted earlier, visceral sensations
          are treated as equal with other sensorimotor hierarchies. In this case “selfhood” emerges
          solely from the metacognitive nature of the deep hierarchy; that is, it is the global ex-
          pectation of precision that embeds an inherently self-​related notion in information pro-
          cessing. To put this another way, consider that the global self-​model is essentially the
 37




                                                             Self-models and interoceptive predictions        37


                                       The Global Predictive Hierarchy



                                         Motor
                                                                                     Expected-Precision
                                                                                     ‘shadow hierarchy’
                                                                    Olfaction               Self-Model
                  Audition                                                                  Multisensory

                                                                                            Unisensory




                                                                                       Gustation



         Vision




                                                                                Somatosensation


                     Proprioception                                                  Canonical Microcircuit
                                                                                              Prediction
                                                    Interoception

                                                                                           Prediction Error

      Figure 2.2  The Dynamic Self-​Model. By depicting the brain as a “centrifugal” hierarchy, the
      self-​model is revealed. At the “periphery” of the brain we find high-​speed, sensory-​motor
      hierarchies with a relatively high modularity and functional specialization. At the next level,
      multisensory cortices combine prediction errors from divergent sensory-​viscero-​motor hierarchies
      with descending “self-​predictions” originating in the centermost layer. At the “center” of the
      hierarchy sits the “rich club,” a network of hubs integrating multi-​sensory prediction errors with
      global “self-​predictions” oscillating at narrative timescales. The metastable interaction of these
      layers is further controlled by a neuromodulatory “shadow hierarchy” which estimates and
      optimizes expected precision from the most global (self-​related) predictions down to the most
      local level of cortical processing.


      brain’s prediction of its own reliability. In this sense, global “experience predictions” (i.e.
      that I am this kind of agent, with these kinds of beliefs, who will experience some stimulus
      in a particular way) are inherently self-​related and constrain lower-​level brain dynamics.
        However, there are numerous reasons to think that visceral sensations may enjoy some
      privileged status within the global hierarchy. Both neuroanatomically and functionally
      speaking, primary viscero-​sensory and viscero-​motor control centers such as the insular
      and cingulate cortices sit firmly within the “middle” integration layer and exhibit greater
      multisensory sensitivity than other “primary” sensory cortices. Further, these areas are
38




     38   The body as first prior


          rich in neuromodulatory neurons thought to encode expected precision, and visceral
          sensations themselves may have an a priori hyper-​precision. Thus, rather than being a
          mere “arm” of the predictive hierarchy, the visceral brain may in fact form the backbone
          of the “shadow hierarchy” responsible for mediating perceptual and affective salience via
          precision optimization. In line with this hypothesis, recent studies have highlighted the
          far-​reaching effects of the visceral brain on a global self-​model by considering the role of
          visceral precision on metacognition.
             The metacognitive ability to monitor our own experiences, actions, and beliefs and
          to form an accurate feeling of confidence is a crucial part of cognition in general and
          decision-​making in particular. If our subjective beliefs become very divorced from reality,
          then poor decisions are sure to follow. Indeed, if perception itself is a kind of “Bayesian
          hallucination,” then overly precise expectations may be doubly so; I may perceive friendly
          faces as hostile, or systematically undervalue my own competence, if my predictions are
          too precise. In general, there is an obvious overlap between the statistical notion of preci-
          sion, and the metacognitive notion of confidence, but how do the two relate? Are we more
          confident when our brain is very precise? At what hierarchical level (i.e. self, integrative,
          or sensorimotor) does precision matter most for our subjective self-​awareness? Most im-
          portantly for the current issue, how do visceral signals come into this picture?
             Until now, these questions have been pursued primarily from the perspective of signal
          detection theory (SDT). Here, metacognition and confidence are presumed to arise
          from the feed-​forward monitoring of decision-​relevant information only. That is to say,
          according to the SDT model, all that really matters for subjective confidence is the (ex-
          teroceptive) evidence upon which my decision itself is based. Yet this view of the brain
          as a feed-​forward device is clearly in contradiction to the predictive processing views
          explained in sections 2.2 and 2.3, where both feedback and multisensory integration are
          pervasive features of self-​experience. Why then should our metacognition be so rationally
          secluded from the homeostatic visceral function of the body?
             In contrast to this view, we argue that metacognition arises generally from the inter-
          action of the global self-​model, with more task-​or performance-​specific modules lower
          in the hierarchy. In this sense, global expectations of self-​precision are a kind of met-
          acognitive model of how accurate I expect to be on an upcoming trial, given both my
          visceral and exteroceptive precision. Put another way: if I expect to be very fatigued on
          an upcoming test, then I will also expect to be less confident on that material even if it is
          relatively easy. The metacognitive self-​model thus emerges from the deepest levels of the
          cortical hierarchy, and enables the brain to both estimate and control its own self-​efficacy
          in the face of an ever-​changing environment. In this sense, descending expected precision
          signals are not only a crucial aspect of selfhood but also of our ability to monitor our per-
          formance and change our behavior when it is no longer adaptive.
             In support of this view, it has recently been demonstrated that subjective exterocep-
          tive confidence depends both on sensory precision, and on visceral surprise itself. To
          demonstrate this, Allen and colleagues utilized a novel task in which participants viewed
          moving dots on a screen and judged whether their average motion was to the left or right,
 39




                           An after-thought: The ontogenetic origins of interoceptive precisions         39


      and also rated their confidence (Allen et  al., 2016). Unbeknownst to the participants,
      on every trial an unconscious neutral or disgust-​related cue was presented using careful
      masking techniques. By carefully controlling the difficulty of the dot judgment, this study
      demonstrated that a sudden increase in interoceptive prediction error can reverse the
      impact of sensory precision, resulting in higher confidence for noisy trials and lower
      confidence for precise trials. In a complementary study, Hauser and colleagues (2017a)
      followed up on these results by administering the beta-​blocking drug propranolol, which
      inhibits the activity of noradrenaline both in the central and autonomic nervous system,
      crucial for interoceptive arousal. Interestingly, this study found blocking noradrenaline
      actually improved the correspondence of perceptual accuracy and confidence, suggesting
      that blocking signals from the body renders metacognition “less embodied” and more
      concerned solely with exteroceptive evidence. In this sense, altering bodily signals is likely
      to influence a variety of biases in both health and disordered decision-​making. This may
      have profound implications for how we understand and treat psychiatric disorders such
      as obsessive–​compulsive disorder (OCD), anxiety, and psychosis, where aberrant visceral
      precision may result in overly precise (or imprecise) metacognitive self-​model (Bliksted
      et al., 2017)), locking the patient into an unrealistically uncertain world.
         Ultimately, the emerging understanding of a metacognitive self-​model integrating in-
      teroceptive and exteroceptive sensations is still in its infancy. It remains to be seen, for ex-
      ample, the extent to which visceral signals influence perceptual or value-​based decisions
      in a variety of different domains. Nevertheless, these sorts of findings are exactly what one
      would expect if visceral sensations are afforded higher a priori precision, and they suggest
      that in many domains our explicit, conscious self-​awareness may be biased in subtle ways
      by the ongoing activity and predictability of the visceral body.


      2.5  An after-​thought: The ontogenetic origins
      of interoceptive precisions
      In section 2.4, we described some key properties of domain-​specific and more global
      self-​models. In the future, it will be crucial to use a model-​based approach in order to
      map how the varieties of self models (e.g. global, multisensory, metacognitive) interact
      with one another and to pit competing hypotheses about how visceral signals contribute
      to these models (e.g. by enhancing expected precision or prediction error) against one
      another. This will not only greatly accelerate the computational neuroscience of embod-
      iment but also provide valuable tools to ask important questions, for instance, about the
      ontogenetic development of self-​models the lifespan, as well as about the role of vis-
      ceral signals for social awareness—​the awareness of other people in relation to the self.
      It is precisely these ontogenetic and more social aspects of interoception that remain
      poorly understood. A large body of developmental research on the development of self-​
      awareness (Lewis, 2001; Rochat, 2003) documents the importance of multisensory inte-
      gration processes that will enable infants to match their mirror reflection with their own
      body and eventually to master delayed self-​recognition, indicative of a more diachronic
40




     40   The body as first prior


          self-​representation by the third year. In addition, an intersubjective approach suggests
          that infants learn self/​other differentiation through social interactions of mutual attention
          (Reddy, 2003)  where they detect the caregiver’s contingent response to their emotion
          expression (see also the social-​biofeedback model; Gergely & Watson, 1999). More re-
          cently, intersubjective approaches on the development of self-​awareness have been ex-
          tended to interoception (Fotopoulou & Tsakiris, 2017), whereby the development of the
          visceral and emotional circuit depends on a caregiver–​infant relationship (Fox et  al.,
          2007; Rinaman, 2009), often conceptualized as one of homeostatic regulation (Rinaman,
          2009). Human infants are born immature, and they do not have the ability to perform by
          themselves the actions needed for addressing their internal sensations and needs. From
          eating and drinking to thermoregulation and even sleep, their bodily regulation depends
          largely on caregivers. Furthermore, the first months post-​partum are characterized by rel-
          ative instability of key cardiovascular variables (e.g. Heart Rate Variability (HRV), Vagal
          Tone) that become moderately stable by the end of the first year (Fox et al., 2007), due to
          physiological maturation (Fracasso et al., 1994). Importantly, their levels depend on care-
          giving (McLaughlin et  al., 2015)  such as parent–​infant contingency during interaction
          (Feldman, 2007; Feldman et  al., 2011), and are predictive of self-​regulation abilities in
          three-​year-​old children (Fracasso et al., 1994).
             From the point of view of interoceptive awareness, progress in this area has been
          hindered by the lack of appropriate experimental methods that would allow to measure
          interoceptive sensitivity in early infancy. Recently, Maister, Tang, and Tsakiris have
          tackled this issue by developing the iBEAT task, a non-​verbal behavioral task that meas-
          ures infants’ sensitivity to their own heartbeat. During the task, five-​month-​old infants
          were shown an animated character that either moved in synchrony with their own heart-
          beat or out of synchrony with their heartbeat. Using this sequential looking time task,
          it was observed that infants spent longer more time looking at the character that was
          moving out of synchrony than the one moving in synchrony, suggesting that even at
          this early age infants are, at least implicitly, sensitive to their own interoceptive signals.
          Moreover, the infants’ performance in the iBEAT task revealed interesting individual
          differences. Infants who displayed greater interoceptive sensitivity in the iBEAT task
          also had larger HEP amplitudes in a subsequent task when infants viewed short video
          clips of facial expressions, a finding that conforms to HEP measures in adults (Pollatos &
          Schandry, 2004). However, the question of what processes can account for such individual
          differences remains unanswered.
             Methodological advances such as the development of the iBEAT task will enable the
          field to study the ontogenetic origins and longitudinal development of interoception as the
          infant enters an intersubjective world of carer–​infant embodied and affective interactions.
          These interactions are thought to be critical for providing the means by which the infant
          will learn to relate specific homeostatic needs (e.g. pain) and their behavioral expres-
          sion (e.g. crying) to contingent allostatic responses from the carer (e.g. soothing rather
          than feeding; see Fotopoulou & Tsakiris, 2017). If these coupled intersubjective embodied
          iterations turn out to be critical for developing a sense of one’s self inside her body, as well
 41




                                                                                       Conclusion      41


      as interoceptive inferences with higher precision and better metacognition, we will then
      be in a position to test empirically the causal and crucial role that interoception plays
      for development and its importance for mentalizing one’s own bodily states and those
      of others (Fotopoulou & Tsakiris, 2017; Shah, Catmur, & Bird, 2017). In particular, this
      approach could be integrated with new methods for studying metacognitive processes in
      infants (Goupil &  Kouider, 2016), revealing how changes in visceral sensitivity contribute
      to the emergence of accurate self-​monitoring and advance our understanding of develop-
      mental disorders such as autism (Brewer et al., 2015; Quattrocki & Friston, 2014), eating
      (Badoud & Tsakiris, 2017; see also the Chapter  9 in the present volume) and affective
      disorders (see the Chapter 8 in the present volume).

      2.6 Conclusion
      One can distinguish among different kinds of “self models” within the predictive mind.
      The exteroceptive and interoceptive models, in a more feed-​forward sense, integrate the
      action of a visceral hierarchy with ascending exteroceptive signals to provide the basic
      embodied context for the self. The second, by representing confidence itself, enforces
      systematic interactions between the different exteroceptive and interoceptive hierarchies
      (see also Garfinkel et al., 2015). Collectively, both are likely to contribute uniquely to our
      embodied self-​experience. Considering the a priori high precision of interoception, in
      favour of which we argued in this chapter, the feed-​forward multisensory integration of
      prediction errors may be a crucial mechanism for binding together conscious contents
      in an embodied way. The high priority of visceral sensations may provide a naturally
      reliable “anchor” on which to lodge a more permanent feeling of bodily self. However,
      these processes are themselves likely to be cognitive impenetrable, in the sense that they
      occur below the metacognitive self-​inferences required for conscious access. Thus, the
      top-​down representation of both visceral and exteroceptive confidence (or precision) is a
      likely precursor for explicit learning in these domains, and may be a critical target for on-
      togenetic and cultural development of social norms, expected behaviors, and ultimately
      our empathic understanding of other minds as embodied agents.
         The hypothesis that interoception plays an important role in cognitive and emotional
      processes is well established in the fields of experimental psychology, cognitive neuro-
      science, and clinical psychology and psychiatry. The proposal we put forward about the
      psychological role of interoception, namely that interoception serves the stability of self-​
      awareness, because of the primacy of a priori high precision of visceral channels, is in
      line with FEP-​inspired models of self-​awareness. This role is informed by the homeo-
      static principles that keep the organism within certain ranges of physiological function
      in adaptive response to external changes. At the same time, one should be aware of the
      long-​lasting dichotomies in our disciplines that have fractionalized the self. FEP-​inspired
      models of the bodily self can, in principle, go beyond such dichotomies to integrate the
      influential traditions that until now have been kept separate:  the awareness of the self
      from the outside and from within. Rather than focusing on the apparent differences of
      these sources of information for the self, our field should consider their antagonism from
42




     42   The body as first prior


          a predictive coding perspective that can explain their integration, and how their relation-
          ship is reflected in the balance between stability and adaptation. In reference to classic
          embodied cognition approaches, which in certain ways depict a surface body, it was about
          time, as the growing body of evidence reviewed in this chapter shows, to ground the self
          to a non-​hollow body with a dimension of visceral depth. This step may pave the way for
          new investigations that can fulfil a long-​standing aim of psychology to link the physiolog-
          ical to the psychological self.

          Acknowledgments
          MA would like to thank Francesca Fardo and Matthew Apps for productive discussions
          on this work. MA was supported by a Wellcome grant 100227 (MA). The Wellcome Trust
          Centre for Neuroimaging is supported by core funding from Wellcome (091593/​Z/​10/​Z).
          MT is supported by the European Research Council (ERC-​2016-​CoG-​724537) under the
          FP7 and the NOMIS Foundation Distinguished Scientist Award.

          References
          Ainley, V., Apps, M. A. J., Fotopoulou, A., and Tsakiris, M. (2016). “Bodily precision”: A predictive
              coding account of individual differences in interoceptive accuracy. Philosophical Transactions of the
              Royal Society B, 371, 20160003.
          Allen, M., Frank, D., Schwarzkopf, D. S., Fardo, F., Winston, J. S., Hauser, T. U., et al. (2016).
              Unexpected arousal modulates the influence of sensory noise on confidence. eLife, 5, e18103.
          Allen, M. and Friston, K. J. (2016). From cognitivism to autopoiesis: Towards a computational
              framework for the embodied mind. Synthese,  1–​24.
          Apps, M. A. J. and Tsakiris, M. (2014). The free-​energy self: A predictive coding account of self-​
              recognition. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 41,  85–​97.
          Aspell, J. E., Heydrich, L., Marillier, G., Lavanchy, T., Herbelin, B., and Blanke, O. (2013). Turning
              body and self inside out: Visualized heartbeats alter bodily self-​consciousness and tactile perception.
              Psychological Science, 24, 2445–​53.
          Badoud, D. and Tsakiris, M. (2017). From the body’s viscera to the body’s image: Is there a link between
              interoception and body image concerns? Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 77, 237–​46.
              <https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​j.neubiorev.2017.03.017>
          Barrett, L. F. and Simmons, W. K. (2015). Interoceptive predictions in the brain. Nature Reviews
              Neuroscience, 16, 419–​29.
          Blefari, M. L., Martuzzi, R., Salomon, R., Bello-​Ruiz, J., Herbelin, B., Serino, A., et al. (2017). Bilateral
              Rolandic operculum processing underlying heartbeat awareness reflects changes in bodily self-​
              consciousness. European Journal of Neuroscience, 45(10), 1300–​12. <https://​doi.org/​10.1111/​
              ejn.13567>
          Bliksted, V., Samuelsen, E., Sandberg, K., Bibby, B. M., and Overgaard, M. S. (2017). Discriminating
              between first-​and second-​order cognition in first-​episode paranoid schizophrenia. Cognitive
              Neuropsychiatry, 22, 95–​107.
          Botvinick, M. and Cohen, J. (1998). Rubber hand feels touch that eyes see. Nature, 391(February), 756.
              <https://​doi.org/​10.1038/​35784>
          Bruineberg, J., Kiverstein, J., and Rietveld, E. (2016). The anticipating brain is not a scientist: The free-​
              energy principle from an ecological-​enactive perspective. Synthese,  1–​28.
 43




                                                                                                       References      43


      Brewer, R., Happé, F., Cook, R., and Bird, G. (2015). Commentary on “Autism, oxytocin and
          interoception”: Alexithymia, not autism spectrum disorders, is the consequence of interoceptive
          failure. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 56, 348–​53. <https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​
          j.neubiorev.2015.07.006>
      Bruineberg, J. and Rietveld, E. (2014). Self-​organization, free energy minimization, and optimal grip on
          a field of affordances. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, 599.
      Bruineberg, J., Kiverstein, J., and Rietveld, E. (2016). The anticipating brain is not a scientist: The free-​
          energy principle from an ecological-​enactive perspective. Synthese, 1–​28. <https://​doi.org/​10.1007/​
          s11229-​016-​1239-​1>
      Clark, A. (2013). Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and the future of cognitive science.
          Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 36, 181–​204.
      Damasio, A. R. (1999). The Feeling of What Happens: Body and Emotion in the Making of Consciousness.
          New York, NY: Harcourt Brace.
      Fardo, F., Auksztulewicz, R., Allen, M., Dietz, M. J., Roepstorff, A., and Friston, K. J. (2017).
          Expectation violation and attention to pain jointly modulate neural gain in somatosensory cortex.
          NeuroImage, 153, 109–​21.
      Faull, O., Hayen, A., and Pattinson, K. (2017). Breathlessness and the body: Neuroimaging
          evidence for the inferential leap. bioRxiv:117408. <https://www.biorxiv.org/content/biorxiv/
          early/2017/03/24/117408.full.pdf>
      Feldman, H. and Friston, K. J. (2010). Attention, uncertainty, and free-​energy. Frontiers in Human
          Neuroscience, 4, 215
      Feldman, R. (2007). Infant biological foundations synchrony and developmental outcomes. Current
          Directions in Psychological Science, 16(6),  340–​5.
      Feldman, R., Magori-​Cohen, R., Galili, G., Singer, M., and Louzoun, Y. (2011). Mother and infant
          coordinate heart rhythms through episodes of interaction synchrony. Infant Behavior and
          Development, 34(4),  569–​77
      Filippetti, M. L. and Tsakiris, M. (2017). Heartfelt embodiment: Changes in body-​ownership and self-​
          identification produce distinct changes in interoceptive accuracy. Cognition, 159,  1–​10.
      Fotopoulou, A. (2013). Beyond the reward principle: Consciousness as precision seeking.
          Neuropsychoanalysis, 15,  33–​8.
      Fotopoulou, A. and Tsakiris, M. (2017). Mentalizing homeostasis: The social origins of interoceptive
          inference. Neuropsychoanalysis, 19(1),  3–​28.
      Fox, N. A., Schmidt, L. A., Henderson, H. A., and Marshall, P. J. (2007). Developmental
          psychophysiology: Conceptual and methodological issues. Handbook of Psychophysiology, (1995),
          453–​81.
      Fracasso, M. P., Porges, S. W., Lamb, M. E., and Rosenberg, A. A. (1994). Cardiac activity in infancy:
          Reliability and stability of individual differences. Infant Behavior & Development, 17(3), 277–​84.
      Friston, K. (2005). A theory of cortical responses. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 360,
          815–​36.
      Friston, K. (2009). The free-​energy principle: A rough guide to the brain? Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
          13, 293–​301.
      Friston, K. (2010). The free-​energy principle: A unified brain theory? Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 11
          127–​38.
      Friston, K. (2013). Life as we know it. Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 10, 20130475.
      Friston, K. and Frith, C. (2015). A duet for one. Consciousness and Cognition, 36, 390–​405
      Friston, K., Rigoli, F., Ognibene, D., Mathys, C., Fitzgerald, T., and Pezzulo, G. (2015). Active
          inference and epistemic value. Cognitive Neuroscience, 6, 187–​214.
4




    44   The body as first prior


         Gallagher, S. and Zahavi, D. (2013). The Phenomenological Mind. London: Routledge.
         Gallagher, S. and Allen, M. (2016). Active inference, enactivism and the hermeneutics of social
             cognition. Synthese,  1–​22.
         Garfinkel, S. N., Seth, A. K., Barrett, A. B., Suzuki, K., and Critchley, H. D. (2015). Knowing your own
             heart: Distinguishing interoceptive accuracy from interoceptive awareness. Biological Psychology,
             104,  65–​74.
         Gergely, G. & Watson, J. S. (1999). Early social-emotional development: Contingency perception and
             the social biofeedback model. In: P. Rochat (ed.), Early Social Cognition. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum,
             pp. 101–36.
         Goupil, L. & Kouider, S. (2016). Behavioral and neural indices of metacognitive sensitivity in preverbal
             infants. Current biology, 26(22), 3038–45.
         Hauser, T. U., Fiore, V. G., Moutoussis, M., and Dolan, R.J. (2016). Computational psychiatry of
             ADHD: Neural gain impairments across marrian levels of analysis. Trends in Neuroscience,
             39,  63–​73.
         Hauser, T. U., Allen, M., Purg, N., Moutoussis, M., Rees, G., and Dolan, R.J. (2017a). Noradrenaline
             blockade specifically enhances metacognitive performance. eLife, 6, e24901.
         Hauser, T. U., Allen, M., Rees G, and Dolan, R. J. (2017b). Metacognitive impairments extend
             perceptual decision making weaknesses in compulsivity. Scientific Reports, 7, 6614.
         Heidegger, M. (1996). Being and Time: A Translation of Sein und Zeit. New York, NY: SUNY Press.
         Hohwy, J. (2013). The Predictive Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
         Hohwy, J. (2014). The neural organ explains the mind. In: T. Metzinger and J. M. Windt
             (eds), Open MIND. Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group. <https://open-mind.net/papers/
             the-neural-organ-explains-the-mind>
         Joffily, M. and Coricelli, G. (2013). Emotional valence and the free-​energy principle. PLoS
             Computational Biology, 9, e1003094.
         Kanai, R., Komura, Y., Shipp, S., and Friston, K. (2015). Cerebral hierarchies: Predictive processing,
             precision and the pulvinar. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 370, 20140169.
         Koster-​Hale, J. and Saxe, R. (2013). Theory of mind: A neural prediction problem. Neuron, 79, 836–​48.
         Lenggenhager, B., Tadi, T., Metzinger, T., and Blanke, O. (2007). Video ergo sum: Manipulating bodily
             self-​consciousness. Science, 317(5841), 1096–​9. <https://​doi.org/​10.1126/​science.1143439>
         Lewis, M. (2011). The origins and uses of self-​awareness or the mental representation of me.
             Consciousness and Cognition, 20(1),  120–​9.
         McLaughlin, K. A., Sheridan, M. A., Tibu, F., Fox, N. A., Zeanah, C. H., and Nelson, C. A. (2015).
             Causal effects of the early caregiving environment on development of stress response systems in
             children. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 112(18), 5637–​42. <https://​doi.
             org/​10.1073/​pnas.1423363112>
         Meessen, J., Mainz, V., Gauggel, S., Volz-​Sidiropoulou, E., Sütterlin, S., and Forkmann, T. (2016). The
             relationship between interoception and metacognition: A pilot study. Journal of Psychophysiology,
             30(2),  76–​86.
         Merleau-​Ponty, M. (1996). Phenomenology of Perception. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publisher.
         Miall, R. C. and Wolpert, D. M. (1996). Forward models for physiological motor control. Neural
             Networks, 9, 1265–​79.
         Moran, R. J., Campo, P., Symmonds, M., Stephan, K. E., Dolan, R. J., and Friston, K. J. (2013). Free
             energy, precision and learning: The role of cholinergic neuromodulation. Journal of Neuroscience,
             33, 8227–​36.
 45




                                                                                                        References      45


      Park, H.-​D., Bernasconi, F., Salomon, R., Tallon-​Baudry, C., Spinelli, L., Seeck, M., et al. (2017).
          Neural sources and underlying mechanisms of neural responses to heartbeats, and their role in
          bodily self-​consciousness: An intracranial EEG study. Cerebral Cortex, 116,  1–​14.
      Pollatos, O. and Schandry, R. (2004). Accuracy of heartbeat perception is reflected in the amplitude of
          the heartbeat-​evoked brain potential. Psychophysiology, 41(3), 476–​82.
      Quattrocki, E. and Friston, K. (2014). Autism, oxytocin and interoception. Neuroscience and
          Biobehavioral Reviews, 47, 410–​30.
      Razran, G. (1961). The observable and the inferable conscious in current Soviet psychophysiology:
          Interoceptive conditioning, semantic conditioning, and the orienting reflex. Psychological Review,
          68, 81–​147.
      Reddy, V. (2003). On being the object of attention: Implications for self–​other consciousness. Trends in
          Cognitive Sciences, 7(9), 397–​402.
      Rinaman, L. and Koehnle, T. J. K. (2009). The development of central visceral circuits. In: M. Blumberg,
          J. Freeman, and S. Robinson (eds), Oxford Handbook of Developmental Behavioral Neuroscience.
          Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 298–​322.
      Rochat, P. (2003). Five levels of self-​awareness as they unfold early in life. Consciousness and Cognition,
          12(4), 717–​31.
      Ronchi, R., Bello-​Ruiz, J., Lukowska, M., Herbelin, B., Cabrilo, I., Schaller, K., et al. (2015). Right
          insular damage decreases heartbeat awareness and alters cardio-​visual effects on bodily self-​
          consciousness. Neuropsychologia, 70,  11–​20.
      Schauder, K. B., Mash, L. E., Bryant, L. K., and Cascio, C. J. (2015). Interoceptive ability and body
          awareness in autism spectrum disorder. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 131, 193–​200.
      Sel, A., Azevedo, R. T., and Tsakiris, M. (2017). Heartfelt self: Cardio-​visual integration affects self-​face
          recognition and interoceptive cortical processing. Cerebral Cortex, 27(11), 5144–​55.
      Seth, A. K., Suzuki, K., and Critchley, H. D. (2012). An interoceptive predictive coding model of
          conscious presence. Frontiers in Psychology, 2, 395.
      Seth, A. K. (2013). Interoceptive inference, emotion, and the embodied self. Trends in Cognitive
          Sciences, 17, 565–​73.
      Shah, P., Catmur, C., and Bird, G. (2017). From heart to mind: Linking interoception, emotion, and
          theory of mind. Cortex, 93,  220–​3.
      Sokolov, E. N. (1963). Higher nervous functions: The orienting reflex. Annual Review of Physiology, 25,
          545–​80.
      Stephan, K. E., Manjaly, Z. M., Mathys, C. D., Weber, L.A.E., Paliwal, S., Gard, T., et al. (2016).
          Allostatic self-​efficacy: A metacognitive theory of dyshomeostasis-​induced fatigue and depression.
          Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 10, 550.
      Suzuki, K., Garfinkel, S. N., Critchley, H. D., and Seth, A. K. (2013). Multisensory integration across
          exteroceptive and interoceptive domains modulates self-​experience in the rubber-​hand illusion.
          Neuropsychologia, 51, 2909–​17.
      Tsakiris, M. (2008). Looking for myself: Current multisensory input alters self-​face recognition. PLoS
          One, 3(12), e4040.
      Tsakiris, M. (2010). My body in the brain: A neurocognitive model of body-​ownership.
          Neuropsychologia, 48(3), 703–​12.
      Tsakiris, M., Jimenez, A. T.-​, and Costantini, M. (2011). Just a heartbeat away from one’s body:
          Interoceptive sensitivity predicts malleability of body-​representations. Proceedings of the Royal
          Society B, 278(1717), 2470–​6.
46




                 Chapter 3

                 Interoceptive signals, brain dynamics,
                 and subjectivity
                 Mariana Babo-​Rebelo and Catherine Tallon-​Baudry



     3.1  The embodied self: Visceral inputs as
     self-​specifying signals

     3.1.1  The   self is rooted in the body
     The question of the bodily basis of the self has long been debated by philosophers. Descartes
     (1641/​1989) had a dualistic point of view, where the self is purely mental and thus de-
     tached from the body. However, his approach fails to explain the interaction between the
     mental and the physical domains. For instance, remembering a vivid, scary event from
     our past increases our heart rate. To solve this issue, Spinoza (1677/​2005) proposed that
     mind and body form one unique entity so that any mental event is accompanied by bodily
     changes. Therefore, the self, as the subject of mental activity, has a bodily basis. William
     James (1890/​1931) further elaborated the concept of self. He defined a hierarchy of the
     self where the bodily self is at the bottom and underlies more cognitive and higher-​level
     forms of self, such as the social self or the spiritual self. For him, “our entire feeling of spir-
     itual activity . . . is really a feeling of bodily activities” (Vol. 1, pp. 301–​2, 1931). Every epi-
     sode of our lives is accompanied by particular bodily feelings that remain associated with
     the memories we retain from those episodes. These bodily feelings give the memories the
     “warmth” necessary for memories to be felt as our own and a sense of continuity of the
     self along time as being one and the same.
        More recently, the idea of the bodily basis of the self has been translated into biological
     terms, notably by Antonio Damasio (1994, 1999). Damasio defines the first level of self,
     the proto-​self, as representing the unconscious monitoring of the moment by moment
     state of the body. This proto-​self is non-​conscious, and corresponds to a mechanism
     shared by all living organisms. When an object (a face, a melody, etc.) interacts with the
     organism, it modifies the organism’s state, thereby modifying the proto-​self. These new
     maps representing the interaction between the organism and the object can become con-
     scious and generate the core-​self. Because a multiplicity of objects is constantly interacting
     with the organism, the core-​self is constantly generated and continuous in time. The au-
     tobiographical self is then composed of the collection of experiences of the core-​self. The
     autobiographical self is extended in time and it places the subject at a given point in their
 47




                                                                                  The embodied self     47


      personal history, with a past that constitutes their identity, and a perspective of the future.
      In this hierarchical model of the self, each level depends on the lower level, and therefore
      all depend on bodily mechanisms. For Damasio, the body ensures the stability of the
      self over time; that is, this feeling that we stay the same person throughout our lifetime.
      Because the range of internal bodily states compatible with life is actually limited, bodily
      representations are stable and so is the self.
         While those proposals have been influential, they have also been met with criticism.
      In particular, on both James and Damasio’s proposals, selfhood is rooted in changes in
      bodily states. For James, the “feeling of bodily activities” constitutes the core definition of
      the self, while for Damasio the proto-​self is generated by the brain response to changes in
      the organism internal state. This is reminiscent of the James–​Lange theory of emotions,
      where physiological changes generate the feeling of an emotion. This theory has been
      criticized on several grounds, but the most relevant point is that altering bodily states
      does not necessarily induce an emotion. Similarly, altering bodily states does not alter the
      self. For instance, the self is not deeply altered when stimulating the viscera by eating. The
      proposal we outline aims at overcoming this criticism. Briefly, we propose that organs
      endowed with pacemaker properties, such as the heart or the stomach, function as con-
      tinuous sources of signals, sending the message to the central nervous system that a body
      is there—​whatever the bodily state is. This information would then be used at the central
      level to generate an egocentric reference frame, from which first-​person perspective can
      arise (Park & Tallon-​Baudry, 2014; Tallon-​Baudry et al., 2017). First-​person perspective
      can be viewed as a basic building block necessary to all aspects of selfhood. First-​person
      perspective is intrinsic to the simplest, pre-​reflective aspect of the self that defines the
      subject who acts, perceives, or feels. In more complex aspects of the self, such as the au-
      tobiographical or social self, the self includes also a reflective component where the self is
      the object of introspection (Christoff et al., 2011; Gallagher, 2012; Legrand & Ruby, 2009;
      Zahavi, 2005).
         In the first part of the chapter, we develop the idea that the neural monitoring of visceral
      signals could constitute the ground for selfhood. Then, we describe cardiac and gastric
      pacemaker properties as well as known anatomical pathways from the viscera to the cen-
      tral nervous system. In the third part of the chapter, we review the recent experimental
      evidence directly relating neural responses to heartbeats to different facets of the self—​the
      bodily self, the self who thinks, and the self who perceives, and finally we discuss the hy-
      pothesis in light of these results.

      3.1.2  Theneural monitoring of visceral signals as the ground
      for the self
      3.1.2.1  The importance of visceral electrical signals from the heart and
      gastrointestinal tract
      In the search for a bodily basis of selfhood, emphasis has mostly been placed on the role
      of sensory and motor signals (from the skin, limbs, joints, vestibular system) in agency
      (Frith, Blakemore, & Wolpert, 2000) or bodily self-​consciousness (Blanke & Metzinger,
48




     48   Interoceptive signals, brain dynamics, and subjectivity


          2009) studies, leading to the proposal that the bodily self results from multi-​sensory in-
          tegration (Blanke, Slater, & Serino, 2015). While sensory and motor signals certainly play
          a role, they are mostly emitted in response to a particular stimulus or as a feedback from a
          motor action, whereas first-​person perspective should be continuously defined. The case
          of locked-​in patients, who are fully paralyzed but nevertheless conscious, also shows that
          the self can exist despite massive disruption of proprioceptive signals (Tononi & Koch,
          2008). Conversely, asomatognosic patients cannot sense their somatosensory body but
          are aware of their visceral functions, such as breathing, the heart beating, or digestion.
          Such a patient described the strangeness of her bodily self but her first-​person perspective
          remained intact; she was able to say “I” (Damasio, 1994). From this clinical case, Damasio
          hypothesized that “some body representations may be of greater value than others to
          ground the mind, namely, those that pertain to the organism’s interior, specifically to the
          viscera and internal milieu” (2003, p. 193).
             The heart and the gastrointestinal tract have a very distinctive property: they contain
          pacemaker cells that continuously and autonomously generate an electrical signal. This
          is well known for the heart, and results in cardiac contraction, at a rate of about one
          beat per second. The gastrointestinal tract is lined with a specific pacemaker cell type,
          the interstitial cells of Cajal (Sanders, Koh, & Ward, 2006), that intrinsically generate a
          slow electrical rhythm at rates varying between 3 cycles per minute in the stomach to 12
          cycles per minute in the duodenum. This slow electrical rhythm controls the frequency
          of contraction of the gastrointestinal tract smooth muscle, but is generated at all times,
          even when fasting (Bozler, 1945). These signals, continuously emitted by the heart and
          gastrointestinal tract, are relayed up to the central nervous system, as will be detailed in
          section 3.2.1. The brain is constantly monitoring visceral signals which most of the time
          are processed implicitly and remain unnoticed. Visceral signals can sometimes become
          conscious to indicate a large deviation from homeostasis in order to trigger a protec-
          tive behavior. However, such events remain quite rare, whereas the self is continuously
          present. It thus seems more likely that the self is rooted in the automatic, unconscious
          monitoring of visceral inputs, rather than in sparse, transient, conscious events.

          3.1.2.2  Proposal for the biological implementation of the self
          Our proposal is that the integration of the various visceral signals in the brain generates a
          body-​centered reference frame (Park & Tallon-​Baudry, 2014; Tallon-​Baudry et al., 2017).
          Ascending visceral signals would be in this sense self-​specifying because they define the
          self at the biological level. This reference frame would then be used by the brain to tag
          mental processes as being subjective or self-​related.
            One could argue that there is no need for a mechanism tagging my mental processes
          as being mine, since they happen in my brain and not someone else’s. However, not all
          mental processes have “mineness.” The vast literature on unconscious processing shows
          numerous examples where mental processes remain unconscious, without first-​person
          perspective. Thus, not all neural processes are by default subjective or self-​related, and a
          tagging mechanism might be useful to define “mineness” (Tallon-​Baudry et al., 2017). In
 49




                                                                                     Visceral signals    49


      this view, first-​person perspective would not be defined at the neural level by activity in
      specific brain regions but would be based on the neural monitoring of visceral afferents,
      which might take place in a quite extended network as detailed in the following.

      3.2  Visceral signals: Pathways and mechanisms
      3.2.1  Pathways      from the viscera to the brain
      Which neuronal pathways carry visceral sensory information? What is the nature of
      visceral information and how is it represented? Surprisingly, we know much less about
      visceroception than about other senses such as vision or audition. One reason is probably
      that it has attracted less attention than classical senses but it also seems that the organiza-
      tion of visceral pathways is more complex, with more parallel pathways and more cortical
      targets, than for exteroceptive senses. However, the existence of multiple pathways also
      speaks about the importance of visceral representations in the brain.

      3.2.1.1  From the periphery to the brainstem
      Information about heart contraction is transduced by baroreceptors, neurons sensing
      changes in pressure following blood ejection. This system is mostly dedicated to the
      regulation of arterial blood pressure. Baroreceptors are located in the heart walls, the
      aortic arch and the carotid bodies and, depending on their location, send ascending
      projections either through the vagus nerve or glossopharyngeal nerve and discharge at
      different moments of the cardiac cycle (Klabunde, 2012). Both vagal and glossopharyn-
      geal pathways converge in the Nucleus Tractus Solitarius (NTS), where they also con-
      verge with spinal afferents (Nosaka et al., 1995). Neurons responding to the stimulation
      of baroreceptor afferents have been observed in the rat NTS (Nosaka et al., 1995). It is
      worth underlining that the baroreceptor route is not the only pathway that can be em-
      ployed. Somatosensory receptors are likely to convey heartbeat-​related information as
      well, although detailed mechanisms have not yet been elucidated. Indeed, the chest is
      innervated by somatosensory afferents that might respond to the impact of the heart on
      the chest, at each heartbeat (Khalsa et al., 2009). Finally, it has recently been shown that,
      at least in vitro, vascular events can alter directly firing rate (Kim et al., 2016), suggesting
      the possibility of a direct route from vessels to neurons that would bypass the peripheral
      mechanotransduction of cardiac contraction.
         Regarding the stomach, the interstitial cells of Cajal, which generate the slow gastric
      basal rhythm, connect not only to smooth muscles but also to sensory neurons (Powley
      & Phillips, 2011). Sensory information from the gastrointestinal tract is, as cardiac infor-
      mation, relayed up to the NTS (Furness et al., 2013).

      3.2.1.2  Central targets of visceral inputs
      Visceral inputs reach a number of cortical targets. The insular cortex receives vagal inputs
      in a number of mammalian species (Saper, 2002)  and appears viscerotopically organ-
      ized, with cardiopulmonary inputs targeting the posterior (granular) insula (Cechetto
      & Saper, 1987). While the insula is sometimes presented as the primary visceral cortex,
50




     50   Interoceptive signals, brain dynamics, and subjectivity


          visceral information is also mapped in a number of other regions, that should not be
          neglected: the ventral anterior cingulate cortex (Vogt, Pandya, & Rosene, 1987) and so-
          matosensory cortices SI and SII (Kern et al., 2013; Korn, Wendt, & Albe-​Fessard, 1966;
          Newman, 1962). More recently, Dum, Levinthal, and Strick (Dum et al., 2009) showed
          that motor cingulate regions receive inputs from the spinothalamic tract.
             While anatomical tracing or stimulation studies show the existence of multiple cor-
          tical targets of visceral inputs, much emphasis has been placed on the role of the insula,
          following the proposal by Craig (Craig, 2002, 2009). In his view, interoceptive informa-
          tion would be represented in the posterior insula, and then integrated with other sen-
          sory and cognitive processes in a gradient progressing toward the anterior insula, thereby
          generating self-​awareness. Following this influential theory, a number of brain imaging
          studies used a region-​of-​interest approach targeting the insula, but did not test other can-
          didate regions. There is no doubt that the right anterior insula is important to explic-
          itly report interoceptive feelings, as elegantly demonstrated by (Critchley et  al., 2004).
          However, as will be detailed in section 3.3.4, the role of the insula appears more limited
          in the absence of heartbeat-​related tasks (Babo-​Rebelo, Richter, & Tallon-​Baudry, 2016a;
          Babo-​Rebelo et al., 2016b; Park et al., 2016; Park et al., 2014).

          3.2.1.3  An impact of visceral inputs on brain dynamics?
          Visceral information can reach a number of different cortical targets but does it have an
          impact on brain dynamics? Evidence accumulates to suggest a strong cross-​talk between
          brain dynamics and physiological signals, such as skin conductance levels (Fan et al., 2012;
          James, Henderson, & Macefield, 2013; Nagai et al., 2004), respiration fluctuations (Yuan
          et al., 2013), or heart rate (de Munck et al., 2008). Classically, physiological measures have
          been considered as reflecting brain outputs. The most well-​known case is fluctuations in
          pupil diameter, which are thought to be directly reflecting noradrenergic release by the
          locus coeruleus (Aston-​Jones & Cohen, 2005; Joshi et al., 2016), or electrodermal activity,
          reflecting sympathetic output (Beissner et al., 2013). More generally, there is a strong bias
          to think that physiological measures reflect mostly top-​down autonomic control, from
          the brain to the peripheral organs. In human brain imaging, physiological signals are
          mostly considered as a source of noise that needs to be regressed out of the data (Birn,
          2012; Glover, Li, & Ress, 2000; Shmueli et al., 2007).
             The importance of a bottom-​up influence of visceral inputs on brain dynamics should
          nonetheless be considered. Indeed, up to 80% of the fibers of the vagus nerve are as-
          cending (Agostoni et  al., 1957), suggesting that the bottom-​up transfer of information
          is prioritized relative to top-​down transfer of information. Besides, while there is no
          doubt that pupil diameter is under strong central control, other organs generate their
          own activity. As mentioned earlier, the stomach intrinsically generates a slow (~0.05 Hz)
          electrical wave, known as the gastric basal rhythm (Sanders et al., 2006). A recent study
          investigated a potential link between the gastric basal rhythm with resting-​state brain
          dynamics (Richter et  al., 2017). There it was shown that the phase of the gastric basal
          rhythm constrains the amplitude of alpha oscillations in the right anterior insula and
 51




                                                 Neural responses to heartbeats encode the self      51


      occipito-​parietal regions, with the gastric slow rhythm accounting for 8% of the vari-
      ance of alpha rhythm amplitude fluctuations. Importantly, the coupling was mostly due
      to an ascending influence from the stomach on the brain. So-​called intrinsic brain activity
      might thus be—​at least partly—​constrained by visceral pacemakers.

      3.2.2  Neural   responses to heartbeats
      To demonstrate a link between the self and ascending visceral information, one needs
      a measure of visceral processing. We will thus focus here on the heart for which such a
      measure is available: the heartbeat-​evoked response.
        Neural responses to heartbeats are computed by averaging brain activity, recorded with
      electroencephalography (EEG) or magnetoencephalography (MEG), locked to heartbeats
      (Figure 3.1). Heartbeat-​evoked responses (HERs) were firstly explored in the 1980s by the
      group of Schandry (Schandry, Sparrer, & Weitkunat, 1986).
        HERs appear to be generated in an impressive range of brain areas. Initial source lo-
      calization (Pollatos, Kirsch, & Schandry, 2005) found dipole locations compatible with
      the anterior cingulate cortex, the medial frontal gyrus, the right insula, and the left
      somatosensory cortex. A more recent EEG study found sources in posterior cingulate
      cortex/​supplementary motor area (Park et  al., 2016). MEG recordings, which have a
      better spatial resolution than EEG, have shown the involvement of the right inferior
      parietal lobule, ventral posterior cingulate cortex, and ventromedial prefrontal cortex
      in the generation of HERs (Babo-​Rebelo et al., 2016a; Park et al., 2014). HERs were also
      found in the insula, using a region of interest analysis of high-​density EEG (Couto et al.,
      2015) or MEG data (Babo-​Rebelo et al., 2016a), as well as in intracranial EEG (Babo-​
      Rebelo et al., 2016b; Park et al., 2017). Intracranial electro-​corticographic (EcoG) grid
      recordings also revealed prominent HERs in the primary somatosensory cortex (Kern
      et  al., 2013). Many studies reported different effect latencies, ranging from 200–​650
      ms after the R-​peak (Kern et al. 2013, for a review), potentially reflecting the different
      latencies at which baroreceptors can fire in a cardiac cycle, or the existence of different
      cortical relays.

      3.3  Neural responses to heartbeats encode the self
      Neural responses to heartbeats are a measure of the neural monitoring of cardiac activity.
      We now review recent evidence showing a link between these responses and three facets
      of the self: bodily awareness, the self in spontaneous thoughts, and the self as the subject
      of visual perception.

      3.3.1  Neural   responses to heartbeats and bodily awareness
      Direct evidence for a link between HERs and bodily awareness comes from a study on full-​
      body illusions (Park et al., 2016), induced by stroking the participant’s back (Lenggenhager
      et al., 2007) in synchrony with the strokes applied to a virtual body displayed in front
      of the participant. If the stroking is asynchronous, participants do not experience the
52




     52   Interoceptive signals, brain dynamics, and subjectivity




          Figure 3.1  What is a Heartbeat-​Evoked Response (HER)? Example from real data. Example
          of raw data in a single participant, with an electrocardiogram (ECG, top row), recorded here
          between the right clavicle and left abdomen, magnetoencephalographic (MEG) raw data (middle
          raw), and after correction of the cardiac field artefact (bottom row), from the MEG sensor
          highlighted in white on the topographical maps. The ECG shows major deflections or R-​waves
          (corresponding to ventricular depolarization and the beginning of myocardial contraction),
          followed by T-​waves (corresponding to ventricular repolarization). The interval between R peaks
          is quite variable in healthy participants. The R and T waves are also detected on MEG raw data,
          a phenomenon called the cardiac-​field artefact (light-​grey shaded areas). One thus has to be
          cautious when searching for brain responses to heartbeats: MEG (or EEG) data includes cardiac
          signals. The cardiac field artefact typically affects sensors located in temporal regions, as shown
          on the topographic map. We combine two solutions to avoid including the cardiac field artefact
          in our analysis. First, we analyze only the portion of MEG data corresponding to an electrical
          “silence” of the heart, when the heart relaxes and refills, after the end of the T wave (dark-​grey
          shaded area). We also correct the MEG data from the cardiac-​field artefact (bottom row), using
          independent component analysis (ICA). The heartbeat-​evoked response (HER) is then computed
          as the average of the data segments in the dark-​grey shaded area.


          illusion. HER amplitude was found to differ depending on whether the stroking was syn-
          chronous or asynchronous and correlated with the strength of the experienced illusion
          (Park et al., 2016). This effect was associated with the posterior cingulate cortex/​supple-
          mentary motor area (PCC-​SMA) (Figure 3.2a). Similar findings were obtained with a
          modified version of the enfacement illusion (Sel, Azevedo, & Tsakiris, 2016). Participants
          watched a morphed face which decreased in luminance synchronously or asynchronously
          with their heartbeats. This manipulation induced a bias in a subsequent self-​recognition
          task where the other person’s face was included to a greater extent in the representation of
 53




      (a)           Baseline          Stroking                 Pause       Questionnaire                     Full-body illusion


                                                                               Questionnaire

                                                                                                         PCC-SMA




      (b)         I’ll go shopping               I’m thirsty
                                                                           He’s coming
                                                                            tomorrow                                “I”
                                                                                                     vPrec-PCC




      “I” scale
                   –            +            –              +              –             +
      “Me” scale
               External        Me        External           Me          External        Me               vmPFC

                               Skip                      Skip                          Skip

                                                                                                                    “Me”


                                                                                                             Visual perception

      (c)
                                                                                                       vACC/vmPFC          vACC/vmPFC




              Fixation         Warning           Stimulus              Delay          Response:
                                                                                   Seen or Unseen?

                               HERs in
                            Hits vs Misses                                                                                 rIPL




      Figure 3.2 Summary of paradigms and results involving Heartbeat-​Evoked Responses (HERs).
      (a)—​HERs covary with the bodily self (Park et al., 2016). Participants were stroked on the back,
      while visualizing their own back being stroked in front of them, in a virtual reality setting. When
      the stroking was synchronous with the visual input, participants may experience the illusion of
      being located closer to the virtual body. The amplitude of HERs recorded during the stroking
      phase varied with illusion strength. This effect was located in the posterior cingulate cortex-​
      supplementary motor area (PCC-​SMA). (b)—​HERs encode the self-​relatedness of spontaneous
      thoughts (Babo-​Rebelo et al., 2016a; Babo-​Rebelo et al., 2016b). Participants had to mind-​
      wander while fixating. They were interrupted at random intervals and had to evaluate the self-​
      relatedness of the interrupted thought on the “I” scale (how much were they involved as the
      subject or agent in the thought) and on the “Me” scale (was the thought referring to themselves,
      the “Me,” or to something external). Participants could skip the answer if they did not know
      how to rate the thought. HERs in the ventral precuneus-​posterior cingulate cortex (vPrec-​PCC)
      encoded the involvement of the “I” in the thought, while HERs in the ventromedial prefrontal
      cortex (vmPFC) independently encoded the “Me” dimension. (c)—​HERs predict conscious visual
      perception (Park et al., 2014). Participants fixated a central point and were presented with a faint
      visual stimulus (annulus grating at threshold of visibility). They had to report if they had seen the
      stimulus or not. The amplitude of HERs before stimulus onset predicted whether the stimulus was
      going to be subsequently seen or not. This effect was located in the ventral anterior cingulate
      cortex/​ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vACC/​vmPFC) and in the right inferior parietal lobule (rIPL).
      Note that differential neural responses to heartbeats were observed in the default network during
      fixation (spontaneous thoughts, panel b; perception at threshold before stimulus onset, panel c)
      while in the virtual body experiment (panel a), differential responses to heartbeats are maximal in
      premotor regions.
54




     54   Interoceptive signals, brain dynamics, and subjectivity


          one’s own face after synchronous stimulation. HER amplitude differed between synchro-
          nous and asynchronous conditions, in centro-​parietal electrodes (Sel et al., 2016).
             Changes in bodily awareness are thus associated with changes in HER amplitude. Those
          results speak in favor of the hypothesis that the neural monitoring of visceral signals is
          linked to self-​awareness. Still, it remains to be determined whether neural responses to
          heartbeats are related to other facets of the self, beyond bodily awareness.

          3.3.2  Neural
                     responses to heartbeats and the self
          in spontaneous thoughts
          The most basic level of self is the self as the subject who acts, feels, and perceives from a
          first-​person perspective. Actions, feelings, and perceptions can then be reflected upon.
          This corresponds to a second level of self, where the self is the object of introspection.
          This distinction between the self as the subject and the self as the object is reminiscent
          of phenomenological theories distinguishing a pre-​reflective from a reflective form of
          self (Christoff et al., 2011; Gallagher, 2012; Legrand and Ruby, 2009; Zahavi, 2005). This
          idea can be operationalized in spontaneous thoughts, by distinguishing the “I” from the
          “Me.” The “I” is always present, but can be more or less engaged. The “I” is engaged when
          one is the agent, the first-​person subject of the thought, for example in a thought like “I
          will go to the supermarket,” as opposed to “It’s raining” or “He has to go to the super-
          market.” In contrast, the “Me” corresponds to a reflective dimension of thoughts, when
          one is thinking about oneself, about one’s feelings or bodily state for instance, as in “I am
          tired” (Babo-​Rebelo et al., 2016a; Babo-​Rebelo et al., 2016b). Could HERs correspond to
          the biological implementation of the “I”, of the “Me”, or both?
             This question was assessed in a thought-​sampling paradigm, where participants
          were asked to mind-​wander while fixating on a screen (Babo-​Rebelo et  al., 2016a).
          They were interrupted at random intervals and had to report whether they were en-
          gaged as the “I” and as the “Me” during the interrupted thought. HER amplitude was
          shown to correlate with the self-​relatedness of thoughts, but in different regions for
          the “I” and the “Me.” The amplitude of HERs in the ventral precuneus and posterior
          cingulate regions (vPrc-​PCC) co-​varied with the engagement of the “I” in the ongoing
          thought (Figure 3.2b). The “Me” dimension was associated with HERs in the ventro-
          medial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) (Figure 3.2b). Although the “I” and the “Me” were
          often combined in a given thought, we could demonstrate that the association between
          the “I” and HERs in vPrc-​PCC was orthogonal to the association between the “Me”
          and HERs in vmPFC.
             These MEG results were then replicated with intracranial recordings, by showing a trial-​
          by-​trial parametrical modulation of HERs along with the level of involvement of each
          self-​dimension in each sampled thought (Babo-​Rebelo et  al., 2016b). The main effects
          were found in midline regions of the default-​network, but a region of interest analysis
          additionally revealed that HERs in the right anterior insula were modulated by the degree
          of engagement of the “I” in thoughts. HERs thus encode the self-​relatedness of thoughts,
          along both the “I” and the “Me” self-​dimensions, but in distinct regions.
 5




                                                  Neural responses to heartbeats encode the self       55


     3.3.3  Neuralresponses to heartbeats and the self as the
     subject of visual perception
     The existence of a first-​person subject underlying any conscious perception has been
     overlooked in cognitive neuroscience (Tallon-​Baudry et al., 2017). Indeed, the hallmark
     of conscious vision is that the participant reports his/​her perception: for conscious per-
     ception to exist, there must be a subject of experience (Park and Tallon-​Baudry, 2014;
     Tallon-​Baudry et al., 2017). In the experiment by Park and colleagues (Park et al., 2014),
     participants had to report the presence or absence of near-​threshold gratings. HER ampli-
     tude in the ventral anterior cingulate/​ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vACC/​vmPFC) and
     the right posterior inferior parietal lobule (rIPL), before stimulus presentation, predicted
     whether the visual stimulus was going to be consciously perceived or not (Figure 3.2c)
     (Park et al., 2014). This effect corresponded to changes in visual sensitivity (d’) and not
     to changes in the criterion of response, suggesting that information carried by neural
     responses to heartbeats is used as sensory evidence in the seen/​unseen decision.
       Differential HERs predicting conscious vision can here be interpreted as corresponding
     to fluctuations in the engagement of the self as the experiencing subject, the one who
     wonders whether or not he/​she has seen the stimulus. Note that only weak, subthreshold
     differences in HERs could be detected in the right insula.

     3.3.4  Reconsidering       the role of the insula
     In the three experiments mentioned above (Babo-​Rebelo et al., 2016a; Babo-​Rebelo et al.,
     2016b; Park et al., 2016, 2014) that directly relate interoceptive processing with the “I,” the
     “Me,” or the bodily self, the insula did not appear to be the key player. This raises questions
     about the “hypothesis that the anterior insula engenders human awareness” (Craig, 2009).
        There is no doubt that the insula is involved in cardiac processing, and indeed neural
     responses to heartbeats were observed in the posterior (Park et al., 2017) and anterior
     (Babo-​Rebelo et al., 2016b) insula using iEEG. fMRI studies further suggest that (a) the
     insula is involved in cardiac-​visual integration (Blefari et al., 2017; Ronchi et al., 2015;
     Salomon et al., 2016), (b) the insula is activated when explicitly paying attention to intero-
     ceptive signals (Critchley et al., 2004; Farb, Segal, & Anderson, 2013), and (c) the anterior
     insula is involved in self-​related bodily processing (Blanke et al., 2014; Brass & Haggard,
     2010; Heydrich & Blanke, 2013; Karnath & Baier, 2010). When combined, these three sets
     of results could suggest a link between cardiac processing and the interoceptive/​bodily
     self in the insula.
        However, there are several reasons why the role of the insula might have been
     overestimated. First, it is not clear whether there is a true anatomical overlap between
     interoception and self-​related processes. This is all the more important that the insula
     is an extended structure, with numerous subdivisions (Deen, Pitskel, & Pelphrey, 2011).
     Second, even if there were an overlap between self-​related activations and interoception,
     it does not necessarily follow that there is a true interaction between interoception
     and the self. For instance, it could be that paying attention to interoceptive signals and
     paying attention to some aspects of the self both require saliency estimation, a pro-
     cess implemented in the insula for a variety of tasks, independently from the self or
56




     56   Interoceptive signals, brain dynamics, and subjectivity


          interoceptive processing (Menon & Uddin, 2010). Last, the reverse inference suggesting
          that insular activity is a signature of interoceptive processing might be flawed, as any re-
          verse inference (Poldrack, 2011). The insula is activated by a wealth of different processes,
          not necessarily related to the self nor to interoception (Chang et  al., 2013; Duncan &
          Owen, 2000).

          3.3.5  Changesin neural responses to heartbeats in the absence
          of physiological changes
          Theories rooting the self in the body have focused on the role of bodily changes (see section
          3.1.1). Importantly, none of the results reported earlier were associated with differences in
          cardiorespiratory parameters (heart rate, heart rate variability, peripheral blood pressure,
          respiratory patterns), suggesting that cardio-​respiratory state did not change. This is in
          line with the hypothesis that bodily information exists and impacts neural processing
          even in the absence of bodily changes. In addition, several arousal measures, such as the
          pupil diameter, interbeat interval, heart rate variability, electrodermal activity, or alpha
          power did not differ between conditions, ruling out the possibility that HER differences
          reflected distinct global arousal states. Altogether, this suggests that the amplitude changes
          of HERs encoding the self are related to neural, rather than bodily, fluctuations, as fur-
          ther discussed in section 3.4. A heartbeat could be considered as a physically constant
          stimulus generating neural responses whose amplitude varies from one stimulus to the
          next, a phenomenon which is well known for exteroception. For instance, the repeated
          presentation of a physically identical visual stimulus can elicit brain responses of different
          amplitudes, depending on neural and cognitive parameters.
             The fact that neural responses to heartbeats can vary independently from changes in
          cardiac parameters seems incompatible with interoceptive prediction error accounts of
          selfhood (Seth, 2013; Seth & Friston, 2016). In this framework, cardiac inputs should vary
          and deviate from the corresponding homeostatic prediction, thereby generating predic-
          tion error signals at the origin of a sense of self.

          3.4  Towards a biological implementation of the self?
          We have presented evidence that neural responses to heartbeats encode changes in bodily
          awareness, encode self-​relatedness in spontaneous thoughts, and predict the seen or un-
          seen fate of a visual stimulus. Such results are in line with the hypothesis that neural
          responses to heartbeats constitute a marker of the first-​person perspective inherent to
          self-​consciousness, bodily consciousness, and perceptual consciousness. However, the
          results show a correlation between HER amplitude and the self, while the hypothesis that
          neural responses to heartbeats play a causal role in the generation of first-​person perspec-
          tive remains to be directly tested. It is thus worth examining the different interpretations
          of the correlations between HER amplitude and the self.
             A first interpretation of the changes in amplitude of HERs is that HERs are a non-​
          specific marker of enhanced brain activity. Any region being particularly active at a given
 57




                                                                                          Conclusion      57


      moment would then show changes in HER amplitude. In this view, if two conditions
      induce different levels of activity in a given region, responses to heartbeats in this region
      differ as well. The fact that differential HERs are found in regions which are expected to
      be differently activated, such as default-​network regions during the resting state or passive
      fixation (Babo-​Rebelo et al., 2016a; Babo-​Rebelo et al., 2016b; Park et al., 2014), or bodily/​
      motor regions during full-​body illusions (Park et al., 2016), could support this interpre-
      tation. However, in the aforementioned three experiments, HER differences could not be
      trivially explained by different levels of neural activity (e.g. alpha power, slow fluctuations)
      differing between conditions. Still, not all features of brain activity (e.g. high-​frequency
      bands) were investigated. Ruling out definitively the hypothesis that neural responses
      to heartbeats are a non-​specific marker of cortical reactivity will prove difficult, since it
      implies measuring all aspects of cortical reactivity and demonstrating the absence of a
      difference, which is a notoriously difficult task.
         A second hypothesis is that ascending visceral signals themselves differ between
      conditions, leading in turn to differential neural responses to heartbeats. In this hypoth­
      esis, information about the self can be found directly in cardiac data. For instance, car-
      diac afferent signals would determine whether or not a stimulus is likely to be seen, or
      whether a spontaneous thought is self-​related. However, there were no differences in the
      measured cardiac parameters (electrocardiogram, heart rate, heart rate variability, and
      blood pressure), but more subtle differences may have gone unnoticed. Other parameters,
      such as volume of blood ejected at each heartbeat, were not measured and might vary.
         The third hypothesis is that self-​related information is present in brain responses to
      ascending visceral signals, not in the visceral signals themselves. Cardiac or gastric as-
      cending signals would function as constant sources of signal, indicating that a body is
      there but not necessarily conveying more specific information. Note that other organs or
      systems might also contribute, but the pacemaker properties of the heart and the gastro-
      intestinal tract make them particularly relevant. These ascending signals could interact
      with ongoing brain activity, anchoring some aspects of brain activity in a body-​centered
      reference frame and hence implementing first-​person perspective. The mechanisms un-
      derlying this interaction remain to be investigated. Cardiac signals would contribute to a
      body-​centered reference frame, which would be used by the brain to anchor thoughts or
      percepts to the self (Park & Tallon-​Baudry, 2014). The amplitude of these neural responses
      would then be a marker of the self-​relatedness of neural activity in this region. Note that
      given that visceral signals target a large number of cortical areas, this mechanism could
      take place in many different brain regions, wherever a self versus non-​self distinction is
      relevant for the task at play.

      3.5 Conclusion
      Building on a long tradition relating the self to bodily signals, we have proposed to revise
      this hypothesis and to focus on visceral inputs. Such signals display interesting charac-
      teristics, notably the fact that they are continuously emitted, in the absence of bodily
58




     58   Interoceptive signals, brain dynamics, and subjectivity


          movement but also in the absence of bodily state changes. Visceral inputs would indicate
          to the brain the mere presence of a body, and could thus act as continuous self-​specifying
          signals. Neural responses to heartbeats, which can be measured non-​invasively in humans,
          offer a valuable tool to experimentally probe the link between the neural monitoring of
          visceral inputs and the self. Recent results show correlations between neural responses to
          heartbeats and the self, not only, as initially hypothesized, when the self is implicit (the
          self as the agent, the self experiencing a visual input) but also in situations where the self is
          explicit or reflective (bodily awareness, thinking about oneself). These results are compat-
          ible with our proposal that the integration of visceral signals generates a subject-​centered
          reference frame underlying the different facets of the self. However, the results so far are
          only correlational, and moving to causation will prove an important, but difficult, step. In
          addition, some questions remain open, for instance how neural responses to heartbeats
          interact with stimulus or thought content.

          References
          Agostoni, E., Chinnock, J. E., Daly, M. D. B., and Murray, J. G. (1957). Functional and histological
              studies of the vagus nerve and its branches to the heart, lungs and abdominal viscera in the cat.
              Journal of Physiology, 135(1), 182–​205. <https://​doi.org/​10.1113/​jphysiol.1957.sp005703>
          Aston-​Jones, G. and Cohen, J. D. (2005). An integrative theory of locus coeruleus-​norepinephrine
              function: Adaptive gain and optimal performance. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 28(1), 403–​50.
              <https://​doi.org/​10.1146/​annurev.neuro.28.061604.135709>
          Babo-​Rebelo, M., Richter, C., and Tallon-​Baudry, C. (2016a). Neural responses to heartbeats in the
              default network encode the self in spontaneous thoughts. Journal of Neuroscience, 36(30), 7829–​40.
              <https://​doi.org/​https://​doi.org/​10.1523/​JNEUROSCI.0262-​16.2016>
          Babo-​Rebelo, M., Wolpert, N., Adam, C., Hasboun, D., and Tallon-​Baudry, C. (2016b). Is the cardiac
              monitoring function related to the self in both the default network and right anterior insula?
              Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 371(1708), 1–​13. <https://​doi.org/​10.1098/​
              rstb.2016.0004>
          Beissner, F., Meissner, K., Bär, K.-​J., and Napadow, V. (2013). The autonomic brain: An activation
              likelihood estimation meta-​analysis for central processing of autonomic function. Journal of
              Neuroscience, 33(25), 10503–​11. <https://​doi.org/​10.1523/​JNEUROSCI.1103-​13.2013>
          Birn, R. M. (2012). The role of physiological noise in resting-​state functional connectivity. NeuroImage,
              62(2), 864–​70. <https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​j.neuroimage.2012.01.016>
          Blanke, O. and Metzinger, T. (2009). Full-​body illusions and minimal phenomenal selfhood. Trends in
              Cognitive Sciences, 13(1), 7–​13. <https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​j.tics.2008.10.003>
          Blanke, O., Pozeg, P., Hara, M., Heydrich, L., Serino, A., Yamamoto, A., et al. (2014). Neurological and
              robot-​controlled induction of an apparition. Current Biology, 24, 2681–​6. <https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​
              j.cub.2014.09.049>
          Blanke, O., Slater, M., and Serino, A. (2015). Behavioral, neural, and computational principles of bodily
              self-​consciousness. Neuron, 88(1), 145–​66. <https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​j.neuron.2015.09.029>
          Blefari, M. L., Martuzzi, R., Salomon, R., Bello-​Ruiz, J., Herbelin, B., Serino, A., et al. (2017). Bilateral
              rolandic operculum processing underlying heartbeat awareness reflects changes in bodily self-​
              consciousness. European Journal of Neuroscience, 45, 1300–​12. <https://​doi.org/​10.1111/​ijlh.12426>
          Bozler, E. (1945). The action potentials of the stomach. American Journal of Physiology, 144, 693–​700.
              <http://​ajplegacy.physiology.org/​content/​144/​5/​693.article-​info>
 59




                                                                                                      References      59


      Brass, M. and Haggard, P. (2010). The hidden side of intentional action: The role of the anterior insular
          cortex. Brain Structure and Function, 214, 603–​10. <https://​doi.org/​10.1007/​s00429-​010-​0269-​6>
      Cechetto, D. F. and Saper, C. B. (1987). Evidence for a viscerotopic sensory representation in the cortex
          and thalamus in the rat. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 262(1), 27–​45. <https://​doi.org/​10.1002/​
          cne.902620104>
      Chang, L. J., Yarkoni, T., Khaw, M. W., and Sanfey, A. G. (2013). Decoding the role of the insula in
          human cognition: Functional parcellation and large-​scale reverse inference. Cerebral Cortex, 23(3),
          739–​49. <https://​doi.org/​10.1093/​cercor/​bhs065>
      Christoff, K., Cosmelli, D., Legrand, D., and Thompson, E. (2011). Specifying the self for
          cognitive neuroscience. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 15(3), 104–​12. <https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​
          j.tics.2011.01.001>
      Couto, B., Adolfi, F., Velasquez, M., Mesow, M., Feinstein, J., Canales-​Johnson, A., et al. (2015). Heart
          evoked potential triggers brain responses to natural affective scenes: A preliminary study. Autonomic
          Neuroscience: Basic and Clinical, 193, 132–​7. <https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​j.autneu.2015.06.006>
      Craig, A. D. (2002). How do you feel? Interoception: The sense of the physiological condition of the
          body. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 3(8), 655–​66. <https://​doi.org/​10.1038/​nrn894>
      Craig, A. D. (2009). How do you feel—​now? The anterior insula and human awareness. Nature Reviews
          Neuroscience, 10(1), 59–​70. <https://​doi.org/​10.1038/​nrn2555>
      Critchley, H. D., Wiens, S., Rotshtein, P., Ohman, A., and Dolan, R. J. (2004). Neural systems supporting
          interoceptive awareness. Nature Neuroscience, 7(2), 189–​95. <https://​doi.org/​10.1038/​nn1176>
      Damasio, A. R. (1994). Descartes’ Error. Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain. New York,
          NY: Avon Books.
      Damasio, A. R. (1999). The Feeling of what Happens: Body, Emotion and the Making of Consciousness.
          New York, NY: Harcourt.
      Damasio, A. R. (2003). Looking for Spinoza. Joy, Sorrow, and the Feeling Brain. New York, NY: Harcourt.
      de Munck, J. C., Gonçalves, S. I., Faes, T. J. C., Kuijer, J. P. A., Pouwels, P. J. W., Heethaar, R. M.,
          et al. (2008). A study of the brain’s resting state based on alpha band power, heart rate and fMRI.
          NeuroImage, 42(1), 112–​21. <https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​j.neuroimage.2008.04.244>
      Deen, B., Pitskel, N. B., and Pelphrey, K. a. (2011). Three systems of insular functional connectivity
          identified with cluster analysis. Cerebral Cortex, 21(7), 1498–​506. <https://​doi.org/​10.1093/​cercor/​
          bhq186>
      Descartes, R. (1989, orig. pub. 1641). Discourse on Method and Meditations. (trans. J. Veitch). New York,
          NY: Amherst.
      Dum, R. P., Levinthal, D. J., and Strick, P. L. (2009). The spinothalamic system targets motor and
          sensory areas in the cerebral cortex of monkeys. Journal of Neuroscience, 29(45), 14223–​35. <https://​
          doi.org/​10.1523/​JNEUROSCI.3398-​09.2009>
      Duncan, J. and Owen, A. M. (2000). Common regions of the human frontal lobe recruited by
          diverse cognitive demands. Trends in Neurosciences, 23(10), 475–​83. <https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​
          S0166-​2236(00)01633-​7>
      Fan, J., Xu, P., Van Dam, N. T., Eilam-​Stock, T., Gu, X., Luo, Y., et al. (2012). Spontaneous brain activity
          relates to autonomic arousal. Journal of Neuroscience, 32(33), 11176–​86. <https://​doi.org/​10.1523/​
          JNEUROSCI.1172-​12.2012>
      Farb, N. a S., Segal, Z. V, and Anderson, A. K. (2013). Mindfulness meditation training alters cortical
          representations of interoceptive attention. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 8(1), 15–​26.
          <https://​doi.org/​10.1093/​scan/​nss066>
      Frith, C. D., Blakemore, S. J., and Wolpert, D. M. (2000). Abnormalities in the awareness and control of
          action. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B, 355(1404), 1771–​88. <https://​doi.
          org/​10.1098/​rstb.2000.0734>
60




     60   Interoceptive signals, brain dynamics, and subjectivity


          Furness, J. B., Rivera, L. R., Cho, H.-​J., Bravo, D. M., and Callaghan, B. (2013). The gut as a sensory
              organ. Nature Reviews Gastroenterology & Hepatology, 10, 729–​40. <https://​doi.org/​10.1038/​
              nrgastro.2013.180>
          Gallagher, S. (2012). Phenomenology. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
          Glover, G. H., Li, T. Q., and Ress, D. (2000). Image-​based method for retrospective correction of
              physiological motion effects in fMRI: RETROICOR. Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, 44(1), 162–​7.
              <https://​doi.org/​10.1002/​1522-​2594(200007)44:1<162::AID-​MRM23>3.0.CO;2-​E>
          Heydrich, L. and Blanke, O. (2013). Distinct illusory own-​body perceptions caused by damage to
              posterior insula and extrastriate cortex. Brain, 136, 790–​803. <https://​doi.org/​10.1093/​brain/​
              aws364>
          James, C., Henderson, L., and Macefield, V. G. (2013). Real-​time imaging of brain areas involved in the
              generation of spontaneous skin sympathetic nerve activity at rest. NeuroImage, 74, 188–​94. <https://​
              doi.org/​10.1016/​j.neuroimage.2013.02.030>
          James, W. (1931, orig. pub. 1890). The Principles of Psychology. New York, NY: Henry Holt and
              Company. <https://​doi.org/​10.1037/​11059-​000
          Joshi, S., Li, Y., Kalwani, R. M., and Gold, J. I. (2016). Relationships between pupil diameter and
              neuronal activity in the locus coeruleus, colliculi, and cingulate cortex. Neuron, 89(1), 221–​34.
              <https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​j.neuron.2015.11.028>
          Karnath, H. O. and Baier, B. (2010). Right insula for our sense of limb ownership and self-​awareness of
              actions. Brain Structure and Function, 214, 411–​17. <https://​doi.org/​10.1007/​s00429-​010-​0250-​4>
          Kern, M., Aertsen, A., Schulze-​Bonhage, A., and Ball, T. (2013). Heart cycle-​related effects on
              event-​related potentials, spectral power changes, and connectivity patterns in the human ECoG.
              NeuroImage, 81, 178–​90. <https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​j.neuroimage.2013.05.042>
          Khalsa, S. S., Rudrauf, D., Feinstein, J. S., and Tranel, D. (2009). The pathways of interoceptive
              awareness. Nature Neuroscience, 12(12), 1494–​6. <https://​doi.org/​10.1038/​nn.2411>
          Kim, K. J., Diaz, J. R., Iddings, J. A., and Filosa, J. A. (2016). Vasculo-​neuronal coupling: Retrograde
              vascular communication to brain neurons. Journal of Neuroscience, 36(50), 12624–​39. <https://​doi.
              org/​10.1523/​JNEUROSCI.1300-​16.2016>
          Klabunde, R. E. (2012). Cardiovascular Physiology Concepts. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott, Williams &
              Wilkins.
          Korn, H., Wendt, R., and Albe-​Fessard, D. (1966). Somatic projection to the orbital cortex of the cat.
              Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, 21(3), 209–​26. <https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​
              0013-​4694(66)90071-​X>
          Legrand, D. and Ruby, P. (2009). What is self-​specific? Theoretical investigation and critical review of
              neuroimaging results. Psychological Review, 116(1), 252–​82. <https://​doi.org/​10.1037/​a0014172>
          Lenggenhager, B., Tadi, T., Metzinger, T., and Blanke, O. (2007). Video ergo sum: Manipulating bodily
              self-​consciousness. Science, 317(5841), 1096–​9. <https://​doi.org/​10.1126/​science.1143439>
          Menon, V. and Uddin, L. Q. (2010). Saliency, switching, attention and control: A network model
              of insula function. Brain Structure and Function, 214(5–​6), 655–​67. <https://​doi.org/​10.1007/​
              s00429-​010-​0262-​0>
          Nagai, Y., Critchley, H. D., Featherstone, E., Trimble, M. R., and Dolan, R. J. (2004). Activity in
              ventromedial prefrontal cortex covaries with sympathetic skin conductance level: A physiological
              account of a “default mode” of brain function. NeuroImage, 22(1), 243–​51. <https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​
              j.neuroimage.2004.01.019>
          Newman, P. P. (1962). Single unit activity in the viscero-​sensory areas of the cerebral cortex. Journal of
              Physiology, 160(2), 284–​97. <https://​doi.org/​10.1113/​jphysiol.1962.sp006846>
          Nosaka, S., Murase, S., Murata, K., and Inui, K. (1995). “Aortic baroreceptor” neurons in the nucleus
              tractus solitarius in rats: Convergence of cardiovascular inputs as revealed by heartbeat-​locked
 61




                                                                                                       References       61


          activity. Journal of the Autonomic Nervous System, 55(1–​2), 69–​80. <http://​www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/​
          entrez/​query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=Citation&list_​uids=8690854>
      Park, H.-​D. and Tallon-​Baudry, C. (2014). The neural subjective frame: From bodily signals to
          perceptual consciousness. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B, 369(1641),
          20130208. <https://​doi.org/​10.1098/​rstb.2013.0208>
      Park, H.-​D., Correia, S., Ducorps, A., and Tallon-​Baudry, C. (2014). Spontaneous fluctuations in
          neural responses to heartbeats predict visual detection. Nature Neuroscience, 17(4), 612–​18. <https://​
          doi.org/​10.1038/​nn.3671>
      Park, H.-​D., Bernasconi, F., Bello-​Ruiz, J., Pfeiffer, C., Salomon, R., and Blanke, O. (2016). Transient
          modulations of neural responses to heartbeats covary with bodily self-​consciousness. Journal of
          Neuroscience, 36(32), 8453–​60. <https://​doi.org/​10.1523/​JNEUROSCI.0311-​16.2016>
      Park, H.-​D., Bernasconi, F., Salomon, R., Tallon-​Baudry, C., Spinelli, L., Seeck, M., et al. (2017).
          Neural sources and underlying mechanisms of neural responses to heartbeats, and their role in
          bodily self-​consciousness: An intracranial EEG study. Cerebral Cortex, 1–​14. <https://​doi.org/​
          10.1093/​cercor/​bhx136>
      Poldrack, R. A. (2011). Inferring mental states from neuroimaging data: From reverse inference to
          large-​scale decoding. Neuron, 72(5), 692–​7. <https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​j.neuron.2011.11.001>
      Pollatos, O., Kirsch, W., and Schandry, R. (2005). Brain structures involved in interoceptive awareness
          and cardioafferent signal processing: A dipole source localization study. Human Brain Mapping,
          26(1), 54–​64. <https://​doi.org/​10.1002/​hbm.20121>
      Powley, T. L. and Phillips, R. J. (2011). Vagal intramuscular array afferents form complexes with
          interstitial cells of Cajal in gastrointestinal smooth muscle: Analogues of muscle spindle organs?
          Neuroscience, 186, 188–​200. <https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​j.neuroscience.2011.04.036>
      Richter, C. G., Babo-​Rebelo, M., Schwartz, D., and Tallon-​Baudry, C. (2017). Phase-​amplitude
          coupling at the organism level: The amplitude of spontaneous alpha rhythm fluctuations varies with
          the phase of the infra-​slow gastric basal rhythm. NeuroImage, 146, 951–​8. <https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​
          j.neuroimage.2016.08.043>
      Ronchi, R., Bello-​Ruiz, J., Lukowska, M., Herbelin, B., Cabrilo, I., Schaller, K., et al. (2015).
          Right insular damage decreases heartbeat awareness and alters cardio-​visual effects on bodily
          self-​consciousness. Neuropsychologia, 70, 11–​20. <https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​j.neuropsycholo
          gia.2015.02.010>
      Salomon, R., Ronchi, R., Donz, J., Bello-​Ruiz, J., Herbelin, B., Martet, R., et al. (2016). The insula
          mediates access to awareness of visual stimuli presented synchronously to the heartbeat. Journal of
          Neuroscience, 36(18), 5115–​27. <https://​doi.org/​10.1523/​JNEUROSCI.4262-​15.2016>
      Sanders, K. M., Koh, S. D., and Ward, S. M. (2006). Interstitial cells of Cajal as pacemakers in the
          gastrointestinal tract. Annual Review of Physiology, 68(1), 307–​43. <https://​doi.org/​10.1146/​annurev.
          physiol.68.040504.094718>
      Saper, C. B. (2002). The central autonomic nervous system: Conscious visceral perception and
          autonomic pattern generation. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 25, 433–​69. <https://​doi.org/​10.1146/​
          annurev.neuro.25.032502.111311>
      Schandry, R., Sparrer, B., and Weitkunat, R. (1986). From the heart to the brain: A study of heartbeat
          contingent scalp potentials. International Journal of Neuroscience, 30(4), 261–​75. <https://​doi.org/​
          10.3109/​00207458608985677>
      Sel, A., Azevedo, R. T., and Tsakiris, M. (2016). Heartfelt self: Cardio-​visual integration affects self-​face
          recognition and interoceptive cortical processing. Cerebral Cortex, 1–​12. <https://​doi.org/​10.1093/​
          cercor/​bhw296>
      Seth, A. K. (2013). Interoceptive inference, emotion, and the embodied self. Trends in Cognitive
          Sciences, 17(11), 565–​73. <https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​j.tics.2013.09.007>
62




     62   Interoceptive signals, brain dynamics, and subjectivity


          Seth, A. K. and Friston, K. J. (2016). Active interoceptive inference and the emotional brain.
              Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 371(20160007). <https://​doi.org/​10.1098/​
              rstb.2016.0007>
          Shmueli, K., van Gelderen, P., de Zwart, J. A., Horovitz, S. G., Fukunaga, M., Jansma, J. M., et al.
              (2007). Low-​frequency fluctuations in the cardiac rate as a source of variance in the resting-​
              state fMRI BOLD signal. NeuroImage, 38(2), 306–​20. <https://​doi.org/​https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​
              j.neuroimage.2007.07.037>
          Spinoza, B. de. (2005, orig. pub. 1677). Ethics (trans. E. Curley). London: Penguin Classics.
          Tallon-​Baudry, C., Campana, F., Park, H.-​D., and Babo-​Rebelo, M. (2017). The neural monitoring
              of visceral inputs, rather than attention, accounts for first-​person perspective in conscious vision.
              Cortex, 1–​11. <https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​j.cortex.2017.05.019>
          Tononi, G. and Koch, C. (2008). The neural correlates of consciousness: An update. Annals of the
              New York Academy of Sciences, 1124, 239–​61. <https://​doi.org/​10.1196/​annals.1440.004>
          Vogt, B. A., Pandya, D. N., and Rosene, D. L. (1987). Cingulate cortex of the rhesus monkey: I.
              Cytoarchitecture and thalamic afferents. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 262(2), 256–​70. <https://​
              doi.org/​10.1002/​cne.902620207>
          Yuan, H., Zotev, V., Phillips, R., and Bodurka, J. (2013). Correlated slow fluctuations in respiration,
              EEG, and BOLD fMRI. NeuroImage, 79, 81–​93. <https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​j.neuroimage.2013.04.068>
          Zahavi, D. (2005). Subjectivity and Selfhood: Investigating the First-​Person Perspective. Cambridge,
              MA: MIT Press.
 63




                Chapter 4

                The embodiment of time: How
                interoception shapes the perception
                of time
                Marc Wittmann and Karin Meissner



      4.1  Introduction: From phenomenology to neuroscience
      Conscious awareness and subjective time are intricately connected. In phenomenolog-
      ical analyses, self-​consciousness and time consciousness cannot be separated. In a phe-
      nomenal description, consciousness can be seen as a world that is present, as an island
      of presence in the continuous flow of time. This “window of presence” is concerned
      with what is happening right now (Metzinger, 2004; Revonsuo, 2006). This description
      complements the analysis of time experience by Edmund Husserl (1928) and William
      James (1890), both of whom also discerned two complementary aspects of temporality.
      Subjective time is described as (a)  a continuous flow and (b)  the feeling of a present
      moment. The flow constitutes itself through the experience of passage created by the se-
      quence of (a)  an expectation of what is going to happen, (b)  the actual experience of
      what is happening right now, and (c) memory of what has happened. Besides the flow of
      time, the unity of the present moment (or the feeling of “nowness”) is a basic property of
      consciousness, which comprises the qualitative character of subjective experience. Felt
      presence is not a duration-​less instant in time but is temporally extended and for which
      neural correlates are assumed and investigated (Pöppel, 1997; Varela, 1999; Lloyd, 2012;
      Northoff, 2016).
        Conscious experience has a first-​person mode of “givenness.” Conscious states are in-
      herently given to me as the experiencer, or phenomenal experience is mine (Nagel, 1974;
      Metzinger, 2008; Kiverstein, 2009). This quality of “mineness” thus includes a minimal
      sense of self within experience. The act of conscious perception includes a basic form
      of self-​consciousness (Zahavi, 2005). Moreover, the self as part of present experience is
      extended. This temporal extension of the presence stems from temporal properties, past
      moments, present awareness, and expectations, all being interwoven in present experi-
      ence. Husserl (1928) termed these facets of present awareness as retention, impression,
      and protention, respectively, forming the implicit temporal structure of any conscious
      experience. The phenomenological connection between “time” and the “self ” can, there-
      fore, be expressed as follows: I become aware of what is happening now to me through
64




     64   The embodiment of time


          what just happened to me and expectations of what might happen to me. The realization
          of a self (what happens to me) is created through this tripartite structure of conscious-
          ness (Kiverstein, 2009). According to this conceptualization, time consciousness and self-​
          consciousness are manifestations of the same underlying process.
            The last connection needed in this short phenomenological introduction to our
          neuroscientific inquiry on subjective time is the concept of embodiment, the notion that
          subjective time emerges through bodily processes. According to the enactive/​embodied
          cognition models of subjectivity (Varela, Thompson, & Rosch, 1991/​2016), the phenom-
          enal first-​person perspective depends on the physical self. In other words, the mental
          self is created by the continuous visceral and proprioceptive input from the body. The
          physical self is the functional (bodily) anchor of subjective experience (Metzinger, 2008).
          Subjective time emerges only through the existence of the self across time as an enduring
          and embodied entity. In his phenomenological analysis, Maurice Merleau-​Ponty (1945)
          was most explicit when he declared that every mental act is based on a bodily function.
          Accordingly, one has to understand time as subject and the subject as time (“Il faut
          comprendre le temps comme sujet et le sujet comme temps,” Merleau-​Ponty, 1945, p. 483);
          the physical self and subjective time are inseparable.


          4.2  Neural models of time perception
          The dimension of time is undoubtedly essential for human cognitive functioning. There
          are many temporal levels of organization in perception and action, ranging from the pro-
          cessing of milliseconds of duration up to daily rhythms and beyond (Buhusi & Meck,
          2005; Wittmann, 2016). Specifically, the feeling of time passing and the estimation of
          duration in the seconds and minutes range are fundamental for orientation in the world
          and for decision-​making. The neural underpinnings of subjective time are, however,
          poorly understood; there is no consensus on how and where time is processed in the brain
          (Wittmann & van Wassenhove, 2009).
             Regarding functional principles, regardless of questions of neural implementation,
          there are several conceptualizations concerning time perception which are summarized
          here. For one, memory decay has repeatedly been suggested to govern the experience
          of duration (Staddon, 2005). The underlying idea is that memory capacity decreases
          over time; therefore, memory decay could function as a clock. An alternative model
          of time perception encompassing a memory sub-​function is the dual klepsydra model
          (Wackermann & Ehm, 2006), where subjective time is represented by the states of lossy
          accumulators. The accumulator receives inflow during the presentation of a stimulus to
          be timed (producing the representation of duration), but, at the same time, a continuous
          outflow reflects the loss of representation over time. In further conceptualizations, energy
          expenditure has been proposed to underlie subjective duration (Mach, 1911; Marchetti,
          2009). It has been shown that a greater demand on mental activity while analyzing more
          complex or novel situations expands subjective duration. In contrast, experienced repe-
          tition leads to higher coding efficiency and to shorter duration estimates (Eagleman &
 65




                                                                 Neural models of time perception      65


      Pariyadath, 2009). Accordingly, the experience of duration would be a function of the
      amount of energy expended during the timed interval.
         The most influential cognitive model is based on the idea of a pacemaker-​accumulator
      clock. A  pacemaker would produce a series of pulses like the ticks of a clock, and the
      number of pulses recorded during an interval would lead to experienced duration
      (Treisman, 2013; Gibbon, Church, & Meck, 1984). In a variant of that model, an atten-
      tional gate is assumed to open only when attention is directed to time. Time units then
      enter the accumulator. Accordingly, the more attention is paid to the passage of time,
      the longer duration is experienced (Zakay & Block, 1997; Wearden, 2016). This notion
      fits well with everyday experience. Time expands when we become aware of it, like in a
      waiting situation. Its strong heuristic value probably explains why this model is predomi-
      nantly used in psychology to account for empirical results.
         Regarding the neuroanatomy and neurophysiology of time perception, several models
      have been brought forward to provide an answer on which brain areas and which neural
      mechanisms underlie duration judgments. The following summary is by no means ex-
      haustive, but provides a rough sketch of the most prominent ideas. Related to the timing
      of events ranging from the milliseconds to a few seconds at most, a general mechanism
      for different magnitudes, such as time, space, and number, has been proposed in the
      right posterior parietal cortex (Bueti & Walsh, 2009), as well as mechanisms related to
      neural-​delay conduction pathways in the cerebellum (Ivry et  al., 2002). Alternatively,
      it has been suggested that many neural networks have intrinsic temporal-​processing
      properties. Accordingly, duration estimation for very brief events lasting less than half a
      second are related to time-​dependent neural changes, such as short-​term synaptic plas-
      ticity (Buonomano, Bramen, & Khodadadifar, 2009). Subjective duration is thus an emer-
      gent property (or processed at a later stage) stemming from modality-​related processes
      in the brain (van Wassenhove, 2009). One of the most prominent recent neural models
      is the striatal beat-​frequency model, which assumes coincidence detection mechanisms
      involving oscillatory signals with various frequencies in cortico-​striatal circuits (Matell &
      Meck, 2004). Phases of different cortical oscillators are read out by neurons located in the
      striatum and give rise to a unique activation pattern over time that distinguishes different
      durations. Neural oscillations of various frequencies have been shown to be associated
      with mechanisms, such as coincidence detection (neural phase timing), as well as re-
      lated to different cognitive functions, including interval timing: the synchronous timing
      of events and temporal expectation (van Wassenhove, 2016). Therefore, an oscillatory
      model favouring synchronization and coincidence detection seems a promising avenue
      for future research (Kononowicz & van Wassenhove, 2016). Although a specific model
      employing oscillatory mechanisms has not received unanimous empirical support, EEG
      data show the involvement of neural oscillations in time perception, at least with intervals
      of up to a few seconds’ duration (Kononowicz & van Rijn, 2015).
         The dopaminergic system plays a key role regarding the involvement of neurotransmitters
      in the perception of time. Many studies in animals and humans have shown that dopamine-​
      receptor agonists and antagonists provoke a relative overestimation and underestimation of
6




    66   The embodiment of time


         duration, respectively (Rammsayer, 2009; Coull, Cheng, & Meck, 2011). Complementing
         these findings, carriers of genotypic variants modulating D2 receptor density in the stri-
         atum were associated with duration-​discrimination variability (but not accuracy) in a
         timing task with a stimulus duration of around 500 ms (Wiener, Lohoff, & Coslett, 2011).
         In contrast, duration-​discrimination variability with visual stimuli lasting around two
         seconds was associated with a polymorphism related to an enzyme modulating synaptic
         dopaminergic metabolism in the prefrontal cortex. These outcomes clearly show how
         different durations are processed by different neural systems. Other transmitter systems
         also influence subjective time. One study using sub-​second visual stimuli showed that
         resting-​state GABA concentration correlated with timing accuracy in humans (Terhune
         et al., 2014). The neuromodulator oxytocin induces a subjective time dilation for happy
         female faces and a time compression for happy male faces in heterosexual male viewers
         (Colonnello, Domes, & Heinrichs, 2016), showing how transient physiological states in-
         fluence duration estimates. Other studies have revealed the involvement of the seroto-
         nergic (5-​HT) transmitter system in the estimation of longer time intervals. For example,
         intake of sub-​threshold doses of psilocybin, a hallucinogenic substance and 5-​HT 2A/​
         1A receptor agonist, interfered with a duration-​reproduction task with intervals up to 5
         seconds (Wackermann et al., 2008). Even though participants did not notice any changes
         in their states of consciousness, duration reproduction was less accurate compared to a
         placebo condition. Gene polymorphisms associated with the serotonin system, but not
         the dopamine system, were associated with duration discrimination of intervals lasting
         between 3.2 and 6.4 seconds (Sysoeva, Tonevitsky, & Wackermann, 2010).
            Complementing these findings on the duration-​dependent involvement of transmitter
         systems, meta-​analyses of neuroimaging data point to at least two distinct neural timing
         systems. A  timing system for sub-​second intervals is more strongly governed by sub-
         cortical systems in the brain, and a more cognitively controlled system of supra-​second
         timing is more strongly related to cortical areas in the brain (Lewis & Miall, 2003;
         Wiener, Turkeltaub, & Coslett, 2010). Further neuroimaging evidence supports a dual
         system separating intervals below and above two seconds (Morillon, Kell, & Giraud,
         2009). Several systems probably function in coordination with each other, and individual
         systems become dominant, depending on the time range involved (Petter et al., 2016).
         Almost all of these models of human time perception are based on empirical findings
         with intervals ranging from milliseconds to a few seconds. These time intervals are def-
         initely important for the understanding of individual sensorimotor processing required
         when performing sports, playing music, driving a car, or even for our survival as homo
         sapiens in interpersonal communication and when hunting and gathering (Wittmann &
         Pöppel, 1999). Brain-​based models of human time perception rarely encompass empir-
         ical data from longer time intervals in the multiple-​second range. The few existing neu-
         roimaging studies employing multiple-​second intervals show that a multitude of areas
         in the brain are activated including the basal ganglia and several cortical areas (Hinton
         & Meck, 2004; Wittmann et al., 2010). Subjective time as an experience and as related to
         everyday decision-​making is crucially dependent upon the perception of the passage of
 67




                                                             Attention, affect, and interoception    67


      time and duration in the multiple-​second range (Wittmann & Paulus, 2009). The feeling
      of boredom, when time drags on and duration expands, or of time pressure, when there
      does not seem to be enough time to finish something, are commonly encountered in eve-
      ryday experience and strongly influence our decisions (Zakay, 2014). These perceptions
      of time are related to the feeling of time passing and most likely cannot be explained by
      mechanisms dealing with sensorimotor processes lasting between a fraction of a second
      and up to three seconds.

      4.3  Body time: Attention, affect, and interoception
      A considerable body of evidence indicates an intricate interplay between affective states
      and subjective time. Subjects overestimate the duration of emotionally arousing pictures
      or short audio files with emotional content presented from several hundred milliseconds
      to a few seconds (Droit-​Volet, Brunot, & Niedenthal, 2004; Noulhiane et  al., 2007;
      Wackermann et al., 2014). This relative overestimation of duration is typically explained
      by the above-​mentioned cognitive model of prospective time perception, the pacemaker-​
      accumulator model (Zakay & Block, 1997; Wearden, 2016). Accordingly, increased
      physiological arousal leads to a higher pacemaker rate which, in turn, leads to a larger
      accumulation of temporal units over a given time interval (Droit-​Volet & Meck, 2007;
      Wittmann & Paulus, 2008). Temporal dilation effects of emotionally arousing stimuli
      seem to be related to the embodiment of emotions, at least when judging the duration
      of presented photos with emotional faces. Participants relatively overestimated the dura-
      tion of presented faces when they were free to spontaneously imitate perceived emotions
      (Effron et al., 2006). When subjects had a pen in their mouths that prevented the mim-
      icking of emotions, the duration of faces was judged to be relatively shorter. The effects
      of emotions on duration estimation are also observed with longer time intervals. In a
      retrospective duration-​judgment task with three video clips lasting 45 seconds each, a
      fear-​inducing horror video led to a relative overestimation compared to a serious docu-
      mentary and a funny cartoon, the latter being estimated as having lasted the shortest time
      (Pollatos, Laubrock, & Wittmann, 2014). In other words, the highly arousing horror video
      elicited time dilation, whereas the cartoon was experienced as “time flies when you are
      having fun.” These relative over-​and underestimations were boosted when subjects were
      instructed to pay attention to their bodily reactions to the film clips. In a further condi-
      tion, when subjects were instructed to focus on physical sensations (interoceptive focus),
      they over-​and underestimated the two emotional films even more strongly compared to
      the neutral documentary.
         The notion that feelings and emotions depend on visceral and somatosensory feed-
      back from the peripheral nervous system goes back at least to the theories of James and
      Lange in the late nineteenth century. Related modern theories postulate that body sig-
      nals are integrated with perceptual, motivational, social, and cognitive information,
      leading to the awareness of complex emotional states (Damasio, 1999; Singer, Critchley,
      & Preuschoff, 2009). For example, one empirical study showed how those individuals who
      were more sensitive in perceiving their heartbeat also felt more aroused while judging
68




     68   The embodiment of time


          photos with emotional content (Pollatos et al., 2007). The timing of the heartbeat is de-
          cisive for generating affective experience. It was shown that fearful faces were detected
          more accurately and were judged as more arousing when photos were presented at the
          cardiac systole compared to when they were presented at the diastole. This behavior and
          experience corresponded with fMRI-​recorded higher amygdala responses (Garfinkel
          et al., 2014). Conscious emotional experiences are directly felt in the body, and people
          can draw emotion-​specific activation maps of physical sensations (Nummenmaa et al.,
          2014). It is argued that perception of these emotion-​triggered and topologically specific
          body changes generates consciously felt emotions.
             A direct link between the perception of time and physical processes was proposed by
          Craig (2009, 2015). Craig suggested that the experience of time is related to emotional
          and visceral processes because they share a common underlying neural system, the inter-
          oceptive system, including the insular cortex. Through integrating the ascending somatic
          signals, the insula would be involved in creating a series of conscious emotional moments
          in time. As a consequence, the sense of duration would be created by these successive
          moments of self-​realization, essentially formed by information originating within the
          body. In this context, it is important to note that the underlying computational cogni-
          tive architecture regarding discrete or continuous processing over time is still debated
          (Madl et al., 2016). The aforementioned phenomenological insight of the dual embod-
          iment of self and time corresponds to a recent conceptualization of time-​awareness in
          neuroscience (Wittmann, 2016). Thus, everyday experience becomes understandable. In
          situations such as when waiting, where one easily gets frustrated, one attends to time and
          is comparably aroused, one is strongly aware of his/​her own emotional and body feelings,
          and, as a consequence, subjective duration expands. The insular cortex is an integral part
          of the saliency network involved in cognitive control and attentional processes (Menon
          & Uddin, 2010). The same brain network is also involved in the functions of body aware-
          ness, attentional control and the sense of time. In combining these three functions, one
          can argue that “attending to time” is equivalent to “attending to bodily signals.” This at
          least is the strong hypothesis.
             An fMRI study by Critchley, Wiens, Rotshtein, and Dolan (2004) was probably the
          first to link the insular cortex anatomy and activity, interoception, attention, and explicit
          timing abilities. Participants took part in an interoceptive task where they had to judge
          the timing of their own heartbeats in relation to a series of presented tones. Activation
          in the right anterior insula predicted accuracy in the heartbeat-​detection task; that is,
          whether the tones were synchronous with the own heartbeat or not. Grey-​matter volume
          in that specific region was also correlated with interoceptive timing accuracy, as well as
          with subjective ratings of heartbeat awareness. The striking novel information this influ-
          ential research report provided is that the right anterior insula is involved in temporally
          fine-​tuned conscious sensing of bodily processes. Empirical findings now identify the role
          of the insular cortex in temporally integrating the heartbeat with exteroceptive signals
          (Salomon et al., 2016). The awareness of visual stimuli depends on when they appear in
          relation to the heartbeat. When stimuli occur close to the heartbeat, detection of external
 69




                                                                              Climbing activation     69


      stimuli is less accurate. More empirical research is now confirming the notion that visual
      conscious experience is dependent upon neural events locked to the heartbeats (Park
      et al., 2014). A recent line of research using fMRI technology and psychophysiological
      measurements complements these findings on the timing of sub-​second events: insular-​
      cortex activation and direct physiological responses, such as the heart rate and skin con-
      ductance levels, are also related to the estimation of duration in the multiple-​second range
      (Wittmann et al., 2010; Meissner & Wittmann, 2011).


      4.4  Body time: Climbing activation
      The initial motivation to use longer time intervals in our research stems from an applied
      research agenda. Trait-​like impulsivity, such as that found in many psychiatric disorders
      such as borderline personality disorder or drug dependence, is associated with an over-
      estimation of duration in the multiple-​second to minute range (Berlin & Rolls, 2004;
      Wittmann et al., 2007). In accordance with our embodiment concept of subjective time,
      impulsivity can be understood as a strongly felt urge for immediate gratification, which is
      generated through the interoceptive system, including insular-​cortex functioning (Turel &
      Bechara, 2016). To test individuals later with higher levels of impulsivity, we began to test
      healthy young students with a duration-​reproduction task while recording activation via
      functional neuroimaging (fMRI) technology. The computerized duration-​reproduction
      task became the standard experimental timing task for the following investigations re-
      ported here (for details on the methods used, see Wittmann et al., 2010, 2011; Wittmann
      & Meissner, 2011; Otten et al., 2015). In the duration-​reproduction task, participants were
      instructed to reproduce the duration of tones with intervals of 3, 9, and 18 seconds. In
      each trial a 1.2 kHz tone was presented for one of the three durations (encoding phase),
      followed by a variable pause after which a second, 2 kHz tone was presented. After the
      second tone had started (reproduction phase), subjects had to stop the tone by pressing a
      key when they estimated that the duration of the first tone had elapsed. Although subjects
      were requested not to count, to prevent any such tendency the participants had to com-
      plete a secondary working-​memory task. At the beginning of each trial, four numbers
      between zero and nine were presented to be memorized. After the second tone had been
      switched off by the subject, one number appeared, and the subjects had to respond by
      pressing one of two buttons for “yes” and “no” whether the presented number was one of
      the four from the beginning of the trial.
        In the first of two fMRI studies (Wittmann et  al., 2010), several areas of activation in
      sub-​cortical and cortical areas were detected for the contrasts between the encoding and
      reproduction phases and, very similarly, for the two timing phases contrasted with a con-
      trol reaction-​time task. In the control task, subjects had to wait the same duration (3, 9,
      18 seconds), but had to press a button as fast as possible at the end of the tone. Because
      we employed comparably long intervals, we were able to analyze activation patterns in
      the identified areas of activation over time. Time-​activity curves showed an increasing
      (climbing) activation pattern over time in the left and right posterior insula during the
70




     70   The embodiment of time


          (a)
          Encoding phase 9 s                                    0.15   tone duration                   *




                                               ROI activation
                                                                        L R SMA

                                                                  0
                                                                       0   2    4     6    8   10 12 14 16 18 20 22
                          SMA


                                                           –0.15

                                                                0.45
          X=8
                                                                        L p Ins, ST
                                               ROI activation


                                                                 0.3


                                                                0.15

                R                          L
                                                                  0
                                                                       0   2    4     6    8   10 12 14 16 18 20 22
                     p Ins                                      0.45
                                  p Ins
                                               ROI activation




                                                                 0.3    R p Ins, ST
                    ST                ST


                                                                0.15
          Z = 14

                                                                  0
                                                                       0   2    4     6    8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22
                                                                                          Duration [sec]

          * Projected peak of hemodynamic response
          Figure 4.1 Brain activity during the 9-​s (4.1a) and 18-​s (4.1b) encoding phase. A sagittal (x = 8)
          and an axial slice (z = 14) show significant brain activity (p < 0.01, corrected) in three regions
          encompassing a bilateral medial frontal area (SMA), left and right posterior insula (p Ins) as well
          as superior temporal cortex (ST) as related to the encoding versus control contrast in the 9-​and
          18-​s conditions. Individual time activity curves (set to zero at the onset of the stimulus) show
          an inverted u-​shape function in the SMA and climbing brain activity that peaks at the end of
          the stimulus (with a delay of around 6 s reflecting the hemodynamic response function) for left
          (L) and right (R) p Ins, ST.
 71




                                                                                                           Climbing activation   71


      (b)
      Encoding phase 18 s                                          Tone duration                                 *




                                           ROI activation
                                                            0.15
                                                                   L R SMA

                                                              0
                             SMA                                   0   2      4   6   8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30

                                                       –0.15                              Duration (sec)

                                                            0.15
      X=8
                                           ROI activation
                                                             0.3
                                                                   L p Ins
                                                            0.15

                                                              0
                                                                   0   2   4      6   8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30
                                                       –0.15
               R                       L                                                  Duration (sec)

                                                            0.35
                                           ROI activation




                                   p Ins                           R p Ins
                     p Ins                                   0.2

                                                            0.05
                   ST, IP
                                                                   0   2      4   6   8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30
                                                            –0.1
                                                                                          Duration (sec)
      z = 14                                                 0.6
                                           ROI activation




                                                            0.45
                                                                   R ST, IP
                                                             0.3
                                                            0.15
                                                              0
                                                                   0   2   4      6   8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30
                                                                                          Duration (sec)
      * Projected peak of hemodynamic response

      Figure 4.1  Continued


      encoding phase (Figure 4.1). Most notably, this region of activation encompassed the dorsal
      posterior insula, which is the primary interoceptive area (Craig, 2015). This neural signature
      was interpreted as being related to the accumulation of subjective duration. Time-​activity
      curves in the reproduction phase revealed similar climbing activation which peaked shortly
      before the motor response in the left and right anterior insula, the inferior frontal cortex,
      and the pre-​SMA. These results were interpreted as an indication that the anterior insula
      and related areas are involved in the comparison of the two presented intervals (encoding,
      reproduction phase). In a following fMRI study assessing time perception with students
      covering a range of self-​reported impulsivity levels, we were able to replicate the main
      findings of time-​activity curves in the posterior and anterior insula (Wittmann et al., 2011).
72




     72   The embodiment of time


            Following the fMRI results of insular cortex activation, we next investigated whether
          performance in the duration-​reproduction task was related to individual interoceptive
          awareness and with measurable changes in autonomic activity during the task (Meissner
          & Wittmann, 2011). Healthy volunteers participated in two tasks:  (a) the heartbeat-
          perception task conducted before the timing task as a measure of interoceptive sensitivity
          and (b) the auditory duration-​reproduction task. Temporal intervals of 8-​, 14-​and 20-​
          second duration were used while skin-​conductance levels and cardiac and respiratory
          periods were recorded. First of all, a relationship was found between the accuracy in
          perceiving one’s resting-​state heartbeat and performance in the following timing task. The
          heartbeat-​perception task was used as suggested originally by Schandry (1981). Subjects
          are asked to count their own heartbeats and report the number at the end of a desig-
          nated interval. Participants who had higher interoceptive accuracy (they deviated less
          from the true number of heartbeats) performed more accurately (with less deviation) in
          the duration-​reproduction task (for a discussion of different interoceptive dimensions,
          see Garfinkel et al., 2015). This indicated that a generally better access to visceral signals—​
          ascending signals from the heart—​enables a more accurate representation of duration.
          Regarding psychophysiological indices during the duration-​reproduction task, cardiac
          periods increased (the heart rate slowed down) and skin-​conductance levels decreased (a
          sign of relaxation) progressively and almost linearly during the encoding of the 8-​, 14-​,
          and 20-​second intervals (Figure 4.2). These analyses point to a possible relationship be-
          tween changes in physiological signals from the body and time-​perception accuracy. It is
          important to emphasize that it is not the mean heart rate during a target interval that is
          predictive of timing behavior, as was assessed by Schwarz and colleagues (2013), but the
          changing (or increase) in cardiac periods over time.
            The findings of linearly increasing cardiac periods and decreasing skin-​conductance
          levels during the auditory duration-​estimation task were replicated in a follow-​up study
          where we compared the behavior of meditators to non-​meditators (Otten et al., 2015).
          Moreover, these physiological changes over time were also observed during an additional
          visual duration-​reproduction task. Results thus strongly support the modality independ­
          ence of mechanisms. One finding from the initial study (Meissner & Wittmann, 2011) was
          not replicated: the heartbeat perception scores in the Schandry task (1981) were not as-
          sociated with timing performance in the auditory and visual duration-​estimation tasks.
          The accuracy index of interoception was, therefore, not predictive of time-​perception ac-
          curacy in the following duration-​reproduction tasks. A visible ceiling effect—​individuals
          were overall better aware of their heartbeats than in the former study—​could potentially
          explain the lack of replication. Methodological considerations also have to be discussed,
          such as the use of more objective psychophysiological tasks when assessing interoceptive
          accuracy (Garfinkel et  al. 2015). One association with the interoception task used was
          that heartbeat-​perception scores were positively related to correct answers in a divided-​
          attention test (Otten et al., 2015). This result confirms a previously found correlation be-
          tween the Schandry task and divided-​attention performance, adding evidence for the
          embodiment conception of mental functioning (Matthias et al., 2009).
 73




                                                                                                   Climbing activation   73


                                                                   8-sec Interval
          Cardiac Periods (ms)   830
                                 820
                                 810
                                 800
                                 790
                                 780
                                 770
                                 760
                                 750
                                       12345678       123    12345 123
                                         Encode        ISI    Reprod. ISI

                                                                    Interval (S)

                                                                   14-sec Interval
                                 830
          Cardiac Periods (ms)




                                 820
                                 810
                                 800
                                 790
                                 780
                                 770
                                 760
                                 750
                                       1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 11 13   123    123456789           123
                                                  Encode          ISI      Reprod.           ISI

                                                                    Interval (S)

                                                                   20-sec Interval
                                 830
          Cardiac Periods (ms)




                                 820
                                 810
                                 800
                                 790
                                 780
                                 770
                                 760
                                 750
                                       1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 11 13 15 17 19     123      1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 11   123
                                                        Encode               ISI             Reprod.         ISI

                                                                     Interval (S)
      Figure 4.2  Mean second-​to-​second changes of cardiac periods (s) during the encoding interval,
      the reproduction interval, and the first 3 s of the subsequent inter-​stimulus intervals (ISI) for tones
      of 8-​s, 14-​s, and 20-​s duration. Due to individual differences in the length of the reproduced
      intervals, the reproduction intervals were restricted to the initial seconds that were available for
      all subjects, namely the first 5 s, 9 s, and 12 s of the 8-​s, 14-​s, and 20-​s intervals, respectively.
74




     74   The embodiment of time


             Another potential component of the heartbeat related to time-​estimation behavior has
          recently been proposed: heart rate variability as an indicator of vagal control was meas-
          ured during a baseline resting period. Using different indices of heart rate variability,
          a positive correlation was found between duration-​reproduction accuracy of multiple-​
          second intervals and the root mean square of successive differences (RMSSD) of inter-​
          beat intervals (Pollatos et  al., 2014). A  positive correlation was also reported between
          cardiac vagal tone (HF) and errors in a millisecond timing task: the greater the variability,
          the better the temporal judgment (Cellini et al., 2015). These results fit with the model
          of neuro-​visceral integration, where a greater vagal tone (stronger parasympathetic ac-
          tivation) is associated with more efficient attentional regulation and response flexibility
          (Thayer & Brosschot, 2005). A higher general vagal tone as measured in the resting-​state
          condition could thereby facilitate the allocation of attention involved in time perception
          and lead to more accurate duration judgment. However, these first study results have to
          be followed up by studies that clarify the role of autonomic cardiac regulation in relation
          to respiratory rate for performance in time perception tasks.

          4.6  Applied research on embodied time
          The upsurge of studies on meditation techniques is relevant for conceptual issues of the
          conscious self and subjective time. In mindfulness meditation, functional aspects of self-​
          consciousness are modulated by specific processes during meditation induction, that is
          by increased attentional focus on body states and emotion regulation (Hölzel et al., 2011).
          An important aspect that is noticed by novices during a meditation session and by expe-
          rienced individuals at least at the beginning of a session is that subjective time slows down
          considerably as the physical self becomes the focus of attention (Kabat-​Zinn, 2005). This
          phenomenon is understandable within the conceptualization of insular cortex function
          underlying the subjective passage of time. fMRI studies show how the instruction to focus
          on “being in the present—​here and now” and on breathing sensations results in an in-
          crease in neural activation in the insular cortex in experienced meditators (Farb et al.,
          2007, Farb, Segal, & Anderson, 2012).
             An interoceptive view on subjective time might also be fruitful for an understanding
          of psychiatric and neurologic syndromes related to distorted notions of the physical and
          mental self, emotional states, and time perception (Hartocollis, 1983). Schizophrenia
          can even be seen as a disturbance of the embodied self (de Haan & Fuchs, 2010; Seth,
          2013). Disturbances in time perception are reported by individual patients as the feeling
          of being “stuck in time” (Vogeley & Kupke, 2007; Giersch & Mishara, 2017). Collected
          reports show that for some of those patients, time is not passing and that the experi-
          enced presence feels expanded: “What is the future? One cannot reach it. . . Time stands
          still . . . This is boring, stretched time without an end.” (Fischer, 1929). Recent experi-
          mental approaches show impairments in the consciously felt passage of time, as well as
          in implicit measures of time continuity (Giersch et al., 2009; Lalanne et al., 2012). Similar
          distortions can also be seen in individual patients with schizotypal disorders, such as
 75




                                                                                                     References      75


      the depersonalization syndrome, which are accompanied by depressive symptoms. These
      patients experience a detachment from their own bodies and, in case studies, exhibit
      disturbances in the subjective sense of time that are complemented by impairments in
      objective timing tasks (D’Allonnes, 1905; Zaytseva et al., 2015). These empirical findings
      correspond with the notion that the underlying self and time disturbances are related to
      disruptions in embodied perceptual experience.
        The passage of time can also be studied in patients who suffer from physical symptoms.
      Wittmann and colleagues (2006) showed that patients with a life-​threatening illness who
      had a lower health-​related quality of life and higher anxiety levels reported time to pass
      more slowly. This finding suggests that the burden of symptoms slows down the passage
      of time. This corresponds with preliminary results from an experimental study in which
      nausea was experimentally induced by optokinetic stimulation: Participants with higher
      nausea levels at the end of the 20-​minute nausea-​stimulation period reported time to
      have passed more slowly than participants with lower nausea levels (n = 69, Spearman’s
      rho = –​0.31, p < 0.01) (Meissner et al., in preparation). Although the specific mediators
      of the association between symptom severity and the passage of time have yet to be
      identified, these findings indicate the close relationship between the affective bodily self
      and subjective time.
        To sum up our analysis of the literature, a variety of time-​perception models exist si-
      multaneously. Recent research presented here has added the idea of an “embodiment of
      subjective time” implying the relationship between emotional physical states and the pro-
      cessing of time duration. The classification of human time perception into different time
      ranges indicates that different neural mechanisms are involved, depending on the length
      of the processed time interval. To find consensus on this issue, research on the neural
      basis of time perception has to test more systematically for duration-​dependent effects by
      expanding the range of tested intervals within one study.

      References
      Berlin, H. A. and Rolls, E. T. (2004). Time perception, impulsivity, emotionality, and personality in self-​
         harming borderline personality disorder patients. Journal of Personality Disorders, 18, 358–​78.
      Bueti, D. and Walsh, V. (2009). The parietal cortex and the representation of time, space, number and
         other magnitudes. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 364, 1831–​40.
      Buhusi, C. V. and Meck, W. H. (2005). What makes us tick? Functional and neural mechanisms of
         interval timing. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 6, 755–​65.
      Buonomano, D. V., Bramen, J., and Khodadadifar, M. (2009). Influence of the interstimulus interval
         on temporal processing and learning: Testing the state-​dependent network model. Philosophical
         Transactions of the Royal Society B, 364(1525), 1865–​73.
      Cellini, N., Mioni, G., Levorato, I., Grondin, S., Stablum, F., and Sarlo, M. (2015). Heart rate variability
         helps tracking time more accurately. Brain and Cognition, 101,  57–​63.
      Colonnello, V., Domes, G., and Heinrichs, M. (2016). As time goes by: Oxytocin influences the
         subjective perception of time in a social context. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 68,  69–​73.
      Coull, J. T., Cheng, R.-​K., and Meck W. H. (2011). Neuroanatomical and neurochemical substrates of
         timing. Neuropsychopharmacology Review, 36,  3–​25.
76




     76   The embodiment of time


          Craig, A. D. (2009). Emotional moments across time: A possible neural basis for time perception in the
              anterior insula. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 364, 1933–​42.
          Craig, A. D. (2015). How Do You Feel? An Interoceptive Moment with your Neurobiological Self.
              Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
          Critchley, H. D., Wiens, S., Rotshtein, P., and Dolan, R. J. (2004). Neural systems supporting
              interoceptive awareness. Nature Neuroscience, 7, 189–​95.
          Damasio, A. (1999). The feeling of What Happens: Body and Emotion in the Making of Consciousness.
              San Diego, CA: Harcourt Inc.
          D’Allonnes, G.-​R. (1905). Rôle des sensations internes dans les émotions et dans la perception de la
              durée. Revue Philosophique de la France et de l’Étranger, 60, 592–​623.
          de Haan, S. and Fuchs, T. (2010). The ghost in the machine: Disembodiment in schizophrenia—​two
              case studies. Psychopathology, 43, 327–​33.
          Droit-​Volet, S., Brunot, S., and Niedenthal, P. M. (2004). Perception of the duration of emotional
              events. Cognition and Emotion, 18, 849–​58.
          Droit-​Volet, S. and Meck, W. H. (2007). How emotions colour our perception of time. Trends in
              Cognitive Sciences, 11, 504–​13.
          Eagleman, D. and Pariyadath, V. (2009). Is subjective duration a signature for coding efficiency?
              Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 364, 1841–​52.
          Effron, D. A., Niedenthal, P. M., Gil, S., and Droit-​Volet, S. (2006). Embodied temporal perception of
              emotion. Emotion, 6,  1–​9.
          Farb, N. A., Segal, Z. V., Mayberg, H., Bean, J., McKeon, D., Fatima, Z., et al. (2007). Attending to the
              present: Mindfulness meditation reveals distinct neural modes of self-​reference. Social Cognitive
              and Affective Neuroscience, 2, 313–​22.
          Farb, N. A., Segal, Z. V., and Anderson, A. K. (2012). Mindfulness meditation training alters cortical
              representations of interoceptive attention. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 8,  15–​26.
          Fischer, F. (1929). Zeitstruktur und Schizophrenie. Zeitschrift für die gesamte Neurologie und Psychiatrie,
              121, 544–​74.
          Garfinkel, S. N., Minati, L., Gray, M. A., Seth, A. K., Dolan, R. J., and Critchley, H. D. (2014). Fear
              from the heart: Sensitivity to fear stimuli depends on individual heartbeats. Journal of Neuroscience,
              34, 6573–​82.
          Garfinkel, S. N., Seth, A. K., Barrett, A. B., Suzuki, K., and Critchley, H. D. (2015). Knowing your own
              heart: Distinguishing interoceptive accuracy from interoceptive awareness. Biological Psychology,
              104,  65–​74.
          Gibbon, J., Church, R. M., and Meck, W. H. (1984). Scalar timing in memory. In J. Gibbon and L. Allan
              (eds), Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences: Vol. 423. Timing and Time Perception. New York,
              NY: New York Academy of Sciences, pp. 52–​77.
          Giersch, A., Lalanne, L., Corves, C., Seubert, J., Shi, Z., Foucher, J., et al. (2009). Extended visual
              simultaneity thresholds in patients with schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 35, 816–​25.
          Giersch, A. and Mishara, A. (2017). Disrupted continuity of subjective time in the milliseconds range
              in the self-​disturbances of schizophrenia: Convergence of experimental, phenomenological, and
              predictive coding accounts. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 24,  62–​87.
          Hartocollis, P. (1983). Time and Timelessness, Or, The Varieties of Temporal Experience (A Psychoanalytic
              Inquiry). New York, NY: International Universities Press.
          Hinton, S. C. and Meck, W. H. (2004). Frontal–​striatal circuitry activated by human peak-​interval
              timing in the supra-​seconds range. Cognitive Brain Research, 21, 171–​82.
          Hölzel, B. K., Lazar, S. W., Gard, T., Schuman-​Olivier, Z., Vago, D. R., and Ott, U. (2011). How does
              mindfulness work? Proposing mechanisms of action from a conceptual and neural perspective.
              Perspectives on Psychological Science, 6, 537–​59.
 7




                                                                                                   References    77


     Husserl, E. (1928). Vorlesungen zur Phänomenologie des inneren Zeitbewußtseins. Halle: Max Niemeyer
         Verlag.
     Ivry, R. B., Spencer, R. M., Zelaznik, H. N., and Diedrichsen, J. (2002). The cerebellum and event
         timing. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 978, 302–​17.
     James, W. (1890). The Principles of Psychology. London: MacMillan.
     Kabat-​Zinn, J. (2005). Coming to Our Senses. New York, NY: Hyperion.
     Kiverstein, J. (2009). The minimal sense of self, temporality and the brain. Psyche, 15,  59–​74.
     Kononowicz, T.W. and van Rijn, H. (2015). Single trial beta oscillations index time estimation.
         Neuropsychologia, 75,  381–​9.
     Kononowicz, T.W. and van Wassenhove, V. (2016). In search of oscillatory traces of the internal clock.
         Frontiers in Psychology, 7(224),  1–​5.
     Lalanne, L., van Assche, M., Wang, W., and Giersch, A. (2012). Looking forward: An impaired ability
         in patients with schizophrenia? Neuropsychologia, 50, 2736–​44.
     Lewis, P. A. and Miall, R. C. (2003). Distinct systems for automatic and cognitively controlled time
         measurement: Evidence from neuroimaging. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 13,  250–​5.
     Lloyd, D. (2012). Neural correlates of temporality: Default mode variability and temporal awareness.
         Consciousness and Cognition, 21, 695–​703.
     Mach, E. (1911). Die Analyse der Empfindungen und das Verhältnis des Physischen zum Psychischen.
         Jena: Verlag von Gustav Fischer.
     Madl, T., Franklin, S., Snaider, J., and Faghihi, U. (2016). Continuity and the flow of time: A cognitive
         science perspective. In: B. Mölder, V. Arstila, and P. Øhrstrøm (eds), Philosophy and Psychology of
         Time. Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 135–​60.
     Marchetti, G. (2009). Studies on time: A proposal on how to get out of circularity. Cognitive Processes,
         10,  7–​40.
     Matell, M. S. and Meck, W. H. (2004). Cortico-​striatal circuits and interval timing: Coincidence
         detection of oscillatory processes. Cognitive Brain Research, 21, 139–​70.
     Matthias, E., Schandry, R., Duschek, S., and Pollatos, O. (2009). On the relationship between
         interoceptive awareness and the attentional processing of visual stimuli. International Journal of
         Psychophysiology, 72,  154–​9.
     Meissner, K. and Wittmann, M. (2011). Body signals, cardiac awareness, and the perception of time.
         Biological Psychology, 86, 289–​97.
     Menon, V. and Uddin, L.Q. (2010). Saliency, switching, attention and control: A network model of
         insula function. Brain Structure and Function, 214, 655–​67.
     Merleau-​Ponty, M. (1945). Phénoménologie de la perception. Paris: La Librairie Gallimard.
     Metzinger, T. (2004). Being No One. The Self-​Model Theory of Subjectivity. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
     Metzinger, T. (2008). Empirical perspectives from the self-​model theory of subjectivity: A brief
         summary with examples. In: R. Banerjee and B. K. Chakrabarti (eds), Progress in Brain Research,
         168. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 215–​45.
     Morillon, B., Kell, C. A., and Giraud, A. L. (2009). Three stages and four neural systems in time
         estimation. Journal of Neuroscience, 29, 14803–​11.
     Nagel, T. (1974). What it is like to be a bat? The Philosophical Review, 83, 435–​50.
     Northoff, G. (2016). Slow cortical potentials and “inner time consciousness”—​A neuro-​phenomenal
         hypothesis about the “width of present”. International Journal of Psychophysiology, 103, 174–​84.
     Noulhiane, M., Mella, N., Samson, S., Ragot, R., and Pouthas, V. (2007). How emotional auditory
         stimuli modulate time perception. Emotion, 7, 697–​704.
     Nummenmaa, L., Glerean, E., Hari, R., and Hietanen, J.K. (2014) Bodily maps of emotions.
         Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 111, 646–​51.
78




     78   The embodiment of time


          Otten, S., Schötz, E., Wittmann, M., Kohls, N., Schmidt, S., and Meissner, K. (2015). Psychophysiology
              of duration estimation in experienced mindfulness meditators and matched controls. Frontiers in
              Psychology, 6, 1215.
          Park, H. D., Correia, S., Ducorps, A., and Tallon-​Baudry, C. (2014). Spontaneous fluctuations in neural
              responses to heartbeats predict visual detection. Nature Neuroscience, 17, 612–​18.
          Petter, E. A., Lusk, N. A., Hesslow, G., and Meck, W. H. (2016). Interactive roles of the cerebellum
              and striatum in sub-​second and supra-​second timing: Support for an initiation, continuation,
              adjustment, and termination (ICAT) model of temporal processing. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral
              Reviews, 71, 739–​55.
          Pöppel, E. (1997). A hierarchical model of temporal perception. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 1,  56–​61.
          Pollatos, O., Herbert, B. M., Matthias, E., and Schandry, R. (2007). Heart rate response after
              emotional picture presentation is modulated by interoceptive awareness. International Journal of
              Psychophysiology, 63, 117–​24.
          Pollatos, O., Laubrock, J., and Wittmann, M. (2014). Interoceptive focus shapes the experience of time.
              PloS One, 9, e86934.
          Pollatos, O., Yeldesbay, A., Pikovsky, A., and Rosenblum, M. (2014). How much time has passed? Ask
              your heart. Frontiers in Neurorobotics, 8, 15.
          Rammsayer, T. (2009). Effects of pharmacological induced dopamine-​receptor stimulation on human
              temporal information processing. NeuroQuantology, 7, 103–​13.
          Revonsuo, A. (2006). Inner Presence. Consciousness as a Biological Phenomenon. Cambridge,
              MA: MIT Press.
          Salomon, R., Ronchi, R., Dönz, J., Bello-​Ruiz, J., Herbelin, B., Martet, R., et al. (2016). The insula
              mediates access to awareness of visual stimuli presented synchronously to the heartbeat. Journal of
              Neuroscience, 36, 5115–​27.
          Schandry, R. (1981). Heart beat perception and emotional experience. Psychophysiology, 18,  483–​8.
          Schwarz, M. A., Winkler, I., and Sedlmeier, P. (2013). The heart beat does not make us tick: The impacts
              of heart rate and arousal on time perception. Attention, Perception & Psychophysics, 75, 182–​93.
          Seth, A. K. (2013). Interoceptive inference, emotion, and the embodied self. Trends in Cognitive
              Sciences, 17, 565–​73.
          Singer, T., Critchley, H. D., and Preuschoff, K. (2009). A common role of insula in feelings, empathy
              and uncertainty. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13, 334–​40.
          Staddon, J. E. R. (2005). Interval timing: Memory, not a clock. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9, 312–​14.
          Sysoeva, O. V., Tonevitsky, A., and Wackermann, J. (2010). Genetic determinants of time perception
              mediated by the serotonergic system. PLoS One 5, e12650.
          Thayer, J. F. and Brosschot, J. F. (2005). Psychosomatics and psychopathology: Looking up and down
              from the brain. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 30, 1050–​8.
          Terhune, D. B., Russo, S., Near, J., Stagg, C. J., and Kadosh, R. C. (2014). GABA predicts time
              perception. Journal of Neuroscience, 34, 4364–​70.
          Treisman, M. (2013). The information-​processing model of timing (Treisman, 1963): Its sources and
              further development. Timing & Time Perception, 1, 131–​58.
          Turel, O. and Bechara, A. (2016) A triadic reflective-​impulsive-​interoceptive awareness model of
              general and impulsive information system use: Behavioral tests of neuro-​cognitive theory. Frontiers
              in Psychology, 7, 601.
          van Wassenhove, V. (2009). Minding time in an amodal representational space. Philosophical
              Transactions of the Royal Society of London B, 364, 1815–​30.
          Wittmann, M., Vollmer, T., Schweiger, C., and Hiddemann, W. (2006). The relation between the
              experience of time and psychological distress in patients with hematological malignancies. Palliative
              & Supportive Care, 4, 357–63.
 79




                                                                                                 References     79


      van Wassenhove, V. (2016). Temporal cognition and neural oscillations. Current Opinion in Behavioral
         Sciences, 8, 124–​30.
      Varela, F. J., Thompson, E., and Rosch, E. (1991/​2016). The Embodied Mind: Cognitive Science and
         Human Experience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
      Varela, F. J. (1999). Present-​time consciousness. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 6, 111–​40.
      Vogeley, K. and Kupke, C. (2007). Disturbances of time consciousness from a phenomenological and a
         neuroscientific perspective. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 33, 157–​65.
      Wackermann, J. and Ehm, W. (2006). The dual klepsydra model of internal time representation and
         time reproduction. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 239, 482–​93.
      Wackermann, J., Wittmann, M., Hasler, F., and Vollenweider, F. X. (2008). Effects of varied doses of
         psilocybin on time interval reproduction in human subjects. Neuroscience Letters, 435,  51–​5.
      Wackermann, J., Meissner, K., Tankersley, D., and Wittmann, M. (2014). Effects of emotional valence
         and arousal on acoustic duration reproduction assessed via the “dual klepsydra model”. Frontiers in
         Neurorobotics, 8, 11.
      Wearden, J. (2016). Psychology of Time Perception. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
      Wiener, M., Turkeltaub, P., and Coslett, H. B. (2010). The image of time: A voxel-​wise meta-​analysis.
         NeuroImage, 49, 1728–​40.
      Wiener, M., Lohoff, F. W., and Coslett, H. B. (2011). Double dissociation of dopamine genes and timing
         in humans. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 23, 2811–​21.
      Wittmann, M. and Pöppel, E. (1999). Temporal mechanisms of the brain as fundamentals of
         communication—​with special reference to music perception and performance. Musicae Scientiae, 3
         (Suppl.),  13–​28.
      Wittmann, M., Leland, D. S., Churan, J., and Paulus, M. P. (2007). Impaired time perception and
         motor timing in stimulant-​dependent subjects. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 90, 183–​192.
      Wittmann, M. and Paulus, M. P. (2008). Decision making, impulsivity and time perception. Trends in
         Cognitive Sciences, 12,  7–​12.
      Wittmann, M. and Paulus, M. P. (2009). Temporal horizons in decision making. Journal of
         Neuroscience, Psychology, and Economics, 2,  1–​11.
      Wittmann, M. and van Wassenhove, V. (2009). The experience of time: Neural mechanisms and the
         interplay of emotion, cognition and embodiment. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B,
         364, 1809–​13.
      Wittmann, M., Simmons, A. N., Aron, J. L., and Paulus, M. P. (2010). Accumulation of neural activity
         in the posterior insula encodes the passage of time. Neuropsychologia, 48, 3110–​20.
      Wittmann, M., Simmons, A. N., Flagan, T., Lane, S. D., Wackermann, J., and Paulus, M. P. (2011).
         Neural substrates of time perception and impulsivity. Brain Research, 1406,  43–​58.
      Wittmann, M. (2016). Felt Time. The Science of How We Experience Time. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
      Zahavi, D. (2005). Subjectivity and Selfhood: Investigating the First-​Person Perspective. Cambridge,
         MA: MIT Press.
      Zakay, D. and Block, R. A. (1997). Temporal cognition. Current Directions in Psychological Science,
         6(1),  12–​16.
      Zakay, D. (2014). Psychological time as information: The case of boredom. Frontiers in Psychology,
         5, 917.
      Zaytseva, Y., Szymanski, C., Gutyrchik, E., Pechenkova, E., Vlasova, R., and Wittmann, M. (2015).
         A disembodied man: A case of somatopsychic depersonalization in schizotypal disorder. PsyCh
         Journal, 4, 186–​98.
80




               Chapter 5

               The neurobiology of gut feelings
               Qasim Aziz and James K. Ruffle



     5.1 Introduction
     Interoception is defined as a “sensitivity to stimuli arising inside of the body,” in con-
     trast to exteroception which can be defined as a “sensitivity to stimuli arising out-
     side of the body.” There are a myriad of “gut feelings” which, taken together, form
     the construct of gastrointestinal (GI) interoception. The GI tract is the second most
     innervated bodily organ, second only to the brain, and specific modalities span from
     interoceptive awareness percepts including visceral sensation and pain signalling,
     hunger, or nausea, but also those outside of conscious perception including the in-
     teroceptive impact of sub-​threshold sensory stimuli. These modalities are processed
     by means of neuroanatomical pathways ascending to the level of the brainstem, sub-
     cortical and cortical brain regions which may invoke a cognitive or bodily response.
     Additionally, humoral mechanisms play a critical role in visceral interoception, as does
     the autonomic nervous system (ANS). Moreover, these intricate signals are influenced
     by various individual factors, including core physiology such as gender or genetics
     and ANS tone, but also complex psyche components such as personality traits. In fact,
     some research suggests that the intestinal bacterial flora composition may even influ-
     ence how we “feel.”
        Visceral interoceptive information reaches the brain through an array of neural, hu-
     moral, and immune pathways, amalgamating in an abundance of ascending signalling
     data which ensures homeostasis within the GI tract, many of which do not reach con-
     scious awareness of interoceptive signals, for example in regulating GI motility and secre-
     tion. However, those that engender conscious perception include sensations of hunger,
     satiety, nausea, the urge to defecate, and, probably the most studied interoceptive signal
     in GI physiology, pain (Derbyshire, 2003).
        To begin, the neuroanatomical pathways of sensory signalling in the GI tract will be
     described. Since the core emphasis in visceral interoception research has consisted of
     understanding the sensory spectrum of the gut, with a vast research body investigating
     pain, this therefore will form a key aspect in this chapter. When describing the neurobi-
     ology and neuroanatomy of visceral sensory signalling this chapter will, for clarity, use
     visceral pain as the sensory example. Additional conscious GI interoceptive signals will be
     discussed later throughout the chapter, including that of hunger and nausea. Sequentially,
     the humoral pathways underpinning the neurobiology of gut feelings will be described,
 81




                                                                Interoceptive signalling pathways     81


      including the brain–​gut axis, and tie in how inter-​individual factors hold an influential
      role in the regulation of these interoceptive signals.

      5.2  Interoceptive signalling pathways
      5.2.1  Ascending     sensory pathways of visceral pain
      Following a visceral insult that would instigate pain, nociceptive GI afferents localized
      in the visceral tissue are activated. The ascending neural pathways from the GI tract are
      encompassed in two main afferent routes: (a) the spinal pathway and (b) the tenth cranial
      nerve (CNX), the vagus nerve (Coen, Hobson, & Aziz, 2012). These two afferent types
      converge at multiple supra-​spinal levels, with the vagus projecting to the nucleus tractus
      solitarii (NTS), a group of brainstem nuclei that receives numerous inputs including that
      originating from baroreceptors, GI and pulmonary afferents (Altschuler et al., 1989). For
      lamina I neurons, these relay principally to the parabrachial nucleus, before subsequently
      ascending to higher centers, whilst spinothalamic tract fibers may project directly to tha-
      lamic regions (Craig, 2003).
        Both spinal and vagal afferents also indirectly project to subcortical and cortical areas,
      including the thalamus (ventral posterior lateral, medial dorsal, and ventral medial pos-
      terior nuclei), insula, amygdala, prefrontal cortex (PFC), primary somatosensory cortex
      (SI), secondary somatosensory cortex (SII), and the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC). By
      large these regions are thought to exhibit a degree of “viscerotopic” organization, meaning
      that specific anatomical parts of the nuclei correspond to different visceral components
      (Altschuler et al., 1989; Aziz et al., 2000). That being said, some exceptions do exist, with
      the ventral posterior lateral aspect of the thalamus as an example of a region that does not
      display viscerotopic organization (Coen et al., 2012). Overall, by these elaborate nuclei
      interconnections, a visceral sensory “neuromatrix” exists both for innocuous and noci-
      ceptive (painful) stimuli (Melzack & Wall, 1965).

      5.2.2  Humoral     signalling
      In addition to the vagal and spinal homeostatic afferent pathways, an intricate humoral
      pathway also aids in homeostatic regulation of visceral interoceptive signalling, reaching
      the central nervous system by circulating substances. There are at least three disparate hu-
      moral pathways permitting information transfer. First, the ventricular humoral pathway
      (also known as the classical pathway) detects changes in substances at the level of the third
      and fourth ventricle, engaging the adjacent circumventricular organs including the area
      postrema, organum vasculosum of lamina terminalis, and subfornical organ (Figure 5.1)
      (Ceunen, Vlaeyen, & Van Diest, 2016). In turn, processed humoral information projects
      to the NTS, hypothalamus, PB nucleus, dorsal motor nucleus, nucleus ambiguous, insula,
      ACC, sympathetic medullary nuclei, and midline thalamic regions.
        Second, the blood−brain humoral pathway (also known as the non-​classical pathway)
      detects changes in substances passing the blood−brain barrier. This pathway, which
      invokes processing at the NTS, hypothalamus, amygdala, and monoamine systems, aims
82




     82   The neurobiology of gut feelings




                                             Pineal
                                                      Subfornical
                                                        Organ




                                                                                  Organum Vasculosum
                                                                                 of the Lamina Terminalis
                                                              Median
                                                             Eminence


                                                                    Posterior Pituitary

                                 Area Postrema




          Figure 5.1 Location of circumventricular organs in the rat brain. AP = area postrema,
          ME = median eminence, OVLT = organum vasculosum of the lamina terminalis, P = pineal gland,
          PP = posterior pituitary, SFO = subfornical organ. (Lechan & Toni, 2016).



          to influence information relay between insula, cingulate cortices, and ventral striatum.
          Third, the microglial humoral pathway (also known as the extraneuronal pathway) refers
          to the response engendered by residing microglia within circumventricular organs, lep-
          tomeninges, and choroid plexus in the presence of both pathogen and/​or inflammation.
            There exists a complex intercommunication between interoceptive signalling modalities.
          Whilst for comprehensibility academic literature will describe neural, humoral, and in-
          deed immune interoceptive signalling mechanisms in a reductionist and disparate fashion,
          there exists significant interconnection and influence from one modality to the next,
          which convolutes further with the influence of inter-​individual variability. As an example
          highlighted by (Browning & Travagli, 2011), the visceral feeling state of dyspepsia can be
          influenced by both psychological factors such as stress but also food indigestion. With
          both stress and indigestion, glucagon-​like peptide 1 (GLP-​1), cholecystokinin (CCK),
          and corticotrophin releasing factor (CRF) are released, which cause increase in cyclic
          AMP levels at brainstem regions. By these humoral factors increasing a localized increase
          in cAMP at vago-​vagal neurocircuitry, the dampening effect of GABAergic synapses is
          decreased. Therefore, signals from normally innoxious events such as meal ingestion are
          processed inappropriately and gastric function disrupted (Browning & Travagli, 2011;
          Tack, Bisschops, & Sarnelli, 2004).

          5.3  The “brain–​gut  axis”
          The “brain–​gut axis” refers to the bi-​directional signalling processes between the brain
          and the gut (Aziz and Thompson, 1998). Although physiological axes such as the
 83




                                                          Brain processing of GI sensory signalling      83


      “hypothalamic pituitary axis” (HPA) have been historically described for some time, the
      construct of physiological data transfer between the brain and the gut has become a rap-
      idly developing area of interoceptive research particularly in the last few decades (Aziz
      and Thompson, 1998). A  variety of research disciplines, albeit with a particular em-
      phasis on functional neuroimaging, have provided a wealth of evidence to support the
      proposal of a brain–​gut axis such that it has become an adopted term and central com-
      ponent to contemporaneous research in visceral sensation (Omran and Aziz, 2014). By
      large, a “visceral sensory neuromatrix” has been largely determined, including not only
      aforementioned sensory neural components but also the autonomic nervous system
      (ANS), neuroendocrine HPA, and neuroimmune systems (Van Oudenhove, Coen, &
      Aziz, 2007).
        The brain–​gut axis has served as an answer to the proposal that an intricate com-
      munication system between the GI tract and the brain must exist in order to permit
      interoception, but also to regulate GI function by means of brain to gut signalling. In
      addition, the physiological, anatomical, and psychological factors that influence this bi-​
      directional signalling pathway have become an intriguing area of brain–​gut axis research,
      not least about how its function may be perturbed in various disorders, a poignant ex-
      ample being irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) (Farmer & Ruffle, 2015).

      5.4  The autonomic nervous system
      The autonomic nervous system (ANS) is a key aspect of the bi-​directional nature of the
      brain–​gut axis. Comprised of two largely opposing arms, the sympathetic (SNS) and par-
      asympathetic nervous system (PNS), its function is to integrate changes in the external
      environment with the internal self so as to maintain homeostasis. The functions of the
      ANS are numerous and essential throughout the body, including regulation of metabo-
      lism and critical components of the cardiorespiratory system. Importantly, it also plays a
      key role in visceral interoception, including pain processing via the vagal nerve, the main
      branch of the PNS (Ruffle et al., 2018; Ruffle et al., 2017a). Whilst the vagal nerve is largely
      comprised of afferent fibers, the efferent arm is posited to have a key role in modulation
      of visceral nociceptive signals (Botha et al., 2015), GI motility (Frokjaer et al., 2016), car-
      diorespiratory regulation, and inflammation (Bonaz et al., 2013).

      5.5  Brain processing of gastrointestinal sensory signalling
      5.5.1  Visceral   pain processing
      Although research in visceral sensory representation in the brain is continually evolving,
      the brain regions arguably best implicated thus far in pain processing are those of the SI,
      SII, cingulate cortex, insula, PFC, thalamus, and amygdala (Aziz et al., 1997; Coen et al.,
      2007; Derbyshire, 2003; Van Oudenhove et al., 2007). These regions have been elucidated
      by means of stimulation of multiple visceral sites including the esophagus, stomach, and
      rectum, but also varying stimulation methods such as mechanical, electrical, or acid-​
      induced stimulation.
84




     84   The neurobiology of gut feelings


             Neuroanatomical and behavioral studies suggest that pain processing in the brain is
          divided into medial and lateral pain systems. The somatosensory cortices, SI and SII, act
          to encode the intensity and localization of the painful stimulus, referred to as the “lateral
          pain system” (Aziz et  al., 2000; Van Oudenhove et  al., 2007). The multifaceted region
          of the cingulate, including the ACC and PFC, as well as interconnection to the anterior
          insula, amygdala, hippocampus, PAG, and brainstem, forms the “medial pain system,”
          which plays an important role in in both the affective-​motivational (experience of pain
          unpleasantness and related anxiety) and cognitive-​evaluative (both anticipation of and
          attention to pain) (Gregory et al., 2003; Kulkarni et al., 2005).
             The insula cortex holds a key role in interoception (Craig, 2002). Indeed, for visceral
          sensation, the right anterior insula has been regarded by some groups as the “interocep-
          tive cortex,” playing a key role in the awareness of the bodily self as a feeling entity (Craig,
          2002). Although multimodal in its role, the insula is thought to have roles in processing
          the affective dimension of pain whereby it may integrate the experience of pain with emo-
          tional information (Ploner et al., 2011). The insula additionally has efferent outputs to
          other key brain regions including the amygdala, hypothalamus, and periaqueductal gray
          (PAG), which have additional roles in the processing of visceral pain (Carrive & Bandler,
          1991; Gregory et al., 2003). The amygdala has an important role in the affective dimen-
          sion of pain, and is regarded as the brain’s “fear center” (Stein et al., 2007). Additionally,
          both the amygdala and PAG play key roles in the descending modulation of pain (Tracey
          et al., 2002).
             The PFC is understood to aid in the cognitive influence on visceral pain (Apkarian
          et al., 2005). The PFC is a cluster of various sub-​regions, of which the orbitofrontal cortex
          (OFC) processes visceral sensory information and encodes the affective, motivational,
          and hedonic aspects (Kringelbach, 2005). Furthermore, the OFC assists in the decisions
          pertaining to the autonomic and behavioral response to the stimulus, including the in-
          tricate interaction between cognition (e.g. anticipation to pain) and emotion to pain
          (Bantick et  al., 2002). The dorsolateral PFC (dlPFC) is another important sub-​region,
          which is involved in cognition, specifically the attention and anticipation of visceral pain
          (Aziz et al., 2000).
             The thalamus is an important subcortical cluster of nuclei located in the center of the
          brain. Its many roles include pain processing. Specifically, it transfers information be-
          tween cortical regions via the relay nuclei, but it also has projections to higher cortical
          regions. It is implicated in both pain sensation and the arousal response, yielding con-
          nectivity to the aforementioned insula cortex, SI, and PFC (Aziz et al., 1997; Craig et al.,
          1994). In the context of neuroimaging however, its activation is not always reported in the
          context of visceral pain, compared to somatosensory where it appears to be more consist-
          ently activated (Coen et al., 2012).

          5.5.2  Brain   networks in visceral sensation
          Advances in functional neuroimaging over the last decade has permitted the ability to de-
          termine proposed brain networks for visceral sensory and pain processing (Labus et al.,
 85




                                                                          Descending analgesia in visceral pain     85


              Table 5.1  Networks of visceral sensation

              Homeostatic Afferent                   Emotional Arousal            Cognitive-​Modulatory
              Thalamus                               Amygdala                     ACC

              Insula                                 LC                           Amygdala
              OFC                                    ACC                          Insula
              Dorsal ACC                                                          OFC
              Three key networks for visceral sensation. Abbreviations: ACC, anterior cingulate cortex; LC, locus
              coeruleus; OFC, orbitofrontal cortex.
              From Omran & Aziz, 2014




      2008; Tillisch & Labus, 2011). These networks are determined by means of correlating
      brain activity during functional neuroimaging of a painful visceral stimulus, thus
      inferring the interaction or “networking” between several brain regions. At present, it has
      been suggested that three main brain networks may be key in the visceral pain matrix, as
      follows: (a) the homeostatic-​afferent network, comprising the thalamus, insula, OFC, and
      dorsal ACC; (b) the emotional arousal network, comprising the amygdala, LC, and ACC
      sub-​regions; and (c) the cortical-​modulatory network, comprising the ACC, amygdala,
      insula, and medial aspect of the OFC (Table 5.1, Figure 5.2) (Labus et al., 2008; Stein et al.,
      2007; Tillisch & Labus, 2011).
         The roles of these networks in processing a complex visceral interoceptive signal such
      as pain differ. The homeostatic-​afferent network is understood to be responsible for the
      processing of the interoceptive physiological input via the PB nucleus, whilst the emo-
      tional arousal network is responsible for how the brain would interpret and perceive the
      stimulus (Pezawas et al., 2005; Tillisch & Labus, 2011). Lastly, the cortical-​modulatory
      network aids in the modulation of the pain experience, tying in to the aforementioned
      process of descending analgesia (Coen et al., 2012).

      5.6  Descending analgesia in visceral pain
      A key mantra of the brain–​gut axis is the bi-​directionality of neural signalling. Signals
      transmit caudally from brain to gut, and one such example is that of “descending an-
      algesia,” a phenomenon that permits the brain to modulate the sensation of visceral
      pain (Melzack & Wall, 1965). Most central brain structures that receive a visceral sen-
      sory input, whether noxious or innocuous, additionally relay information caudally as a
      means to modulate the sensory transmission of visceral afferents, in particular to the
      dorsal horn of the spinal cord. One key region in descending analgesia is the ACC which,
      prior to further caudal transmission, projects to the amygdala and PAG which may allow
      both affective and cognitive factors to modulate the visceral pain experience (Dunckley
      et  al., 2005; Tracey et  al., 2002). The amygdala and PAG caudally project to the locus
      coeruleus (LC), and onwards to the dorsal horn of the spinal cord. It should be noted
      that the construct of descending analgesia is not specific to visceral pain but engenders
86




     86   The neurobiology of gut feelings


          (a)       Homeostatic afferent network                    (b)         Emotional arousal network
                                                       aMCC                                                     aMCC
                                                                                                                    spgACC




                                                                                                                    pgACC
                                                       Insula

                                     Thalamus                                                   Amygdala
          Brain stem

          Figure 5.2 Networks of brain activation in visceral stimulation studies. (a) The homeostatic–​
          afferent network encompasses areas that are thought to resemble those of pain when stimulated
          in visceral pain studies both in participants with a FGID and in participants who are otherwise
          healthy. The core regions are shown.(b) The emotional arousal network is depicted. Cognitive
          (e.g. expectation and anticipation), emotional (e.g. sadness), and psychological aspects have
          all been shown to be involved in visceral perceptions and this progress has established what is
          known as the “emotional arousal network.” The central components of this network are the
          amygdala and parts of the ACC. Abbreviations: ACC, anterior cingulate cortex; aMCC, anterior
          midcingulate cortex; FGID, functional gastrointestinal disorder; pgACC, perigenual ACC; sgACC,
          subgenual ACC.
          Reprinted by permission from Nature Reviews Gastroenterology & Hepatology, 11 (9), Functional brain imaging
          in gastroenterology: to new beginnings, Yasser Al Omran and Qasim Aziz, pp. 565–​76, Figure 1, doi:10.1038/​
          nrgastro.2014.89, Copyright © 2014, Springer Nature.



          somatosensory nociception also, overall referred to famously as Melzack and Wall’s pain
          “gate control theory” (see Melzack & Wall, 1965). Interestingly however, this has formed
          an important area of visceral pain research regarding how individual factors such as the
          psyche, including personality or anxiety, also influence descending analgesia (Farmer
          et al., 2014a; Farmer et al., 2013; Tracey, 2011). Such roles for individual factors will be
          further described later.

          5.7  Additional interoceptive modalities
          Visceral states include numerous modalities other than core sensory and pain pathways.
          These range from sensations under the umbrella of conscious interoceptive awareness,
          such as nausea and hunger, to far more complex visceral states such as anticipation of a
          visceral threat, or sub-​threshold sensation to reach conscious awareness. These differing
          modalities will be discussed in the following sections.

          5.7.1 Nausea
          Nausea is a common and distressing symptom, often preceding vomiting. Numerous
          evidence has purported that the bi-​directional interactions between brain–​gut axis, in
          addition to both autonomic and endocrine systems (in particular arginine vasopressin,
 87




                                                              Additional interoceptive modalities     87


      ghrelin, and cortisol), play important roles in the experience of nausea. Indeed, the sen-
      sory experience of nausea is often accompanied by numerous physiological changes, in-
      cluding pallor, sweating, and gastric dysrhythmia (Sanger & Andrews, 2006).
         The neurobiology of nausea has been implicated the ANS, in particular the vagal
      pathway to cortical brain regions. Through mechanism similar to that of pain as
      described earlier, abdominal vagal afferent fibers reach the NTS and area postrema
      which are thought to play a major role in integrating both the emetic and nausea re-
      sponse. Our understanding of the neurobiology of nausea is further complicated by
      studies illustrating that abdominal vagal afferents are not essential for its sensation,
      given that humans with bilateral abdominal vagotomy can still experience nausea
      (Sanger & Andrews, 2006). It is important to note, however, the difference between
      emesis, the act of vomiting, and nausea, the physiological sense of feeling sick. Whilst
      the two often occur together, they are not equivalent. Because there are no clear an-
      imal models of nausea (whilst there are for emesis), the neurobiology of emesis has
      been clearly demonstrated, with a particular emphasis at the brainstem level, given
      that decerebrate animal models still can exhibit emetic behavior (Miller, Nonaka, &
      Jakus, 1994).
         Functional neuroimaging studies suggest that “higher” cortical regions and the ves-
      tibular system are particularly important in the genesis of nausea. In a recent functional
      magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) study, it has been shown that nausea (induced
      by visual stimulus) is associated with decreased plasma ghrelin and vasopressin, with
      increased ACC, inferior frontal, and middle occipital gyri activity (Farmer et al., 2015).
      Meanwhile, cerebellar areas showed decreased activity, including the declive nucleus and
      parahippocampal gyrus (Farmer et al., 2015).

      5.7.2 Hunger
      Hunger or appetite is an additional visceral interoceptive state. Comprising
      interconnections between behavior and core physiology, it has been purported that
      four main brain areas play key role in the control of appetitive behavior. These are as
      follows:  (a) amygdala/​hippocampus, (b)  insula, (c)  OFC, and (d)  striatum, together
      formulating a complex interoceptive phenomena of learning about reward (food), alloca-
      tion of attention and resource/​effort (to food), and the integration between bodily home-
      ostasis regarding energy stores, GI contents, and extrinsic signals such as food availability
      (Figure 5.3) (Dagher, 2009).
         Homeostatic and GI information is largely relayed by circulating gut peptide hormones
      and nutrients, which act at the hypothalamus. Additional brain structures are also in-
      volved, as is the vagal nerve, in regulating appetite and the behaviors as described earlier,
      which are perturbed if their interconnections are disrupted. For example, one study has
      shown that lesion-​induced disruption of the amygdala–​OFC interconnection abolishes
      sensory-​specific satiety—​that is, a normal response whereby food fed to satiety loses its
      incentive properties (Holland & Gallagher, 2004). The PFC additionally adds cognitive
      influence over the apparent brain network of appetite regulation.
8




    88   The neurobiology of gut feelings



                                 Sensation                   Lateral PFC                    Interoception
                         (taste, olfaction, vision)                                       (hunger, nausea)




                                                                Insula



                                             Amygdala/
                                                                                  OFC
                                            hippocampus



                                                              Striatum



                                                              VTA (DA)

                                                                                            Hypothalamus

         Figure 5.3 A brain network for appetitive behavior. (Not all connections are depicted)
         PFC, prefrontal cortex; OFC, orbitofrontal cortex; VTA, ventral tegmental area; DA, dopamine.
         Reprinted by permission from International Journal of Obesity, 33 (S2), The neurobiology of appetite: hunger as
         addiction, A. Dagher, pp. S30–​S33, Figure 1, doi: 10.1038/​ijo.2009.69, Copyright © 2009, Springer Nature.



         5.7.3  Interoceptive             awareness of sensory signals
         Under normal physiological conditions, stimulation of intestinal afferents does not typi-
         cally reach conscious awareness. However, these neural signals likely still reach the brain-
         stem in order to subsequently trigger GI reflexes to maintain bodily homeostasis, and
         thus permit interoceptive awareness (Kern & Shaker, 2002). Without this process, there
         would be no feedback loop to maintain the internal GI milieu. Until relatively recently, it
         was also unknown whether viscerosensory signals of interoceptive awareness even reach
         higher cortical regions.
           In an early study, by means of rectal distension to a threshold below conscious per-
         ception in healthy volunteers, it was shown that these afferent signals, whilst not strong
         enough to reach conscious perception, are still registered in the cortex, and are detect-
         able by functional neuroimaging. However, the degree of magnitude of activity of these
         cortical areas was much smaller than a visceral interoception sensory afferent signal that
         would reach the level of conscious perception (Kern & Shaker, 2002). The areas activated
         following stimulation that was not consciously perceived were fourfold:  sensorimotor,
         parietal-​occipital, ACC, and insula (Kern & Shaker, 2002). The group posited that these
         areas of activation came as a consequence of vagal or spinal afferents as discussed earlier
         in this chapter. Additionally, given that sensorimotor cortical regions are supplied by
         spinal afferents alone, it was suggested that visceral interoception sensory signals that do
         not reach conscious perception may be relayed to the cortex by spinal afferents, whilst the
         vagal nerve be more implicated in conscious sensation or pain proper (Kern & Shaker,
         2002). In follow-​up studies from the same group, the effect of esophageal acid stimulation
 89




                                                Inter-individual factors in visceral interoception     89


      to below-​conscious perception thresholds were additionally explored, revealing sim-
      ilar findings of activity in the cingulate, insula and sensorimotor regions (Kern, Chai, &
      Lawal, 2009). Indeed, more recent studies have also shown how the functional connec-
      tivity of interoceptive regions such as the insula are modulated by esophageal acid stimu-
      lation below a threshold of conscious perception (Babaei et al., 2013).

      5.7.4  Anticipation     of visceral threat
      An additional visceral interocept that has gained attention over the last decade is that
      of anticipation to a bodily threat. Largely achieved by means of the threat of pain (e.g.
      to be told one would soon receive visceral pain), it has been shown that anticipation is
      processed at the brain level quite differently to that of pain proper. When expecting a
      threat which merits emotional arousal, one’s anticipation modulates the sequential cog-
      nitive response to that stimuli, such as the stress and anxiety that might accompany it.
        Numerous groups have studied pain anticipation in an effort to characterize brain re-
      gions implicated, and perhaps even that an anticipatory brain network should such exist.
      One frequently proposed brain region in anticipation is the anterior insula, given its well-​
      described roles in conscious interoceptive awareness. However, additionally proposed
      regions include the ACC, PAG, PFC, medial frontal lobe, amygdala, and OFC. These re-
      gions are implicated in the processing of visceral pain also, and thus their documented
      activation prior to actual pain proper is interesting in the context of modulation, certainly
      warranting further study (Bishop et  al., 2004; Coen et  al., 2011; Fairhurst et  al., 2007;
      Ploghaus et al., 2001; Ruffle et al., 2015b). In the context of disease, anticipation of pain
      in IBS is different from healthy controls as they inactivate certain brain regions, including
      the ACC and amygdala, to a lesser degree than IBS patients, possibly representing a mal-
      adaptive coping strategy to pain in IBS patients (Berman et al., 2008).

      5.8  Inter-​individual factors in visceral interoception
      A major focus into advancing our understanding to the “neurobiology of gut feelings”
      has been to characterize the factors of an individual which influence visceral interocep-
      tive processing, referred to as the “inter-​individual factors.” In gastroenterology, further-
      more, the Rome working collaborative group has previously highlighted how lack of
      understanding of these factors at present significantly limits advancements in the field
      (Drossman & Hasler, 2016). To date, there are an array of factors which have been discov-
      ered, and span genetics, physiology, neuroanatomy, and psychophysiology. Taking this a
      step further, some groups have suggested the concept of visceral pain “endophenotypes”
      (Farmer & Aziz, 2014; Ruffle et al., 2017b; Tracey, 2011). In understanding the neurobi-
      ology of visceral interoception, it is important to take these factors into account, and thus
      will be discussed later in this chapter.

      5.8.1 Gender
      One frequently studied difference in visceral interoception is that of gender. It has been
      often documented that women demonstrate both higher pain sensitivity and greater
90




     90   The neurobiology of gut feelings


          prevalence of chronic visceral pain conditions than the male counterparts (Kano et al.,
          2013), IBS being an example discussed in section 5.9.2. In fact, some contemporaneous
          studies have even moved to studying only males or females, so as to eliminate the pos-
          sibility of a gender confound in their results. These gender differences have been and
          continue to be investigated with the ever-​advancing tools in neuroimaging. As one
          example, a previous study utilizing acute esophageal pain, by mechanical distension,
          showed that female subjects display greater brain activity in the mid-​cingulate cortex,
          anterior insula, and premotor cortex regions well associated with the emotional arousal
          constituent of visceral pain processing which led the group to suggest that females may
          attribute greater emotional importance to an acute visceral pain stimulus than males
          (Kano et  al., 2013). These findings of increased activity in emotional arousal brain
          regions have also been reported by other groups using connectivity analysis (Labus
          et al., 2008).

          5.8.2 Genetic
          Genetic differences have additionally been investigated in the brain processing of vis-
          ceral signals. For example, polymorphisms in the 5-​hydroxytryptamine (5-​HT) signalling
          system have been shown to play a role in processing of interoceptive signals, the subse-
          quent stress response a signal may invoke and furthermore the emotional regulation that
          accompanies it (Kilpatrick et  al., 2015). Specific to visceral pain, the 5-​HT (serotonin)
          transporter gene-​linked polymorphic region (5-​HTTLPR) has been shown to affect the
          brain response. In a neuroimaging study of brain connectivity in healthy males exposed
          to painful mechanical rectal distension, the S/​S genotype of 5-​HTTLPR was associated
          with significantly greater hippocampal-​amygdala strength, an important central pro-
          cessing component of the stress response and emotion regulation, compared to alter-
          native genotypic carriers (Kilpatrick et  al., 2015). Indeed, additional studies have also
          suggested that the 5-​HTTLPR genotype is associated with a differing extent of emotional
          regulation in visceral pain, whereby the S/​S genotype has been shown to correspond to
          greater cerebral blood flow (as a surrogate to brain activity) in the ACC, hippocampus,
          and OFC in one study (Fukudo & Kanazawa, 2011; Fukudo et al., 2009), while to the in-
          sula, inferior frontal gyrus, supplementary motor area, and precentral gyrus in another
          (Schaub et al., 2013). Furthermore, it has been suggested that the functional gene poly-
          morphism may predict the efficacy of a selective serotonin re-​uptake inhibitor (SSRI) in
          the use of visceral pain, a finding particular poignant in current GI practice where SSRIs
          have been investigated for their utility in relieving IBS symptoms (Farmer & Ruffle, 2015;
          Tack et al., 2006).

          5.8.3  Autonomic      physiology
          Abnormalities in the activity of the ANS are apparent in numerous GI disorders, many
          of which are associated with perturbation in visceral interoception processes (fre-
          quently pain). These clinical disorders specific to the GI tract include functional chest
          pain, IBS, inflammatory bowel disease, and Ehlers–​Danlos syndrome (Bonaz et  al.,
 91




                                                 Inter-individual factors in visceral interoception     91


      2013; De Wandele et al., 2014; Hoff et al., 2016; Ruffle et al., 2015a; Ruffle et al., 2018;
      Spaziani et  al., 2008). Over the last decade, accumulating evidence has suggested an
      anti-​nociceptive role for the PNS whereby many of these aforementioned disorders ex-
      hibit a paucity of baseline vagal tone when compared to healthy controls (Botha et al.,
      2015; Farmer et al., 2014a). The exact mechanism by which abnormal function of the
      vagus may lead to anti-​nociception is not yet known, although it has been proposed to
      have an anti-​nociceptive and anti-​inflammatory function (Farmer et  al., 2016; Ruffle
      et al., 2017a).
         Baseline autonomic function is an additional important variable to account for in un-
      derstanding the brain processing of visceral interoceptive stimuli. With structural neuro-
      imaging, it has been shown that cortical thickness of the mid-​cingulate cortex correlates
      with degree of resting parasympathetic activity, quantified by heart rate variability (HRV)
      (Winkelmann et al., 2016). Meanwhile, using fMRI it has additionally been shown that
      activity in the ACC and cerebellum correlates with vagal tone (Kano et al., 2014). Using
      vertex analysis, it has recently been reported that the shapes of subcortical nuclei are
      influenced by both the resting SNS and PNS tone of an individual (Ruffle et al., 2018).
      Specifically, SNS was positively correlated to outward shape changes of the brainstem,
      nucleus accumbens, amygdala, and pallidum, whilst PNS vagal tone was negatively
      correlated to inward shape changes of the amygdala and pallidum. Furthermore, vagal
      tone was correlated to total volume of the brainstem and the putamen. Needless to say, it
      is clear that baseline autonomic function in an individual influences their processing of
      visceral neural signals.

      5.8.4 Psychophysiological
      The emotional and affective dimension of a visceral signal, especially a threat such as
      pain, is a key aspect to its cognitive interpretation. Psychophysiological factors such
      as personality traits have historically been thought highly important in the cognitive
      processes underpinning processing a threat such as pain (Harkins, Price, & Braith,
      1989). However, in the context of the viscera, the influence of personality has only rela-
      tively recently been studied. Using mechanical esophageal distension in induce visceral
      pain, it has been shown with fMRI that personality, anxiety, negative emotion, and so-
      ciability influence central brain processing of anticipation and actual visceral pain (Coen
      et al., 2008; Coen et al., 2011; Kumari et al., 2007; Paine et al., 2009a; Paine et al., 2009b;
      Ruffle et al., 2015b).
         During a study by Coen and colleagues, in anticipation to visceral pain, higher neu-
      roticism scores were associated with greater activity in the thalamus, parahippocampal
      gyrus, and ACC, but these regions had lower activity during visceral pain proper. These
      regions are previously attributed to the emotional and cognitive appraisal of pain, but
      it is thought that these findings may reflect the neurotic individual’s tendency to a
      heightened arousal during pain anticipation yet an avoidance coping response during
      pain (Coen et  al., 2011). Notably, neuroticism has strong ties to IBS also and is a
      risk factor for unexplained chronic abdominal pain in the disorder (Hazlett-​Stevens
92




     92   The neurobiology of gut feelings


          et al., 2003). Referring to extraversion, in a follow-​up study it was shown that during
          both pain anticipation and visceral pain, a higher degree of extraversion was asso-
          ciated with greater activity to the right insula, which may link to the sympathetic-​
          predominant response to threat which higher extraversion individuals display (Ruffle
          et al., 2015b).

          5.8.5 Microbiota
          The human microbiota is a diverse and dynamic ecosystem within the GI tract, which
          has evolved to be symbiotic to the host. An estimated 1014 microorganisms populate the
          adult gut (Ley, Peterson, & Gordon, 2006). Whilst sterile prenatally, inoculation occurs
          vertically during birth, and over the course of the first year of life it is fully established.
          Throughout an individual’s life, this ecosystem is determined by genetics, diet, and en-
          vironment (Dominguez-​Bello et  al., 2011). The microbiota protects the body from ex-
          ternal pathogens, aids in digestion and metabolism, and additionally acts as a source
          for neurochemicals in numerous bodily processes, including neural transmission.
          As an example, the microbiota is responsible for 95% of bodily serotonin (Sommer &
          Backhed, 2013).
             The microbiota has formed an interesting area of GI research in recent years,
          culminating in the suggestion that it forms an aspect in bi-​directional brain–​gut axis
          communication; the brain influences the microbiota, and the microbiota influences the
          brain (Figure 5.4) (De Vadder et al., 2014). The central nervous system can influence the
          GI microbiota composition (a) directly, for example by means of neurotransmitter release
          (e.g. serotonin) from enterochromaffin cells, neurones, and immune cells, or (b)  indi-
          rectly, by fluctuations in GI motility and secretions by autonomic tone (this subsequently
          affecting blood flow and nutrient availability for said microbiota) (Rhee, Pothoulakis, &
          Mayer, 2009).
             To investigate the effect of microbiota on the brain, studies have largely relied on the
          premise of sterility in prenatal animals and maintenance in sterile environments postna-
          tally (see Cryan & Dinan, 2012; Cryan & O’Mahony, 2011). Using these methods, groups
          have shown that the microbiota affect the central nervous system by affecting behavioral
          traits in animals, accompanied by changes in neurotrophic factors such as brain-​derived
          neurotrophic factor (BDNF) in regions such as the hippocampus (Bercik et  al., 2011).
          Numerous animal examples are apparent (Cryan & Dinan, 2012; Cryan & O’Mahony,
          2011; Farmer, Randall, & Aziz, 2014b).
             In GI disease, it is also thought that changes to the gut microbiota may play an im-
          portant role. The frequent comorbidity of mood disorders in GI disorders, including
          both IBS and coeliac disease, has been proposed in part due to changes in the micro-
          biota. Furthermore, microbiota may perturb the brain–​gut axis, one poignant example
          being that of post-​infection IBS (Spiller & Lam, 2012). The concept of the microbiota
          influencing the neurobiology of gut feelings is an exciting and developing field expected
          to reveal significant developments for our understanding of the GI microbiota and its im-
          pact on interoception (Farmer et al., 2014b; Rhee et al., 2009).
 93




                                                     Inter-individual factors in visceral interoception    93



                                            Mood, cognition
                                              & emotion



               Hypothalamus
                       CRF
                  Pituitary



                   ACTH                                     Vagus nerve




                   Adrenals
                                                                                             Systemic
                                                                                            circulation
                                     Cytokines




                  Cortisol




                                                 Gastrointestinal lumen

       Gastrointestinal microbiota                                                     Neurotransmitters



      Figure 5.4 Bidirectional brain–​gut–​microbiota pathways. Multiple pathways, including but not
      limited to neural, endocrine, and immune, exist in which the gastrointestinal microbiota may
      modulate the brain. Abbreviations: ACTH, adrenocorticotrophic hormone; CRF, corticotrophin
      releasing hormone.


      5.8.6  Combining        factors to form complex endophenotypes
      One future direction of this research area is the possibility of combining these factors
      to form visceral “endophenotypes” as a form of statistical dimension reduction of mul-
      tiple data arrays into a simpler construct (Tracey, 2011). Endophenotypes are measur-
      able components of a disease/​condition, which may include neuroanatomical or cognitive
      characteristics that have simpler ties to underpinning factors such as genetics. Clustering
      individuals into endophenotypes has been suggested as a means to aid identification of
      patients at risk for developing chronic pain.
         Using a group of healthy controls, it has been previously shown that more pain-​sensitive
      and pain-​resistant phenotypes do indeed exist, using arrays of physiological, psychophys-
      iological, and genetic data (Farmer et al., 2014a; Farmer et al., 2013). With data coalesced
94




     94   The neurobiology of gut feelings


          into two main clusters, individual’s in pain cluster 1, at baseline, show higher neuroti-
          cism and anxiety, a preponderance for the SS/​LS 5-​HTTLPR genotype, higher baseline
          sympathetic tone, lower parasympathetic tone, and higher serum cortisol. During pain
          however, this group tolerated it less, habituated less to the stimulus, showed a greater
          parasympathetic nervous system activation, a sympathetic nervous system withdrawal,
          and had an elevated serum cortisol. In contrast, pain cluster 2 at baseline showed higher
          extraversion but lower anxiety, a preponderance for the L/​L genotype, lower serum cor-
          tisol, a higher parasympathetic tone with low sympathetic tone. During pain however, the
          group tolerated the pain stimulus to a greater extent, displayed a greater habituation effect
          and a parasympathetic withdrawal coupled to a sympathetic activation. Using fMRI,
          individuals with high extraversion and low anxiety have been shown preferentially to
          activate the frontal cortex, insula, and left thalamus during pain in comparison to cluster
          1 individuals, see (Farmer et al., 2014a; Farmer et al., 2013). In a follow-​up study of this
          cohort, it has also recently been shown that visceral pain endophenotypes can be accu-
          rately predicted using machine learning with whole-​brain connectivity data with over
          85% accuracy (Ruffle et al., 2017b).

          5.9  Comparing gut feelings in health and disease
          5.9.1  Chronic pain
          Acute and chronic pain both have a distinct neurobiology, and indeed visceral pain is no
          exception. Some authorities have even called for chronic pain to be considered an indi-
          vidual disease entity (Tracey & Bushnell, 2009). Herein two common causes of chronic
          visceral pain will be discussed, IBS and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Both IBS and
          IBD are associated with altered interoception, and thus these conditions also demonstrate
          altered brain processing of acute visceral painful compared to healthy controls.

          5.9.2  Irritable   bowel syndrome
          IBS is one of the most often studied “functional” GI disorders with regards to neuroim-
          aging of visceral interoception in disease, in part attributable to its incomplete under-
          standing and high prevalence of between 5% and 20% (Farmer & Ruffle, 2015). IBS is
          more prevalent in women, and is associated with a significant socioeconomic burden by
          means of a reduction in health-​related quality of life, not least large healthcare costs from
          recurrent consultation and over-​investigation. It has been described as one of the most
          common persistent “pain syndromes,” where dysregulation of the aforementioned brain–​
          gut axis is a core aspect of the underpinning disorder. This in turn leads to the develop-
          ment of a visceral hypersensitivity state. Denoted by the Rome working group criteria,
          now in its fourth iteration, IBS patients by definition experience recurrent abdominal
          pain which improves with defecation (Drossman & Hasler, 2016).
            As discussed earlier in the chapter, there are three key networks in the processing
          of a visceral pain, the homeostatic-​afferent, the emotional arousal, and the cortical-​
          modulatory. In IBS, a disorder for which the presence of recurrent visceral pain is part
 95




                                                      Comparing gut feelings in health and disease       95


      of its very definition, the homeostatic-​afferent and emotional arousal networks dem-
      onstrate increased engagement (Tillisch & Labus, 2011). Because the pathophysiology
      of IBS has been difficult to understand, multiple groups have turned to neuroimaging
      as a means to investigate it. These studies have demonstrated that the majority of the
      visceral pain neuromatrix is activated as described earlier (Mayer et al., 2005), however,
      differences from healthy controls are apparent. A meta-​analysis has shown that patients
      with IBS display more consistent brain activation in emotional arousal network regions,
      including the pregenual ACC and amygdala, as well as brainstem regions implicated
      in the cortical-​modulatory aspects of descending analgesia (Tillisch, Mayer, & Labus,
      2011). Structural brain differences in IBS patients and controls have also been studied,
      revealing that IBS patients exhibit a decreased grey matter density (GMD) in many re-
      gions involved in visceral pain processing, including the thalamus, PFC, posterior pa-
      rietal cortex, and ventral striatum, but an increase in GMD in the ACC and OFC, areas
      involved in the cognitive and attentional aspects of visceral pain (Seminowicz et  al.,
      2010). Additionally, it is possible that increased anxiety in the IBS group also affects
      these findings (Seminowicz et al., 2010), not least the change in baseline autonomic tone
      (Ruffle et al., 2015a; Ruffle et al., 2018). It is possible that duration of disease (Blankstein
      et al., 2010) or indeed important inter-​individual factors influence such results. Further
      research is certainly warranted.
        It is also possible to investigate white matter tract differences between chronic vis-
      ceral pain conditions and healthy controls, by means of diffusion tensor imaging. Using
      probalistic tractography, a reduced structural connectivity was demonstrated in IBS
      patients between the amygdala and the dorsolateral PFC, possibly related to a decreased
      or insufficient inhibition of emotional arousal circuitry leading to amplification of the
      visceral pain experience (Labus et al., 2010). Notably, healthy control studies investigating
      brain white matter have shown a complex neural network for visceral pain including the
      insula, thalamus, ACC, PFC, SI, and SII (Moisset et  al., 2010). However, the degree of
      white matter connectivity between these regions has been shown to be highly variable,
      most likely due to inter-​individual variability factors (Moisset et  al., 2010). Lastly, the
      influence of genetic factors on the processing of visceral interoceptive signals in healthy
      individuals was discussed in section 5.8.6 with specific reference to the 5-​HTTLPR. This
      polymorphic region has also been studied in the context of IBS, whereby it has been
      shown that the S/​S genotype corresponded to decreased IBS symptoms, whilst the LS/​SS
      genotype was associated both with increased pain ratings in one study (Camilleri et al.,
      2008), but also the severity of symptoms as a whole in another (Colucci et al., 2013).

      5.9.3  Inflammatory       bowel disease
      IBD refers to both ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn’s disease (CD) which are chronic
      GI disorders frequently accompanied by abdominal pain. The neurobiology of this pain
      has been investigated by some groups. Using positron emission tomography and painful
      mechanical rectal distension, it has been shown that UC patients, whilst showing brain
      region activity comparable to the aforementioned pain neuromatrix including the ACC,
96




     96   The neurobiology of gut feelings


          insula, and PAG, also show greater activity in the frontal cortex and PAG circuits (Mayer
          et al., 2005). Interestingly, when comparing IBD to IBS cohorts, IBD patients additionally
          show greater activity in the pons and PAG in comparison to IBS patients. Conversely, IBS
          patients display greater activity in the ACC, PFC, and amygdala in comparison to UC
          patients (Tillisch & Labus, 2011). These findings may suggest that in IBS there is greater
          involvement of emotional arousal circuits to visceral pain, whilst UC patients appear to
          show greater activity of regions involved in descending analgesia (such as the PAG).

          5.10 Conclusion
          The neurobiology of gut feelings is a complex and ever-​evolving field of interoception.
          Ascending signalling pathways include neural, humoral, neuroimmune, and endocrine,
          and culminate with intricate brain networks specific to a specific visceral state, including
          those of visceral pain, hunger, and nausea. With the brain–​gut axis, a bi-​directional com-
          munication between gut and brain is permitted to ensure gastrointestinal homeostasis,
          and to that end, inter-​individual factors including genetics, demographic, the psycho-
          physiological, and the neurophysiological influence its regulation at an individual level.
          Furthermore, this neurobiology is perturbed in common GI disorders such as IBS and
          IBD. Future avenues of visceral interoception research should further interrogate these
          inter-​individual factors thus far identified, including autonomic neurophysiology and gut
          microbiota, and indeed how these interact with one another.

          References
          Altschuler, S. M., Bao, X. M., Bieger, D., Hopkins, D. A., and Miselis, R. R. (1989). Viscerotopic
              representation of the upper alimentary tract in the rat: Sensory ganglia and nuclei of the solitary and
              spinal trigeminal tracts. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 283(2), 248–​68.
          Apkarian, A. V., Bushnell, M. C., Treede, R. D., and Zubieta, J. K. (2005). Human brain mechanisms of
              pain perception and regulation in health and disease. European Journal of Pain, 9(4), 463–​84.
          Aziz, Q., Andersson, J. L., Valind, S., Sundin, A., Hamdy, S., Jones, A. K., et al. (1997). Identification
              of human brain loci processing esophageal sensation using positron emission tomography.
              Gastroenterology, 113,  50–​59.
          Aziz, Q. and Thompson, D. G. (1998). Brain–​gut axis in health and disease. Gastroenterology, 114(3),
              559–​78.
          Aziz, Q., Thompson, D. G., Ng, V. W., Hamdy, S., Sarkar, S., Brammer, M. J., et al. (2000). Cortical
              processing of human somatic and visceral sensation. Journal of Neuroscience, 20(7), 2657–​63.
          Babaei, A., Siwiec, R. M., Kern, M., Douglas Ward, B., Li, S. J., and Shaker, R. (2013). Intrinsic
              functional connectivity of the brain swallowing network during subliminal esophageal acid
              stimulation. Neurogastroenterology and Motility, 25(12), 992–​e779.
          Bantick, S. J., Wise, R. G., Ploghaus, A., Clare, S., Smith, S. M., and Tracey, I. (2002). Imaging how
              attention modulates pain in humans using functional MRI. Brain, 125(Pt 2), 310–​19.
          Bercik, P., Denou, E., Collins, J., Jackson, W., Lu, J., Jury, J., et al. (2011). The intestinal microbiota
              affect central levels of brain-​derived neurotropic factor and behavior in mice. Gastroenterology,
              141(2), 599–​609, 609 e1–​3.
          Berman, S. M., Naliboff, B. D., Suyenobu, B., Labus, J. S., Stains, J., Ohning, G., et al. (2008). Reduced
              brainstem inhibition during anticipated pelvic visceral pain correlates with enhanced brain response
 97




                                                                                                    References      97


         to the visceral stimulus in women with irritable bowel syndrome. Journal of Neuroscience, 28(2),
         349–​59.
      Bishop, S., Duncan, J., Brett, M., and Lawrence, A. D. (2004). Prefrontal cortical function and
         anxiety: Controlling attention to threat-​related stimuli. Nature Neuroscience, 7(2),  184–​8.
      Blankstein, U., Chen, J., Diamant, N. E., and Davis, K. D. (2010). Altered brain structure in
         irritable bowel syndrome: Potential contributions of pre-​existing and disease-​driven factors.
         Gastroenterology, 138(5), 1783–​9.
      Bonaz, B., Picq, C., Sinniger, V., Mayol, J. F., and Clarencon, D. (2013). Vagus nerve stimulation: From
         epilepsy to the cholinergic anti-​inflammatory pathway. Neurogastroenterology and Motility, 25(3),
         208–​21.
      Botha, C., Farmer, A. D., Nilsson, M., Brock, C., Gavrila, A. D., Drewes, A. M., et al. (2015).
         Preliminary report: Modulation of parasympathetic nervous system tone influences oesophageal
         pain hypersensitivity. Gut, 64(4), 611–​17.
      Browning, K. N. and Travagli, R. A. (2011). Plasticity of vagal brainstem circuits in the control of
         gastrointestinal function. Autonomic Neuroscience, 161(1–​2),  6–​13.
      Camilleri, M., Busciglio, I., Carlson, P., McKinzie, S., Burton, D., Baxter, K., et al. (2008). Candidate
         genes and sensory functions in health and irritable bowel syndrome. American Journal of
         Physiology–​Gastrointestinal and Liver Physiology, 295(2), G219–​25.
      Carrive, P. and Bandler, R. (1991). Viscerotopic organization of neurons subserving hypotensive
         reactions within the midbrain periaqueductal grey: A correlative functional and anatomical study.
         Brain Research, 541(2), 206–​15.
      Ceunen, E., Vlaeyen, J. W., and Van Diest, I. (2016). On the origin of interoception. Froniers in
         Psychology, 7, 743.
      Coen, S. J., Gregory, L. J., Yaguez, L., Amaro Jr., E., Brammer, M., Williams, S. C., et al. (2007).
         Reproducibility of human brain activity evoked by esophageal stimulation using functional magnetic
         resonance imaging. American Journal of Physiology, Gastrointestinal and Liver Physiology, 293, G188–​97.
      Coen, S. J., Aziz, Q., Yaguez, L., Brammer, M., Williams, S. C., and Gregory, L. J. (2008). Effects of
         attention on visceral stimulus intensity encoding in the male human brain. Gastroenterology, 135(6),
         2065–​74, 2074 e1.
      Coen, S. J., Kano, M., Farmer, A. D., Kumari, V., Giampietro, V., Brammer, M., et al. (2011).
         Neuroticism influences brain activity during the experience of visceral pain. Gastroenterology,
         141(3), 909–​17 e1.
      Coen, S. J., Hobson, A. R. and Aziz, Q. (2012). Processing of Gastrointestinal Sensory Signals in the
         Brain. In: L. R. Johnson (ed.), Physiology of the Gastronintestinal Tract, 5th edn. Oxford: Academic
         Press, pp. 689–​702.
      Colucci, R., Gambaccini, D., Ghisu, N., Rossi, G., Costa, F., Tuccori, M., et al. (2013). Influence of the
         serotonin transporter 5HTTLPR polymorphism on symptom severity in irritable bowel syndrome.
         PLoS One, 8(2), e54831.
      Craig, A. D., Bushnell, M. C., Zhang, E. T., and Blomqvist, A. (1994). A thalamic nucleus specific for
         pain and temperature sensation. Nature, 372(6508),  770–​3.
      Craig, A. D. (2002). How do you feel? Interoception: The sense of the physiological condition of the
         body. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 3(8), 655–​66.
      Craig, A. D. (2003). Pain mechanisms: Labeled lines versus convergence in central processing. Annual
         Review of Neuroscience, 26,  1–​30.
      Cryan, J. F. and O’Mahony, S. M. (2011). The microbiome–​gut–​brain axis: From bowel to behavior.
         Neurogastroenterology and Motility, 23(3), 187–​92.
      Cryan, J. F. and Dinan, T. G. (2012). Mind-​altering microorganisms: The impact of the gut microbiota
         on brain and behaviour. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 13(10), 701–​12.
98




     98   The neurobiology of gut feelings


          Dagher, A. (2009). The neurobiology of appetite: Hunger as addiction. International Journal of Obesity
              (London), 33 Suppl. 2, S30–​3.
          De Vadder, F., Kovatcheva-​Datchary, P., Goncalves, D., Vinera, J., Zitoun, C., Duchampt, A., et al.
              (2014). Microbiota-​generated metabolites promote metabolic benefits via gut-​brain neural circuits.
              Cell, 156(1–​2),  84–​96.
          De Wandele, I., Rombaut, L., Leybaert, L., Van de Borne, P., De Backer, T., Malfait, F., et al. (2014).
              Dysautonomia and its underlying mechanisms in the hypermobility type of Ehlers–​Danlos
              syndrome. Seminars in Arthritis and Rheumatism, 44(1), 93–​100.
          Derbyshire, S. W. (2003). A systematic review of neuroimaging data during visceral stimulation.
              American Journal of Gastroenterology, 98(1),  12–​20.
          Dominguez-​Bello, M. G., Blaser, M. J., Ley, R. E., and Knight, R. (2011). Development of the human
              gastrointestinal microbiota and insights from high-​throughput sequencing. Gastroenterology,
              140(6), 1713–​19.
          Drossman, D. A. and Hasler, W. L. (2016). Rome IV-​functional GI disorders: Disorders of gut–​brain
              interaction. Gastroenterology, 150(6), 1257–​61.
          Dunckley, P., Wise, R. G., Fairhurst, M., Hobden, P., Aziz, Q., Chang, L., et al, . (2005). A comparison
              of visceral and somatic pain processing in the human brainstem using functional magnetic
              resonance imaging. Journal of Neuroscience, 25(32), 7333–​41.
          Fairhurst, M., Wiech, K., Dunckley, P., and Tracey, I. (2007). Anticipatory brainstem activity predicts
              neural processing of pain in humans. Pain, 128(1–​2), 101–​10.
          Farmer, A. D., Coen, S. J., Kano, M., Paine, P. A., Shwahdi, M., Jafari, J., et al. (2013).
              Psychophysiological responses to pain identify reproducible human clusters. Pain, 154(11), 2266–​76.
          Farmer, A. D. and Aziz, Q. (2014). Mechanisms of visceral pain in health and functional
              gastrointestinal disorders. Scandinavian Journal of Pain, 5(2),  51–​60.
          Farmer, A. D., Coen, S. J., Kano, M., Naqvi, H., Paine, P. A., Scott, S. M., et al. (2014a).
              Psychophysiological responses to visceral and somatic pain in functional chest pain identify
              clinically relevant pain clusters. Neurogastroenterology and Motility, 26(1), 139–​48.
          Farmer, A. D., Randall, H. A., and Aziz, Q. (2014b). It’s a gut feeling: How the gut microbiota affects
              the state of mind. Journal of Physiology, 592(14), 2981–​8.
          Farmer, A. D. and Ruffle, J. K. (2015). Irritable bowel syndrome. Hamdan Medical Journal, 8(3).
          Farmer, A. D., Ban, V. F., Coen, S. J., Sanger, G. J., Barker, G. J., Gresty, M. A., et al. (2015). Visually
              induced nausea causes characteristic changes in cerebral, autonomic and endocrine function in
              humans. Journal of Physiology, 593(5), 1183–​96.
          Farmer, A. D., Albu-​Soda, A., and Aziz, Q. (2016). Vagus nerve stimulation in clinical practice. British
              Journal of Hospital Medicine (London), 77(11), 645–​51.
          Frokjaer, J. B., Bergmann, S., Brock, C., Madzak, A., Farmer, A. D., Ellrich, J., et al. (2016).
              Modulation of vagal tone enhances gastroduodenal motility and reduces somatic pain sensitivity.
              Neurogastroenterology and Motility, 28,  592–​8.
          Fukudo, S., Kanazawa, M., Mizuno, T., Hamaguchi, T., Kano, M., Watanabe, S., et al. (2009). Impact of
              serotonin transporter gene polymorphism on brain activation by colorectal distention. Neuroimage,
              47(3), 946–​51.
          Fukudo, S. and Kanazawa, M. (2011). Gene, environment, and brain–​gut interactions in irritable bowel
              syndrome. Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 26 Suppl 3, 110–​15.
          Gregory, L. J., Yaguez, L., Williams, S. C., Altmann, C., Coen, S. J., Ng, V., et al. (2003). Cognitive
              modulation of the cerebral processing of human oesophageal sensation using functional magnetic
              resonance imaging. Gut, 52(12), 1671–​7.
          Harkins, S. W., Price, D. D., and Braith, J. (1989). Effects of extraversion and neuroticism on
              experimental pain, clinical pain, and illness behavior. Pain, 36(2), 209–​18.
 9




                                                                                                      References      99


     Hazlett-​Stevens, H., Craske, M. G., Mayer, E. A., Chang, L., and Naliboff, B. D. (2003). Prevalence
        of irritable bowel syndrome among university students: The roles of worry, neuroticism, anxiety
        sensitivity and visceral anxiety. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 55(6),  501–​5.
     Hoff, D. A., Brock, C., Farmer, A. D., Dickman, R., Ruffle, J. K., Shaker, A., and Drewes, A. M. (2016).
        Pharmacological and other treatment modalities for esophageal pain. Annals of the New York
        Academy of Sciences, 1380(1),  58–​66.
     Holland, P. C. and Gallagher, M. (2004). Amygdala-​frontal interactions and reward expectancy. Current
        Opinions in Neurobiology, 14(2), 148–​55.
     Kano, M., Farmer, A. D., Aziz, Q., Giampietro, V., Brammer, M. J., Williams, S. C., et al. (2013).
        Sex differences in brain activity to anticipated and experienced visceral pain in healthy subjects.
        American Journal of Physiology–​Gastrointestinal and Liver Physiology, 304(8), G687–​99.
     Kano, M., Coen, S. J., Farmer, A. D., Aziz, Q., Williams, S. C., Alsop, D. C., et al. (2014). Physiological
        and psychological individual differences influence resting brain function measured by ASL
        perfusion. Brain Structure and Function, 219(5), 1673–​84.
     Kern, M. K. and Shaker, R. (2002). Cerebral cortical registration of subliminal visceral stimulation.
        Gastroenterology, 122(2),  290–​8.
     Kern, M., Chai, K., Lawal, A., and Shaker, R. (2009). Effect of esophageal acid exposure on the cortical
        swallowing network in healthy human subjects. American Journal of Physiology–​Gastrointestinal and
        Liver Physiology, 297(1), G152–​8.
     Kilpatrick, L. A., Mayer, E. A., Labus, J. S., Gupta, A., Hamaguchi, T., Mizuno, T., et al. (2015).
        Serotonin transporter gene polymorphism modulates activity and connectivity within an emotional
        arousal network of healthy men during an aversive visceral stimulus. PLoS One, 10(4), e0123183.
     Kringelbach, M. L. (2005). The human orbitofrontal cortex: Linking reward to hedonic experience.
        Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 6(9), 691–​702.
     Kulkarni, B., Bentley, D. E., Elliott, R., Youell, P., Watson, A., Derbyshire, S. W., et al. (2005). Attention
        to pain localization and unpleasantness discriminates the functions of the medial and lateral pain
        systems. European Journal of Neuroscience, 21(11), 3133–​42.
     Kumari, V., ffytche, D. H., Das, M., Wilson, G. D., Goswami, S., and Sharma, T. (2007). Neuroticism
        and brain responses to anticipatory fear. Behavioral Neurosciences, 121(4), 643–​52.
     Labus, J. S., Naliboff, B. N., Fallon, J., Berman, S. M., Suyenobu, B., Bueller, J. A., et al. (2008). Sex
        differences in brain activity during aversive visceral stimulation and its expectation in patients with
        chronic abdominal pain: A network analysis. Neuroimage, 41(3), 1032–​43.
     Labus, J. S., Vianna, E., Jarcho, J. M., Tillisch, K., Bueller, J. A., and Mayer, E. A. (2010). 858 reduced
        structural connectivity between amygdala and prefrontal cortex in patients with irritable bowel
        syndrome: A diffuse tensor imaging study. Gastroenterology, 138(5),  S-​118.
     Lechan, R. M. and Toni, R. (2016). Functional Anatomy of the Hypothalamus and Pituitary. South
        Dartmouth, MA: MDText.com.
     Ley, R. E., Peterson, D. A., and Gordon, J. I. (2006). Ecological and evolutionary forces shaping
        microbial diversity in the human intestine. Cell, 124(4), 837–​48.
     Mayer, E. A., Berman, S., Suyenobu, B., Labus, J., Mandelkern, M. A., Naliboff, B. D., and Chang,
        L. (2005). Differences in brain responses to visceral pain between patients with irritable bowel
        syndrome and ulcerative colitis. Pain, 115(3), 398–​409.
     Melzack, R. and Wall, P. D. (1965). Pain mechanisms: A new theory. Science, 150(3699),  971–​9.
     Miller, A. D., Nonaka, S., and Jakus, J. (1994). Brain areas essential or non-​essential for emesis. Brain
        Research, 647(2), 255–​64.
     Moisset, X., Bouhassira, D., Denis, D., Dominique, G., Benoit, C., and Sabate, J. M. (2010).
        Anatomical connections between brain areas activated during rectal distension in healthy
        volunteers: A visceral pain network. European Journal of Pain, 14(2),  142–​8.
10




     100   The neurobiology of gut feelings


           Omran, Y. A. and Aziz, Q. (2014). Functional brain imaging in gastroenterology: To new beginnings.
               Nature Reviews Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 11(9), 565–​76.
           Paine, P., Kishor, J., Worthen, S. F., Gregory, L. J., and Aziz, Q. (2009a). Exploring relationships for
               visceral and somatic pain with autonomic control and personality. Pain, 144(3), 236–​44.
           Paine, P., Worthen, S. F., Gregory, L. J., Thompson, D. G., and Aziz, Q. (2009b). Personality differences
               affect brainstem autonomic responses to visceral pain. Neurogastroenterology and Motility, 21(11),
               1155–​e98.
           Pezawas, L., Meyer-​Lindenberg, A., Drabant, E. M., Verchinski, B. A., Munoz, K. E., Kolachana, B.
               S., et al. R. (2005). 5-​HTTLPR polymorphism impacts human cingulate-​amygdala interactions: A
               genetic susceptibility mechanism for depression. Nature Neurosciences, 8(6), 828–​34.
           Ploghaus, A., Narain, C., Beckmann, C. F., Clare, S., Bantick, S., Wise, R., et al. (2001). Exacerbation
               of pain by anxiety is associated with activity in a hippocampal network. Journal of Neuroscience,
               21(24), 9896–​903.
           Ploner, M., Lee, M. C., Wiech, K., Bingel, U., and Tracey, I. (2011). Flexible cerebral connectivity
               patterns subserve contextual modulations of pain. Cerebral Cortex, 21(3), 719–​26.
           Rhee, S. H., Pothoulakis, C., and Mayer, E. A. (2009). Principles and clinical implications of the brain–​
               gut -​enteric microbiota axis. Nature Reviews Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 6(5), 306–​14.
           Ruffle, J., Shah, M., Monro, J., and Julu, P. (2015a). Pattern of dysautonomia in patients with functional
               gastrointestinal disorders. Autonomic Neuroscience: Basic and Clinical, 192(Complete), 119.
           Ruffle, J. K., Farmer, A. D., Kano, M., Giampietro, V., Aziz, Q., and Coen, S. J. (2015b). The influence
               of extraversion on brain activity at baseline and during the experience and expectation of visceral
               pain. Personality and Individual Differences, 74(0), 248–​53.
           Ruffle, J. K., Coen, S. J., Giampietro, V., Williams, S. C. R., Farmer, A. D., and Aziz, Q. (2017a).
               Higher baseline cardiac vagal tone implicates a subcortical functional brain network during acute
               oesophageal pain. Neurogastroenterology and Motility, 29((Suppl. 2)),  47–​8.
           Ruffle, J. K., Coen, S. J., Giampietro, V., Williams, S. C. R., Farmer, A. D., and Aziz, Q. (2017b). OC-​
               054 Pain endophenotypes can be accurately predicted by whole brain connectivity during painful
               oesophageal stimulation. Gut, 66(Suppl. 2), A28.
           Ruffle, J. K., Coen, S. J., Giampietro, V., Williams, S. C. R., Apkarian, A. V., Farmer, A. D., et al.
               (2018). Morphology of subcortical brain nuclei is associated with autonomic function in healthy
               humans. Human Brain Mapping, January 39(1), 381–​92.
           Sanger, G. J. and Andrews, P. L. (2006). Treatment of nausea and vomiting: Gaps in our knowledge.
               Autonomic Neuroscience, 129(1–​2),  3–​16.
           Schaub, N., Kano, M., Farmer, A. D., Aziz, Q., and Coen, S. J. (2013). Su2109 The Influence of the 5-​
               HTTLPR Genotype on the cerebral processing of esophageal pain—​A pilot study. Gastroenterology,
               144(5),  S-​560.
           Seminowicz, D. A., Labus, J. S., Bueller, J. A., Tillisch, K., Naliboff, B. D., Bushnell, M. C., et al.
               (2010). Regional gray matter density changes in brains of patients with irritable bowel syndrome.
               Gastroenterology, 139(1), 48–​57 e2.
           Sommer, F. and Backhed, F. (2013). The gut microbiota—​Masters of host development and physiology.
               Nature Reviews Microbiology, 11(4), 227–​38.
           Spaziani, R., Bayati, A., Redmond, K., Bajaj, H., Mazzadi, S., Bienenstock, J., et al. (2008). Vagal
               dysfunction in irritable bowel syndrome assessed by rectal distension and baroreceptor sensitivity.
               Neurogastroenterology and Motility, 20(4), 336–​42.
           Spiller, R. and Lam, C. (2012). An update on post-​infectious irritable bowel syndrome: Role of genetics,
               immune activation, serotonin and altered microbiome. Journal of Neurogastroenterology and
               Motility, 18(3), 258–​68.
 10




                                                                                                       References      101


      Stein, J. L., Wiedholz, L. M., Bassett, D. S., Weinberger, D. R., Zink, C. F., Mattay, V. S., et al. (2007). A
          validated network of effective amygdala connectivity. Neuroimage, 36(3), 736–​45.
      Tack, J., Bisschops, R., and Sarnelli, G. (2004). Pathophysiology and treatment of functional dyspepsia.
          Gastroenterology, 127(4), 1239–​55.
      Tack, J., Broekaert, D., Fischler, B., Van Oudenhove, L., Gevers, A. M., and Janssens, J. (2006). A
          controlled crossover study of the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor citalopram in irritable bowel
          syndrome. Gut, 55(8), 1095–​103.
      Tillisch, K. and Labus, J. S. (2011). Advances in imaging the brain–​gut axis: Functional gastrointestinal
          disorders. Gastroenterology, 140(2), 407–​11 e1.
      Tillisch, K., Mayer, E. A., and Labus, J. S. (2011). Quantitative meta-​analysis identifies brain regions
          activated during rectal distension in irritable bowel syndrome. Gastroenterology, 140(1), 91–​100.
      Tracey, I., Ploghaus, A., Gati, J. S., Clare, S., Smith, S., Menon, R. S., et al. (2002). Imaging attentional
          modulation of pain in the periaqueductal gray in humans. Journal of Neuroscience, 22(7), 2748–​52.
      Tracey, I. and Bushnell, M. C. (2009). How neuroimaging studies have challenged us to rethink: Is
          chronic pain a disease? Journal of Pain, 10(11), 1113–​20.
      Tracey, I. (2011). Can neuroimaging studies identify pain endophenotypes in humans? Nature Reviews
          Neurology, 7(3), 173–​81.
      Van Oudenhove, L., Coen, S. J., and Aziz, Q. (2007). Functional brain imaging of gastrointestinal
          sensation in health and disease. World Journal of Gastroenterology, 13(25), 3438–​45.
      Winkelmann, T., Thayer, J. F., Pohlack, S., Nees, F., Grimm, O., and Flor, H. (2016). Structural brain
          correlates of heart rate variability in a healthy young adult population. Brain Structure and Function,
          222(2), 1061–​8.
102




                 Chapter 6

                 The cutaneous borders
                 of interoception: Active and social
                 inference of pain and pleasure on
                 the skin
                 Mariana von Mohr and Aikaterini Fotopoulou



      6.1 Introduction
      Humans are capable of conscious feelings that concern the state of the body, such as
      pain, itch, muscular and visceral sensations, hunger, thirst, sexual desire, and air need.
      The classification of such feelings, and particularly their relation to the more classical
      sensory systems for vision, audition, and touch, as well as to emotions such as anger and
      happiness, has been a matter of ongoing debate. Unlike sight, smell, and hearing that
      have dedicated sensory organs, there are no dedicated bodily organs for position and
      movement sense, pain, and many other modalities. Instead, developments in physics,
      anatomy, and physiology since the nineteenth century have given rise to a wide interest
      in mapping and classifying the senses with reference to criteria such as the nature of the
      stimulus, anatomy and location of receptors across body parts, the pathways to and the
      representation of the signal at the central nervous system (CNS), as well as the quality of
      the experience. This interest led to a number of classifications of the senses; for example,
      in exteroceptive (their receptive field “lies freely open to the numberless vicissitudes
      and agencies of the environment” Sherrington, 1910, p.  132), interoceptive (sensory
      receptors located within the body and primarily in the viscera), and proprioceptive
      sensations (receptors in muscles, tendons, and joints detecting position and movement
      of the body). Since this influential classification (see Ceunen, Vlaeyen, & Van Diest, 2016
      for a review), exteroceptive and proprioceptive systems have received far more attention
      than interoceptive modalities. However, as this volume exemplifies, this has changed
      in the two last decades. On the one hand, theories and studies in affective neurosci-
      ence (e.g. Damasio, 2010)  have brought to the foreground William James’s older idea
      that interoceptive sensations may lie at the heart of our emotions and self-​awareness.
      On the other hand, progress in anatomy and physiology has urged certain researchers
      (e.g. Craig, 2002) to propose alternative classifications of the senses that include a more
      encompassing definition of interoception as the sense of the physiological condition of
      the entire body, not just the viscera.
 103




                                                                                    Introduction     103


          Bud Craig’s proposal relies in synthesizing findings regarding the functional anatomy
       of a lamina I spinothalamocortical pathway that is portrayed as the long-​missing afferent
       complement of the efferent autonomic nervous system, underlying distinct, conscious,
       affective bodily feelings such as cool, warm, itch, first (pricking) pain, second (burning)
       pain, pleasant or sensual touch, muscle burn, joint ache, visceral fullness, flush, nausea,
       cramps, hunger, thirst, and visceral taste (Craig, 2002). Specifically, he proposes that
       the primate brain has evolved a direct sensory pathway to the thalamus that provides a
       modality-​specific representation of various individual aspects of the physiological con-
       dition of the body (interoception redefined; Craig 2002, 2003a). This pathway is thought
       to originate in lamina I of the spinal dorsal horn and in the nucleus of the solitary tract
       in the caudal medulla, and to represent the afferent inputs from sympathetic (somatic)
       and parasympathetic nerves, respectively, and to terminate with a posterior-​to-​anterior
       somatotopic organization in a specific thalamic structure (the posterior and basal parts of
       the ventral medial nucleus, Craig 2002). He has further proposed that the functional role
       of this pathway is to represent the sensory aspects of homeostatic emotions (Craig 2003a,
       2008)  and their accompanying motivations (represented in anterior cingulate cortex)
       that serve to maintain the body in relative stability despite ongoing internal and external
       changes (e.g. variabilities in metabolic energy levels and the availability of food). This
       proposal brings the concept of interoception into a tight relation to the notion of home-
       ostasis (Cannon, 1929, see also Chapter 1 and Chapter 15 by Corcoran and Jakob Hohwy
       in the present volume), so that interoception is the sensory representation of the phys-
       iological condition of the whole body allowing homeostatic, and ultimately ‘allostatic’
       control (i.e. self-​initiated temporary change in homeostatic imperatives to prepare for
       a predicted external change). In other words, interoceptive signals provide information
       regarding current homeostatic levels (e.g. reduced glucose levels in the blood), which
       are used as motivations to steer action (e.g. ingest food to restore glucose levels). This
       definition of interoception, which subsumes cutaneous pain, itch, and pleasant touch,
       differs greatly from the classic association of these modalities with exteroception and
       particularly discriminatory touch. Moreover, in addition to this “spinal pathway,” there
       are also other proposed interoceptive pathways (Critchley & Harrison, 2013), and more
       broad proposals regarding the role of higher order processing in interoception (Ceunen
       et al., 2016).
          We will here focus on pleasant touch and cutaneous pain, which are two interoceptive
       (Craig, 2003a, 2003b) sub-​modalities of touch that have contrasting affective qualities
       (pleasantness/​unpleasantness) and social meanings (care/​harm). Although the source of
       the skin stimulation lies outside the body and the resulting sensations can be used to gain
       information about how, where, and by what one is touched, we also assume that these
       modalities are of fundamental homeostatic importance, signalling physiological safety
       (i.e. the pleasantness of touch signifies a homeostatically safe environment in is contact
       with the body) or threat (i.e. pain signifies the reverse) to the organism and leading to
       certain behavioral and physiological reactions of homeostatic and allostatic significance.
       In the present chapter, we first briefly outline the current literature on the peripheral
104




      104   The cutaneous borders of interoception


            and central neurophysiology of unpleasant, cutaneous pain and affective, pleasant touch.
            Subsequently, we make use of recent neurocomputational theories of perception and
            action, as applied to both exteroceptive and interoceptive modalities, to put forward a
            unifying model of how bottom-​up and top-​down signals can be integrated to give rise
            to these modalities. We speculate that the understanding of these modalities within the
            Bayesian predictive coding framework of “active inference” (Friston, 2010) offers a unique
            opportunity to unify various insights into a common framework that emphasizes partic-
            ularly: (a) the deep interdependence between bottom-​up and top-​down mechanisms in
            any modality; (b) the deep interdependence of perception and action in any modality;
            (c) the special role of these modalities in homeostatic and allostatic control; and (d) the
            particular relevance of social developmental factors in determining the salience of inter-
            oceptive modalities such as pain and pleasant touch.


            6.2  The peripheral and central neurophysiology
            of cutaneous pain and pleasant touch
            Surrogate animal models and human studies have revealed that nociceptors are distinc-
            tive afferent units rather than the extremes of a single class of receptors with a continuum
            of features (reviewed by Marks et al., 2006). While low-​threshold, mechanoreceptive, or
            thermoreceptive afferent neurons cannot discriminate reliably between noxious and non-​
            noxious (innocuous) stimulation, nociceptors can (Bessou et al., 1971). These two classes
            of fibers also differ in their termination patterns in the spinal cord (Sugiura, Lee, & Perl,
            1986), their membrane constituents (Caterina et al., 1997), and properties, including their
            action potential shape (Ritter & Mendell, 1992). Broadly, nociceptors can be divided into
            two types: A-​(most in the Aδ-​range) and C-​fibers, which are mediated by myelinated fast
            (5–​30 m/​s) and unmyelinated slow (0.4–​1.4m/​s) conductive axons (Dubin & Patapoutian,
            2010), corresponding to initial fast-​onset pain (sharp pain sensation) and slow second
            pain (pervasive burning pain sensation), respectively. Nociceptors, particularly in mus-
            culoskeletal tissue, have been mostly thought to be electrically ‘silent’, transmitting all or
            no action potentials only when excited, and thus give rise to pain (Marks et al., 2006).
               Different pathways on how the nociceptor is conveyed to the CNS have been suggested,
            including different spinal neural features and their functional role. First, it is thought
            that an afferent volley is produced upon activation of the nociceptor. The nociceptive
            volley travels along the periphery and enters the dorsal horn of the spinal cord (Brooks &
            Tracey, 2005) and mostly terminates in laminae I where they synapse with relay neurons
            and local interneurons important for signal modification (see Dubin & Patapoutian, 2010
            for the specific role of laminae I, IV, and V in relation to A-​and C-​fibers). Via spinal
            ascending pathways, the relay neurons project to the thalamus and brainstem, which in
            turn project to large distributed brain networks (Dubin & Patapoutian, 2010). However, a
            different type of multimodal spinal neurons located deeper in the dorsal horn, namely the
            wide dynamic (WDR) neurons, has also been implicated in nociceptive and pain-​related
            mechanisms (Perl, 2007).
 105




              The peripheral and central neurophysiology of cutaneous pain and pleasant touch           105


          More generally, peripheral neurophysiological specificity does not seem to lead to a
       direct relation between nociception and conscious pain perception. While the activa-
       tion of nociceptors and nociceptive pathways can lead to pain (Marks et al., 2006), it is
       also known that nociceptors can be active in the absence of pain perception and pain
       can occur without known nociceptive activity. Indeed, there have been observations of
       a lack of reported pain by soldiers during battle, despite severe injuries, as well as ex-
       perimental evidence suggesting that pain perception varies with psychological state and
       context (Head & Holmes, 1911; Melzack, Wall, & Ty, 1982). In fact, since the proposal of
       the influential “gate control theory” (inhibition of nociceptive excitatory signalling at the
       level of the spinal cord), and more recent insights regarding the heightened sensitivity of
       afferent signals at the same level, known as “central sensitization,” it is widely accepted
       that although much pain is a consequence of stimulation of peripheral nociceptors, the
       CNS plays a major role in the processing of noxious sensations (Melzack & Wall, 1965).
          Furthermore, more potent neuroscientific methods in recent decades have provided
       corroborating evidence for the role of the brain in pain (Rainville et al., 1997; Ploghaus
       et al., 1999; Ploner, Freund, & Schnitzler, 1999). For example, novel cortical stimulation
       studies have qualified Penfield’s inability to detect ‘pain cortical areas’ (Mazzola et  al.,
       2011). Moreover, functional neuroimaging studies indicate that noxious stimulation
       involves large distributed brain networks (Brooks & Tracey, 2005; Talbot et al., 1991). The
       so-​called pain matrix has been subdivided into a medial and lateral pain system, based
       on their respective projection sites from the thalamic structures to the cortex. The lateral
       pain system involves the S1 and secondary somatosensory cortex (S2) and is thought to
       play a role in the sensory-​discriminative aspect of pain (i.e. where is the stimulus and how
       intense it is), whereas the medial pain system, including areas such as the AAC, the in-
       sula, and the amygdala, is thought to be involved in the affective-​cognitive aspect of pain.
       However, the insular cortex may play a role in facilitating the integration of information
       between the lateral and medial pain systems (Brooks & Tracey, 2005) and some studies
       suggest that the functional role of these areas may not be pain-​specific but rather relating
       to the processing of all sensory-​salient events (see Legrain et al., 2011). Nevertheless, it
       is assumed that a top-​down descending circuitry modulates ascending nociceptive infor-
       mation and consequently, influences pain perception. Hence, scientific and health organ-
       izations such as the International Association for the Study of Pain stress the difference
       between nociception and pain. However, debates regarding the bottom-​up versus the top-​
       down contributions to pain and their corresponding definitions remain. Similar debates
       surround the study of pleasant touch.
          Recent research suggests that slow conducting unmyelinated (non-​              nociceptive)
       afferent CT fibers mediate the affective, pleasant component of touch. These C-​fiber tac-
       tile afferents were first identified in a cat in 1939 by showing low spike heights using
       the skin-​nerve preparation technique (Zotterman, 1939). More recently, low threshold
       mechanosensitive C-​fibers (C-​LTMs; detected by cutaneous sensory neurons, i.e. C-​low
       threshold mechanoreceptors, C-​LTMRs) have been found in the hairy skin of rodents and
       primates (Bessou et al., 1971). C-​LTMs are now acknowledged also to exist in human skin,
106




      106   The cutaneous borders of interoception


            termed CT afferents (Vallbo, Olausson, & Wessberg, 1999). CTs have different character-
            istics than myelinated fast conducting Aβ-​fibers associated with discriminative touch,
            including their conduction axon velocity (0.6–​1.3 m/​s) and skin location (i.e. found in
            hairy but not glabrous skin).
               Microneurography studies have shown that CTs are highly sensitive mechanoreceptors
            responding to stimuli that are clearly innocuous, and their firing rate seems to be dis-
            tinct from myelinated afferents, reflecting an inverted U-​shaped relationship between the
            stroking velocity and mean firing rate with the most vigorous responses being at 1–​10 cm/​
            s (Löken et  al., 2009). Moreover, subjective responses of perceived pleasantness in re-
            sponse to stroking also showed an inverted U-​shape relationship, with the highest pleas-
            antness responses found at 1–​10 cm/​s stroking velocities (Löken et al., 2009), indicating
            that CT afferents may carry a positive hedonic quality. Furthermore, CTs are also tem-
            perature sensitive (i.e. preferentially discharged ≈ 32°C, the typical skin temperature;
            Ackerley et  al., 2014). However, one main difficulty in our understanding of selective
            CT stimulation is related to the fact that to date, we cannot stimulate CT fibers without
            stimulating Aβ-​fibers in healthy subjects. Nevertheless, insights have been provided from
            patients with sensory neuropathy, as these patients are thought to lack Aβ afferents while
            their CTs afferents remain intact (Olausson et al., 2002, 2008). Research has shown that
            CT stimulation in these patients activates the insula (i.e. the preferential cortical target for
            CT afferents), but not somatosensory regions associated with the sensory discriminative
            processing of touch (Olausson et al., 2002). Moreover, these patients were able to detect,
            although poorly, slow brushing on the forearm (where CTs are abundant; Olausson et al.,
            2008). Given the sensory discriminative properties associated with Aβ-​fibers and the lack
            thereof in these patients, it is possible to presume that CT afferents may follow a separate
            neurophysiological route than Aβ mediated discriminative touch (Olausson et al., 2008).
               Unfortunately, our knowledge of how CTs peripheral information reaches spinal, brain-
            stem, and cortical areas in humans remains scarce, yet meaningful insights regarding the
            spinal processing of CTs have been obtained from animal studies. Mice studies suggest
            that C-​LTMS enter the laminae II of the dorsal horn, with axons arborizing in lamina
            I, where they would synapse with secondary afferent neurons (reviewed by McGlone,
            Wessberg, & Olausson, 2014). Secondary afferent neurons then project to higher centers
            such as the insula via spinal pathways (Andrew, 2010). Furthermore, as with pain, there
            could be different classes of spinal neurons responsive to gentle touch, including WDR
            neurons (Andrew, 2010). Finally, yet controversially, recent findings using mice ge-
            netic tools indicate the dorsal horn as the key initial focus for integration of Aβ and C-​
            LTMRs (Abraira & Ginty, 2013). Together, these lines of inquiry suggest that there may
            be different pathways through which CT peripheral information is conveyed to higher
            centers, although these pathways may likely vary across species.
               Similar to pain, neuroimaging research has shown that gentle stroking activates the
            posterior superior temporal sulcus, medial prefrontal cortex, orbitofrontal cortex (OFC),
            and ACC, which are typically implicated in the cognitive-​affective aspects of pleasant
            touch (Gordon et al., 2013). Further, while investigating the cortical areas that represent
 107




        An integration: The predictive, active and social components of pain and pleasant touch            107


       pleasant touch, painful touch, and neutral touch, studies have also found increased ac-
       tivity in the OFC in response to pleasant and painful touch, highlighting the role of the
       OFC on the affective aspects of the touch. In contrast, the somatosensory cortex was
       less activated by pleasant and painful touch, relative to neutral touch (Rolls et al., 2003;
       see also Gordon et al., 2013; Olausson et al., 2002). These studies suggest that CT-​based
       touch may not be involved in the discriminative aspects of touch. Importantly, slow gentle
       touch on CT skin has also been shown to preferentially activate the insula (Olausson
       et al., 2002; Gordon et al., 2013), although the insula also plays a critical role in integrating
       sensory-​discriminative and affective-​cognitive aspects of the touch (McCabe et al., 2008;
       Rolls, 2010).


       6.3  An integration: The predictive, active, and social
       components of pain and pleasant touch
       The history of the study of pain, and more recently of pleasant touch can be said to be
       steeped in the debates between bottom-​up, neurophysiological specificity at the periphery
       versus top-​down convergence and gating at the spinal and brain levels. In this section, we
       make use of a Bayesian, predictive coding framework, namely the Free Energy Principle,
       also referred to as “active inference” (Friston, 2010) to put forward a unifying model of
       how bottom-​up and top-​down signals can be integrated to give rise to affective, pleasant
       touch and unpleasant, cutaneous pain.

       6.3.1  Action–​perception        loops and the control
       of physiological states
       Recent neurocomputational theories of perception and action assume that the brain is an
       organ that learns and self-​improves a generative model of the organism and its environ-
       ment based on sensory signals and action (Friston, 2010). A basic tenet of such accounts
       is that perception is an active process, whereby top-​down mechanisms are activated to
       make predictions about the upcoming bottom-​up sensory signals. Thus, perception is an
       inferential process, whose aim is to minimize prediction errors or the difference between
       top-​down hypotheses about the most likely causes of sensations (termed “empirical prior
       beliefs”) and current sensations. Recurrent message passing among several levels of the
       sensorimotor hierarchy allows the suppression of (small or irrelevant) prediction errors by
       priors, or the adjustment of (empirical) prior expectations by (large or highly salient) pre-
       diction errors. Furthermore, the relative influence of predictions versus prediction errors
       across several layers in this hierarchical organization is determined by the weighting (pre-
       cision) of predictions versus prediction errors at each level. Precision can be regarded
       as a measure of signal-​to-​noise ratio or confidence, or mathematically, as the inverse
       variance, uncertainty, or reliability of a signal (Feldman & Friston, 2010; Friston et al.,
       2012). Uncertainty is thought of as encoded mainly by neuromodulations of synaptic gain
       (such as dopamine and acetylcholine) that encode the precision of random fluctuations
       about predicted states —​the context in which sensory data is encountered (Quattrocki &
108




      108   The cutaneous borders of interoception


            Friston, 2014). For example, cholinergic or dopaminergic neuromodulatory mechanisms
            can optimize the attentional gain of populations encoding prediction errors, so that
            greater attention is allocated to certain salient events in the environment, influencing the
            relative weighting or importance of prediction errors.
               Importantly, prediction errors can also be minimized through action. At the simplest
            control loop level, peripheral reflexes are engaged to suppress proprioceptive predic-
            tion errors (Feldman & Friston, 2010), generated by comparing primary afferents from
            receptors in muscles, tendons, and joints with proprioceptive predictions regarding body
            position that descend to alpha motor neurons in the spinal cord and cranial nerve nu-
            clei. Thus, action is driven by such predictions rather than descending motor commands.
            Ultimately, action is seen as a prediction-​driven tendency to re-​sample the world to gen-
            erate more sensory evidence for one’s predictions (active inference). Critically, the or-
            ganism could solve a discrepancy between prediction and error (e.g. unexpected noxious
            stimulation) by either changing its predictions (effectively convincing oneself that one is
            not in pain) or by generating protecting action (moving to avoid the noxious source of the
            prediction error). Both of these can be adaptive depending on the magnitude as well as
            the context of the noxious stimulation and hence, their relation needs to be optimized by
            weighting in each case. This framework emphasizes the tight interconnection of percep-
            tion and action as well as the fundamental integration of bottom-​up and top-​down factors
            in all perceptual and active inference.
               Recently several proposals have applied this framework to interoception (Paulus &
            Stein, 2006; Barrett & Simmons, 2015; Gu et al., 2013; Pezzulo, Rigoli, & Friston, 2015;
            Seth, 2013; Seth, Suzuki, & Critchley, 2011), and by extension to the concepts of “homeo-
            static” and “allostatic” control (see also Chapter 15 in the present volume). “Homeostasis”
            (Cannon, 1929)  refers to the maintenance of a relative stability in one’s physiological
            states despite ongoing internal and external changes. “Allostasis” refers to the idea that
            physiological changes need to be anticipated by adaptive changes and choices across
            different spatial and temporal scales, for example adjusting one’s metabolic needs in cer-
            tain environments where foraging is dangerous (Sterling & Eyer, 1988). In predictive
            coding frameworks, both homeostatic and allostatic control can be cast formally as active
            inference (e.g. Pezzulo et  al., 2015; Stephan et  al., 2016). Homeostatic control enslaves
            reflexes to produce corrective actions that fulfill beliefs about bodily states, and allostatic
            control entails changing homeostatic beliefs under guidance by higher predictive models
            about future perturbations of bodily states.
               Moreover, as in the case of exteroceptive perception and action, the balance between
            homeostatic and allostatic regulation rests upon the precision (i.e. weighting) placed
            in deeper expectations about the organism and its environment. For example, during
            conditions of bodily threat or psychological stress, such as the anticipated pain from
            a sharp object approaching one’s face, noxious signals on one’s body may induce low-​
            level proprioceptive predictions that mobilize withdrawal movements away from the
            source of the stimulation. However, high-​precision predictions at a higher level of the
            neurocognitive hierarchy may indicate that the source of the noxious stimulation is
 109




        An integration: The predictive, active and social components of pain and pleasant touch         109


       actually our dentist, and then predictions of tooth pain can be fulfilled without engaging
       low-​level motor reflexes and instead engage allostatic changes in the form of updated
       beliefs about the “safety” and tolerance (i.e. attenuated pain) of nociceptive signals in this
       context, in order to ensure future pain-​free and healthy teeth.

       6.3.2  Active,   interoceptive inference, and feelings on the skin
       Despite these proposals of interoceptive predictive coding, there is currently no direct
       evidence for the proposal that interoceptive predictions, prediction errors, and their re-
       lation rest on a common neurocomputational framework (for a first step, see Kleckner
       et al., 2017). There are, however, ample circumstantial findings in the pain and pleasant
       touch literature that can be cast in this light and importantly, the framework can allow
       some specific predictions regarding the nature of pain and pleasant touch, and their mod-
       ulation by cognitive and social factors, that we will focus on here.
          First, this framework suggests that peripheral signals, such as nociceptive and CT
       tactile channels, do not cause homeostatic perceptions or emotions (e.g. pain or the
       affectivity of touch), or vice versa. Instead, there is a circular and multi-​layered cau-
       sality, where on one end of the neural hierarchy, neuronally encoded predictions about
       bodily states, including in this case states of the skin, engage autonomic, somatic, and
       motor reflexes in a top-​down fashion. On the other end of the hierarchy, specialized skin
       organs and their spinal cord circuitry carry interoceptive signals in a bottom-​up way that
       informs and updates predictions at the levels above. These aspects can be linked to the
       cognitive and sensory aspects of pain, respectively. Moreover, the affective component
       of pain or touch can be seen as an attribute of the weighting (precision, see earlier) of
       any representation that generates predictions and prediction errors about the physio-
       logical state of the skin (see also Ainley et al., 2016; Fotopoulou, 2013). In other terms,
       the subjective feelings of pain or pleasant touch can be linked to the neuromodulatory
       weighting of the corresponding sensory prediction errors in relation to higher-​order
       predictions regarding these sensory states. Typically, the optimization of precision is
       linked with the function of neuromodulators in the brain (see section 6.3.1) but similar
       processes of synaptic gain modulation have long been described in the spinal cord, par-
       ticularly in the context of pain (see section 6.2.). We have previously proposed that in
       interoceptive modalities, optimizing the precision of internal body signals can be seen
       as optimizing interoceptive sensitivity and related feelings in perceptual inference (see
       also Ainley et al., 2016; Fotopoulou, 2013). We propose here that concepts such as “pre-
       cision” and its reverse, uncertainty, relate to the affective, conscious components of pain
       and pleasant touch. The intensity of painful or pleasurable aspects of touch can be thus
       understood as our sensitivity to such tactile, interoceptive signals in a given context (e.g.
       a measurement of our subjective pain threshold in the lab) and our corresponding be-
       havioral tendency to approach the world to gather more information (uncertainty) or to
       avoid resampling (the certainty of pain and pleasant touch). This view can offer a new
       integration of previous theories of pain and hence potentially also pleasant touch, as we
       specify in the following.
10




     110   The cutaneous borders of interoception


              Specifically, classic theories may view cutaneous pain and the affectivity of touch as
           signals of danger or safety to the organism respectively, starting in the periphery and
           reaching consciousness if a “threshold” is surpassed at the spinal cord level, allowing the
           brain to “read” them as pain or pleasure. For example, this threshold may be equated to
           the “gate control theory” (Melzack & Wall, 1965) or more modern “central sensitization”
           theories, where the gain of the spinal cord nociceptive synapse is amplified and hence
           “travels up” the hierarchy to elicit conscious pain (Woolf & Salter, 2000). On the contrary,
           more “active,” alternative theories of pain suggest that acute pain is not a warning signal
           but rather is the failure of the “aversion” machinery (nociceptor activity) designed to op-
           erate unconsciously in order to avoid harm and ultimately also conscious pain (Baliki &
           Apkarian, 2015). In such accounts, most nociceptive activity is designed to remain “sub-
           conscious” and protect the organism from harm without necessarily eliciting conscious
           pain. Conscious pain instead only emerges when subconscious pain is converted to con-
           scious pain in subcortical areas in the brain. In such accounts, it is conscious pain that has
           the capacity to modulate spinal nociceptive sensitivity and thus actively determine “gate
           control” and/​or “central sensitization” spinal nociceptive processes, mediated through de-
           scending pathways (Vera-​Portocarrero et al., 2006).
              From the point of view of active inference models, these are not competing but supple-
           mentary views. Allostatic control is an extension of homeostatic control and they both
           work to minimize prediction errors. Thus, these two perspectives can be integrated in
           the following way, illustrated here with specific reference to cutaneous pain and pleasant
           touch. For homeostatic control purposes, the organism entails (in an embodied manner)
           a set of inherited prior expectations of the state of the skin. Any stimulation of the skin
           that deviates from the range of such predicted states generates a prediction error. This
           prediction error is corrected in simple, unconscious loops, by reflexive motor or auto-
           nomic reactions that fulfil the initial beliefs about the state of the skin. If, however, these
           “homeostatic corrections” fail (i.e. the prediction error persists), then the prediction error
           travels up the hierarchy to generate posterior beliefs (updated predictions) at the above
           hierarchical level. These updated beliefs act as priors towards future positive or nega-
           tive events, thus attempting to anticipate and avoid danger, or anticipate and approach
           pleasure, before these occur (allostasis). Specifically, more complex, generative, predictive
           models of the organism’s needs are better able to predict stimuli at the levels below and
           at different time-​scales and hence ‘suppress’ any future, anticipated prediction errors at
           the level below by guiding autonomic function and action more effectively and under
           the control of higher-​order predictive models. Please note that these homeostatic and
           allostatic control operations are understood to be processes of unconscious inference for
           the most part, so conscious feelings of skin pain and pleasure are not necessary for such
           processes. This conclusion, however, raises the question of why should we have conscious
           feelings such as pain and pleasure, if we can predict and control our sensations uncon-
           sciously? We speculatively propose that it is important that the organism registers the
           core feelings that relate to the specificity of innate, homeostatic needs (in this case safe or
           dangerous contact on the skin), so that the cognitive resources available for scanning the
 1




      An integration: The predictive, active and social components of pain and pleasant touch          111


     world and the body for novelty and salience are always constrained by, and in competi-
     tion with, the high precision of our innate expectations. In other terms, conscious pain
     and pleasant touch are there to ensure that we do not habitually update, or ignore our
     predictions about what is safe versus dangerous for the skin.
        Interestingly, although these two modalities, pain and unpleasant touch, appear oppo-
     site in hedonic content and behavior tendencies towards their particular sensory stimulus
     (i.e. avoidance versus approach), from the point of view of the certainty–​uncertainty axis
     described here, they are of similar characteristics. The greater the pain, or the felt pleasure
     of touch, the more one’s attention and behavior is captured in the experience and the less
     one is likely to engage in active, exploration of new sensations. Instead, the organism’s
     resources are focused on controlling or escaping pain, and enjoying or prolonging the
     feelings of pleasant touch. This view goes against the intuitive, long-​standing view of core
     affective consciousness, pain and pleasure, as monitoring hedonic quality. Instead, the
     core quality of affective consciousness is a kind of certainty–​uncertainty, or disambigu-
     ation principle (Fotopoulou, 2013). Pain and pleasant touch therefore are a measure of
     how important is for a given organism, in a given context, to be “certain” about what was
     predicted versus what occurred.
        This view of the conscious feelings of pain and pleasant touch tallies with long-​standing
     insights regarding the dissociation between sensory and affective aspects of pain and,
     more recently, pleasant touch, as well as with the fact that the physiology of nociception
     has a well-​known specificity at the periphery which is not mirrored at the brain (see
     section 6.2). The unique feeling qualities of painful or pleasant touch may be associated
     with the CNS’s capacity for synaptic gain modulation and large-​scale integration of in-
     formation arising from the body and the world in different time-​scales. This is consistent
     with the fact that no single area or network in the brain has been reliably associated with
     the conscious perception of pain (Baliki & Apkarian, 2015). Instead, the various networks
     that have been associated with pain and its modulation, and with pleasant touch and
     its modulation, are not only common to these two modalities, but seem relevant to the
     processing of the salience of any sensory modality (Legrain et al., 2011). Indeed, several
     recent neuroimaging studies have included such areas and their observed functional con-
     nectivity in various hypothesized “salience networks” (Legrain et al., 2011; Medford &
     Critchley, 2010; Wiech et al., 2010). For instance, predictive signals from such a “salience
     network” process and integrate information about the significance of an impending nox-
     ious stimulus and determine whether or not such a stimulus will be consciously perceived
     as painful (Wiech et al., 2010).
        More generally, a plethora of neuroimaging studies have shown that cognitive, affective,
     and social factors modulate our perception of cutaneous pain, with emerging evidence
     also making a case for these factors modulating the pleasantness of CT-​optimal touch. For
     example, expectations may help an individual to adjust sensory, cognitive, and motor sys-
     tems in order to process the noxious stimuli in terms of neural and behavioral responses
     optimally (Wiech, Ploner, & Tracey, 2008; see also Villemure & Brushnell, 2002 for re-
     view). Most consistently with the present proposal, expectations in which there is a high
12




     112   The cutaneous borders of interoception


           level of certainty regarding the stimulus may activate descending control systems to at-
           tenuate pain, whereas in contrast, uncertainty may increase pain (Ploghaus et al., 2003).
             Although there is less evidence on the neural mechanisms underlying the cognitive and
           social factors that modulate pleasant CT-​optimal touch, studies suggest that a person’s
           beliefs about the stimulus (McCabe et al., 2008) or the person (Ellingsen et al., 2015) pro-
           viding the pleasant touch influences the perceived pleasantness of the touch. We use the
           example of the social modulation of pain in the following to unpack and illustrate these
           ideas further.

           6.3.3  The
                  mentalization of nociception and CT stimulation:
           homeostatic and allostatic control by proxy
           The long-​observed fact that conscious pain is modulated by social context has received
           experimental support in recent years (see Krahé et al., 2013 for review). In the last decade,
           similar observations have also been made regarding the modulation of pleasant touch
           by social context. In this section, we will apply these insights from the active inference
           framework to propose some mechanisms by which this social modulation takes place.
           This application has the advantage that it can provide a mechanistic, unified account of
           the relation between bottom-​up (e.g. neurophysiological) and top-​down (e.g. psychoso-
           cial) influences on homeostasis and allostasis. Existing biopsychosocial models of pain
           offer similar insights but the current model has the advantage of offering direct links be-
           tween these different bottom-​up and top-​down determinants of pain and pleasant touch
           instead of treating them as merely additive variables.
             Specifically, we propose that the perception of the social environment of pain or pleasant
           touch can affect inferential processes about the perception of these modalities, as well
           as related active tendencies, by influencing the certainty or precision of an individual’s
           predictions about an impending stimulus versus the certainty or precision of related
           prediction errors. As mentioned earlier, top-​down predictions do not represent just the
           content of lower level representations but also predict their context, defined in mathemat-
           ical terminology as the precision of a probability distribution (inverse variance or uncer-
           tainty). For example, the allocation of attention toward specific events can optimize their
           salience and ultimately influence the relative weighting or importance of prediction errors
           against predictions. This kind of top-​down prediction in sensory cortices is thought to be
           mediated by cholinergic neuromodulatory mechanisms that optimize the attentional gain
           of populations encoding prediction errors (Feldman & Friston, 2010), as well as by dopa-
           mine in fronto-​striatal circuits (Fiorillo, Tobler, & Schultz, 2003) and by neuropeptides
           such as oxytocin in social contexts (Quatrokki & Friston, 2014). In interoception, precision
           may relate to attention to signals from the body or interoceptive sensitivity (Ainley et al.,
           2016; Fotopoulou, 2013) and may be modulated by several contextual factors. Therefore,
           factors such as active social support or empathy may modulate pain or pleasant touch by
           changing the precision of top-​down predictions about nociception or CT stimulation. In
           such social contexts, individuals have learned to anticipate social support and thus the
           optimization of the weight allocated to bottom-​up signals versus top-​down predictions
 13




       An integration: The predictive, active and social components of pain and pleasant touch          113


      maybe different than in conditions of experiencing similar stimuli alone, or in hostile
      environments. For example, in previous studies we have shown that the administration of
      intranasal oxytocin versus placebo, or the provision of high versus low empathy, or social
      support may modulate the subjective, behavioral and neural responses to noxious stimu-
      lation (Hurter et al., 2014; Krahé et al., 2015; Paloyelis et al., 2016). More generally, based
      on a systematic review of the experimental pain literature (Krahé et al., 2013), we have
      concluded that precision modulation by interpersonal interactions takes several forms,
      including two main categories: (a) social signals about the safety or threat and thus the
      salience of the impending stimulus itself, and (b) social signals about the threat or safety
      and thus the salience of the environment in which the stimulus occurs. In turn, the per-
      ception and interpretation of such interpersonal variables themselves may in turn depend
      on (a) their own salience, as well as (b) an individual’s prior beliefs about interpersonal
      relating and associated behaviors (see following for further details).
         This notion of social modulation as precision modulation is compatible with pre-
      vious theories such as the social baseline theory, which proposes that the presence of
      other people helps individuals to conserve metabolically costly somatic and neural re-
      sources through the social regulation of emotion (Beckes & Coan, 2011; see also Decety
      & Fotopoulou, 2015). Integrating such notions within a predictive coding model has the
      advantage of placing them in a wider and neurobiologically plausible framework and
      hence integrating findings across many fields, as well as generating novel hypotheses, as
      we outline here.

      6.3.3.1  Developmental considerations: The social origins
      of interoceptive inference
      The active inference framework we propose allows us to observe that the social modu-
      lation of pain and pleasant touch is not a simple “add-​on” in our understanding of such
      modalities. Rather, it appears that interpersonal interactions are necessary in shaping all
      interoceptive modalities from the onset. This claim is supported by several observations
      (presented in detail elsewhere, Fotopoulou & Tsakiris, 2017), the most important of which
      we outline here: namely, in early infancy, when the human motor system is not yet de-
      veloped, interoceptive function and homeostasis are wholly dependent on embodied
      interactions with other bodies. Action and perception do not mature at the same time. As
      human infants are born without a fully matured motor system, and hence they cannot reg-
      ulate their own homeostasis unaided, the actions of their caregivers necessarily determine
      how they come to update their beliefs by active inference and ultimately how they experi-
      ence all their sensations and particularly those requiring purposeful actions. For example,
      young infants cannot position, balance, feed, thermoregulate, or protect themselves from
      accidentally cutting or burning their skin (beyond some reflexive avoidance movements).
      Thus, in the case of these interoceptive modalities, no available movement on the part of
      the infant alone can change certain key neurophysiological states relating to homeostasis and
      allostasis. As such, the young infant cannot use action to collect evidence about the causes
      of interoceptive experience to test its interoceptive predictions against the world.
14




     114   The cutaneous borders of interoception


             Instead, infants use autonomic and motor reflexes in response to unpredicted physi-
           ological states (e.g. crying when hypothalamic function detect that glucose level are not
           within the predicted viable range) to elicit caregivers’ actions that can change the infant’s
           physiological state (e.g. by feeding it) until the homeostatic needs are met (i.e. glucose
           levels are within the predicted range). Thus, updating interoceptive predictions in infants
           (close the action–​perception loop) includes multisensory signals regarding the reaction of
           caregivers to infants’ initial autonomic and proprioceptive predictions; a process we have
           termed as the “mentalization” of physiological states elsewhere; Fotopoulou & Tsakiris,
           2017). In other words, the origins of interoceptive active inference are always by necessity
           social, and thus core subjective feelings such as hunger and satiation, pain and relief, cold
           or warmth, have actually social origins.

           6.3.3.2  Adult predictions about the role of others in pain and
           pleasant touch
           These conclusions about the social origins of interoceptive feelings such as pain and
           pleasant touch are also consistent with the literature on the relation between these
           modalities and social attachment (see also Panksepp, 1998). As we mentioned earlier, pain
           and pleasant touch may be modulated by social factors. In turn, the perception and inter-
           pretation of social variables themselves may depend on individual prior beliefs, or gener-
           ative models about interpersonal relating and associated behaviors. One influential way
           of conceptualizing prior beliefs about relating to others is attachment theory. Attachment
           theory posits that from early in life, attachment partners can serve as a “secure base”
           from which the infant explores the world (Bowlby, 1969). If a secure attachment bond is
           formed over repeated instances of responsive caregiving, the “secure base” signals safety
           to the infant, while insecure bonds lead to more ambivalent or even threatening signals
           from others. These bonds lead to the formation of attachment styles, which remain rela-
           tively stable into adulthood.
              Individual differences in attachment style have been linked directly with the perception
           of pain and related reactions (e.g. Hurter et al., 2014; Meredith, Ownsworth, & Strong,
           2008; Sambo et al., 2010). Moreover, in the clinical pain literature, insecure attachment
           has been proposed as a vulnerability factor for developing chronic pain (Meredith et al.,
           2008), supporting its importance as a pain-​relevant prior. In a series of pain studies by
           our lab, we have shown that differences in attachment style influence the effects of inter-
           personal variables on subjective, behavioral, physiological and neural responses to pain.
           For example, social contextual factors and individual differences in attachment style de-
           termine the amount of subjective report, facial expressions, heart-​rate, skin conductance
           and neural responses people show in response to experimental pain (Sambo et al., 2010;
           Hurter et al., 2014; Krahe et al., 2015, 2016).
              Using laser-​evoked potentials (LEPs) we further found that pleasant touch, as a form
           of active social support, can reduce both subjective and neural pain-​related outcomes
           (Krahe et al., 2016; von Mohr et al., under review). However, contrary to other neuro-
           imaging studies on passive forms of social support between couples (e.g. Coan, Schaefer,
 15




                                                                                        Conclusion     115


      & Davidson, 2006; Eisenberger et al., 2011), our neural effects indicate that the effects of
      active support by one’s romantic partner may begin at earlier stages of cortical nociceptive
      processing, as reflected by changes in the N1 local peak amplitude (von Mohr et al., under
      review). The N1 component is thought to reflect pre-​perceptual sensory response (out-
      side of conscious awareness), with activation in the operculoinsular and primary somato-
      sensory cortex (Garcia-​Larrea, Frot, & Valeriani, 2003; Valentini et al., 2012). Given that
      LEPs have been recently proposed to detect environmental threat to the body in response
      to sensory salient events (Legrain et al., 2011), we speculate that pleasant touch by one’s
      romantic partner seems to reduce the sensory salience of impending noxious stimulation.
        Similar findings have been reported in relation to the perception of pleasantness
      and attachment style in response to CT-​optimal touch (Krahé et  al., under review).
      Nevertheless, the field of pleasant touch is still at its infancy and further neuroscientific
      studies are needed in both humans and other animals before firm conclusions can be
      drawn about the social nature of this modality.

      6.4 Conclusion
      Cutaneous pain and pleasant touch have been recently classified by some researchers as
      interoceptive modalities, even if their stimulation site lies outside the body. This reclassi-
      fication is the basis of a more encompassing definition of interoception itself as the sense
      of the physiological condition of the entire body, not just the viscera. However, this reclas-
      sification lies at the heart of long-​standing debates regarding the nature of such modalities
      and particularly the question of whether they should be defined as sensations on their
      basis of their bottom-​up, neurophysiological specificity at the periphery or as homeo-
      static emotions on the basis of top-​down convergence and modulation at the spinal and
      brain levels. In the present chapter, we speculatively recast this current state of knowl­
      edge within a recent Bayesian predictive coding framework of brain function, namely the
      active inference model. This framework suggests that peripheral signals, such as nocicep-
      tive and CT tactile channels, do not cause homeostatic perceptions or emotions (e.g. pain
      or pleasant touch), or vice versa. Instead, there is a circular and multilayered causality,
      where on one end of the neural hierarchy, neuronally encoded predictions about bodily
      states, including in this case states of the skin, engage autonomic, somatic, and motor
      reflexes in a top-​down fashion. At the other end of the hierarchy, specialized skin organs
      and their spinal cord circuity carry interoceptive signals in a bottom-​up way that informs
      and updates predictions at the levels above. These aspects can be linked to the cognitive
      and sensory aspects of pain, respectively. The affective component of pleasant or painful
      touch is a third component of this circular causality. Such affects are an attribute of the
      optimisation of the weighting (precision) of any representation that generates predictions
      and prediction errors about the physiological state of the skin (see also Ainley et al., 2016;
      Fotopoulou, 2013). This weighting is further not only determined by such specialized
      modalities and pathways but also necessarily contextualized by concurrent propriocep-
      tive signals, as well as by concurrent exteroceptive cues about the body itself and about
16




     116   The cutaneous borders of interoception


           the physical, material, and social environment currently and across different time-​scales
           (for allostatic control purposes). The painful or pleasurable aspects of touch can be thus
           understood as our sensitivity to bottom-​up signals in given interoceptive, exteroceptive,
           cognitive, social, and time contexts and our corresponding behavioral and anticipatory
           tendencies.
              These assumptions have received some empirical support in adult studies from our
           lab, as well as many other labs, that show that “on-​line” social factors such as active social
           support or empathy, as well as “off-​line” predictions about the availability of social help
           (e.g. individual differences in attachment style), may modulate pain or pleasant touch by
           changing the precision of top-​down predictions versus prediction errors from nociception
           or CT stimulation. Finally, such claims are supported by the developmental observation
           that in early infancy, when the human motor system is not yet developed, interoceptive
           function and homeostasis are dependent on embodied interactions with other bodies. It
           is the adult’s actions that will generate changes in interoceptive states and hence ultimately
           close the action–​perception loop. Thus, the origins of interoceptive active inference are
           always, by necessity social, and core subjective feelings, such as hunger and satiation, pain
           and relief, cold or warmth, actually have social origins.

           Acknowledgments
           This work was supported by the European Research Council (ERC) Starting Grant ERC-​
           2012-​STG GA313755 (to AF) and the National Council on Science and Technology
           (CONACyT-​538843) scholarship (to MVM).

           References
           Abraira, V. E. and Ginty, D. D. (2013). The sensory neurons of touch. Neuron, 79(4), 618–​39.
           Ackerley, R., Wasling, H. B., Liljencrantz, J., Olausson, H., Johnson, R. D., and Wessberg, J. (2014).
               Human C-​tactile afferents are tuned to the temperature of a skin-​stroking caress. Journal of
               Neuroscience, 34(8), 2879–​83.
           Ainley, V., Apps, M. A., Fotopoulou, A., and Tsakiris, M. (2016). “Bodily precision”: A predictive
               coding account of individual differences in interoceptive accuracy. Philosophical Transactions of the
               Royal Society B, 371(1708), 20160003.
           Andrew, D. (2010). Quantitative characterization of low‐threshold mechanoreceptor inputs to lamina
               I spinoparabrachial neurons in the rat. Journal of Physiology, 588(1), 117–​24.
           Baliki, M. N. and Apkarian, A. V. (2015). Nociception, pain, negative moods, and behavior selection.
               Neuron, 87(3), 474–​91.
           Barrett, L. F. and Simmons, W. K. (2015). Interoceptive predictions in the brain. Nature Reviews.
               Neuroscience, 16(7), 419.
           Beckes, L. and Coan, J. A. (2011). Social baseline theory: The role of social proximity in emotion and
               economy of action. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 5(12), 976–​88.
           Bessou, P., Burgess, P. R., Perl, E. R., and Taylor, C. B. (1971). Dynamic properties of mechanoreceptors
               with unmyelinated (C) fibers. Journal of Neurophysiology, 34(1), 116–​31.
           Bowlby, J. (1969). Attachment and Loss: Vol. 1. Attachment. New York, NY: Basic Books.
           Brooks, J. and Tracey, I. (2005). From nociception to pain perception: Imaging the spinal and
               supraspinal pathways. Journal of Anatomy, 207(1),  19–​33.
 17




                                                                                                   References      117


      Cannon, W. B. (1929). Bodily Changes in Pain, Hunger, Fear and Rage, 2nd edn. New York,
          NY: Appleton.
      Caterina, M. J., Schumacher, M. A., Tominaga, M., and Rosen, T. A. (1997). The capsaicin receptor: A
          heat-​activated ion channel in the pain pathway. Nature, 389(6653), 816.
      Ceunen, E., Vlaeyen, J. W., and Van Diest, I. (2016). On the origin of interoception. Frontiers in
          Psychology, 7, 743.
      Coan, J. A., Schaefer, H. S., and Davidson, R. J. (2006). Lending a hand: Social regulation of the neural
          response to threat. Psychological Science, 17(12), 1032–​9.
      Craig, A. D. (2002). Opinion: How do you feel? Interoception: The sense of the physiological condition
          of the body. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 3(8), 655.
      Craig, A. D. (2003a). Interoception: The sense of the physiological condition of the body. Current
          Opinion in Neurobiology, 13(4),  500–​5.
      Craig, A. D. (2003b). A new view of pain as a homeostatic emotion. Trends in Neurosciences,
          26(6),  303–​7.
      Craig, A. D. (2008). Interoception and emotion: A neuroanatomical perspective. Handbook of Emotions,
          3(602), 272–​88.
      Critchley, H. D. and Harrison, N. A. (2013). Visceral influences on brain and behavior. Neuron, 77(4),
          624–​38.
      Damasio, A. (2010). Self Comes to Mind: Constructing the Conscious Brain. New York, NY: Vintage.
      Decety, J. and Fotopoulou, A. (2015). Why empathy has a beneficial impact on others in
          medicine: Unifying theories. Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience, 8, 457.
      Dubin, A. E. and Patapoutian, A. (2010). Nociceptors: The sensors of the pain pathway. Journal of
          Clinical Investigation, 120(11), 3760.
      Eisenberger, N. I., Master, S. L., Inagaki, T. K., Taylor, S. E., Shirinyan, D., Lieberman, M. D., et al.
          (2011). Attachment figures activate a safety signal-​related neural region and reduce pain experience.
          Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(28), 11721–​6.
      Ellingsen, D. M., Leknes, S., Løseth, G., Wessberg, J., and Olausson, H. (2015). The neurobiology
          shaping affective touch: Expectation, motivation, and meaning in the multisensory context. Frontiers
          in Psychology, 6, 1986.
      Feldman, H. and Friston, K. J. (2010). Attention, uncertainty, and free-​energy. Frontiers in Human
          Neuroscience, 4, 215.
      Fiorillo, C. D., Tobler, P. N., and Schultz, W. (2003). Discrete coding of reward probability and
          uncertainty by dopamine neurons. Science, 299(5614), 1898–​1902.
      Fotopoulou, A. (2013). Beyond the reward principle: Consciousness as precision seeking.
          Neuropsychoanalysis, 15(1),  33–​38.
      Fotopoulou, A. and Tsakiris, M. (2017). Mentalizing homeostasis: The social origins of interoceptive
          inference. Neuropsychoanalysis, 19(1),  3–​28.
      Friston, K. (2010). The free-​energy principle: A unified brain theory? Nature Reviews Neuroscience,
          11(2), 127–​38.
      Friston, K. J., Shiner, T., FitzGerald, T., Galea, J. M., Adams, R., Brown, H., et al. (2012). Dopamine,
          affordance and active inference. PLoS Computational Biology, 8(1), e1002327.
      Garcia-​Larrea, L., Frot, M., and Valeriani, M. (2003). Brain generators of laser-​evoked potentials: From
          dipoles to functional significance. Clinical Neurophysiology, 33(6), 279–​92.
      Gordon, I., Voos, A. C., Bennett, R. H., Bolling, D. Z., Pelphrey, K. A., and Kaiser, M. D. (2013). Brain
          mechanisms for processing affective touch. Human Brain Mapping, 34(4), 914–​22.
      Gu, X., Hof, P. R., Friston, K. J., and Fan, J. (2013). Anterior insular cortex and emotional awareness.
          Journal of Comparative Neurology, 521(15), 3371–​88.
18




     118   The cutaneous borders of interoception


           Head, H. and Holmes, G. (1911). Sensory disturbances from cerebral lesions. Brain, 34, 102–​254.
           Hurter, S., Paloyelis, Y., Williams, A. C. D. C., and Fotopoulou, A. (2014). Partners’ empathy increases
              pain ratings: Effects of perceived empathy and attachment style on pain report and display. Journal
              of Pain, 15(9), 934–​44.
           Kleckner, I., Zhang, J., Touroutoglou, A., Chanes, L., Xia, C., Simmons, W. K., et al. (2017). Evidence
              for a large-​scale brain system supporting allostasis and interoception in humans. Nature Human
              Behaviour, 1(5), 0069.
           Krahé, C., Springer, A., Weinman, J. A., and Fotopoulou, A. (2013). The social modulation of
              pain: Others as predictive signals of salience—​a systematic review. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience,
              7, 386.
           Krahé, C., Paloyelis, Y., Condon, H., Jenkinson, P. M., Williams, S. C., and Fotopoulou, A. (2015).
              Attachment style moderates partner presence effects on pain: A laser-​evoked potentials study. Social
              Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 10(8), 1030–​7.
           Krahé, C., Drabek, M. M., Paloyelis, Y., and Fotopoulou, A. (2016). Affective touch and attachment
              style modulate pain: A laser-​evoked potentials study. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
              B, 371(1708), 20160009.
           Krahé, C., von Mohr, M., Gentsch, A., Vari, C., Fidler, L., Nolte, T., et al. (under review). Sensitivity to
              affective touch depends on adult attachment style.
           Legrain, V., Iannetti, G. D., Plaghki, L., and Mouraux, A. (2011). The pain matrix reloaded: A salience
              detection system for the body. Progress in Neurobiology, 93(1), 111–​24.
           Löken, L. S., Wessberg, J., McGlone, F., and Olausson, H. (2009). Coding of pleasant touch by
              unmyelinated afferents in humans. Nature Neuroscience, 12(5),  547–​8.
           Marks, L. E., Ringkamp, M., Campbell, J. N., and Raja, S. N. (2006). Peripheral Mechanisms of
              Cutaneous Nociception. London: Elsevier.
           Mazzola, L., Isnard, J., Peyron, R., and Mauguière, F. (2011). Stimulation of the human cortex and the
              experience of pain: Wilder Penfield’s observations revisited. Brain, 135(2), 631–​40.
           McCabe, C., Rolls, E. T., Bilderbeck, A., and McGlone, F. (2008). Cognitive influences on the affective
              representation of touch and the sight of touch in the human brain. Social Cognitive and Affective
              Neuroscience, 3(2), 97–​108.
           McGlone, F., Wessberg, J., and Olausson, H. (2014). Discriminative and affective touch: Sensing and
              feeling. Neuron, 82(4), 737–​55.
           Medford, N. and Critchley, H. D. (2010). Conjoint activity of anterior insular and anterior cingulate
              cortex: Awareness and response. Brain Structure and Function, 214(5-​6), 535–​49.
           Melzack, R. and Wall, P. D. (1965). Pain mechanisms: A new theory. Science, 150(3699),  971–​9.
           Melzack, R., Wall, P. D., and Ty, T. C. (1982). Acute pain in an emergency clinic: Latency of onset and
              descriptor patterns related to different injuries. Pain, 14(1),  33–​4.
           Meredith, P., Ownsworth, T., and Strong, J. (2008). A review of the evidence linking adult attachment
              theory and chronic pain: Presenting a conceptual model. Clinical Psychology Reviews, 28, 407–​29.
              doi:10.1016/​j.cpr.2007.07.009
           Olausson, H., Lamarre, Y., Backlund, H., Morin, B. G., Wallin, G., Starck, S., Ekholm, S., et al. (2002).
              Unmyelinated tactile afferents signal touch and project to insular cortex. Nature Neuroscience,
              5(9), 900.
           Olausson, H., Cole, J., Rylander, K., McGlone, F., Lamarre, Y., Wallin, B. G., et al. (2008). Functional
              role of unmyelinated tactile afferents in human hairy skin: Sympathetic response and perceptual
              localization. Experimental Brain Research, 184(1), 135–​40.
           Paloyelis, Y., Krahé, C., Maltezos, S., Williams, S. C., Howard, M. A., and Fotopoulou, A. (2016). The
              analgesic effect of oxytocin in humans: A double‐blind, placebo‐controlled cross‐over study using
              laser‐evoked potentials. Journal of Neuroendocrinology, 28(4). <https://​doi.org/​10.1111/​jne.12347>
 19




                                                                                                     References      119


      Panksepp, J. (1998). Affective Neuroscience: The Foundations of Human and Animal Emotions. New York,
          NY: Oxford University Press
      Paulus, M. P. and Stein, M. B. (2006). An insular view of anxiety. Biological Psychiatry, 60(4),  383–​7.
      Perl, E. R. (2007). Ideas about pain, a historical view. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 8(1),  71–​80.
      Pezzulo, G., Rigoli, F., and Friston, K. (2015). Active inference, homeostatic regulation and adaptive
          behavioural control. Progress in Neurobiology, 134,  17–​35.
      Ploghaus, A., Tracey, I., Gati, J. S., Clare, S., Menon, R. S., Matthews, P. M., et al. (1999). Dissociating
          pain from its anticipation in the human brain. Science, 284(5422), 1979–​81.
      Ploghaus, A., Becerra, L., Borras, C., and Borsook, D. (2003). Neural circuitry underlying pain
          modulation: Expectation, hypnosis, placebo. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7(5), 197–​200.
      Ploner, M., Freund, H. J., and Schnitzler, A. (1999). Pain affect without pain sensation in a patient with
          a postcentral lesion. Pain, 81(1), 211–​14.
      Quattrocki, E. and Friston, K. (2014). Autism, oxytocin and interoception. Neuroscience &
          Biobehavioral Reviews, 47, 410–​30.
      Rainville, P., Duncan, G. H., Price, D. D., Carrier, B., and Bushnell, M. C. (1997). Pain affect encoded
          in human anterior cingulate but not somatosensory cortex. Science, 277(5328), 968–​71.
      Ritter, A. M. and Mendell, L. M. (1992). Somal membrane properties of physiologically identified
          sensory neurons in the rat: Effects of nerve growth factor. Journal of Neurophysiology, 68(6),
          2033–​41.
      Rolls, E. T., O’Doherty, J., Kringelbach, M. L., Francis, S., Bowtell, R., and McGlone, F. (2003).
          Representations of pleasant and painful touch in the human orbitofrontal and cingulate cortices.
          Cerebral Cortex, 13(3), 308–​17.
      Rolls, E. T. (2010). The affective and cognitive processing of touch, oral texture, and temperature in the
          brain. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 34(2), 237–​45.
      Sambo, C. F., Howard, M., Kopelman, M., Williams, S., and Fotopoulou, A. (2010). Knowing
          you care: Effects of perceived empathy and attachment style on pain perception. Pain, 151(3),
          687–​93.
      Seth, A. K., Suzuki, K., and Critchley, H. D. (2011). An interoceptive predictive coding model of
          conscious presence. Frontiers in Psychology, 2, 395.
      Seth, A. K. (2013). Interoceptive inference, emotion, and the embodied self. Trends in Cognitive
          Sciences, 17(11), 565–​73.
      Sherrington, C. (1910). The Integrative Action of the Nervous System. Cambridge: Cambridge University
          Press.
      Stephan, K. E., Manjaly, Z. M., Mathys, C. D., Weber, L. A., Paliwal, S., Gard, T., et al. (2016).
          Allostatic self-​efficacy: A metacognitive theory of dyshomeostasis-​induced fatigue and depression.
          Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 10, 550.
      Sterling, P. and Eyer, J. (1988). Allostasis: A new paradigm to explain arousal pathology. In: K. Fisher
          and J. Reason (eds), Handbook of Life Stress, Cognition and Health. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley
          &  Sons, pp. 629–​49.
      Sugiura, Y., Lee, C. L., and Perl, E. R. (1986). Projections of identified, unmyelinated (C) afferent fibers
          innervating mammalian skin. Science, 234, 358–​62.
      Talbot, J. D., Marrett, S., Evans, A. C., Meyer, E., Bushnell, M. C., and Duncan, G. H. (1991). Multiple
          representations of pain in human cerebral cortex. Science, 251(4999), 1355–​9.
      Valentini, E., Hu, L., Chakrabarti, B., Hu, Y., Aglioti, S. M., and Iannetti, G. D. (2012). The primary
          somatosensory cortex largely contributes to the early part of the cortical response elicited by
          nociceptive stimuli. Neuroimage, 59(2), 1571–​81.
      Vallbo, Å. B., Olausson, H., and Wessberg, J. (1999). Unmyelinated afferents constitute a second system
          coding tactile stimuli of the human hairy skin. Journal of Neurophysiology, 81(6), 2753–​63.
120




      120   The cutaneous borders of interoception


            Vera-​Portocarrero, L. P., Zhang, E. T., Ossipov, M. H., Xie, J. Y., King, T., Lai, J., et al. (2006).
                Descending facilitation from the rostral ventromedial medulla maintains nerve injury-​induced
                central sensitization. Neuroscience, 140(4), 1311–​20.
            Villemure, C. and Bushnell, C. M. (2002). Cognitive modulation of pain: How do attention and
                emotion influence pain processing? Pain, 95(3),  195–​9.
            von Mohr, M., Krahé, C., Beck, B., and Fotopoulou, A. (under review). The social buffering of pain by
                affective touch in romantic couples: A laser-​evoked potentials study.
            Wiech, K., Ploner, M., and Tracey, I. (2008). Neurocognitive aspects of pain perception. Trends in
                Cognitive Sciences, 12(8), 306–​13.
            Wiech, K., Lin, C. S., Brodersen, K. H., Bingel, U., Ploner, M., and Tracey, I. (2010). Anterior insula
                integrates information about salience into perceptual decisions about pain. Journal of Neuroscience,
                30(48), 16324–​16331.
            Woolf, C. J. and Salter, M. W. (2000). Neuronal plasticity: Increasing the gain in pain. science,
                288(5472), 1765–​1768.
            Zotterman, Y. (1939). Touch, pain and tickling: An electro‐physiological investigation on cutaneous
                sensory nerves. Journal of Physiology, 95(1),  1–​28.
 12




      PART III

      From health to disease
      Interoception in physical and
      mental health
12
 123




                  Chapter 7

                  Interoception and emotion: Shared
                  mechanisms and clinical implications
                  Lisa Quadt, Hugo D. Critchley,
                  and Sarah N. Garfinkel



       7.1 Introduction
       Emotions are often accompanied by bodily changes. We experience this when we blush
       with embarrassment, feel our heart beat faster, and our breath go shallow when we are
       in fear. The view that emotion and body are intimately related was first formulated by
       William James (James, 1884)  who claimed that peripheral autonomic changes consti-
       tute emotions. The sensing of autonomic changes is referred to as interoception, the
       afferent processing of signals that originate within the body. Involved in interoception
       are different classes and channels (e.g. cardiovascular, gastric) of information that are
       distinct with respect to their afferent pathway (neural, humoral) and the generation of
       the signal (mechanoreceptive organ stretching, chemoreception). These channels share
       neural substrates, that is, brain mechanisms, in which integrative processes take place.
       These allow for the generation of representations that predict internal states, which might
       steer adaptive behavior (e.g. when blood sugar levels drop below a specific threshold, find
       food). Changes in bodily states and their interoceptive signalling can be constitutive of
       emotional feelings, leading to the possibility that the affective style (e.g. the intensity of
       emotions) of a person reflects differences in conscious and unconscious processing of in-
       teroceptive information.
          Individual interoceptive differences manifest themselves in different psychological
       dimensions of interoception that comprise objective, subjective, and metacognitive meas-
       ures (Canales-​Johnson et al., 2015; Garfinkel et al., 2015). Quantifications of interocep-
       tive abilities include objective measures such as behavioral performance accuracy during
       heartbeat detection tasks (Schandry, 1981). Subjective (i.e. sensibility) measures include
       self-​reports about interoceptive proficiency, such as evaluations of how well internal sig-
       nals can be sensed using questionnaires (Porges, 1993). An enhanced mismatch between
       subjective and objective measures of interoception is associated with anxiety symptoma-
       tology (Garfinkel et al., 2016).
          A way in which bodily and emotional processes merge can be found within the brain,
       where they share a similar neural architecture (Zaki, Davis, & Ochsner, 2012). Specific cor-
       tical regions, especially the anterior insular cortex (AIC), are activated when individuals
124




      124   Interoception and emotion


            focus their attention on changes in internal bodily states, highlighting the role of AIC
            in the perception of autonomic changes (Critchley, 2004; Peyron, Laurent, & Garcia-​
            Larrea, 2000; Williams et al., 2000). The insular cortex is thus of special interest to both
            interoception and emotion. In the brain, fibers from lamina 1 project into the NTS (nu-
            cleus of the solitary tract), parabrachial nucleus, periaqueductal grey, and other brainstem
            autonomic output nuclei. However, the ventromedial posterior nucleus of the thalamus
            is the main relay of viscerosensory information within the spinothalamic tract projecting
            onto insular cortex (see Critchley & Harrison, 2013). The insular cortex is located in the
            brain bilaterally underneath frontal and temporal lobes and is part of the cerebral cortex.
            It is divided into posterior and anterior insular cortex, where each part has its own cellular
            and functional structure. Its cytoarchitecture changes from granular in the posterior re-
            gion to agranular in the anterior insula. The insular cortex is bi-​directionally connected to
            parietal, frontal, and limbic regions (Deen, Pitskel, & Pelphrey, 2011). While the posterior
            regions of the insula are reciprocally connected with the second somatosensory cortex
            (SII) and receive input from the thalamus, conveying information such as pain, tem-
            perature, and oxygen status, AIC is closely connected with the anterior cingulate cortex
            (ACC). AIC and ACC together engage subcortical regions such as the amygdala and or-
            bitofrontal cortex (OFC). It has thus been suggested that the posterior parts of the insula
            support primary, objective representations of bodily signals, while AIC re-​represents and
            integrates these signals with exteroceptive and motivational information (Seth, 2013).
            AIC is also engaged in emotion elicitation tasks (Kober et al., 2008; Wicker et al., 2003),
            and neuroscientific models posit that the processing of visceral information in AIC
            supports an overlap between interoceptive and emotional states (Lamm & Singer, 2010).
               Appraisal theories of emotion (Schachter & Singer, 1962) add another component to
            the mix of interoception and emotion, namely that of cognitive appraisal. According
            to this view, emotional states are elicited by bodily changes and subsequent contextu-
            alization. Modern theories of the embodiment of emotion (Craig, 2002; Critchley et al.,
            2004)  adopt a similar approach, by also integrating findings about the shared neural
            underpinnings of interoception and emotion with the idea of contextualization. Together
            they highlight the role of bodily signals in shaping emotional experience and the role of
            cognitive appraisal in shaping the type of emotion felt.
               These theoretical and empirical advances on the interplay of emotional and inter-
            oceptive processes have recently been put together within the unifying perspective of
            predictive processing (Clark, 2016). Predictive processing (PP) views the brain as a hier-
            archical generator of predictions about its most likely next states. These predictions are
            then compared against actual sensory input (generating a prediction error), which either
            leads to a change of predictions in light of the new evidence (perception), or to action that
            changes brain-​external circumstances (active inference). This principle not only applies
            to exteroceptive information processing but also to predicting and controlling bodily in-
            teroceptive states. This can be described as interoceptive inference (Seth, 2013), which has
            also been called “interoceptive predictive processing” (IPP). IPP claims that emotional
            states are brought forth in the process of minimizing interoceptive prediction error and
 125




                                                                                Shared mechanisms       125


       the top-​down (i.e. from higher to lower levels in the processing hierarchy) predictive in-
       ference of causes of interoceptive signals. The network of AIC and other cortical regions is
       thought to underlie this process of generating emotions via interoceptive inference (Seth,
       Suzuki, & Critchley, 2011).
         In this chapter, we will elaborate on the IPP perspective to frame findings about the
       relationship between emotion and interoception. We will detail shared mechanisms of
       emotional and interoceptive processing, focusing on the role of the insular cortex as a
       central hub in addition to core regions such as ACC and amygdala. In a next step, we
       describe how differences in interoceptive processing can lead to individual differences
       in emotional expression, behavior, and experience. Finally, we show how impairments in
       interoception relate to affective psychopathology, with particular focus on autism spec-
       trum conditions (ASCs), anxiety disorders, depression, and eating disorders (EDs).

       7.2  Shared mechanisms
       The relation between emotion and interoception is reflected in their neural counterparts.
       Previous findings support the description of a joint network of interoceptive and emo-
       tional processing that has AIC and ACC at its center. Imaging studies show that emotions
       are mediated by a matrix of subcortical and cortical structures whose activity is also
       correlated to alterations in internal bodily states (Phan et al., 2002). Specifically, ventral
       prefrontal, anterior cingulate, and insular cortices, amygdala, ventral striatum, and dorsal
       brainstem are identified as relevant structures for emotions, which also have been related
       to changes in heart rate (Critchley et al., 2005), temperature (Nummenmaa et al., 2014),
       and blood pressure (Critchley et al., 2000).
          The insula and ACC play an especially important role for the joint processing of
       emotion and interoception. AIC is seen as mediating both interoceptive accuracy (i.e.
       how well individuals perceive inner states; Critchley et al. 2004) and deficits in emo-
       tion processing (Berthoz et  al., 2002). This is in line with the claim that integration
       processes in the anterior insula allow the uncovering of internal bodily states which
       then informs emotional processing (Terasawa et al., 2013). Thus there appears to be a
       triadic relationship between activity in AIC, emotional and interoceptive processing.
       Specifically, heightened activity in the insula is associated with both interoceptive pro-
       cessing and the processing of emotional intensity (Zaki et  al., 2012), supporting the
       view that judgments of emotional intensity are informed by the sensing of internal
       bodily sensations.
          An instance of how interoceptive signalling influences emotion processing is how
       responses to emotional stimuli vary depending on when in the cardiac cycle they are
       presented (Critchley & Garfinkel, 2017). Fear stimuli, for example, are more easily
       detected and perceived as more intense when presented at systole when baroreceptors
       (interoceptors that encode blood vessel and cardiac chamber stretch due to pressure
       change) are active compared to presentation at diastole when baroreceptors are inac-
       tive (Critchley & Garfinkel, 2015; Garfinkel & Critchley, 2016; Garfinkel et  al., 2014).
       Cardiovascular arousal thus can enhance the experience of fear and anxiety.
126




      126   Interoception and emotion


               Another example of the interacting relationship between interoception and emo-
            tion can be found in the influence of inflammation on emotional states. Inflammatory
            processes can lead to “sickness behaviors” like fatigue, social withdrawal, and irritability
            (Harrison, 2017). Interoceptive pathways to insula are involved in conveying inflamma-
            tion signals, thus suggesting an interoceptive mechanism in the shared relation between
            inflammatory and emotional states.
               These findings show that emotional and interoceptive processing have a common
            underlying neural architecture, which comprises AIC, ACC, and other functionally
            connected regions. Bodily arousal and emotional intensity are tightly correlated, which
            points towards shared mechanisms beyond the brain.

            7.3  Individual differences
            People differ with respect to how intensely they experience emotions in general, and it is
            particularly interesting that this might be due to individual differences in interoceptive
            performance. It is typically assumed that a heightened ability to detect internal bodily
            changes is associated with more intensely felt emotions, a hypothesis that has been con-
            firmed in several studies (Wiens, Mezzacappa, & Katkin, 2000).
               Quantifying interoceptive performance involves a variety of methods, ranging from
            questionnaires to behavioral tests that look for fluctuations in physiological signals or
            experimentally alter organ physiology. Among the most widely used methods are heart-
            beat detection tasks, where individuals either count their heartbeats silently for a given
            amount of time (Schandry, 1981) or judge whether an external signal is in or out of syn-
            chrony with their heartbeat (Katkin et al., 1982). In order to grasp these different meas-
            ures, novel conceptual tools have been introduced to describe different psychological
            dimensions of interoception; viz. objective performance accuracy, subjective sensibility,
            and metacognitive awareness (Garfinkel et al., 2016).
               Interoceptive accuracy refers to the objective measure of how well people perform
            on interoceptive tasks, such as heartbeat discrimination or counting tasks. This dimen-
            sion is dissociable from sensibility, which refers to the subjective impression of how
            well individuals think they are able to perceive internal signals. This can be measured
            by questionnaires such as the Body Perception Questionnaire (Porges, 1993). The third
            dimension describes the relationship between subjective and objective measures; that is,
            the metacognitive awareness of individuals regarding how well they performed on an
            interoceptive task (e.g. knowing they performed well when they actually performed well
            or knowing they performed poorly when they did perform poorly). Interoceptive aware-
            ness can be quantified through measures such as confidence-​accuracy correspondence
            (Garfinkel et al., 2015). Thus metacognitive awareness can be conceptualized as an inter-
            oceptive insight measure. Deficits within these dimensions can predict emotional states
            and affective psychopathology. In line with this, individuals with higher alexithymia—​a
            sub-​clinical condition that is characterized by impairments in recognizing and describing
            one’s emotions (Nemiah, 1976)—​        show impoverished interoceptive accuracy (Ernst
            et al., 2014).
 127




                                                                                            Individual differences   127


          The three-​level model of interoceptive dimensions was recently extended (Critchley &
       Garfinkel, 2017) to include lower levels that exhibit afferent neural trafficking and the pre-
       conscious impact of interoceptive signals on sensory processing (Figure 7.1). Good heart-
       beat perceivers, for example, experience greater arousal for emotional pictures than poor
       heartbeat perceivers and also show greater heartbeat-​evoked potentials (HEP) for emo-
       tional pictures (Herbert, Pollatos, & Schandry, 2007). Within brain, individual differences
       in insula activation correlate with levels of negative emotional states expressed as anxiety
       and neuroticism (Terasawa et  al., 2013). This again points into the direction of a link
       between interoceptive and emotional performance. Additionally, higher levels beyond




                                                  Dimensions of Interoception

                                                         Afferent Signal
                                                         Interoceptive Signal
                                                          Strength of signal
                      Brain/Body




                                                  e.g., heartbeat evoked potentials



                                            Preconscious Impact of Afferent Signal
                                                       Brain-body Interaction
                                                          Degree of impact
                                                  e.g., cardiac modulation of tear



                                                     Interoceptive Accuracy
                                                      Objective performance
                                                 Performance on behavioural tests
                      Behaviour




                                                   e.g., heartbeat detection task



                                                    Interoceptive Sensibility
                                                          Subjective belief
                                                              Self report
                                                         e.g., questionnaire



                                                    Interoceptive Awareness
                                                        Metacognitive accuracy
                      Metacognition




                                                  Insight into performance aptitude
                                              e.g., confidence-accuracy correspondence



                                                     Execution/Attribution
                                                  Metacognitive execution/attribution
                                          Attention modulation/attribution of bodily signals
                                        e.g., attributing aversive outcomes to heart pounding


       Figure 7.1  Dimensions of interoception: Dimensions of interoception range from the level of
       brain and body, to behavior, and metacognition. At each dimension, individual differences
       manifest themselves and can have an impact on emotional processes and states. These
       dimensions are though to interact with each other, for example in the alignment of interoceptive
       accuracy and sensibility.
128




      128   Interoception and emotion


            metacognition are added to the model, which include executive processes like the modu-
            lation of attention (Critchley & Garfinkel, 2017). Individual differences could manifest in
            the ability to attend flexibly to either interoceptive or exteroceptive signals or switching
            between interoceptive tasks. This in turn may be related to focusing on and consciously
            detecting one’s own emotional state.
               The ability to detect emotion and its relationship to interoceptive performance may
            also extend into the social domain and influence how accurately emotions of others
            are perceived. Empirical results on this topic are, however, conflicting, possibly due
            to different measurement methods. On the one hand, it was found that the higher the
            interoceptive accuracy, the more sensitive one is to the emotions of another person
            (Terasawa et  al., 2014). In line with this finding is a study showing that people who
            score high on alexithymia questionnaires show reduced activation in insular cortex
            both when they try to access their own emotions and when empathizing with another
            person’s pain (Bird et al., 2010; Silani et al., 2008). Another indication for a close rela-
            tionship between interoception and empathy is a finding that shows enhanced neural
            activity during empathy in brain regions related to both interoception and empathy after
            participants completed an interoceptive performance task (Ernst et al., 2013). The in-
            sula cortex underlies both current and predictive representations, which are crucial for
            learning processes of uncertainty and emotional states (Singer, Critchley, & Preuschoff,
            2009). In this learning process, predictions about feeling states in self and others are
            compared to actual incoming signals and then updated depending on the discrepancy
            between prediction and signal. Integrative processes within the insula cortex support
            this error-​based learning process in which empathic and subjective feeling states are
            generated.
               On the other hand, Ainley, Maister, and Tsakiris (Ainley et al., 2015) did not find any
            correlations between interoceptive accuracy and empathy scores on questionnaires
            that focus on cognitive, rather than affective, aspects of empathy. The relationship
            between empathy and interoceptive performance thus is still open to debate, how-
            ever there seems to be a consensus that levels of interoceptive accuracy may posi-
            tively correlate with higher levels of affective empathy (see Bird, Shah, & Catmur, 2017;
            Tsakiris, 2017).
               In summary, these findings strongly suggest that the degree to which one is able to
            detect and attend to internal states determines how well emotions are recognized in
            self and others. These individual differences can be found along different dimensions of
            interoception, which interact with and influence emotional experience.

            7.4  Interoceptive predictive processing (IPP) and emotion
            Predictive processing (PP; Clark, 2013, 2016) is ultimately a theory about how the brain
            makes sense of the world and body in which it is embedded. While it has historically been
            exclusively applied to perception and action, it has recently been extended to include
            interoception and emotion (Seth et al., 2011).
 129




                                                          Interoceptive predictive processing and emotion               129


       7.4.1  Predictive       processing
       The rationale of PP is that there are hidden causes in the world—​hidden from the brain
       in the skull—​that need to be inferred. All the brain can access are its own states: it can
       neither directly access the external world, nor the body it is embedded in, nor other
       agents. It thus has to solve an inverse problem, viz. how do the effects on the brain relate
       to causes in the external world (Hohwy, 2013). The solution to this problem presents it-
       self in the form of inference; in order to find out about what lies behind the effects the
       brain receives, the causes must be inferred. It is proposed that this happens within a hier-
       archy where predictions about the most likely state of the level below are generated and
       then compared to actual sensory input.1 While low levels predict basic sensory properties
       of incoming signals at fast timescales, higher levels predict more complex regularities
       at slower timescales (Hohwy, 2010). The crucial information, that is, the mismatch (i.e.
       error) between prediction and signal, is then conveyed via feedforward connections in
       order to improve the model. This process of updating the model is called perceptual infer-
       ence and is contrasted against active inference (Friston, 2010). In active inference, instead
       of changing models, biological agents act so to change sensory input to make it accom-
       modate predictions better. Both perceptual and active inference serve the brain’s main
       task: minimizing prediction error.
         One question that arises, though, is the following: How does the brain “decide” which of
       these strategies to choose? This is determined by how precise the expectations and error
       signals are deemed to be. The “job” of prediction errors, as we have seen, is to improve the
       generative model. However, it is important that errors are not simply taken to be “trust-
       worthy” (i.e. reliably informing the system about external states) and change the model
       or motivate to act. Error signals are taken into account depending on an estimation of
       how reliable they will be. If prediction errors are, for example, estimated as highly precise,
       they are likely to change the hypothesis; that is, the impact of an error signal depends on
       how precise it is estimated to be. At the same time, the reliability of predictive models
       needs to factored in too. Thus, “we are, in effect, estimating the uncertainty of our own
       representations of the world.” (Clark, 2015, p. 12)

       7.4.2  Interoceptive          predictive processing (IPP)
       This PP scheme was recently applied to interoception (Barrett & Simmons, 2015; Seth,
       2013b; Seth et al., 2011). In general, IPP follows the same principle as inference of exter-
       oceptive states as described earlier. Predictive models of the next most probable intero-
       ceptive signals are generated and compared to actual input. This mechanism serves to

       1
        	 There might be confusion in the PP scheme about what is considered a “signal” and what counts as a
          “representation” (thanks to our reviewer for bringing up this important issue). A helpful distinction
          could be that representations exist even at very low levels, if representations are defined as abstractions
          from the actual signal. As soon as there is a prediction about what the signal (e.g. mechanoreceptive
          organ stretching) might be, there is an abstraction from the signal itself, thus making it a representation
          (for a more detailed discussion, see Quadt, 2017, Chapter 6, and Quadt, 2018).
130




      130   Interoception and emotion


            keep bodily states in their expected range and to adapt flexibly to external and internal
            changes. Instead of simply comparing inputs to homeostatic setpoints and changing the
            internal environment accordingly, the idea is that the system anticipates demands that
            deviate from the average and thus efficiently regulates needs and resources. The terms
            “allostasis” and “predictive regulation” were introduced to conceptualize this process
            of optimizing regulation in a predictive manner (Sterling, 2012). According to the size
            and estimated reliability of the prediction error, prediction errors can be minimized in
            several ways; namely by updating generative models of interoceptive states; by engaging
            hormonal, visceral, immunological, and autonomic mechanisms to change interoceptive
            signals via active inference; or by actions that change external conditions which have an
            impact on the body (see Figure 7.2; Seth, 2015).
               The engagement of autonomic, hormonal, visceral, and immunological mechanisms
            serves to maintain homeostasis or to enable allostasis (see also Chapter  15 in the pre-
            sent volume).2 Throughout the process of monitoring its own states, the system keeps
            updating and changing its states in order to keep them in an expected range. Active in-
            teroceptive inference describes the process of how internal systems use autonomic, im-
            munological, and metabolic resources depending on the difference (prediction error)
            between predicted (demanded) and actual signal (Barrett & Simmons, 2015).
               Throughout the process of adjusting interoceptive predictions and bodily states, emo-
            tional contents may arise (Barrett, 2017; Seth, 2013a). Visceromotor cortices engender
            autonomic, hormonal, and immunological predictions which underlie the system’s al-
            lostatic responses. These predictions are not only forwarded to the body where they
            cause internal changes, they are also sent to the insula, termed the “primary interocep-
            tive cortex” (Barrett & Simmons, 2015). Here, these predictions are compared to afferent
            signals resulting from visceral, muscular, and skin changes. The ensuing error signal is
            propagated back up to visceromotor regions where the prediction originated. Once in-
            teroceptive input is accounted for, that is, once it is sufficiently explained by predictive
            models, emotional content arises (Barrett, 2017).
               This model of emotions draws on the James–​Lange theory, which assumes that emo-
            tional experiences are first and foremost constituted by the monitoring of interoceptive
            states. However, one shortcoming of this theory, which has been adopted and refined
            widely (e.g. the somatic marker hypothesis, Damasio, 1996), is that it (at least implicitly)
            asserts a one-​to-​one mapping of emotional effect and interoceptive cause (Clark, 2016).
            This means that it is assumed that there is one change in interoception (that can prob-
            ably be marked, hence “somatic marker hypothesis”) that leads to the perceived emotion.


            	 The difference between homeostasis and allostasis is that the former refers to the maintenance of spe-
            2

              cific and rather rigid setpoints, while the latter describes a highly flexible demand-​regulated change of
              states. Rather than committing to homeostatic setpoints (e.g. keeping blood pressure around a specific
              value), allostasis anticipates the changing needs of the system and adjusts bodily states accordingly (e.g.
              adjusting blood pressure relative to moment-​by-​moment demands). For a much more detailed discus-
              sion, see Sterling, 2012).
                                                                                                                                                            13




                                                  t1                                                              t2




                                                       PE                                                            PE
                                         PE                                                             PE
                                                                              Multiple
                                                                             subcortical
                                                                P                                                             P
                                                                               nodes

                                                   P                                                             P


                                         P                                                              P




                                                         Interoceptive                                                 Interoceptive
                                                             Input                                                         Input
                  Comparison of
                  interoceptive
                  predictions            PE                                                            PE
                  and input
                  forms errors signal




                                                                                                        a


                           Descending Prediction Error
                           Ascending Prediction Error
                                                                                                              Prediciton errors
                           Prediction                                                                         are quashed
                           Precision Estimation                                                               by autonomic
                                                                                                              control
                           Attenuated Precision

Figure 7.2 Active interoceptive inference: This figure depicts a sketch of the dynamics of active interoceptive inference. At time t1, predictions (“P”)
about the interoceptive state of the body are passed down via backward connections and compared against actual incoming interoceptive input.
When there is a mismatch between predicted and actual body state, a prediction error (“PE”) is generated. Note that precision of this ascending error
signal must be attenuated, so not to change predictions and thus to inhibit autonomic control. At time t2, prediction errors are quashed by autonomic
control. The changed interoceptive input is again fed forward to now inform predictions.
132




      132   Interoception and emotion


            However, it is more likely that there are several possible causes that bring forth an emo-
            tion. Viewing this basic idea within an IPP perspective, though, promises to alleviate this
            problem of former theories in the sense that the most probable of a variety of likely reasons
            is actively inferred.
               IPP furthermore describes a strong relation between exteroceptive, proprioceptive,
            and interoceptive processes in that it assumes that information from all three channels
            is integrated at hierarchically higher levels. It is this “context-​reflecting amalgam” (Clark,
            2016) that then presents itself as an experienced emotion. Emotions, in this view, integrate
            low-​level uni-​modal information (i.e. interoceptive, exteroceptive, or proprioceptive in-
            formation) with higher-​level predictions of probable causes. In other words, emotions
            occur in the process of integrating information from several sources in order to form
            interoceptive predictions. These predictions, which then contain contextual information
            from exteroception, interoception, and proprioception, are compared to actual incoming
            signals. Emotional states arise throughout this process. Note that this implies an intimate
            and most likely interacting relation between interoceptive and exteroceptive processing.
            For one, both external and internal events shape emotional response. Additionally, when
            external events trigger a cascade of interoceptive processing, these events will be “affec-
            tively colored” (Clark, 2016).
               One important consequence of adopting such a view is that it updates appraisal or two-​
            factor theories of emotional experience (Schachter & Singer, 1962). These theories suggest
            that emotions have two components: a bodily and a cognitive one. The latter is needed to
            appraise the former and thus leaves the emotion subjectively colored. However, IPP now
            claims that subjective emotional states simply occur in virtue of the single mechanism just
            described. Multimodal higher-​level top-​down predictions entail contextual information,
            which frames how interoceptive signals are interpreted and transformed into emotions.
            This means that in the process of interoceptive predictive processing, cognitive appraisal
            is already “built in”, and shapes emotional experience.
               The role of the insular cortex, especially the AIC, undoubtedly plays a key role in
            this coordinating process. Seth (2013) claims that emotional responses crucially rely
            on predictions of causes of interoceptive input that are continually updated. These
            predictions are generated, compared to actual input, and then updated within a salience
            network that consists of insular cortex, ACC, and several other functional connections to
            the brainstem.
               IPP is a promising theory to frame the relationship between emotion and interoception
            because it proposes a single principle—​prediction error minimization—​to underlie the
            generation of emotional and bodily states. It also provides novel ways to look at psycho-
            pathology, which we will detail in section 7.5.

            7.5  Clinical implications
            Many psychiatric conditions come with emotional impairments—​ranging from prevalent
            negative affect in depression to feelings of high alert and arousal in anxiety. A clear ex-
            ample of how emotion and interoception are related in psychopathology is the connection
 13




                                                                             Clinical implications   133


      between interoceptive performance and occurrence of alexithymia. It has been proposed
      that where there is alexithymia, there is poor interoceptive accuracy (Murphy et al., 2016).
      Indeed, many clinical conditions come with both alexithymia and impairments in inter-
      oceptive processing. Here, we will focus on autism spectrum conditions (ASCs), anx-
      iety disorders, depression, and eating disorders (EDs; see also Chapter 9 in the present
      volume), all of which show an interesting relation between emotional and interoceptive
      processing.

      7.5.1  Autism    spectrum conditions
      Autism spectrum conditions are characterized as neurodevelopmental lifelong conditions
      that come with alterations in social cognition and emotion processing, as well as
      restrictions in interest and activities, and stereotyped patterns of behavior (Frith, 2014).
      ASCs express high rates of alexithymia (Bird et al., 2010), which indicate difficulties in
      processing and detecting own emotional states. This extends into the social realm where
      the detection of emotions in others can be exacerbated.
         A predictive processing perspective has been used to explain several aspects of the
      symptomology of ASCs, including unusual perception and sensation (Pellicano & Burr,
      2012), and impairments in social cognition (Palmer, Seth, & Hohwy, 2015). Aiming at
      an overarching predictive processing account of autism, it was claimed that sensory pro-
      cessing in individuals with ASCs is characterized by an unusually high weighting of sen-
      sory prediction errors (Palmer, Lawson, & Hohwy, 2017).
         An aberrant oxytocin system in early infancy may play a role in the development of
      autistic traits (Quattrocki & Friston, 2014). The neuromodulatory effects of oxytocin per-
      form a major part in the processing of interoceptive information and their association
      with exteroceptive stimuli, and may also be involved in the neuromodulations that are
      necessary to elicit emotions. The functional anatomy of oxytocin is situated in the brain in
      such a way that it is involved in interoceptive paths that also mediate emotions. Oxytocin
      is thought to play an important role in the modulation of associative learning between in-
      teroceptive and exteroceptive cues. To learn emotional affordances (e.g. caregiver means
      warmth and comfort) during infancy, associations between exteroceptive cues (touch)
      and interoceptive signals (warmth) need to be established. Neuromodulatory mechanisms
      are involved in making these associations. For example, the interoceptive change of body
      temperature is associated with the bodily presence of a caregiver due to neuromodulatory
      mechanisms that underlie the establishment of this association. This is thought to be
      done via selective augmentation and attenuation of interoceptive prediction errors, most
      likely mediated by oxytocin. If these mechanisms go awry, however, the context-​sensitive
      adjustment of prediction errors is disrupted, resulting in a disturbance of the necessary
      mechanisms to acquire generative models for interoceptive inference, which target the
      emotional states of self and other. In other words, the failure to associate the interocep-
      tive consequence (warmth and comfort) with the exteroceptive cause (caregiver) may
      lead to an incorrect attribution of agency in prosocial actions. Impaired interoceptive
      inference, following this logic, could thus lead to difficulty in recognizing emotions in
134




      134   Interoception and emotion


            self and others. The faulty modulation of precision of interoceptive prediction error may
            thus result in hypersensitivity to interoceptive cues (“autonomic hypersensitivity”). This
            is because when interoceptive signals are always weighted as precise, they will have an
            increased propensity to be propagated back up the hierarchy, and consequently they have
            the power to change predictions. This, in turn, could lead to difficulties in both emotional
            and interoceptive processing.
               Viewing autism as a consequence of an abnormal neuromodulatory system (including
            oxytocin) provides an interesting perspective on well-​known symptoms like emotional
            echopraxia (which can be interpreted as interoceptive hypersensitivity) and the tendency
            not to engage with exteroceptive cues in social settings. This explanation points to aber-
            rant precision control in brain systems that mediate interoceptive inference, such as ante-
            rior insular and cingulate cortex (Seth & Friston, 2016).
               On a neural level, autism studies report altered activity in regions that underlie emo-
            tion processing, as well as impoverished functional connectivity in regions important to
            both interoception and emotion. Ebisch, Gallese, Willems, and colleagues (Ebisch et al.,
            2011) quantified aberrant functional connectivity between posterior insula and somato-
            sensory cortices, as well as between anterior insula and amygdala. These regions are hubs
            for interoception and emotion (Critchley, Mathias, & Dolan, 2002), suggesting not only
            a link between the two in healthy individuals but also in individuals with ASCs. Based
            on this evidence, it was shown that impairments in interoceptive processing are related
            to aberrant emotional processing in ASCs (Garfinkel et al., 2016). This appears to con-
            firm theories of emotion which state that the detection of internal signals informs emo-
            tional experience, since it shows that when detection is disrupted, emotional impairments
            follow. Another indication of a relationship between aberrant interoception, emotion and
            ASCs is that these conditions often co-​occur with heightened alexithymia. Interestingly, it
            was shown, however, that levels of alexithymia and not ASC severity are predictive of low
            interoceptive accuracy (Shah et al., 2016). Thus poor interoceptive accuracy may serve
            as a general feature of alexithymia as well as underscore alexithymic traits in individuals
            with ASCs.
               A discrepancy between levels of interoception, that is, enhanced interoceptive sensi-
            bility and low interoceptive accuracy, is predictive of anxiety symptomology. This dis-
            crepancy was termed “interoceptive trait prediction error” (ITPE) and was found to be
            enhanced in individuals with ASCs (Garfinkel et al., 2016). This finding is in line with
            the proposal that the development of anxiety is due to both noisy interoceptive input and
            noisily amplified self-​referential interoceptive belief states (Paulus & Stein, 2010). Viewing
            the relation between anxiety and autism in terms of ITPE is based on the fine-​grained dis-
            tinction of psychological dimensions of interoception. Where previous findings suggest
            that there is heightened sensitivity to bodily signals in autism, the differentiation between
            interoceptive sensibility and accuracy helps identify how interoceptive processing is al-
            tered autism.
               The accounts of autism described here assign an important role of prediction error pro-
            cessing to symptoms of ASC. However, there are crucial differences between the types of
 135




                                                                              Clinical implications    135


       prediction errors mentioned. While in general IPP, prediction errors refer to error signals
       occurring on a moment-​to-​moment basis in interoceptive processing, ITPE describes a
       relationship between subjective and objective traits. They thus characterize relevant error
       signals on different time scales, both of which could contribute to the occurrence of au-
       tistic characteristics.
          Taken together, these results suggest that alignment and misalignment of interoceptive
       dimensions are fundamental to affective symptoms in autism, and—​as will be detailed in
       following sections—​other clinical conditions.

       7.5.2  Anxiety    disorders
       The misalignment of interoceptive dimensions may be especially important for the de-
       velopment of anxiety disorders (ADs; see also Chapter  8 in the present volume). The
       misattribution of bodily sensations is a factor underlying the development of panic and
       related anxiety symptoms (Clark et  al., 1997). The basis for misinterpreted bodily sig-
       nals forms a heightened tendency to detect internal physiological changes. Indeed, sev-
       eral studies show that higher interoceptive accuracy is related to higher anxiety traits
       (Domschke et al., 2010).
         In a model of anxiety that focuses on the role of insula in the processing of bodily sig-
       nals, the ability to detect sub-​threshold interoceptive signals is identified as one major
       mechanism in the expression of anxiety (Paulus & Stein, 2006, 2010). These signals are
       then amplified and associated with potential aversive outcomes, thus forming the basis
       for anxious thought. Individuals with high anxiety traits are thought to be particularly
       sensitive to changes in interoceptive state when they anticipate ensuing aversive events.
       Belief-​based thought with the tendency to focus on potential negative outcomes then
       strongly modifies the emotional valence of amplified bodily signals and leads to anxiety
       symptoms.
         From an IPP perspective, it is likely that anxiety symptoms stem from abnormal preci-
       sion weighting processes. In line with previous theories, aberrantly large interoceptive pre-
       diction errors lead to heightened anxiety. Whereas in healthy individuals these errors get
       attenuated, this mechanism might fail in anxious individuals, causing an abnormally high
       sensitivity to afferent interoceptive signals. In other words, bodily signals are weighted
       high much more often in anxious than healthy individuals. This means that these signals
       are more likely to be propagated back up the hierarchy and update predictions at higher
       levels. Where interoceptive input is usually attenuated and does not reach awareness, this
       mechanism might be impaired in anxiety, leading to a hypersensitivity to interoceptive
       signals. This is then also reflected in higher interoceptive accuracy, where bodily signals
       are more readily detected and available to conscious perception.

       7.5.3 Depression
       Major depressive disorder (MDD) is marked by a range of somatic and affective symptoms,
       including loss of appetite, sleep disorders, aches and pains, changes in libido, loss of en-
       ergy, pervasive negative affect, and intense feelings of loneliness and hopelessness (Tylee &
136




      136   Interoception and emotion


            Gandhi, 2005). Somatic symptoms are universal cross-​culturally (Kirmayer, 2001) and as-
            sociated with disruptions in physiological regulatory processes, including hypoactivity of
            the autonomic nervous system (Dawson, Schell, & Catania, 1977). Over the past decade,
            there has been growing recognition that somatic changes may drive alterations in emo-
            tion and cognition (Dunn et  al., 2007; Pollatos, Traut‐Mattausch, & Schandry, 2009).
            The role of interoception in low mood and clinical depression has been investigated in a
            number of studies; interoceptive accuracy is reduced in low to moderate, but not severe
            depression (Dunn et al., 2007). A negative correlation between heartbeat perception and
            depressive symptoms has been reported (Pollatos et  al., 2009), where individuals with
            reduced interoceptive accuracy may experience emotions less intensely. These emotional
            impairments will impact social processes, as is often observed in MDD.
               There is frequent comorbidity of depression and anxiety, possibly confounding
            interpretations. One subsequent study chose depressed subjects with no comorbid anx-
            iety disorder (Furman et al., 2013). An association between interoceptive accuracy and
            positive affect intensity was observed. Moreover, worse performance was related to less
            affect intensity ratings in individuals with MDD, but not controls. The reduced autonomic
            reactivity to positive stimuli in depression (Bylsma, Morris, & Rottenberg, 2008), and the
            association between depressive symptoms and decreased responses to positive stimuli
            (Sloan & Sandt, 2010), indicate an aberrant interoceptive mechanism for positive rein-
            forcement. In other words, physiological disruption in depression limits the intensity
            of interoceptive input. This in turn results in attenuated affective reactions to positive
            information.
               Depression was recently framed in the PP framework and described as a disorder of
            predictive mechanisms that steer allostasis, that is, the ability to adapt flexibly to changing
            internal and external environments (Barrett, Quigley, & Hamilton, 2016). Affective
            feelings can inform the system about the state of bodily energy conditions, whereby the
            inefficient regulation of energy is coupled to affective, motor, autonomic, and metabolic
            dysregulations. In depression, the brain’s internal model is negatively affected by this
            dysregulation. The brain is described as “locked in” in the sense that there is an insensi-
            tivity to interoceptive prediction errors which—​coupled with energy dysregulation that
            is related to negative affect—​leads to depression. In more detail, this means that when in-
            teroceptive prediction errors (i.e. bodily signals) are not used to update predictions, these
            predictions may result in inefficient energy regulation. This inefficiency could be related
            to negative affect, and the tendency to disengage in physical and mental activity. Pervasive
            negative affect, in turn, could lead to the generation of more and more negative internal
            models, resulting in both predictions and prediction errors to show a bias towards the
            negative and unpleasant.
               Furthermore, peripheral endocrine immunological changes that accompany the onset
            of a depressive episode can perturb precision of interoceptive afferents (Seth & Friston,
            2016). The attenuation of precision of ascending interoceptive signals, and greater reli-
            ance on interoceptive predictions, lead to dyshomeostasis. This process could engender
            a positive feedback loop in which higher reliance on predictions leads to larger and
 137




                                                                                         Clinical implications      137


       nosier prediction errors, which in turn increases the reliance on the now dysfunctional
       predictions. Since interoceptive predictions include “homeostatic setpoints,” dysfunc-
       tional prediction will result in dysregulated homeostasis, which may trigger sickness be-
       havior and fatigue, marking the onset of depression.
          Taken together, these findings suggest that dysfunctions in interoception and auto-
       nomic regulation are strongly related to both somatic and emotional symptoms of depres-
       sion. PP models of depression exhibit a strong connection between allostasis/​homeostasis
       and the resulting dysbalance of affective processing.

       7.5.4  Eating     disorders
       Both interoceptive and emotional processing appear impaired in eating disorders.
       Alexithymia often co-​occurs with EDs, indicating a generally impaired recognition of
       own emotions. This extends into the social realm where it was found that emotion rec-
       ognition in others is diminished in patients with eating disorders (Harrison et al., 2009).
       Emotion recognition performance, however, was predicted by alexithymia scores rather
       than eating disorder symptomology (Brewer et al., 2015). What still stands out, though, is
       the high co-​occurrence of alexithymia and EDs, suggesting that emotional processing is
       indeed impaired in eating disorders.
         When investigated directly, there appears to be a three-​way relation between intero-
       ceptive performance, emotional intensity, and symptomology of eating disorders. So far,
       interoceptive abilities in EDs were tested by the Eating Disorder Inventory (EDI; Garner,
       Olmstead, & Polivy, 1983), in which the ability to discriminate sensations of hunger and
       satiety and to respond to emotional states (“interoceptive awareness”)3 was in focus.
       Interoceptive awareness, as measured by the EDI, was impaired in patients with eating
       disorders, where this is characterized as a low certainty in emotion recognition related to
       hunger and satiety (Fassino et al., 2004).
         When using the heartbeat counting task (Schandry, 1981) to quantify interoceptive ac-
       curacy, decreased measures were found in patients with eating disorders compared to
       healthy controls (Pollatos et al., 2008). This shows that interoceptive ability is impaired in
       general and not just with respect to hunger and satiety, as measured by the EDI.
         Together with findings that show altered autonomic functioning in eating disorders
       (Murialdo et  al., 2007), which could lead to altered bodily feedback, this suggests that
       individuals with EDs experience emotions less intensely. Evidence in favor of this claim
       comes again from studies linking alexithymia to eating disorders (Berthoz et al., 2007) and
       showing diminished affect in patients (de Zwaan et al., 1996).
         Eating disorders could be a result of aberrant precision weighting when viewed from
       an IPP perspective (Seth, 2015). In PP, only prediction errors that are deemed “reliable”
       will be propagated back up the hierarchy and update predictions. This means that in

       3
        	 Note how the term “interoceptive awareness” here relates to the specific measure of discrimination of
          sensations and response to emotional states and is different from how we use the term in section 7.3 as
          a measure of the relationship between objective and subjective scores.
138




      138   Interoception and emotion


            healthy individuals, interoceptive prediction errors related to blood sugar levels are gen-
            erally weighted high in order to update predictions and lead to the sensation of hunger
            when the levels drop below a specific threshold. The desired, predicted bodily state thus
            is different from the actual state, which leads to the generation of interoceptive prediction
            errors. These in turn are forwarded to higher-​level, multimodal models. Such models
            generate predictions of temporal sequences of exteroceptive and interoceptive inputs,
            which are propagated down the hierarchy. The ensuing prediction errors can then be
            resolved by either autonomic control, where fat stores are metabolized, or by engaging
            active movements to seek food resources. It is hypothesized that dysfunctions in precision
            weighting, which steers this process, may help understanding EDs. If, for example, it is
            constantly assumed that blood sugar will be low (i.e. high-​level predictions of low blood
            sugar become aberrantly strong), behavior to find food may not be pursued.
               Taken together, these findings suggest that problems in the discrimination of sensations
            like hunger and satiety, which are deemed at the core of the onset and maintenance
            of eating disorders, are mediated by a more general inability to regulate and describe
            emotions. This in turn can be traced back to impairments in interoceptive ability, showing
            a link between interoception and emotion in eating disorders.

            7.6 Conclusion
            Links between interoception and emotion can be found in the relationship between in-
            teroceptive performance and experience of emotional intensity, the ability to recognize
            one’s own emotions (as measured in alexithymia scores) and interoceptive accuracy, and
            emotion and interoception in psychopathology.
               The framework of IPP provides a means to put these findings together in terms of inter-
            oceptive inference and integration of multimodal information to generate interoceptive
            predictions. Aberrant precision weighting may be involved in psychopathology, as was
            hypothesized for depression and eating disorders.
               Together, experimental and clinical findings support the proposal that interoception,
            including individual differences in interoceptive processing, guides the experience and ex-
            pression of emotions. Altered interoceptive pathways may account for aberrant emotional
            processing in psychopathological disorders. These observations provide insights into po-
            tential body-​centered therapies and pharmacological targets for novel interventions for
            clinical disorders of emotion. Where interoceptive dimensions diverge, leading to psy-
            chopathological symptoms like anxiety, training interoceptive accuracy could lead to a
            reduction in these symptoms. Thus insight into specific interoceptive deficits may offer a
            targeted therapeutic approach for clinical conditions with altered emotional and affective
            processing.

            References
            Ainley, V., Maister, L., and Tsakiris, M. (2015). Heartfelt empathy? No association between
               interoceptive awareness, questionnaire measures of empathy, reading the mind in the eyes task or
               the director task. Frontiers in Psychology, 6, 554. doi:10.3389/​fpsyg.2015.00554.
 139




                                                                                                       References       139


       Barrett, L. F. and Simmons, W. K. (2015). Interoceptive predictions in the brain. Nature Reviews
          Neuroscience, 16(7), 419.
       Barrett, L. F., Quigley, K. S., and Hamilton, P. (2016). An active inference theory of allostasis and
          interoception in depression. Philosophical Transaction of the Royal Society B, 371(1708), 20160011.
       Barrett, L. F. (2017). The theory of constructed emotion: An active inference account of interoception
          and categorization. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 12(1), 1–​13. doi:10.1093/​scan/​
          nsw154.
       Berthoz, S., Artiges, E., Van De Moortele, P. F., Poline, J. B., Rouquette, S., Consoli, S. M., et al. (2002).
          Effect of impaired recognition and expression of emotions on frontocingulate cortices: An fMRI
          study of men with alexithymia. American Journal of Psychiatry, 159(6), 961–​7. doi:10.1176/​appi.
          ajp.159.6.961.
       Berthoz, S., Perdereau, F., Godart, N., Corcos, M., and Haviland, M. G. (2007). Observer-​and self-​
          rated alexithymia in eating disorder patients: Levels and correspondence among three measures.
          Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 62(3),  341–​7.
       Bird, G., Silani, G., Brindley, R., White, S., Frith, U., and Singer, T. (2010). Empathic brain responses in
          insula are modulated by levels of alexithymia but not autism. Brain, 133(Pt 5), 1515–​25. doi:10.1093/​
          brain/​awq060.
       Bird, G., Shah, P., and Catmur, C. (2017). From heart to mind: Linking interoception, emotion, and
          theory of mind. Cortex, 93, 220–​3. doi:10.1016/​j.cortex.2017.02.010.
       Brewer, R., Cook, R., Cardi, V., Treasure, J., and Bird, G. (2015). Emotion recognition deficits in
          eating disorders are explained by co-​occurring alexithymia. Royal Society Open Science, 2(1),
          140382.
       Bylsma, L. M., Morris, B. H., and Rottenberg, J. (2008). A meta-​analysis of emotional reactivity in
          major depressive disorder. Clinical Psychology Review, 28(4), 676–​91.
       Canales-​Johnson, A., Silva, C., Huepe, D., Rivera-​Rei, Á., Noreika, V., del Carmen Garcia, M., et al.
          (2015). Auditory feedback differentially modulates behavioral and neural markers of objective and
          subjective performance when tapping to your heartbeat. Cerebral Cortex, 25, 4490–​503. doi:10.1093/​
          cercor/​bhv076.
       Clark, A. (2013). Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and the future of cognitive science.
          Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 36, 181–​253. doi:10.1017/​S0140525X12000477.
       Clark, A. (2015). Embodied prediction. In: T. K. Metzinger and J. M. Windt (eds), Open MIND.
          Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group, pp. 1–​21. doi:10.15502/​9783958570115.
       Clark, A. (2016). Surfing Uncertainty: Prediction, Action and the Embodied Mind. Oxford: Oxford
          University Press.
       Clark, D. M., Salkovskis, P. M., Öst, L.-​G., Breitholtz, E., Koehler, K. A., Westling, B. E., et al.
          (1997). Misinterpretation of body sensations in panic disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
          Psychology, 65(2), 203.
       Craig, A. D. (2002). How do you feel? Interoception: The sense of the physiological condition of the
          body. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 3(8), 655–​66. doi:10.1038/​nrn894.
       Critchley, H. D., Corfield, D., Chandler, M., Mathias, C., and Dolan, R. J. (2000). Cerebral correlates of
          autonomic cardiovascular arousal: A functional neuroimaging investigation in humans. Journal of
          Physiology, 523(1), 259–​70.
       Critchley, H. D., Mathias, C. J., and Dolan, R. J. (2002). Fear conditioning in humans: The influence of
          awareness and autonomic arousal on functional neuroanatomy. Neuron, 33(4), 653–​63.
       Critchley, H. D. (2004). The human cortex responds to an interoceptive challenge. Proceedings of the
          National Academy of Sciences USA, 101(17), 6333–​4. doi:10.1073/​pnas.0401510101.
       Critchley, H. D., Wiens, S., Rotshtein, P., Ohman, A., and Dolan, R. (2004). Neural systems supporting
          interoceptive awareness. Nature Neuroscience, 7(2), 189–​95. doi:10.1038/​nn1176.
140




      140   Interoception and emotion


            Critchley, H. D., Rotshtein, P., Nagai, Y., O’Doherty, J., Mathias, C. J., and Dolan, R. J. (2005). Activity
                in the human brain predicting differential heart rate responses to emotional facial expressions.
                Neuroimage, 24(3), 751–​62. doi:10.1016/​j.neuroimage.2004.10.013.
            Critchley, H. D. and Garfinkel, S. N. (2015). Interactions between visceral afferent signaling and
                stimulus processing. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 9, 286. doi:10.3389/​fnins.2015.00286.
            Critchley, H. D. and Garfinkel, S. N. (2017). Interoception and emotion. Current Opinion in Psychology,
                17, 7–​14. <https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​j.copsyc.2017.04.020>
            Damasio, A. R. (1996). The somatic marker hypothesis and the possible functions of the prefrontal
                cortex. Philosophical Transactions Royal Society London B, 351(1346), 1413–​20. doi:10.1098/​
                rstb.1996.0125.
            Dawson, M. E., Schell, A. M., and Catania, J. J. (1977). Autonomic correlates of depression and clinical
                improvement following electroconvulsive shock therapy. Psychophysiology, 14(6), 569–​78.
            de Zwaan, M., Biener, D., Bach, M., Wiesnagrotzki, S., and Stacher, G. (1996). Pain sensitivity,
                alexithymia, and depression in patients with eating disorders: Are they related? Journal of
                Psychosomatic Research, 41(1),  65–​70.
            Deen, B., Pitskel, N. B., and Pelphrey, K. A. (2011). Three Systems of Insular Functional Connectivity
                Identified with Cluster Analysis. Cerebral Cortex, 21(7), 1498–​506. doi:10.1093/​cercor/​bhq186.
            Domschke, K., Stevens, S., Pfleiderer, B., and Gerlach, A. L. (2010). Interoceptive sensitivity in anxiety
                and anxiety disorders: An overview and integration of neurobiological findings. Clinical Psychology
                Review, 30(1), 1–​11. doi:10.1016/​j.cpr.2009.08.008.
            Dunn, B. D., Dalgleish, T., Ogilvie, A. D., and Lawrence, A. D. (2007). Heartbeat perception in
                depression. Behavior Research and Therapy, 45(8), 1921–​30.
            Ebisch, S. J., Gallese, V., Willems, R. M., Mantini, D., Groen, W. B., Romani, G. L., et al. (2011).
                Altered intrinsic functional connectivity of anterior and posterior insula regions in high-​functioning
                participants with autism spectrum disorder. Human Brain Mapping, 32(7), 1013–​28. doi:10.1002/​
                hbm.21085.
            Ernst, J., Northoff, G., Böker, H., Seifritz, E., and Grimm, S. (2013). Interoceptive awareness enhances
                neural activity during empathy. Human Brain Mapping, 34(7), 1615–​24.
            Ernst, J., Böker, H., Hättenschwiler, J., Schüpbach, D., Northoff, G., Seifritz, E., et al. (2014). The
                association of interoceptive awareness and alexithymia with neurotransmitter concentrations in
                insula and anterior cingulate. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 9(6), 857–​63. doi:10.1093/​
                scan/​nst058.
            Fassino, S., Pierò, A., Gramaglia, C., and Abbate-​Daga, G. (2004). Clinical, psychopathological and
                personality correlates of interoceptive awareness in anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa and obesity.
                Psychopathology, 37(4), 168–​74.
            Friston, K. (2010). The free-​energy principle: A unified brain theory? Nature Review Neuroscience,
                11(2), 127–​38. <http://​www.nature.com/​nrn/​journal/​v11/​n2/​suppinfo/​nrn2787_​S1.html>
            Frith, U. (2014). Autism—​are we any closer to explaining the enigma? Psychologist, 27(10),  744–​5.
            Furman, D. J., Waugh, C. E., Bhattacharjee, K., Thompson, R. J., and Gotlib, I. H. (2013). Interoceptive
                awareness, positive affect, and decision making in major depressive disorder. Journal of Affective
                Disorders, 151(2),  780–​5.
            Garfinkel, S. N., Minati, L., Gray, M. A., Seth, A. K., Dolan, R. J., and Critchley, H. D. (2014). Fear
                from the heart: Sensitivity to fear stimuli depends on individual heartbeats. Journal of Neuroscience,
                34(19), 6573–​82. doi:10.1523/​JNEUROSCI.3507-​13.2014.
            Garfinkel, S. N., Seth, A. K., Barrett, A. B., Suzuki, K., and Critchley, H. D. (2015). Knowing your own
                heart: Distinguishing interoceptive accuracy from interoceptive awareness. Biological Psychology,
                104, 65–​74. doi:10.1016/​j.biopsycho.2014.11.004.
            Garfinkel, S. N. and Critchley, H. D. (2016). Threat and the body: How the heart supports fear
                processing. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 20(1), 34–​46. doi:10.1016/​j.tics.2015.10.005.
 14




                                                                                                   References      141


      Garfinkel, S. N., Tiley, C., O’Keeffe, S., Harrison, N. A., Seth, A. K., and Critchley, H. D. (2016).
         Discrepancies between dimensions of interoception in autism: Implications for emotion and anxiety.
         Biological Psychology, 114, 117–​26. doi:10.1016/​j.biopsycho.2015.12.003.
      Garner, D. M., Olmstead, M. P., and Polivy, J. (1983). Development and validation of a
         multidimensional eating disorder inventory for anorexia nervosa and bulimia. International Journal
         of Eating Disorders, 2(2),  15–​34.
      Harrison, A., Sullivan, S., Tchanturia, K., and Treasure, J. (2009). Emotion recognition and regulation
         in anorexia nervosa. Clinical Psychology & Psychotherapy, 16(4), 348–​56.
      Harrison, N. A. (2017). Brain structures implicated in inflammation-​associated depression. In: R.
         Dantzer and L. Capuron (eds), Inflammation-​Associated Depression: Evidence, Mechanisms and
         Implications. Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 221–​48.
      Herbert, B. M., Pollatos, O., and Schandry, R. (2007). Interoceptive sensitivity and emotion
         processing: An EEG study. International Journal of Psychophysiology, 65(3), 214–​27.
      Hohwy, J. (2010). The hypothesis testing brain: some philosophical applications. In: J. Sutton (ed.), 9th
         Conference of the Australasian Society for Cognitive Science. Sydney, Sep 30–Oct 02, 2009. Sydney:
         Macquarie Centre for Cognitive Science, pp. 135–​44.
      Hohwy, J. (2013). The Predictive Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
      James, W. (1884). What is an emotion? Mind, 9, 188–​205.
      Katkin, E. S., Morell, M. A., Goldband, S., Bernstein, G. L., and Wise, J. A. (1982). Individual
         differences in heartbeat discrimination. Psychophysiology, 19(2),  160–​6.
      Kirmayer, L. J. (2001). Cultural variations in the clinical presentation of depression and
         anxiety: Implications for diagnosis and treatment. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 62,  22–​30.
      Kober, H., Barrett, L. F., Joseph, J., Bliss-​Moreau, E., Lindquist, K., and Wager, T. D. (2008).
         Functional grouping and cortical-​subcortical interactions in emotion: A meta-​analysis of
         neuroimaging studies. Neuroimage, 42(2), 998–​1031. doi:10.1016/​j.neuroimage.2008.03.059.
      Lamm, C. and Singer, T. (2010). The role of anterior insular cortex in social emotions. Brain Structure
         and Function, 214(5–​6), 579–​91. doi:10.1007/​s00429-​010-​0251-​3.
      Murialdo, G., Casu, M., Falchero, M., Brugnolo, A., Patrone, V., Cerro, P., et al. (2007). Alterations
         in the autonomic control of heart rate variability in patients with anorexia or bulimia
         nervosa: Correlations between sympathovagal activity, clinical features, and leptin levels. Journal of
         Endocrinological Investigation, 30(5), 356–​62.
      Murphy, J., Brewer, R., Catmur, C., and Bird, G. (2016). Interoception and psychopathology: A
         developmental neuroscience perspective. Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience, 23, 45–​56.
         doi:10.1016/​j.dcb2016.12.006.
      Nemiah, J. C. (1976). Alexithymia: A view of the psychosomatic process. Modern Trends in
         Psychosoamtic Medicine, 3,  430–​9.
      Nummenmaa, L., Glerean, E., Hari, R., and Hietanen, J. K. (2014). Bodily maps of emotions.
         Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA, 111(2), 646–​51. doi:10.1073/​pnas.1321664111.
      Palmer, C. J., Seth, A. K., and Hohwy, J. (2015). The felt presence of other minds: Predictive processing,
         counterfactual predictions, and mentalising in autism. Consciousness and Cognition, 36, 376–​89.
         doi:10.1016/​j.concog.2015.04.007.
      Palmer, C. J., Lawson, R. P., and Hohwy, J. (2017). Bayesian approaches to autism: Towards volatility,
         action, and behavior. Psychology Bulletin, 143(5), 521–​42. doi:10.1037/​bul0000097.
      Paulus, M. P., and Stein, M. B. (2006). An insular view of anxiety. Biological Psychiatry, 60(4), 383–​7.
         doi:10.1016/​j.biopsych.2006.03.042.
      Paulus, M. P. and Stein, M. B. (2010). Interoception in anxiety and depression. Brain Structure and
         Function, 214(5–​6), 451–​63. doi:10.1007/​s00429-​010-​0258-​9.
142




      142   Interoception and emotion


            Pellicano, E. and Burr, D. (2012). When the world becomes “too real”: A Bayesian explanation of
                autistic perception. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 16(10), 504–​10.
            Peyron, R., Laurent, B., and Garcia-​Larrea, L. (2000). Functional imaging of brain responses to pain.
                A review and meta-​analysis (2000). Clinical Neurophysiology, 30(5), 263–​88.
            Phan, K. L., Wager, T., Taylor, S. F., and Liberzon, I. (2002). Functional neuroanatomy of emotion: A
                meta-​analysis of emotion activation studies in PET and fMRI. Neuroimage, 16(2), 331–​48.
            Pollatos, O., Kurz, A.-​L., Albrecht, J., Schreder, T., Kleemann, A. M., Schöpf, V., et al. (2008). Reduced
                perception of bodily signals in anorexia nervosa. Eating Behaviors, 9(4),  381–​8.
            Pollatos, O., Traut‐Mattausch, E., and Schandry, R. (2009). Differential effects of anxiety and
                depression on interoceptive accuracy. Depression and Anxiety, 26(2), 167–​73.
            Porges, S. (1993). Body perception questionnaire. Laboratory of Developmental Assessment, University
                of Maryland, Baltimore, MD.
            Quadt, L. (2017). Levels of social embodiment—​towards a unifying perspective on social cognition.
                Mainz. Doctoral dissertation, Gutenberg Qualify. <http://​d-​nb.info/​113138878X/​34>.
            Quadt, L. (2018). Commentary: First-​order embodiment, second-​order embodiment, third-​order
                embodiment. Frontiers of Psychology, 9(445), 1–​3. doi:10.3389/​fpsyg.2018.0045.
            Quattrocki, E. and Friston, K. (2014). Autism, oxytocin and interoception. Neuroscience and
                Biobehavioral Reviews, 47, 410–​30. doi:10.1016/​j.neubiorev.2014.09.012.
            Schachter, S. and Singer, J. E. (1962). Cognitive, social, and physiological determinants of emotional
                state. Psychological Review, 69, 379–​99.
            Schandry, R. (1981). Heart beat perception and emotional experience. Psychophysiology, 18(4),  483–​8.
            Seth, A. K., Suzuki, K., and Critchley, H. D. (2011). An interoceptive predictive coding model of
                conscious presence. Frontiers in Psychology, 2, 395. doi:10.3389/​fpsyg.2011.00395.
            Seth, A. K. (2013). Interoceptive inference, emotion, and the embodied self. Trends in Cognitive
                Sciences, 17(11), 565–​73. doi:10.1016/​j.tics.2013.09.007.
            Seth, A. K. (2015). The cybernetic bayesian brain. In: T. K. Metzinger and J. M. Windt (eds), Open
                MIND. Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group, pp. 1–​24. doi: 10.15502/​9783958570108.
            Seth, A. K. and Friston, K. J. (2016). Active interoceptive inference and the emotional brain.
                Philosophical Transaction of the Royal Society B, 371(1708). doi:10.1098/​rstb.2016.0007.
            Shah, P., Hall, R., Catmur, C., and Bird, G. (2016). Alexithymia, not autism, is associated with impaired
                interoception. Cortex, 81, 215–​20.
            Silani, G., Bird, G., Brindley, R., Singer, T., Frith, C., and Frith, U. (2008). Levels of emotional
                awareness and autism: An fMRI study. Social Neuroscience, 3(2), 97–​112. doi:10.1080/​
                17470910701577020.
            Singer, T., Critchley, H. D., and Preuschoff, K. (2009). A common role of insula in feelings, empathy
                and uncertainty. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13(8), 334–​340. doi:10.1016/​j.tics.2009.05.001.
            Sloan, D. M. and Sandt, A. R. (2010). Depressed mood and emotional responding. Biological
                Psychology, 84(2), 368–​74.
            Sterling, P. (2012). Allostasis: A model of predictive regulation. Physiology Behavior, 106(1),  5–​15.
            Terasawa, Y., Shibata, M., Moriguchi, Y., and Umeda, S. (2013). Anterior insular cortex mediates
                bodily sensibility and social anxiety. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 8(3), 259–​266.
                doi:10.1093/​scan/​nss108.
            Terasawa, Y., Moriguchi, Y., Tochizawa, S., and Umeda, S. (2014). Interoceptive sensitivity predicts
                sensitivity to the emotions of others. Cognition and Emotion, 28(8), 1435–​1448. doi:10.1080/​
                02699931.2014.888988.
            Tsakiris, M. (2017). The multisensory basis of the self: From body to identity to others. Quarterly
                Journal of Experimental Psychology, 70(4), 597–​609.
 143




                                                                                                   References     143


       Tylee, A. and Gandhi, P. (2005). The importance of somatic symptoms in depression in primary care.
          Primary Care Companion Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 7(4), 167–​76.
       Wicker, B., Keysers, C., Plailly, J., Royet, J. P., Gallese, V., and Rizzolatti, G. (2003). Both of us
          disgusted in My insula: The common neural basis of seeing and feeling disgust. Neuron, 40(3),
          655–​64.
       Wiens, S., Mezzacappa, E. S., and Katkin, E. S. (2000). Heartbeat detection and the experience of
          emotions. Cognition and Emotion, 14(3), 417–​27. doi:10.1080/​026999300378905.
       Williams, L. M., Brammer, M. J., Skerrett, D., Lagopolous, J., Rennie, C., Kozek, K., et al. (2000). The
          neural correlates of orienting: An integration of fMRI and skin conductance orienting. Neuroreport,
          11(13), 3011–​15.
       Zaki, J., Davis, J. I., and Ochsner, K. N. (2012). Overlapping activity in anterior insula during
          interoception and emotional experience. Neuroimage, 62(1), 493–​99. doi:10.1016/​j.neuroim
          age.2012.05.012.
14




               Chapter 8

               The somatic error hypothesis
               of anxiety
               Sahib S. Khalsa and Justin S. Feinstein



     8.1 Introduction
     Interoceptive experiences are characterized by heightened physiological and psycholog-
     ical states, particularly when homeostatic deviations occur in response to threats—​or
     potential threats—​to the body. This chapter argues that anxiety disorders are funda-
     mentally driven by somatic errors that fail to be adaptively regulated, leaving the or-
     ganism in a state of dissonance where the predicted body state is perpetually out of line
     with the current body state as mapped within the interoceptive circuitry of the brain.
        Classification models have clearly identified interoceptive symptoms as prominent
     features in the diagnosis of psychiatric disorders including anxiety, mood, eating,
     and somatic symptom disorders (APA, 2013), though they are likely to be present in
     many others. Despite the contribution of interoceptive disturbances in the clinical
     manifestations of these disorders, there are presently no interoceptive biomarkers
     that have been demonstrated to improve diagnosis, prognosis, or treatment reliably
     (Khalsa et al., 2018). Furthermore, interoception has not yet gained a foothold in al-
     ternative frameworks for biologically phenotyping mental illness, such as the Research
     Domain Criteria (RDoC) initiative (Kozak & Cuthbert, 2016). This stagnated prog-
     ress is perhaps complicated by the fact that it remains unclear whether such patients
     process interoceptive sensations differently or whether they have a systematic bias
     toward reporting such feelings. Recent developments in computational neurosci-
     ence are spurring progress in interoception research by re-​examining the traditional
     view that visceral sensations arise solely from perception of the body’s internal milieu
     via ascending afferent pathways. Based on the notion of “active inference” (Friston,
     Daunizeau, & Kiebel, 2009), these models suggest that interoceptive perceptions are
     dynamically constructed by the brain, meaning that interoception occurs through an
     iterative process of comparing the brain’s anticipation of sensation with concurrently
     incoming sensation (Paulus & Stein, 2006; Singer, Critchley, & Preuschoff, 2009; Seth
     et al., 2011; Barrett & Simmons, 2015; Pezzulo, Rigoli, & Friston, 2015; Stephan et al.,
     2016; Petzschner et al., 2017).
        A consequence of active inference models may be that certain psychiatric disorders,
     especially those characterized by chronic and unrelenting anxiety, are exemplified by
 145




                                                                         What are somatic errors?      145


       mismatches between the brain’s ongoing comparison of anticipated and incoming sig-
       nals. These mismatches have been previously referred to as altered prediction states or
       “interoceptive prediction errors” (Paulus & Stein, 2006; Seth et al., 2011). In particular,
       it has been proposed that sustained and exaggerated interoceptive prediction errors
       dysregulate the ability to accurately sense what is happening in the body, resulting
       in a turbulent reference state (i.e. a “noisy baseline”) (Paulus & Stein, 2010), atten-
       tional bias toward threat (Hakamata et  al., 2010), increased worry and self-​related
       cognitions, dysfunctional learning about bodily states over time (Van den Bergh
       et al., 2017), and increased allostatic load (Sterling, 2012) leading to increased stress
       and mental illness (Sterling, 2014; Peters, McEwen, & Friston, 2017). Building upon
       this framework, a number of recent models have further elaborated how the brain
       computes interoceptive prediction errors, including which regions and cellular lamina
       are involved, and how these may be modeled using hierarchical Bayesian models
       (Seth, Suzuki, & Friston, 2011; Barrett & Simmons, 2015; Pezzulo, Rigoli, & Friston,
       2015; Stephan et al., 2016; Petzschner et al., 2017). The purpose of this chapter is not
       to review these proposals in detail, and for further guidance the reader is encouraged
       to examine the cited references and other chapters in this edited volume. Instead, our
       aim is to juxtapose these perspectives against some clinical observations of how inter-
       oceptive dysfunction generates anxious psychopathology via a global mechanism of
       somatic errors.

       8.2  What are somatic errors?
       One way that anxiety disorders can be broadly characterized is by a dysfunction in the
       way the mind computes and integrates representations of the inner and outer worlds of the
       body across time. According to this view, anxiety results from the brain’s distorted transla-
       tion of what it anticipates will happen in these worlds versus what is actually happening in
       these worlds, producing discrepancy or error signals. These somatic errors are not simply
       the passive result of a dysfunctional transfer of afferent body-​to-​brain mapping. They
       are highly constructive. They reflect dynamic breakdowns in the brain’s tightrope act of
       simultaneously mapping objects in the world external to the body, mapping objects in
       the world internal to the body, integrating these maps with neural representations of the
       predicted state of the world, and subsequently modifying these maps over time to main-
       tain an updated representation of the self (Figure 8.1).
          Thus, there are two very different worlds inside our brain:  the internal world of
       our body and the external world in which that body lives. Each waking moment, the
       brain is in constant flux, attempting to pair what is happening on the outside with
       what is happening on the inside. A  somatic error is produced whenever the body
       state predicted by the brain differs from the actual body signals being continuously
       delivered and mapped in viscerosensory regions of the brainstem, diencephalon, in-
       sular, and somatosensory cortices. Collectively, the brain’s processing of these afferent
       body signals is critical for the computation of a neural map of the self. While there
       is an initial moment of sensory mapping of the self with no prior experience (i.e. the
                                                                                                                                                               146




                                                                        SOMATIC ERROR =
    All incoming sensory                                         Overall difference between the                           Adaptive corrective action
 signals from the previous                                      predicted and observed body state                         leads to healthy outcomes
      moment in time                                                                                                       •   Intact learning
                                                                                                                           •   Recovery
           Prior                                                                                  No corrective action     •   Resiliency
                                                                              Minimal Somatic Error     needed
        experiences
                                                          No                                                              Maladaptive corrective
                                                                                                                          action leads to illness states
          Predicted          Observed
                                            Is there a                                                                     •   Exaggerated symptom intensity
         body state    vs.   body state
                                           difference?                                                                     •   Symptom misinterpretation
         (expected)           (actual)
                                                                                                                           •   Autonomic hypervigilance
                                                          Yes                                                              •   Bodily preoccupation
                                                                               Large                                       •   Worry/Rumination
                                                                            Somatic Error             Corrective action    •   Cognitive distortions
                        Current signals from                                                             imperative        •   Avoidance/Escape behaviors
                         the internal world


           Regulation of                  Regulation of
          as-if body loop                  body loop




Figure 8.1  The somatic error hypothesis of anxiety. A regulatory battle for control ensues in the central nervous system following a mismatch between
the current physiological state of an organism as mapped in viscerosensory brain regions, and the predicted body state as computed in visceromotor
control regions. The discrepancy between the predicted and current body state (i.e., the ‘somatic error’) signals a need for corrective action, motivating
changes in both cognition and behavior. The predicted body state is continuously constructed based on a moving snapshot of all the sensory signals
encountered during the previous moment in time, filtered through the lens of past experience via conditioning. Notably, these conditioned sensory
signals can emerge from both the internal world of the body, and the external world in which that body currently lives. The observed body state is
a moment-​to-​moment mapping of all the incoming signals from the internal world of the body. The degree of discrepancy between the predicted
and observed body state signals the need for corrective action, which can be achieved by either adjusting the predictions to better match the current
physiological state (via regulation of the as-​if body loop), or by modifying the current physiological state to more closely conform to the predictions
(via regulation of the body loop). When somatic errors are small, corrective action is discretionary, whereas when somatic errors are large, corrective
action is imperative. Adaptive corrective action leads to healthy outcomes whereas maladaptive corrective actions lead to anxiety, as described further in
the text.
 147




                                                  Corrective action failure and its consequences     147


       “inaugural moment” per Damasio, 1999), this initial neural map is quickly modified
       by life experience. The result is the gradual development over time of a set of prior
       experiences which inform expectations about the potential physiological impact of
       encountering specific sensory stimuli whether they be internal or external to the body.
       At the interface between these two worlds lies the brain’s machinery for generating
       predicted body states, namely in anterior insula and visceromotor control regions such
       as the amygdala, anterior cingulate, and ventromedial prefrontal cortices (vmPFC),
       critical gatekeepers responsible for helping to merge the internal and external worlds
       so that the next time they collide, the body will be better prepared to cope with the
       challenges posed by the environment (we elaborate in further detail on the neural cir-
       cuitry of somatic errors in section 8.5).
          The predicted body state is continuously modified and constructed based on the
       sensory signals and cognitions from the previous moment in time. This ongoing modi-
       fication inevitably results in discrepancies between the predicted and observed state of
       the body, that is, somatic errors. The occurrence of somatic errors are entirely normal
       biological events, and their successful detection and regulation is often critical for
       the maintenance of homeostatic conditions within the body. When somatic errors
       are minimal, no corrective action is needed and the preceding neural map of the self
       is maintained. When somatic errors are large, corrective action becomes imperative.
       Under normal circumstances successful corrective action flexibly modifies the neural
       model of the self. However, under abnormal circumstances somatic errors can persist
       for many years, reinforced by maladaptive behaviors (often in the form of avoidance
       and withdrawal behavior) and cognitions (often in the form of worry, rumination, and
       hypervigilance), resulting in distorted and rigid models of the self in the world.

       8.3  Corrective action failure and its consequences
       Corrective action in the presence of somatic error can be achieved by adjusting the
       predictions to match the current physiological state better, or by modifying the current
       physiological state to conform more closely to the predictions. A key proposition of this
       model is that successful corrective action reduces somatic error, promoting homeostatic
       balance within the nervous system, and reductions in feelings of anxiety. However, in
       cases of anxiety disorder, these reductions are often short-​lived. The discrepancy between
       the predicted and observed body state is easily reinstated by a myriad of triggers, leading
       to long-​term impairment in life functioning. Prolongation of somatic error for an unsus-
       tainable period of time will eventually force the system into making long-​term allostatic
       adjustments, further promoting states of chronic and disordered anxiety, and leading
       to feelings of helplessness due to repeated failures to quell the somatic error, and often
       comorbid depression. In its most severe form, the somatic error becomes so pervasive
       that the only corrective action that seems to quell the error is avoidance of all perceived
       triggers (a condition known as agoraphobia).
          This interoceptively focused model of anxiety is predicated on the assumption that a
       primary function of the nervous system is to develop accurate models of the world in
148




      148   The somatic error hypothesis of anxiety


            an effort to establish conditions ideal for optimizing bodily functioning. These internal
            models rely upon sensory mapping of current signals (akin to the “body loop” described
            by Damasio)1 and anticipated signals (akin to the “as-​if body loop” also described by
            Damasio),2 leading to the generation and experience of emotion. Corrective actions in
            response to somatic errors can be achieved via regulation of these body loops, and may
            be reflected by the adaptation of different patterns of thoughts, beliefs, or behaviors by
            an individual. Adaptive corrective action via regulation of body loop and as-​if body loop
            signals results in adaptation, learning, and resilience. On the other hand, corrective action
            failure results in dysregulation of body loop and as-​if body loop signaling. This can man-
            ifest via reports of sudden changes in symptom intensity, mislabeling of symptoms, a pre-
            dominant focus on bodily signals in daily life, extreme hypervigilance towards disturbed
            body states, aberrant self-​related thinking patterns, and attempts to reduce these aversive
            experiences via avoidance or escape behaviors. We propose that in the case of certain psy-
            chiatric disorders, a systematic failure to correct somatic errors leads individuals to make
            choices which fail to establish ideal conditions for optimizing internal bodily functioning
            and survival; that is, repeated attempts to reduce somatic error conflict lead to suboptimal
            functioning that is energetically costly to regulate, resulting in maladapative behaviors
            and cognitions, often leading to further discrepancies between predicted and observed
            body states. These discrepancies propagate and/​or amplify the presence of somatic errors,
            leading to a positive feedback loop which often manifests as anxious psychopathology.
               Most of the processing and regulation of somatic errors occurs beneath the surface of
            conscious awareness. However, if the somatic error magnitude becomes large enough,
            and the repeated failure to correct the error overwhelms the system, it can directly lead to
            subjective feeling states marked by prominent (often aversive) interoceptive symptoms,
            as well as an obligatory motivation to act to reduce the associated discomfort and dis-
            tress. In the setting of psychopathology, this compensatory response generates a cascade
            of persisting predictions that, in future moments, are often disconnected from ongoing
            afferent body signals. Such “predictions gone astray” reflect an overregulation by the
            brain of repeatedly modifying the observed body state. In essence, the predicted body
            state hijacks the present moment, culminating in an observed body state that never quite
            matches the contingencies of the present moment.
               When it comes to subjective feeling states, particularly in the setting of psychopa-
            thology, it may be very difficult for individuals to differentiate the past, present, and
            future, all of which are melded into a current feeling state. One way to consider these

            	 Damasio defined the body loop as a set of neural and humoral pathways by which “the body landscape
            1

              is changed and is subsequently represented in somatosensory structures of the central nervous system,
              from the brainstem on up” (1999, p. 80).
            	 Damasio characterized the as-​if body loop as a separate pathway for the brain to simulate the body, in
            2

              which “the representation of body-​related changes is created directly in sensory maps, under the con-
              trol of other neural sites.” In other words, “it is ‘as if ’ the body had really been changed, but it has not.”
              The primary benefit of operating directly at the as-​if body loop was that “bypassing the body saves both
              time and energy, something that may be helpful in certain circumstances” (1999, p. 281).
 149




                                                                        Somatic errors in the brain    149


       temporal influences is to view the predicted body state as a merging of both the past
       (memories and conditioned associations between exteroceptive stimuli and their intero-
       ceptive consequences) and the future (Bayesian predictions based on a moving snapshot
       of all the sensory information from the previous moment in time, filtered through the
       lens of past experience). The subjective feeling state of each moment in time is then a
       balancing between an observed body state in the present and a predicted body state of
       the future that is grounded by past experience. Such a balancing act requires seamless
       integration and realistic weighting of all streams of information from the past, present,
       and future in order to maintain balance and homeostatic stability within the nervous
       system. Unfortunately, in the case of chronic anxiety, the weight given to the predicted
       body state of some future moment often dominates the present moment. In turn, this can
       lead to persistent and exaggerated somatic errors that fail to be sufficiently regulated and
       controlled. In the desperate search for a more stable state, a nervous system in constant
       disequilibrium and struggling to cope with the contingencies of life will initiate corrective
       actions, namely avoidance/​withdrawal from all sensory cues that predict the onset of fu-
       ture disequilibrium. This behavior is a by-​product of a sensitization process which we dis-
       cuss in greater detail later in this chapter. Nevertheless, a nervous system alarmed about
       its own demise will strive to find ways to adapt, and anxiety is a natural outcome when it
       fails to make accurate predictions about its own future.

       8.4  Somatic errors in the brain
       Body sensing brain regions include those which play primary roles in directly mapping
       the autonomic, chemosensory, endocrine, and immune systems, which relay information
       via interoceptive sensory channels to the brainstem (e.g. nucleus tractus solitarius, NTS),
       hypothalamus, thalamus (e.g. ventromedial posterior thalamic nucleus), insula (mainly
       dorsal mid and posterior sectors), and somatosensory cortices (SI and SII) (Damasio,
       1999; Craig, 2002; Critchley et  al., 2004; Khalsa et  al., 2009; Feinstein et  al., 2013;
       Hassanpour et al., 2018). The processing of information across these channels occurs in
       a hierarchical fashion, with multiple feedback loops starting in early levels of the brain-
       stem. Body prediction generators include agranular visceromotor brain regions such as
       the anterior cingulate, vmPFC, amygdala, and anterior insula (Barrett & Simmons, 2015),
       as well as granular neocortical regions implicated in other forms of motor and autonomic
       control including supplementary motor areas and premotor cortex.
          A somatic error is fundamentally a summative reflection of the discrepancies in
       predicted and observed body states as information flows from lower to higher levels
       within the nervous system, and back (see Smith et al., 2017 for a detailed example of this
       pertaining to the autonomic nervous system and vagal control). Ultimately, the calcula-
       tion of somatic errors occurs in brainstem nuclei such as NTS, and in cortical structures
       such as the dorsal mid-​insula, both of which are uniquely situated, anatomically, to
       (a) compare incoming interoceptive information directly with the predictions of this sen-
       sory information submitted by nearby structures such as the parabrachial nucleus and
       anterior insula, and (b) transmit error signals to other closely connected structures, such
150




      150   The somatic error hypothesis of anxiety


            as the periaqueductal gray and dorsal anterior cingulate, so that corrective action can
            be initiated and the error signal can be regulated. We propose that discrete cortical and
            subcortical networks underlie the prediction, detection, and regulation of somatic errors.
            Namely, the vmPFC (Barrett & Simmons, 2015), anterior insula (Simmons et al., 2011),
            amygdala/​extended amygdala (Davis et  al., 2010), and parabrachial nucleus (Herbert,
            Moga, & Saper, 1990) are important hubs for the generation of prediction signals, par-
            ticularly faulty prediction signals in the context of anxious anticipation and subjective
            uncertainty and ambiguity. In contrast, important hubs for the detection of somatic errors
            include NTS, one of the primary recipients of interoceptive signals from the cranial nerves
            and spinal cord, and the dorsal mid/​posterior insula, the first cortical recipient of afferent
            signals from the vagus nerve and lamina 1 spinothalamic neurons (Craig, 2002) and a re-
            gion highly responsive to bottom-​up physiological changes in the viscera (Gianaros et al.,
            2017; Hassanpour et al., 2018). Finally, the periaqueductal grey (Roy et al., 2014), amyg-
            dala (Feinstein, Adolphs, & Tranel , 2016), and dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (ACC)
            (Shackman et al., 2011; Gianaros et al., 2017) are important hubs for the regulation of
            somatic errors and inhibition of pain and panic. Differences in the laminar organization
            may explain how signal transmission flows between hubs, and more specifically why gran-
            ular regions of the insula detect somatic errors (Barrett & Simmons, 2015), and agranular
            regions such as the anterior insula and ACC have outsized roles in the prediction and
            regulation of somatic errors. Based on this reasoning, it is plausible that sustained somatic
            error dysregulation may result in long-​term brain alterations localized to the regions in-
            volved in the prediction, detection, and regulation of somatic errors. Supportive evidence
            comes from functional abnormalities seen in amygdala, insula, and ACC during emotion
            processing across multiple types of anxiety disorders (Etkin & Wager, 2007), as well as
            recent meta-​analytic work observing volumetric reductions localized to the insula and
            ACC across multiple forms of mental illness, including anxiety (Goodkind et al., 2015).
            The presence of functional and structural brain alterations in the amygdala, insula, and
            ACC following sustained somatic error dysregulation in patients with anxiety suggests
            that somatic errors may be a core feature of anxious psychopathology.

            8.5  How is a somatic error different from
            a somatic marker?
            The somatic marker hypothesis (Damasio, 1994, 1996) proposed the idea that marker sig-
            nals pertaining to the state of the body were integral to the process of decision-​making.
            Much like interoceptive processes, these marker signals operate at both overt (con-
            scious) and covert (unconscious) levels to rapidly guide decision-​making, particularly
            under conditions of uncertainty (Bechara et al., 1997). The circuitry underlying somatic
            markers is postulated to overlap with brain circuits involved in the generation and ex-
            perience of emotion, with initial evidence for the hypothesis based on observed deficits
            in autonomic responses to emotionally charged stimuli and abnormal decision-​making
            behaviors in neurological lesion patients with damage to sectors of the vmPFC. However,
            somatic markers were theorized also to require the operation of other body-​sensing and
 15




                                                 Somatic errors are prominent drivers of anxiety       151


      emotion-​related brain structures such as the amygdala, insula, and somatosensory cor-
      tices, which collaborated with the ventromedial prefrontal cortex to establish an optimal
      decision signal via the body loop or the as-​if body loop circuit. In this regard, there is
      considerable overlap between the somatic marker and somatic error hypotheses, with
      the latter critically building off the former. However, there are several key differences.
      First, the somatic marker hypothesis focuses specifically on predicting future body
      states in service of guiding advantageous decision-​making, whereas the somatic error
      hypoth­esis concentrates on the comparison between predicted body states in relation to
      the observed body state in service of guiding corrective regulatory actions. In essence,
      somatic markers guide optimal decision-​making, whereas sustained somatic errors ob-
      scure optimal decision-​making. Thus, somatic errors may help to explain the process by
      which somatic marker signals become distorted or lost in translation during the decision-​
      making process. Second, the somatic marker hypothesis provides no explication of psy-
      chiatric disturbances such as anxiety disorders, whereas the somatic error hypothesis is
      entirely aimed at addressing how anxiety is fundamentally driven by failures to adaptively
      regulate the error signal via the body loop or as-​if body loop.

      8.6  Somatic errors are prominent drivers of anxiety
      The heightened experience of fear and anxiety, the pervasive avoidance of stimuli capable
      of inducing such an experience, and the compulsive worrying and rumination about
      future encounters with anxiety-​inducing stimuli represent the emotional, behavioral,
      and cognitive sequelae of an anxious state. Within the framework of the somatic error
      hypothesis these sequelae are a consequence, or by-​product, of the corrective actions
      aimed at attenuating somatic error. Thus, many instances of chronic anxiety are being
      fundamentally driven by somatic errors that fail to be adaptively regulated, leaving the
      individual in a state of dissonance where the predicted body state is perpetually out of
      line with the current body state.
         Here we begin to outline the process by which chronic anxiety develops over time. The
      classic example is panic disorder, where an individual suddenly experiences an unpro-
      voked panic attack marked by interoceptive sensations of sympathetic nervous system
      overdrive: they feel palpitations, dyspnea, dizziness, a feeling of separation from their self
      or surroundings, and a sense of impending doom or death. These feelings are typically
      accompanied by signs of sympathetic activation, although they can arise in the absence of
      bodily changes via dysregulated as-​if body loop signaling. In the absence of any indicators
      of a source of threat, a search process ensues, and corrective action is taken, often in the
      form of escape and safety-​seeking followed by future avoidance. Each panic-​associated
      interoceptive sensation begins to take on further negative meaning and generates new
      abnormal beliefs about the self and the world, leading to abnormal behaviors.
         To provide a more concrete example of this phenomenon in relation to the somatic
      error hypothesis, we discuss the case of “Freddy,” a patient with severe panic disorder,
      so severe in fact that at its peak he was going to the emergency room over six times
      a month. Each visit was precipitated by a panic attack that Freddy misinterpreted as a
152




      152   The somatic error hypothesis of anxiety


            heart attack. Upon arriving at the emergency room, the doctors would run him through
            the same battery of tests, including 12-​lead electrocardiogram and myocardial enzyme
            assessments to detect damage to the heart. The outcome was always the same: Freddy’s
            heart was healthy and there was absolutely no evidence for any cardiac abnormalities.
            Let us assume, for the moment, that at the onset of a panic attack, Freddy’s observed
            body state was characterized by a heightened heart rate, pounding palpitations, and dif-
            ficulty breathing. In the absence of any obvious sensory cues that could predict such
            sensations, a large somatic error is produced that compels corrective action. For Freddy,
            the corrective action often entailed a rapid adjustment of his predicted body state so
            that it more closely matched his observed body state. Consequently, the predicted body
            state became one of a heart attack, leading him, quite rationally, to rush to the emer-
            gency room. The fascinating aspect of Freddy’s case is that despite repeated medical
            tests showing that nothing was wrong with his heart, the visceral feeling at the onset
            of a panic attack was so powerful that all rational thought processes and memories for
            these past visits to the emergency room became overshadowed by the somatic error. The
            only explanation that made sense to him at that moment in time was that he must be
            having a heart attack. Thus, being unable to dampen the error signal by downregulating
            his observed body state during the onset of a panic attack, Freddy often turned to
            upregulating his predicted body state such that he now had the feeling “as-​if ” he was
            having a heart attack. Freddy’s repeated failures to regulate the somatic error adaptively
            after dozens of emergency room visits led him to even more aberrant corrective action.
            He began misattributing his panic attacks to other related aspects of the context that just
            so happened to be occurring at the same time, a process known as fear generalization
            (Dymond et al., 2015). For example, one day Freddy had a panic attack while driving
            to his mother’s house, and he became convinced that his mother was somehow respon-
            sible for generating the panic attack. This aberrant belief caused him to avoid visiting his
            mother for an entire year. Another panic attack that occurred while he was at work made
            him to avoid going to his job, eventually leading him to be fired. These failed attempts to
            control the discomfort and distress associated with each panic attack interfered with his
            daily life, and were only temporarily successful at reducing the underlying error signal.
            Freddy continued to experience triggers of somatic error routinely (e.g. perturbations in
            interoceptive sensations and/​or aberrant predictions), continued to have panic attacks,
            and continued to avoid an ever-​growing list of perceived triggers, ultimately leading to
            the development of panic disorder with agoraphobia, a condition marked by substantially
            greater functional disability. This illustrates that corrective actions are not always adapt­
            ive. They do not always eradicate somatic error and can, in fact, perpetuate it.

            8.7  The slippery slope of anxiety sensitivity
            Anxiety sensitivity refers to an individual’s fear of experiencing anxiety-​related sensations,
            especially those arising from within the body (e.g. heart palpitations or dyspnea), and is a
            core construct underlying the initiation and maintenance of pathological anxiety (Taylor,
 153




                                                              Somatic errors and altered thought        153


       2014). Individuals with high levels of anxiety sensitivity often believe that these sensations
       can lead to adverse consequences such as death, insanity, or social rejection. Such cat-
       astrophic misinterpretations make anxiety sensitivity an anxiety amplifier; people with
       high levels of anxiety sensitivity are quickly alarmed by anxiety-​related sensations,
       which further intensifies their anxiety and reinforces their avoidance. Consequently,
       most patients with pathological anxiety also have heightened anxiety sensitivity, in-
       cluding patients with panic disorder, agoraphobia, post-​traumatic stress disorder (PTSD),
       generalized anxiety disorder, and social anxiety disorder (Olatunji & Wolitzky-​Taylor,
       2009; Naragon-​Gainey, 2010).
          In the context of the somatic error hypothesis, anxiety sensitivity can be conceptualized
       as the persistent triggering of an abnormally large predicted body state by sensory sig-
       nals that have become associated with anxiety. Even small degrees of exposure to these
       sensory cues can generate an exaggerated body prediction, which will lead to a somatic
       error followed by corrective action that upregulates the observed body state to be more
       in line with the predicted body state. However, by upregulating the very signals which
       one is sensitized to, there is further amplification of the predicted body state, followed by
       additional amplification of the observed body state. The process can quickly escalate into
       a vicious cycle which often leads patients to avoid all sensory cues that have been associ-
       ated with the experience of anxiety. Avoidance of perceived triggers quickly reduces the
       somatic error but this relief is only temporary as the vicious cycle returns whenever the
       trigger is again encountered, as was seen in the case of Freddy.

       8.8  Somatic errors and altered thought
       Distorted beliefs are not somatic errors but can lead to somatic errors by triggering
       alterations in the predicted body state. Distorted beliefs are thus a consequence of
       dysfunctional modeling of the bodily world by the brain, and do  not  necessarily  re-
       quire  conscious  appraisal. However, because an initial somatic error can reverberate
       alarmingly throughout networks in the brain critical for making inferences about the
       world, distorted beliefs can quickly reinforce or magnify somatic errors. This distinction
       was made by Paulus and Stein (2006) such that altered interoceptive prediction signals
       were viewed as the primary process underlying states of anxiety, with both cognitive
       features (e.g. worrying) and behavioral features (e.g. avoidance) being the resulting
       consequence of this dysfunction. Later, they argued for a stronger role of cognition
       and self-​based beliefs such that negative schemas might drive a tendency to anticipate
       aversive body states through a process of alliesthesia (Paulus & Stein, 2010). Both views
       differ substantially from the cognitive-​behavioral perspective because they emphasize
       that cognitions are typically a consequence rather than a cause of anxiety, and they
       arise out of interoceptive prediction error signaling. This is compatible with the general
       notion that maladaptive corrective actions can perpetuate somatic errors and lead to
       sensitized states of anxiety. We are not arguing at this juncture that somatic error is the
       sole generator of anxiety (e.g. for several models with a broader emphasis on deficits
154




      154   The somatic error hypothesis of anxiety


            in cognitive, behavioral, and social processes; see Mineka & Zinbarg, 2006; Bystritsky
            et al., 2013; Beck & Haigh, 2014)). Nor do we claim that somatic error processing is
            necessarily unique to anxiety (e.g. for several models featuring allostatic dysregulation
            of interoceptive signals in depression; see Harshaw, 2015; Barrett, Quigley, & Hamilton,
            2016; Stephan et al., 2016). However, we do assert that sustained somatic errors which
            lead to maladaptive corrective actions are the cause (rather than consequence) of the
            cognitive, behavioral, and emotional manifestations of anxiety.

            8.9  Somatic errors and visceral illusions
            While changes in observed body state can be routinely felt, it is also possible to feel changes
            in the predicted body state, so long as the prediction triggers a somatic error. To highlight
            this point, we previously examined interoceptive processing in anorexia nervosa (AN)
            by administering double-​blinded infusions of either saline or isoproterenol, a peripher-
            ally acting beta-​adrenergic agonist akin to adrenaline (Khalsa et al., 2015). The general
            notion was to perturb the observed body state systematically under different contexts,
            either shortly before or after a calorically dense meal. In general, AN patients reported
            feeling the isoproterenol sensations at the same rate as healthy comparison participants,
            suggesting preserved interoception for changes in their observed body state (Figure 8.2).
            However, there was one important exception. During saline infusions, which did not alter
            the observed body state, the patients reported feeling significantly more sensations of
            palpitations and dyspnea, but only during the pre-​meal period (Figure 8.2). The fact that


                                                               Pre meal                                                            Post meal
                                                                                     Interoceptive detection (%)
                Interoceptive detection (%)




                                              100                                                                  100

                                               75                                                                   75
                                                      *
                                               50                                                                   50

                                                            Noise                                                                Noise
                                               25           background                                              25           background


                                                    Saline 0.5 1.0    2.0      4.0                                       Saline 0.5 1.0    2.0      4.0
                                                                Dose (mcg)                                                           Dose (mcg)

                                                                HC        AN                                                         HC        AN

            Figure 8.2  Evidence of somatic error in anorexia nervosa (AN). AN patients disproportionately felt
            sensations of heart palpitations and dyspnea during saline infusions, when no bodily modulation
            had occurred, but only during a pre-​meal state when anticipating the consumption of a large
            meal (*p < 0.05). The shaded rectangles illustrate a hypothetical noise background as postulated
            by (Paulus & Stein, 2010). HC = healthy comparisons.
            Adapted from International Journal of Eating Disorders, 48 (7), Sahib S. Khalsa, Michelle G. Craske, Wei Li, Sitaram
            Vangala, Michael Strober, Jamie D. Feusner, Altered interoceptive awareness in anorexia nervosa: Effects of meal
            anticipation, consumption and bodily arousal, pp. 889–​97, doi:10.1002/​eat.22387, © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
 15




                                                                        Iatrogenic somatic errors      155


      no bodily modulation had actually occurred during the saline infusions suggests that AN
      patients were actually feeling cardiorespiratory “visceral illusions.” Moreover, these vis-
      ceral illusions were only present during the pre-​meal state, a time period which is known
      to trigger strong feelings of fear and anxiety in patients with AN. This noisy baseline
      observed in AN is indicative of a somatic error being driven by their anxious predictions
      of the approaching meal. It seems possible that such visceral illusions permeate many
      aspects of these patients’ lives, leading to maladaptive corrective actions that often include
      a profound avoidance of food.
         Another instance of visceral illusion can occur when medical conditions cause poten-
      tially life-​threatening changes to the observed body state. One such condition is known as
      atrial fibrillation, which is a cardiac arrhythmia affecting the upper chambers of the heart.
      Patients with atrial fibrillation frequently report interoceptive disturbances in the form of
      palpitations, shortness of breath, dizziness, fatigue, and chest pain, yet these symptoms
      only corroborate an observable heart rhythm disturbance in approximately one-​third
      of active cases (Camm, Corbucci, & Padeletti, 2012). A fascinating study evaluated the
      accuracy of heart rhythm perception in such patients by fitting them with continuous
      electrical monitors for an entire week and recording self-​perceived reports of irreg-
      ular rhythms via button presses (Garimella et al., 2015). They found that the subset of
      patients with comorbid anxiety had a tendency to overestimate the presence of the irreg-
      ular rhythm incorrectly (i.e. endorsing arrhythmia perception despite its absence). Once
      again, predicted body states were consciously felt as anxiety-​inducing visceral illusions.

      8.10  Iatrogenic somatic errors
      Traumatic alterations to the observed body state are often a harbinger for corrective
      action that leads the predicted body into a highly anxious state. A prime example from
      cardiovascular medicine concerns the insertion of an implantable cardioverter defibril-
      lator (ICD) within the body. ICD placement occurs when patients with cardiac pathology
      affecting the lower chambers of the heart are judged to be at increased risk of developing
      a fatal arrhythmia (Tracy et al., 2012). Although this intervention has well demonstrated
      survival benefits (Maron et al., 2000), the mechanism of treatment involves delivering a
      single or series of electrical discharges (i.e. “shocks”) directly to neurons in the heart in
      order to resynchronize its rhythm. These shocks may be delivered appropriately (i.e. the
      discharge occurs in the presence of a detected arrhythmia) or inappropriately (i.e. the
      discharge occurs when there is no arrhythmia) (Sears & Conti, 2003). Even in the setting
      of positive treatment response, patients frequently develop clinically significant anxiety
      due to the large number of painful shocks to the heart, including approximately 10% that
      are due to false alarms (Magyar-​Russell et al., 2011). Moreover, the amount of ICD shocks
      predicts the development of anxiety one year after implantation (Schulz et al., 2013).
         We have treated numerous patients affected by these serious cardiac conditions (Khalsa
      et al., 2014) and found that the sensations elicited by ICD discharges in these individuals
      are indeed interoceptive in nature (Table 8.1). The somatic error generated by the ICD
      shock and subsequent corrective actions taken by patients are consistently reflective of
                                                                                                                                                                 156




Table 8.1  Interoceptive symptoms and corrective actions following receipt of implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) shocks in six patients referred
for psychiatric treatment evaluation

Patient Chief concern           Initial shock episode           Subsequent shock episodes               Feared sequelae            Corrective actions taken
                                                                                                                                   prior to consultation
ICD #l   “I'm looking           Pain intensity: 5 out of 10     Total no. shocks: 4, single episode     Hospitalization            Excessively checking radial
         for some way           Location: “whole                Pain intensity: 5 out of 10             Cardiac surgery            pulse to determine whether
         to decrease my         body”: “like somebody                                                                              heart is skipping
                                                                Location: “central core of the body''
         concerns about this    hitting me in the stomach,                                                                         Eating smaller meals due
         thing firing                                           Quality:
                                only you can't prepare                                                                             to concerns fullness caused
         off again.”            for it.”                        “like a jolt”;                                                     shocks, then avoiding all
                                Radiation: throughout body      “like getting punched in the chest.”                               restaurants

                                Reported precipitating          Radiation: throughout the body                                     Avoiding physical exertion
                                factors: dehydration,                                                                              such as swimming or
                                                                Precipitating factors:
                                exertion                                                                                           playing with grandchildren
                                                                walking “a long distance”
                                                                “I probably had some stress about
                                                                getting on the plane”

ICD #2   “I've been fighting    Pain intensity: 8 out of 10     Total no. shocks: > 30, multiple        Recurring dreams of being Avoiding physical positions
         this for a long time   Location: chest                 episodes                                shocked. Feeling persisted believed to induce
         now.”                                                  Pain intensity: 8 out of 10             upon waking.               palpitations and arrhythmia
                                Quality: “like a horse kicked
                                me in the chest.”               Location: chest                         Lack of control over body sensation
                                                                                                        symptoms                   Extremely avoidant of any
                                Radiation: to shoulder          Precipitating factors: unknown
                                                                                                                                   salt intake
                                Reported precipitating
                                                                                                                                   Will not walk any
                                factors: hot day
                                                                                                                                   distance > l mile
                                                                                                                                                                           157




ICD #3   Anxiety                 Pain intensity : 10 out of 10       Total no. shocks: “too many to count”   Nightmares of getting         Scanning body repeatedly
                                 Location: chest                     (> 40), multiple episodes               shocked                       for signals predicting shock

                                 Quality: “like a kick to the                                                                              Avoiding jogging for >
                                 chest''                                                                                                   10 years

                                 Radiation: none                                                                                           Avoiding being alone for
                                                                                                                                           fear help won't arrive
                                 Reported precipitating
                                 factors: none, was watching                                                                               Avoiding being in
                                 TV                                                                                                        public due to fear of
                                                                                                                                           embarrassment
ICD #4   “Fear, I guess that     Pain intensity: 8 out of 10         No further shocks; single episode       Nightmares about being        Avoiding approaching site
         I will die.”            Location: chest                                                             shocked again.                of shock due to severe
                                 Quality: “It felt like I was in                                             Fear of life-​threatening     anxiety
                                 a head-​on car collision . . . it                                           condition                     Avoiding sexual activity
                                 felt like my brain was being
                                 scrambled.”
                                 Radiation: neck
                                 Reported precipitating
                                 factors: none
ICD #5   “I'm just living in a   Pain intensity: unable              Total no. shocks: 27, multiple          “It's kind of a               Avoiding all exercise
         world where I can't     to report                           episodes                                consciousness. Every          Avoiding stress
         walk 10 miles.”         Quality: “like every cell in                                                moment I'm worrying: ‘is
                                 your body is given a jolt                                                   there going to
                                 from head to foot. It feels                                                 be a trigger?’”
                                 like your whole body has
                                 expanded by an inch.”
                                 Precipitating factors: none
ICD #6   Anxiety                 Pain intensity: none, but           Total no. shocks: 12, multiple          “There's a sense of           Frequently checking blood
                                 “very unpleasant”;                  episodes                                helplessness with             pressure and auscultating
                                 “kapow, kabang!”                                                            it. I understand              heart with stethoscope
                                                                                                             intellectually it's           Repeated Emergency
                                 Location: chest
                                                                                                             [ICD] keeping                 Department presentations
                                 Precipitating factors: none                                                 me alive, but physically it
                                                                                                             isn't pleasant”
158




      158   The somatic error hypothesis of anxiety


            inflated body-​state predictions and excessive avoidance behavior. One potent example of
            such maladaptive corrective action concerned “Sam,” a cardiomyopathy patient who began
            spending all of his time in his local hospital after receiving recurrent ICD shocks. Sam
            would remain in the public visitation areas of the hospital throughout all hours for several
            months, and experienced significant fear upon leaving, under the rationale that this was
            the safest place to be to avoid further harm should another shock occur. Due to continued
            worry about being shocked, Sam even purchased a stethoscope in order to better listen to
            his own heartbeat. Upon perceiving the sensation of a racing heart, he would immediately
            auscultate it with the stethoscope for verification. Sam claimed he could distinguish be-
            tween normal tachycardia and tachycardia associated with his arrhythmia, and predict the
            onset of a shock approximately three seconds later, although this did nothing to ameliorate
            his anxiety. Sam’s corrective action here was maladaptive to the extreme, necessitating the
            neglect of all major functional domains (familial, occupational, and social), and against
            the reassurance and recommendations of his cardiologists. Even worse, it did not actually
            address the root cause of the anxiety, that the source of his somatic error was a prediction
            gone astray (i.e. “If I leave the hospital I will receive an ICD shock”). In this specific sit-
            uation there was no actual bodily threat to respond to, just an aberrant prediction. Sam’s
            case further illustrates how somatic errors triggered by aberrant body-​state predictions can
            generate palpably real feelings. We speculate that they feel real because they are the result
            of aberrant activity in body-​sensing brain regions (specifically, as-​if body loops), resulting
            in a de novo or “simulated” perception indistinguishable from the real thing. Such cases,
            although uncommon, are not unique. Another corrective action failure involved a patient
            who refused to shower alone for three months out of fear that he would be shocked by his
            ICD and no one would find him. This same patient remained within a three-​mile radius of
            his home for an entire year because it was located near a hospital, out of fear that he would
            be shocked and would not be evaluated and resuscitated in time.

            8.11  Clinical implications of the somatic error hypothesis
            By this point it should be clear that a somatic error can inspire both adaptive and mala-
            daptive corrective actions. The ultimate goal of the corrective action is to minimize so-
            matic error as quickly and efficiently as possible by temporarily returning the organism
            to a more stable homeostatic state, and thus, whether the action is adaptive or maladap-
            tive is not actually taken into account during the regulatory process. For this reason,
            avoidance/​withdrawal behavior is often the corrective action that initially wins the reg-
            ulatory battle, as it is a highly effective technique for rapidly reducing somatic error.
            Unfortunately, avoidance/​withdrawal behaviors fail to prevent the recurrence of somatic
            errors, nor do they confer enhanced regulatory control strategies over them. In this con-
            text it is not surprising that avoidance/​withdrawal is the primary behavioral manifesta-
            tion of most anxiety disorders, and the symptom that elicits the most impairment in life
            functioning.
               It follows that the active ingredient of most psychotherapies for anxiety often involves
            learning to inhibit immediate maladaptive corrective actions triggered by somatic errors
 159




                                             Clinical implications of the somatic error hypothesis      159


       and experiencing the discrepancy long enough to develop a new adaptive model. A prime
       example is exposure-​based therapies, which principally target avoidance behaviors by
       teaching individuals how to systematically approach the very things in life they have
       been avoiding including distressing experiences, thoughts, and memories. This requires
       placing the person in situations likely to exacerbate somatic errors, at least temporarily,
       but the main difference is that maintaining exposure to the aversive experience long
       enough requires the brain to adjust its regulatory strategy and develop a new setpoint
       (e.g. by changing the expectation of harm from an avoided situation). This happens pri-
       marily via inhibitory fear learning, which includes standard mechanisms such as habit-
       uation and desensitization, but importantly, seems to rely on the successful learning of
       new information via expectancy violations (Craske et al., 2008). Exposure therapy can be
       very effective, but is unfortunately highly underutilized in clinical practice (Deacon et al.,
       2013; Boettcher, Brake, & Barlow, 2015).
          Interoceptive interventions that directly modify the observed state of the body can also
       help to acutely correct somatic errors. These interventions view the body as the entry
       point for modifying erroneous sensory experiences relevant to anxiety and can help
       reduce somatic errors being driven at the body loop level. Elicitation of the physiolog-
       ical relaxation response (Benson, 1993) is one way to attenuate the observed body state.
       Examples include progressive muscle relaxation, deep breathing, and autogenic guided
       imagery. These are often incorporated within cognitive-​behavioral therapies due to small
       but reliable clinical effects, although they are only temporarily effective because they do
       not inherently induce new learning or address aberrant body predictions. Short-​acting
       anxiolytic medications such as benzodiazepines also provide a temporary relief of so-
       matic errors, but they do not change the brain’s tendency to issue erroneous prediction
       signals about the inner and outer worlds of the body. Moreover, they do not introduce
       new learning, and in fact such medications are well known to hamper learning (Lister
       et al., 1988).
          Given our emphasis on the role of interoceptive disturbances generating somatic
       errors, it is worth noting that there are several strategies on the horizon, some of
       which take the notion of interoceptive exposure therapy to a whole new level. These
       strategies, some newer and some older, may be effective at modulating interocep-
       tive processing and attenuating somatic errors. The first strategy is referred to as
       Floatation-​ REST (Reduced Environmental Stimulation Therapy), an intervention
       which attenuates exteroceptive sensory input to the nervous system through the act
       of floating supine in a pool of water saturated with Epsom salt. The float experience is
       calibrated so that sensory signals from visual, auditory, olfactory, gustatory, thermal,
       tactile, vestibular, gravitational, and proprioceptive channels are minimized, as is most
       movement and speech. Subjectively, the effect appears to be one of both heightened
       interoceptive awareness and relaxation (Feinstein et al., 2018a), leading to lower levels
       of chronic anxiety in generalized anxiety disorder (Jonsson & Kjellgren, 2016)  as
       well as lower levels of acute anxiety in patients with heightened anxiety sensitivity
       (Feinstein et al., 2018b). The floatation environment, which systematically reduces the
160




      160   The somatic error hypothesis of anxiety


            nervous system’s exposure to most external triggers of stress and anxiety, may provide
            a chronically anxious and hypervigilant nervous system with a rare respite from the
            daily barrage of external triggers, reducing the occurrence of exteroceptively triggered
            body predictions. Likewise, the heightened interoceptive awareness induced during
            Floatation-​REST amplifies the observed body state and, in the context of physiological
            relaxation, the aversive association between visceral sensations and anxiety may be
            weakened. Subsequently, a competing association may be formed, one that links the
            experience of visceral sensations with a state of relaxation instead of anxiety. Another
            novel interoceptive approach is whole body hyperthermia (WBH), which involves the
            selective stimulation of heat-​sensitive thermosensory pathways projecting from the
            skin to subcortical and cortical brain regions to achieve an elevated core body temper-
            ature of 38.5 degrees Celsius. A recent randomized sham-​controlled trial found that
            a single session of WBH produced a significant antidepressant effect lasting up to six
            weeks in depressed patients (Janssen et al., 2016). While the underlying mechanism
            is uncertain, the study’s effective sham-​control suggests that the active antidepressant
            component was related to the heightened modulation of observed thermosensory and
            inflammatory signals from the body. From the perspective of somatic error, this inter-
            vention also relies heavily on modulation of current body state via the body loop, poten-
            tially forcing a recalibration of the prior setpoint. Other potential anxiety interventions
            involving interoceptive modulations of the observed body state include: modulation of
            muscle tension via Swedish massage (Rapaport et al., 2016), yoga (Jeter et al., 2015),
            exercise (Pedersen & Saltin, 2015)  and cyclic activation of the sympathetic nervous
            system (Kox et al., 2014). In each case, these practices provide the brain with an in-
            tense inflow of salient and unambiguous bodily information, albeit across different
            sensory channels. The systematic application of these bodily inputs forces a shift in the
            mapping of the observed body state. These strategies may help to re-​establish a new set
            point closer to a healthy physiological baseline, triggering a “reset” which ultimately
            reduces allostatic load. Other ways to reduce somatic errors at the as-​if body loop
            level include psychotherapies, especially insight-​oriented therapies such as cognitive
            therapy or psychodynamic therapy, that provide a means of belief-​based attenuation
            of erroneous predictions. Finally, mindful meditation practices may help minimize
            somatic errors by refocusing attention on observed body-​state processes and reducing
            attention to predicted body-​state processes (Farb, Segal, & Anderson, 2013).

            8.12 Conclusion
            The somatic error hypothesis provides a point of understanding for both the genesis of anx-
            iety, and the basis from which to explore novel interoceptive interventions that modulate
            body−brain communication. We anticipate that the concept of somatic error may be relevant
            to other forms of psychopathology characterized by aberrant body−brain signaling, and we
            hope this chapter has highlighted some of the ways in which corrective actions aimed at
            regulating somatic error can be the catalyst for anxiety in all its different varieties.
 16




                                                                                                      References      161


      References
      American Psychiatric Association (2013). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders: DSM-​
         5. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.
      Barrett, L. F. and Simmons, W. K. (2015). Interoceptive predictions in the brain. Nature Reviews
         Neuroscience, 16, 419–​29.
      Barrett, L. F., Quigley, K. S., and Hamilton, P. (2016). An active inference theory of allostasis and
         interoception in depression. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B: Biological
         Sciences, 371(1708), pii: 20160011. doi:10.1098/rstb.2016.0011.
      Bechara, A., Damasio, H., Tranel, D., and Damasio, A. R. (1997). Deciding advantageously before
         knowing the advantageous strategy. Science, 275, 1293–​5.
      Beck, A. T. and Haigh, E. A. (2014). Advances in cognitive theory and therapy: The generic cognitive
         model. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 10,  1–​24.
      Benson, H. (1993). The Relaxation Response. New York, NY: Consumer Reports.
      Boettcher, H., Brake, C. A., and Barlow, D. H. (2015). Origins and outlook of interoceptive exposure.
         Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 53,  41–​51.
      Bystritsky, A., Khalsa, S. S., Cameron, M. E., and Schiffman, J. S. (2013). Current diagnosis and
         treatment of anxiety disorders. Pharmacy and Therapeutics, 38,  30–​57.
      Camm, A. J., Corbucci, G., and Padeletti, L. (2012). Usefulness of continuous electrocardiographic
         monitoring for atrial fibrillation. American Journal of Cardiology, 110,  270–​6.
      Craig, A. D. (2002). How do you feel? Interoception: The sense of the physiological condition of the
         body. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 3, 655–​66.
      Craske, M. G., Kircanski, K., Zelikowsky, M., Mystkowski, J., Chowdhury, N., and Baker, A. (2008).
         Optimizing inhibitory learning during exposure therapy. Behavior Research Therapy, 46,  5–​27.
      Critchley, H. D., Wiens, S., Rotshtein, P., Ohman, A., and Dolan, R. J. (2004). Neural systems
         supporting interoceptive awareness. Nature Neuroscience, 7, 189–​95.
      Damasio, A. R. (1994). Descarte’s Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain. New York, NY: Avon.
      Damasio, A. R. (1996). The somatic marker hypothesis and the possible functions of the prefrontal
         cortex. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B, 351, 1413–​20.
      Damasio, A. R. (1999). The Feeling of What Happens: Body and Emotion in the Making of Consciousness.
         New York, NY: Harcourt Brace.
      Davis, M., Walker, D. L., Miles, L., and Grillon, C. (2010). Phasic vs sustained fear in rats and
         humans: Role of the extended amygdala in fear vs anxiety. Neuropsychopharmacology, 35, 105–​35.
      Deacon, B. J., Lickel, J. J., Farrell, N. R., Kemp, J. J., and Hipol, L. J. (2013). Therapist perceptions and
         delivery of interoceptive exposure for panic disorder. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 27, 259–​64.
      Dymond, S., Dunsmoor, J. E., Vervliet, B., Roche, B., and Hermans, D. (2015). Fear generalization in
         humans: Systematic review and implications for anxiety disorder research. Behavior Therapy, 46,
         561–​82.
      Etkin, A. and Wager, T. D. (2007). Functional neuroimaging of anxiety: A meta-​analysis of emotional
         processing in PTSD, social anxiety disorder, and specific phobia. American Journal of Psychiatry,
         164, 1476–​88.
      Farb, N. A., Segal, Z. V., and Anderson, A. K. (2013). Mindfulness meditation training alters cortical
         representations of interoceptive attention. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 8,  15–​26.
      Feinstein, J. S., Buzza, C., Hurlemann, R., Follmer, R. L., Dahdaleh, N. S., Coryell, W. H., et al. (2013).
         Fear and panic in humans with bilateral amygdala damage. Nature Neuroscience, 16,  270–​2.
      Feinstein, J. S., Adolphs, R., and Tranel, D. (2016). A Tale of Survival from the World of Patient SM.
         New York, NY: Guilford Press.
162




      162   The somatic error hypothesis of anxiety


            Feinstein, J. S., Khalsa, S. S., Yeh, H., Al Zoubi, O., Arevian, A. C., Wohlrab, C., et al. (2018a). The
                elicitation of relaxation and interoceptive awareness using floatation therapy in individuals with
                high anxiety sensitivity. Biological Psychiatry Cognitive Neuroscience and Neuroimaging, 3, 555–62.
            Feinstein, J. S., Khalsa, S. S., Yeh, H., Wohlrab, C., Simmons, W. K., Stein, M. B., et al. (2018b).
                Examining the short-​term anxiolytic and antidepressant effect of Floatation-​REST. PLoS One, 13,
                e0190292.
            Friston, K. J., Daunizeau, J., and Kiebel, S. J. (2009). Reinforcement learning or active inference? PLoS
                One, 4, e6421.
            Garimella, R. S., Chung, E. H., Gehi, A. K., Mounsey, J. P., Schwartz, J. D., Pursell, I., et al. (2015).
                Accuracy of patient perception of their prevailing rhythm: A comparative analysis of monitor data
                and questionnaire responses in patients with atrial fibrillation. Heart Rhythm, 12, 658–​65.
            Gianaros, P. J., Sheu, L. K., Uyar, F., Koushik, J., Jennings, J. R., Wager, T. D., et al. (2017). A
                brain phenotype for stressor-​evoked blood pressure reactivity. Journal of the American Heart
                Association, 6.
            Goodkind, M., Eickhoff, S. B., Oathes, D. J., Jiang, Y., Chang, A., Fox, P. T., et al. (2015). Identification
                of a common neurobiological substrate for mental illness. JAMA Psychiatry, 72, 305–​15.
            Hakamata, Y., Lissek, S., Bar-​Heim, Y., Britton, J.C., Fox, N. A., Leibenluft, E., et al. (2010). Attention
                bias modification treatment: A meta-​analysis toward the establishment of novel treatment for
                anxiety. Biological Psychiatry, 68, 982–​90.
            Harshaw, C. (2015). Interoceptive dysfunction: Toward an integrated framework for understanding
                somatic and affective disturbance in depression. Psychological Bulletin, 141, 311–​63.
            Hassanpour, M. S., Simmons, W. K., Feinstein, J. S., Luo, Q., Lapidus, R., Bodurka, J., et al.
                (2018). The insular cortex dynamically maps changes in cardiorespiratory interoception.
                Neuropsychopharmacology, 43, 426–34.
            Herbert, H., Moga, M. M., and Saper, C. B. (1990). Connections of the parabrachial nucleus with the
                nucleus of the solitary tract and the medullary reticular formation in the rat. Journal of Comparative
                Neurology, 293, 540–​80.
            Janssen, C. W., Lowry, C. A., Mehl, M. R., Allen, J. J., Kelly, K. L., Gartner, D. E., et al. (2016). Whole-​
                body hyperthermia for the treatment of major depressive disorder: A randomized clinical trial.
                JAMA Psychiatry, 73, 789–​95.
            Jeter, P. E., Slutsky, J., Singh, N., and Khalsa, S. B. (2015). Yoga as a therapeutic intervention: A
                bibliometric analysis of published research studies from 1967 to 2013. Journal of Alternative and
                Complementary Medicine, 21, 586–​92.
            Jonsson, K, and Kjellgren, A. (2016). Promising effects of treatment with flotation-​REST (restricted
                environmental stimulation technique) as an intervention for generalized anxiety disorder (GAD): A
                randomized controlled pilot trial. BMC Complementary and Alternative Medicine, 16, 108.
            Khalsa, S. S., Rudrauf, D., Feinstein, J. S., and Tranel, D. (2009). The pathways of interoceptive
                awareness. Nature Neuroscience, 12, 1494–​6.
            Khalsa, S. S., Shahabi, L., Ajijola, O. A., Bystritsky, A., Naliboff, B. D., and Shivkumar, K.
                (2014). Synergistic application of cardiac sympathetic decentralization and comprehensive
                psychiatric treatment in the management of anxiety and electrical storm. Frontiers in Integrative
                Neuroscience, 7, 98.
            Khalsa, S. S., Craske, M. G., Li, W., Vangala, S., Strober, M., and Feusner, J. D. (2015). Altered
                interoceptive awareness in anorexia nervosa: Effects of meal anticipation, consumption and bodily
                arousal. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 48, 889–​97.
            Khalsa, S. S., Adolphs, R., Cameron, O. G., Critchley, H. D., Davenport, P. W., Feinstein, J. S., et al.
                (2018). Interoception and mental health: A roadmap. Biological Psychiatry Cognitive Neuroscience
                and Neuroimaging, 3, 501–13.
 163




                                                                                                       References     163


       Kox, M., van Eijk, L.T., Zwaag, J., van den Wildenberg, J., Sweep, F. C., van der Hoeven, J. G., et al.
           (2014). Voluntary activation of the sympathetic nervous system and attenuation of the innate
           immune response in humans. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA, 111, 7379–​84.
       Kozak, M. J. and Cuthbert, B. N. (2016). The NIMH research domain criteria initiative: Background,
           issues, and pragmatics. Psychophysiology, 53, 286–​97.
       Lister, R. G., Weingartner, H., Eckardt, M. J., and Linnoila, M. (1988). Clinical relevance of effects of
           benzodiazepines on learning and memory. Psychopharmacology Series, 6, 117–​27.
       Magyar-​Russell, G., Thombs, B. D., Cai, J., Baveja, T., Kuhl, E. A., Singh, P. P., et al. (2011). The
           prevalence of anxiety and depression in adults with implantable cardioverter defibrillators: A
           systematic review. Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 71, 223–​31.
       Maron, B. J., Shen, W. K., Link, M. S., Epstein, A. E., Almquist, A. K., Daubert, J. P., et al. (2000).
           Efficacy of implantable cardioverter-​defibrillators for the prevention of sudden death in patients
           with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. New England Journal of Medicine, 342, 365–​73.
       Mineka, S. and Zinbarg, R. (2006). A contemporary learning theory perspective on the etiology of
           anxiety disorders: It’s not what you thought it was. American Psychology, 61,  10–​26.
       Naragon-​Gainey, K. (2010). Meta-​analysis of the relations of anxiety sensitivity to the depressive and
           anxiety disorders. Psychology Bulletin, 136, 128–​50.
       Olatunji, B. O. and Wolitzky-​Taylor, K. B. (2009). Anxiety sensitivity and the anxiety disorders: A
           meta-​analytic review and synthesis. Psychology Bulletin, 135, 974–​99.
       Paulus, M. P. and Stein, M. B. (2006). An insular view of anxiety. Biological Psychiatry, 60,  383–​7.
       Paulus, M. P. and Stein, M. B. (2010). Interoception in anxiety and depression. Brain Structure and
           Function, 214, 451–​63.
       Pedersen, B. K. and Saltin, B. (2015). Exercise as medicine—​evidence for prescribing exercise as
           therapy in 26 different chronic diseases. Scandinavian Journal of Medicine and Science in Sports, J
           Med Sci Sports 25 Suppl. 3, 1–​72.
       Peters, A., McEwen, B. S., and Friston, K. (2017). Uncertainty and stress: Why it causes diseases and
           how it is mastered by the brain. Progress in Neurobiology, 156, 164–​88.
       Petzschner, F. H., Weber, L. A. E., Gard, T., and Stephan, K. E. (2017). Computational psychosomatics
           and computational psychiatry: Toward a joint framework for differential diagnosis. Biological
           Psychiatry, 82, 421–​30.
       Pezzulo, G., Rigoli, F., and Friston, K. (2015). Active Inference, homeostatic regulation and adaptive
           behavioural control. Progress in Neurobiology, 134,  17–​35.
       Rapaport, M. H., Schettler, P., Larson, E. R., Edwards, S. A., Dunlop, B. W., Rakofsky, J. J., et al.
           (2016). Acute swedish massage monotherapy successfully remediates symptoms of generalized
           anxiety disorder: A proof-​of-​concept, randomized controlled study. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry,
           77, e883–​91.
       Roy, M., Shohamy, D., Daw, N., Jepma, M., Wimmer, G. E., and Wager, T. D. (2014). Representation of
           aversive prediction errors in the human periaqueductal gray. Nature Neuroscience, 17, 1607–​12.
       Schulz, S.M., Massa, C. Grzbiela, A., Dengler, W., Wiedemann, G., and Pauli, P. (2013). Implantable
           cardioverter defibrillator shocks are prospective predictors of anxiety. Heart and Lung, 42(2), 105–​11.
       Sears, S. E., Jr. and Conti, J. B. (2003). Understanding implantable cardioverter defibrillator shocks and
           storms: Medical and psychosocial considerations for research and clinical care. Clinical Cardiology,
           26, 107–​11.
       Seth, A. K., Suzuki, K., and Critchley, H. D. (2011). An interoceptive predictive coding model of
           conscious presence. Frontiers in Psychology, 2, 395.
       Shackman, A. J., Salomons, T. V., Slagter, H. A., Fox, A. S., Winter, J. J., Davidson, R. J. (2011). The
           integration of negative affect, pain and cognitive control in the cingulate cortex. Nature Reviews
           Neuroscience, 12, 154–​67.
164




      164   The somatic error hypothesis of anxiety


            Simmons, A. N., Stein, M. B., Strigo, I. A., Arce, E., Hitchcock, C., and Paulus, M. P. (2011). Anxiety
                positive subjects show altered processing in the anterior insula during anticipation of negative
                stimuli. Human Brain Mapping, 32, 1836–​46.
            Singer, T., Critchley, H. D., and Preuschoff, K. (2009). A common role of insula in feelings, empathy
                and uncertainty. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 13, 334–​40.
            Smith, R., Thayer, J. F., Khalsa, S. S., and Lane, R. D. (2017). The hierarchical basis of neurovisceral
                integration. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 75, 274–​96.
            Stephan, K. E., Manjaly, Z. M., Mathys, C. D., Weber, L. A., Paliwal, S., Gard, T., et al. (2016).
                Allostatic self-​efficacy: A metacognitive theory of dyshomeostasis-​induced fatigue and depression.
                Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 10, 550.
            Sterling, P. (2012). Allostasis: A model of predictive regulation. Physiology Behavior, 106,  5–​15.
            Sterling, P. (2014). Homeostasis vs allostasis: Implications for brain function and mental disorders.
                JAMA Psychiatry, 71, 1192–​3.
            Taylor, S. (2014). Anxiety Sensitivity: Theory, Research, and Treatment of the Fear of Anxiety.
                London: Routledge.
            Tracy, C. M., Epstein, A. E., Darbar, D., DiMarco, J. P., Dunbar, S. B., and Mark Estes, N. A., et al.
                (2012). 2012 ACCF/​AHA/​HRS focused update of the 2008 guidelines for device-​based therapy of
                cardiac rhythm abnormalities. Circulation, 126, 1784–​800.
            Van den Bergh, O., Witthoft, M., Petersen, S., and Brown, R. J. (2017). Symptoms and the
                body: Taking the inferential leap. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 74, 185–​203.
 165




                  Chapter 9

                  The relevance of interoception
                  for eating behavior and
                  eating disorders
                  Beate M. Herbert and Olga Pollatos



       9.1 Introduction
       The importance of interoception for adaptive and maladaptive behavior, as well as for
       psychopathology, has gained growing interest, and dysfunctional interoception has been
       increasingly recognized as representing a core impairment across psychosomatic and psy-
       chiatric disorders (e.g. Khalsa & Lapidus, 2016; Murphy et al., 2017). Recently its role in
       psychopathology has been related to a potential “p-​factor” (Murphy et al., 2017) that may
       represent lesser-​to-​greater severity of psychopathology with associated dysfunction in in-
       teroceptive neural circuitry.
         Eating is a fundamental behavior that reveals how we are intrinsically guided by in-
       teroceptive signals and that is most directly associated with homeostatic psychophysio-
       logical needs, survival, and well-​being. Eating comprises perceiving and discriminating
       interoceptive sensations of hunger and satiety, and steering behavior according to these
       sensations. These processes are critically disturbed in obesity and eating disorders (ED),
       such as anorexia nervosa (AN) and bulimia nervosa (BN).
         Disordered interoception and distorted body image (see section 9.3) have been
       recognized as core symptoms of ED from the beginnings of modern clinical research and
       are defining characteristics of these devastating disorders (Bruch, 1962, 1973). In the field
       of maladaptive eating and ED, dysfunction of interoception represents more than a po-
       tential p-​factor; it is the pivot of these disorders.
         Interoception is of multifaceted nature and comprises distinguishable dimensions
       (Garfinkel et al., 2016a), as well as different modalities, that is, different organ/​visceral
       systems (Herbert et  al., 2012a). We adopt the nomenclature of Garfinkel, Manassei,
       Hamilton-​Fletcher, and colleagues (Garfinkel et  al., 2016a) that differentiates among
       three major dimensions: “Interoceptive Accuracy” (IAcc) as reflected in objective perfor-
       mance on behavioral tests, such as heartbeat perception tests; “Interoceptive Sensibility“
       (IS), that is, the individuals’ experience and subjective beliefs and perceptions as is
       assessed by self-​report; and “Interoceptive Awareness” (IA), that is, the metacognitive
       insights into performance aptitude, as characterized by the degree to which interoceptive
16




     166   The relevance of interoception for eating behavior and eating disorders


           accuracy is predicted by subjective confidence in an individual’s judgment about her
           task performance. These dimensions represent different levels of being aware of one’s
           interoceptive body.
              Additionally, we introduce the further dimension of “Interoceptive Emotional
           Evaluation” (IE) into a model of distinguishable facets of interoception that has been
           demonstrated to be of importance in shaping behavior and that is interacting with
           IAcc, especially in the eating domain (Herbert et  al., 2012b; Herbert et  al., 2013)  (see
           Figure 9.1). Interoceptive emotional evaluation (IE) represents subjective appraisal related
           to sensations and perceptions of interoceptive signals. We usually assess IE as subjective
           ratings of affective evaluations of perceived interoceptive signals (e.g. arousal, valence,
           anxiety, as well as other affects) in situ, that is during specific behavioral paradigms meas-
           uring IAcc (Herbert et al. 2012a, 2012b, 2013; van Dyck et al., 2016). By using specific
           protocols, we demonstrated that IE can be modulated during short-​term fasting (Herbert
           et al., 2012b), or after manipulation of insular cortex activity (Pollatos et al., 2016). IE has
           been linked to autonomic-​nervous activity changes (heart rate variability measures) that
           reflect processes of top-​down inhibition (Herbert et al., 2012a, 2012b, 2013). Additionally,
           IAcc and IE represent independent dimensions (Herbert et  al., 2012a, 2012b, 2013;
           Pollatos et al., 2016). We suggest that IE is of relevance in understanding ED because pro-
           found negative evaluation of bodily signals—​as show up in aversive and/​or ambivalent




                                                     • Interoceptive                            • Interoceptive
                                                       accuracy      IAcc                  IS     sensibility (IS)



                                                                         IAcc         IS



                                                                          IA         IE
                                                     • Interoceptive                            • Interoceptive
                                                       awareness (IA)   IA                        emotional
                                                                                           IE
                                                                                                  avaluation




                       Modalities of Interoception                      Dimensions of Interoception



           Figure 9.1  This figure visualizes dimensions and modalities of interoceptive processing.
 167




                                                                                     Introduction      167


       reaction towards food, and interoceptive signals of, for example, hunger and fullness, as
       well as in typical distortion of body image—​are part of the core symptoms in ED.
          The relevance of emotional evaluation of interoceptive (and other bodily) signals as
       an independent process is also supported by Smith and Lane’s multi-​hierarchical model
       of emotion processing (Smith & Lane, 2015), suggesting a multi-​stage interoceptive/​
       somatosensory process by which distinct body state patterns (discrete body features
       that are represented in somatosensory cortices, posterior insula, nucleus of the tractus
       solitarii, hypothalamic nuclei, and the parabrachial nucleus; whole-​body patterns that are
       represented in the mid and anterior insula) are detected and assigned conceptual emo-
       tional meaning. Emotional concepts are suggested to occur by appraisal mechanisms
       involving other brain regions such as the anterior cingulate and the medial prefrontal
       cortices that refer to this mapping of the body state. These assumptions are in accordance
       with studies showing that the insular cortex and anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) play
       crucial roles in connecting interoceptive processes and emotions (Pollatos, Gramann, &
       Schandry, 2007).
          There is evidence that certain dimensions of interoception do not overlap in healthy
       populations but represent dissociable measures (Garfinkel et al., 2015). However, IS and
       IAcc have been shown to be aligned in those individuals with high precision of interocep-
       tive perception (IAcc) (Garfinkel et al., 2015), supporting the idea that IAcc might be the
       core ability within the construct of interoception underpinning other dimensions.
          Dissociability of dimensions of interoception is suggested to have variable relevance
       for different clinical disorders and maladaptive functions (Garfinkel et al., 2016a; Herbert
       et al., 2012b; Murphy et al., 2016 and Chapter 7 in the present volume). Dissociation be-
       tween objectively and subjectively quantified interoceptive indices has been suggested to
       reflect interoceptive (trait) prediction error and to be greater in individuals with lower
       IAcc (Garfinkel et  al., 2016a). This divergence of dimensions has been evidenced to
       be large, for example in persons with Autism Spectrum Conditions (ASC) (Garfinkel
       et  al., 2016b). We suggest that in ED there is larger dissociation of dimensions of
       interoception (e.g. IS and IAcc), that may reflect greater interoceptive (trait) predic-
       tion error (see section 9.5). The question of overlap of interoception across modalities
       has been discussed on the assumption that interoceptive information may be processed
       within a unity of nervous systems entities (Craig, 2009). There is some scope to concep-
       tualize multimodal interoception either as individual coherence of crossmodal unity of
       interoceptive processing, or as fractionation of multimodal interoception, and/​or both
       (Garfinkel et al., 2016a; Herbert et al., 2012a; Whitehead & Drescher, 1980; Pollatos et al.,
       2016). It has been suggested that this depends on dynamically changing environmental
       demands and corresponding physiological adaptations (Herbert et al., 2012a, 2012b).
          With regard to the eating domain, relevant studies on interoception across modalities
       are sparse, reporting evidence for significant, but moderate, correlations of cardiac IAcc
       and intensity of gastric perception, as measured by adapted water-​loading tests (WLT),
       using non-​caloric water drinking and filling levels (Herbert et al., 2012a; Whitehead &
       Drescher, 1980 van Dyck et al., 2016) in healthy samples. Data suggest that in a controlled,
168




      168   The relevance of interoception for eating behavior and eating disorders


            baseline setting, there may be a trait-​like overlap in perceiving cardiac signals accurately
            and in perceiving gastric signals of fullness more precisely, suggestive of individual
            differences. Heart and stomach have been also shown to have partially overlapping cor-
            tical representations within the interoceptive insula (Avery et al., 2015), suggesting that
            a unitary structure may exist in some modalities, especially in cardiovascular and gastric
            domains. This may be related to relevance of vagal afferents in both modalities. It has been
            shown that many of the signals relevant to satiety and food intake travel via the vagus nerve
            from the stomach to the brain, terminating in a unique region of the insula that subserves
            both monitoring the state of the body and the sense of taste (Bartoud, 2008). However,
            this multimodal unity may not exist in other modalities (e.g. cardiac and respiratory re-
            sistance perception; Garfinkel et  al., 2016a), as well as in other populations or clinical
            disorders (e.g. autism; Garfinkel et al., 2015, 2016b). Moreover, multimodal interoception
            may not be continuous across situations, over development, or in neurodevelopmental
            and psychiatric conditions (Murphy et al., 2017) .
               Dimensions of interoception in relation to adaptive or maladaptive eating behavior,
            obesity, or EDs have been mainly investigated by self-​report, that is via questionnaire
            measures, primarily covering the IS dimension (Merwin et al., 2010). There are far fewer
            results focusing on objective performance measures of interoception in relation to eating
            behavior, body weight, and EDs. As in general interoception research, objective perfor-
            mance measures of IAcc primarily focused on the cardiac modality, that is, heartbeat
            perception tests. When investigating eating-​related phenomena, it is obviously of interest
            to measure individual perception sensitivity of gastric functions, sensations of hunger,
            fullness, or satiety, that characterize relevant specific interoceptive symptoms of EDs and
            obesity. Up to now, there are sparse data on gastric interoceptive perception in relation
            to eating behavior and EDs, especially when non-​invasive paradigms with high ecolog-
            ical validity are intended to be used (e.g. Geliebter & Hashim, 2001; Herbert et al., 2012a,
            2012b; van Dyck et al., 2016; Beglinger & Degen, 2006).
               Finally, extant investigation of dimensions and modalities of interoception has mainly
            focused on disorders of eating behavior, much more than on adaptive eating. Section 9.2
            and 9.3 summarize some relevant findings in both domains.

            9.2  Interoception and adaptive eating, body weight,
            and obesity
            Adaptive behaviors, that is, regulation of behavior according to bodily needs and envi-
            ronmental demands, play an important role in maintaining somatic and mental health,
            and trait-​like IAcc, as measured by heartbeat perception tasks, have been demonstrated
            to be positively connected with relevant aspects of adaptive behavior regulation (Herbert,
            Ulbrich, & Schandry, 2007; Herbert et  al., 2013; Furman, 2013; Kirk, Doawnar, &
            Montague, 2011) and emotion regulation (Füstös et al., 2013).
              Eating adaptively is of relevance for body-​weight regulation, the brain’s capability to
            balance food intake with energy needs, and finally for obesity, that results from persist­
            ent failure of this balance and ends in chronic energy surplus. In studies investigating
 169




                                      Interoception and adaptive eating, body weight, and obesity       169


       adaptive eating behaviors in unrestrained eating and in eating disorders, adaptive eating
       has been primarily defined as the absence of eating disorder symptoms; however, adapt­
       ive eating obviously is more than just the absence of clinical symptoms. Although there
       are many factors that predispose individuals to weight gain and obesity (e.g. Cui, López,
       & Rahmouni, 2017), we focus here on how eating behavior and body weight may be
       influenced by sensitivity to interoceptive signals.
          A possibly adaptive form of eating that has recently gained recognition is the construct
       of “intuitive eating” (Herbert et al., 2013). It has been defined as eating in response to in-
       ternal physiological hunger and satiety cues rather than to emotional reasons, and relying
       on internal hunger and satiety cues to determine when and how much to eat. It includes
       the unconditional permission to eat when hungry and what food is desired (Tylka, 2006).
       This form of adaptive eating is commonly assessed via self-​report such as the Intuitive
       Eating Scale (IES) (Tylka, 2006). There are supporting data that scoring high in intuitive
       eating is associated with self-​reported eating according to physiological reasons and with
       reduced emotional eating, improved emotional well-​being, less preoccupation with food
       choice, as well as less ED (Faith et al., 2004; Tylka, 2006). Accordingly, there is some evi-
       dence from cross-​sectional studies showing lower/​normal body weight in intuitive eaters,
       especially in early and mid-​aged women (Madden et al., 2012).
          Herbert, Blechert, Hautzinger, and colleagues (2013) examined the connection of facets
       defining intuitive eating as assessed by the IES and (trait) IAcc, as measured by heart-
       beat tracking, as well as IE (affective ratings during heartbeat perception) in 111 healthy,
       normal-​weight women. Two key findings from that study highlighted the relevance of
       different interoceptive dimensions in shaping adaptive eating and body weight. First,
       IAcc was significantly positively related to those facets of self-​reported intuitive eating
       that have been supposed to represent eating for physical rather than emotional reasons,
       as well as trusting and relying on internal hunger and satiety cues. Furthermore, IAcc
       mediated the negative relationship between the tendency to eat intuitively and lower body
       weight. However, IAcc was not related to self-​reported “unconditional permission to eat
       when hungry.” We proposed that this unrestricted eating reflects the influence of other
       external and internal factors that affect eating behavior, such as environmental pressure
       to be thin, others’ acceptance of body shape, emphasis on body appearance, as well as
       aspects comprising cognitive inhibition of behavior, such as shows up, for example, in re-
       strictive eating (Herbert et al., 2013; Kaye, Fudge, & Paulus, 2009). Thus, although more
       accurate interoceptive perception might represent a prerequisite for eating adaptively, the
       permission to eat without restrictions and to respond behaviorally accordingly, may in-
       volve further relevant factors such as top-​down control, that have been shown to be im-
       paired at one end, that is in obesity and BN, or that is dominating at the other end, that
       is in restrictive AN (Wierenga et al., 2014; Kaye et al., 2009). The second main finding of
       this study showed that the degree of negative evaluation of one’s interoceptive signals (IE)
       during heartbeat tracking was negatively correlated to “eating for physical reasons rather
       than emotional cues” as well as significantly predicted higher BMI. IE and IAcc were not
       related. This highlights the independent roles of IAcc and of emotional evaluation of one’s
170




      170   The relevance of interoception for eating behavior and eating disorders


            interoceptive cues (IE) as unpleasant in shaping body weight and those aspects of adapt­
            ive eating, that are related to successful emotion regulation.
               The relevance of the IE dimension is also underscored by the prominence of both dis-
            turbed perception of interoceptive signals (Kaye et al., 2009; Lilenfeld et al., 2006; Pollatos
            et  al., 2008)  and aversive experience of visceral sensations during exposure to food or
            food-​related stimuli (Kaye et al., 2009) or one’s own or other’s bodily cues (Vocks et al.,
            2010) in samples with disordered eating behavior (see section 9.3).
               The role of IE as well as of higher-​order top-​down related cognitive control in shaping
            adaptive or maladaptive eating is supported by hypotheses on extremes of eating behav­
            ior. It is suggested that dysregulated eating, obesity, and EDs emerge from an altered
            balance of reward and inhibitory processing (see Wierenga et al., 2014). Altered activa-
            tion within brain networks, including corticostriatal limbic and dorsal cognitive (control)
            neural circuitry (e.g. DLPFC), as well as anterior insula, has been observed in substance
            use disorders, obesity, and in ED (Wierenga et  al., 2014). These limbic, cognitive, and
            salience circuits interact to valuate reward, assess future consequences of one’s behavior,
            and integrate and evaluate reward prediction to guide decisions by using both intero-
            ceptive bottom-​up signalling and top-​down cognitive control. Altered reward appraisal
            (not only restricted to food cues and eating) has been demonstrated in obesity, as well as
            in ED, and is linked to emotional dysregulation, manifesting as exaggerated anxiety and
            sensitivity to punishment (Kaye et al., 2009; Wierenga et al., 2014). Inhibitory function
            is suggested to vary between different diagnoses (Kaye et al., 2009). In obesity and in BN
            there is evidence for deficits in cognitive control, proposed to increase instability and er-
            ratic responding to appetitive stimuli, whereas restrictive type of AN has been related to
            exaggerated cognitive control, suggested to be used for compensating for dysfunctional
            reward processing (Wierenga et al., 2014). Thus, maladaptive eating/​overeating and obe-
            sity as well as EDs may represent a spectrum anchored by extremes of inhibition and
            dysregulation interacting with altered and dysfunctional interoception at its base.
               Concerning obesity, there is evidence supporting attenuated cardiac IAcc in over-
            weight and obese women and men that is associated with higher BMI in these samples
            (Herbert & Pollatos, 2014), suggesting that low IAcc impairs detection of bodily changes
            accompanying satiety.
               This is complemented by findings by our findings (van Dyck et al., 2016), measuring
            gastric interoception by an adapted, standardized, non-​invasive WLT protocol in a large
            healthy sample of 99 women. Results showed that BMI was positively associated with
            drunk water volume until feeling satiation as well as with maximum capacity of drunk
            water volume, suggesting attenuated gastric interoceptive sensitivity (IAcc dimension).
            Additionally, cardiac IAcc was positively correlated with a gastric sensitivity measure of
            drunk water volume until satiation in the whole sample, supporting earlier findings on
            cardiac and gastric crossmodal overlap within a similar protocol (Herbert et al., 2012a).
            Recent results based on another non-​invasive WLT protocol (Arrouk et al., 2017) support
            the finding that obese children drink more water until sensing maximum fullness,
            suggesting abnormal satiety perception. Medical interventions using intragastric filling of
 17




                                      Interoception and adaptive eating, body weight, and obesity        171


      the stomach mechanically by balloons that intend to stimulate gastric mechanoreceptors
      triggering short-​acting vagal signals to interoceptive brain regions have been reported to
      help obese people lose weight, and may support the relevance of mechanoreceptor-​driven
      interoceptive perception facilitating body-​weight regulation (Tate & Geliebter, 2017).
      Taken together, this evidence supports a hypothesis of in-​or hyposensitivity of intero-
      ceptive signals across gastric and cardiac modalities in obesity and overeating. Existent
      results on gastric sensitivity specifically suggest interoceptive hyposensitivity for signals of
      satiety and fullness.
         However, for dysfunctional body-​weight regulation (i.e. obesity), there might also exist
      another prediction regarding IAcc. Positive and negative alliesthesia for food cues (i.e. in-
      crease or decrease in reward value of a stimulus that is based on its potential to move the
      body’s physiological state towards homeostasis) is basically driven by interoceptive pro-
      cessing of the body’s state (e.g. glucose, insulin levels, visceral signals of fullness, hunger,
      etc.; Stice, Burger, & Yokum, 2013). Accordingly, it may be argued that greater sensitivity
      of interoceptive signals of hunger or bodily weakness, signalling energy depletion of the
      body, such as during food-​deprivation, facilitates generation of behaviors in reaction to
      these signals (i.e. seeking food and eating). This mechanism is supported by increasing
      the motivational salience of food cues. Thus, positive alliesthesia might be supposed to
      facilitate obesity in interaction with interoceptive sensitivity.
         Page, Seo, Belfort-​DeAguiar, and colleagues (2011) demonstrated that obese adults
      exhibit greater activation of bilateral insula, hypothalamus, striatum, substantia nigra,
      and ventral tegmental area during hypoglycaemia which occurs during food-​deprivation.
      Comparable to drug abuse, hypersensitivity to internal signals associated with hunger
      and other bodily states of energy loss might contribute to the experience of positive
      alliesthesia for food cues, and thereby may undermine attempts to lose weight. Until now
      there is only sparse evidence from behavioral studies resolving this idea (e.g. Stevenson,
      Mahmut, & Rooney, 2015). However, the findings may suggest that within this process,
      top-​down inhibitory control as well as appraisal processes of interoceptive signals (IE)
      interact in steering final eating behavior: for example, less capability of behavioral inhibi-
      tion (e.g. in BN and obesity) is suggested to support food consumption; negative evalua-
      tion of interoceptive cues (e.g. satiation) is assumed to restrict eating behavior in order to
      avoid negative sensations (e.g. in AN) (see section 9.3).
         Eating adaptively according to the balance of interoceptive cues of hunger and satiety
      may be disrupted by early restrictive or monitoring feeding practices, external eating
      rules, or dietary restraint, that is, pressures that may induce a disconnection of internal
      (interoceptive multidimensional and multisensory) experience and food intake regula-
      tion. This disconnection has been reported to be related to the emergence of dieting,
      weight gain, and eating in the absence of hunger and in response to emotional and situa-
      tional factors (e.g. Birch & Fisher, 2000; Galloway, Farrow, & Martz, 2010).
         Dieting and fasting represent one of those interruptions that has been recognized as
      a major risk factor in triggering and maintaining disordered eating, obesity, and EDs
      (Hetherington, 2000). Acute, short-​term fasting in healthy young women has been shown
172




      172   The relevance of interoception for eating behavior and eating disorders


            to alter cardiac IAcc and IE via differential psychophysiological, cardiodynamic, and
            vagal mechanisms which may shape functions of interoceptive brain regions by altered
            sensory feedback from visceral systems  (Herbert et  al., 2012b). This finding supports
            the relevance of fasting on interoceptive mechanisms of positive alliesthasia, with po-
            tential relevance for obesity. Acute fasting induced an increase in cardiac IAcc that was
            directly related to ongoing changes of sympathetic and parasympathetic activity and cor-
            responding cardiodynamic alterations during the fasting period, thereby facilitating car-
            diac signal strength and improving IAcc. It is suggested that (frequent) short-​term food
            deprivation involves visceral learning processes that may induce more intense processing
            of and a sensitization for visceral bodily signals, especially of hunger states, that depend
            on changes in autonomic activity and self-​control. This may facilitate hypersensitivity for
            hunger-​related interoceptive cues and thereby impact the development of obesity.
               On the contrary, specific diets and specific food consumption may impair intero-
            ceptive perception accuracy of satiety, and thus facilitate interoceptive hyposensitivity of
            fullness. This idea is supported by recent evidence (Attuquayefio et  al., 2017)  showing
            that a Western-​style diet (high in saturated fat and added sugar) compared to healthier
            food intake over four consecutive days induced impairment of cognitive functions (i.e.
            hippocampal-​dependent learning and memory), as well as rated sensitivity and percep-
            tion of hunger and fullness. In obesity, both factors, attempts of diets as well as intake of
            palatable, high-​caloric food, often coexist, thereby potentially triggering specific intero-
            ceptive hypo-​and hypersensitivity.
               However, the findings mentioned earlier are primarily based on cross-​sectional designs
            that do not allow us to draw firm conclusions regarding the causal directional relation
            between IAcc, other dimensions of interoception, and eating behavior and body weight.
            Furthermore, maladaptive eating behavior, obesity, as well as EDs, have developmental
            roots and early manifestations in childhood and youth. Hence, in order to improve our
            understanding of the interaction between interoception, eating behavior, body weight,
            and experience of the body it is necessary to investigate longitudinal processes of devel-
            opment in healthy and in pathological samples. There is one prospective study (Koch &
            Pollatos, 2014) with a large sample of 1657 children, aged between 6 and 11 years, that
            investigated development of cardiac IAcc over one year as well as its prospective associa-
            tion with food approach behaviors. The findings support interoceptive hyposensitivity in
            the cardiac domain (IAcc) in overweight compared to normal weight children. Only in
            overweight children was external and emotional eating behavior predictive of later IAcc,
            highlighting that existent eating behavior preceded low cardiac IAcc and not vice versa.
            This corroborates the reported findings in adults and demonstrates the impact of food
            and eating behavior in shaping interoception in children.

            9.3  Interoception in eating disorders
            Concerning developmental factors, physiological changes represent relevant disturbances
            challenging homeostasis and allostatic adaptation as well as requiring new and adaptive
            ways of reducing increased “prediction errors” (see Chapter  9.5) of all bodily sensory
 173




                                                                  Interoception in eating disorders     173


       channels, including interoceptive signals. For example, cardiac IAcc has been shown to
       depend on individual differences of cardiodynamic mechanisms that either facilitate or
       dampen perception and processing of cardiac signals (Herbert et al., 2010). These phys-
       iological mechanisms may alter attention focus towards interoceptive sensations as well
       as visceral learning, thereby influencing development of IAcc. There is certainly no more
       profound metamorphosis of all bodily and physiological systems than in puberty, espe-
       cially in girls and adolescent women. Therefore, it is not surprising that puberty in par-
       ticular represents the critical period for first manifestation of disorders of EDs. We will
       focus here on AN and BN.
          AN is the psychiatric disorder with the highest rate of mortality (Arcelus et al., 2011),
       the onset mainly occurring in adolescent girls and young women. AN is characterized
       by extremely low body weight and on obsessive fear of becoming fat, as well as abnormal
       experiences of the body interior, such as vague feelings of fullness or failure (American
       Psychiatric Association, 2013; Bruch, 1962, 1973). Bulimia nervosa (BN) is characterized
       by recurrent episodes of binge eating large amounts of food and self-​induced vomiting
       or other compensatory behaviors for body-​weight maintenance (American Psychiatric
       Association, 2013). Hilde Bruch summarized the outstanding interoceptive characteristic
       of EDs, as “disturbance in the accuracy of perception or cognitive interpretation of stimuli
       arising in the body, with failure to recognize signs of nutritional need as the most prom-
       inent deficiency of this type” (Bruch, 1962, p. 189). In addition to interoceptive deficits,
       clinical descriptions of EDs portray distorted “body image” (Bruch, 1973; Fairborn &
       Harrison, 2003). Body image refers to a diverse, multifaceted psychological construct that
       relies primarily on exteroceptive (here mostly visual) information and beyond perceptual
       and behavioral dimensions, and incorporates subjective evaluation; that is, whether an
       individual is satisfied or dissatisfied with his or her physical appearance (Emanuelsen,
       Drew, & Köteles, 2015).
          Numerous empirical studies document severe distortions of all facets of body image
       in EDs, supporting clinical observations that AN patients perceive themselves as fat de-
       spite often severe state of emaciation, in combination with fundamental body dissatisfac-
       tion (Fairburn & Harrison, 2003). In contrast, study results on interoception in EDs are
       still sparse. At the self-​report level, studies primarily used the Eating Disorders Inventory
       (EDI) subscale “interoceptive deficits” to assess subjectively rated identification of bodily
       signals, especially hunger or satiety, in AN and BN samples (see Klabunde, Collado, &
       Bohon, 2017; Merwin et al., 2010). Results have shown that interoceptive impairments
       predict risk for developing EDs (Clausen et al., 2011), as well as that patients with BN
       show problems in perception of bodily signals and its evaluation (Merwin et al., 2010).
       However, the EDI subscale refers to a mixture of self-​reported bodily sensations and
       affective experiences, such as experiencing affective confusion and fear (a mixture of IS
       and IE) by asking for difficulties in identification and interpretation of internal, emotional
       signals as well as of interoceptive hunger and satiety cues (e.g. Merwin et al., 2010).
          Beyond self-​report, only a few, cross-​sectional studies up to today demonstrated im-
       paired IAcc in ED. Pollatos and colleagues (2008) found decreased IAcc, as measured by
174




      174   The relevance of interoception for eating behavior and eating disorders


            a heartbeat tracking task in female AN patients. EDI interoceptive deficiency was also
            impaired in AN, however IAcc was not correlated with EDI interoceptive deficits scores.
            This underscores that the subjective, evaluative interoceptive experience and IAcc do not
            overlap in AN. Acknowledging the fact that EDI interoception score is a mixed measure,
            this may explain this incoherence. However, this finding may be recognized as a deviation
            across interoceptive dimensions, that is as a mismatch of subjective expectation/​predic-
            tion and sensory afferent perception accuracy that may result from an altered interocep-
            tive prediction signal (see section 9.5). Accordingly, the findings may be interpreted as
            a rough estimate for elevated interoceptive (trait) prediction error in patients with AN
            (Garfinkel et al., 2016b).
               These results may tentatively suggest that in AN patients with active illness there
            exists dampened IAcc that does not match self-​perceived judgment of one’s bodily states,
            suggesting a failure to integrate or minimize ongoing discrepancy of “prior” predictions
            (see section 9.5) about bodily states and afferent interoceptive prediction errors adapt-
            ively. Low trait-​like IAcc might mediate this failure. This interpretation is consistent
            with results in healthy subjects demonstrating that dissociation between interoceptive
            dimensions is greatest in those individuals with lower in IAcc (Garfinkel et al., 2015), as
            well as in clinical conditions, such as autism spectrum disorders (Garfinkel et al., 2016b).
               Whereas these results, based on measures of IAcc at rest, may reflect dampened intero-
            ceptive perception as a trait-​like condition in AN, there are interesting findings reporting
            more intense interoceptive signal processing, especially during meal anticipation. Khalsa
            and colleagues (2015) investigated cardiorespiratory interoceptive processing in AN by
            disturbing autonomic nervous system afferent signalling by use of infusions of isoproter-
            enol during meal anticipation and after consumption. In this critical food-​related context,
            AN patients demonstrated exaggerated interoceptive bias; that is, patients with AN expe-
            rienced cardiorespiratory sensations abnormally intensely, as well as exaggerated detec-
            tion of symptoms even during control saline infusion, but only during meal anticipation.
            This suggests that AN patients perceive interoceptive symptoms in critical—​arousing and
            aversive—​food-​anticipatory contexts more intensely, and not in a more dampened way.
            This finding provides more direct evidence that IAcc is varying in a context-​specific way
            in AN. This also supports the idea that interoceptive prediction (anticipatory condition)
            signalling is distorted in AN (Khalsa et al., 2015), especially in a fear-​related and self-​ref-
            erential context, which is important for these patients.
               Complementing these findings there is ample evidence in ED for abnormal neural
            encoding of interoceptive signals in relevant neurocircuitry, involving insula, anterior cin-
            gulate, somatosensory cortices, and amygdala (see Khalsa & Lapidus, 2016). Interesting
            study results show more intense activation of insula and anterior cingulate cortex in
            recovered patients as well as those with acute AN during viewing food pictures (Cowdrey
            et al., 2011), or when confronted with aversive self-​comparison or with desirable ideal body
            shape (Friederich et al., 2010). However, there is evidence for decreased insular cortex acti-
            vation when food was actually tasted (Oberndorfer et al., 2013), or when confronted with
            self-​body images (Gaudio & Quattrocchi, 2012). These results support the view that in
 175




                                                                 Interoception in eating disorders     175


       critical situations that are intruding relevant symptom areas, interoceptive perception and
       signal processing is intensified in active AN. This speaks in favour of the hypothesis that—​
       phasic—​interoceptive hypersensitivity may be of relevance in AN (Zucker et  al., 2017).
       Dampening of interoceptive brain activation, on the one hand, might be interpreted as
       downregulation of interoceptive perception as a possible coping strategy of aversive in-
       teroceptive signalling. On the other hand, when challenging stimuli or bodily sensations
       become overwhelming and/​or top-​down inhibition fails, interoceptive processing might
       break through.
          The non-​acceptance or aversive experience of affective and bodily signals may con-
       tribute to symptoms of disordered eating (e.g. Merwin et al., 2010). For instance, binge
       eating has been proposed to function as an escape from aversive self-​awareness or feelings
       of dysphoria (Heatherton & Baumeister, 1991), and (long-​term) dietary restraint has been
       suggested as a way to avoid internal sensations of fullness and/​or feelings of guilt and
       shame (Schmidt & Treasure, 2006). Relief from negative affective states or bodily dis-
       comfort by the use of avoidance strategies or manipulations influencing these negative
       bodily sensations is suggested to be highly reinforcing for individuals with an ED, thus
       perpetuating ED symptoms (Kaye et al., 2009).
          These mechanisms may be affected in both AN and BN, with potential differences
       in top-​down cognitive control mediating this process. This interpretation is supported
       by the augmented proactive inhibitory motor control and delay of gratification in AN
       compared to BN and healthy controls (Bartholdy et al., 2017).
          Findings of a paradoxical effect of self-​focus (viewing one’s own face) on cardiac IAcc
       in AN (Pollatos et  al., 2016)  as compared to healthy controls, who typically show an
       increased IAcc evoked by focusing on oneself (Ainley et al., 2012), support the idea that
       AN patients “shut down” interoceptive perception when confronted with highly salient,
       aversive exteroceptive processing of their body exterior. This atypical effect remained after
       cognitive-​behavioral psychotherapy and questions the usefulness of direct body confron-
       tation techniques for changing interoception in AN. Therefore, IAcc and other dimensions
       of interoceptive sensibility are not constant in EDs but may show variations depending
       on salient context, such as expecting food confrontation, or confrontation with the body.
          Regarding BN, results are more heterogeneous, suggesting impaired cardiac IAcc
       (Klabunde et  al., 2017)  or no differences compared to healthy controls (Pollatos &
       Georgiou, 2016). However, reduced sensitivity of gastric perception has been reported
       in BN, as evidenced by increased gastric capacity compared to obese and normal-​weight
       comparisons (Geliebter & Hashim, 2001), as well as lower responding to satiety signalling
       in a yoghurt consumption paradigm (Beglinger & Degen, 2006). This is in accord with
       our recent finding (van Dyck et al., 2016) that satiation volume, as assessed by an adapted
       standardized, non-​invasive WLT paradigm and corrected to individual maximum fullness
       capacity, was significantly positively associated with bulimic symptoms in a non-​clinical
       sample of young adults. Hence, individuals with bulimic symptoms (with binge-​eating
       and purging behaviors) are less sensitive to gastric signals and therefore drink beyond
       the satiation threshold. Additionally, it has been demonstrated that BN patients show
176




      176   The relevance of interoception for eating behavior and eating disorders


            negative attribution style towards interoceptive sensations, suggesting more aversive per-
            ception of interoceptive signals, and thereby underscoring the relevance of IE (Morrison,
            Waller, & Lawson, 2006).
              In accordance with our conceptualization of interoception and empirical findings
            (Tsakiris et al., 2017 Ainley & Tsakiris, 2013; Seth & Friston, 2016 Crucianelli et al., 2016),
            we assume dysfunctional interoception to lie at the core of maladaptive eating and EDs,
            of related dysfunctions of embodied cognition, as well as deficient unity and stability of
            an embodied self (Herbert & Pollatos, 2012; Tsakiris, 2017). The perception and knowl­
            edge of one’s own body is due to co-​perception and integration of the different sensory
            information (visual, tactile, proprioceptive, and interoceptive) that enables an individual
            to gain an accurate perception of one’s own body (Tsakiris, 2017).
              We suggest that in EDs, integrative multisensory processes, forming the self are basi-
            cally disturbed, by this supporting what Hilde Bruch (1962, 1982) recognized: that at the
            root of EDs, especially and most deeply in AN, is fundamentally a deficit of the self.

            9.4  Eating disorders as disorders of the self
            The self may be considered as an integrative structure of the mind that organizes and
            coordinates affective, cognitive, social, sensorimotor, and vegetative functions with re-
            gard to interoceptive and exteroceptive stimuli from one’s own body and the environ-
            ment (Amianto et  al., 2016). Recent accounts (Amianto et  al., 2016; Gaete & Fuchs,
            2016) suggest that the integrative function of the self (i.e. its ability to integrate cognitive,
            affective, and conative functions) as well as its diachronic function (i.e. the experience of
            a consistent self over time indicated by one’s identity) is profoundly compromised in EDs.
            This implies problems in integrating one’s own internal experiences within a meaningful
            narrative of the self as persisting across time, which results in an unstable sense of self that
            weakens related functions like self-​esteem, emotion regulation, and interpersonal effec-
            tiveness (Amianto et al., 2016).
               At the core of our self is the experience of our body, our bodily self. Embodied cog-
            nition approaches agree that the self is grounded in the body (Herbert & Pollatos, 2012;
            Fuchs & Schlimme, 2009) and that the body is the starting point for understanding self-​
            awareness as well as social interactions.
               The experience of our body as our own is fundamentally based on multimodal integra-
            tion of signals from the whole body (e.g. Herbert & Pollatos, 2012; Tsakiris, 2017; Picard
            & Friston, 2014). Exteroceptive multisensory bodily sources and their percepts are related
            to concepts of body image—​and associated with it—​with fundamental dimensions of the
            bodily self such as the sense of body ownership (Tsakiris, 2017; Eshkevari et al., 2012). This
            refers to the special status of one’s own body that is characterized by the feeling that my
            “body belongs to me.” Hilde Bruch (1972) described individuals with AN as functioning
            with a “false-​self,” suggesting that they may not be able to discriminate between their
            own and their caregivers’ or others’ expectations and needs. Distinguishing “self ” from
            “other” is of fundamental importance for self-​awareness as well as for successful social
 17




                                                           Eating disorders as disorders of the self       177


      interactions and has been demonstrated to depend on multisensory integration of exter-
      oceptive and interoceptive bodily perceptions (see Tsakiris, 2017).
         Research in healthy samples has used multisensory stimulation between “self ” and
      “other” to induce controlled changes in the representation of one’s identity (Tajadura-​
      Jiménez & Tsakiris, 2014; Tajadura-​Jimenez et  al., 2014). This was examined by use
      of experimental paradigms that allow the quantification of the contribution of ex-
      teroceptive information on distinguishing between self and other, such as manip-
      ulation of self-​face recognition (“enfacement illusion”) and Rubber Hand Illusion
      paradigms (RHI). Beyond the known role of multisensory integration, it was shown
      that individuals with lower IAcc experienced more intense changes in body ownership
      and self-​identification, suggestive of a dominance of perceiving the body from the out-
      side, that is, a greater weighting of exteroceptive over interoceptive information in these
      individuals (Tsakiris et al., 2011; Tajadura-​Jiménez & Tsakiris, 2014; see also Chapter 2
      in the present volume).
         Thus, higher interoceptive accuracy (precision) is suggested to be critical for ensuring
      psychophysiological stability of the organism and the bodily self as well as its embodied
      unity in a changing environment with alternating challenges (Herbert & Pollatos,
      2012; Tsakiris, 2017). Furthermore, results in healthy samples (Ainley & Tsakiris,
      2013) highlighted that individuals with lower cardiac IAcc show a greater tendency to con-
      sider their body as an object, suggesting that low IAcc facilitates this self-​objectification
      tendency. Precisely this dysbalanced dominance of exteroceptive focus of body percep-
      tion and of exaggerated self-​objectification has been demonstrated in EDs. In accordance
      with reported impaired IAcc in EDs, there is evidence for more intense body-​illusion
      effects, that is, greater plasticity of the bodily self (Eshkevari et al., 2012). This underscores
      an overreliance on exteroceptive information (i.e. vision), and a stronger focus on the
      body from the outside in EDs.
         Self-​objectification has been related to increasing number of EDs in the Western world,
      with the influence of media communicating images that convey ideals of beauty, espe-
      cially of girls and women, that are unattainable for most persons. This has been reported
      to be of relevance for increasing body dissatisfaction in girls and women (Emanuelsen
      et al., 2015), and facilitating internalization of typical beauty ideal and produce objective
      body consciousness, the tendency towards body surveillance (watching oneself from the
      outside as an observer), as well as the appearance of control beliefs (believing that cul-
      tural body standards can be achieved if one tries hard enough) (McKinley, 1999). This is
      of major relevance in EDs.
         We propose that perceptual and cognitive-​affective body image disturbances in EDs
      may reflect an increased focus to mainly visually perceiving the body from the outside
      at the expense of sensing internal bodily states. Body focus varies dynamically in AN,
      depending on salient, aversively evaluated contexts (Khalsa et  al., 2015). These shifts
      of body focus may depend on compromised coping resources in dealing with bodily
      sensations and with environmental demands. This supports considerations of Amianto,
178




      178   The relevance of interoception for eating behavior and eating disorders


            Northoff, Abbate Daga, and colleagues (2016) proposing that in EDs, especially in AN,
            the experience of the body is not integrated into the self. The authors state:
               “even though patients with AN do not perceive their body as sharply extraneous, as sometimes
               happens in schizophrenia . . . they do appear to maintain an attitude of ‘objectification’ toward their
               body, as if their body does not pertain to their self. The body is no longer experienced in a subjec-
               tive way as ‘my’ body, and thus as personal or self-​related.” (Amianto et al., 2016, p.2)

               This is suggested to lead to pervasive weakness of the integrative functions of the self,
            which may explain why certain personality traits that are common to AN become rigid,
            such as high harm avoidance, low self-​directedness, and perfectionism.
               This view is in accord with Gaete and Fuchs (2016) who state that EDs may be
            characterized by an embodied defense, so that patients experience their own bodies pri-
            marily as objects, at the expense of the “subject body.” This is based on a phenomenolog-
            ical approach of psychopathologies of embodiment by Fuchs and Schlimme (2009), who
            differentiate between the body that one “pre-​reflectively” lives, the lived or “subject body”
            (implicit in one’s ongoing experience), and the physical body (that appears as an object of
            conscious attention, and that one can perceive or that is perceived by others), the “object
            body.” This means that the body has a double or ambiguous experiential status, with an
            ongoing oscillation between these bodily modes as a foundation of all experiences. It is to
            conclude, that an adaptive, healthy self emanates when we are able to integrate “subject”
            and “object body” fluctuations continuously in a balanced way, balancing the inner and
            outer self (e.g. Tajadura-​Jiménez & Tsakiris, 2014).
               The exaggerated self-​   objectification associated with greater malleability of sense
            of body-​ownership that has been found in EDs, paired with aversive experience of
            the body and a “sense of ineffectiveness” (Bruch, 1962), fits with our hypothesis of a
            failure to balance the two modes of body experience, at the expense of the subject body.
            Accordingly, therapeutic interventions should focus on helping patients to recover in par-
            ticular the subjective experience of their bodies, their lived body. Concentrating on inter-
            oceptive dimensions of relevance (e.g IAcc, IE, and eventual IA) should play a major role
            in strengthening the lived body.
               The most outstanding symptoms in EDs, distortion of body image and dysfunctional
            interoception may be interpreted as failure to balance interoceptive and exteroceptive per-
            ception. We suggest that the lack of integration of interoceptive signals and exteroceptive
            sensory information results in an impoverished sense of self (as a single entity, distinct
            from others) and in social difficulties. Within this process, aversive affective experience of
            the body and interoceptive signals (IE) seem to play a major role in EDs (Gadsby, 2017).
               Attachment insecurity during development has been described to result in self-​deficits
            and failing processes of self/​other differentiation (i.e. development of individuation)
            (Amianto et  al., 2016)  and it is suggested that early intersubjective interactions may be
            critical for the development of our ability to mentalize homeostatic interoceptive states
            (Fotopoulou & Tsakiris, 2017). Quattrocki and Friston (2014) suggest that infants associate
            interoceptive signals of warmth and satiety with their caregiver’s face, which in turn drives
            attachment behavior and the development of endogenous social attention. The authors
 179




                Conceptualizing eating disorders within interoceptive predicting coding theories      179


       consider impaired integration of interoceptive signals with salient information from other
       sensory domains to hamper the infant in forming a higher representation of self, that
       allows feeling distinct from other, and that results in an impoverished sense of self.


       9.5  Conceptualizing eating disorders within interoceptive
       predicting coding theories
       How interoception, as well as multisensory integration of interoceptive, exteroceptive
       and proprioceptive bodily signals may construe a “sense of self ” has been addressed by
       Bayesian predictive coding accounts (Apps & Tsakiris, 2014; Picard & Friston, 2014; Seth
       & Friston, 2017; see Chapter  2 in the present volume). Anatomical models have been
       proposed delineating cortico-​cortical connections of limbic brain regions and the insular
       cortex, with anterior insula operating as an “error module” (Barrett & Simmons, 2015).
          Instead of a linear translation from sensations to perceptions, these models state that
       incoming sensory data are compared with internal models, that is, with the brain’s proba-
       bilistic predictions about the body and the environmental causes that affect the organism.
       This leads to bottom-​up prediction errors (PE), that must be minimized, according to the
       “free energy principle” that warrants adaptive functioning of the organism (Seth & Friston,
       2017; Picard & Friston, 2014). With respect to the body, PE arise when the actual state of
       the body does not match the predicted state. This may occur in each sensory system, and
       also within interoception. This means that exteroceptive and interoceptive perceptions are
       continuously constructed by the probabilistically computing brain, and thereby sensory
       perceptions, including interoceptive perceptions, may occur through an active, iterative in-
       ference process of comparing the brain’s anticipation of sensations with incoming afferent
       input. Thus, also interoceptive experience reflects predictions about the state of the body.
          With respect to multisensory integration of interoceptive, exteroceptive and proprio-
       ceptive sensory channels within self-​processing, one’s body is suggested to be processed in
       a probabilistic manner as the most likely to be “me” (Apps & Tsakiris, 2014). Accordingly,
       for a body to be represented as self, exteroceptive and interoceptive streams have to be
       integrated in order to minimize PEs across multisensory bodily systems (e.g. Tsakiris,
       2016; Picard & Friston, 2014). As has been summarized, maladaptive eating and EDs
       are characterized by dysfunctional interoception as well as deficient multisensory inter-
       oceptive and exteroceptive integration that shows up in greater malleability of the sense
       of body-​ownership. Especially, lower IAcc has been demonstrated in EDs, as well as in
       obesity, that may vary dynamically related to self-​relevant context. We also summarized
       evidence for a basic exteroceptive/​interoceptive imbalance in EDs with a dominant focus
       on the body from the outside, that is paired with body dissatisfaction, and an experience
       of an “object body” that is or has to be controlled.
          Within interoceptive coding accounts higher IAcc should reflect less noisy informa-
       tion in this domain, that is, greater “precision” within the interoceptive system. This
       has been suggested to determine the dominance of the brain’s weighing interoceptive
       predictions and PEs as more reliable (Ainley et al., 2016). This then supports resistance to
180




      180   The relevance of interoception for eating behavior and eating disorders


            exteroceptive multisensory conflicts, as shows up in less malleability to body illusions (see
            Tsakiris, 2017). This process might explain the emphasis on the body as object in patients
            with EDs, who seem to shut down interoceptive perceptions (e.g. not to sense hunger or
            unpleasant, fear-​related bodily sensations) and in doing so they are able to control the
            “object body,” that is, body weight and body shape by fasting, for example.
               Additionally, large interoceptive PEs are suggested to occur in EDs, that is when in-
            coming interoceptive information is discordant with interoceptive predictions. This is also
            reflected in massive body image distortion. We reported clues from very few studies up to
            now that investigated interaction of different dimensions of interoception to grasp the de-
            gree of mismatch of self-​ascribed proficiency in interoceptive ability and actual capacity to
            perceive interoceptive signals accurately, which may serve as an estimate of “interoceptive
            (trait) prediction error” (Garfinkel et al., 2016b). In a sample of women with AN, greater
            mismatch of interoceptive dimensions has indeed been reported (Pollatos et al., 2008).
               We suggest that larger PEs arise either by trait-​like impaired IAcc and/​or by exter-
            nally and internally (physiologically) disturbing processes such as food-​deprivation,
            rigid exercising, bingeing and purging (BN), as well as overeating and unhealthy food-​
            consumption (obesity). Indeed, these clinical symptoms of EDs and features of obesity
            may obviously in turn influence dimensions of interoception and IAcc via physiological
            changes of autonomic nervous activity (see Herbert et  al., 2012b). A  noisy interocep-
            tive (and/​or a noisy, dynamically varying multisensory bodily) system may prompt the
            brain to find ways of reducing (interoceptive, as well as exteroceptive, proprioceptive)
            PEs either by (a) (selectively) attenuating processing of incoming sensory input; (b) by
            triggering changes in the body that resemble the expected input; or (c) by altering per-
            ceptual inferences about bodily states (Khalsa & Lapidus, 2016). In many ways the clin-
            ical symptoms of EDs as well as use of overeating or high-​caloric food-​choice in obesity
            can be characterized as ways of minimizing PEs within the interoceptive system as well
            as in other sensory systems, (i.e. coping with sensory and expected inconsistencies or
            challenges) in order to modulate the object body.
               We assume that a core mechanism of all eating-​related disorders is a history of learning
            during development that information from the body is not reliable. Thus, bodily sig-
            nals cannot be adequately used to update prior predictions across multimodal bodily
            sensations in order to minimize PEs, that results in dysfunction of the self. Instead, eating,
            fasting, and other clinical symptoms characterizing obesity or EDs develop as (dysfunc-
            tional) strategies to cope with an “insufficient self ” (Bruch, 1962).


            9.6 Conclusion
            Interoceptive deficits are major clinical characteristics in AN and BN, and interoception
            plays an important role in steering eating behavior according to hunger and satiety sig-
            nals and bodily needs. We outlined the relevance of dimensions of interoception, in-
            cluding IAcc and IE, in shaping eating behavior. Eating according to interoceptive signals
            of hunger and satiety, undisturbed from external or emotional cues, has been shown to
 18




                                                                                                    References      181


      represent one way of adaptive eating that is associated with body weight in the normal
      range in healthy individuals.
         We discussed evidence for hyposensitivity of interoceptive signals across gastric and
      cardiac modalities in obesity. However, we also proposed the view that hypersensitivity
      of interoceptive signals associated with hunger and bodily states of energy loss may con-
      tribute to the experience of positive alliesthesia for food cues in obesity, and thereby may
      undermine attempts to lose weight.
         For EDs, dysfunctional IAcc lies at the core of clinical symptoms of AN and BN. In
      line with evidence showing context-​dependent biased IAcc in AN, and together with the
      well-​documented aversive evaluation of interoceptive cues and the negative apprecia-
      tion of the body from the outside in EDs, we suggest that IAcc and other interoceptive
      dimensions may not be constantly dampenend in EDs but show variations depending on
      salient (aversively experienced and/​or fear provoking) contexts, such as expecting food
      confrontation, or confrontation with the body. Aversive body appreciation and negative
      evaluation of interoceptive cues (IE) play a major role in shaping the process of shutting-​
      down interoceptive sensations, and of dominantly focusing on the exteroceptive body,
      the “object body.”
         A major difference between AN and BN is supposed to be the capacity of top-​down
      inhibitory function, that is greatest in AN, and is low in binge-​eating BN. Maladaptive
      eating or overeating may represent a spectrum anchored by extremes of inhibition and
      dysregulation interacting with altered interoception at its base.
         Going beyond its relevance for eating behavior, we highlight the importance of
      interoception in shaping dimensions of the self that is thought to be disordered in EDs.
      This shows up in perceptive and cognitive-​affective body image distortion and “an over-
      whelming sense of ineffectiveness” (Bruch, 1962). The lack of integration of interocep-
      tive signals and exteroceptive sensory information results in an impoverished sense of
      self. Within this process, aversive experience of the body and of interoceptive signals (IE)
      play a major role in EDs. We delineated that in EDs, long-​term, dysfunctional strategies
      are used (e.g. fasting, exteroceptive body focus, bingeing, heavy exercising) in order to
      minimize existent large PEs within the interoceptive system, as well as in exteroceptive
      sensory systems, to control the body as an object. Clinical symptoms of EDs may reflect
      an insufficient self that is aimed to be stabilized by inadequate actions to minimize free
      energy. This may explain the persistence of clinical symptoms in ED that are so often re-
      sistant to therapy.


      References
      Ainley, V., Tajadura-​Jiménez, A., Fotopoulou, A., and Tsakiris, M. (2012). Looking into
         myself: Changes in interoceptive sensitivity during mirror self-​observation. Psychophysiology, 49(11)
         1672–​6. doi:10.1111/​j.1469-​8986.2012.01468.x.
      Ainley, V. and Tsakiris, M. (2013). Body conscious? Interoceptive awareness, measured by heartbeat
         perception, is negatively correlated with self-​objectification. PLoS One, 8(2) e55568. <http://​dx.doi.
         org/​10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0055568>
182




      182   The relevance of interoception for eating behavior and eating disorders


            Ainley, V., Apps, M. A. J., Fotopoulou, A., and Tsakiris M. (2016). “Bodily precision”: A predictive
                coding account of individual differences in interoceptive accuracy. Philosophical Transactions of the
                Royal Society of London B, 371(1708), 20160003. doi:10.1098/​rstb.2016.0003.
            Apps, M. A. J. and Tsakiris, M. (2014). The free-​energy self: A predictive coding account of self-​
                recognition. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 41, 85–​97. doi:10.1016/​j.neubiorev.2013.01.029.
            Arrouk, R., Karpinski, A., Lavenbarg, T., Belmont, J., McCallum, R. W., and Hyman, P. (2017). Water
                load test in children with chronic abdominal pain or obesity compared with nonobese controls.
                Southern Medical Journal, 110(3), 168–​71. doi:10.14423/​SMJ.0000000000000612.
            Amianto, F., Northoff, G., Abbate Daga, G., Fassino, S., and Tasca, G.A. (2016). Is anorexia nervosa
                a disorder of the self? A psychological approach. Frontiers in Psychology, 7, 849. <https://​doi.org/​
                10.3389/​fpsyg.2016.00849>
            American Psychiatric Association (2013). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th
                edn. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.
            Arcelus, J., Mitchell, A. J., Wales, J., and Nielsen, S. (2011). Mortality rates in patients with anorexia
                nervosa and other eating disorders: A meta-​analysis of 36 studies. Archives of General Psychiatry,
                68(7), 724–​31. doi:10.1001/​archgenpsychiatry.2011.74.
            Attuquayefio, T., Stevenson, R. J., Oaten, M. J., and Francis, H. M. (2017). A four-​day Western-​style
                dietary intervention causes reductions in hippocampal-​dependent learning and memory and
                interoceptive sensitivity. PloS One, 12(2), e0172645. doi:10.1371/​journal.pone.0172645.
            Avery, J. A., Kerr, K. L., Ingeholm, J. E., Burrows, K., Bodurka, J., and Simmons, W. K. (2015). A
                common gustatory and interoceptive representation in the human mid‐insula. Human Brain
                Mapping, 36(8), 2996–​3006. doi:10.1002/​hbm.22823.
            Barrett, L. and Simmons, W.K. 2015. Interoceptive predictions in the brain. Nature Reviews
                Neuroscience, 16(7) 419–​29. <http://​dx.doi.org/​10.1038/​nrn3950>
            Bartholdy, S., Rennals, S. J., Jacques, C., Danby, H., Campbell, I. C., Schmidt, U., et al. (2017).
                Proactive and reactive inhibitory control in eating disorders. Psychiatry Research, 255, 432–​40.
                doi:10.1016/​j.psychres.2017.06.073.
            Beglinger, C. and Degen, L. (2006). Gastrointestinal satiety signals in humans—​physiologic roles for
                GLP-​1 and PYY? Physiology & Behavior, 89(4), 460–​4. doi:10.1016/​j.physbeh.2006.05.048.
            Bertoud, H. R. (2008). The vagus nerve, food intake and obesity. Regulatory Peptides, 149(1), 15–​25.
                doi:10.1016/​j.regpep.2007.08.024.
            Birch, L. L. and Fisher, J. O. (2000). Mothers’ child-​feeding practices influence daughters’ eating and
                weight. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 71(5), 1054–​61.
            Bruch, H. (1962). Perceptual and conceptual disturbances in anorexia nervosa. Psychosomatic Medicine,
                24(2), 187–​94.
            Bruch, H. (1973). Eating Disorder: Obesity, Anorexia Nervosa and the Person Within. New York,
                NY: Basic Books.
            Clausen, L., Rosenvinge, J. H., Friborg, O., and Rokkedal, K. (2011). Validating the Eating Disorder
                Inventory-​3 (EDI-​3): A comparison between 561 female eating disorders patients and 878 females
                from the general population. Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment, 33(1), 101–​10.
                doi:10.1007/​s10862-​010-​9207-​4.
            Cowdrey, F. A., Park, R. J., and McCabe, C. (2011). Biological Psychiatry, 15, 736–​43. doi:10.1016/​
                j.biopsych.2011.05.028.
            Craig, A. D. (2009). How do you feel—​now? The anterior insula and human awareness. Nature Reviews
                Neuroscience, 10(1), 59–​70. doi:10.1038/​nrn2555.
            Crucianelli, L., Cardi, V., Treasure, J., Jenkinson, P. M., and Fotopoulou, A. (2016). The
                perception of affective touch in anorexia nervosa. Psychiatry Research, 239, 72–​8. doi:10.1016/​
                j.psychres.2016.01.078.
 183




                                                                                                        References      183


       Cui, H., López, M., and Rahmouni, K. (2017). The cellular and molecular bases of leptin and ghrelin
           resistance in obesity. Nature Reviews Endocrinology, 13(6), 338–​51. doi:10.1038/​nrendo.2016.222.
       Emanuelsen, L., Drew, R., and Köteles, F. (2015). Interoceptive sensitivity, body image dissatisfaction,
           and body awareness in healthy indivdiuals. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 56(2), 167–​74.
           doi:10.1111/​sjop.12183.
       Eshkevari, E., Rieger, E., Longo, M. R., Haggard, P., and Treasure, J. (2012). Increased plasticity of the
           bodily self in eating disorders. Psychological Medicine, 42(4), 819–​28. doi:10.1017/​S0033291711002091.
       Fairburn, C. G. and Harrison, P. J., (2003). Eating disorders. Lancet, 361(9355), 407–​16.
       Faith, M. S., Scanlon, K. S., Birch, L. L., Francis, L. A., and Sherry, B. (2004). Parent–​child feeding
           strategies and their relationships to child eating and weight status. Obesity, 12(11), 1711–​22.
           doi:10.1038/​oby.2004.212.
       Fotopoulou, A. and Tsakiris, M. (2017). Mentalizing homeostasis: The social origins of interoceptive
           inference. Neuropsychoanalysis, 19(1), 3–​28. doi:10.1080/​15294145.2017.1294031.
       Fuchs, T. and Schlimme, J. E. (2009). Embodiment and psychopathology: A phenomenological
           perspective. Current opinion in Psychiatry, 22(6), 570–​5. doi:10.1097/​YCO.0b013e3283318e5c.
       Furman, E. (2013). The theory of compromised eating behavior. Research in Gerontological Nursing,
           7(2), 78–​86. doi:10.3928/​19404921-​20130930-​01.
       Füstös, J., Gramann, K., Herbert, B. M., and Pollatos, O. (2013). On the embodiment of emotion
           regulation: Interoceptive awareness facilitates reappraisal. Social Cognitive and Affective
           Neuroscience, 8(8), 911–​17. doi:10.1093/​scan/​nss089.
       Friederich, H.C., Brooks, S., Uher, R., Campbell, I.C., Giampietro, V., Brammer, M., et al. (2010).
           Neural corelates of body dissatisfaction in anorexia nervosa. Neuropsychologia, 48, 2878–​85.
           doi:10.1016/​j.neuropsychologia.2010.04.036.
       Gadsby, S. (2017). Distorted body representations in anorexia nervosa. Consciousness and Cognition, 51,
           17–​33. doi:10.1016/​j.concog.2017.02.015.
       Gaete, M. I. and Fuchs, T. (2016). From body image to emotional bodily experience in eating disorders.
           Journal of Phenomenological Psychology, 47(1), 17–​40. doi:10.1163/​15691624-​12341303.
       Garfinkel, S. N., Seth, A. K., Barrett, A. B., Suzuki, K., and Critchley, H. D. (2015). Knowing your own
           heart: Distinguishing interoceptive accuracy from interoceptive awareness. Biological Psychology,
           104, (0) 65–​74. doi:10.1016/​j.biopsycho.2014.11.004.
       Garfinkel, S. N., Manassei, M. F., Hamilton-​Fletcher, G., den Bosch, Y. I., Critchley, H. D., and Engels,
           M. (2016a). Interoceptive dimensions across cardiac and respiratory axes. Philosophical Transactions
           of the Royal Society B, 371,1708, 20160014. doi:10.1098/​rstb.2016.0014.
       Garfinkel, S. N., Tiley, C., O’Keeffe, S., Harrison, N. A., Seth, A. K., and Critchley, H. D. (2016b).
           Discrepancies between dimensions of interoception in autism: Implications for emotion and anxiety.
           Biological Psychology, 114, 117–​26. doi:10.1016/​j.biopsycho.2015.12.003.
       Galloway, A. T., Farrow, C. V., and Martz, D. M. (2010). Retrospective reports of child feeding practices,
           current eating behaviors, and BMI in college students. Obesity, 18(7), 1330–​5. doi:10.1038/​oby.2009.393.
       Gaudio, S. and Quattrocki, C.C. (2012). Neural basis of multimodal model of body image distortion
           in anorexia nervosa, Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 36(8), 1839–​47. doi:10.1016/​
           j.neubiorev.2012.05.003.
       Geliebter, A. and Hashim, S. A. (2001). Gastric capacity in normal, obese, and bulimic women.
           Physiology & Behavior, 74(4), 743–​6. doi:10.1016/​S0031-​9384(01)00619-​9.
       Heatherton, T. F. and Baumeister, R. F. (1991). Binge eating as escape from self-​awareness.
           Psychological Bulletin, 110(1), 86. doi:10.1037/​0033-​2909.110.1.86.
       Herbert, B. M., Ulbrich, P., and Schandry, R. (2007). Interoceptive sensitivity and physical
           effort: Implications for the self-​control of physical in everyday life. Psychophysiology, 44, 194–​202.
           doi:10.1111/​j.1469-​8986.2007.00493.x.
184




      184   The relevance of interoception for eating behavior and eating disorders


            Herbert, B.M., Pollatos, O., Flor, H., Enck, P., and Schandry, R. (2010). Cardiac awareness and
                autonomic cardiac rseactivity during emotional picture viewing and mental stress. Psychophysiology,
                47, 342–​54. doi:10.1111/​j.1469-​8986.2009.00931.x.
            Herbert, B. M. and Pollatos, O. (2012). The body in the mind: On the relationship between
                interoception and embodiment. Topics in Cognitive Science, 4, 692–​704. doi:10.1111/​
                j.1756-​8765.2012.01189.x.
            Herbert, B. M., Muth, E. R., Pollatos, O., and Herbert, C. (2012a). Interoception across modalities: On
                the relationship between cardiac awareness and the sensitivity for gastric functions. PloS One, 7(5),
                e36646. doi:10.1371/​journal.pone.0036646.
            Herbert, B. M., Herbert, C., Pollatos, O., Weimer, K., Enck, P., Sauer, H., and Zipfel, S. (2012b). Effects
                of short-​term food deprivation on interoceptive awareness, feelings and autonomic cardiac activity.
                Biological Psychology, 89(1), 71–​9. doi:10.1016/​j.biopsycho.2011.09.004.
            Herbert, B. M., Blechert, J., Hautzinger, M., Matthias, E., and Herbert, C. (2013). Intuitive eating
                is associated with interoceptive sensitivity. Effects on body mass index. Appetite, 70, 22–​30.
                doi:10.1016/​j.appet.2013.06.082.
            Hetherington, M. M. (2000). Eating disorders: Diagnosis, etiology, and prevention. Nutrition, 16 (7–​8),
                547–​51.
            Khalsa, S. S., Craske, M. G., Li, W., Vangala, S., Strober, M., and Feusner, J. D. (2015). Altered
                interoceptive awareness in anorexia nervosa: Effects of meal anticipation, consumption and bodily
                arousal. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 48(7), 889–​97. doi:10.1002/​eat.22387.
            Khalsa, S. S. and Lapidus, R. C. (2016). Can interoception improve the pragmatic search for biomarkers
                in psychiatry?. Frontiers in Psychiatry, 7. doi:10.3389/​fpsyt.2016.00121.
            Kaye, W. H., Fudge, J. L., and Paulus, M. (2009). New insights into symptoms and neurocircuit
                function of anorexia nervosa. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 10(8), 573–​84. doi:10.1038/​nrn2682.
            Kirk, U., Downar, J., and Montague, P. R. (2011). Interoception drives increased rational decision-​making
                in meditators playing the ultimatum game. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 5. doi:10.3389/​fnins.2011.00049.
            Klabunde, M., Collado, D., and Bohon, C. (2017). An interoceptive model of bulimia nervosa: A
                neurobiological review. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 94, 36–​46. <https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​
                J.JPSYCHIRES.2017.06.009>
            Koch, A. and Pollatos, O. (2014). Interoceptive sensitivity, body weight and eating behavior in
                children: A prospective study. Frontiers in Psychology, 5. doi:10.3389/​fpsyg.2014.01003.
            Lilenfeld, L. R., Wonderlich, S., Riso, L. P., Crosby, R., and Mitchell, J. (2006). Eating disorders and
                personality: A methodological and empirical review. Clinical PsychologyRreview, 26(3), 299–​320.
                doi:0.1016/​j.cpr.2005.10.003.
            Madden, C. E., Leong, S. L., Gray, A., and Horwath, C. C. (2012). Eating in response to hunger and
                satiety signals is related to BMI in a nationwide sample of 1601 mid-​age New Zealand women.
                Public Health Nutrition, 15(12), 2272–​9. doi:10.1017/​S1368980012000882.
            McKinley, N. M. (1999). Women and objectified body consciousness: Mothers’ and daughters’ body
                experience in cultural, developmental, and familial context. Developmental Psychology, 35,  760–​9.
            Merwin, R. M., Zucker, N. L., Lacy, J. L., and Elliott, C. A. (2010). Interoceptive awareness in eating
                disorders: Distinguishing lack of clarity from non-​acceptance of internal experience. Cognition and
                Emotion, 24(5), 892–​902. doi:10.1080/​02699930902985845.
            Morrison, T., Waller, G., and Lawson, R. (2006). Attributional style in the eating disorders. Journal of
                Nervous and Mental Disease, 194(4), 303–​5. doi:10.1097/​01.nmd.0000208114.79179.7e.
            Murphy, J., Brewer, R., Catmur, C., and Bird, G. (2017). Interoception and psychopathology: A
                developmental neuroscience perspective. Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience, 23, 45–​56.
                doi:10.1016/​j.dcn.2016.12.006.
 185




                                                                                                      References      185


       Page, K. A., Seo, D., Belfort-​DeAguiar, R., Lacadie, C., Dzuira, J., Naik, S., et al. (2011). Circulating
           glucose levels modulate neural control of desire for high-​calorie foods in humans. Journal of Clinical
           Investigation, 121(10), 4161. doi:10.1172/​JCI57873.
       Picard, F. and Friston, K. (2014). Predictions, perception, and a sense of self. Neurology, 83(12), 1112–​
           18. doi:10.1212/​WNL.0000000000000798.
       Pollatos, O., Gramann, K., and Schandry, R. (2007). Neural systems connecting interoceptive
           awareness and feelings. Human Brain Mapping, 28(1), 9–​18. doi:10.1002/​hbm.20258.
       Pollatos, O., Kurz, A. L., Albrecht, J., Schreder, T., Kleemann, A. M., Schöpf, V., et al. (2008). Reduced
           perception of bodily signals in anorexia nervosa. Eating Behaviors, 9(4), 381–​8. doi:10.1016/​
           j.eatbeh.2008.02.001.
       Pollatos, O., and Georgiou, E. (2016). Normal interoceptive accuracy in women with bulimia nervosa.
           Psychiatry Research, 240, 328–​32. doi:10.1016/​j.psychres.2016.04.072.
       Pollatos, O., Herbert, B.M., Mai, S., and Kammer, T. (2016). Changes in interoceptive processes
           following brain stimulation. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 371, 1708.
           doi:10.1098/​rstb.2016.0016.
       Quattrocki, E. and Friston, K. 2014. Autism, oxytocin and interoception. Neuroscience and
           Biobehavioral Reviews, 47, 410–​30. <http://​www.sciencedirect.com/​science/​article/​pii/​
           S0149763414002395>
       Schmidt, U. and Treasure, J. (2006). Anorexia nervosa: Valued and visible. A cognitive‐interpersonal
           maintenance model and its implications for research and practice. British Journal of Clinical
           Psychology, 45(3), 343–​66. doi:10.1348/​014466505X53902.
       Seth, A. K. and Friston, K. J. (2016). Active interoceptive inference and the emotional brain.
           Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 371, 20160007. doi:10.1098/​rstb.2016.0007.
       Smith, R. and Lane, R. D. (2015). The neural basis of one’s own conscious and unconscious emotional
           states. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 57, 1–​29. doi:10.1016/​j.neubiorev.2015.08.003.
       Stevenson, R. J., Mahmut, M., and Rooney, K. (2015). Individual differences in the interoceptive states
           of hunger, fullness and thirst. Appetite, 95, 44–​57. doi:10.1016/​j.appet.2015.06.008.
       Stice, E., Burger, K. S., and Yokum, S. (2013). Relative ability of fat and sugar tastes to activate reward,
           gustatory, and somatosensory regions. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 98(6), 1377–​84.
           doi:10.3945/​ajcn.113.069443.
       Tajadura-​Jiménez, A. and Tsakiris, M. (2014). Balancing the ‘inner’ and the ‘outer’ self: Interoceptive
           sensitivity modulates self–​other boundaries. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 143(2),
           736. doi:10.1037/​a0033171.
       Tate, C. M. and Geliebter, A. (2017). Intragastric balloon treatment for obesity: Review of recent
           studies. Advances in Therapy, 1–​17. doi:10.1007/​s12325-​017-​0562-​3.
       Tsakiris, M., Tajadura-​Jiménez, A., and Costantini, M. (2011). Just a heartbeat away from one’s
           body: Interoceptive sensitivity predicts malleability of body-​representations. Proceedings of the Royal
           Society of London B, 278(1717), 2470–​6. doi:10.1098/​rspb.2010.2547.
       Tsakiris, M. (2017). The multisensory basis of the self: From body to identity to others. Quarterly
           Journal of Experimental Psychology, 70, 597–​609. doi:10.1080/​17470218.2016.1181768.
       Tylka, T. L. (2006). Development and psychometric evaluation of a measure of intuitive eating. Journal
           of Counselling Psychology, 53(2), 226. doi:10.1037/​0022-​0167.53.2.226.
       Whitehead, W. E. and Drescher, V. M. (1980). Perception of gastric contractions and self‐control of
           gastric motility. Psychophysiology, 17(6), 552–​8. doi:10.1111/​j.1469-​8986.1980.tb02296.x.
       Wierenga, C. E., Ely, A., Bischoff-​Grethe, A., Bailer, U. F., Simmons, A. N., and Kaye, W. H. (2014).
           Are extremes of consumption in eating disorders related to an altered balance between reward and
           inhibition? Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience, 8. doi:10.3389/​fnbeh.2014.00410.
186




      186   The relevance of interoception for eating behavior and eating disorders


            Van Dyck, Z., Vögele, C., Blechert, J., Lutz, A. P., Schulz, A., and Herbert, B. M. (2016). The water load
               test as a measure of gastric interoception: Development of a two-​stage protocol and application to a
               healthy female population. PloS One, 11(9), e0163574. doi:10.1371/​journal.pone.0163574.
            Vocks, S., Busch, M., Grönemeyer, D., Schulte, D., Herpertz, S., and Suchan, B. (2010). Neural
               correlates of viewing photographs of one’s body and another woman’s body in anorexia and
               bulimia nervosa: An fMRI study. Journal of Psychiatry and Neuroscience, 35, 163–​76. doi:10.1503/​
               jpn.090048.
            Zucker, N. L., Kragel, P. A., Wagner, H. R., Keeling, L., Mayer, E., Wang, J., et al. (2017). The clinical
               significance of posterior insular volume in adolescent anorexia nervosa. Psychosomatic Medicine,
               79(9), 1025–​35. doi:10.1097/​PSY.0000000000000510.
 187




                  Chapter 10

                  Cardiac interoception in neurological
                  conditions and its relevance
                  for dimensional approaches
                  Adrián Yoris, Adolfo M. García, Paula Celeste
                  Salamone, Lucas Sedeño, Indira García-​Cordero,
                  and Agustín Ibáñez



       10.1  Interoception as a new dimensional and
       transdiagnostic framework for neurology
       Mental disorders have been classically defined in terms of mutually exclusive sets of dis-
       crete symptoms, yet they can be fruitfully reconceptualized along dimensions of normal
       and abnormal behavior. Building on the Research Domain Criteria (Insel et al., 2010),
       this perspective has already afforded breakthroughs concerning phenomenological, cog-
       nitive, and neural alterations in psychopathological conditions. Its application to neu-
       rological diseases, however, remains comparatively limited (Ibanez et al., 2016b; Ibanez
       et al., 2014), despite accruing evidence that cognitive, emotional, behavioral, and auto-
       nomic neurological impairments may affect (or predict) dimensionally different clinical
       conditions (Kling et al., 2013).
         As shown by recent research on psychiatric populations (Muller et al., 2015; Yoris et al.,
       2017), informative dimensional insights into mental disorders can be gained by assessing
       interoception (Khalsa & Lapidus, 2016), a complex construct subsuming multiple forms
       of visceral signal processing (Craig, 2009). Though somewhat more incipiently, studies
       on neurological disorders also suggest that specific dimensions of interoception may be
       differentially compromised across pathologies (Garcia-​Cordero et al., 2016). Thus, more
       classical approaches focused on externally triggered neurocognitive processes (e.g. per-
       ception, recognition or classification of outer stimuli) could be fruitfully complemented
       by assessments of neurocognitive processes triggered by internal cues (e.g. heartbeats,
       respiration changes, visceral sensations).
         In this sense, cardiac interoception (the ability to monitor one’s own heartbeats) emerges
       as a potential transdiagnostic and dimensional biomarker for neurological disorders.
       Research on healthy and brain-​damaged individuals (Couto et al., 2015; Garcia-​Cordero
18




     188   Cardiac interoception in neurological conditions


           et  al., 2016)  shows that heartbeat detection (HBD) and heartbeat discrimination tasks
           shed light on several key phenomena. First, they can tap into different dimensions of
           interoception (as defined in (Garfinkel et  al., 2015; see also Chapter  7 in the present
           volume), including interoceptive accuracy (the ability to monitor each heartbeat cor-
           rectly), interoceptive sensitivity (the subjective perception of one’s interoceptive perfor-
           mance), interoceptive awareness or metacognition (the association between confidence
           about one’s own performance and the actual performance), and a measure developed by
           our group termed interoceptive learning, that reflects the improvement of interoceptive
           accuracy after auditory feedback of one’s own heartbeats (Garcia-​Cordero et  al., 2016;
           Garfinkel et al., 2015) (details in Table 10.1). Second, these tasks and dimensions allow
           us to investigate the functions of different interoceptive pathways, such as the vagal and
           the somatosensory pathways (Khalsa et al., 2009a). Finally, they illuminate the relations
           between interoception and emotional or social cognition processes (Adolfi et al., 2016),
           among others. Thus, the cardiac interoception paradigm represents a validated, promising
           approach to explore how various functions in the brain−body interface are compromised
           across neurological conditions.
              Here we deploy this proposal considering behavioral, neuroanatomical, and brain
           functional evidence in the context of experimental and clinical settings. We also evaluate
           the potential role of interoception as (a)  predictor of clinical outcomes, (b)  marker of
           neurocognitive deficits in neuropsychiatric diseases, and (c) general source of insights for
           breakthroughs in the treatment and prevention of multiple disorders.



           Table 10.1  Interoceptive dimensions addressed through our group’s HBD task.

           Dimension           Definition                    Instruction                     Observations
           Accuracy            Behavioral precision          “Tap the keyboard with          Accuracy index is obtained by
                               in tracking one’s own         the middle finger of            comparing the temporal proximity
                               heartbeat via finger          your dominant hand              between the subject’s ECG signal
                               taps                          when you feel or think          and his/​her finger taps.1
                                                             about your heart beats”

           Learning            Behavioral precision          “Now, after feedback,           Learning is calculated exactly as
                               after receiving external      tap the keyboard each           done for the accuracy index, but
                               feedback of one’s own         time you feel or think          after the subject was exposed to
                               heartbeats                    about your heart beats”         his/​her own heartbeats through
                                                                                             a stethoscope during a so-​called
                                                                                             feedback condition.
           Awareness           Subject’s confidence in       “Rate your confidence in        Awareness index is obtained
                               his/​her own behavioral       your performance from           normalizing scores of self-​
                               performance is                1 (not confident at all)        confidence with the accuracy
                               controlled in base            to 9 (fully confident)”         performance. Higher awareness
                               of his/​her accuracy                                          scores appear close to zero.
                               performance in HBD
           1
               Note that the calculation of accuracy is similar to Schandry’s, although the actual formula differs.
 189




                               Disruptions of interoceptive mechanisms in neurological disorders          189


       10.2  Disruptions of interoceptive mechanisms
       in neurological disorders
       Recent research on interoceptive deficits in neurological disorders has focused on is-
       chemic stroke (IS), Alzheimer’s disease (AD), behavioral variant fronto-​temporal de-
       mentia (bvFTD), multiple sclerosis (MS), Parkinson’s disease (PD), functional motor
       disorders (FMDs), and chronic pain (CP). The key brain areas, neural pathways, and in-
       teroceptive dimensions compromised in each case, considering behavioral, electrophysi-
       ological, neuroanatomical, and functional imaging findings, are presented in Table 10.2.

       10.2.1 Stroke
       Cardiovascular lesions in the brain are often caused by ischemic stroke (IS). While hem-
       orrhagic stroke refers to burst blood vessels, IS constitutes a pervasive condition caused
       by the block of a blood vessel (e.g. a blood clot) (Sacco et al., 2013). IS involves high levels
       of mortality and disability, burdening health systems worldwide. Research into its associ-
       ated cognitive, behavioral, and affective changes has long yielded theoretical and clinical
       insights into the human brain (Ibanez, Gleichgerrcht, & Manes, 2010). As shown below,
       assessments of interoception in this condition may also afford conceptual and transla-
       tional breakthroughs.
          In a pioneering study, Khalsa, Rudrauf, Feinstein, and colleagues (Khalsa et al., 2009a)
       examined the contributions of two complementary interoceptive pathways (vagal and
       somatosensory) in a patient with bilateral damage to two critical interoceptive regions
       (the insula and the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), closely related with cardiac activity)
       (Critchley et al., 2004) alongside full preservation of his somatosensory cortex. The pa-
       tient was asked to turn a dial to track his ongoing experience of the overall intensity of
       heartbeat sensations in a baseline condition and during pharmacologically induced tach-
       ycardia (details in (Khalsa et al., 2009a)). While interoceptive perception was reduced at
       baseline, it proved normal during pharmacological condition. Poor performance would
       reflect damage to the insula and the ACC, with pharmacological restoration apparently
       acted on preserved somatosensory structures. These patterns suggest a differential partic-
       ipation of the vagal and the somatosensory pathways during interoception, such that both
       internal (e.g. cardiac) and external (e.g. skin) afferents can contribute to this domain.
          Further insights into the neural bases of such pathways were offered by Couto, Adolfi,
       Sedeno, and colleagues (Couto et al., 2015). They assessed interoceptive accuracy through
       a multidimensional HBD task tapping into interoceptive accuracy (behavioral precision
       in tracking one’s own heartbeat via finger taps), and exteroceptive skills (a control con-
       dition measuring behavioral precision in following an auditorily presented heartbeat
       (for details see Couto et al., 2015). Also, additional somatosensory domains (e.g. taste,
       pain, and smell recognition) were measured to examine alternative afferent mechanisms
       relying on regions and pathways different from those engaged by interoception. Two
       patients were recruited, one with grey matter compromise in the right insula and an-
       other one with white matter damage in the subcortical tracts connecting fronto-​temporal
                                                                                                                                                                                  190




Table 10.2  Studies on interoception in neurological disorders.

Authors         Disorders, samples         Tasks, dimensions          Results                                                          Implications
Couto et al.,   IS                         -​HBD task                 BVL: The insular lesion patient showed impaired internal         Results indicate that two patients
2015            (N = 2, insular lesion     (accuracy)                 signal processing (interoception), while the subcortical         presenting selective damage to different
                and subcortical lesion);   -​Taste, smell, and pain   lesion patient exhibited external perception deficits (smell,    areas of the insular body-​sensing
                frontal lesion (N = 5)     recognition tasks          taste, and pain). Such selective deficits remained even when     network, share a differential pattern
                and HC (N = 7).            (somatosensory             comparing each patient with controls and frontal patients.       of disruption of internal and external
                                           perception)                                                                                 perception.

García-​        bvFTD), AD and FIS         -​ HBD task (accuracy,     BVL: Accuracy was impaired in all patient groups, associated Damage to specific fronto-​temporo-​
Cordero         bvFTD (N = 18);            awareness,                 with insular damage, connectivity alterations, and abnormal insular hubs differentially compromises
et al., 2016    AD (N = 21); non-​         learning)                  HEP modulations. Learning was differentially impaired in      interoceptive dimensions.
                hemorrhagic FIS                                       AD patients. Awareness results showed that bvFTD and AD
                (N = 18) and HC                                       patients overestimated their performance.
                (N = 42).                                             EEG: Relative to the three patient groups, controls exhibited
                                                                      more negative HEP modulations during the accuracy
                                                                      condition.
                                                                      MRI: Impairments were associated with frontal-​temporo-​
                                                                      insular damage and widespread connectivity abnormalities.
Seeley, 2010    bvFTD                      Review                     MRI/​fMRI: BvFTD involves both ventral and dorsal anterior       The search for bvFTD treatments will
                (Review of image                                      insula by the time of early clinical presentation. An early-​    depend on a rich understanding of
                studies)                                              stage fronto-​insular that leaves patients unable to model the   insular biology and could help clarify
                                                                      emotional impact of their own actions or inactions.              specialized human language, social, and
                                                                                                                                       emotional functions.
Ricciardi       PD                         -​ HBD                     BVL: PD patients showed reduced accuracy and higher              Lower interoceptive accuracy in
et al., 2016    (N = 20) and HC            (accuracy)                 levels of depression, anhedonia, and apathy. Accuracy did        PD might be related to insular
                (N = 20)                                              not correlate with motor, non-​motor, affective, and emotion     degeneration, irrespective of multiple
                                                                      symptoms.                                                        symptom types.
Criaud, 2016    PD                     Meta-​analysis                 MRI/​fMRI: Significant convergence of activation maxima          The insula should be considered a
                Meta-​analysis: 132                                   related to PD in different insular regions including anterior    region of interest studying cognitive
                insular foci from 96                                  and posterior regions bilaterally. PD patients medicated         and behavioral changes, as well
                published experiments.                                showed a more physiological involvement of bilateral             as disruptions in viscerosensory or
                PD patients.                                          anterior insula.                                                 somatosensory processes in PD.
                                                                                                                                                                                             19




Christopher,     PD                          Review                     MRI/​fMRI: The insula processes cognitive, affective and              Mid and posterior insular cortex serve
2014             (image studies)                                        interoceptive information in uncertain conditions and                 a crucial role in interoceptive sensation
                                                                        subjective feeling or state of awareness. Its disruption may          and behavior, and seems related to
                                                                        alter the subjective state and ultimately behavior in patients        neurobehavioral disturbances in PD.
                                                                        with PD.
Ricciardi        FMD                         -​HBD task: (accuracy      BVL: FMD patients have lower accuracy, predicting their               FMD patients have interoceptive
et al., 2016     FMD (N = 16) and HC         and awareness)             depressive symptoms and their tendency to focus on                    deficits which may be predictive of
                 (N = 17)                                               external bodily features.                                             their depressive symptoms, as well as
                                                                                                                                              their tendency to focus on the external
                                                                                                                                              features of their body.
Xie et al.,      MCI                         Resting-​state             MRI/​fMRI: Patients showed reduced right posterior                    The disrupted insula network
2012             MCI (N = 30) and HC                                    insula volumes, cognitive deficits and disrupted intrinsic            connectivity would significantly
                 (N = 26)                                               connectivity of insular networks. The latter pattern was              contribute to EM impairment in aMCI
                                                                        associated with EM deficits only in the patients.                     patients. The disturbance of emotional
                                                                                                                                              awareness regulation in aMCI patients
                                                                                                                                              will have a negative impact on the
                                                                                                                                              process of cognition, and ultimately
                                                                                                                                              lead to cognitive decline.
Di Lernia        CP                          Systematic review:         BVL: Chronic pain subjects present low accuracy. Accuracy             Different patterns across pain
et al., 2016     8 studies.                  -​ MAIA questionnaire      negatively correlates with symptoms severity in specific              disorders was observed. That indicates
                                             (awareness)                disorders. Data were inconclusive for interoceptive                   interoceptive dimensions could explain
                                             -​ Heartbeat               awareness.                                                            differentially pain disorders in a
                                             perception task                                                                                  dimensional approach.
                                             (accuracy)
Duscheck         FMS                         -​Heartbeat                BVL: Patients exhibited reduced heartbeat perception.                 Poor access to bodily signals may restrict
et al., 2016     FMS (N = 45) and HC         perception task            Moreover, there was an inverse relationship between                   patients´ ability to integrate these
                 (N = 31)                    (accuracy)                 awareness and FMS symptom severity.                                   signals during emotional processing,
                                                                                                                                              which, by extension, may preclude
                                                                                                                                              optimal emotional self-​regulation.

aMCI: amnestic mild cognitive impairment; aPFC: anterior prefrontal cortex; AD: Alzheimer disease; bvFTD: behavioral variant fronto temporal dementia; BVL: behavioral; DMN: default
mode network: EEG: electroencephalogram; EM: episodic memory; FIS: fronto-​insular stroke; FMD: functional motor disorders; FMS: fibromyalgia syndrome; FTD: fronto temporal dementia;
HBD: heartbeat detection; HEP: heart-​evoked potential; HC: healthy controls; Accuracy: interoceptive accuracy; Awareness: interoceptive awareness; MCI: mild cognitive impairment; MRI/​
fMRI: image results; PD: Parkinson disease; pDMN: posterior default mode network; RSNs: resting state networks; vmPFC: ventromedial prefrontal cortex; vSN: ventral salience network.
192




      192   Cardiac interoception in neurological conditions


            areas (right putamen and claustrum, and the white matter of the external capsule, see
            Figure 10.1). Relative to healthy controls and control patients with lesions in other areas,
            the stroke patients exhibited a double dissociation: while the former showed interocep-
            tive impairments with good somatosensory performance, the latter showed the opposite
            pattern. These results suggest the existence of distinct and dissociable streams for body-​
            signal processing: a purely interoceptive one, affording low-​level processing of autonomic
            inputs; and a somatosensory one, subserving high-​level integration of external signals
            involving other areas and networks.
               More recently, interoceptive accuracy, awareness, and learning were assessed in frontal
            IS patients relative to healthy controls and subjects with neurodegenerative conditions
            (AD and bvFTD) (Garcia-​Cordero et al., 2016). Participants completed an HBD task with
            ongoing EEG recordings (aimed at examining the heart-​evoked potential (HEP)), and
            they underwent resting functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) measurements
            for connectivity analysis. All patient groups presented deficits in interoceptive accuracy
            as indexed by HBD, accompanied by reduced HEP modulations and insular damage.
            Interoceptive awareness (based on a measure that associates a self-​report questionnaire
            of the confidence about one’s performance and the actual performance) remained in-
            tact in IS, but it proved altered in neurodegenerative conditions. Finally, interoceptive
            learning (indexed as behavioral performance after exposure to heartbeat feedback via
            a stethoscope) remained intact in IS in contrast to neurodegenerative diseases. Thus,
            this study showed that these three dimensions are subserved by partially distinct neural
            mechanisms, suggesting that distinguishable patterns of neurological damage may be as-
            sociated with recognizable interoceptive profiles. In particular, the selective compromise
            of interoceptive accuracy in IS, with preserved functioning of the awareness and learning
            dimensions, could have important implications to guide therapeutic interventions (see
            section 10.3.1).
               Finally, another study (Adolfi et  al., 2016)  explored the convergence of aberrant
            interoception with affective impairments in IS patients with fronto-​insular-​temporal
            lesions and healthy controls. All subjects performed an HBD task tapping interocep-
            tive accuracy, a complementary exteroceptive task assessing tracking of an auditorily
            presented heartbeat, and tests assessing emotion recognition, verbal prosody, and theory
            of mind (ToM). The patients were selectively impaired in cardiac interoception, emo-
            tion recognition, and ToM (Figure 10.2). Such first direct evidence highlights the fronto-​
            insular-​temporal networks as critical hubs for the integration of internal sensations with
            emotional and social information.
               In sum, studies on patients with IS have revealed key aspects of interoceptive deficits
            following brain damage (Ibanez et al., 2010), such as the dimensional specializations
            of specific regions and pathways, the complementary participation of cortical and
            subcortical substrates in the integration of internal and external information, and the
            role of specific interoceptive hubs for the convergence of visceral and socio-​emotional
            processes.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                193




  (a) Different plots of insular and subcortical brain damage                       (b) Internal stream: Heartbeat Detection Task (HBD)
     A.                  C.

                                                                                                                              0.6                                                                                   p<.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   p<.001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Insular lesion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Subcortical lesion
                                                                                                                              0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Healthy controls
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Frontal lesion
     B.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               controls
                                                                                                                              0.2




                                                                                                        Interoceptive score
                                                                                                                              0.0
                                                                                                                                          Motor control                                                      Interoception

                                                                                      (c)                                                                   External stream: smell, taste and pain
    D.                                                                        A.                                                          Smell
                                                                                                                                                                B.                                               Taste                C.                                                           Thermal pain
                                                                                                                                                        *
                                                                                                        100                                         *                                        100                                *                              60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            *                                                                      *
                                                                                                        80                                                                                   80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               40                 *
                                                                                                        60                                                                                   60                                                                                  *
                                                                                                        40                                                                                   40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                        20                                                                                   20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Degrees in Celsius




                                                                                                            0                                                                                 0                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                               % of Accuracy and Intensity




                                                                          % of Threshold and Accuracy
                                                                                                                              Threshold       Identification                                       Taste intensity Taste Identification                                      i   on            i   on                  in               a in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          sat               sat                   pa               tp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ld                a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    sen               sen               Co                  He
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ol               rm
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Co                   Wa


Figure 10.1  Cortical and subcortical damage associated with cardiac interoceptive impairment and other domains (impairments in smell,
taste and pain). (a) A. Structural MRI of insular lesion, with sequence T2 showing the right insular cortex lesion. B. Structural MRI of subcortical
lesion, with sequence T2 showing damage to the right Posterior putamen, capsula extrema, claustrum. C. Three-​dimensional rendering of lesion-​traced
MNI-​normalized brain lesions with the Mango software. D. Overlap of lesion-​traced MNI-​normalized brain lesions and the JHU-​Atlas of white matter,
showing differential affectation of external capsule in both lesions. (b) Left side of the panel shows the motor control condition, where no differences
were observed given that all participants performed the task accurately. The right side of the panel shows the performance on interoceptive sensitivity,
where the IL patient exhibited impaired interoception. Conversely, the SL patient was spared. (c) External stream: SL patient’s impairment and IL patient’s
normal performance across measures. A. Smell (threshold and identification). B. Taste (intensity and identification). C. Thermal pain (cold perception,
warm perception, cold pain, heat pain).
                                                                                                                                                                                              194




      (a) Overlap of the fronto-insular lesions of patients.
                                                                                                                n lesion            2                     4              6




      (b)              Performance in interoception, emotional recognition and social cognition (ToM)
                 A.         Interoception             B.             Emotional Prosody           C.                 Emotional Morphing                        D.         ToM
                                     *                                          *                                               *                                              *
                 1.0                                           1.0                                        1.0                                                 1.0

                 0.8                                           0.8                                        0.8                                                 0.8

                 0.6                                           0.6                                        0.6                                                 0.6




      Accuracy
                                                    Accuracy
                                                                                               Accuracy
                                                                                                                                                   Accuracy




                 0.4                                           0.4                                        0.4                                                 0.4

                 0.2                                           0.2                                        0.2                                                 0.2

                 0.0                                           0.0                                        0.0                                                 0.0
                          Patients       Controls                    Patients       Controls                         Patients           Controls                    Patients       Controls

Figure 10.2  Fronto-​insular stroke induces impaired performance on interoception, emotion recognition and social cognition. (a) Overlap of
the fronto-​insular lesions created by adding the MNI warped images over a single-​subject T1 scan. Areas with greater lesion overlap across patients are
shown brighter. (b) Box-​plot diagram shows significantly worse performance in patients (grey) than controls (black) in all three domains.
 195




                              Disruptions of interoceptive mechanisms in neurological disorders      195


       10.2.2  Alzheimer’s    disease
       In addition to cognitive and emotional changes, healthy aging also seems to disrupt in-
       teroceptive mechanisms. Indeed, a study with 59 participants ranging from 22 to 63 years
       old (Khalsa et al., 2009) revealed that interoceptive accuracy decreased as age increased.
       This pattern could reflect reduced sensitivity of central nervous system (and, more pre-
       cisely, bodily receptors) due to aging, or a higher incidence of cardiac impairments in
       elder than younger subjects (Khalsa, Rudrauf, & Tranel, 2009). Additional insights come
       from pathological aging models. For instance, patients with MCI—​a subtle form of non-​
       demential cognitive impairment intermediate between healthy age-​related decline and
       AD (Teipel & Grothe, 2015)—​can present atrophy and reduced intrinsic and extrinsic
       connectivity of the insula, a key interoceptive hub (Xie et al., 2012). While such evidence
       remains indirect, specific links between interoceptive deficits and brain deterioration can
       be found in AD research.
          AD, the most prevalent age-​related neurodegenerative disease worldwide, involves
       progressive cognitive, behavioral, and functional abnormalities (Dubois et  al., 2014).
       While such deficits are mainly related with temporo-​posterior network damage (Buckner
       et al., 2009), recent studies indicate that key interoceptive areas (insula, ACC) and re-
       lated functional networks could be affected in AD (Moon et al., 2014). Moreover, AD
       patients exhibit delayed modulations of the vagal evoked potential (VSEP), triggered
       by stimulation of the vagal pathway (Polak et al., 2014). Importantly, this same pattern
       has been reported in MCI (Metzger et  al., 2012)  and MS (Polak et  al., 2013)  but not
       in other psychiatric conditions (Polak et al., 2014), which underscores the relevance of
       selective interoceptive mechanisms as potential transdiagnostic markers for neurolog-
       ical diseases. Moreover, AD has been linked with reduced cardiovascular capacity (Jin
       et al., 2017), which could imply higher susceptibility to strokes and related autonomic
       disruptions. This suggests that at least some dimensions of cardiac interoception could
       be systematically affected in AD.
          This hypothesis was tested in a multi-​group study assessing interoceptive dimensions
       via behavioral, electrophysiological, neuroanatomical and functional imaging methods
       (Garcia-​Cordero et  al., 2016). Similar to IS and bvFTD patients, AD patients showed
       impaired interoceptive accuracy, as indexed by poor precision in tracking their own
       heartbeats via fingertaps. However, they differed from the former in showing intero-
       ceptive learning deficits (revealed by a negligible enhancement of performance after in-
       teroceptive feedback) and awareness (indexed by the association between a self-​report
       questionnaire of the confidence about one’s performance and the actual performance).
       For AD, performance on the latter two dimensions was associated with the structural
       integrity of temporal and fronto-​temporal areas, respectively, and both were functionally
       related to fronto-​temporal hubs (see Figure 10.3). Additionally, interoceptive awareness
       was associated to cingulate, prefrontal, and fronto-​temporal cortices involved in self-​
       awareness and error monitoring processes (Shany-​Ur et al., 2014). These results reinforce
       role of fronto-​temporo-​insular networks across interoceptive dimensions.
196




      196   Cardiac interoception in neurological conditions


             (a)     Behavioural results
                                Interoceptive Accuracy                                   Interoceptive Learning                                   Interoceptive Awareness
                     0.7
                                                                                   0.7                                                        3                       *




                                                                                                                        Metacognition index
            Scores




                                                                          Scores
                                                                                                                    *                         2
                     0.5                                                                           *                                                         *
                                                                                   0.5                      *                                                                   *
                                                                                                                                              1
                                             *        *          *

                     0.3                                                           0.3                                                        0
                           Controls          bvFTD        AD         Stroke


             (b)     Structural association with interoceptive dimentsions




                                                                                                                                                                            t - values
                 All groups                                                                                                                                                              4
                 (excluding
                 stroke)




                                                                                                                                                                            t - values
                                                                                                                                                                                         4
                      beFTD




                                                                                                                                                                            t - values
                                                                                                                                                                                         4
                              AD




                                                                                                                                                                            t - values
                               FIS                                                                                                                                                       4



             (c)     Functional networks associated with interoceptive dimensions
                       All groups




                                     bvFTD       AD            FIS                        bvFTD        AD         FIS                               bvFTD        AD       FIS
            Figure 10.3 A. Multi-​level interoceptive approach in IS, AD, and bvFTD. Performance of all
            four groups in each interoceptive dimension. Interoceptive (accuracy and learning) scores vary
            between 0 and 1, with higher scores indicating better performance. For awareness, scores
            nearer zero mean better metacognition. (b) Structural association with interoceptive dimensions.
            Accuracy was positively associated with the volume of temporal, hippocampus, and frontal
            regions. Interoceptive learning was associated with the temporal pole and the para-​hippocampal
            together with the inferior frontal gyrus, superior and middle temporal gyrus; and the regions
            associated with awareness included the para-​hippocampus, temporal pole, inferior-​frontal
            gyrus, pre-​frontal cortex, supplementary motor area, ACC, and inferior temporal gyrus. (c)
            Functional networks associated with interoceptive dimensions shows insular cortex, inferior and
            superior frontal gyri, temporal pole and middle occipital gyrus, were associated to interoceptive
            accuracy; inferior-​frontal gyrus, hippocampus, amygdala, para-​hippocampus, insular cortex
            and supramarginal gyrus with interoceptive learning; and hippocampus, amygdala, and IFG for
            interoceptive awareness).
 197




                               Disruptions of interoceptive mechanisms in neurological disorders        197


         In sum, critical regions subserving specific interoceptive dimensions can become
       compromised in AD. Moreover, imaging findings from MCI suggest that these disruptions
       might appear even in pre-​demented stages of cognitive decline, although direct testing of
       interoception in such a condition is still wanting.

       10.2.3  Behavioral     variant fronto-​temporal dementia
       BvFTD, the second most prevalent type of dementia after AD, is associated with changes
       in personality, behavior, executive functions (Ibanez & Manes, 2012), and social cogni-
       tion (Báez et al., 2016a, 2016b). Though predominantly frontal, early neurodegeneration
       in this condition also affects core interoceptive hubs (in particular, the ventral and dorsal
       anterior insula), disrupting their dynamic interactions with medial cingulo-​         frontal,
       frontopolar, orbitofrontal, striatal, and other subcortical sites (Seeley, 2010). Predictably,
       such patterns involve abnormalities in some interoceptive dimensions, such as accuracy
       and awareness (Garcia-​Cordero et al., 2016).
          In the above-​cited study by García-​Cordero, Sedeno, de la Fuente, and colleagues
       (Garcia-​Cordero et al., 2016), bvFTD patients showed impairments of interoceptive ac-
       curacy and awareness (with higher interoceptive learning but poor interoceptive accu-
       racy, as compared to controls). Structurally, accuracy deficits positively correlated with
       the volume of the insula and the medial cingulate cortex, whereas awareness results were
       associated with the medial cingulate cortex, the para-​hippocampus, the amygdala, and
       temporal and parietal regions. Functionally, accuracy results were positively associated
       with connectivity within the insular cortex, the superior frontal gyrus, and the hypothal-
       amus, while awareness positively correlated with connectivity within the inferior, middle,
       and superior frontal gyri. Fronto-​temporo-​insular areas, considered key nodes of meta-
       cognition, could be responsible for the construction of subjective feeling states and their
       disruption could explain the impairments in patients’ awareness (see Figure 10.3).
          Compatibly, indirect evidence further suggests that daily behavioral alterations in
       bvFTD may be related to interoceptive deficits. For example, neuroimaging evidence
       suggests that binge-​eating tendencies and altered satiety awareness in this condition are
       associated with atrophy in a network linking the right insula with other subcortical targets
       of neurodegeneration (Woolley et al., 2007). This finding aligns with previous results to
       suggest that altered processing of visceral signals (such as those coming from the heart or
       the stomach) could lie at the core of the patients’ daily behavioral abnormalities.

       10.2.4  Multiple    sclerosis
       MS is a neurodegenerative condition affecting young (mainly female) adults (Ron, 2016).
       Its varied symptomatology includes deficits in smell, taste, and temperature perception,
       alongside pain and fatigue symptoms. Considering that these impairments are related to
       abnormal body-​signal processing, a recent proposal suggests that they may all be related
       to core interoceptive dysfunctions (Salamone et  al., accepted). To test this hypothesis,
       Salamone and colleagues conducted the first assessment of cardiac interoception in two
       neuroscientific studies.
198




      198   Cardiac interoception in neurological conditions


              First, they showed that, relative to controls, MS patients did not show the expected
            HEP modulations during the interoceptive condition of an HBD task, accompanied
            by significant atrophy in the bilateral insula and the left ACC. While task-​related HEP
            results in controls were associated with these key interoceptive areas, in patients they
            only correlated with the somatosensory cortex. The second study relied on fMRI to ex-
            amine functional connectivity during two resting-​state conditions:  mind-​wandering
            (thinking about nothing in particular) and interoception (directing attention to one’s
            own heartbeats or respiration). Results showed that the patients’ interoceptive network,
            unlike that of controls, was not differentially engaged by the above states (see Figure 10.4).
            Taken together, these findings suggest that multidimensional disruptions of interoceptive
            mechanisms may be hallmark of abnormal body-​signal processing in MS.

            10.2.5  Parkinson’s     disease
            PD is a neurodegenerative disorder mainly characterized by movement abnormalities.
            However, cognitive and autonomic symptoms can actually precede motor dysfunction
            (Hanağası, Bilgiç, & Emre, 2016). While this condition is typically linked with cortico-​
            striatal degeneration, atrophy can also compromise interoceptive hubs, such as the insula
            (Christopher et al., 2014).
               In fact, insular disruptions in PD can impair the integration of interoceptive, cognitive,
            and affective processes, eventually altering subjective states (Christopher et  al., 2014).
            Compatibly, meta-​analytical evidence (Criaud et al., 2016) points to the bilateral insula
            as a convergence hub cutting across multiple symptoms, including disturbances of bodily
            awareness and autonomic function, sensorimotor systems, and cognitive, affective, and
            behavioral domains. Whereas such convergences were maximal in dorsal posterior insular
            regions for unmedicated patients, they mainly involved anterior portions in medicated
            patients. Insular disruptions, then, seem to lie at the core of viscerosensory or somatosen-
            sory processes in PD (Criaud et al., 2016).
               More particularly, direct assessment of cardiac interoception via an HBD task revealed
            significant deficits in PD patients (Ricciardi et  al., 2016b). Of note, such dysfunctions
            emerged irrespective of the severity of motor and non-​          motor (including affective)
            symptoms, highlighting their sensitivity as potential early biomarkers of PD. These
            findings open new opportunities for translational research fine-​grained interoceptive
            dimensions in this condition.

            10.2.6  Functional     motor disorders
            Within the broad spectrum of movement diseases, FMDs are characterized by neurolog-
            ical symptoms like motor weakness, epileptic-​type attacks, and sensory disturbances,
            although body-​part function is preserved beyond clinical assessment. In a behavioral
            study, Ricciardi, Demartini, Crucianelli, and colleagues (Ricciardi et al., 2016a) compared
            FMD patients with a control sample in interoceptive accuracy via an HBD task. FMD
            patients had poorer interoceptive accuracy, and this pattern was predictive of their de-
            pressive symptoms as well as their tendency to focus on the external features of their
                                                                                                                                                               19




             (a) HEP amplitude in Exteroception and Interoception                  (b) Differences between interoception and mind wandering

                                                                                            ACC
                                                                                                                                      ACC

                                    Region of Interest
                                                                                      Ins




                           µV
                                                                                                                           Ins




             Controls
                                                                                    SSC
                                                                                                                                      SSC




                                Exteroception              Interoception

                                                                                             SSC                                SSC
                                                                                     ACC




                           µV
                                                                                                   Ins              ACC




             MS patients
                                                                                                                          Ins



                                                                                            (c) Interoceptive areas related to HEP
                                Controls            MS patients




                           µV
             Differences
                                0          100           200   300     400   500
Figure 10.4  Electrophysiological (HEP) and neuroimaging (MRI and functional connectivity) correlates of interoception in MS. (a) No HEP
modulation in MS shows neurodegenerative effect in cortical signals. Red lines indicate interoceptive condition and black ones exteroceptive condition.
Horizontal shadows lines show statistically significant differences (at p < .05 for a minimum extension of five consecutive points of difference. (b) No
functional association of interoceptive areas in MS reveals interoceptive network impairment. (c) The bilateral insula and the right ACC were significantly
associated with HEP subtraction results in the control sample. HEP amplitude is associated with the somatosensory cortex in MS.
20




     200   Cardiac interoception in neurological conditions


           body (self-​objectification). On the contrary, interoceptive accuracy was not predictive
           of alexithymia (Watters et al., 2016). Thus, this particular interoceptive dimension is not
           only compromised following motor dysfunction but it also seems to underlie concomi-
           tant psychiatric manifestations. This reinforces the notion that interoceptive mechanisms
           are intimately linked with affective domains.

           10.2.7  Chronic pain
           CP is a condition in which signals triggered by aversive stimuli and/​or damaged tissue
           persist over time, beyond their normal duration. The varied epidemiology of CP overlaps
           with musculoskeletal disorders (arthritis, osteoarthritis), oncologic diseases, and
           neuropathies like MS, PD, and AD (Di Lernia, Serino, & Riva, 2016). Acute pain in this
           condition seems to engage specific neural areas (e.g. somatosensory cortex, insula, and
           mid-​cingulate cortex) and networks (e.g. the default mode, the salience, the sensorimotor,
           and the fronto-​parietal networks (Farmer, Baliki, & Apkarian, 2012)).
              Classical descriptions of pain (Craig, 2003)  mechanisms highlight the role of vagal
           and somatosensory pathways subserving interoceptive processing (Khalsa et al., 2009a).
           Moreover, the interoceptive network (comprising the insular cortex, the ACC, and the
           somatosensory cortex) (Critchley et  al., 2004)  is associated with subjective anticipa-
           tion, perception, and generation of pain. Indeed, such circuitry exhibits distinct activity
           patterns in subjects with CP (Kupers, Gybels, & Gjedde, 2000).
              A systematic review (Di Lernia et al., 2016) shows that different interoceptive dimensions
           (accuracy, metacognition, and awareness) have been experimentally evaluated in various
           pathologies involving CP. Patients with fibromyalgia exhibit reduced interoceptive accu-
           racy and an inverse association with symptom severity (Duschek, Montoro, & Reyes del
           Paso, 2016), as well as normal performance in interoceptive metacognition (Borg et al.,
           2015). Reduced interoceptive accuracy has also been reported in somatoform disorders,
           together with an association between pain sensitivity and pain symptoms (Pollatos et al.,
           2011). Deficits in interoceptive accuracy, with poor interoceptive awareness and high
           attention to bodily symptoms, have also been reported in patients with chronic low back
           pain (Mehling et al., 2013). The former domain is also affected in patients with migraine
           and temporomandibular pain disorder (for details see Di Lernia et al., 2016). In sum, the
           systematicity of interoceptive deficits (especially in the accuracy dimension) across such
           varied conditions highlights their relevance as a potential transdiagnostic marker for the
           field of neurology.

           10.3 Discussion
           As seen by the previous discussion, several neurocognitive mechanisms underlying in-
           teroceptive skills are dimensionally and transdiagnostically affected in neurological
           disorders. Building on these findings, we now discuss (a)  the relevance of neurolog-
           ical lesion models to study interoception, (b) the relationship between this domain and
           socio-​emotional processes, (c) the specific roles of different interoceptive pathways across
           disorders, and (d) the future of cardiac interoception research in health and neuroscience.
 201




                                                                                         Discussion     201


       10.3.1  Neurological
                         disorders as key models to characterize
       interoceptive mechanisms
       As reviewed earlier, interoceptive processes rely on neurocognitive mechanisms that are
       affected in numerous neurological disorders. This growing empirical corpus informs in-
       teroceptive research by providing critical lesion models, revealing fine-​grained links be-
       tween interoceptive disruptions and other disease symptoms, and yielding insights on
       plastic mechanisms which could prove relevant for recovery in specific disorders (e.g. IS).
          First, the relatively specific patterns of brain damage of each condition shed light on the
       neurocognitive organization of interoceptive mechanisms. For example, fronto-​cingulo-​
       insular lesions following frontal IS seem to compromise interoceptive accuracy without
       affecting interoceptive awareness and learning, which highlights the relative dissocia-
       tion between all three dimensions and the dependence of the latter two on posterior re-
       gions (Garcia-​Cordero et al., 2016). Also, evidence from focal strokes suggests that while
       interoception would be mainly subserved by the right insula, such a region would not be
       so critical for sensing body-​external stimuli (Couto et al., 2015). Furthermore, evidence
       from MS indicates that interoceptive deficits can become manifest upon atrophy of the
       insula and the ACC even if the somatosensory cortex is preserved, which highlights the
       secondary role of the latter structure (Salamone et al., accepted). Additional clinical evi-
       dence shows that a wide network linking the insula with frontal and temporal structures
       integrates interoceptive functions with emotional and social cognition processes (Adolfi
       et al., 2016). As exemplified by these findings, neurological lesion models offer crucial
       data to understand the neurocognitive basis of interoception.
          Indeed, such models can complement the insights yielded by research on psychiatric
       disorders. For example, interoceptive accuracy reveals variable patterns across psy-
       chiatric diseases (e.g. it is enhanced in obsessive−compulsive and panic disorders but
       disturbed in depression, depersonalization, bipolar disorder, borderline personality dis-
       order, and anorexia) (Dunn et al., 2007; Khalsa et al., 2015; Muller et al., 2015; Sedeno
       et al., 2014; Yoris et al., 2015; Yoris et al., 2017). However, this dimension is consistently
       impaired in neurological conditions, thus emerging as a potentially robust and more pre-
       dictable transdiagnostic marker. Also, whereas interoceptive awareness or metacognitive
       estimations of cardiac interoception appear to be impaired in highly disabling psychi-
       atric disorders but not in subclinical cases of anxiety or social phobia (Yoris et al., 2015),
       this domain seems compromised in early stages of neurological conditions, such as AD,
       bvFTD (Garcia-​Cordero et al., 2016), and CP (Di Lernia et al., 2016). Thus, this dimen-
       sion may prove particularly relevant for early (and, ideally, preclinical) characterization of
       neurological, as opposed to psychiatric, disorders. Moreover, specific dissociations across
       neurological conditions underscore the usefulness of teasing apart interoceptive skills
       into identifiable dimensions. Indeed, interoceptive learning seems specifically related
       to the physiopathology of AD, given that neither focal nor neurodegenerative damage
       to fronto-​insular damage seems to disrupt it (Garcia-​Cordero et al., 2016) (see findings
       summarized in Figure 10.5).
                                                                                                                                                       20




Figure 10.5 Representative schema of main results: interoceptive dimensions, emotion and social cognition across neurologic diseases. Left: Columns
represent categorical diagnostics in neurology where the interoception was studied. Pointed lines represent categories not yet explored. Rows show
principal interoceptive dimensions explored. Black areas indicate disorders where those dimensions were explored, whereas white pointed lines
areas those unexplored. Neurodegenerative disorders are emplaced over a shadow block. Above: Boxes represent social cognition. Circles represent
interoception. Pentagons represent emotion. Right: Diagram that represents the relationship of interoception (and its different dimensions) with the
domains of emotion and social cognition.
 203




                                                                                        Discussion    203


          In addition, these models can reveal links between high and low levels of interocep-
       tive dimensions and differential symptomatology. In particular, systematic cognitive
       dysfunctions may be more readily identifiable in specific neurological conditions than
       in psychiatric disorders. Thus, the detection of distinctive interoceptive deficits in the
       former may illuminate the interaction between viscerosensory and exteroceptive pro-
       cessing beyond the contributions of more diffuse conditions. Indeed, disruptions of inter-
       oceptive learning and awareness have been linked to specific metacognitive and memory
       deficits in neurodegenerative diseases (Garcia-​Cordero et al., 2016).
          Finally, neurological disorders may reveal subtle plastic mechanisms acting on intero-
       ceptive networks post-​morbidly. For example, cognitive decline has been linked to insular
       atrophy in MCI (Xie et al., 2012), whereas memory and interoceptive learning deficits
       seem to rely on extended insulo-​temporal damage in AD (Garcia-​Cordero et al., 2016).
       This perspective opens new opportunities to explore both the role of interoceptive areas
       in overall cognitive performance across disorder types. Indeed, in PD, insular damage
       increases as the disease progresses, which could partially explain the development of sev-
       eral non-​motor symptoms (Christopher et al., 2014).
          Neurological disorders also allow us to explore the recruitment of alternative circuits
       for possible functional compensation. For example, while HEP modulations during car-
       diac interoception are associated with the main interoceptive hubs (the insula and the
       ACC) in controls, in MS patients they only correlated with a complementary interocep-
       tive area (the somatosensory cortex) (Salamone et  al., accepted). Useful insights could
       also be gained by assessing plastic changes in stroke patients. Speculatively, interoceptive
       dimensions which are specifically affected by focal fronto-​insular lesions could eventually
       become (optimally or suboptimally) subserved by perilesional or homologous contralat-
       eral structures. Beyond neurological conditions, hitherto unexplored forms of plasticity
       involving interoceptive mechanisms could be revealed by studying patients who un-
       dergo heart transplants. Indeed, ongoing work by our team seeks to examine the timing
       and effectiveness of the vagal re-​innervation and its impact on interoceptive and related
       domains (e.g. emotion processing) by comparing relevant behavioral and neurocognitive
       markers before and after surgery. These possibilities pave the way for a promising agenda
       in the field of interoception.

       10.3.2  Interactions
                          between interoceptive dimensions and
       socio-​emotional processes
       Visceral-​interoceptive signals seem to interact with emotional and socio-​       cognitive
       mechanisms (Adolfi et  al., 2016). Such an interaction likely reflects the neural overlap
       between both domains in the anterior insular cortex and the ACC (Adolfi et al., 2016),
       but it also seems to involve more extended neural networks. Indeed, several neurological
       conditions leading to interoceptive deficits (see section 10.2) are also linked with im-
       paired emotional processing. In AD, for example, facial emotion recognition (particularly
       in the domain of negative emotions) is disturbed in line with the progression of dementia.
       Similar deficits have also been reported in IS, MCI, bvFTD, and MS, as well as in other
204




      204   Cardiac interoception in neurological conditions


            conditions in which interoception has not been studied so far, like Huntington’s disease
            (for a review see Ibanez et al., 2016b).
              Similarly, several disorders linked with interoceptive abnormalities are known to affect
            social cognition skills (Adolfi et  al., 2016), including empathy, theory of mind (ToM),
            moral judgment, among others (Adolphs, 1999). For example, pervasive ToM deficits
            have been documented in PD. This domain is also compromised in bvFTD and related
            neurodegenerative conditions, which also impairs empathy processes, moral judgment,
            and social emotions (Báez et al., 2014; Báez et al., 2016a; Báez et al., 2016b; Báez et al.,
            2017; Báez et al., 2016c; Ibanez et al., 2016a; Melloni et al., 2016; Melloni, Lopez, & Ibanez,
            2013; Sedeno et al., 2016).
              While the above associations are indirect, meta-​analytic evidence from more than 4,500
            neuroimaging studies revealed a robust overlap among regions supporting interoceptive,
            emotional, and social cognition processes (Adolfi et  al., 2016). Convergences between
            the three domains were maximal in the right anterior insula, a core interoceptive hub.
            However, ignificant overlaps were also found in the left anterior insula, the right ACC,
            and the right temporal pole. Thus, although most research on interoception in neurolog-
            ical disorders has not empirically examined linked with socio-​emotional mechanisms
            (but see Figure 10.6 and Adolfi et al., 2016), this evidence strongly suggests that all three
            domains may be rooted in partially shared fronto-​insulo-​temporal networks whose hubs
            are affected by multiple brain diseases.
              Future studies should explore these relationships via multilevel designs tapping different
            interoceptive dimensions. In particular, the available evidence invites new questions on as
            yet unexamined issues, including the potential role of cardiac interoception or vagal stim-
            ulation as facilitators or inhibitors of emotion recognition, or the relationship between
            interoceptive performance and emotional regulation. Research along these lines could
            broaden our current understanding of interoception and the overarching impact of its
            disruption in neurological conditions.

            10.3.3  Ascertaining      the roles of different interoceptive
            pathways
            Beyond the evidence afforded by lesion models (Khalsa et  al., 2009a), little is known
            about how different interoceptive pathways are affected by pharmacological interventions
            and cardiovascular impairments. This limitation could be overcome by replicating ex-
            tant designs in neurological samples. For example, enhancements of the somatosensory
            pathway via bolus isoproterenol infusion (Khalsa et al., 2009b) could reveal which intero-
            ceptive dimensions (accuracy, awareness, and learning) are more critically dependent on
            secondary interoceptive regions. Likewise, evidence that peripheral cardiac dysfunction
            in hypertensive subjects impairs neurocognitive interoceptive mechanisms (Yoris et al.,
            2018) suggests that the vagal signalling may play a causal role in the neural dynamics on
            this domain. Thus, vagal stimulation, a therapeutic intervention in CP (Goadsby et al.,
            2014)  and other conditions, could constitute a promising option for experimental re-
            search and clinical interventions in neurological disorders.
 205




                                                                                                  Discussion   205


                                                                      Inferior Parietal Lobe

        Inferior
        Frontal
        Cortex                                          TPJ




          Anterior
          Insula                                                                                 Anterior
                                                                                                 Insula
                                       Interoception           Emotion




                                                                           Overlap all
                                      Overlap


                                                   Social Cognition

       Medial
       Occipital                                       ACC
       Cortex




                                                       vMPFC

                     Fisuform                                                             Parahippocampal
                     Gyrus
       Figure 10.6  Meta-​analytic evidence (fMRI) of convergence across interoception, emotion, and
       social cognition. Meta-​analyses of cortical overlap (red). Significantly activated (meeting height-​
       or extent-​based threshold at p < 0.05, FWE corrected) clusters from studies of interoception
       (sky blue), emotion recognition, perception (violet), and social cognition (green). A conjunction
       analysis performed revealed common activations throughout an insular-​frontotemporal
       network: the right anterior insula, the ACC, the bilateral para-​hippocampal gyrus, the
       hippocampus, the right amygdala, the inferior frontal gyrus, and the right globus pallidus
       (p < .001, FWE corrected)).



       10.3.4  The
                future of cardiac interoception research in health
       and neuroscience
       The considerations covered could improve clinical assessment and the description and
       prognosis of signs and symptoms across multiple brain diseases. In particular, dimen-
       sional approaches like the Research Domain Criteria offer new opportunities to inte-
       grate clinical knowledge with genes, tissues, anatomy and physiology, electrophysiology,
206




      206   Cardiac interoception in neurological conditions


            observable behavior, measurable laboratory behavior, and self-​report data. Under this
            framework, the study of interoception can be segmented into multiple levels of analysis
            (from accuracy to awareness; Garfinkel et al., 2015), so that common and specific dimen-
            sional symptoms can be identified within the broad spectrum of neurological diseases.
            Likewise, this approach would permit connecting contributions from research on lan-
            guage, memory, decision-​making, learning, and embodied cognition, while revealing
            cross-​domain interactions between the brain, the heart, and the rest of the organism.
               The evidence reviewed above suggests that alterations in interoceptive accuracy might
            emerge as either primary or secondary deficits, depending on the condition. The initial
            atrophy pattern of bvFTD affects putative interoceptive hubs, such as the insular cortex
            and the ACC, among other frontal structures (Seeley, 2010). Moreover, these areas are
            comprised by the salience network, a resting-​state network which is also affected in this
            disease (Ibanez & Manes, 2012). Although further research is needed, interoceptive
            alterations in bvFTD patients might constitute primary deficits. Be that as it may, little is
            known about the relation between such impairments and socio-​emotional deficits typical
            of bvFTD, which are also related to fronto-​insular disruptions (Van den Stock & Kumfor,
            2017). Interoceptive deficits may also prove primary in PD, given the evidence highlighting
            the critical role of the insula across many of its symptoms (e.g. disturbances of bodily
            awareness and autonomic functions, sensorimotor systems) (Christopher et al., 2014).
               Alterations of interoceptive accuracy in the broad spectrum of CP conditions might be
            related to the overlap between interoceptive hubs and the activation of the pain matrix
            network (e.g. somatosensory cortex, insula, and mid-​cingulate cortex). However, given
            the lack of a clear and systematic cortical damage across forms of CP, it remains unclear
            whether the deficits in question represent primary or secondary symptoms. Although the
            scenario is also heterogeneous for MS, some studies have reported cortical alterations in
            the insula and the ACC in this pathology. Also, MS patients present deficits related to the
            sensing of physiological body signals (e.g. olfaction, taste, temperature, fatigue) that have
            recently been proposed as related to core interoceptive dysfunctions (Salamone et al., ac-
            cepted). However, further research is needed to determine the nature of interoceptive
            impairments in such a disorder.
               The situation seems to be different in the case of AD. Although interoceptive accu-
            racy deficits have been reported in this disease (Garcia-​Cordero et al., 2016), its atrophy
            pattern involves temporo-​parietal regions (Du et al., 2007). As such damage is consist-
            ently associated with impairments in memory mechanisms, it has been suggested that
            interoceptive deficits are secondary in AD given that they may be epiphenomenal to
            memory deficits (Garcia-​Cordero et al., 2016).
               Relative to awareness or learning, it is difficult to determinate whether they are pri-
            mary or secondary affectations in these conditions. First, most studies focused merely on
            accuracy. This is the case of learning that has only been explored one work in neurolog-
            ical diseases (Garcia-​Cordero et al., 2016). It has been suggested that in AD this dimen-
            sion might be considered as a manifestation of its impairment in more basic memory
            mechanisms (Garcia-​Cordero et al., 2016). However, further research in this and other
 207




                                                                                                  References   207


       conditions is needed to disentangle the relation between interoceptive learning and other
       memory dimensions. Second, dimensions such as interoceptive sensibility and aware-
       ness are suggested to depend on widespread anatomical networks and not on core inter-
       oceptive areas, as shown by the preservation of interoceptive awareness in fronto-​insular
       strokes (Garcia-​Cordero et al., 2016). In this way, their disruption might be secondary to
       the alteration of extended brain damage instead of being circumscribed to specific hubs
       (Garcia-​Cordero et al., 2016).
          Be that as it may, future efforts in this line of research should strive to integrate cog-
       nitive, autonomic, behavioral, neuroimaging, and electrophysiological data via designs
       which combine measures of interoception, emotion, and social cognition. This prospec-
       tive agenda should particularly emphasize (a) the systematic operationalization of specific
       dimensions, (b) the development of more sensitive and specific measurements to such
       an end, (c) the search for common and differential disturbances across conditions, and
       (d) the conduction of longitudinal studies to measure relevant plastic changes and asso-
       ciated behavioral adaptations. Thereupon, possible lines of innovation might be forged,
       including the development of new pharmacologic therapies that reduce the negative im-
       pact on other areas of health; prevention programmes focusing on nutrition, physical ac-
       tivity, and stress reduction; and activities of high impact on health, such as meditation and
       interventions based on well-​being, among others. In sum, the interoception framework
       may pave the way for fruitful breakthroughs towards the consolidation of a dimensional
       and transdiagnostic approach for neurological research.

       10.4 Conclusion
       The study of interoceptive domains in neurology offers new possibilities for experi-
       mental research and clinical interventions in cognitive neuroscience. Here we showed
       that neurological disorders present deficits in diverse interoceptive domains, evidencing
       a disrupted interplay between neurocognitive and autonomic processes. These findings
       highlight the potential of dimensional and transdiagnostic approaches to better charac-
       terize the manifold manifestations of cerebral damage. New experimental studies could
       afford important breakthroughs in this direction, and eventually inspire new forms of
       testing and intervention in clinical settings.

       Acknowledgments
       This work has been partially supported by the CONICET, the INECO foundation and
       projects of CONICYT/​FONDECYT Regular (1170010); FONCyT-​PICT (2012-​0412 and
       2012-​1309), and FONDAP (15150012).

       References
       Adolfi, F., Couto, B., Richter, F., Decety, J., Lopez, J., Sigman, M., et al. (2016). Convergence of
          interoception, emotion, and social cognition: A twofold fMRI meta-​analysis and lesion approach.
          Cortex, 88, 124–​42. doi:10.1016/​j.cortex.2016.12.019.
208




      208   Cardiac interoception in neurological conditions


            Adolphs, R. (1999). Social cognition and the human brain. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 3(12), 469–​79.
               doi:S1364-​6613(99)01399-​6  [pii].
            Báez, S., Couto, B., Torralva, T., Sposato, L. A., Huepe, D., Montañes, P., et al. (2014). Comparing
               moral judgments of patients with frontotemporal dementia and frontal stroke. JAMA Neurology,
               doi:10.1001/​jamaneurol.2014.347.
            Báez, S., Kanske, P., Matallana, D., Montanes, P., Reyes, P., Slachevsky, A., et al. (2016a). Integration of
               intention and outcome for moral judgment in frontotemporal dementia: Brain structural signatures.
               Neurodegenerative Diseases, 16(3–​4), 206–​17.
            Báez, S., Morales, J. P., Slachevsky, A., Torralva, T., Matus, C., Manes, F., et al. (2016b). Orbitofrontal
               and limbic signatures of empathic concern and intentional harm in the behavioral variant
               frontotemporal dementia. Cortex, 75, 20–​32. doi:10.1016/​j.cortex.2015.11.007.
            Báez, S., Santamaría-​García, H., Orozco, J., Fittipaldi, S., García, A., Pino, M., et al. (2016c). Your
               misery is no longer my pleasure: Reduced Schadenfreude in Huntington’s disease families. Cortex.
               <http://​dx.doi.org/​10.1016/​j.cortex.2016.07.009>
            Báez, S., Pino, M., Berrío, M., Santamaría-​García, H., Sedeño, L., García, A., et al. (2017).
               Corticostriatal signatures of Schadenfreude: Evidence from Huntington’s disease. Journal of
               Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry, 1, 89(1), 112–​16.
            Borg, C., Emond, F. C., Colson, D., Laurent, B., and Michael, G. A. (2015). Attentional focus on
               subjective interoceptive experience in patients with fibromyalgia. Brain and Cognition, 101,  35–​43.
            Buckner, R. L., Sepulcre, J., Talukdar, T., Krienen, F. M., Liu, H., Hedden, T., et al. (2009). Cortical
               hubs revealed by intrinsic functional connectivity: Mapping, assessment of stability, and relation to
               Alzheimer’s disease. Journal of Neuroscience, 29(6), 1860–​73.
            Couto, B., Adolfi, F., Sedeno, L., Salles, A., Canales-​Johnson, A., Alvarez-​Abut, P., et al. (2015).
               Disentangling interoception: Insights from focal strokes affecting the perception of external and
               internal milieus. Frontiers in Psychology, 6, 503. doi:10.3389/​fpsyg.2015.00503.
            Craig, A. D. (2003). Pain mechanisms: Labeled lines versus convergence in central processing. Annual
               Reviews in Neuroscience, 26, 1–​30. doi:10.1146/​annurev.neuro.26.041002.131022.
            Craig, A. D. (2009). How do you feel—​now? The anterior insula and human awareness. (Research
               Support, Non-​U.S. Gov’t). Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 10(1), 59–​70. doi:10.1038/​nrn2555.
            Criaud, M., Christopher, L., Boulinguez, P., Ballanger, B., Lang, A. E., Cho, S. S., et al. (2016).
               Contribution of insula in Parkinson’s disease: A quantitative meta‐analysis study. Human Brain
               Mapping, April 1, 37(4), 1375–​92.
            Critchley, H. D., Wiens, S., Rotshtein, P., Ohman, A., and Dolan, R. J. (2004). Neural systems
               supporting interoceptive awareness. (Research Support, Non-​U.S. Gov’t). Nature Neurosciences, 7(2),
               189–​95. doi:10.1038/​nn1176.
            Christopher, L., Koshimori, Y., Lang, A. E., Criaud, M., and Strafella, A. P. (2014). Uncovering the role
               of the insula in non-​motor symptoms of Parkinson’s disease. Brain, 137(8), 2143–​54.
            Di Lernia, D., Serino, S., and Riva, G. (2016). Pain in the body. Altered interoception in chronic pain
               conditions: A systematic review. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 71, 328–​41.
            Du, A.-​T., Schuff, N., Kramer, J. H., Rosen, H. J., Gorno-​Tempini, M. L., Rankin, K., et al. (2007).
               Different regional patterns of cortical thinning in Alzheimer’s disease and frontotemporal dementia.
               Brain, 130(4), 1159–​66.
            Dubois, B., Feldman, H. H., Jacova, C., Hampel, H., Molinuevo, J. L., Blennow, K., et al. (2014).
               Advancing research diagnostic criteria for Alzheimer’s disease: The IWG-​2 criteria. Lancet
               Neurology, 13(6), 614–​29.
            Dunn, B. D., Dalgleish, T., Ogilvie, A. D., and Lawrence, A. D. (2007). Heartbeat perception in
               depression. (Research Support, Non-​U.S. Gov’t). Behavioral Research Therapy, 45(8), 1921–​30.
               doi:10.1016/​j.brat.2006.09.008.
 209




                                                                                                         References       209


       Duschek, S., Montoro, C. I., and Reyes del Paso, G. A. (2016). Diminished interoceptive awareness in
           fibromyalgia syndrome. Behavioral Medicine, 1–​8. 17(S), 723.
       Farmer, M. A., Baliki, M. N., and Apkarian, A. V. (2012). A dynamic network perspective of chronic
           pain. Neuroscience Letters, 520(2), 197–​203.
       Garcia-​Cordero, I., Sedeno, L., de la Fuente, L., Slachevsky, A., Forno, G., Klein, F., et al. (2016). Feeling,
           learning from and being aware of inner states: Interoceptive dimensions in neurodegeneration and
           stroke. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B, 371(1708). doi:10.1098/​rstb.2016.0006.
       Garfinkel, S. N., Seth, A. K., Barrett, A. B., Suzuki, K., and Critchley, H. D. (2015). Knowing your own
           heart: Distinguishing interoceptive accuracy from interoceptive awareness. (Research Support, Non-​
           U.S. Gov’t). Biological Psychology, 104, 65–​74. doi:10.1016/​j.biopsycho.2014.11.004.
       Goadsby, P., Grosberg, B., Mauskop, A., Cady, R., and Simmons, K. (2014). Effect of noninvasive vagus
           nerve stimulation on acute migraine: An open-​label pilot study. Cephalalgia, 34(12), 986–​93.
       Hanağası, H. A., Bilgiç, B., and Emre, M. (2016). Dementia with Lewy bodies and Parkinson’s disease
           dementia. In: M. Husain and J. M. Schott (eds), Oxford Textbook of Cognitive Neurology and
           Dementia. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 399–​412.
       Ibanez, A., Gleichgerrcht, E., and Manes, F. (2010). Clinical effects of insular damage in humans.
           (Review). Brain Structure and Function, 214(5-​6), 397–​410. doi:10.1007/​s00429-​010-​0256-​y.
       Ibanez, A. and Manes, F. (2012). Contextual social cognition and the behavioral variant of
           frontotemporal dementia. Neurology, 78(17), 1354–​62. doi:10.1212/​WNL.0b013e3182518375.
       Ibanez, A., Kuljis, R. O., Matallana, D., and Manes, F. (2014). Bridging psychiatry and neurology
           through social neuroscience. World Psychiatry, 13(2), 148–​9. doi: 10.1002/​wps.20125
       Ibanez, A., Billeke, P., de la Fuente, L., Salamone, P., Garcia, A. M., and Melloni, M. (2016a).
           Reply: Towards a neurocomputational account of social dysfunction in neurodegenerative disease.
           Brain, doi:10.1093/​brain/​aww316.
       Ibanez, A., Garcia, A. M., Esteves, S., Yoris, A., Munoz, E., Reynaldo, L., et al. (2016b). Social
           neuroscience: Undoing the schism between neurology and psychiatry. Society Neuroscience,
           doi:10.1080/​17470919.2016.1245214.
       Insel, T., Cuthbert, B., Garvey, M., Heinssen, R., Pine, D. S., Quinn, K., et al. (2010). Research domain
           criteria (RDoC): Toward a new classification framework for research on mental disorders: American
           Psychiatric Association. American Journal of Psychiatry, 167(7), 748–​51.
       Jin, W., Bu, X., Wang, Y., Li, L., Li, W., Liu, Y., et al. (2017). Reduced Cardiovascular Functions in
           Patients with Alzheimer’s Disease. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 58(3), 919–​25.
       Khalsa, S. S., Rudrauf, D., Feinstein, J. S., and Tranel, D. (2009a). The pathways of interoceptive
           awareness. (Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural). Nature Neuroscience, 12(12), 1494–​6.
           doi:10.1038/​nn.2411.
       Khalsa, S. S., Rudrauf, D., Sandesara, C., Olshansky, B., and Tranel, D. (2009b). Bolus isoproterenol
           infusions provide a reliable method for assessing interoceptive awareness. (Randomized Controlled
           Trial Khalsa, S. S., Craske, M. G., Li, W., Vangala, S., Strober, M., and Feusner, J. D. (2015). Altered
           interoceptive awareness in anorexia nervosa: Effects of meal anticipation, consumption and bodily
           arousal. (Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural). International Journal of Eating Disorders, 48(7),
           889–​97. doi:10.1002/​eat.22387.
       Khalsa, S. S. and Lapidus, R. C. (2016). Can interoception improve the pragmatic search for biomarkers
           in psychiatry? [Review]. Frontiers in Psychiatry, 7, 121. doi:10.3389/​fpsyt.2016.00121.
       Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural). International Journal of Psychophysiology, 72(1), 34–​45.
           doi:10.1016/​j.ijpsycho.2008.08.010.
       Khalsa, S. S., Rudrauf, D., and Tranel, D. (2009). Interoceptive awareness declines with age.
           (Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural). Psychophysiology, 46(6), 1130–​6. doi:10.1111/​
           j.1469-​8986.2009.00859.x.
210




      210   Cardiac interoception in neurological conditions


            Kling, M. A., Trojanowski, J. Q., Wolk, D. A., Lee, V. M., and Arnold, S. E. (2013). Vascular disease and
                dementias: Paradigm shifts to drive research in new directions. Alzheimer’s & Dementia, 9(1),  76–​92.
            Kupers, R. C., Gybels, J. M., and Gjedde, A. (2000). Positron emission tomography study of a chronic
                pain patient successfully treated with somatosensory thalamic stimulation. Pain, 87(3), 295–​302.
            Mehling, W. E., Daubenmier, J., Price, C. J., Acree, M., Bartmess, E., and Stewart, A. L. (2013). Self-​
                reported interoceptive awareness in primary care patients with past or current low back pain.
                Journal of Pain Research, 6,403, 403–​18.
            Melloni, M., Lopez, V., and Ibanez, A. (2013). Empathy and contextual social cognition. Cognitive and
                Affective Behavioral Neuroscience. doi:10.3758/​s13415-​013-​0205-​3.
            Melloni, M., Billeke, P., Báez, S., Hesse, E., de la Fuente, L., Forno, G., et al. (2016). Your perspective
                and my benefit: Multiple lesion models of self-​other integration strategies during social bargaining.
                Brain. <http://​dx.doi.org/​10.1093/​brain/​aww1231. doi: 10.1093/​brain/​aww231>
            Metzger, F. G., Polak, T., Aghazadeh, Y., Ehlis, A.-​C., Hagen, K., and Fallgatter, A. J. (2012). Vagus
                somatosensory evoked potentials: A possibility for diagnostic improvement in patients with mild
                cognitive impairment? Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, 33(5), 289–​96.
            Moon, Y., Moon, W.-​J., Kim, H., and Han, S.-​H. (2014). Regional atrophy of the insular cortex is
                associated with neuropsychiatric symptoms in Alzheimer’s disease patients. European Neurology,
                71(5–​6),  223–​9.
            Muller, L. E., Schulz, A., Andermann, M., Gabel, A., Gescher, D. M., Spohn, A., et al. (2015). Cortical
                representation of afferent bodily signals in borderline personality disorder: Neural correlates and
                relationship to emotional dysregulation. (Research Support, Non-​U.S. Gov’t). JAMA Psychiatry,
                72(11), 1077–​86. doi:10.1001/​jamapsychiatry.2015.1252.
            Polak, T., Zeller, D., Fallgatter, A. J., and Metzger, F. G. (2013). Vagus somatosensory-​evoked potentials
                are prolonged in patients with multiple sclerosis with brainstem involvement. Neuroreport,
                24(5),  251–​3.
            Polak, T., Dresler, T., Zeller, J. B., Warrings, B., Scheuerpflug, P., Fallgatter, A. J., et al. (2014). Vagus
                somatosensory evoked potentials are delayed in Alzheimer’s disease, but not in major depression.
                European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience, 264(3),  263–​7.
            Pollatos, O., Herbert, B. M., Wankner, S., Dietel, A., Wachsmuth, C., Henningsen, P., et al. (2011).
                Autonomic imbalance is associated with reduced facial recognition in somatoform disorders.
                Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 71(4),  232–​9.
            Ricciardi, L., Demartini, B., Crucianelli, L., Krahé, C., Edwards, M. J., and Fotopoulou, A. (2016a).
                Interoceptive awareness in patients with functional neurological symptoms. Biological Psychology,
                113,  68–​74.
            Ricciardi, L., Ferrazzano, G., Demartini, B., Morgante, F., Erro, R., Ganos, C., et al. (2016b). Know
                thyself: Exploring interoceptive sensitivity in Parkinson’s disease. Journal of Neurological Sciences,
                364, 110–​15.
            Ron, M. A. (2016). Cognition in multiple sclerosis. In: M. Husain and J. M. Schott, (eds), Oxford
                Textbook of Cognitive Neurology and Dementia. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 123–​76.
            Sacco, R. L., Kasner, S. E., Broderick, J. P., Caplan, L. R., Culebras, A., Elkind, M. S., et al. (2013). An
                updated definition of stroke for the 21st century. Stroke, 44(7), 2064–​89.
            Salamone, P., Esteves, S., Sinay, V., Garcia-​Cordero, I., Abrevaya, S., Couto, B., et al. (accepted).
                Altered neural signatures of interoception in multiple sclerosis. Human Brain Mapping.
            Sedeno, L., Couto, B., Melloni, M., Canales-​Johnson, A., Yoris, A., Báez, S., et al. (2014). How do
                you feel when you can’t feel your body? Interoception, functional connectivity and emotional
                processing in depersonalization-​derealization disorder. PLoS One, 9(6), e98769. doi:10.1371/​journal.
                pone.0098769.
 21




                                                                                                    References      211


      Sedeno, L., Couto, B., Garcia-​Cordero, I., Melloni, M., Báez, S., Morales Sepulveda, J. P., et al. (2016).
         Brain network organization and social executive performance in frontotemporal dementia. Journal
         of the International Neuropsychology Society, 22(2), 250–​62. doi:10.1017/​S1355617715000703.
      Seeley, W. W. (2010). Anterior insula degeneration in frontotemporal dementia. Brain Structure and
         Function, 214(5-​6), 465–​75.
      Shany-​Ur, T., Lin, N., Rosen, H. J., Sollberger, M., Miller, B. L., and Rankin, K. P. (2014). Self-​
         awareness in neurodegenerative disease relies on neural structures mediating reward-​driven
         attention. Brain, 137(8), 2368–​81.
      Teipel, S. J., and Grothe, M. J. (2015). The relative importance of imaging markers for the prediction
         of Alzheimer’s disease dementia in mild cognitive impairment: The curse of dimensionality.
         Alzheimer’s & Dementia, 11(7), P10–​P11.
      Van den Stock, J. and Kumfor, F. (2017). Behavioural-​variant frontotemporal dementia: At the
         interface of interoception, emotion and social cognition? Cortex. In Press. <https://​doi.org/​10.1016/​
         j.cortex.2017.08.013>
      Watters, C. A., Taylor, G. J., Quilty, L. C., and Bagby, R. M. (2016). An examination of the topology and
         measurement of the alexithymia construct using network analysis. Journal of Personality Assessment,
         98(6), 649–​59.
      Woolley, J. D., Gorno-​Tempini, M. L., Seeley, W. W., Rankin, K., Lee, S. S., Matthews, B. R., and
         Miller, B. L. (2007). Binge eating is associated with right orbitofrontal-​insular-​striatal atrophy in
         frontotemporal dementia. (Case Reports Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural). Neurology, 69(14),
         1424–​33. doi:10.1212/​01.wnl.0000277461.06713.23.
      Xie, C., Bai, F., Yu, H., Shi, Y., Yuan, Y., Chen, G., et al. (2012). Abnormal insula functional network
         is associated with episodic memory decline in amnestic mild cognitive impairment. Neuroimage,
         63(1),  320–​7.
      Yoris, A., Esteves, S., Couto, B., Melloni, M., Kichic, R., Cetkovich, M., et al. (2015). The roles of
         interoceptive sensitivity and metacognitive interoception in panic. Behavioural and Brain Functions,
         11, 14. doi:10.1186/​s12993-​015-​0058-​8.
      Yoris, A., García, A., Traiber, L., Santamaría-​García, H., Martorell, M., Alifano, F., et al. (2017). The
         inner world of overactive monitoring: Neural markers of interoception in obsessive–​compulsive
         disorder. Psychological Medicine, 47(11),  1–​14.
      Yoris, A., Abrevaya, S., Esteves, S., Salamone, P., Lori, N., Martorell, et al. (2018). Multilevel
         convergence of interoceptive impairments in hypertension: New evidence of disrupted body–​brain
         interactions. Human Brain Mapping, 39(4) 39, 1563–​81.
21




                Chapter 11

                Interoception, categorization,
                and symptom perception
                Omer Van den Bergh, Nadia Zacharioudakis,
                and Sibylle Petersen



     11.1 Introduction
     Although the body is always immediately present, it seems to be a most elusive perceptual
     object (Leder, 1990; Chapter 17 in the present volume). Recent years have seen a growing
     interest in interoception and the perception of bodily sensations which has raised different
     opinions about which signals are interoceptive:  signals emerging from the viscera only
     (Dworkin, 2000), or also proprio-​and somatoceptive signals generated by the muscles, joints,
     and surface of the body (Craig, 2004) or, more broadly, all the information contributing
     to a mental meta-​representation of the body as distinct from the outer world (Moseley,
     Gallace, & Spence, 2012). Also, different aspects of interoception have been distinguished
     such as interoceptive sensibility (i.e. the disposition to focus on bodily processes), intero-
     ceptive accuracy/​sensitivity (i.e. the ability to detect internal bodily processes accurately),
     and interoceptive awareness (i.e. the metacognitive awareness of being accurate; Garfinkel
     et al., 2015). Interoception is thought to influence a vast array of psycho(physio)logical phe-
     nomena, ranging from eating and drinking, over emotion and emotional disorders, to time
     perception, decision-​making, the sense of self in a spatiotemporal context, and several other
     domains (Ceunen, Vlaeyen, & Van Diest, 2016).
        In this chapter, we focus on the relationship between interoception and symptom per-
     ception. We consider interoception rather broadly as the perception of both visceral and
     somatic sensations that, conjointly with external contextual information, produces a sense
     of the state of the body. Interoception seems a precondition for symptom perception, yet
     symptom perception is also more than that: it implies classifying (a pattern of) sensations
     into meaningful categories with behavioral relevance, indicating a non-​normative state
     of the body that can vary from transient and rather vague (not well) to a life-​threatening
     specific disease (cancer).
        Here, we will not review empirical findings documenting how psychological factors
     impact symptom perception (see Van den Bergh, Bogaerts, & Van Diest, 2015) but will
     instead elaborate on a number of fundamental assumptions underlying symptom percep-
     tion in medical practice.
 213




                                                                 Accuracy of symptom perception        213


       11.2  Accuracy of symptom perception
       Traditionally, a key interest of the research on symptom perception is accuracy. This
       research domain assumes that individuals are able to perceive their internal state and
       non-​normative changes therein accurately. Accurate symptom perception implies that
       symptom reports closely reflect some physiological dysfunction and that the latter directly
       causes the experience of symptoms. The interest in accuracy of symptom perception has
       a clear rationale in line with the basic assumptions of a traditional disease model: if there
       is a close correspondence between the conscious experience of symptoms and the under-
       lying physiological cause, symptoms are a valid source of diagnostic information and can
       be used as a readout of the underlying cause. In addition, it follows that remedying the
       underlying cause removes the symptoms.
          Although it is acknowledged that psychological factors can bias symptom reports,
       either as overperception or underperception (Van den Bergh et al., 2015), the accuracy
       assumption in medical practice represents a fundamental implicit contract among the
       patient, the physician, and the healthcare system. First, the subjective experience of
       symptoms is considered a valid reason, typically the primary one, for a patient to con-
       sult a physician, to take medication, or undertake other actions to maintain or restore
       physical health. Second, the experience of symptoms is a major source of information
       for physicians to guide decisions on further medical examinations, on specific thera-
       peutic interventions, and to assess the effectiveness of their interventions. Third, the
       healthcare system supports the patient−physician interaction resulting from this im-
       plicit contract by providing a wide range of technical and logistic facilities and financial
       compensations.
          Fortunately, the accuracy assumption seems to hold quite well when physiological dys-
       function generates rather intense and specific interoceptive sensations that are low in
       complexity, are clearly localized, and have clear on/​off boundaries, such as with acute
       pain (Price, Riley, & Wade, 2001). However, for more systemic changes in the body and/​
       or for chronic multisymptomatic conditions, the correspondence between symptoms and
       objective parameters indicating disease severity becomes highly variable and is only ac-
       curate under some conditions (Janssens et al., 2009; Van den Bergh et al., 2015, 2017a).
       The experience of breathlessness, for example, relies upon the integration by the brain
       of signals from up to 16 different afferent systems, such as stretch receptors in the chest,
       chemoreceptors in the brainstem, muscle afferents, and many others (Parshall et al., 2012).
       In addition, breathlessness is a highly distressing emotional experience involving a variety
       of attentional, cognitive, and behavioral responses that influence perception and reporting
       of symptoms. Poor correspondence between objective disease indicators and symptom
       reports is therefore rather common in a wide range of chronic respiratory conditions. For
       example, correlations between physiological measures of disease severity and self-​reported
       dyspnea in patients with asthma or Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD)
       are moderate at best (COPD: r = 0.36 in Agusti et al., 2010; r = 0.28 in Müllerová et al.,
       2014; see also Janssens et al., 2009). Correspondence between physiological test results
214




      214   Interoception, categorization, and symptom perception


            and symptom reports is similarly low for symptoms of cardiovascular diseases (Barsky,
            2001) or diabetes (Frankum & Ogden, 2005).
               Failure to perceive and interpret symptoms accurately may have life threatening
            consequences for the patient (e.g. Banzett et al., 2000). Nevertheless, as long as critical
            disease processes can be assessed and described in a set of measurable variables, poor
            symptom perception in objectively defined diseases typically does not undermine the
            shared accuracy assumption, nor the implicit contract represented by the disease model.
            Medicine is focused on objective variables and is rarely interested in how, exactly, the expe-
            rience of symptoms comes about, nor in systematically assessing the relationship between
            the experience of symptoms and physiological dysfunction.
               The situation is more dramatic when symptoms are experienced in the absence of
            established physiological dysfunction after repeated medical examinations, leading to
            the conclusion that “nothing is wrong.” Symptoms of that type are often called psy-
            chosomatic symptoms, medically unexplained symptoms (MUS), and functional
            symptoms, and patterns of them are the core of functional somatic syndromes, bodily
            distress syndrome, somatization disorder, etc. (Creed et  al., 2010).1 In such cases,
            the implicit contract is fundamentally violated and all parties are in problems. For
            patients, it often leads to perseverative needs to justify a symptom as legitimate and
            to consult more and other doctors. For the physician, it leads to ever more clinical
            and laboratory investigations to find the physiological dysfunctions and/​or to exclude
            others. Eventually, it results in an erosion of trust in the relationship between patient
            and doctor and frustration on both sides which in turn has detrimental effects on the
            development and treatment of symptoms (Nettleton, 2006). For the healthcare system,
            an excessive use of technical facilities and of expert time, and an important financial
            burden for society ensues.
               Despite these important consequences for the prevailing disease model, MUS are
            highly prevalent. Research reports that 40−50% of all symptoms presented in primary
            care are not, or not sufficiently, explained by physiological dysfunction (Haller et al.,
            2015). About 23% of the patients in general practice consult with such symptoms (one
            year prevalence; Steinbrecher et al., 2011) and this prevalence amounts to one-​third to
            one-​half of the patients referred to outpatient clinics for further investigation (Nimnuan,
            Hotopf, & Wessely, 2001). Interestingly, the occurrence of MUS is more likely in persons
            reporting elevated negative affectivity (Watson & Pennebaker, 1989) and mood and anx-
            iety disorders (Wessely, Nimnuan, & Sharpe, 1999), and evidence shows that perceptual-​
            cognitive mechanisms play an important and, most likely, a causal role (Van den Bergh
            et  al., 2017a). The high prevalence of symptoms unrelated to observable physiological
            dysfunction constitutes a major theoretical, clinical, and socio-​economical challenge.



            	 Although the concept of MUS is plagued by empirical and (meta-​)theoretical problems reminding one
            1

              of Cartesianism, alternatives are not less problematic (Creed et al., 2010). We will therefore use MUS
              in this text for the sake of convenience.
 215




                                             Traditional views on medically unexplained symptoms          215


       11.3  Traditional views on medically unexplained
       symptoms
       Traditionally, the problem of how to understand symptoms that are poorly or unrelated
       to physiological dysfunction is typically addressed in two ways, both of which preserve
       the accuracy assumption. The first way assumes that the critical physiological dysfunc-
       tion causing the symptoms is not yet found. A large array of potential etiological and
       pathogenic mechanisms is being investigated, such as autonomic, neuro-​endocrine,
       inflammatory, infectious, and (auto-​)immune responses. In general, the conclusion
       reached by Rief and Barsky (2005) still holds that physiological abnormalities are often
       not found in association with diagnostic categories of such symptoms, and if some are
       found, the associations are not strong, are inconsistently found, and lack specificity.
       In addition, a major problem is the causal status of these associations. The absence
       of convincing evidence for a critical dysfunction in peripheral physiology prompts an
       increasing tendency in researchers to search for abnormalities in central mechanisms of
       interoceptive information processing as an explanation for the symptoms (e.g. central
       sensitization).
          The second way assumes that there are no distinct illness-​             related physiolog-
       ical dysfunctions but that bodily sensations associated with stress-​          related arousal
       are transformed into symptoms by psychological mechanisms. First, interoceptive
       hypervigilance is assumed to lower the perceptual threshold leading to perceiving bodily
       sensations. Second, negative interpretation biases toward perceived bodily sensations will
       result in illness-​related interpretations and attributions of these sensations (e.g. an erratic
       heartbeat may be interpreted as a sign of impending heart attack). The absence of a clear
       medical explanation may further enhance interoceptive hypervigilance, while personality
       and contextual factors may further prompt negative interpretations of sensations lacking
       a clear explanation. This results in a positive feedback loop, eventually leading to a wide
       range of symptoms and a seriously disabling condition. Variations of this model tilt the
       balance between the role of stress-​related bodily sensations on the one hand and of per-
       ceptual-​cognitive mechanisms on the other hand more toward one of these interacting
       factors. The bottom-​line, however, preserves the accuracy assumption, in that “the per-
       ception of physical symptoms is generally preceded by peripheral, physiological changes”
       (Kolk et al., 2003, p. 2344).
          A review of the evidence related to latter perspective on MUS is beyond the scope
       of this chapter, but a recent critical analysis of the research findings concluded that
       the overall evidence is unconvincing that symptoms unrelated to physiological dys-
       function “result from dysregulated peripheral (stress) physiology, hypervigilance for
       bodily sensations, heightened interoceptive accuracy, or misinterpretations of bodily
       sensations” (Van den Bergh et al., 2017a, p. 190; 2017b). Conversely, there is compel-
       ling experimental evidence that symptom experiences can be induced unrelated to
       physiological dysfunction. For example, in a series of conditioning studies creating
       experience-​  based expectations, we showed that repeated symptom inductions,
216




      216   Interoception, categorization, and symptom perception


            either through hypercapnia from breathing of CO2-​enriched air or through hypocapnia
            from voluntary hyperventilation in association with a harmless odor, results in elevated
            symptom reports upon presenting the harmless odor only (see Van den Bergh et al.,
            2017b, and Table 11.1 for an overview of findings). A vast literature provides strong ev-
            idence that also (social) context-​induced and instruction-​based expectations can cause
            bodily symptoms (Webster, Weinman, & Rubin, 2016; Petersen et al., 2014). These no-
            cebo effects show up as adverse side effects of placebo drugs or as symptoms attributed
            to modern technological triggers such as environmental chemicals, electromagnetic
            fields, windmills, and the like, for which there is no evidence that they are physiologi-
            cally harmful (Van den Bergh et al., 2017b).
               Nocebo effects violate the accuracy assumption and suggest that the idea that we first
            perceive a bodily sensation that is subsequently interpreted in a stepwise unidirectional
            bottom-​up process may not be the proper way to look at symptom perception. However,
            this raises the fundamental question of how we can experience symptoms in the ab-
            sence of distinct peripheral physiological dysfunction. We propose that symptoms un-
            related to bodily dysfunction are not just an aberrant phenomenon that is at odds with
            “normal” symptom perception in standard medical practice, but are critically revealing
            basic mechanisms of symptom perception in a similar way as visual illusions reveal basic
            functional characteristics of the visual system.


            Table 11.1  Differences in the definition of accuracy, bias, and error between traditional
            criterion approaches to validity of the perception of bodily sensations and Bayesian approaches
            emphasizing construct validity

                             Criterion validity                 Construct validity
            Aim of           Assessment of the world         Initiating adaptive behavior.
            perception       in close correspondence to
                             physiology or physical stimulus
                             magnitude.

            Bias             ◆	A lack    of correspondence      ◆	A directed   hypothesis that optimizes perception.
                                between perception and an       ◆	Rational if data is ambiguous.
                                external criterion.             ◆	Rational if two (or more) competing hypotheses
                             ◆	 Is irrational.                    are not equally likely (base rates) and if costs and
                                                                  benefits of misses and false alarms are not equal.
            Error            ◆	 Intra-​individualvariation in   ◆	 Intra-​individual
                                                                                   variation (IIV) in the perception
                                the perception of the same         of the same stimulus is a tool that helps to keep
                                stimulus is error variance.        generative models of the body in the world up
                             ◆	 Errors are mistakes.               to date.
                                                                ◆	 IIV that corresponds with stimulus ambiguity is
                                                                   information that helps to navigate in dynamic
                                                                   environments.
            Ways to          ◆	Avoidmistakes and                ◆	Creatingperceptual IIV (in response to
            optimize           minimize bias.                     ambiguity) to assess error feedback and to
            perception                                            produce an adaptive (rational) bias.
 217




                                                      Symptom perception as adaptive sense making        217


       11.4  Symptom perception as adaptive sense making
       Psychology and philosophy have identified different types of “truth” such as criterion
       versus construct validity (Cronbach & Meehl, 1955) or correspondence versus pragmatic
       accuracy (Kruglanski, 1989; Petersen, von Leupoldt, & Van den Bergh, 2015).

       11.4.1  Criterion    validity
       The accuracy assumption of symptom reports resembles criterion validity in test psy-
       chology:  it refers to the correspondence of a test value (e.g. a participant reporting
       moderate breathlessness on a scale) with an external criterion such as a physiological
       measurement (e.g. a lung function test). Taking a correspondence approach to the per-
       ception of bodily sensations, symptoms that seem to be disproportional or unrelated to
       the objective state of the body appear to be “wrong”. However, poor symptom percep-
       tion is not necessarily “wrong” in a pragmatic sense: criterion validity of symptoms can
       be low while the predictive validity of symptom reports for morbidity, mortality, or de-
       velopment of comorbidities can still be high. In respiratory and cardiovascular disease,
       for example, the perception of dyspnea is a better predictor of mortality than objective
       physiological measures (Nishimura et al., 2002). One reason for a high predictive va-
       lidity is that perceived symptoms rather than objective physiological impairment are
       related to avoidance of exercise, sedentary lifestyle, mood disorder, and further physio-
       logical deterioration (Prince et al., 2007). Thus, poor symptom perception can be valid in
       a pragmatic sense.

       11.4.2  Construct     validity
       Aristotle’s illusion is a tactile illusion that occurs when we close our eyes and cross two
       fingers while another person touches the space between the two fingertips with a cylin-
       drical object, for example, a pencil. Aristotle (384−322 BC) first described that in these
       circumstances we perceive that we touch two objects instead of one. In everyday life, si-
       multaneous stimulation of the left side of the index finger and the right side of the middle
       finger of the right hand nearly always involves two objects. Thus, the brain selects the most
       likely hypothesis, ignoring part of the sensory evidence. Aristotle’s illusion illustrates that
       perception is based as much on prior beliefs about the world and the body as it is based
       on sensory information. Conceptualizing perception of bodily sensations as a series of
       tests, construct validity is the degree to which a percept is consistent within a network of
       other percepts and useful for inferring its causes and consequences. From this perspec-
       tive, percepts need to make sense within a given context and enable adaptive behavior
       rather than to adhere to an objective truth (Petersen, von Leupoldt, & Van den Bergh,
       2015b; Seth, Suzuki, & Critchley, 2011). Internal consistency is therefore more relevant
       for the brain than (unattainable) criterion accuracy (e.g. Kruglanski, 1989; Petersen et al.,
       2015b) and an external criterion is not necessary for this type of validation.
          The latter conclusion is also exemplified in a recent (meta)theoretical account of brain
       functioning, known as predictive coding (Friston, 2005; Hohwy, 2012). This account
218




      218   Interoception, categorization, and symptom perception


            starts from the observation that the brain has no direct access to the (outside or inside)
            world and that it only has its own neural activity to make sense of, or in other words, to
            make a model of the world that is useful and adaptive. A major task of the brain is then
            (a) to find statistical regularities in stimulation, (b) to formulate hypotheses about causes
            and consequences of stimulation, and (c) to integrate error feedback to increase preci-
            sion of inferences. For symptom perception, the brain has to come up with a model that
            represents the internal state with reference to a normative versus non-​normative state (e.g.
            from unwell to illness) and settle on a particular illness-​related category that accounts for
            most of the information that is generated by somatic input. This perspective considers
            symptom perception as somatic decision-​making, replacing the notion of (accurately)
            perceiving an absolute reality with an idea of perception as the creation of categorical
            meaning. From a predictive coding perspective, this is done in a Bayesian way; that is,
            taking benefit from previous experience as it is represented in the brain as an estimate
            of the likelihood that a specific illness category applies. Predictive coding approaches
            (Friston, 2005)  also emphasize the importance of action for perception, implying that
            somatic decision-​making is based on the active sampling of evidence via physiological
            activation and behavior. The relevance of behavior for perception underlines the impor-
            tance of perception being adequate for a specific context rather than perception having
            some context-​independent truth.


            11.5  Symptom perception as categorical decision-​making
            Teachers of Bayesian statistics often use a simple example to explain Bayesian decision-​
            making and learning: an experimenter draws poker chips from a bag one by one. Initially,
            the observers only know that these items can be one of two colours; for example, red or
            blue. The task of the observers is to guess the percentage of red items. At the start, the
            observers have no prior knowledge and formulate a random starting point. After each
            guess, another item is drawn from the bag resulting in accumulating observations that
            allow observers to update their cognitive representation of the unknown contents. A hy-
            pothesis based on robust and consistent evidence will act as a precise prior, creating a
            strong expectation of what is going to happen.
               Modelling the perception of bodily sensations along this example, the body is a highly
            complex bag and the sensory information forwarded to the brain is like poker chips
            characterized by an infinite number of subtle variations, possibly having ambiguous
            meaning, or gaining meaning only when present together with other chips. As the brain
            draws samples of sensory input, initially random hypotheses become more reliable or pre-
            cise as evidence is collected. Reliability expectations (precision) are weighing factors that
            play an important role in determining the relative impact of priors and sensory evidence
            on the eventual model. The process of evidence sampling, error detection, and updating
            of hypotheses is hierarchically organized in the brain and involves a bi-​directional flow
            of information with increasing abstraction at higher levels of the hierarchy (Barrett &
            Simmons, 2015). Importantly, this process of hypothesis testing and updating is a fast,
 219




                                             Symptom perception as categorical decision-making         219


       automatic, and unconscious inferential process that eventually promotes a categorical
       meaning with the maximum expected utility or likelihood. For example, the abstracted
       representation in the brain of (seeing) a chair acts as a categorical prior that allows us to
       see a new chair as a chair, automatically and compellingly, despite the huge variety of sen-
       sory stimuli that possibly can represent a chair. This implies that an inferential process is
       used to arrive at this specific meaningful percept (Geisler & Kersten, 2002).
          Illness-​related bodily sensations often have no clear onset or offset, are systemic (i.e.
       have multiple afferent sources), are unspecific regarding their cause, and are embedded
       in constant background noise (Petersen et al., 2011). Thus, the brain needs to generalize
       and apply rules established in prior experiences to create categorical meaning out of am-
       biguous, incomplete, and inconsistent information. These prior experiences act as a bias
       (or directed hypothesis) representing the likelihoods of competing causal explanations,
       for example, whether it is more likely that somatic input from an erratic heart rate is ex-
       perienced as a panic attack or as cardiac failure.
          Optimal decision-​making requires a perceptual system that finds a balance between
       sensitivity for stimulation and the use of bias (Hahn & Harris, 2014). A perfectly sen-
       sitive system that responds to every single variation in stimulation would be unable to
       generalize and to learn from prior experience (Shepard, 1987), while a completely biased
       perceptual system would be oblivious to or unaffected by sensory information, and hold
       on to a priori beliefs about the state of the body without processing error feedback. So,
       optimal decisions take into account the likelihoods of competing hypotheses (base rates)
       and costs and benefits that arise from following one interpretation instead of another
       that have been established in prior, similar sensory events. The majority of perceptual
       “mistakes” and biases are rational and useful (e.g. Lynn & Barrett, 2014). Mathematical
       models suggest that the best perceptual performance will be obtained by a learner who
       has “a bias suitable to the problem at hand” (Hahn & Harris, 2014, p. 62). Table 11.1 lists
       the differences in perspective on accuracy and bias between a model based on the ac-
       curacy or correspondence assumption and the view on how the brain “makes sense” of
       interoceptive stimulation to enhance usefulness and adaptivity (for more background see
       Lynn & Barret, 2014; Hahn & Harris, 2014).
          The overwhelming majority of studies on interoception take a correspondence
       approach to accuracy and correlate objective stimulation with self-​reported perception
       (e.g. heartbeat tracking tasks, Domschke et al., 2010). Studies that test somatic decision-​
       making are less common. However, the benefit of having categorical expectations as a
       directed hypothesis is that it reduces the amount of evidence that needs to be processed
       before a decision is made, suggesting that priming categories to perceive the internal state
       changes the way in which somatic information is processed. This is shown in a study with
       (healthy) persons scoring high or low on symptom reporting in daily life in which we
       calculated the within-​subject correlation between respiratory changes induced by inhala-
       tion of CO2-​enriched air and moment-​by-​moment self-​reports thereof. In one condition,
       participants rated sensations using a neutral category (faster/​deeper breathing), whereas
       in another condition they used a symptom category (breathlessness). The within-​subject
20




     220   Interoception, categorization, and symptom perception


           correlation was equal for both groups when using a neutral category, but dropped signifi-
           cantly for the symptom category, but only in the high symptom reporting group (Bogaerts
           et al., 2008). In other studies, we used the Interoceptive Classification Task (Petersen et
           al., 2014). This task implies collecting ratings of inspiratory resistances that differed in
           magnitude by a constant factor. Presenting them in two different categories, A  and B,
           compared to presenting them in one single category changed the intensity perception,
           affective ratings, and breathing behavior in the same way:  differences within category
           diminished, whereas differences between categories increased. These examples show that
           (priming) categorical priors changes the impact of peripheral somatic input in a rather
           pervasive way and fits with the assumption that the experience of a symptom reflects the
           generative model of the state of the body that results from a continuous hierarchical in-
           terplay between prior hypotheses and sensory evidence, and their associated reliabilities
           (precision). Because precision expectations are context-​dependent, it means that the re-
           lationship between experienced symptoms and input from physiological dysfunction is
           variable within and between persons and contexts. The conditions determining the rel-
           ative impact of priors versus sensory evidence are extensively described elsewhere (Van
           den Bergh et al., 2017a).


           11.6  Another look at medically unexplained symptoms
           The above perspective underlies recent predictive coding models of nociception (Büchel
           et al., 2014) and MUS (Edwards et al., 2012; Van den Bergh et al., 2017a). These models
           suggest that the experience of a symptom is the result of an automatic inferential process
           across several hierarchical levels in which the brain interprets interoceptive sensations,
           informed by “predictions” (priors) about the cause of the sensations. The resulting pre-
           diction errors are propagated through the system in an error minimization process, even-
           tually leading to a posterior model representing the conscious experience of a symptom.
           Both priors and prediction errors should be conceptualized as neural distributions with a
           variance (statistical confidence) or its inverse, precision, representing the reliability of the
           prior and prediction errors. Because more reliable distributions are given more weight,
           the experienced symptom may be more determined by prior expectations or by somatic
           prediction errors depending on their relative precision. Contextual cues, characteristics
           of the person, and their interactions may further influence the relative precisions and,
           consequently, the balance between priors and prediction errors in the eventual symptom
           experience, such as attention, affective states, memory processes, and personality traits.
           This perspective allows us to understand that the relationship between peripheral phys-
           iological dysfunction and the conscious experience of symptoms may vary between and
           within persons.
              The categorical experience of a symptom can thus be seen as a posterior model of the
           state of the body, but it will also act as a categorical prior with a specific likelihood to apply
           in a given context, generating automatic feedforward hypotheses to represent the state of
           the body. If priors are regularly updated in the light of new evidence, being biased will
 21




                                                 Another look at medically unexplained symptoms           221


      lead to better decisions. However, somatic decision-​making may become maladaptive if
      the assessment of base rates and costs and benefits is unrealistic because error feedback
      is not constantly incorporated in generative models. Several phenomena may interfere
      with optimization of perception by error feedback, such as the inertia effect (Peterson
      & Miller, 1965), confirmation bias (Nickerson, 1998), or the inferential leap effect (Van
      den Bergh et al., 2017a). A person can, for example, show inertia in updating perceptual
      hypotheses and avoid distress caused by ambiguity (Proulx, Inzlicht, & Harmon-​Jones,
      2012), or jump to conclusions that a symptom is present or absent without sufficiently
      detailed sensory-​perceptual processing (Petersen et al., 2015a, b). According to Hahn and
      Harris (2014), the common causes for these maladaptive biases are misperceiving the
      diagnostic value of new evidence and underestimating variability in existing evidence.
         In general, we propose that MUS arise when prediction errors from somatic input
      have low precision. This may occur when input is little intense, more widespread
      (systemic), and characterized by poor on/​off boundaries, when a little detailed sam-
      pling strategy is used, or when sensitivity at the level of interoceptive signaling is
      reduced. In those conditions, a highly precise prior as resulting from contextual
      or learning factors will shift the experience of a symptom more toward the prior
      and make it less determined by somatic input (see Van den Bergh et  al., 2017a).
      MUS can therefore be conceived as instances at the extreme end of the continuum
      representing the relationship between experienced symptoms and peripheral physi-
      ological dysfunction.
         In order to understand the mechanism more clearly, it may be interesting to look at
      how risk factors may contribute to such symptoms. For example, a well-​known vulner-
      ability factor in the development of such symptoms is high trait negative affectivity. This
      trait is associated with an overreactive evaluative system and less efficient inhibitory sys-
      tems to counteract negative affect (Hariri, 2009). Because somatic input generates both
      a sensory-​perceptual and an affective-​motivational aspect that are intuitively integrated
      into a unified symptom experience, enhanced affective responding to somatic stimulation
      may contribute to more elevated symptom reports found in this group (Van den Bergh &
      Walentynowicz, 2016).
         However, enhanced affective-​motivational responding may occur at the expense of detailed
      sensory-​perceptual processing, resulting in augmented but imprecise prediction errors that
      largely overlap with prediction errors representing an emotional state (see Van den Bergh
      et al., 2017a, p. 196, for further elaboration). Reduced detail in sensory-​perceptual processing
      of somatic input is suggested by a number of findings. First, in persons with high negative
      affect, with elevated habitual symptom reports, and in patients with somatoform disorders,
      self-​reported symptoms are less strongly related with induced physiological changes, espe-
      cially when put in a negative affective context (Bogaerts et al., 2008, 2010). Second, these
      persons, unlike healthy controls, do not exhibit a peak-​end memory bias after an experimen-
      tally induced somatic episode despite identical physiological responses (Bogaerts et al., 2012;
      Walentynowicz et al., 2015). Apparently, patients’ retrospective memory of the symptom
      episode is minimally affected by the actual sensory-​perceptual changes during that somatic
2




    222   Interoception, categorization, and symptom perception


          episode. Third, patients with somatoform disorder exhibit reduced health-​related autobio-
          graphical memory specificity, suggesting that they process and encode sensory-​perceptual
          aspects of symptom episodes in a broad-​brush manner (Walentynowicz et al., 2017).
             If somatic prediction errors are imprecise and largely overlapping with affective pre-
          diction errors, priors prompted by negative emotions and health concerns may easily
          come to dominate the posterior model of the somatic state. This is shown in studies that
          simply induce a negative affective state through picture viewing followed by a symptom
          questionnaire to assess somatic state: elevated symptom reports emerge in these persons,
          independent of physiological arousal during picture viewing and regardless whether the
          pictures are health-​related or not (Constantinou et al., 2013). Interestingly, this symptom
          induction effect is particularly strong in persons who have difficulties in identifying
          feelings and tend to become absorbed in experiences (Bogaerts et al., 2015). The overall
          pattern of results suggests that offering a strong symptom-​related prior while inducing
          a negative affective state prompts a symptom experience, because somatic input from
          affective states is insufficiently distinguished by these individuals from input produced by
          physiological dysfunction (see Van den Bergh et al., 2017a, for an elaboration on other
          risk factors).
             Predictive coding approaches (Friston, 2005) also emphasize the role of active inference
          in the process of error minimization. In persons with symptoms unrelated to physiological
          dysfunction, this is evidenced by chronic scanning of their bodies for the signs of illness
          that are consistent with pre-​existing illness beliefs. If there is little differentiation between
          somatic and affective prediction errors, chronic activation of illness-​related priors and its
          associated scanning process will easily lead to confirming its own predictions, creating a
          vicious circle. Recent theorizing (Seth & Friston, 2016, p. 2) takes the idea of interocep-
          tive inference one step further by assuming that “generative models of interoceptive sig-
          nals should be geared toward control or regulation of physiological variables, rather than
          toward accurate representation of some extracranial state-​of-​affairs.” In other words, it
          is assumed that interoceptive predictions about homeostatic setpoints and goal-​directed
          allostatic behavior generate autonomic and other physiological responses to minimize
          prediction errors as a way of adaptive regulation. It is not clear, however, whether the
          latter kind of interoceptive inference contributes to symptoms unrelated to physiological
          dysfunction.

          11.7 Conclusion
          Bayesian approaches underlying a predictive coding model of the brain are promising in
          bridging the gap between epistemology and mechanistic common sense approaches by
          eliminating the idea of a homunculus in the mind (that does the perceiving) and replacing
          it with statistical processes of predictions based on likelihood estimation. These models
          discard the notion of error as mistake (i.e. as lack of correlation between percept and cri-
          terion), and instead attribute to error and bias the role of driving forces in maintaining
          adaptive perception and behavior (Hohwy, 2012).
 23




                                                                                                References   223


         This perspective fundamentally challenges the accuracy assumption underlying the tra-
      ditional disease model and advocates a rather radical view by stating that peripheral phys-
      iological dysfunction is neither necessary nor sufficient for symptoms to be experienced.
      It implies that at the process level there is no categorical difference between symptoms
      closely related to physiological dysfunction and those that are not, and that all symptoms
      are characterized by an equally compelling experience of being “real” or “true” regardless
      whether there is a strong, weak, or absent relationship with peripheral dysfunction. It
      further accommodates empirical evidence that this relationship is variable both between
      and within persons, depending on both the precision of the sensory input and of prior
      expectations. It also recognizes that contextual variables and the person’s learning history
      modulates this relationship.
         Patients reporting symptoms unrelated to physiological dysfunction are considered to
      apply a useful, that is, rational bias. Therefore, instead of branding some patients as “poor”
      perceivers, or even malingering, or to label their symptoms as “unfounded,” it is more
      useful to understand when and under which conditions it is the most rational choice of
      the brain to perceive a symptom to be present. This perspective may eliminate the need in
      these patients for exhausting and futile attempts to prove the validity of their symptoms
      as following from a perspective that takes accuracy as the validity criterion. In addition,
      further analysis of the underlying mechanisms of symptoms unrelated to physiological
      dysfunction may suggest therapeutic interventions. Conscious awareness of processes un-
      derlying perceptual inferences, however, is highly limited and replacing maladaptive per-
      ceptual biases that may have been established by the brain over years is a challenge. One
      way to go, as suggested earlier by the analysis of the role of negative affectivity for symptoms
      unrelated to physiological dysfunction, is “interoceptive differentiation training” (Van den
      Bergh et al., 2017a). This could help the individual to process sensory-​perceptual aspects
      of the somatic input more closely and to differentiate them from affective sensations, and
      might be a promising way to treat patients with symptoms violating the traditional disease
      model. However, given the relative nature of perception of the body as somatic decision-​
      making, a closer correspondence between a physiological criterion and perception cannot
      be the primary goal in such treatment. Rather, the goal should be to establish more adapt­
      ive biases in the perception of the body. While in some cases this might result in a higher
      criterion validity, the rationale behind these two approaches is fundamentally different.

      References
      Agusti, A., Calverley, P. M., Celli, B., Coxson, H. O., Edwards, L. D., Lomas, D. A., et al. (2010).
         Characterisation of COPD heterogeneity in the ECLIPSE cohort. Respiratory Research, 11(1), 122.
         doi:10.1186/​1465-​9921-​11-​122.
      Banzett, R. B., Dempsey, J. A., O’Donnell, D. E., and Wamboldt, M. Z. (2000). Symptom perception
         and respiratory sensation in asthma. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine,
         162(3), 1178–​82. doi:10.1164/​ajrccm.162.3.9909112.
      Barrett, L. F., and Simmons, W. K. (2015) Interoceptive predictions in the brain. Nature Reviews
         Neurosciences, 16(7), 419–29. doi:10.1038/​nrn3950.
24




     224   Interoception, categorization, and symptom perception


           Barsky, A. J. (2001). Palpitations, arrhythmias, and awareness of cardiac activity. Annals of Internal
               Medicine, 134(9 Pt 2), 832–​37. doi:10.7326/0003-4819-134-9_Part_2-200105011-00006.
           Bogaerts, K., Millen, A., Li, W., De Peuter, S., Van Diest, I., Vlemincx, E., et al. (2008). High symptom
               reporters are less interoceptively accurate in a symptom-​related context. Journal of Psychosomatic
               Research, 65(5), 417–​24. doi:10.1016/​j.jpsychores.2008.03.019.
           Bogaerts, K., Van Eylen, L., Wan, L., Bresseleers, J., Van Diest, I., Stans, L., et al. (2010). Distorted
               symptom perception in patients with medically unexplained symptoms. Journal of Abnormal
               Psychology, 119(1), 226–​34. doi:10.1037/​a0017780.
           Bogaerts, K., Wan, L., Van Diest, I., Stans, L., Decramer, M., and Van den Bergh, O. (2012). Peak-​
               end memory bias in laboratory-​induced dyspnea: A comparison of patients with medically
               unexplained symptoms and healthy controls. Psychosomatic Medicine, 74(9), 974–​81. doi:10.1097/​
               PSY.0b013e318273099c.
           Bogaerts, K., Rayen, L., Lavrysen, A., Van Diest, I., Janssens, T., Schruers, K., et al. (2015). Unraveling
               the relationship between trait negative affectivity and habitual symptom reporting. PLoS One, 10(1),
               e0115748. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0115748.
           Büchel, C., Geuter, S., Sprenger, C., and Eippert, F. (2014). Placebo analgesia: A predictive coding
               perspective. Neuron, 81(6), 1223–​39. doi:10.1016/​j.neuron.2014.02.042.
           Ceunen, E., Vlaeyen, J. W., and Van Diest, I. (2016). On the origin of interoception. Frontiers in
               Psychology, 7, 743. doi:10.3389/​fpsyg.2016.00743.
           Constantinou, E., Bogaerts, K., Van Diest, I., and Van den Bergh, O. (2013). Inducing symptoms
               in high symptom reporters via emotional pictures: The interactive effects of valence and arousal.
               Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 74(3), 191–​6. doi:10.1016/​j.jpsychores.2012.12.015.
           Creed, F., Guthrie, E., Fink, P., Henningsen, P., Rief, W., Sharpe, M., et al. (2010). Is there a better
               term than “medically unexplained symptoms”? Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 68(1), 5–​8.
               doi:10.1016/​j.jpsychores.2009.09.004.
           Cronbach, L. J., and Meehl, P. E. (1955). Construct validity in psychological tests. Psychological Bulletin,
               52(4), 281–302. doi:10.1037/h0040957.
           Craig, A. D. (2004). Human feelings: Why are some more aware than others? Trends in Cognitive
               Sciences, 8(6), 239–​41. doi:10.1016/​j.tics.2004.04.004.
           Domschke, K., Stevens, S., Pfleiderer, B., and Gerlach, A. L. (2010). Interoceptive sensitivity in
               anxiety and anxiety disorders: An overview and integration of neurobiological findings. Clinical
               Psychological Review, 30(1), 1–​11. doi.org/​10.1016/​j.cpr.2009.08.008.
           Dworkin, B. R. (2000). Interoception. In: Cacioppo, J. T., Tassinary, L. G., and Berntson, G. G. (Eds.),
               Handbook of Psychophysiology (2nd ed.) (pp. 482–506). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
           Edwards, M. J., Adams, R. A., Brown, H., Pareés, I., and Friston, K. J. (2012). A Bayesian account of
               “hysteria”. Brain, 135(11), 3495–​512. doi.org/​10.1093/​brain/​aws129.
           Frankum, S., and Ogden, J. (2005). Estimation of blood glucose levels by people with diabetes: A cross-​
               sectional study. British Journal of General Practice, 55(521),  944–​8.
           Friston, K. (2005). A theory of cortical responses. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B,
               360(1456), 815–​36. doi:10.1098/​rstb.2005.1622.
           Garfinkel, S. N., Seth, A. K., Barrett, A. B., Suzuki, K., and Critchley, H. D. (2015). Knowing your own
               heart: Distinguishing interoceptive accuracy from interoceptive awareness. Biological Psychology,
               104, 65–​74. doi:10.1016/​j.biopsycho.2014.11.004.
           Geisler, W. S., and Kersten, D. (2002). Illusions, perception and Bayes. Nature Neurosciences, 5(6),
               508–​10. doi:10.1038/nn0602-508.
           Hahn, U., and Harris, A. J. (2014). What does it mean to be biased: Motivated reasoning and rationality.
               Psychology of Learning and Motivation, 61, 41–​102. doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-800283-4.00002-2.
 25




                                                                                                     References      225


      Haller, H., Cramer, H., Lauche, R., and Dobos, G. (2015). Somatoform disorders and medically
         unexplained symptoms in primary care. Deutsches Ärzteblatt International, 112(16), 279–​87.
         doi:10.3238/​arztebl.2015.0279.
      Hariri, A. R. (2009). The neurobiology of individual differences in complex behavioral traits. Annual
         Review of Neurosciences, 32, 225–​47. doi:10.1146/​annurev.neuro.051508.135335.
      Hohwy, J. (2012). Attention and conscious perception in the hypothesis testing brain. Frontiers in
         Psychology, 3, 96. doi:10.3389/​fpsyg.2012.00096.
      Janssens, T., Verleden, G., De Peuter, S., Van Diest, I., and Van den Bergh, O. (2009). Inaccurate
         perception of asthma symptoms: A cognitive–​affective framework and implications for asthma
         treatment. Clinical Psychological Review, 29(4), 317–​27. doi:10.1016/​j.cpr.2009.02.006.
      Kruglanski, A. W. (1989). The psychology of being “right”: The problem of accuracy in social
         perception and cognition. Psychological Bulletin, 106(3), 395–​409. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.106.3.395.
      Kolk, A. M., Hanewald, G. J., Schagen, S., and van Wijk, C. M. G. (2003). A symptom perception
         approach to common physical symptoms. Social Sciences & Medicine, 57(12), 2343–​54. doi:10.1016/​
         S0277-​9536(02)00451-​3.
      Leder, D. (1990). The Absent Body. Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press.
      Lynn, S. K. and Barrett, L. F. (2014). “Utilizing” signal detection theory. Psychological Science, 25(9),
         1663–​73. doi:10.1177/​0956797614541991.
      Moseley, G. L., Gallace, A., and Spence, C. (2012). Bodily illusions in health and disease: Physiological
         and clinical perspectives and the concept of a cortical “body matrix”. Neurosciences & Biobehavioral
         Reviews, 36(1), 34–​46. doi:10.1016/​j.neubiorev.2011.03.013.
      Müllerová, H., Lu, C., Li, H., and Tabberer, M. (2014). Prevalence and burden of breathlessness in
         patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease managed in primary care. PloS One, 9(1),
         e85540. doi:​10.1371/​journal.pone.0085540.
      Nettleton, S. (2006). “I just want permission to be ill”: Towards a sociology of medically unexplained
         symptoms. Social Sciences and Medicine, 62(5), 1167–​78. doi:​10.1016/​j.socscimed.2005.07.030.
      Nickerson, R. S. (1998). Confirmation bias: A ubiquitous phenomenon in many guises. Review of
         General Psychology, 2(2), 175–220. doi:10.1037/1089-2680.2.2.175.
      Nishimura, K., Izumi, T., Tsukino, M., and Oga, T. (2002). Dyspnea is a better predictor of 5-​year
         survival than airway obstruction in patients with COPD. Chest, 121(5), 1434–​40. doi:10.1378/​
         chest.121.5.1434.
      Nimnuan, C., Hotopf, M., and Wessely, S. (2001). Medically unexplained symptoms: An
         epidemiological study in seven specialities. Journal Psychosomatic Research, 51(1), 361–​7.
         doi:10.1016/​S0022-​3999(01)00223-​9.
      Parshall, M. B., Schwartzstein, R. M., Adams, L., Banzett, R. B., Manning, H. L., Bourbeau, J., et al.
         (2012). An official American Thoracic Society statement: Update on the mechanisms, assessment,
         and management of dyspnea. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 185(4),
         435–​52. doi:10.1164/​rccm.201111-​2042ST.
      Petersen, S., van den Berg, R., Janssens, T., and Van den Bergh, O. (2011). Illness and symptom
         perception: A theoretical approach towards an integrative measurement model. Clinical
         Psychological Review, 31(3), 428–​39. doi:10.1016/​j.cpr.2010.11.002.
      Petersen, G. L., Finnerup, N. B., Colloca, L., Amanzio, M., Price, D. D., Jensen, T. S., et al. (2014).
         The magnitude of nocebo effects in pain: A meta-​analysis. Pain, 155(8), 1426–​34. doi:​10.1016/​
         j.pain.2014.04.016.
      Petersen, S., Schroijen, M., Mölders, C., Zenker, S., and Van den Bergh, O. (2014). Categorical
         interoception: Perceptual organization of sensations from inside. Psychological Science, 25(5), 1059–​66.
         doi:10.1177/​0956797613519110.
26




     226   Interoception, categorization, and symptom perception


           Petersen, S., Van Staeyen, K., Vögele, C., von Leupoldt, A., and Van den Bergh, O. (2015a).
               Interoception and symptom reporting: Disentangling accuracy and bias. Frontiers in Psychology,
               6(732). doi:10.3389/​fpsyg.2015.00732.
           Petersen, S., Von Leupoldt, A., and Van den Bergh, O. (2015b). Interoception and the uneasiness of the
               mind: Affect as perceptual style. Frontiers in Psychology, 6(1408). doi:10.3389/​fpsyg.2015.01408.
           Peterson, C., and Miller, A. (1965). Sensitivity of subjective probability revision. Journal of Experimental
               Psychology, 70(1), 117–​21. doi:10.1037/h0022023.
           Price, D. D., Riley, J. L., and Wade, J. B. (2001). Psychophysical approaches to measurement of
               the dimensions and stages of pain. In: D. C. Turk and R. Melzack (Eds.), Handbook of Pain
               Assessment (2nd ed.) (pp. 53–75). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
           Prince, M., Patel, V., Saxena, S., Maj, M., Maselko, J., Phillips, M. R., et al. (2007). No health without
               mental health. Lancet, 370(9590), 859–​77. doi:​10.1016/​S0140-​6736(07)61238-​0.
           Proulx, T., Inzlicht, M., and Harmon-​Jones, E. (2012). Understanding all inconsistency compensation
               as a palliative response to violated expectations. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 16(5), 285–​91. doi:​
               10.1016/​j.tics.2012.04.002.
           Rief, W., and Barsky, A. J. (2005). Psychobiological perspectives on somatoform disorders.
               Psychoneuroendocrinology, 30(10), 996–​1002. doi:​10.1016/​j.psyneuen.2005.03.018.
           Seth, A. K., Suzuki, K., and Critchley, H. D. (2011). An interoceptive predictive coding model of
               conscious presence. Frontiers in Psychology, 2(395). doi:10.3389/​fpsyg.2011.00395.
           Seth, A. K., and Friston, K. J. (2016). Active interoceptive inference and the emotional brain.
               Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 371(1708), 20160007. doi:10.1098/​rstb.2016.0007.
           Shepard, R. N. (1987). Toward a universal law of generalization for psychological science. Science,
               237(4820), 1317–​23. doi:10.1126/science.3629243.
           Steinbrecher, N., Koerber, S., Frieser, D., and Hiller, W. (2011). The prevalence of medically
               unexplained symptoms in primary care. Psychosomatics, 52(3), 263–​71. doi:​10.1016/​
               j.psym.2011.01.007.
           Van den Bergh, O., Bogaerts, K., and Van Diest, I. (2015). Symptom perception, awareness and
               interpretation. In: Wright, J. D. (Ed.), International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences
               (2nd ed.) (pp. 866–72). Oxford: Elsevier.
           Van den Bergh, O., and Walentynowicz, M. (2016). Accuracy and bias in retrospective symptom
               reporting. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 29(5),  302–​8. doi:10.1097/YCO.0000000000000267.
           Van den Bergh, O., Witthöft, M., Petersen, S., and Brown, R. W. (2017a). Symptoms and the
               body: Taking the inferential leap. Neurosciences & Biobehavioral Reviews, 74(Pt A), 185–​203.
               doi:10.1016/​j.neubiorev.2017.01.015.
           Van den Bergh, O., Brown, R. J., Petersen, S., and Witthöft, M. (2017b). Idiopathic environmental
               illnesses: A comprehensive model. Clinical Psychological Science, 5(3), 551–​67. doi:10.1177/​
               2167702617693327.
           Walentynowicz, M., Bogaerts, K., Van Diest, I., Raes, F., and Van den Bergh, O. (2015). Was it so bad?
               The role of retrospective memory in symptom overreporting. Health Psychology, 34(12), 1166–
               74. doi:​10.1037/​hea0000222.
           Walentynowicz, M., Raes, F., Van Diest, I., and Van den Bergh, O. (2017). The specificity of health-​
               related autobiographical memories in patients with somatic symptom disorder. Psychosomatic
               Medicine, 79(1), 43–​9. doi:10.1097/​PSY.0000000000000357.
           Watson, D., and Pennebaker, J. W. (1989). Health complaints, stress, and distress: Exploring the central
               role of negative affectivity. Psychological Review, 96(2), 234. doi:10.1037//0033-295X.96.2.234.
           Webster, R.K., Weinman, J., and Rubin, G. J. (2016). A systematic review of factors that contribute to
               nocebo effects. Health Psychology, 35(12), 1334–​55. doi:​10.1037/​hea0000416.
           Wessely, S., Nimnuan, C., and Sharpe, M. (1999). Functional somatic syndromes: One or many? Lancet,
               354(9182), 936–​9. doi:​10.1016/​S0140-​6736(98)08320-​2.
 27




                 Chapter 12

                 Interoceptive appraisal and
                 mental health
                 Norman A. S. Farb and Kyle Logie



      12.1 Introduction
      Interoception is the sense of the internal state of the body (Craig, 2002). This sense is
      informed by the reception, representation, and appraisal of ascending autonomic signals
      that indicate changes in physiological arousal (Farb et  al., 2015). Interoceptive signals
      play a vital role in homeostasis via the autonomic nervous system (Craig, 2003), and it is
      assumed that most of these signals do not reach conscious awareness. However, salient
      interoceptive signals seem to support the conscious experience of an embodied self (Seth
      & Friston, 2016) and influence cognition, feelings, and behavior (Critchley & Garfinkel,
      2017; Katkin, Wiens, & Öhman, 2001; Dunn et al., 2012).
         Awareness across sensory modalities is often discussed in terms of crossing a threshold,
      wherein stimulus perception requires a certain intensity to trigger conscious representa-
      tion (Rouder & Morey, 2009). In interoception, such representation occurs in the form of
      subjective feeling states such as pain, itch, hunger, and thirst (Craig, 2002; Craig, 2003).
      These feeling states are described as “homeostatic emotions” (Craig, 2003; Strigo & Craig,
      2016), which most likely evolved as a survival mechanism to allow for behavioral regu-
      lation to correct for physiological imbalances (Damasio & Carvalho, 2013). In addition
      to these feeling states, subjective experience of interoceptive signals can be appraised as
      a more generalized state of physiological arousal. This subjective experience of arousal
      is well documented as playing an important role in emotional experience (Schachter &
      Singer, 1962), such as feelings of attraction towards romantic partners (White, Fishbein, &
      Rutsein, 1981) and other aspects of cognition such as speed in decision-​making (Hackley
      & Valle-​Inclán, 1999).
         As Leder discusses in Chapter 17 in the present volume, one feature of interoceptive ex-
      perience is that particular interoceptive signals are often diffuse and difficult to differen-
      tiate from the integrated whole that characterizes our embodied experience in the world,
      yet despite the ambiguity of myriad competing signals, interoception often manifests
      within consciousness as a subjective gestalt. Changes in physiology can therefore con-
      tribute to interoceptive experience without being directly and distinctly perceived.
      Interoceptive appraisal is the process of integrating these diffuse physiological changes
      into a coherent feeling state.
28




     228   Interoceptive appraisal and mental health


              We define interoceptive appraisal as the process of making sense of consciously detected
           physiological change, regardless of whether there is awareness of the appraisal process
           itself. We suggest that conscious detection of physiological change provokes interocep-
           tive appraisal, whereas physiological change without awareness provides no basis for ap-
           praisal. We readily acknowledge that physiological change can influence cognition and
           behavior following implicit or unconscious pathways. However, unconscious responses to
           physiological change are not interoceptive appraisals because they do not, by definition,
           integrate physiological changes into subjective feeling states. Interoceptive appraisals de-
           termine the impact that physiological changes have on our sense of self, even if we are not
           always aware of how such integration occurs.
              If interoceptive appraisal is provoked by awareness of physiological change, the ability
           to detect interoceptive change influences when appraisals are made. Interoceptive accu-
           racy, the ability to reliably detect interoceptive signals, varies across individuals, and is
           often measured by evaluating accuracy in tasks involving heartbeat detection (Critchley
           et  al., 2004; Ainley & Tsakiris, 2013)  or perception of respiratory resistance (Harver,
           Katkin, & Bloch, 1993; Davenport & Kifle, 2001). To operationalize these terms, Garfinkel,
           Seth, Barrett, and colleagues (2015) define interoceptive awareness as the correlation be-
           tween accuracy—​objective performance on an interoceptive task, and sensibility—​self-​
           evaluated confidence ratings of task performance. However, interoceptive accuracy and
           sensibility are dissociable and only weakly correlated in the general population (Garfinkel
           et al., 2015), suggesting that appraisals of interoceptive change can vary independently
           from objectively observable physiological changes. Thus, while interoceptive appraisal is
           provoked by the detection of interoceptive signals, interoceptive signals need not be accu-
           rate representations of the body to provoke appraisal. Given this independence between
           interoceptive accuracy and appraisal, it is appraisal that is therefore most consistently de-
           terminant of subjective well-​being, while interoceptive accuracy determines the extent to
           which such appraisals are provoked by real physiological changes.
              Research supports the idea that appraisal tendency is a central determinant of well-​
           being. Greater accuracy of heartbeat detection has been associated with greater reactivity
           to emotionally provocative stimuli but it does not determine the affective tone of such
           reactivity (Barrett, et al., 2004; Herbert, Pollatos et al., 2007). Indeed, emotional reactivity
           is agnostic with respect to well-​being, an ambiguity clarified only through interoceptive
           appraisal. For example, an accurately perceived stirring in one’s chest could just as easily
           be appraised as excitement or anxiety, depending on one’s appraisal tendencies. When
           low interoceptive accuracy interacts with strong interoceptive appraisal biases, it provides
           a framework for unfettered appraisal, which in turn can predict a variety of pathological
           symptoms and behaviors (Khalsa & Lapidus, 2016).
              Supporting the relevance of interoceptive appraisal for well-​being, dysfunctional inter-
           oceptive appraisal habits have been associated with a growing number of mental health
           disorders, including anxiety (Paulus & Stein, 2006), depression (Barrett, Quigley, &
           Hamilton, 2016), autism (Silani et al., 2008), and eating disorders (Merwin et al., 2010).
           It is important to note that these disorders are more often associated with abnormal
 29




                                                               An emerging neurobiological model         229


      appraisal habits rather than impaired interoceptive accuracy. As a canonical example,
      anxiety disorders are associated with superior levels of interoceptive accuracy, but ac-
      curate identification of physiological change often gives rise to anxious or catastrophic
      appraisals (Domschke et al., 2010). In panic disorders, small but real changes in intero-
      ceptive arousal are often catastrophized, an appraisal that physiological changes reflect
      an underlying pathological and life-​threatening process (Kearney et  al., 1997). While
      interoceptive accuracy seems important for provoking appropriate and adaptive regula-
      tory responses, appraisal tendencies may be the most effective point by which to predict
      mental health and approach treatment.
         To support this claim, evidence from the clinical literature emphasizes that it is not inter-
      oceptive accuracy per se but rather the appraisal of interoceptive signals that is most rele-
      vant to feelings of wellness or illness (Paulus & Stein, 2010). Studies on the misattribution
      of arousal suggest that the appraised causes of a detected physiological change can mod-
      erate the effects of such change on mood. For example, attributing heightened physio-
      logical arousal to a pill reduces the experience of anxiety stemming from such arousal
      (Zanna & Cooper, 1974). Similarly, anxiety related to public speaking is reduced when
      one attributes arousal to a source unrelated to the speech act (Olson, 1988). Therefore, the
      measurement of interoceptive appraisal habits may be a vital step in efforts to characterize
      whether interoception serves to support or undermine mental health, and the modifica-
      tion of interoceptive appraisal habits may serve as an important treatment target in the
      presence of affective distress.
         To clarify the roles of interoceptive representation and appraisal in determining mental
      health, this chapter will proceed by presenting an emerging neurobiological model for
      interoceptive processing, and explaining how this model can be used to characterize ab-
      errant interoceptive processing in various mental disorders. To correct such processing
      abnormalities, we discuss the theoretical rationale for contemplative interventions such as
      mindfulness training, and we review our group’s neuroscience research on how attention
      training can improve the fidelity and plasticity of neural interoceptive representations.
      Finally, we propose a novel behavioral task for assessment of interoceptive function
      through characterization of appraisal habits following controlled changes in physiological
      arousal. By experimentally manipulating interoceptive awareness independently from
      objectively defined arousal, it may be possible directly to assess the influence of intero-
      ceptive appraisal habits on affect, cognition, and behavior.


      12.2  An emerging neurobiological model
      Emerging research supports both the existence of a dedicated neural network for in-
      teroceptive representation and the distinction between such representation and its
      contextualized appraisal. Small diameter (Aδ and C) afferents have long been known to
      carry information about pain and temperature through the lamina I spinothalamocortical
      pathway, though it is now apparent that these fibers contain homeostatic information
      from all tissues of the body (Craig, 2002; Strigo & Craig, 2016). These afferents travel
230




      230   Interoceptive appraisal and mental health


            through the ventromedial thalamic nucleus and eventually project to the mid/​posterior
            dorsal insula, which acts as a primary interoceptive cortex (Craig, 2002). This area is or-
            ganized as a topographical map and appears to be the primary region of viscerosensory
            fields for body sensation (Brooks et al., 2005). Positron emission tomography (PET) and
            functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies have related that activation in
            the mid/​posterior insula reveals graduated activity to sensual touch, temperature, itch,
            and pain (Craig, 2002). Using fMRI, our research group has also found graduated ac-
            tivity in right posterior insula to changes in respiration rate (Farb, Segal, & Anderson,
            2013a). Attention directed towards respiration was associated with enhanced activation
            in this primary interoceptive cortex. This is similar to the effect of selective attention on
            signal gain amplification observed in external senses such as vision (Hillyard, Vogel, &
            Luck, 1998).
               While the posterior insula seems to operate as a primary interoception representation
            cortex, the appraisal of these representations seems dependent on the propagation of pos-
            terior insula representations towards the anterior insula and adjacent prefrontal cortex.
            Topographically organized interoceptive information from the posterior insula appears
            to be re-​represented in the right anterior insula as an image of the interoceptive state of
            the body (Craig, 2002, 2009). The right anterior insula is thought to act as an area of in-
            tegration between interoceptive signals from the body and contextual information from
            the external environment (Craig, 2009). Imaging studies have commonly implicated right
            anterior insula activity in tasks that involve interoceptive awareness (Crichley et al., 2004;
            Pollatos, et al., 2007) as well as during induction of high-​arousal affective states (Jabbi,
            Bastiaansen, & Keysers, 2008; Gu et al., 2013). Given its anatomical role in connecting pri-
            mary interoceptive cortex in the posterior insula to higher cognitive processes supported
            by the prefrontal cortex, anterior insula processing is a likely candidate region involved in
            translating interoceptive sensory signals into appraisals of well-​being.

            12.3  Interoceptive appraisal in mental disorders
            In keeping with a theory of interoceptive appraisal constituting the sense of well-​being,
            it is unsurprising that altered activation in the anterior insula is commonly associated
            with mental health disorders. With regards to depression and anxiety, Paulus and Stein
            (2010) argue that belief states and top-​down processes play a large role in these disorders
            as well as influence how interoceptive signals are appraised. For instance, it appears that
            individuals suffering from anxiety disorders tend to overrepresent interoceptive signals
            and to appraise them as more threatening (Paulus & Stein, 2006). This leads to a state of
            enhanced sensitivity to aversive interoceptive signals. Accordingly, studies have found
            that individuals suffering from general anxiety disorder (GAD) were able to detect in-
            teroceptive signals associated with autonomic arousal better than controls despite no
            differences in external measures of physiological arousal (Andor, Gerlach, & Rist, 2008).
            With regard to brain activation, fMRI studies have found that anxiety-​prone individuals
            show heightened activity in the bilateral insula as well amygdala when shown emotional
 231




                                                     Interoception in contemplative interventions      231


       faces (Stein, et al., 2007), and individuals with phobias tend to show increased activation
       in the right insula when viewing fearful faces (Wright et al., 2003). Research on anxiety
       disorders emphasizes the importance of proper appraisal of the interoceptive signal and
       shows that increased sensitivity to aversive interoceptive signals can be detrimental to
       mental health. From a neurobiological standpoint, amplification of afferent interoceptive
       signals in the anterior insula may serve as a biological correlate of the catastrophizing
       appraisals associated with anxiety disorders.
          Major depressive disorder (MDD) may serve as a useful example for why suppression
       of nominal levels of interoceptive activation is also maladaptive. Although studies have
       found that individuals suffering from MDD show increased activation in right anterior
       insula in anticipation to painful stimuli (Strigo et al., 2008), our research has found that
       depression symptom burden is associated with suppression rather than activation of right
       insula activity during sadness provocation (Farb et al., 2010). This finding is convergent
       with clinical reports that people suffering from MDD tend to use maladaptive emo-
       tion regulation strategies defined by avoidance and dissociation from body sensations
       (Naragon-​Gainey, McMahon, & Chacko, 2017). A  consequence of such suppression is
       that appraisals of low mood and lethargy are unchallenged by natural variation in physio-
       logical arousal. Once again, accuracy in detecting interoceptive signals seems less relevant
       for mental health than appraisal tendency—​both the exaggeration of interoceptive signal
       importance and the dissociation from such signals seem to support psychopathology, in
       the form of anxiety and depressive disorders respectively.
          In summary, suboptimal integration of interoceptive signals in mental disorders may
       involve deficits in the detection of these signals, followed by maladaptive appraisal of
       interoceptive states (Paulus & Stein, 2010). Disorders characterized by feelings of discon-
       nection and isolation seem to involve deficits in actively attending to and appraising inter-
       oceptive signals, including both depression (Farb et al., 2010) and autism (Quattrocki &
       Friston, 2014). Conversely, anxiety disorders are associated with a heightened awareness
       towards, and a tendency to appraise negatively initial detection of physiological change
       without attending to the full range of interoceptive information (Paulus & Stein, 2010).
       Restructuring interoceptive appraisal habits may therefore be beneficial in alleviating
       symptoms associated with these mental disorders. One approach to restructuring intero-
       ceptive appraisal tendencies may lie in contemplative practices that modulate interocep-
       tive attention and appraisal habits, such as mindfulness meditation and other mind−body
       interventions.

       12.4  Interoception in contemplative interventions
       The past decades have featured an increasing assimilation of contemplative intervention
       techniques originating from Eastern spiritual traditions into Western clinical practices
       and broader culture (Farb, 2014). Although there are many variations of meditation
       and movement-​based exercises that are classified as contemplative interventions, they
       commonly, though not exclusively, feature exploration of one’s relationship to physical
23




     232   Interoceptive appraisal and mental health


           sensation, and this is a particular focus of mindfulness-​based training techniques (Farb
           et al., 2015). As such, promoting awareness of appraisal habits, and in particular intero-
           ceptive appraisals, is a core aspect of these techniques.
             Contemplative interventions often progress from focal attention on somatic and inter-
           oceptive targets towards an “open monitoring” or diffuse approach to awareness in which
           mental content is observed as it arises in the present moment (Raffone & Srinivasan,
           2010). As Bishop (2004) explains, in order to cultivate this open-​monitoring style of
           attention, contemplative practices often begin by shifting attention towards the inter-
           oceptive target of respiration. Interoceptive attention is coupled with instructions on
           how to structure appraisal of interoceptive signals, such as responding to novel signals
           with an attitude of acceptance and curiosity (Bishop, 2004). Two popular contemplative
           interventions used in clinical research are Mindfulness Based Stress Reduction (MBSR)
           and Mindfulness Based Cognitive Therapy (MBCT), which are both eight-​week long
           programs in a group setting and involve a range of exercises. As their names suggest, both
           approaches emphasize awareness of interoceptive signals and related appraisal tendencies
           as an overarching orientation. Critically, both interventions emphasize the suspension of
           interoceptive appraisal habits as a means by which to improve interoceptive awareness
           and response (Bishop, 2004).
             Clinical research has found both MBSR and MBCT to be moderately effective
           treatments across a range of disorders, such as chronic pain, depression, and anxiety
           (Goyal et al., 2014). These interventions have also been shown to be effective in increasing
           overall measures of subjective well-​being (Carmody & Baer, 2008), although the process
           of developing new interoceptive habits may itself be stressful (Farias et al., 2016). Central
           to these interventions’ theorized efficacy is the intention to restructure one’s relationship
           with experience, and particularly interoceptive experience, to reduce habitual exagger-
           ation or suppression in interoceptive appraisal (Kabat-​Zinn, 2009; Segal, Williams, &
           Teasdale, 2012). This intention is consistent with the finding that maladaptive and in-
           accurate appraisals tend to be associated with a range of anxiety and affective disorders.
           MBIs thus offer a unique method of re-​attending to primary sensation in an effort to
           renegotiate chronic interoceptive appraisal tendencies. By reducing habits that patholog-
           ically catastrophize or dissociate from interoceptive experience, it may be possible to de-
           velop resilience against the translation of interoceptive change into maladaptive feeling
           states. While definitive validation of these interventions’ mechanisms of action are still
           pursued in the research literature, evidence to date is consistent with the stated intention
           of these programs to introduce flexibility into the appraisal of interoceptive signals, and
           by extension, the ability to respond more flexibly and adaptively to life stressors that cue
           interoceptive signalling.

           12.5  The role of attention and precision
           in interoceptive networks
           Emerging neuroscience research supports the notion that interoceptive attention can
           be transformative when coupled with appropriate appraisal instructions. While feeling
 23




                      A respiration-based task for characterizing interoceptive appraisal habits      233


      states such as hunger, itch, or pain arise in a bottom-​up manner signalling homeostatic
      imbalance or potential tissue damage (Craig, 2003), attention can also influence which
      interoceptive signals cross the threshold into conscious awareness. First, interoceptive
      attention promotes precision in the representation of the attended interoceptive signal
      in interoceptive networks: our research group has shown that interoceptive attention to
      respiration increases the correlation between variation in respiration rate and variation in
      posterior insula activation (Farb et al., 2013a).
         A second major finding is that contemplative training of interoceptive attention
      introduces both state-​like and trait-​like neuroplasticity to interoceptive networks that
      may be indicative of altered interoceptive appraisal tendencies. Interoceptive training via
      MBSR was associated both with an increased capacity to engage interoceptive regions
      such as the right insula and somatosensory association cortex during self-​referential
      thought (Farb et al., 2007), and reduced insula suppression following sadness provoca-
      tion (Farb et al., 2010). Furthermore, compared to a waitlisted control group, individuals
      who underwent eight weeks of MBSR training tended to have stronger activation in the
      right insula as well as decreased activity in dorsomedial prefrontal cortex during attention
      towards respiration (Farbet al., 2013b). In both the 2007 and 2013 MBSR training studies,
      connectivity between the insula and prefrontal cortex shifted, with increased connec-
      tivity to dorsal regions of the prefrontal cortex associated with executive control, and
      reduced connectivity to the ventral prefrontal cortex in regions associated with evaluative
      appraisal. These findings are consistent with an account of shifting interoceptive attention
      away from habitual appraisal into a state of sensory exploration, which may then poten-
      tiate novel or more flexible appraisals of a wide range of interoceptive signals.
         Other studies have found that attention training that focuses on interoceptive aware-
      ness can lead to changes in the brain. For example, long-​term meditators have shown
      reduced atrophy in right anterior insula compared to age-​matched controls (Lazar et al.,
      2005), suggesting less pruning or fixedness in interoceptive integration supported by the
      right anterior insula. These findings suggest that MBIs engage interoceptive networks in
      the brain and reduce appraisal-​laden interoceptive integration with prefrontal structures
      supporting conscious awareness. The ability to continually integrate interoceptive signals
      in the face of a negative mood stressor in the 2010 study, the reduction of ventral pre-
      frontal connectivity with the posterior insula following training, and the general findings
      of clinical benefits of MBSR interventions in our research together support a theory of
      therapeutic efficacy in mindfulness interventions as stemming from a restructuring of
      interoceptive appraisal habits.


      12.6  A respiration-​based task for characterizing
      interoceptive appraisal habits
      12.6.1 Rationale
      A significant challenge for interoceptive accounts of well-​being is the possibility that ab-
      normal interoception is merely a symptom rather than cause of mental health disorders.
234




      234   Interoceptive appraisal and mental health


            This confusion arises because changes in physiological arousal are often confounded
            with measurement of interoceptive appraisal. For example, in the anxiety literature, es-
            tablished tasks for provoking interoceptive appraisal also require provocation of physio-
            logical arousal, such as being required to run on a treadmill. It is therefore unknown to
            what degree anxiety stems directly from physiological change as opposed to the appraised
            meaning of the physiological change. Similarly, in therapy, it is difficult to demonstrate
            to a patient that seemingly threatening physiological change is innocuous because the
            patient is generally aware of efforts to induce physiological arousal, thus it is difficult for
            the patient to have an experience of physiological arousal that is separated from fear or
            threat appraisal. The critical demonstration that appraisal rather than physiology is deter-
            minant of mental health requires that we are able to manipulate physiological arousal in-
            dependently of appraisal, and ideally to do this repeatedly to characterize an individual’s
            appraisal habits and their influence on subjective well-​being reliably.
               Here, we present preliminary data on a respiration-​focused interoceptive task that
            allows for independent manipulation of physiological arousal from detectability of phys-
            iological change. We suggest that, at a given level of physiological change, contrasting
            trials with and without accurate change detection allows for the examination of intero-
            ceptive appraisal habits, which only occur with awareness, that is, accurate detection of
            physiological change. The intention in this chapter is only to provide the rationale and
            “proof of concept” for this task rather than to validate the task’s experimental and clinical
            relevance for interoception research fully, which we hope to provide in future scholarship.

            12.6.2 Design
            Leveraging the controllability of respiration, the novel task requires that participants en-
            train their respiration frequency to match an external visual stimulus, such as a circle on a
            computer screen that “pulses”—​expanding and contracting in size over time. Participants
            are instructed to inhale when the circle expands, and exhale when the circle contracts. On
            a given trial, participants breathe along with the circle for ~60 seconds, which allows for
            around 12 to 18 pulses, depending on breathing rate.
               The task allows for manipulation of both physiological change and the probability of
            physiological change detection. Correspondingly, the two independent variables (IV) are
            (a)  total change in respiration frequency and (b)  rate of respiration frequency change.
            For the first IV, we incorporated six levels of total respiration rate change to manipu-
            late physiological change. Three levels of respiration rate change (ΔRR) were employed
            for both increasing and decreasing respiration rate, at 35%, 50%, and 85% change from
            baseline respiration rates. For the second IV, we incorporated two rates of respiration
            frequency change, “quick” and “gradual,” to manipulate the probability of physiological
            change detection. “Quick” trials were designed to enhance the detectability of change,
            and they involve changing the pulse frequency abruptly between two consecutive pulses
            in the middle of the trial pulse sequence; “gradual” trials were designed to mask change,
            and involve changing the pulse frequency very slightly between each pulse. Thus, two
            trials in which respiration slows by 50% can be manipulated with respect to detectability
 235




                       A respiration-based task for characterizing interoceptive appraisal habits    235


       in “quick” trials by increasing pulse length 1.5 times between two pulses in the middle
       of the trial, or in “gradual” trials by increasing pulse length with every pulse across the
       trial by 1.5-​N times, where N is the number of pulses in the trial. To summarize, phys-
       iological change is manipulated by the extent to which pulse rate changes over a trial,
       whereas detectability of change is manipulated by how abruptly the pulse change occurs.
       Unlike most interoceptive tasks that measure individual differences between participants,
       this task would manipulate physiological change and detectability within-​participant and
       within the same experimental session.
          The primary dependent variable in the task is awareness of physiological change.
       Each trial is followed by a three-​alternative forced choice paradigm that asks the partic-
       ipant whether respiration rate changed (“faster,” “slower,” or “no change”). As discussed
       in the following, other dependent variables can be appended to measure the effects of
       physiological change and awareness on various facets of cognition, affect and behavior.
       Awareness of a given level of physiological change may moderate performance on other
       measures, and this moderation effect can serve as an individual difference measure of
       appraisal tendency.

       12.6.3  Pilot data
       Pilot data from our lab (N = 16; 10 women; mean age 20 ± 1.4 yr) confirms the feasibility
       of this paradigm and the dual manipulation of physiology and detection probability. In
       this version of the task, trial length was 8 pulses, which were 30 to 70 seconds in length
       depending on the level of rate change. A respiration belt (Bioharness 3; Zephyr Technology,
       Annapolis, MD) was used to assess baseline respiration rate and to verify participants
       correctly entrained their breaths to match the circle stimulus. Raw correlations between
       circle size and belt size over time were routinely > 0.85, indicating very good entraining
       of respiration. No participants reported difficulties in understanding task instructions or
       any feelings of distress or light-​headedness from the respiratory rate manipulation.
         Even in this modest sample, strong significant effects of both manipulations were
       observed using the “nlme” package for multilevel modeling (Pinheiro et al., 2016) in the
       R programming environment (R Core Team, 2014). Prediction of change detection accu-
       racy was modelled progressively compared to the null model, first using the degree of res-
       piratory rate change, then quadratic effects to account for extremity of frequency change
       regardless of change direction, and finally the effect of gradual versus quick change type
       conditions (Table 12.1).
         All model steps were significant, and so t-​scores reported here reflect the final model
       values. The analysis suggested that detection accuracy was significantly better for rate
       increases than decreases, t(146)  =  4.23, p < 0.001, and better for more extreme rate
       changes in either direction, t(146) = 2.41, p = 0.017. Change type was also a significant
       predictor of accuracy, t(14) = 5.08, p < 0.001, with quick rate changes detected more ac-
       curately than gradual changes.
         Finally, change type interacted with degree of change. There was a trend for the effects
       of change type to increase with greater extremity of frequency change (ΔRate2 *Type),
236




      236   Interoceptive appraisal and mental health


            Table 12.1  Effects of respiratory rate change and change type (quick or gradual) on change
            detection.

            Model                                                        Df         Log Likelihood     Likelihood Ratio    P-V
                                                                                                                             ​ alue
            Accuracy ~ 1 (Intercept Only)                                    5      −174.4

            Accuracy ~ ΔRate                                                 6      −170.3                 8.2                 0.004
            Accuracy ~ ΔRate + ΔRate2                                        7      −157.7             25.3                <0.001
            Accuracy ~ ΔRate + ΔRate + Type                     2
                                                                             8      −149.2             16.9                <0.001
            Accuracy ~ (ΔRate + ΔRate ) * Type                  2
                                                                         10         −143.7             11.1                    0.004



            t(146) = 1.86, p = 0.06; this trend was driven by a significant interaction between change
            type and the linear effect of frequency change (ΔRate *Type), t(146) = −2.77, p < 0.01, that
            shows greater effects of change type for respiratory slowing than respiratory acceleration
            (Figure 12.1).
              As Figure 12.1 shows, the relationship between total change in respiration rate (ΔRR)
            and awareness of change (accuracy on forced choice reports of change detection) can
            be modelled by a similar parabolic function for both gradual-​change and quick-​change
            conditions. As expected, more extreme shifts in respiration rate tend to be associated
            with greater detection of change. However, critical to these findings is the main effect of
            change type (gradual or quick) in which the ability to manipulate change detectability, and




                                                   0.75
                    Accuracy (Prportion Correct)




                                                   0.50




                                                   0.25
                                                                                                                 Change Type
                                                                                                                    Gradual
                                                                                                                    Quick

                                                   0.00
                                                          0.4          0.8                       1.2                      1.6
                                                                    Respiration Rate Change (Proportion)
            Figure 12.1  The effects of respiration rate change and change type on change detection
            accuracy.
 237




                        A respiration-based task for characterizing interoceptive appraisal habits      237


       thereby participant awareness, was demonstrated across various levels of ΔRR. In other
       words, across all trials participants were less aware of change when it occurred gradually
       as opposed to quickly. Figure 12.1 also shows that this difference is more pronounced in
       the trials in which respiration rate was increased compared to decreased.
         The ability to examine the effects of interoceptive awareness using a within-​participant
       design affords potential for better understanding of how physiological change and aware-
       ness combine to impact cognition across a variety of contexts. The pilot data results
       support the promise of this paradigm while identifying some areas for improvement.
       Future piloting will aim to create a more consistent effect of change type in both directions,
       as the greater accuracy for acceleration than deceleration was unexpected. One solution
       may be to make trials slightly longer (perhaps ~90 seconds in duration) to allow for more
       subtle shifts in respiratory rate in the gradual change condition.

       12.6.4 Applications
       It is important to note that this task is not intended as a measure of interoceptive accuracy
       but rather a means by which to measure awareness (via the three-​alternative forced choice
       question) and consequences of awareness following experimentally induced changes in
       respiration rate. As such, it is irrelevant whether or not participants become aware of a
       change due to visual observation of the circle, or through the physical sense of changing
       respiration rate. The critical features of the task are instead that: (a) it introduces objec-
       tively verifiable changes in physiological states through the manipulation of the respira-
       tion rate, and (b) it assesses the presence or absence of awareness of physiological change.
       The task allows for manipulation of respiration rate independently from the probability
       of detecting this change. The appraisal consequences of interoceptive awareness of a given
       level of physiological change could then be measured through measures appended to
       the task.
          There may be several important applications of this experimental design to the
       assessment of appraisal tendency. There are numerous decisions which may be moderated
       by awareness of physiological change, with the most obvious being self-​appraisal of mood
       states. Such appraisal can be operationalized simply by asking participants to rate their
       current subjective mood after each trial. Mood ratings allow for an investigation of the
       interaction between changes in physiological arousal, manipulated through alterations
       in the entrained respiration rate, and the awareness of this change, manipulated by the
       detectability of the respiration change, on subjective appraisals of mood and well-​being.
       Using this task, it may be possible to establish individual differences interoceptive ap-
       praisal tendencies, with some participants feeling more anxious following awareness of
       respiratory acceleration, and some participants feeling more dejected following aware-
       ness of respiratory deceleration. Other participants may feel excited or calm following
       awareness of the same changes. Thus, independent from measurement of interoceptive
       accuracy, appraisal tendency can become the focus of empirical investigation. Because
       participants will be generally unaware of the low-​detectability change trials, this con-
       trol condition will allow us to observe the direct effect of physiological change without
238




      238   Interoceptive appraisal and mental health


            awareness, isolating the effect of awareness of such changes on subsequent mood ratings
            and other measures of affect, cognition, and behavior.
              As alluded to earlier, our ongoing investigations with this task examine how awareness
            of respiration change impacts appraisals of mood and subjective well-​being. However, the
            paradigm can also be applied to other forms of decision-​making, such as effects on social
            judgments. There is a substantial literature on the misattribution of arousal in making
            attractiveness ratings (Payne & Lundberg, 2014). Specifically, trials could be followed
            by asking participants to rate faces of potential romantic partners or make aesthetic
            judgment about abstract art. Indeed, anywhere that physiological change has an effect on
            cognition or behavior, such as choices about food consumption, activity planning, self-​
            assessment of motivation or discomfort, etc., this paradigm may have direct applications.
            The change in appraisal tendency over time would also be a useful application of this task,
            with natural extensions in testing the basic tenets of mind−body training techniques such
            as mindfulness or yoga.

            12.7 Conclusion
            Interoception has long been held to be a central component in our subjective appraisals
            of well-​being. Interoceptive knowledge has been argued to serve as the building blocks
            of emotional experience (James, 1884, 1890; Lange, 1885), and interoception is thought
            to be a critical faculty for the ongoing sense of well-​being or illness in the body (Farb
            et al., 2015; Tsakiris & Critchley, 2016; see Chapter 17 in this volume). One of the most
            intriguing aspects of interoceptive processing is that it often acts at the boundaries of
            awareness, with more pressing interoceptive signals crossing the threshold for conscious
            appraisal, whereas other signals may be represented with little to no access to awareness
            and interpretation.
               The rise of mind−body therapies, and their growing evidence base for the treatment of
            affective disorders, has brought the importance of interoceptive awareness into the spot-
            light. The ability to adaptively attend and respond to interoceptive signals, and particu-
            larly the ability to shift appraisal tendencies away from rigid or dysfunctional patterns of
            reactivity, is a theoretical cornerstone of many of these interventions and warrants further
            scientific investigation. By generating more comprehensive, multifaceted assessments of
            interoceptive awareness, and in particular including assessment of appraisal tendencies
            in such assessments, it may be possible to translate rich contemplative and clinical
            accounts of interoception’s role into contemporary scientific discourse. In doing so, we
            may be able to establish the role of interoceptive appraisal in healthy and pathological
            states with greater care, as well as the mechanisms for restructuring interoceptive access
            and appraisal to promote greater well-​being. It is suggested that innovation is needed to
            move past unidimensional assessment of interoception through self-​report or heart rate
            monitoring alone, to develop more comprehensive assessment of interoceptive access in
            relation to mental health. Through novel paradigms such as the one described here, it
            may be possible to extend substantial progress in characterizing interoceptive accuracy
            to also experimentally manipulate the roles of awareness and appraisal in responding
 239




                                                                                                     References      239


       to interoceptive signals. Together, such efforts will inform our understanding of what it
       means to engage constructively with the sense of the embodied self.

       References
       Ainley, V. and Tsakiris, M. (2013). Body conscious? Interoceptive awareness, measured by heartbeat
          perception, is negatively correlated with self-​objectification. PloS One, 8(2), e55568.
       Andor, T., Gerlach, A. L., and Rist, F. (2008). Superior perception of phasic physiological arousal and
          the detrimental consequences of the conviction to be aroused on worrying and metacognitions in
          GAD. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 117(1), 193–​205.
       Barrett, L. F., Quigley, K. S., and Hamilton, P. (2016). An active inference theory of allostasis and
          interoception in depression. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 371(1708).
       Barrett, L. F., Quigley, K. S., Bliss-​Moreau, E., and Aronson, K. R. (2004). Interoceptive sensitivity and
          self-​reports of emotional experience. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87, 684–​97.
       Bishop, S. R. (2004). Mindfulness: A proposed operational definition. Clinical Psychology: Science and
          Practice, 11(3), 230–​41.
       Brooks, J. C. W., Zambreanu, L., Godinez, A., Craig, A. D., and Tracey, I. (2005). Somatotopic
          organisation of the human insula to painful heat studied with high resolution functional imaging.
          Neuroimage, 27,  201–​9.
       Carmody, J. and Baer, R. A. (2008). Relationships between mindfulness practice and levels of
          mindfulness, medical and psychological symptoms and well-​being in a mindfulness-​based stress
          reduction program. Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 31(1),  23–​33.
       Craig, A. D. (2002). How do you feel? Interoception: The sense of the physiological condition of the
          body. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 3(8), 655–​66.
       Craig, A. D. (2003): Interoception: The sense of the physiological condition of the body. Current
          Opinions Neurobiology, 13,  500–​5.
       Craig, A. D. (2009). How do you feel—​now? The anterior insula and human awareness. Nature Reviews
          Neuroscience, 10,  59–​70.
       Critchley, H. D., Wiens, S., Rotshtein, P., Öhman, A., and Dolan, R. J. (2004). Neural systems
          supporting interoceptive awareness. Nature Neuroscience, 7, 189–​95.
       Critchley, H. D. and Garfinkel, S. N. (2017). Interoception and emotion. Current Opinion in Psychology,
          17,  7–​14.
       Damasio, A. and Carvalho, G. B. (2013). The nature of feelings: Evolutionary and neurobiological
          origins. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 14, 143–​52.
       Davenport, P. W. and Kifle, Y. (2001). Inspiratory resistive load detection in children with life‐
          threatening asthma. Pediatric Pulmonology, 32(1),  44–​8.
       Domschke, K., Stevens, S., Pfleiderer, B., and Gerlach, A. L. (2010). Interoceptive sensitivity in anxiety
          and anxiety disorders: An overview and integration of neurobiological findings. Clinical Psychology
          Review, 30,  1–​11.
       Dunn, B. D., Evans, D., Makarova, D., White, J., and Clark, L. (2012). Gut feelings and the reaction to
          perceived inequity: The interplay between bodily responses, regulation, and perception shapes the
          rejection of unfair offers on the ultimatum game. Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience,
          12(3), 419–​29.
       Farb, N. A. S., Segal, Z. V., Mayberg, H., Bean, J., Mckeon, D., Fatima, Z., et al. (2007). Attending to
          the present: Mindfulness meditation reveals distinct neural modes of self-​reference. Social Cognitive
          and Affective Neuroscience, 2(4), 313–​22.
       Farb, N. A., Anderson, A. K., Mayberg, H., Bean, J., McKeon, D., and Segal, Z. V. (2010). Minding
          one’s emotions: Mindfulness training alters the neural expression of sadness. Emotion, 10(1),  25–​33.
240




      240   Interoceptive appraisal and mental health


            Farb, N. A., Segal, Z. V., and Anderson, A. K. (2013a). Attentional modulation of primary interoceptive
                and exteroceptive cortices. Cerebral Cortex, 23(1), 114–​26.
            Farb, N. A., Segal, Z. V., and Anderson, A. K. (2013b). Mindfulness meditation training alters cortical
                representations of interoceptive attention. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 8(1),  15–​26.
            Farb, N. A. S. (2014). From retreat center to clinic to boardroom? Perils and promises of the modern
                mindfulness movement. Religions, 5, 1062–​86.
            Farb, N. A. S., Daubenmier, J., Price, C. J., Gard, T., Kerr, C., Dunn, B. D., et al. (2015). Interoception,
                contemplative practice, and health. Frontiers in Psychology, 7(1898),  1–​26.
            Farias, M., Wikholm, C., and Delmonte, R. (2016). What is mindfulness-​based therapy good for?
                Lancet Psychiatry, 3(11), 1012–​13.
            Garfinkel, S. N., Seth, A. K., Barrett, A. B., Suzuki, K., and Critchley, H. D. (2015). Knowing your own
                heart: Distinguishing interoceptive accuracy from interoceptive awareness. Biological Psychology,
                104,  65–​74.
            Goyal, M., Singh, S., Sibinga, E. M., Gould, N. F., Rowland-​Seymour, A., Sharma, R., et al. (2014).
                Meditation programs for psychological stress and well-​being: A systematic review and meta-​
                analysis. JAMA Internal Medicine, 174(3), 357–​68.
            Gu, X., Hof, P. R., Friston, K. J., and Fan, J. (2013), Anterior insular cortex and emotional awareness.
                Journal of Comparative Neurology, 521, 3371–​88.
            Hackley, S. A. and Valle-​Inclán, F. (1999). Accessory stimulus effects on response selection: Does
                arousal speed decision making? Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 11(3),  321–​9.
            Harver, A., Katkin, E. S., and Bloch, E. (1993). Signal-​detection outcomes on heartbeat and respiratory
                resistance detection tasks in male and female subjects. Psychophysiology, 30, 223–​30.
            Herbert, B. M., Pollatos, O., and Schandry, R. (2007). Interoceptive sensitivity and emotion
                processing: An EEG study. International Journal of Psychophysiology, 65, 214–​27.
            Hillyard, S. A., Vogel, E. K., and Luck, S. J. (1998). Sensory gain control (amplification) as a mechanism
                of selective attention: Electrophysiological and neuroimaging evidence. Philosophical Transactions of
                the Royal Society B, 353(1373), 1257–​70.
            Jabbi, M., Bastiaansen, J., and Keysers, C. (2008). A common anterior insula representation of disgust
                observation, experience and imagination shows divergent functional connectivity pathways. PloS
                One, 3(8), e2939.
            James, W. (1884). What is emotion? Mind, 9, 188–​205.
            James, W. (1890). Principles of Psychology. New York, NY: Holt.
            Kabat-​Zinn, J. (2009). Full Catastrophe Living: Using the Wisdom of your Body and Mind to Face Stress,
                Pain, and Illness. New York, NY: Ballantine Bantam Dell.
            Katkin, E., Wiens, S., and Öhman, A. (2001). Nonconscious Fear Conditioning, Visceral Perception,
                and the Development of Gut Feelings. Psychological Science, 12(5), 366–​70.
            Kearney, C. A., Albano, A. M., Eisen, A. R., Allan, W. D., and Barlow, D. H. (1997). The
                phenomenology of panic disorder in youngsters: An empirical study of a clinical sample. Journal of
                Anxiety Disorders, 11(1),  49–​62.
            Khalsa, S. S. and Lapidus, R. C. (2016). Can interoception improve the pragmatic search for biomarkers
                in psychiatry? Frontiers in Psychiatry, 7(121),  1–​19.
            Lange, C. G. (1885). The mechanism of the emotions. The Classical Psychologists. Boston,
                MA: Houghton Mifflin, pp. 672–​84.
            Lazar, S. W., Kerr, C. E., Wasserman, R. H., Gray, J. R., Greve, D. N., Treadway, M. T., et al. (2005).
                Meditation experience is associated with increased cortical thickness. Neuroreport, 16(17), 1893–​7.
            Merwin, R. M., Zucker, N. L., Lacy, J. L., and Elliott, C. A. (2010). Interoceptive awareness in eating
                disorders: Distinguishing lack of clarity from non-​acceptance of internal experience. Cognition and
                Emotion, 24(5), 892–​902.
 241




                                                                                                     References     241


       Naragon-​Gainey, K., McMahon, T. P., and Chacko, T. P. (2017). The structure of common emotion
           regulation strategies: A meta-​analytic examination. Psychological Bulletin, 143(4), 384–​427.
       Olson, J. M. (1988). Misattribution, preparatory information, and speech anxiety. Journal of Personality
           and Social Psychology, 54(5), 758.
       Paulus, M. P. and Stein, M. B. (2006). An insular view of anxiety. Biological Psychiatry, 60(4),  383–​7.
       Paulus, M. P. and Stein, M. B. (2010). Interoception in anxiety and depression. Brain Structure and
           Function, 214(5-​6), 451–​63.
       Payne, K. and Lundberg, K. (2014). The affect misattribution procedure: Ten years of evidence on
           reliability, validity, and mechanisms. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 8(12), 672–​86.
       Pinheiro, J., Bates, D., DebRoy, S., Sarkar, D., and R Core Team (2016). nlme: Linear and Nonlinear
           Mixed Effects Models. R package version 3.1-​131.1. <http://​CRAN.R-​project.org/​package=nlme>
       Pollatos, O., Schandry, R., Auer, D. P., and Kaufmann, C. (2007). Brain structures mediating
           cardiovascular arousal and interoceptive awareness. Brain Research, 1141, 178–​87.
       Quattrocki, E. and Friston, K. (2014). Autism, oxytocin and interoception. Neuroscience &
           Biobehavioral Reviews, 47, 410–​30.
       R Core Team (2014). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. Vienna: R Foundation for
           Statistical Computing. <http://​www.R-​project.org/​>
       Raffone, A. and Srinivasan, N. (2010). The exploration of meditation in the neuroscience of attention
           and consciousness. Cognitive Processing, 11(1),  1–​7.
       Rouder, J. N. and Morey, R. D. (2009). The nature of psychological thresholds. Psychological Review,
           116(3), 655–​60.
       Schachter, S. and Singer, J. (1962). Cognitive, social, and physiological determinants of emotional state.
           Psychological Review, 69(5), 379.
       Segal, Z. V., Williams, J. M. G., and Teasdale, J. D. (2012). Mindfulness-​based Cognitive Therapy for
           Depression. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
       Seth, A. K. and Friston, K. J. (2016). Active interoceptive inference and the emotional brain.
           Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 371(1708).
       Silani, G., Bird, G., Brindley, R., Singer, T., Frith, C., and Frith, U. (2008). Levels of emotional
           awareness and autism: An fMRI study. Social Neuroscience, 3(2), 97–​112.
       Stein, M. B., Simmons, A. N., Feinstein, J. S., and Paulus, M. P. (2007). Increased amygdala and insula
           activation during emotion processing in anxiety-​prone subjects. American Journal of Psychiatry,
           164(2), 318–​27.
       Strigo, I. A. and Craig, A. D. (2016). Interoception, homeostatic emotions and sympathovagal balance.
           Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society Bs, 371(1708).
       Strigo, I. A., Simmons, A. N., Matthews, S. C., Arthur, D., and Paulus, M. P. (2008). Association of
           major depressive disorder with altered functional brain response during anticipation and processing
           of heat pain. Archives of General Psychiatry, 65(11), 1275–​84.
       Tsakiris, M. and Critchley, H. (2016). Interoception beyond homeostasis: Affect, cognition and mental
           health. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 371(1708).
       White, G. L., Fishbein, S., and Rutsein, J. (1981). Passionate love and the misattribution of arousal.
           Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 41(1), 56.
       Wright, C. I., Martis, B., McMullin, K., Shin, L. M., and Rauch, S. L. (2003). Amygdala and insular
           responses to emotionally valenced human faces in small animal specific phobia. Biological
           Psychiatry, 54(10), 1067–​76.
       Zanna, M. P. and Cooper, J. (1974). Dissonance and the pill: An attribution approach to studying the
           arousal properties of dissonance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 29(5),  703–​9.
24
 243




       PART IV

       Toward a philosophy
       of interoception
       Subjectivity and experience
24
 245




                    Chapter 13

                    From physiology to experience:
                    Enriching existing conceptions of
                    “arousal” in affective science
                    Giovanna Colombetti and Neil Harrison



       13.1 Introduction
       “Arousal” is a key notion in the interdisciplinary field of “affective science”, which includes
       primarily the psychology and neuroscience of emotion, but also philosophical and com-
       putational approaches to emotion (Davidson, Scherer, & Goldsmith, 2003; Scarantino,
       forthcoming). Roughly and preliminarily, we can say that “arousal” refers to how more
       or less “excited” or “activated” one is during an emotion; for example, someone who is
       very scared is often said to be highly aroused, whereas sadness and contentment are often
       regarded as involving low degrees of arousal. Several affective scientists regard arousal not
       just as an important dimension of emotion, but even as a necessary one: part of what it is
       to be in an emotional state is to be more or less aroused (e.g. Russell, 2003). Importantly
       for the topic of this volume, arousal is often regarded as interlinked with interoception.
         What is it to be aroused during an emotion, exactly? As it turns out, no short definition
       can capture the various meanings that the term “arousal” has in affective science; more-
       over, these different meanings are often not clearly discriminated (Colombetti & Kuppens,
       forthcoming). One goal of this chapter is to bring some clarity by distinguishing the two
       main meanings of this term; that is, what we call physiological and experienced arousal.1
       Another goal is to clarify the relationship between these two meanings of arousal, and
       interoception, understood broadly as “sensitivity to stimuli arising inside the organism”—​
       where “sensitivity” does not necessarily entail conscious perception. In particular, we
       argue that it is restrictive and inaccurate to reduce physiological arousal to a single di-
       mension of sympathetic activation, or even to just autonomic activation2 (psychological

       1
        	 In this chapter we limit our analysis to arousal as a component or dimension of emotion and other
          affective states, such as moods.
       2
        	 “Autonomic activation” commonly refers to activation of the autonomic nervous system (ANS). The
          ANS is a division of the peripheral nervous system, and is itself divided into the sympathetic and the
          parasympathetic nervous system. The other two divisions of the peripheral nervous system are the so-
          matic nervous system, which controls the voluntary muscles and more generally the musculoskeletal
          system, and the enteric nervous system, which both alone and together with the ANS controls activity
          within the gastrointestinal tract. Until recently the enteric nervous system was regarded as a part of the
          ANS; it is now recognized as a mainly independent system.
246




      246   From physiology to experience


            studies that include “physiological measurements,” for example, often measure only a few
            dimensions of autonomic activation, such as skin conductance responses, heart rate, and
            blood pressure; see Fox, 2008, pp. 32−4). As for experienced arousal, we argue, relatedly,
            that it is restrictive and inaccurate to reduce it to the conscious perception of organismic
            changes signalled just via visceral afferents (the afferent partner of the autonomic nervous
            system). Experienced arousal, we suggest, additionally includes the perception of circu-
            lating substances mediated via humoral interoceptive pathways, as well as various somatic
            sensations and what we call “background bodily feelings.”

            13.2  Two main meanings of “arousal”
            In contemporary affective science, “arousal” has two main meanings. First, it refers to what
            we term experienced arousal, the lived, first-​personal, or subjective experience of being
            (more or less) aroused during an emotion. Second, it refers to what we term physiological
            arousal, the third-​personal or objective biological processes that occur in the organism
            during an emotion. These two meanings of arousal are clearly different but they are some-
            times conflated, and it is often assumed that experienced arousal provides veridical infor-
            mation about physiological arousal. For example, Scherer and Wallbott (1994) addressed
            the question of whether at least some emotions exhibit the same patterns of “physiological
            symptoms” (their term) across cultures. To do this, they used questionnaires that asked
            participants how they felt their body when experiencing various emotions, but did not
            actually record any physiological measurements. Likewise, Grewe, Nagel, Kopiez, and
            Altenmuller (2007) studied “physiological responses” to music with questionnaires asking
            participants to “report their perceived bodily reactions” (p. 779). They actually also meas-
            ured physiological responses to music in the form of skin conductance and facial muscle
            activity. Throughout the paper, however, they conflate “physiological changes” with “re-
            ported (or experienced) physiological changes.” More recently, Nummenmaa, Glerean,
            Hari, and Hietanen (2014) identified different “bodily sensations maps” for 13 different
            emotions. Although they make it clear that this study was about experienced arousal, they
            assume throughout their paper that bodily sensations “represent” (their term) physiolog-
            ical processes.
               How experienced arousal relates to physiological arousal, however, needs to be
            assessed empirically. Suppose you are feeling very agitated (experienced arousal) as
            part of being worried about an imminent job interview. Your feeling of agitation may
            include specific sensations such as feeling your heart pounding heavily in your chest,
            and your mouth and throat being dry. Now, it is natural and not implausible in this
            case to think that your heart is in fact beating differently from when you are calmer,
            and that your mouth and throat are in fact drier (physiological arousal). Whether this
            is really the case, however, needs to be confirmed by conducting actual measurements
            on the state of your heart, mouth, and throat. One cannot simply infer the physio-
            logical condition of any specific body part from how the person feels, for a variety of
            reasons. One is that the person’s reports of her bodily feelings may be influenced by
 247




                                                                                     Physiological arousal         247


       “social schemata” (Rimé, Philippot, & Cisamolo, 1990), that is, learnt templates of how
       one is expected to feel in specific situations. Another reason is that there are individual
       differences in how accurately people can perceive their actual bodily changes (usually
       measured with heartbeat detection tasks)—​a capacity termed “interoceptive accuracy”
       (Garfinkel et  al., 2015). Furthermore, the same person can be more or less accurate
       depending on the task performed, context, stress, etc. (Schulz et al., 2013). Finally, even
       though some of us can, at times, accurately feel what is going on in some parts of our
       body, there is much going on in our body that is inaccessible consciously (Critchley &
       Harrison, 2013). For example, we cannot feel our pupils dilating or our blood pressure
       rising. Thus, how bodily aroused a person feels (experienced arousal) provides at best
       only a partial look into her physiological arousal. At worst, it provides an inaccurate or
       distorted view of the latter.
         The upshot is that we need to distinguish clearly between the subjective experience, or
       feeling, of being aroused, excited, or activated (all terms found in the literature and used
       as synonyms), and what is actually going on in the organism during an emotional episode.
       Having clarified this, let us now examine both phenomena more closely.

       13.3  Physiological arousal
       That our organism often undergoes physiological changes during emotional episodes is
       something we can easily witness, and often do: we see our hands shaking when we are
       nervous, and a mirror can show our skin getting red when we are embarrassed. This
       is such a commonplace observation that it is not surprising to find it in ancient philo-
       sophical texts. At the beginning of De Anima, for example, Aristotle noted that in “anger,
       mildness, fear, pity, hope and even joy and love and hating . . . the body is affected in some
       way” (1986, p. 128). The Stoics and Galen also recognized the contribution of the body to
       our emotional states (Gill, 2010).
          There is thus a sense in which we have always known that our body gets more or less
       “excited” during different emotions. It is worth noting, though, that contemporary em-
       pirical studies of emotion typically measure physiological arousal by measuring some-
       thing very specific, that is, changes in the organism ascribed (sometimes incorrectly)
       to activation of the sympathetic division of the ANS, such as increases in heart rate and
       skin conductance, alterations in skin temperature, and pupillary dilation (Berntson &
       Cacioppo, 2009).3 Walter Cannon famously associated the sympathetic nervous system
       with the “fight or flight response,” and the narrow identification of physiological arousal
       with sympathetic activation can be traced back to the work on fear and rage he conducted
       in the 1910s and 1920s (Cannon, 1929). Cannon also conceptualized sympathetic acti-
       vation as mutually exclusive with, and antagonistic to, activation of the parasympathetic
       system, whose contribution to emotion he generally disregarded. Finally, Cannon is also

       3
        	 Acute increases in heart rate and pupil size are actually initiated by a withdrawal in parasympathetic
          tone (Robinson et al., 1966; Barbur, 2004).
248




      248   From physiology to experience


            responsible for characterizing sympathetic activation as generally uniform and undif-
            ferentiated. Though these ideas were challenged by Cannon’s contemporaries (see Dror,
            2014), they influenced scientific conceptions of arousal throughout the twentieth cen-
            tury, and still do so. Most famously, Schachter and Singer (1962, pp. 381−2) maintained
            that the same state of (sympathetic) physiological arousal (induced using an adrenaline
            injection) “could be labelled ‘joy’ or ‘fury’ or ‘jealousy’ or any of a great diversity of emo-
            tional labels depending on the cognitive aspects of the situation.” These authors also
            suggested (despite previous studies to the contrary, e.g. Ax, 1953; Wolf & Wolff, 1947),
            that “emotional states may . . . be generally characterized by a high level of sympathetic
            activation with few if any physiological distinguishers among the many emotional states”
            (Schachter & Singer, 1962, pp. 397).
               Our view is that this conception of arousal during emotion is superseded and too
            narrow, and needs to be abandoned, for the following four reasons.
            1.	 The term “autonomic nervous system” (ANS) and its division into sympathetic and
                para-​(meaning “by the side of,” “alongside”) sympathetic components was introduced
                by Langley (1900) on the basis of predominantly neuroanatomical, rather than func-
                tional, considerations. To talk of global sympathetic and parasympathetic functions (e.g.
                fight and flight versus rest and digest) has the potential to generate misunderstandings
                and to create an overly simplistic impression of the functional architecture of the ANS
                (for more details, see Harrison, Kreibig, & Critchley, 2013). For example, empirical
                data acquired over the last half-​century show that pre-​and postganglionic neurons of
                both the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous system link together in multiple
                functionally distinct pathways that facilitate the generation of a huge variety of highly
                differentiated and specific responses (Jänig, 2006). This has undermined previous false
                assumptions that sympathetic preganglionic neurons diverge widely and synapse with
                postganglionic neurons with multiple diverse functions, dispelling the belief that the
                sympathetic nervous system operates in a monolithic all-​or-​nothing fashion. This re-
                search also demonstrates that the ANS can support emotion-​specific physiological
                patterning.
            2.	 A  consideration that invites broadening the traditional conception of physiological
                arousal is that autonomic activation is also influenced by afferent (from periphery to
                brain) neural and humoral feedback pathways (for details see Critchley & Harrison,
                2013). Visceral afferent fibers innervate almost all tissues of the body and fall into two
                broad groups: first, those that carry motivational information such as hunger, satiety,
                thirst, nausea, and respiratory sensations, and travel mainly along cranial (e.g. vagus
                and glossopharyngeal) nerves to terminate within the nucleus of the solitary tract;
                second, spinal visceral afferents that project to the dorsal horns of the spinal cord and,
                via spinal laminar 1, into the spinothalamic tract. These fibers tend to have a more
                prominent role in signalling tissue damage. Humoral feedback is largely processed
                through the circumventricular organs (regions of the brain that lack a normal blood-​
                brain barrier), though some (e.g. core temperature, glucose, and insulin) can also
 249




                                                                             Physiological arousal       249


          be sensed directly within brain regions such as the hypothalamus. Additionally, in-
          flammatory mediators can modulate brain function through microglial transduction
          pathways, resulting in a wave of microglial activation that propagates across the brain
          (Rivest, 2009; Saper, Romanovsky, & Scammell, 2012). Efferent activation is continu-
          ously modulated by this afferent, “interoceptive” feedback, so that it is misleading to
          restrict autonomic arousal occurring during emotion only to the outcome of neural
          efferent processes without including the continuous regulatory afferent feedback that
          co-​occurs with those processes.
       3.	 A further and partly related challenge to narrow conceptions of physiological arousal
           comes from psychoneuroendocrinology and psychoneuroimmunology. Developments
           in these fields have shown that the central and peripheral nervous system bi-​directionally
           interact with both endocrine and immune processes, and that these interactions influ-
           ence, and are influenced by, our emotional states. We know for example that the stress
           response includes the release of hormones from the brain into the adrenal glands and
           the bloodstream, which in turn influence hypothalamic-​pituitary activity in the brain
           (Charmandari, Tsigos, & Chrousos, 2005; Spiga et al., 2015). We also know that during
           illness, the immune system produces pro-​inflammatory proteins (cytokines) that in-
           fluence brain activity (Harrison, 2017) and that appear to play a contributory role in at
           least some patients with depression (Dantzer et al., 2008); in turn, the brain responds
           by sending signals to inhibit this inflammatory process (Tracey, 2002). Given this bi-​
           directional interactivity, in our view it is arbitrary to identify arousal with activation
           of any one system alone (the ANS, the endocrine system, etc.), or of any subset of it.
           Bi-​directional interactivity also implies that it would still be arbitrary to regard the
           ANS (or any other system alone) as the “most relevant” or “most basic” arousal system,
           with the other systems making only a “peripheral contribution” to arousal. The exist-
           ence of reciprocal influences entails that the systems involved are coupled, such that
           without additional criteria or reasons, no system alone can be picked out as the one
           having the causally most relevant role. In the presence of this complexity, we think it
           more plausible to regard the combined activity of all systems involved as constituting
           physiological arousal.
       The reason why endocrine and immune changes are generally not included in definitions
       of physiological arousal may have to do with the widespread assumption, in affective
       science, that emotions are short-​lived episodes that involve brief but intense changes in
       the body. Changes in the endocrine and immune systems are typically regarded to unfold
       on a longer time frame, and thus arguably do not qualify as candidates for arousal. Indeed,
       sometimes arousal in emotion is explicitly characterized as “phasic” (temporary, short-​
       lived; see e.g. Fowles, 2009, p. 50), which excludes longer-​lasting physiological processes
       (see also Bradley & Lang, 2007, p. 601). However, it is not obvious that emotions are al-
       ways short lived: whereas sometimes we are upset, annoyed, or scared for a few seconds
       or minutes, we are also often upset, annoyed, or scared (as well as jealous, envious, angry,
       happy, and so on) for hours or even longer. Arousal, in the latter cases, may well involve
250




      250   From physiology to experience


            physiological processes that unfold and change over hours or even days. Moreover, it is
            not just emotions, defined as short-​lived affective episodes, that involve a certain level of
            arousal; moods, often characterized as lasting longer than emotions, also do (see Thayer,
            1996). Perhaps, one might suggest, the main difference between emotions and moods is
            precisely that, in the former, physiological arousal corresponds to brief patterns of ac-
            tivation of the ANS, whereas in the latter it also involves longer-​lasting endocrine and
            immune changes.4 This is in part, of course, an empirical question, yet, importantly,
            emotions typically occur in the context of a mood that makes some emotions more likely
            than others (e.g. one is more likely to get angry at someone when in an irritable mood);
            the physiological profile of a certain mood is thus likely to affect one of these emotions so
            that short-​lived activation of the ANS would occur in a specific endocrine and immune
            context, which should then be regarded as part and parcel of the physiological arousal
            profile of the emotions in question.
            4.	 Yet another challenge to narrow conceptions of physiological arousal comes from re-
                search on the bacteria that live in our organism. They are found in almost all parts
                of the body, with the highest concentration in the guts. The human guts contain
                nearly 1014−1015 bacteria, which is 10−100 times the number of eukaryotic cells of
                the human organism (1013). The many different functions of these bacteria have only
                recently begun to be revealed. Importantly, we now know that they influence, and are
                influenced by, the central nervous system, along the so-​called microbiota-​gut−brain
                axis. Particularly relevant for present purposes is recent evidence indicating that
                stress-​related mood disorders, such as anxiety and depression, alter the composition
                of gut bacteria, and that, in turn, the composition of gut bacteria influences those
                states (for reviews, see Cryan & Dinan, 2012; Foster & McVey Neufeld, 2013; Mayer
                et al., 2014). In a landmark study on mice, Sudo, Chida, Aiba, and colleagues (2004)
                showed that gut microbiota influence the development of the hypothalamic-​pituitary-​
                adrenal system, responsible for the endocrine response to stress. Since then, further
                evidence has been gathered indicating that, in humans too, microbiota influence
                brain processes and behaviors relevant to anxiety-​related stress disorders, and even
                individuals’ susceptibility to depression (see reviews listed earlier for references). This
                influence appears to occur via neural, hormonal, and immune routes:  many of the
                effects of gut microbiota on brain and behavior are dependent on activation of visceral
                afferents travelling in the vagus nerve; gut microbiota also generate neurotransmitters
                and neuromodulators known to influence mood, such as GABA, serotonin, noradren-
                aline, dopamine, and acetylcholine; and gut microbiota can also influence circulating
                levels of pro-​inflammatory cytokines produced by innate immune cells which, as we
                saw, affect brain function. Less is known about the relation between microbiota and




            	 Thanks again to an anonymous reviewer for raising this possibility.
            4
 251




                                                                               Experienced arousal     251


          short-​lived emotions, but given the influence of moods on the latter, microbiota are
          likely to influence them as well.
       Conceptually, this body of work raises the question of where the natural boundaries of
       physiological arousal lie: what is the physical entity that gets aroused? The more con-
       servative answer is that physiological arousal recruits subsystems and processes of the
       organism “traditionally conceived” (i.e. formed by cells with the same DNA), and that
       gut microbiota are different living forms (cells with different DNA) that causally influ-
       ence those subsystems and processes. In other words, bacteria are not part of the or-
       ganism, and thus not of physiological arousal either; rather, they constitute an external
       context that modulates, and is modulated by, the organism “proper.” A less intuitive, yet
       arguably more coherent, answer is that gut microbiota can be constitutive parts of the
       physiological arousal that characterizes affective processes. The reasoning is the same
       we applied earlier to the recognition of the existence of reciprocal influences between
       the sympathetic and parasympathetic system, and more generally between the central
       nervous system (CNS), ANS, endocrine, and immune systems: given the complex mu-
       tual relations interconnecting all these systems and the gut microbiota, it is arguably
       conceptually problematic and even arbitrary to maintain that only processes of the or-
       ganism traditionally conceived can constitute physiological arousal, and that micro-
       bial processes are mere external factors or extrinsic (non-​constitutive) causes. Rather,
       it seems more coherent to regard microbiotic processes as constitutive of physiological
       arousal.
          In sum, together these four sets of considerations indicate that it is misleading to re-
       gard physiological arousal during an emotion as a temporary upsurge from a baseline
       state of “non-​aroused physiology” of the organism traditionally conceived. Our physi-
       ology (i.e. the totality of the processes that contribute to sustaining our living condition)
       is continuously changing and shifting, with the CNS influencing, and being influenced
       by, a multitude of processes taking place at many different timescales in the (various
       divisions of) the peripheral nervous system, the endocrine and immune systems, and
       even beyond them.

       13.4  Experienced arousal
       Let us now take a closer look at the notion of experienced, or subjective, arousal. Again,
       we can begin by noting that there is nothing surprising or controversial in claiming that
       during some emotions we feel more agitated or excited than during others. Indeed, that
       emotions can vary in how upset or excited one feels was noted long before the birth
       of modern psychology. Just to mention a few examples, the Stoics distinguished the
       “passions” from the “good emotions,” where the former are intense and overwhelming,
       and the latter are calm and under control (Graver, 2007). Later, and possibly under the
       influence of the Stoics, in his Treatise of Human Nature (2003 [1739−40]) David Hume
       distinguished the violent passions from the calm ones. The calm passions include the
       moral sentiments and the aesthetic sense, which cause “no disorder in the soul” (Treatise,
25




     252   From physiology to experience


           2.3.3.8) and are known more by their effects than by any immediate feeling; the violent
           passions (love, hate, grief, joy, pride, humility), on the other hand, are characterized by
           the felt quality of “turbulence.”5
              As for contemporary affective science, Jim Russell, for example, characterizes arousal
           as “one’s sense of mobilization and energy” (Russell, 2003, p. 148). Similarly, Fox (2008,
           p. 120) writes that “arousal or activation are often interpreted as the amount of energy
           we feel we have available.” A recent neuroscientific paper defines arousal as “the degree
           of activation experienced during an instance of emotion, ranging from calm to excited”
           (Kragel & LaBar, 2016, p. 445).
              Whereas it is relatively uncontroversial to say that we feel more or less activated during
           an emotion, it is surprisingly hard to specify what it is to feel more or less activated,
           energized, mobilized, and/​or under the control of a “turbulent passion.” A common view
           (consistent with the popular identification, discussed in the section 13.3, of “physiological
           arousal” with autonomic or even sympathetic activation) is to characterize experienced
           arousal as the conscious perception of bodily changes induced by the ANS.6 According to
           this view, to feel aroused during an episode of fear, for example, is to feel one’s own heart
           beating fast, or one’s own skin sweating profusely or changing temperature (famously, this
           view was originally proposed by James, 1884; it is still influential today. See e.g. references
           at the beginning of section 13.2).
              Intuitively, it indeed seems to be the case that these sensations contribute to feeling
           aroused during an emotion, and also that they contribute to the felt intensity of
           arousal: the more (less, respectively) one feels certain parts of one’s body, the more (less)
           aroused one feels. By analogy, at first glance at least, this appears to be what happens
           when one feels sexually aroused, which partly involves feeling changes in erogenous
           areas of the body controlled by the ANS:  the “more” one feels those areas, the more
           sexually aroused one feels.7 Similarly, it would seem, in the case of arousal during an
           emotion. Moreover, the more aroused one feels, the less in control one feels; the tradi-
           tionally recognized overwhelming character of a passion, in other words, appears to owe
           much to the uncontrollable nature of visceral sensations of autonomic origin. Finally,
           in addition to contributing to the intensity of experienced arousal, these sensations also
           appear to contribute to the intensity of an emotional experience. Back in 1964, Schachter
           had already proposed that experienced arousal contributes to felt emotional intensity.
           Relatedly, Wiens, Mezzacappa, and Katkin (2000) showed that subjects who are better



           	 See Dixon (2003) for a historical overview of other philosophical accounts that distinguished the ‘un-
           5

             ruly passions’ from the calmer ‘affects’ or ‘affections’.
           	 In the rest of the chapter we call these, for lack of a better term, visceral sensations “of autonomic or-
           6

             igin” or “due to the ANS,” to distinguish them from other visceral sensations due to the interoception
             of substances circulating in the blood stream (as described in section 13.3).
           	 But note that feelings of sexual arousal are likely mediated by a combination of visceral and somatic
           7

             afferents.
 253




                                                                                   Experienced arousal      253


       at perceiving their physiological arousal and report more subjective arousal also experi-
       ence emotions more intensely.
          In our view, this is a plausible but still partial account of what it is to feel aroused during
       an emotion. Similar to the case of physiological arousal discussed in the section 13.3, to
       regard experienced arousal as constituted only by sensations of bodily changes induced by
       the ANS is too narrow, and does not account for other ways in which we can feel aroused
       during an emotion; in particular: (a) some visceral sensations are due to the interoception
       of substances circulating in the bloodstream; (b)  non-​visceral somatic sensations also
       contribute to feeling aroused; and (c) experienced arousal also appears to involve con-
       scious experiences that are not feelings of bodily changes. We already discussed the first
       point briefly in section 13.3.2. Here we consider the other two points in turn.
       1.	 William James (1884) already noted that emotional experience also involves the per-
           ception of bodily changes mediated by the somatic nervous system (the division of the
           peripheral nervous system that controls the musculoskeletal system; see footnote 2).
           We can call them “somatic sensations.” Important somatic sensations that contribute
           to feeling aroused come from facial expressions (smiling, frowning, pouting, grinning,
           and so on) and from bodily posture, and also include felt urges to act in specific ways.
           For example, feeling angry and anxious often involves the conscious perception of
           one’s tense facial muscles (such as tense jaws and/​or forehead) and other bodily mus-
           cles (especially in the upper back, neck, and shoulders); feeling sad often involves
           feeling one’s drooping jaws and eye corners, slouched posture, and so on.
          In addition, feeling aroused during an emotion often involves the experience of wanting
       to move one way or the other (felt urges to act). This experience partly constitutes the
       motivational aspect of emotion. For example, during an aggressive face-​to-​face confron-
       tation, we may experience wanting to shout at, or even physically attack, the person we
       are angry at. Most of the time in this kind of scenario we repress our outward behavior
       because of social rules, yet even if we do not assail the opponent, the urge to do so is
       there and is felt in one’s own body tensing up, preparing to attack, and restraining itself.
       Note that, especially in the moment, we may not be able to clearly discriminate these felt
       urges to act from other types of sensations (e.g. the angry person may also feel her heart
       pounding hard). Similar considerations readily apply to experiences of fear, great joy, con-
       tempt, pride, jealousy, and many others. In affective science, the term that best captures
       this aspect of emotion experience is action readiness awareness (Frijda, 1986, pp. 231−40).
       “Action readiness,” as the word indicates, refers to a state of being ready to act in a certain
       way. The awareness of this state is a bodily feeling, in the sense that it involves the con-
       scious perception of one’s own body, constituted by proprioceptive sensations of position,
       and state of tension or calmness. As in the case of visceral sensations of autonomic origin,
       felt urges to act appear to contribute significantly to experienced arousal during an emo-
       tion, and also to the intensity of the emotion: for example, the more I want to shout at
       someone, the more aroused, agitated, or upset I feel as part of my experience of anger, and
       arguably also the “more angry” or “more intensely angry” I feel.
254




      254   From physiology to experience


            2.	 The other reason why experienced arousal during emotion cannot be reduced to per-
                ception of bodily changes due to the ANS is that it arguably includes also conscious
                states that are not feelings of bodily changes. This possibility splits into two: (a) expe-
                rienced arousal includes non-​bodily experiences; that is, experiences with no “bodily
                phenomenology”; (b) experienced emotional arousal involves bodily feelings that are
                not feelings of the body but feelings of the world shaped through bodily self-​awareness;
                here, experienced emotional arousal does include bodily phenomenology, but this re-
                mains “in the background,” as we explain in the following.
               According to (a), it is possible to be highly aroused during an emotion without feeling
            one’s own body. Mostly philosophers supporting a cognitivist view of emotions tend to
            make this claim. For example, Claire Armon-​Jones (1986, p. 51) writes: “whether or not
            I feel any twinges or palpitations, if my thoughts are totally consumed by a ‘strong desire
            for an object which I do not possess and which belongs to another’, then I can be said to
            feel ‘extremely envious’.” According to this view, one can be very worried that his child
            might have a life-​threatening condition, for example, without experiencing any bodily
            sensation (neither visceral nor somatic). What constitutes feeling worried, here, is likely
            to be the conscious thoughts that one’s child may suffer and die young, say, with the fre-
            quency and disruptive character of these thoughts determining the level of experienced
            arousal. Uriah Kriegel’s (2015) recent account of emotional phenomenology also supports
            this possibility. In his view, emotional experience is reducible to a combination of cogni-
            tive, conative, and algedonic (pain−pleasure) phenomenology, none of which, he argues,
            necessarily involves bodily feelings. He briefly suggests that conative phenomenology
            contributes to felt emotional intensity (2015, p. 135), however not in virtue of any bodily
            sensation.
               Our view is that possibility (a) is implausible. Although it is the case that “cognitive phe-
            nomenology” (thoughts, predictions, memories) can constitute much of our experience
            of being aroused during an emotion, it is not clear to us that it is deprived of any bodily
            phenomenology. We think that cognitivist accounts of this sort overlook possibility (b),
            that is, the existence of bodily feelings that are not feelings of the body but experiences
            of the body through which certain aspects of the world (one’s current situation, imagined
            future events, etc.) are experienced as emotionally salient (see also Colombetti, 2014,
            Chapter 5); because these bodily experiences are often subtle and inconspicuous, they can
            be mistaken for “purely mental” (Kriegel, 2015, p. 89). To illustrate this second possibility,
            consider again Armon-​Jones’s example of her experience of an alleged “non-​bodily” envy.
            As she describes this case, she says that her thoughts “are totally consumed by a ‘strong
            desire for an object which I do not possess and which belongs to another,” ’ and that these
            thoughts exhaust her experience of envy. However, it does not seem to be phenomeno-
            logically accurate to say that one can be “totally consumed” by a “strong desire” (note the
            intensity of the described experience) for an object without any bodily phenomenology.
            Even if we grant that the desired object is quite abstract (e.g. respect and admiration,
            rather than a new modern kitchen) and that being “totally consumed” by a desire for it
            consists in cognitive rumination, it seems inaccurate to maintain that bodily feelings are
 25




                                                                                         conclusion      255


      entirely absent from this experience. In particular, we suggest that the experience of envy,
      for example, is shaped by inconspicuous background bodily feelings that “color” what the
      person attends to in her thoughts and ruminations (much like looking through a colored
      pair of lenses makes the world show up as colored, while the lenses themselves are not
      noted, and are rather that through which the world appears tinted). These background
      bodily feelings may not be noted by the envious person but they nevertheless contribute
      to feelings of tension and unpleasantness that, arguably, partly constitute the experience of
      envy described by Armon-​Jones. In addition, emotional experiences typically take place
      in the context of more general mood experiences—​such as feeling up or down, sluggish
      or energized, tense or calm (Thayer, 1996). These feelings, we propose, are bodily feelings
      that constitute a “background bodily phenomenology” against which the occurrent
      emotional experiences can stand out (in the foreground).8 So, even if one granted that,
      sometimes at least, emotional experiences include primarily “purely mental” cognitive
      or conative phenomenology, it would still be the case that bodily feelings constituting
      background moods shape and structure what is in the foreground. Taken together, these
      considerations complement, at the experiential level, the point we made in section 13.3
      about the existence of several bi-​directional pathways between brain and body, such that
      it does not seem possible to “silence” all sources of feedback from the body.

      13.5 Conclusion
      In sum, then, in this chapter we have argued that the notion of arousal used in affective
      science needs to be characterized broadly, both at the physiological and experiential level,
      and cannot be reduced to narrow conceptions of interoception limited to the perception
      (conscious and not) of ANS activation. At the physiological level, we need to move be-
      yond Cannon’s (1929) and Schachter and Singer’s (1962) conceptualization of arousal as
      a uniform pattern of sympathetic activation. The sympathetic and parasympathetic sys-
      tems are complexly interrelated and work together to generate specific patterns of auto-
      nomic arousal; additionally, autonomic activity includes not just neural efferent processes
      but is also influenced by afferent neural and humoral feedback. Third, autonomic acti-
      vation does not happen in isolation from other bodily processes, rather it is complexly
      interrelated via bi-​directional pathways with the CNS and the endocrine and immune
      system. Fourth, we suggested that the notion of physiological arousal may be extended
      even beyond processes taking place within the organism traditionally conceived, so as to
      include (at least) those gut bacteria known to influence and be influenced by neural, en-
      docrine, and immune processes relevant to emotions and moods.
         At the experiential level, we have argued that arousal cannot be reduced to visceral
      sensations of autonomic origin but instead additionally includes perception of circu-
      lating substances mediated via humoral interoceptive pathways as well as specific somatic


      8
       	 See also Damasio (1999) for the related notion of ‘background feeling’, and Colombetti (2014,
         Chapter 5) for a discussion of this and other notions of background bodily experiences.
256




      256   From physiology to experience


            sensations: feedback from facial muscles and bodily posture and felt urges to act (percep-
            tion of muscle tension in preparation for action). We also proposed to regard “background
            bodily feelings” as constituting the experience of being aroused during emotion, where
            these are feelings in which bodily self-​awareness is present but is not conspicuous, and is
            best characterized as shaping the person’s experience from, or through, the background.

            References
            Aristotle. (1986). De anima (On the soul). (trans. H. Lawson-​Tancred). London: Penguin.
            Armon-​Jones, C. (1986). The thesis of constructionism. In: R. Harré (ed.), The Social Construction of
               Emotions. Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 32–​56.
            Ax, A. F. (1953). The physiological differentiation between fear and anger in humans. Psychosomatic
               Medicine, 15(5), 433–​42.
            Barbur, J. L. (2004). Learning from the pupil: Studies of basic mechanisms and clinical applications.
               In: L. M. Chalupa and J. S. Werner (eds), The Visual Neurosciences, Vol. 1. Cambridge, MA: MIT
               Press, pp. 641–​56.
            Berntson, G. G. and Cacioppo, J. T. (2009). Autonomic nervous system. In: D. Sander and K. R. Scherer
               (eds), Oxford Companion to Emotion and the Affective Sciences. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
               pp.  65–​7.
            Bradley, M. M. and Lang, P. J. (2007). Emotion and motivation. In: J. Cacioppo, L. G. Tassinary, and G.
               G. Berntson (eds), Handbook of Psychophysiology, 3rd edn. New York, NY: Cambridge University
               Press, pp. 581–​607.
            Cannon, W. B. (1929). Bodily Changes in Pain, Hunger, Fear and Rage, 2nd edn. Boston, MA: Charles
               Branford.
            Charmandari, E., Tsigos, C., and Chrousos, G. (2005). Endocrinology of the stress response. Annual
               Review of Physiology, 67(1), 259–​84.
            Colombetti, G. (2014). The Feeling Body: Affective Science Meets the Enactive Mind. Cambridge,
               MA: MIT Press.
            Colombetti, G. and Kuppens, P. (forthcoming). Valence, arousal and their relation: Conceptual
               clarifications and empirical issues. In: A. Scarantino (ed.), The Routledge Handbook of Emotion
               Theory. Oxford: Routledge.
            Critchley, H. D. and Harrison, N. A. (2013). Visceral influences on brain and behavior. Neuron, 77(4),
               624–​38.
            Cryan, J. F. and Dinan, T. G. (2012). Mind-​altering microorganisms: The impact of the gut microbiota
               on brain and behaviour. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 13(10), 701–​12.
            Damasio, A. R. (1999). The Feeling of What Happens: Body, Emotion and the Making of Consciousness.
               London: Vintage.
            Dantzer, R., O’Connor, J. C., Freund, G. G., Johnson, R. W., and Kelley, K. W. (2008). From
               inflammation to sickness and depression: When the immune system subjugates the brain. Nature
               Reviews Neuroscience, 9(1),  46–​56.
            Davidson, R. J., Scherer, K. R., and Goldsmith, H. H. (eds), (2003). Handbook of Affective Sciences.
               Oxford: Oxford University Press.
            Dixon, T. (2003). From Passions to Emotions: The Creation of a Secular Psychological Category.
               Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
            Dror, O. E. (2014). The Cannon–​Bard thalamic theory of emotions: A brief genealogy and reappraisal.
               Emotion Review, 6(1),  13–​20.
            Foster, J. A. and McVey Neufeld, K.-​A. (2013). Gut–​brain axis: How the microbiome influences anxiety
               and depression. Trends in Neurosciences, 36(5), 305–​12.
 257




                                                                                                     References     257


       Fowles, D. C. (2009). Arousal. In: D. Sander and K. R. Scherer (eds), Oxford Companion to Emotion and
           the Affective Sciences. Oxford: Oxford University Press, p. 50.
       Fox, E. (2008). Emotion Science: Cognitive and Neuroscientific Approaches to Understanding Human
           Emotions. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
       Frijda, N. H. (1986). The Emotions. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
       Garfinkel, S. N., Seth, A. K., Barrett, A. B., Suzuki, K., and Critchley, H. D. (2015). Knowing your own
           heart: Distinguishing interoceptive accuracy from interoceptive awareness. Biological Psychology,
           104,  65–​74.
       Gill, C. (2010). Naturalistic Psychology in Galen and Stoicism. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
       Graver, M. R. (2007). Stoicism and Emotion. Chicago, IL: University Of Chicago Press.
       Grewe, O., Nagel, F., and Kopiez, R., and Altenmuller, E. (2007). Emotions over time: Synchronicity
           and development of subjective, physiological, and facial affective reactions to music. Emotion, 7,
           774–​88.
       Harrison, N. A. (2017). Brain structures implicated in inflammation-​associated depression. Current
           Topics in Behavioral Neuroscience, 31, 221–​48.
       Harrison, N. A., Kreibig, S. D., and Critchley, H. D. (2013). A two-​way road: Efferent and afferent
           pathways of autonomic activity in emotion. In: J. Armony and P. Vuilleumier (eds), Cambridge
           Handbook of Human Affective Neuroscience. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 82–​106.
       Hume, D. (1739–​40 [2003]). A Treatise of Human Nature. London: Everyman.
       James, W. (1884). What is an emotion? Mind, 9, 188–​205.
       Jänig, W. (2006). The Integrative Action of the Autonomic Nervous System: Neurobiology of Homeostasis.
           Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
       Kragel, P. A. and LaBar, K. S. (2016). Decoding the nature of emotion in the brain. Trends in Cognitive
           Sciences, 20(6), 444–​55.
       Kriegel, U. (2015). The Varieties of Consciousness. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
       Langley, J. N. (1900). The sympathetic and other related systems of nerves. In: E. A. Sharpey-​Schäfer
           (ed.), Textbook of Physiology. London: Young J. Pentland, pp. 616–​96.
       Mayer, E. A., Knight, R., Mazmanian, S. K., Cryan, J. F., and Tillisch, K. (2014). Gut microbes and the
           brain: Paradigm shift in neuroscience. Journal of Neuroscience, 34(46), 15490–​6.
       Nummenmaa, L., Glerean, E., Hari, R., and Hietanen, J. K. (2014). Bodily maps of emotions.
           Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111(2), 646–​51.
       Rimé, B., Philippot, P., and Cisamolo, D. (1990). Social schemata of peripheral changes in emotion.
           Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59(1),  38–​49.
       Rivest, S. (2009). Regulation of innate immune responses in the brain. Nature Reviews Immunology,
           9(6), 429–​39.
       Robinson, B. F., Epstein, S. E., Beiser, G. D., and Braunwald, E. (1966). Control of heart rate by the
           autonomic nervous system: Studies in man on the interrelation between baroreceptor mechanisms
           and exercise. Circulation Research, 19(2), 400–​11.
       Russell, J. A. (2003). Core affect and the psychological construction of emotion. Psychological Review,
           110(1), 145–​72.
       Saper, C. B., Romanovsky, A. A., and Scammell, T. E. (2012). Neural circuitry engaged by
           prostaglandins during the sickness syndrome. Nature Neuroscience, 15(8), 1088–​95.
       Scarantino, A. (ed.), (forthcoming). The Routledge Handbook of Emotion Theory. Oxford: Routledge.
       Schachter, S. (1964). The interaction of cognitive and physiological determinants of emotional state.
           In: L. Berkowitz (ed.), Advances in Experimental Social Psychology. New York, NY: Academic Press,
           pp.  49–​80.
       Schachter, S. and Singer, J. (1962). Cognitive, social, and physiological determinants of emotional state.
           Psychological Review, 69(5), 379–​99.
258




      258   From physiology to experience


            Scherer, K. R. and Wallbott, H. G. (1994). Evidence for universality and cultural variation of differential
               emotion response patterning. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 66, 310–​28.
            Schulz, A., Lass-​Hennemann, J., Sütterlin, S., Schächinger, H., and Vögele, C. (2013). Cold pressor
               stress induces opposite effects on cardioceptive accuracy dependent on assessment paradigm.
               Biological Psychology, 93(1), 167–​74.
            Spiga, F., Walker, J. J., Gupta, R., Terry, J. R., and Lightman, S. L. (2015). 60 Years of
               neuroendocrinology. Glucocorticoid dynamics: Insights from mathematical, experimental and
               clinical studies. Journal of Endocrinology, 226(2), T55–​T66.
            Sudo, N., Chida, Y., Aiba, Y., Sonoda, J., Oyama, N., Yu, X.-​N., et al. (2004). Postnatal microbial
               colonization programs the hypothalamic–​pituitary–​adrenal system for stress response in mice.
               Journal of Physiology, 558(1), 263–​75.
            Thayer, R. E. (1996). The Origin of Everyday Moods: Managing Energy, Tension, and Stress.
               Oxford: Oxford University Press.
            Tracey, K. J. (2002). The inflammatory reflex. Nature, 420(6917),  853–​9.
            Wiens, S., Mezzacappa, E. S., and Katkin, E. S. (2000). Heartbeat detection and the experience of
               emotions. Cognition & Emotion, 14(3), 417–​27.
            Wolf, S. and Wolff, H. G. (1947). Human Gastric Function. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
 259




                    Chapter 14

                    Was Descartes right after all? An
                    affective background for bodily
                    awareness
                    Frédérique de Vignemont



       14.1 Introduction
       These last 20 years have seen an explosion of experimental work on interoception. Recent
       accounts of interoception have highlighted its role for self-​awareness, positing it at the core
       of what is sometimes called the “sentient self ” (Craig, 2010), the “proto-​self ” (Damasio,
       1999), the “embodied self ” (Seth, 2013), or the “material me” (Tsakiris, 2017). What gives
       such a privileged status to interoception compared to other sources of information about
       the body, and is it actually warranted?
         In this chapter, I shall leave aside the empirical investigation of interoception and more
       simply return to Descartes’s Meditations on First Philosophy.1 Although he is mainly
       known for his dualism and sometimes even perceived as an enemy of interoception (e.g.
       Damasio, 1994), one should not forget that he also strongly emphasizes the unity between
       the body and the self:
           Nature likewise teaches me by these sensations of pain, hunger, thirst, etc., that I  am not only
           lodged in my body as a pilot in a vessel, but that I am besides so intimately conjoined, and as it were
           intermixed with it, that my mind and body compose a certain unity. For if this were not the case,
           I should not feel pain when my body is hurt, seeing I am merely a thinking thing, but should per-
           ceive the wound by the understanding alone, just as a pilot perceives by sight when any part of his
           vessel is damaged; and when my body has need of food or drink, I should have a clear knowledge
           of this, and not be made aware of it by the confused sensations of hunger and thirst: for, in truth,
           all these sensations of hunger, thirst, pain, etc., are nothing more than certain confused modes of
           thinking, arising from the union and apparent fusion of mind and body. (Descartes, 2016 [1641]
           Meditation VI, p. 56)

       What is interesting is that Descartes uses the examples of pain, thirst, and hunger to show
       that we have a unique relationship with our body. Descartes might thus have been the first
       advocate of the significance of interoception for bodily awareness. In this chapter I shall
       first explore the many ways one might understand the notion of interoception. I shall then
       assess its contribution for the awareness of one’s body as one’s own.

       1
        	 See also The Passions of the Soul (1649).
260




      260   Was Descartes right after all?



            14.2  The manifold of interoception
            The first question one may ask is whether the notion of interoception corresponds to a
            natural kind since it might sometimes seem that it results more from an artificial tax-
            onomy than from the structure of the natural world. However, there is no easy answer in-
            sofar as many disagree on the ontological status and the exact criterion for natural kinds.
            Leaving aside these delicate issues, one may still question the homogeneity of the notion
            of interoception. What should be included or not is indeed not always clear. Consider the
            following three definitional attempts:
             	 The sole-​object definition:  Interoception consists of information that is exclusively
            ◆​

               about one’s body.
             	 The insider definition: Interoception consists of information about what is internal to
            ◆​

               the body and not about what is at its surface.
             	 The regulator definition: Interoception consists of information that plays a role in in-
            ◆​

               ternal regulation and monitoring.
            Each definition is problematic. Consider for instance proprioception, which informs the
            organism about joint angle, muscle stretch, and tendon tension. It meets both the sole-​
            object and the insider criteria and yet it is usually distinguished from interoception. The
            regulator definition does not fare better. On this interpretation, an efferent copy sent
            when moving should qualify as interoceptive and yet nobody includes it in interoception.
            On the other hand, pain and affective touch are sometimes—​but not always—​conceived
            of as being part of interoception and yet they are felt to be located on the surface of the
            skin. One could go on like that without finding a single unifying criterion that is not
            too broad. The best strategy may then be to return to Sherrington’s (1906) original def-
            inition since he was the first to coin the term (for review see Ceunen, Vlaeyen, & Van
            Diest, 2016):
             	 The visceral definition:  Interoception consists of information coming from internal
            ◆​

               organs.
            Sherrington’s definition includes neither nociception nor thermal perception nor affective
            touch. It is thus narrower than most definitions but one may still question its unity be-
            cause each internal organ is different and sends different types of signals. One may then
            talk of the “modalities” of interoception in the same way that we talk of the modalities of
            exteroception, such as sight and audition (e.g. Crucianelli et al., in press; Garfinkel et al.,
            2016; Herbert et al., 2012). A further source of complexity is that we need to distinguish
            between three levels at which one can analyse interoception:
             	 Physiological level: interoceptive signals originating from internal organs.
            ◆​

             	 Phenomenological level: interoceptive sensations (e.g. feeling one’s bladder or stomach
            ◆​

               full) and interoceptive feelings (e.g. feeling hungry or thirsty).
             	 Introspective level: interoceptive accuracy (as measured by heartbeat counting, for in-
            ◆​

               stance), interoceptive sensibility (as measured by the confidence in one’s interoceptive
 261




                                                                            The manifold of interoception   261


           accuracy), and interoceptive awareness (as measured by the relationship between ac-
           curacy and sensibility) (Garfinkel et al., 2015).
       Most current literature focuses either on the physiological level itself (e.g. Babo-​Rebelo
       et  al., 2016; Critchley & Harrison, 2013)  or on the introspective level (e.g. Seth, 2013;
       Tsakiris, 2017), but it largely neglects the phenomenological one. However, it is important
       to note that the way it is operationalized, interoceptive awareness involves more than being
       conscious of interoceptive signals. Consider interoceptive accuracy: it requires a reflective
       act of attention that turns to one’s bodily signals in order to perform a cognitive task (e.g.
       counting one’s heartbeat). The “interoceptive score” is then computed either directly on
       the basis of the reliability of the judgment or more indirectly by comparing the reliability
       of the judgment with the confidence that one has in it. It is thus disconnected from the
       function of interoception to maintain optimal homeostasis: interoceptive accuracy by it-
       self has no positive or negative valence and it plays no motivational role. One may then
       legitimately wonder to what extent it can actually be taken as a proxy to interoception
       as such. It rather seems to be a proxy for interoceptive top-​down attention: the capacity
       to voluntarily switch the focus of attention from the external world (on which it usually
       is) to the internal world, and to access and process the information that is then avail-
       able. Interoceptive awareness further involves metacognitive processes. These are inter-
       esting capacities and many studies have shown that the capacity to pay attention inward
       modulates the reliability of bodily judgments and the sensitivity to bodily illusions, such
       as the Rubber Hand Illusion (for review see Tsakiris, 2017), but we are a long way from
       the primitive self-​regulatory function of interoception.
          Many might easily grant that interoceptive awareness is far from perfect but still argue
       that it remains the best proxy available. After all, we can spontaneously feel our heart
       beating too fast or feel our bladder full. Interoceptive awareness is simply a way to volun-
       tarily pay attention to these interoceptive sensations. However, I do not think that these
       kinds of sensations, even when experienced spontaneously, are the right starting point to
       investigate the significance of interoception for self-​awareness. Indeed, I want to propose
       that they are indirect or impure, so to speak: they inform us about the state of our internal
       organs but they do not result from interoceptive signals only. Consider the example of
       the full bladder, which is sometimes experimentally used as a measure for interoception.
       What we actually experience is a sensation of pressure, as if something were pushing
       the surface of our body from the inside, as well as the sensation of our skin stretching.
       The sensation is then not only interoceptive but also tactile.2 Something along the same
       lines could be said about the heartbeat sensation, which also involves tactile sensations of
       the blood in our veins and arteries tapping too fast on the surface. It might also involve
       internal auditory sensations of the heart pumping and the blood rushing. These non-​
       interoceptive signals contribute to the way we are aware of the internal state of our body
       and play a crucial role for homeostasis. However, because they involve other modalities

       2
        	 See de Vignemont and Massin (2015) for a definition of touch in terms of pressure.
26




     262   Was Descartes right after all?


           (touch, audition), there is too many potential confound and one cannot control what
           comes from interoception per se. I shall thus leave aside these interoceptive sensations
           from now on. Instead, I will focus on what I call interoceptive feelings.
              It was Armstrong (1962) who first distinguishes between bodily feelings and sensations.
           His criterion could be phrased as follows: sensations, such as touch and pain, are local
           whereas feelings, such as thirst, hunger, fatigue, sleepiness, dizziness, and shortness of
           breath, are global. For instance, you can contrast the sensation of the pinprick at the tip of
           your index finger with the diffuse feeling of fatigue in your whole body. Or consider the
           case of thirst: it reveals the general state of the entirety of your body missing water. More
           generally, interoceptive feelings inform us about the welfare of the organism as a whole.3
           Their spatial principle of organization is thus holistic.
              Despite these apparent differences, one may question the validity of the distinction be-
           tween interoceptive sensations and interoceptive feelings. In other words, are interocep-
           tive feelings really global? Although it is true that they do not activate specific areas of
           Penfield’s Homunculus in the primary somatosensory cortex, Craig (2010) argues that
           there are interoceptive maps which are organized somatotopically. The difficulty here is
           that in his definition of interoception he includes pain, thermal perception, and affective
           touch which are clearly localized on the surface of the body. My claim is restricted to thirst,
           hunger, fatigue, and so forth. Is there a somatotopic representation of these feelings? One
           way to test their spatial organization is to investigate the consequences of local anaes-
           thesia. It is true that one can feel a sensation of dryness in the throat when one feels thirsty
           but does this entail that you cannot feel thirsty during a local anaesthesia of the throat?
           I doubt it. Alternatively, one may try to perform some classic tasks in psychophysics such
           as judgments of spatial distance:  you can judge whether two tactile stimuli are farther
           apart than two other tactile stimuli but can you do it for interoceptive feelings? Again,
           this seems unlikely.4 Hence, the spatiality of interoceptive feelings is limited. Their role
           is not to attract attention to a specific part of the body but rather to adjust one’s behavior
           to reinstate the internal equilibrium that has been disturbed.5 Hence, we generally do not


           	 Interoceptive feelings are tightly connected to emotions. According to the James−Lange theory, they
           3

             actually constitute emotions. However, they should not be confused because emotions are not only
             about the body, they are also about the object or the event in the world that is taken as the source of
             the emotion (e.g. I am afraid of the dog). One may then suggest that interoceptive feelings are similar
             or even identical to moods. Moods indeed lack intentional objects. For instance, when I feel anxious,
             I may not feel anxious about anything particular, my feeling seems to be primarily bodily, something
             like a negative form of arousal. Nonetheless, moods and bodily feelings do not play the same motiva-
             tional role. In brief, I should stop eating if I feel full but there is no salient action that I should perform
             if I feel anxious and the behavior that I might adopt is directed toward the external world (e.g. paying
             more attention to potential threats in the environment) and not toward my body.
           	 Even for painful sensations, which are localized, subjects have difficulties judging their distance
           4

             (Mancini et al., 2015).
           	 Still it should be noted that in some occasions their affective valence can be positive and they can feel
           5

             pleasant (e.g. feeling full).
 263




                                                    The bodyguard hypothesis of bodily ownership        263


       need voluntarily to pay attention to interoceptive feelings. We spontaneously experience
       them when needed (they can even invade our whole mental life).
          As mentioned earlier, interoceptive feelings are rarely investigated in the recent litera-
       ture on interoception. It is easy to see why: they are indeed difficult to operationalize in
       experimental context. Roughly speaking, one does not want to starve one’s subjects not
       one time but 60 times to have reliable data. Furthermore, one would have to be able to
       dissociate cases with and without interoceptive feelings but they are pervasive in our life
       and almost never fully impaired, leading, for instance, to the complete absence of thirst
       (i.e. hypodipsia). Even in pain asymbolia, patients who seem to no longer care about
       their body still drink and eat normally (Bain, 2014). Nonetheless, interoceptive feelings
       might be disturbed in some disorders like depersonalization (Billon, 2017), anorexia
       nervosa (Holsen & Goldstein, 2015 see Chapter 9 in the present volume), and addiction
       (Naqvi et. al., 2014) but the difficulty is that many other factors intervene to explain these
       disorders, which makes difficult any conclusion about the specific role of interoception.
       My approach here will thus be mainly based on conceptual analysis. I shall first describe
       what it takes to be aware of one’s body as being one’s own and then determine what role,
       if any, interoceptive feelings play.

       14.3  The bodyguard hypothesis of bodily ownership
       Consider the following basic example: I touch the table with my hand. My tactile sensa-
       tion includes sensations of resistance, texture, and temperature, as well as the sensation
       of the location at which I feel the pressure to occur, namely the hand. I am also aware
       that the hand on which I feel touch is mine. This type of self-​awareness is known as the
       sense of bodily ownership, for want of a better name. It might seem indeed that I do not
       “own” my body; I only own my laptop, my flat, and my books, while I have a more privi-
       leged relation with my body than with any other objects, one might even say a relation of
       identity. The fact is that numerous other languages—​although not English—​use different
       suffixes to indicate the possession of alienable (e.g. my flat) and inalienable entities (e.g.
       my hand) (Kemmerer, 2014). The relation that we have with our body, however, cannot be
       characterized only by the fact that it is inalienable. Indeed, I can also qualify my relation
       to my son in the same way. We thus need to go beyond this in our description and ask
       what it actually means to experience one’s body as one’s own.
          Let me start with a first approximation by drawing a parallel with nationalistic feelings.
       Consider what was called the Russian “Patriotic War” of 1812. In the nineteenth cen-
       tury, people who lived in the Russian Empire were characterized by the heterogeneity of
       their cultures and religions and the enormous distances that separated them. It was only
       at the time when Napoleon invaded Russia and burnt Moscow down that the Russians
       felt that they belonged to the one country. More generally, it has been noted in social
       psychology that feeling one’s country as one’s own involves not just being aware of its
       borders, nor being aware that one can vote; it also involves being aware that what happens
       to the country matters, and this feeling is especially salient when the country is under
       threat. One can then experience a feeling of national unity against the common enemy. To
264




      264   Was Descartes right after all?


            some extent this characterization applies to the sense of bodily ownership (de Vignemont,
            2018). To fix the boundaries of the body that one feels as one’s own, I propose that it is
            not sufficient to fix where the body stops and the rest of the world starts; one must also fix
            what matters for self-​preservation. It is not sufficient to be aware of the boundaries of the
            body, one must also be aware of the valence of these boundaries: one must be aware that
            these boundaries are the ones to care about and to protect if one wants to survive and that
            it is important to keep track of them.
               My claim is relatively simple and uncontroversial: one’s own body matters for survival
            and needs to be defended. Because of the significance of the body for the organism’s
            survival, I propose that a specific representation to fix the body that must be protected,
            which I call a protective body map, evolved to increase the organism’s chance of survival.
            Consequently, one does not protect one’s biological body, one protects the body that one
            takes oneself to have. The protective body map represents the body that has a special value
            for the organism’s evolutionary needs. I  further propose that the protective body map
            grounds the sense of bodily ownership.
               The bodyguard hypothesis: One experiences as one’s own any body parts that are incorporated in
               the protective body map.

            The protective body map informs the brain about the potential relevance of the location
            of the sensation for the organism’s needs. Hence, if a spider crawls on my hand, I feel its
            contact as being located within the frame of the body to protect. Thanks to their protec-
            tive reference frame, bodily experiences involve the awareness of the body as having a
            special import for the self. They are thus endowed with a specific affective coloring that
            goes beyond their sensory phenomenology. This affective quality constitutes the phenom-
            enology of bodily ownership: feeling your body as your own consists in feeling that it has
            a special significance for you.
               Evidence in favor of the bodyguard hypothesis can be found in borderline cases of
            ownership. Physiological response to threat (measured by skin conductance response, or
            SCR) has become the main implicit measure of the Rubber Hand Illusion (RHI), which
            is conceived of as the main experimental paradigm to test the sense of bodily ownership.
            It has been repeatedly shown that participants react when the rubber hand is threatened,
            but only when they report it as their own after synchronous stroking, and the strength of
            their reaction is correlated with their ownership rating in questionnaires (e.g. Ehrsson
            et al., 2007). Conversely, patients with somatoparaphrenia who no longer experience their
            limb as their own show a lack of increase of SCR when their “alien” hand is threatened
            (Romano et  al., 2014). This finding is consistent with their broad pattern of attitudes.
            Many somatoparaphrenic patients try to get rid of their “alien” limb by pulling it out of
            their bed, giving it to the doctor, putting it in the garbage, and so forth.
               Further evidence in favor of the bodyguard hypothesis can be found in congenital
            pain insensitivity. Patients with congenital pain insensitivity are characterized by dra-
            matic impairment of pain sensations since birth, caused by a hereditary neuropathy
            or channelopathy. They show a complete lack of discomfort, grimacing, or withdrawal
 265




                                                          The bodyguard hypothesis of bodily ownership               265


       reaction to prolonged pinpricks, strong pressure, soft tissue pinching, and noxious
       thermal stimuli. Interestingly, they can describe that their body feels like an external ob-
       ject, a kind of tool (Danziger, 2010). An 18-​year-​old boy with congenital pain insensitivity
       reported: “A body is like a car, it can be dented but it pops out again and can be fixed like
       a car. Someone can get in and use it but the body isn’t you, you just inhabit it” Frances &
       Gale, 1975, pp. 116−17).
          Descartes was right: without pain, one is only as a pilot in a vessel.6 This does not mean
       that it is only when the body is in danger that we feel our body as our own. I defend a
       weaker conception, according to which there is a stage in development in which it is im-
       portant, possibly even necessary, to experience pain (or other affectively loaded bodily
       sensations) in order to give affective significance to the boundaries of the body, a signifi-
       cance that is at the origin of the sense of bodily ownership. In short, past experiences that
       the boundaries of the body could be at risk make these boundaries the boundaries of the
       body that we experience as our own now. Hence, it appears that without pain expertise
       and without pain expectation, bodily boundaries are just spatial boundaries, and this is
       not sufficient for the sense of bodily ownership (de Vignemont, 2017).
          One may object at this point that one does not always protect the body that one
       experiences as one’s own, and that one protects many things—​including many bodies—​
       besides one’s own body without having a sense of ownership of them. However, this is
       not an objection against the bodyguard hypothesis. First, one should not neglect that
       protective behaviors can be analysed at many different levels, and only the lowest one
       is relevant here. Consider the pleasure that some people experience in extreme sports,
       for instance. Even if the mountain biker is ready to risk his life by going downhill on
       a very steep and dangerous slope, he also pays extreme attention to its immediate en-
       vironment and he is ready to react in case of obstacles. More generally, the affective
       conception that I  defend does not assume that the protective body map is the only
       factor that decides which body is to be protected, even at the most primitive level. Like
       any other behavior, protective behaviors can result from complex decision-​making
       processes, involving a variety of beliefs, desires, emotions, moral considerations, and
       so forth.
          To recapitulate, it is a fact of the matter that there is a specific body that one should pro-
       tect to survive and reproduce and it is the function of the protective body map to covariate
       reliably with it. The protective body map is normally recruited as a spatial frame of refer-
       ence for bodily experiences, ascribing an affective value to the body that one experiences.

       6
        	 Interestingly, patients with congenital pain insensitivity often engage in self-​mutilation, including
          burns and auto-​amputations of fingertips and tongues (Danziger & Willer, 2009; Nagasako, Oaklander,
          & Dworkin, 2003). Similar self-​inflicted injuries can also be found in animals raised in isolation pre-
          served from pain (Melzack & Scott, 1957; Lichstein & Sackett, 1971). Injuring one’ s body may be a way
          to test whose body it is. Feeling something can then strengthen a fading feeling of confidence in the
          sense of bodily ownership, whereas feeling nothing can confirm that this body has nothing to do with
          oneself, or it might be that one simply feels no sense of ownership whatsoever. If so, one is not volun-
          tarily injuring oneself, rather one is injuring a body, which happens to be one’s own.
26




     266   Was Descartes right after all?


           One is then aware of one’s body as one’s own and one is motivated to protect it. The feeling
           of bodily ownership should thus be conceived of in affective terms. For all that, does the
           bodyguard hypothesis qualify as an interoceptive theory of ownership?

           14.4.  Disembodied interoception
           We have just seen that pain plays a key role for the sense of bodily ownership. It may
           then seem that interoceptive feelings should play the same role: they are affective-​loaded
           experiences, which are essential for self-​preservation. However, as I shall now argue, their
           significance is of a different kind.
              Imagine a creature that only receives interoceptive signals and that only experiences
           interoceptive feelings. It receives information about its body, and its body only. It thus
           has self-​specific information, but does it have a sense of bodily ownership? Not neces-
           sarily, I  argue. There is indeed a difference between self-​specificity and self-​reference.
           Self-​specific information corresponds to information exclusively about the body that
           happens to be one’s own; self-​reference corresponds to the awareness of the body qua
           one’s own. Self-​specific information is thus necessary for the sense of ownership but it
           is not sufficient. In other words, it does not suffice to be aware exclusively of one’s body
           for one to be aware of it as one’s own. The sense of ownership cannot be reduced to a
           privileged informational link to one’s body. It also involves being able to discriminate
           one’s body from what is not one’s body. The problem is that on the basis of interoception
           only, one is locked in one’s body: the body is only an inside. Since our creature receives
           no information about the outside world, and thus about other bodies, it does not have
           to discriminate its body from what is not its body. It is so fixated on its own body that it
           can dispense with representing whose body is hungry or thirsty. Following a principle
           of cognitive parsimony, we may then conclude that if there is no need to individuate the
           body that it feels as being its own, then the creature simply does not do it. To show that
           interoception is not sufficient for the sense of bodily ownership is clearly illustrated by
           the many cases in which patients—​with spinal cord injuries, peripheral deafferentation,
           right parietal lesion, or congenital pain insensitivity—​report a sense of disownership
           toward their body despite still receiving interoceptive signals and experiencing intero-
           ceptive feelings.
              The fact is that one usually says “I am thirsty,” “I am out of breath,” or “I am full” without
           any explicit reference to the body. There is only a unique occurrence of the first-​person
           pronoun, which refers to the mental subject, the subject who experiences the sensation.
           By contrast, when I say “I feel touch on my hand,” the body is an explicit part of the con-
           tent and there are two occurrences of the first person: there is the “I” that experiences the
           tactile sensation but there is also “my” hand, which individuates the limb as being part
           of my body. In interoceptive feelings, there is no such “myness,” no specific limb that one
           experiences as one’s own. As O’Shaughnessy (1980 ) notes, there is no feeling of “imme-
           diate presence” when it comes to our kidneys, unlike our legs or our hands. This is so
           because the function of interoceptive feelings is to inform the individual about the state
 267




                                                                          An affective background       267


       of the whole body for self-​regulation. What matters is not the kidney as such but whether
       the organism gets rid of its toxins. By being so much about what is inside, interoceptive
       feelings are unable to contrast what is inside from what is outside, and thus to fix the spa-
       tial boundaries of the body. If one conceives of the body as being primarily a “res extensa”
       as Descartes puts it—​that is, as a material entity extended in space—​then interoceptive
       feelings might almost qualify as being disembodied.

       14.5  An affective background
       None of the advocates of interoception for the embodied self actually assumes that
       interoception on its own could suffice for self-​awareness. Instead, the view is that it is in
       the interaction between interoceptive and exteroceptive information that the sense of self
       can emerge. They say very little, however, on the nature of these interactions. What is the
       special contribution provided by interoception and how is interoception integrated with
       exteroception?
          Tsakiris (2017), for instance, suggests that there is both integration and competition be-
       tween interoception and exteroception. These two types of interaction involve a common
       denominator that can bring together exteroceptive and interoceptive information, but
       what can it be? One might reply that interoceptive awareness competes with extero-
       ceptive awareness for the focus of attention. In everyday life when we are not counting
       our heartbeats, however, is interoception in such a competitive situation? At the physi-
       ological level, interoceptive signals are sent whether one pays attention to them or not.
       Furthermore, attention clearly does not suffice to integrate information together. What
       else is required?
          Consider a classic example of multisensory integration such as the RHI. The visual in-
       formation about the rubber hand being stroked is integrated with the tactile and propri-
       oceptive information about the subject’s hand leading the subject to experience touch on
       the rubber hand and to mislocate her hand in the direction of the location of the rubber
       hand. This process of integrative binding involves redundant information (i.e. about the
       same property of the object) and aims at reliability:  it is important to have more than
       one source of information because informational redundancy increases robustness and
       compensates for sensory noises. Integrative binding is successful only if the information
       that is bound is actually about the same object or event. It thus involves selecting the rel-
       evant information to bind in order to avoid bringing together features or experiences
       that have nothing to do with each other, as in the RHI. There are then two main criteria
       used to guide the selection: one binds together the sensory states that carry information
       about the same location and/​or about the same object. For instance, it has been shown
       that there are spatial constraints for the RHI: the rubber hand needs to be located in the
       peripersonal space of the subject’s hand for visual information to be integrated with tac-
       tile and proprioception information (Lloyd, 2007). Furthermore, the RHI does not work
       if one visually presents a rectangular piece of wood while one strokes the subject’s hand
       (Tsakiris et al., 2010).
268




      268   Was Descartes right after all?


               What about the interaction between interoception and the other senses? Tsakiris (2017,
            p. 350) seems to suggest similar processes:
                The exteroceptive evidence suggests that what I am looking at (i.e., the rubber hand) is my hand.
                However if this is my hand, then there are interoceptive prediction errors that need to be explained
                away between how my true hand feels (i.e., the interoceptive prediction) and the fact that I cannot
                feel the rubber hand interoceptively.

            However, do we really have interoceptive feelings of our hands? If we use Sherrington’s
            visceral definition, this is not obvious. I do not feel the rubber hand interoceptively, but
            neither do I feel my own hand interoceptively. What I feel is the stretching of my skin,
            its temperature, its position, and possibly pressure exerted on it, pain, itches, or tickles,
            but no visceral sensation. In brief, there are no interoceptive feelings experienced in one’s
            hand or in one’s foot. How then could one integrate them with localized visual, tactile, and
            proprioceptive experiences? In addition, most information carried by interoception is not
            redundant with information coming from other sensory modalities.7 In all the integra-
            tive models of the bodily self that have been recently proposed, it is paradoxically often
            forgotten how unique interoception is. In short, interoception cannot be integrated with
            proprioception and touch in the same way that vision is. What form, then, can its inter-
            action take with the other senses?
               Here I suggest that one should consider another type of perceptual binding, not in-
            tegrative binding, but additive binding (de Vignemont, 2014). In additive binding,
            modality-​specific experiences complement each other:  the perceptual system collects
            all the pieces of information that are not redundant in order to have as rich and com-
            plete an experience of the perceived object as possible. Now what is bound together
            can be of different types. One can bring together different properties of the same ob-
            ject or different parts of it. There is a further dimension that might be more relevant
            here, however, which is the relationship figure/​ground. The proposal, which is still very
            sketchy, is thus the following. At the phenomenological level, interoceptive feelings,
            which are about the global state of the body, constitute the ground on which local bodily
            sensations are experienced and they are bound together for a rich awareness of the body.
            Insofar as interoceptive feelings are affectively loaded, the background that they provide
            is affective. They thus provide an affective coloring to bodily awareness. We can now try
            to refine the proposal further and become more precise about the exact affective shade
            of interoceptive feelings.
               Interoceptive feelings aim at protecting the organism. They have what Kathleen Akins
            (1996) calls a narcissistic function: they aim at securing what is best for the organism.
            On her view, sensory systems are not just servile detection systems that aim to be as
            reliable as possible in carrying information about the states with which they co-​vary.
            Narcissistic perception is not about what is perceived but about the impact of what is


            	 The exception is rhythm, which can be internally felt but also seen and heard. One can then envisage
            7

              interaction with other sensory modalities.
 269




                                                                                                    Conclusion     269


       perceived for the subject. This theory of perception can already be found in Descartes’s
       Sixth Meditation: “These perceptions of the senses, although given me by nature, merely
       to signify to my mind what things are beneficial and hurtful to the composite whole of
       which it is a part.”8 To illustrate her narcissistic hypothesis, Akins considers the case
       of thermal sensations, which indicate what is safe or dangerous for the body given its
       thermal needs:
           What the organism is worried about, in the best of narcissistic traditions, is its own comfort. The
           system is not asking, “What is it like out there?”, a question about the objective temperature states
           of the body’s skin. Rather it is doing something—​informing the brain about the presence of any
           relevant thermal events. Relevant, of course, to itself. (Akins, 1996, p. 349)

       Narcissistic principles are especially plausible in the case of interoception: what matters
       is not to track one’s heartbeats in order to be able to count them; what matters is to de-
       termine whether the rhythm is neither too fast nor too slow. As said earlier, the function
       of interoception is to regulate the physiological balance of the organism. Therefore,
       interoception is not about the state of the body simpliciter; it is about the state of the body
       given the organism’s needs and interests. One might also say that it is about the state of
       the body for the self. According to Akins, the narcissistic question can indeed be phrased
       as follows: “But how does this all relate to ME?” (Akins, 1996, p. 345). On her view, this
       question does not only affect the content of my experiences, filtering only what is relevant
       to me; it also marks the structure, or the format, of my experiences, like a signature: “by
       asking the narcissistic question, the form of the answer is compromised: it always has a
       self-​entered (sic) glow” (Akins, 1996, p. 345). One may then suggest that by being narcis-
       sistic, interoceptive feelings that are at the background of bodily sensations give a “self-​
       centered glow” to bodily awareness.

       14.6 Conclusion
       In this chapter I proposed to return to the original functional meaning of interoception,
       which is to ensure the physiological stability of the organism as a whole. To do so, one
       needs to leave aside interoceptive awareness, which is primarily about attention con-
       trol and reliability, and focus on self-​regulatory interoceptive feelings such as thirst and
       hunger, which are too often neglected in the recent literature. I then argued that intero-
       ceptive feelings cannot provide a contrast between inside and outside of the body because
       they only present the body as being an inside. Consequently, on their own they cannot
       ground the distinction between self and non-​self. What they can do, however, is to pro-
       vide a narcissistic coloring to our bodily sensations. All sensations are experienced not
       only on the spatial background of the protective body map but also on the affective back-
       ground of our interoceptive feelings: this is not any body that we are aware of, this is the
       body that matters the most for our survival.



       8
        	 For more detail on Descartes’s view see Simmons (2008).
270




      270   Was Descartes right after all?


            References
            Akins, K. (1996). Of sensory systems and the “aboutness” of mental states. Journal of Philosophy, 93(7),
                337–​72.
            Armstrong, D. (1962). Bodily Sensations. London: Routledge.
            Babo-​Rebelo, M., Wolpert, N., Adam, C., Hasboun, D., and Tallon-​Baudry, C. (2016). Is the cardiac
                monitoring function related to the self in both the default network and right anterior insula?
                Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B, Biological Sciences, 371(1708), 20160004.
            Bain, D. (2014). Pains that don’t hurt. Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 92(2), 305–​20.
            Billon, A. (2017). Mineness first. In: F. de Vignemont and A. Alsmith (eds), The Subject’s Matter: Self-​
                Consciousness and the Body. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 189–​216.
            Ceunen, E., Vlaeyen, J. W. S., and Van Diest, I. (2016). On the origin of interoception. Frontiers in
                Psychology, 7, 743.
            Critchley, H. D. and Harrison, N. A. (2013). Visceral influences on brain and behavior. Neuron, 77(4),
                624–​38.
            Craig, A. D. B. (2010). The sentient self. Brain Structure and Function, 214(5), 563–​77.
            Crucianelli, L., Krahé, C., Jenkinson, P. M., and Fotopoulou, A. K. (in press). Interoceptive ingredients
                of body ownership: Affective touch and cardiac awareness in the rubber hand illusion. Cortex.
            Damasio, A. R. (1994). Descartes’ Error: Emotion, Reason and the Human Brain. New York,
                NY: Putnam.
            Damasio, A. R. (1999). The Feeling of What Happens. London: William Heinemann.
            Danziger, N. and Willer, J. C. (2009). Congenital insensitivity to pain. Revue Neurologique (Paris),
                165(2), 129–​36.
            Danziger, N. (2010). Vivre sans la douleur. Paris: Odile Jacob.
            Descartes, R. (1649). The Passions of the Soul. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett.
            Descartes, R., Williams, B., and Cottingham, J. (2016 [1641]). René Descartes: Meditations On First
                Philosophy: With Selections from the Objections and Replies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
            Ehrsson, H. H., Wiech, K., Weiskopf, N., Dolan, R. J., and Passingham, R. E. (2007). Threatening a
                rubber hand that you feel is yours elicits a cortical anxiety response. Proceedings of the National
                Academy of Sciences of the USA, 104(23), 9828–​33.
            Frances, A. and Gale L. (1975). The proprioceptive body image in self-​object differentiation—​a case of
                congenital indifference to pain and head-​banging. Psychoanalytic Quarterly, 44(1), 107–​26.
            Garfinkel, S. N., Seth, A. K., Barrett, A. B., Suzuki, K., and Critchley, H. D. (2015). Knowing your own
                heart: Distinguishing interoceptive accuracy from interoceptive awareness. Biological Psychology,
                104,  65–​74.
            Garfinkel, S. N., Manassei, M. F., Hamilton-​Fletcher, G., In den Bosch, Y., Critchley, H. D., and
                Engels, M. (2016). Interoceptive dimensions across cardiac and respiratory axes. Philosophical
                Transactions of the Royal Society of London B, 371(1708), 20160014.
            Herbert, B. M., Muth, E. R., Pollatos, O., and Herbert, C. (2012). Interoception across modalities: On
                the relationship between cardiac awareness and the sensitivity for gastric functions. PLoS One, 7(5),
                e36646.
            Holsen, L. M. and Goldstein, J. M. (2015). Valuation and cognitive circuitry in anorexia
                nervosa: Disentangling appetite from the effort to obtain a reward. Biological Psychiatry,
                77(7),  604–​6.
            Kemmerer, D. (2014). Body ownership and beyond: Connections between cognitive neuroscience and
                linguistic typology. Consciousness and Cognition, 26(1), 189–​96.
            Lichstein L. and Sackett G. P. (1971). Reactions by differentially raised rhesus monkeys to noxious
                stimulation. Developmental Psychobiology, 4(4), 339–​52.
 271




                                                                                                    References     271


       Mancini, F., Steinitz, H., Steckelmacher, J., Iannetti, G., and Haggard, P. (2015). Poor judgment of
          distance between nociceptive stimuli. Cognition, 143,  41–​7.
       O’Shaughnessy, B. (1980). The Will, Vol. 1. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
       Lloyd, D. M. (2007). Spatial limits on referred touch to an alien limb may reflect boundaries of visuo-​
          tactile peripersonal space surrounding the hand. Brain and Cognition, 64(1),  104–​9.
       Melzack R. and Scott, T. H. (1957). The effects of early experience on the response to pain. Journal of
          Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 50(2), 155–​61.
       Nagasako, E. M., Oaklander, A. L., and Dworkin, R. H. (2003). Congenital insensitivity to pain: An
          update. Pain, 101(3), 213–​19.
       Naqvi, N. H., Gaznick, N., Tranel, D., and Bechara, A. (2014). The insula: A critical neural substrate
          for craving and drug seeking under conflict and risk. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences,
          1316,  53–​70.
       Romano, D., Gandola, M., Bottini, G., and Maravita, A. (2014). Arousal responses to noxious stimuli
          in somatoparaphrenia and anosognosia: Clues to body awareness. Brain, 137(Pt 4): 1213–​23.
       Seth, A. (2013). Interoceptive inference, emotion, and the embodied self. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
          17(11), 565–​73.
       Sherrington, C. S. (1906). The Integrative Action of the Nervous System. New Haven, CT: Yale
          University Press.
       Simmons, A. (2008). Guarding the body: A Cartesian phenomenology of perception. In: P. Hoffman
          and G. Yaffe (eds), Contemporary Perspectives on Early Modern Philosophy: Essays in Honor of Vere
          Chappell. Peterborough, Ont: Broadview Press, pp. 81–​113.
       Tsakiris, M., Carpenter, L., James, D., and Fotopoulou, A. (2010). Hands only illusion: Multisensory
          integration elicits sense of ownership for body parts but not for non-​corporeal objects. Experimental
          Brain Research, 204(3), 343–​52.
       Tsakiris, M. (2017). The material me. In: F. de Vignemont and A. Alsmith (eds), The Subject’s
          Matter: Self-​Consciousness and the Body. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 33–​361.
       de Vignemont, F. (2014). Multimodal unity and multimodal binding. In: D. Bennett and C. Hill (eds),
          Sensory Integration and the Unity of Consciousness. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 125–​50.
       de Vignemont, F. and Massin, O. (2015). Touch. In: M. Matthen (ed.), Oxford Handbook of Philosophy
          of Perception. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 294–​311.
       de Vignemont, F. (2017). Pain and touch. The Monist, 100(4), 465–​77.
       de Vignemont, F. (2018). Mind the Body. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
27




                Chapter 15

                Allostasis, interoception, and
                the free energy principle: Feeling
                our way forward
                Andrew W. Corcoran and Jakob Hohwy



     15.1 Introduction
     The free energy principle (Friston, 2010) invokes variational Bayesian methods to explain
     how biological systems maximize evidence for their predictive models via the minimi-
     zation of variational free energy, a tractable information-​theoretic quantification of pre-
     diction error. This account, which was originally proposed to explain sensory learning,
     has evolved into a much broader scheme encompassing action and motor control, deci-
     sion-​making, attention, communication, and many other aspects of mental function (for
     overviews see Clark, 2013, 2016; Hohwy, 2013). Under the free energy principle, mini-
     mization of free energy is what any self-​organizing system is compelled to do in order
     to resist dissipation and maximize the evidence for its own existence (i.e. self-​evidencing
     through active inference; Hohwy, 2016).
        Recent years have witnessed a growing interest in extending the conceptual apparatus
     of the free energy principle to the interoceptive domain. A number of investigators have
     sought to explain the influence of interoceptive modes of prediction error minimiza-
     tion on various cognitive processes and disruptions (for recent reviews see Barrett, 2017;
     Khalsa et al., in press; Seth & Friston, 2016, Smith et al., 2017). Central to such interocep-
     tive inference perspectives is the notion that interoceptive signals encode representations
     of the internal (physiological) state of the body, thus providing vital information about
     how well the organism is managing to preserve the biological viability of its internal en-
     vironment. Traditionally, the latter has been conceived in terms of homeostasis, a concept
     that usually refers (minimally) to the process of maintaining the internal conditions of
     complex, thermodynamically open, self-​organizing biological systems in stable, far-​from-​
     equilibrium states (Yates, 1996). From the perspective of the free energy principle, home-
     ostasis translates to the process of restricting the organism to visiting a relatively small
     number of states that are conducive to its ongoing existence, with interoceptive prediction
     error playing a particularly important role in signaling deviation from these attractive
     states (technically, these are known as attracting sets).
        Notably, the centrality of homeostasis in some free energy-​inspired accounts of inter-
     oceptive processing has started to give way to the newer concept of allostasis. According
 273




                                              Discovering “the wisdom of the body”: Homeostasis         273


       to proponents of the latter, homeostasis fails to capture the rich variety of self-​regula-
       tory processes that biological systems engage in in order to conserve their own integrity.
       Allostasis tries to address this shortcoming through various theoretical innovations, chief
       amongst which is a core emphasis on predictive or anticipatory modes of regulation. This
       is to say that, rather than merely responding to physiological perturbations in order to
       ensure the internal conditions of the body remain within homeostatic bounds, allostasis
       enables the organism to proactively prepare for such disturbances before they occur.
          While this account carries obvious appeal from the perspective of predictive model-​
       based theories of interoceptive processing, attempts to marry the two have given rise to
       a number of divergent interpretations of allostatic regulation. As it turns out, the history
       of allostasis is a history of contested definitions; some 30  years on from its inception,
       there appears to be no definitive consensus as to its precise meaning. The key aims of this
       chapter, then, are to establish (a) how allostasis might be best understood as a distinc-
       tive concept in the overall scheme of biological regulation, and (b)  how this construal
       might inform (and indeed, be informed by) free energy-​inspired theories of interoceptive
       inference.

       15.2  Discovering “the wisdom of the body”: Homeostasis
       A standard account of the history of homeostasis might trace its source to the nineteenth
       century physiologist Claude Bernard, whose pioneering work on the role of the nervous
       system in maintaining the relative constancy of internal states (le milieu intérieur, i.e.
       the extracellular fluid environment that envelops the cell) would prove highly influential
       (Cooper, 2008; Woods & Ramsay, 2007). The key ideas at the core of Bernard’s thinking—​
       notions of harmony, equilibrium, and regulation—​are, however, much older, dating as
       far back as the pre-​Socratics (see Adolph, 1961, for a historical review). Bernard refined
       the ancient insight that organisms maintain a healthy constitution by engaging in cer-
       tain self-​regulatory behaviors (e.g. consuming nutrients, excreting waste)—and deviate
       from well-​being whenever subject to certain unfavorable physiological imbalances—
       by drawing attention to the physiological mechanisms that ensure the continuity of a
       stable internal environment. Such compensatory adjustments act to cancel out internal
       disturbances that would otherwise be caused by fluctuations in the external environment.
       This capacity to meet environmental impingements with countervailing responses thus
       grants the organism an adaptive coupling with—​and a special kind of autonomy from—​
       its environmental niche.
          Benefitting from Bernard’s keen insights and some 50  years of subsequent experi-
       mental research, Walter Cannon (1929, 1939) coined the term “homeostasis” to describe
       the organism’s capacity to maintain a “steady state” or intrinsic uniformity despite on-
       going fluctuations in its internal and external processes. Cannon was at pains, however,
       to stress that his neologism was intended to characterize a complex process in which
       multiple physiological mechanisms are recruited to ensure the continued stability of the
       organism’s internal milieu, where stability is construed in terms of a more or less vari-
       able range of acceptable (i.e. viable) values. This latter point is crucial for distinguishing
274




      274   Allostasis, interoception, and the free energy principle


            Cannon’s conception of homeostasis from Bernard’s emphasis on the fixed, invariant
            nature of internal conditions, in as much as homeostatic processes admit a space of
            permissible states. Also important was Cannon’s concern to elucidate the autonomic
            mechanisms responsible for mediating adaptive physiological responses (e.g. increased
            respiratory rate) to altered internal conditions (e.g. decreased blood pH, increased
            carbon dioxide concentration) (Cooper, 2008), a subtle reorientation that would prove
            highly influential for later work in cybernetics.
               The basic concept of homeostasis elaborated by Cannon (and extended by
            contemporaries such as Curt Richter; see Woods & Ramsay, 2007) would become one of,
            if not the core theoretical principle of modern physiology (Michael & McFarland, 2011;
            Michael et al., 2009). One essential element of modern conceptions of homeostasis that
            was, however, still missing from the Cannonian picture was a formal account of negative
            feedback (Modell et  al., 2015). From a control-​theoretic perspective, Cannon’s careful
            analysis of particular homeostatic processes can be conceived according to a generic
            scheme of error detection (i.e. where some regulated variable, for instance blood glucose
            concentration, is found to deviate from some desirable value or setpoint) and correction
            (i.e. where some effector mechanism is activated in order to restore the regulated variable
            to the prescribed setpoint). It is important to note here that the notion of a setpoint gen-
            erally conforms to Cannon’s conception of a (broader or narrower) range of acceptable
            values, rather than any singular, fixed level (Modell et al., 2015). This set of values can
            thus be construed as a model against which the actual (sensed) state of the regulated var-
            iable is compared. The error signal elicited when the current state of the monitored tissue
            deviates from its setpoint reference represents a threat to organismic viability, and must
            therefore be corrected via mobilization of the appropriate effector system(s). Recasting
            homeostasis in this light thus furnishes a powerful conceptual framework in which the
            processes responsible for maintaining internal stability achieve this goal through the
            communication of information between peripheral tissues and a central controller (such
            as the central nervous system).

            15.3  Allostasis: The future of homeostatic regulation?
            As mentioned in our introduction, several recent theoretical frameworks of interoceptive
            inference co-​opt notions of allostasis in order to situate the autonomic regulation of the
            internal milieu within the broader scheme of hierarchical predictive processing. Various
            theorists have argued that the basic concept of homeostasis is somehow insufficient to
            account for the rich complexity of self-​regulatory behavior evinced by humans and other
            animals, advocating allostasis as a necessary theoretical supplement or corrective. To what
            extent allostasis extends, encompasses, or eliminates homeostasis is, however, unclear,
            not least because the characteristic features of allostatic regulation have been espoused in
            ambiguous or inconsistent terms across the literature (Lowe, Almér, & Dodig-​Crnkovic,
            2017; Power, 2004; Schulkin, 2004). This section thus aims to canvass some of the most
            influential accounts of allostasis to have emerged over the past three decades.
 275




                                                            The future of homeostatic regulation?       275


       15.3.1  Achieving     stability through change
       The term “allostasis” was originally introduced by Sterling and Eyer (1988) to describe
       the integrated, hierarchical mechanisms through which the nervous system maintains
       organismic integrity. In this scheme, the brain is responsible for orchestrating complex,
       multisystem responses to physiological perturbations, resulting in a cascade of mutually
       reinforcing effects that are designed to maintain “stability through change” (Sterling &
       Eyer, 1988, p. 636). Multilevel allostatic regulation is supposedly accomplished through
       a fine-​grained network of feedforward and feedback mechanisms, thus affording a more
       flexible and coordinated means of physiological control than the rather more primitive
       negative feedback loops typically attributed to homeostatic regulation. One key advantage
       of this arrangement is that it enables anticipatory alterations of physiological parameters
       prior to undergoing some perturbation (e.g. increasing blood pressure before standing
       up from a chair, rather than correcting the hypotension induced by the postural change
       after the fact). Under this allostatic regime, the body benefits from the brain’s capacity to
       learn from experience by forecasting the organism’s physiological needs ahead of time. As
       such, allostasis represents a rather more sophisticated system of internal regulation, one
       which minimizes reliance upon the kind of error signaling required to drive homeostatic
       correction.
          Sterling and Eyer argued that the concept of homeostasis is fatally deficient, and ought
       thus to be “superseded” by their notion of allostasis (1988, p.  646; see also Sterling,
       2004, 2012; Sterling & Laughlin, 2015). However, the validity of this assertion has been
       challenged by critics who argue that it turns on a fundamentally mistaken construal of
       homeostatic regulation (Carpenter, 2004; Day, 2005). The source of this error is twofold.
       First, the careful nuance of Cannon’s (1929, 1939) definition of homeostasis is ignored
       in this account, giving rise to the overly simplistic (and arguably misleading) impression
       that homeostasis is supposed to “clamp each internal parameter at a ‘setpoint’ ” (Sterling,
       2004, p. 17), except in response to emergency (i.e. potentially life-​threatening) situations.
       Second, Sterling and Eyer (1988) conflate the physiological variables that are the target of
       homeostatic regulation with the control mechanisms tasked with the job of maintaining
       such variables within acceptable bounds. The idea that physiological parameters such as
       blood pressure should fluctuate significantly throughout the day does not constitute a
       counterexample to the homeostatic model; rather, these fluctuations are in the service of
       homeostasis precisely insofar as they ensure that the vital constituents and properties of
       the fluid matrix (e.g. blood pH, oxygen tension) remain suitable for cell functioning. On
       this reading then, allostasis appears little more than “an unnecessary re-​statement of the
       concept of homeostasis” (Day, 2005, p. 1196).

       15.3.2  Allostatic   means for homeostatic ends
       Since Sterling and Eyer’s (1988) introduction of the concept, less radical versions of al-
       lostasis have been developed that seek to complement or extend the scope of homeo-
       static regulation, rather than reject it wholesale. Early work by McEwen, Schulkin, and
276




      276   Allostasis, interoception, and the free energy principle


            colleagues (McEwen & Stellar, 1993; Schulkin, McEwen, & Gold, 1994) embraced allo-
            stasis as a promising framework for studying complex relations between stress, behavior,
            and chronic disease, and set about developing the concept of allostatic load to account for
            the potentially deleterious consequences of resisting stressful stimuli. (Although an im-
            portant dimension of the allostatic framework developed by McEwen and others, notions
            relating to allostatic load/​overload will not be considered here—​but see Peters, McEwen,
            & Friston, 2017).
               As these theories matured, however, a more distinctive articulation of the base concept
            of allostasis started to emerge. McEwen began to conceive of allostasis as “an essential
            component of maintaining homeostasis” (1998, p. 37); where the latter is limited to “sys-
            tems . . . that are truly essential for life” (2000b, p. 173). According to this view, allostasis
            describes “the process for actively maintaining homeostasis” (McEwen, 2000b, p. 173);
            or alternatively, “the means by which the body re-​establishes homeostasis in the face of
            a challenge” (McEwen, 2000a, p. 25). In collaboration with Wingfield, McEwen’s notion
            of allostatic regulation was further expanded to include setpoint adjustments in antici-
            pation of cyclical changes across various temporal scales (McEwen & Wingfield, 2003,
            2010). This conceptual development highlighted the circadian modulation of homeo-
            static parameters implicit in Sterling and Eyer’s (1988) paradigmatic example of allostatic
            change (i.e. the diurnal variation of blood pressure upon which phasic modulations are
            superposed), while also extending the scope of allostatic processes to incorporate broader
            aspects of animal well-​being, reproduction, and ontogenetic adaptation (e.g. seasonal
            variations in physiology and behavior in preparation for hibernation or migration).
               McEwen concedes that his construal of allostasis might seem almost identical to
            broader conceptions of homeostasis, such as the view promulgated by Cannon (McEwen,
            2000b, 2004; McEwen & Wingfield, 2003). He insists, however, that the notion of the
            “steady state” at the core of Cannonian homeostasis is inherently vague, insofar as it fails
            to delineate vital (homeostatic) systems from those mechanisms which work to maintain
            their stability. It is not entirely clear though why such a distinction ought to be desired,
            or indeed, if it is even coherent in the context of McEwen’s broader framework. Dallman
            (2003) argued that so-​called allostatic systems do not manifest qualitatively distinct
            properties as compared to their homeostatic counterparts, on the basis that such sys-
            tems are responsible for a great deal of essential physiological and behavioral functions.
            Indeed, it seems strange to claim that allostatic mechanisms are not equally essential to
            survival if such adaptive systems play a crucial role in enabling the organism to flee (or
            better yet, entirely avoid) a deadly predator, for example.
               Although arguments of this sort might be blunted by a more charitable interpretation
            of the key idea underlying McEwen’s proposed distinction (namely, that allostatic systems
            accommodate large fluctuations precisely so that those physiological parameters which
            cannot tolerate such lability are not pushed beyond their narrow limits; e.g. McEwen,
            1998), it seems plausible that significant enough deviations in allostatic systems should
            likewise prove fatal. Furthermore, cross-​species analysis suggests that setpoint flexibility
            does not constitute a reliable indicator of the relative importance of a given physiological
 27




                                                            The future of homeostatic regulation?       277


      parameter (see Boulos & Rosenwasser, 2004). Nevertheless, McEwen and Wingfield’s
      (2003) thematization of the multiple layers of predictive regulation that unfold across the
      life cycle strikes us a valuable addition to the allostasis framework, one which we take to
      be a genuine departure from traditional notions of homeostasis.

      15.3.3  Two   modes of sustained viability
      Another account of allostatic regulation that seeks to integrate (rather than replace) con-
      ventional notions of homeostatic control was put forth by Schulkin and colleagues (Power
      & Schulkin, 2012; Rosen & Schulkin, 2004; Schulkin, 2003a, 2003b). Schulkin (2003a,
      2003b) credits Cannon’s conception of homeostasis with greater scope and sophistica-
      tion than Sterling and Eyer (1988), while maintaining that some kind of supplementary
      concept is necessary in order to capture the full gamut of regulatory strategies exhibited
      by complex organisms (Power & Schulkin, 2012; Schulkin, 2003b). Schulkin expounds
      a version of allostasis in which brain-​driven regulatory mechanisms effect fluctuating
      physiological and psychological states in the absence of any clear setpoint boundary. In
      particular, anticipatory (feedforward) hormonal processes are posited to play a crucial
      role in the emergence of many appetitive, self-​protective, and socially orientated mo-
      tivational drives (Schulkin, 2003b, 2011), as well as explaining the affective valence of
      emotional experiences that accompany such states (Rosen & Schulkin, 2004). Schulkin
      and colleagues (Power & Schulkin, 2012; Rosen & Schulkin, 2004; Schulkin, 2003b,
      2004) thus advocate a broad conception of biological regulation, one in which homeo-
      stasis and allostasis constitute equally important (yet functionally opponent) mechanisms
      for maintaining the biological viability of the internal milieu.
         In some sense, we might regard Schulkin’s framework as a kind of synthesis of prior al-
      lostatic concepts. It clearly inherits from Sterling and Eyer’s (1988) original conception of
      allostasis, retaining as it does an explicit emphasis on the role of anticipatory physiological
      changes in efficient adaptation to environmental diversity. It also takes up McEwen and
      Wingfield’s (2003) temporal expansion of the concept to account for longer-​term adaptive
      changes in response to various ecological and life cycle contexts (Schulkin, 2003b, 2004).
      However, by balancing the homeostatic imperative to conserve stability with the allostatic
      impulse towards dynamic state transition, Schulkin and colleagues thematize the deeper
      continuity uniting these apparently contradictory concepts. At the heart of these regula-
      tory principles is not so much the immediate influence they exert over target physiolog-
      ical parameters (i.e. internal constancy versus variability) but rather the overarching goal
      that these mechanisms dually subserve: namely, the ongoing survival and reproductive
      success (i.e. evolutionary fitness) of the organism (Power & Schulkin, 2012; Schulkin,
      2004; see also Power, 2004).
         This is not to say that the regulatory frameworks described by Sterling, McEwen,
      and others do not also ground the emergence of allostatic mechanisms in the selective
      advantages they confer. The point here, rather, is that sustained biological viability (rather
      than some other criterion such as internal stability) seems to us the most plausible target
      towards which physiological and behavioral regulatory mechanisms are striving. By these
278




      278   Allostasis, interoception, and the free energy principle


            lights, there is no inherent contradiction between homeostatic and allostatic principles;
            they are merely different routes to the same end.

            15.4  Allostasis and interoceptive inference
            The imperative to maintain biological viability over time is at the very core of the free
            energy principle (Friston, 2010). Briefly, this principle begins with the observation that
            living entities must “maintain their sensory states within physiological bounds,” and
            that they do so by engaging in actions which maintain the integrity of their structural
            and dynamical organization (Friston, 2013, pp. 1–​2). This restates the cybernetic insight
            that biological organisms resist the tendency towards disorder wrought by variable ex-
            ternal conditions (Ashby, 1947, 1962). The central element of the principle is that such
            self-​preserving adaptation is achieved via environmental exchanges enabled by the min-
            imization of free energy (or, under simplifying assumptions, the long-​term average of
            prediction error; Friston, 2010). Under most accounts invoking the free energy principle,
            the process of maintaining the biological agent’s internal milieu within the limited subset
            of states conducive to its ongoing existence is that of homeostasis (where homeostasis
            is understood more precisely in terms of minimizing the free energy of internal state
            trajectories in order to avoid surprise, i.e. minimize prediction error; Friston, 2010).
               The concept of allostasis started to infiltrate this picture in conjunction with remarks
            on the necessity of maintaining homeostasis for survival (e.g. Friston, 2012;  Friston
            et al., 2014; Moran et al., 2014). Such comments typically invoked allostasis in the same
            breath as homeostasis, without offering any indication as to how the two terms might
            refer to differentiated aspects of biological regulation. To our knowledge, the first attempt
            at characterizing a substantive notion of allostasis as an independent mode of physio-
            logical regulation within the context of free energy minimization was made by Gu and
            FitzGerald (2014). In the short period that has elapsed since, a number of investigators
            have imported allostasis into their own free energy-​inspired accounts of interoceptive
            inference. Much like the original development of allostasis in the biomedical and etho-
            logical literatures however, the precise nature of allostatic control in these schemes has
            been elaborated in various ways. The time is ripe then to take stock of this nascent body
            of research, both to establish its continuities with—​and departures from—​pre-​existing
            notions of allostasis, and to assess which interpretation(s) of the concept seem most
            promising from the free energy perspective.
               For convenience, we divide these recent allostatic treatments of interoceptive inference
            into three broad classes: behavioral, teleological, and diachronic (see Figure 15.1). This di-
            vision is not meant to be taken as absolute; indeed, these accounts share many similarities
            by dint of their common theoretical origins.

            15.4.1  Behavioral     allostasis
            In their commentary on Seth’s (2013) theory of interoceptive inference, Gu and FitzGerald
            argue that the scope of predictive interoceptive processing should be extended beyond
                                                                                                                                                                                       279




 (a)    Behavioural Allostasis                                 (b)      Teleological Allostasis                          (c)    Diachronic Allostasis


                                        ALLOSTASIS                                                                                                        ALLOSTASIS
                                      Immediate action in                                   Behaviour in support                                 Future-oriented behaviour in
                                   response to interoceptive                               of allostatic regulation                             anticipation of 'counterfactual'
                                        prediction error                                                                                                prediction error



                                                                                                                                                            Associative learning:
                                                                                                                                                          Internal state trajectory
          HOMEOSTASIS                                                    ALLOSTASIS                                            HOMEOSTASIS                 conditioned on action
       Autonomic regulation in                                       Brain regulates internal                         Regulation guided by (allostatic)
       response to interoceptive                                      milieu by anticipating                           expectancies and interoceptive
           prediction error                                            physiological needs                                    prediction error



Figure 15.1 Schematic summary of the key conceptual distinctions between (a) behavioral, (b) teleological, and (c) diachronic accounts of allostatic
regulation (see main text for details).
280




      280   Allostasis, interoception, and the free energy principle


            “homeostatic control of the internal milieu” to incorporate “allostatic actions on the ex-
            ternal world” (2014, p. 269). At first, their position sounds isomorphic to that espoused by
            McEwen, insofar as allostasis is defined as “the process of achieving homeostasis” (Gu &
            FitzGerald, 2014, p. 269). It becomes quickly apparent, however, that Gu and FitzGerald
            (2014) conceive of homeostasis and allostasis in rather different terms. Here, homeostasis
            consists of autonomic reflexes that resist substantial fluctuations in the physiological
            conditions of the body (e.g. metabolizing stored fat in response to declining blood glucose
            levels), while allostasis corresponds to the behavioral actions that the agent undertakes
            in order to ameliorate some internal perturbation (e.g. consuming food in response to
            glucose decline). Gu and FitzGerald (2014) thus advocate a framework in which home-
            ostatic (brain−internal world) and allostatic (brain−external world) loops offer alterna-
            tive pathways to the same ultimate goal; namely, that of keeping the organism within the
            subset of biophysical states most conducive to its survival (in other words, minimizing the
            surprise or free energy indexed by interoceptive prediction error).
               Gu and FitzGerald’s (2014) behavior-​orientated characterization of allostasis is adopted
            and further elaborated by Seth (2015). Thematizing the continuity between Ross Ashby’s
            pioneering work in cybernetics (Ashby, 1956, 1960) and the free energy principle, Seth
            (2015) seeks to map homeostasis and allostasis onto the “ultrastable” scheme exemplified
            by Ashby’s (1960) homeostat. Briefly, this device consists of four modular subsystems
            which dynamically interact to influence one another’s essential variables. If these
            interactions fail to preserve essential variables within an acceptable range, a regulatory
            switch intervenes to randomly reconfigure the system’s behavior. If the homeostat’s new
            organization fails to stabilize essential variables within range, it will continue to transition
            through its repertoire of possible configurations until stability is restored, or until the
            system disintegrates (see Cariani, 2009, for a more detailed explication of the homeostat’s
            functional architecture). Seth compares homeostasis to the first-​order feedback loop
            constituted by the dynamic interplay of each module’s inputs and outputs, and allostasis
            to the second-​order reorganization of these interactions (although allostatic behavior
            constitutes a purposeful, rather than random, attempt to transform system dynamics).
            On this account, then, allostatic behavior functions to alter the organism’s relation to its
            environment when homeostatic compensation fails to maintain physiological parameters
            within viable bounds.
               Implementing these ideas within the context of free energy minimization, Seth (2015)
            argues that interoceptive prediction error can be minimized in one of three ways: (a) by
            adjusting model predictions in order to better approximate the incoming sensory signal
            (equivalently, updating one’s emotional state; i.e. perceptual inference); (b) by enlisting au-
            tonomic reflexes to alter internal conditions such that they correspond with the predicted
            internal state (i.e. active inference or first-​order (homeostatic) control); or (c) by engaging
            in goal-​directed behavior to act on the environment in such a way that brings about the
            predicted internal state (i.e. second-​order (allostatic) control). Here, then, allostasis is not
            only distinguished from the physiological mechanisms responsible for regulating the in-
            ternal milieu, but also construed as an alternative mode of achieving organismic viability.
 281




                                                               Allostasis and interoceptive inference      281


          An interesting aspect of Seth’s (2015) analysis is the claim that perception simply “falls
       out” of the fundamental necessity to achieve homeostatic control. It is not entirely clear
       whether Seth subscribes to a kind of anti-​realism which denies the veridicality of per-
       ceptual experience, or whether he wants to say that our rich perceptual experiences of
       the world are merely an accidental consequence of (or a useful tool for) the homeostatic
       imperative. In any case, Seth interprets the free energy principle in a way that assigns
       primacy to interoception (over exteroceptive perception), insofar as interoceptive infer-
       ence is regarded as playing an instrumental role in steering the agent towards its home-
       ostatic states. We shall encounter a similar view in section 15.4.2, hence we postpone
       further consideration of its implications until later. Let us first review the allostatic picture
       presented here.
          Perhaps the most striking feature of these initial attempts to assimilate allostatic prin-
       ciples within a broader predictive processing framework is the surprisingly reactive way
       in which allostasis is depicted. Rather than presenting a paradigmatic example of antic-
       ipatory behavior in the service of some homeostatic goal (e.g. consuming food prior to
       the decline of blood glucose concentration), Gu and FitzGerald (2014) portray allostatic
       actions as a kind of external-​world equivalent to the corrective autonomic responses
       orchestrated by homeostatic control mechanisms. Seth (2015) likewise articulates what
       seems to be a distinctly reactive form of allostatic regulation. Indeed, the ultrastable
       system to which Seth draws conceptual allusion is entirely dependent on negative feed-
       back responses to the perturbation of essential variables. Although the second-​order
       feedback loop is functionally analogous to McEwen’s conception of allostasis as the
       means by which homeostatic variables are stabilized, this arrangement lacks the capacity
       to anticipate and offset such deviations before they occur (a vital feature of all allostatic
       frameworks reviewed in section 15.3). Consequently, the notion of allostasis invoked by
       these “behavioral” accounts does not obviously pick out any process that is distinctively
       predictive in nature.
          Arguably, these fundamentally reactive models of allostasis derive from a partitioning
       of biological regulation along the lines of internal/​autonomic (i.e. homeostatic) and ex-
       ternal/​goal-​directed (i.e. allostatic) responses. Such a distinction is to our knowledge un-
       precedented in the allostasis literature, inasmuch as allostatic mechanisms have always
       been conceived as a suite of actions traversing the physiological—behavioral continuum.
       Here, notably, allostasis seems instead to refer exclusively to the behavioral strategies an
       agent can engage in response to mounting interoceptive prediction error, rather than a
       process that participates in the proactive avoidance of such surprising states. It is however
       unclear to us what substantive insights can be gleaned from this sort of picture. Indeed,
       it is so obvious that organisms must interact with their environment in order to satisfy
       their basic homeostatic needs (e.g. seeking out and drinking fluids to quench thirst) that
       such behavioral repertoires are a well-​established feature of homeostatic theory (see e.g.
       Richter, 1942–​43). Simply reassigning such activities under the rubric of allostasis is thus
       likely to revive the kind of criticism engendered by earlier renditions of the theory (e.g.
       that allostasis is essentially redundant insofar as it “represent[s]‌nothing that has not
28




     282   Allostasis, interoception, and the free energy principle


           always been part of the ordinary conceptual basis of homeostatic control,” Carpenter,
           2004, p. 180).
             On balance then, these interpretations risk diluting the concept of allostasis to the point
           where it constitutes little more than a particular mode of homeostasis, a behavioral rear-
           guard for occasions when autonomic mechanisms prove insufficient. As such, these in-
           herently reactive accounts do not seem to carry us far beyond the insights availed by
           traditional homeostatic principles.

           15.4.2  Teleological     allostasis
           The Embodied Predictive Interoception Coding model (EPIC; Barrett & Simmons,
           2015) offers another free-​energy inspired account grounding interoceptive experience in
           the physiological status of homeostatic variables. Initially, the authors of this model also
           defined allostasis in instrumental terms, describing it as the “process of activating phys-
           iological systems (such as hormonal, autonomic, or immune systems) with the aim of
           returning the body to homeostasis” (Barrett & Simmons, 2015, p. 422; Chanes & Barrett,
           2016, p.  97). However, allostasis assumes a more pivotal role in subsequent work by
           Barrett and colleagues (Barrett, 2017; Barrett et al., 2016; Kleckner et al., 2017); the focus
           shifting from a reactive-​mechanistic interpretation (i.e. where allostatic processes are
           recruited in response to homeostatic perturbation, similar to McEwen’s (1998, 2004) def-
           inition), to a broader perspective emphasizing its fundamentally predictive nature (i.e.
           where bodily conditions are efficiently regulated through the coordinated allocation of
           energy resources in anticipation of upcoming demands, similar to Sterling’s (2004, 2012;
           Sterling & Eyer, 1988) position). In this view, allostasis (and its interoceptive consequents)
           is assigned primary importance in the brain’s computational economy such that the pre-
           dictive models posited to underpin cognitive representation are entirely subservient to
           the efficient satisfaction of the body’s physiological requirements (Barrett, 2017; Barrett
           et al., 2016).
              Barrett and colleagues’ more recent characterizations of allostasis as the primary design
           feature driving brain evolution involves a number of important theoretical commitments.
           First, this expanded version of allostasis apparently subsumes the homeostatic functions
           that allostatic processes had previously been supposed to support. In eliminating all talk
           of homeostasis in favor of a more comprehensively encompassing model of predictive
           regulation, Barrett and colleagues (Barrett, 2017; Barrett et  al., 2016; Kleckner et  al.,
           2017) align themselves with Sterling’s (2004, 2012; Sterling & Laughlin, 2015) more rad-
           ical allostatic agenda. It is not immediately clear that this sort of move is necessary for
           Barrett and colleagues’ more recent formulations to cohere, especially since their explicit
           concern with metabolic exchange and energy regulation would seem to sit just as com-
           fortably within McEwen and Wingfield’s (2003) framework.
              The second notable claim deriving from this framework is that the brain’s computa-
           tional architecture has evolved in order to optimize allostatic regulation, rather than for
           purposes such as veridical perception or reasoned action (Barrett, 2017; Barrett et  al.,
 283




                                                              Allostasis and interoceptive inference     283


       2016; Kleckner et al., 2017). This is to say that the brain’s internal model (or “embodied
       simulation”) of the body and the ecological niche it inhabits is fundamentally attuned
       to its physiological needs, such that only those features (i.e. statistical regularities) of
       the body−niche dyad relevant to allostatic regulation are represented (Barrett, 2017).
       Furthermore, Barrett and colleagues (Barrett, 2017; Barrett et al., 2016) propose that inter-
       oceptive representations emerge as a consequence of allostatic processing, and that such
       affective sensations form a fundamental and pervasive feature of conscious awareness.
       By implication, other sensory domains (and presumably, volitional motor activity) figure
       as secondary or derivative phenomena, the metabolic costs of which are tolerated only
       insofar as they furnish additional support to the brain’s primary allostatic−interoceptive
       axis (Barrett, 2017).
          This picture is reminiscent of Seth’s (2015) argument for the primacy of interocep-
       tive inference and physiological regulation. It is not entirely clear whether Barrett and
       colleagues consider higher-​level cognitive functions to be useful adjuncts for maintaining
       allostasis, or whether they simply emerge as a byproduct of the brain’s allostatic ma-
       chinery. It is clear, however, that Barrett (2017) considers perceptual experience to be
       fundamentally driven by allostatic and interoceptive processing, such that one’s subjective
       grasp of reality is modelled according to one’s physiological needs. The upshot of this hy-
       pothesis is a constructivist account in which allostasis functions as the author and arbiter
       of phenomenological experience, both insofar as the imperative to optimize allostasis
       has carved out an evolutionary trajectory that has endowed the creature with a partic-
       ular cognitive architecture and set of sensory capacities, and insofar as the experiential
       possibilities afforded by these devices are constrained and modulated in ways designed to
       realize this imperative in a given context.
          The brain’s evolution into a highly efficient allostatic machine, rather than (say) a ra-
       tional decision-​maker or accurate perceiver of the world, does not necessarily preclude the
       possibility that it should realize these additional properties also. Indeed, Seth, Barrett, and
       their colleagues may well agree that providing a creature with the capacity to accurately
       model the hidden causes of its external perturbations would, over the long-​run, improve
       its capacity to maintain the viability of its internal milieu, as well as engage in other in-
       trinsically rewarding (and evolutionarily relevant) projects such as reproductive activity.
       As Barrett (2017) points out, however, creatures need only be informed about hidden
       causes that are (potentially) relevant to their ongoing allostatic needs and priorities (for
       instance, evolution has endowed humans with a sensorium that is indifferent to infrared
       light stimulation). In this sense, then, these authors are correct to say that human percep-
       tion does not afford a “true” picture of the world, at least insofar as the latter is construed
       as some complete account of the totality of measurable phenomena. Indeed, it is hard to
       imagine how the kind of experience that would obtain in the event that we really could
       perceive “everything” could be of much use, as dense with (predominantly irrelevant)
       information as it would be. There seems to be good prima facie reason then to think that
       (exteroceptive) sensation has evolved precisely to the extent that it is useful, and adaptive
284




      284   Allostasis, interoception, and the free energy principle


            self-​regulatory activity (maximizing the likelihood of well-​being and successful repro-
            duction) would seem a reasonable object for which it ought to be useful.
               These considerations notwithstanding, we note a general doubt about the plausibility of
            any thoroughgoing distinction between interoception and exteroception (independent
            of the specific role accorded to allostasis). Although it is true that the free energy prin-
            ciple allows for the possibility of inherited model parameters, and hence the newborn
            may come into the world equipped with certain expectations about the kinds of states
            its various sensory receptors ought to entertain, it is unclear why information conveyed
            via interoceptive afferents should be recognized by the brain as somehow different in
            kind to that received via exteroceptive (or proprioceptive) channels. From a brain-​cen-
            tric perspective, the external world to be modelled is that which lies beyond its neural
            projections, irrespective of whether this environment happens to be within or without
            the boundary formed by the body (Friston, 2010). In this respect, then, there is no mean-
            ingful distinction (for the brain) between the internal and external milieu; rather, there
            is only a Markov blanket (see Hohwy, 2017) separating a nervous system on the one side,
            and a hidden world of glucose molecules, blood vessels, muscles, fires, kittens, and so
            on, on the other. Collapsing this distinction leaves no principled rationale for privileging
            interoception over alternative forms sensory input; all channels furnish the brain with
            equally vital information about the state of play beyond the Markov blanket, from which
            its models profit.
               A further,  rather abstract concern about the teleological perspective presented here
            relates subtly to the conceptual role of the free energy principle. A key justification for the
            subordination of perceptual experience to homeostatic or allostatic regulation is made by
            way of appeal to the free energy principle’s central concern with the persistent integrity of
            self-​organized systems in the face of uncertain environmental conditions. Although we
            opened this section with a somewhat similar comment on the vital import of sustained bi-
            ological viability in Friston’s (2010) account, we urge caution in equating this with any so-​
            called “fundamental imperative towards homeostasis” (Seth, 2015, p. 3). Rather, it would
            be more precise to say that the free energy principle captures something essential about
            the sorts of properties a biological system must possess in order to live (e.g. Friston &
            Stephan, 2007). It might be better then to say something like the following: any biological
            entity that consists of some form of sensorimotor interface through which it can enter
            into a dynamic exchange of energy and information with its environment, and which
            comprises an internal organization that enables it to minimize the free energy that bounds
            the surprise on its sensory states, is likely to endure; and in so doing, any such entity will
            thus appear to conform to the assumed imperative for the conservation of its biophysical
            integrity via self-​regulatory processes. In other words, if a free energy-​minimizing system
            exists, then it must indeed do so in virtue of possessing the right kind of internal configu-
            ration, and having entered into the right kind of circular-​causal relationship with its envi-
            ronment, to be able to model the causes of its sensory states and engage in (what will look
            like) adaptive, self-​regulatory activity (cf. Allen & Friston, 2018). As such, the apparent
            imperative towards self-​regulatory behavior (be it homeostatic, allostatic, or whatever)
 285




                                                             Allostasis and interoceptive inference      285


       seems to fall out of the ongoing minimization of free energy in much the same way as the
       apparent teleological force driving evolutionary “design” emerges as a consequence of the
       intricate, non-​teleological dynamics driving natural selection.

       15.4.3  Diachronic     allostasis
       We turn finally to two remaining inferential formulations of allostasis, which we refer to
       as “diachronic” on account of the important implications they have for regulatory activity
       over various timescales.
          Pezzulo, Rigoli, and Friston (2015) set out to explain how prospective and goal-​directed
       (i.e. allostatic) forms of control might have evolved from more primitive mechanisms
       subserving homeostatic regulation. Here, homeostasis is construed along control-​theoretic/​
       cybernetic lines of negative feedback and setpoint control, where autonomic and behav-
       ioral reflexes are enlisted to correct deviations in physiological variables (see also Pezzulo,
       2013; Seth, 2013). By contrast, allostasis refers to the flexible, context-​specific engagement
       of complex, adaptive behavioral repertoires for the purposes of achieving some future out-
       come. Like the accounts surveyed in section 15.4.1, then, homeostasis and allostasis are
       equated with “direct” and “indirect” modes of eliminating interoceptive prediction error,
       respectively. Note however that the distinction here is more nuanced, insofar as homeo-
       static responses extend to the innate behavioral sets (e.g. approach/​avoidance behavior)
       that equip animals to survive in the absence of associative learning.
          If complex behavioral policies are to offer an effective means of controlling the phys-
       iological conditions of the body, it is essential that they deliver the right kinds of state
       transitions at the right time. This requirement is inherently challenging, however, since
       the consequences of a particular policy are necessarily realized some time after those
       conditions that triggered its initiation. Such delays are nontrivial in the context of homeo-
       static control, where a process causing physiological conditions to deteriorate may precip-
       itate catastrophic damage if not promptly addressed. Pezzulo, Rigoli, and Friston’s (2015)
       solution to this problem leverages the free energy minimizing agent’s ability to acquire
       sophisticated internal models of the hidden environmental causes of its sensory states.
       Specifically, they argue that such generative interoceptive models enable such agents to
       predict the temporal evolution of interoceptive state trajectories (i.e. how interoceptive
       signals are likely to change over time), and encode how these trajectories correlate with
       sensorimotor events in the external world (cf. Friston et al., 2017). In virtue of the higher-​
       level integration of sensory information converging from interoceptive, exteroceptive,
       and proprioceptive streams, the agent is thus able to acquire a rich understanding of how
       behavioral activities come to influence interoceptive states across various contexts. By
       linking interoceptive prediction errors and their suppression through active inference
       (i.e. engagement of allostatic behavior) via such associative learning processes, Pezzulo
       and colleagues (2015) provide a compelling explanation of (a) how the allostatic anticipa-
       tion of future homeostatic needs might systematically arise, and (b) why allostatic behav-
       ioral policies should be endorsed despite potentially lengthy delays in their homeostatic
       payoff.
286




      286   Allostasis, interoception, and the free energy principle


               On this construal, allostatic processing turns out to be fundamentally counterfactual
            in nature. Higher (or deeper) hierarchical representations map the relation between in-
            creasingly distal outcome states and the behavioral policies that would lead towards their
            accomplishment. This account thus renders a smooth continuum of adaptive action se-
            lection, ranging from the primitive drives that work, for instance, to sate appetite via
            exploitation of the immediate environment, to the complex deliberative activities serving
            various motivations extending well beyond the basic requirements of the internal milieu
            (see also Pezzulo, 2017). Indeed, Pezzulo and colleagues (2015) observe that the capacity
            to learn the counterfactual relations that enable the agent to engage in prospective pla-
            nning, and to choose amongst various available policies, confers an unparalleled degree
            of autonomy from the exigencies of the homeostatic imperative. Thus, in much the same
            way as Bernard and Cannon recognized how the capacity to maintain the stability of
            the internal milieu granted complex biological systems a remarkable degree of autonomy
            from the caprices of their external environments, allostasis under this scheme extends
            such freedom even further. Capable of holding the immediate demands of homeostasis
            in abeyance to some supraordinate desired (i.e. unsurprising and attracting) state, the
            autonomous horizon of the allostatic organism expands beyond the conditions of the
            present into a predictable (albeit uncertain) future.
               Finally, Stephan, Manjaly, Mathis, and colleagues (2016) propose a formalized Bayesian
            implementation of hierarchical allostatic control that likewise operates across various
            temporal grains. Allostasis is defined here as the mode of active inference which performs
            “anticipatory homeostatic control” (Stephan et  al., 2016, p.  5). This is achieved via the
            modulation of prior beliefs concerning the expected state trajectory of a given homeo-
            static setpoint. Expectancies about setpoint values are construed in terms of a probability
            distribution, such that beliefs propagated from higher-​level circuits influence both the
            mean value of the controlled variable, and its associated variability (or precision). In other
            words, the traditional notion of a homeostatic negative feedback loop is situated at the
            lowest level of the processing hierarchy, with its target setpoint (i.e. the expected phys-
            iological state) conditioned by top-​down information received from higher (allostatic)
            circuits. These higher (or deeper) hierarchical levels are posited to model increasingly
            broader, domain-​general representations of the present state of the body and its envi-
            ronment, as well as predictions about changes in those states. Consequently, this account
            of allostatic regulation incorporates an important temporal dimension, where higher-​
            level generative models are able to inform and update lower-​level homeostatic control
            mechanisms in accordance with predictions about upcoming state transitions.
               Stephan and colleagues (2016) set out their model of allostatically regulated homeo-
            static reflexes in accordance with the basic computational architecture assumed by the
            free energy principle. Homeostatic control thus depends on both the perception of sa-
            lient features within the internal and external milieu (comprising both physical and so-
            cial dynamics), and selection of appropriate actions designed to prevent dangerous (i.e.
            surprising) deviations of physiological parameters. Inference is divided into interocep-
            tive and exteroceptive sensory processing. Prediction concerns how internal and external
 287




                                                             Allostasis and interoceptive inference      287


       states will evolve over time, as well as the degree to which possible actions will main-
       tain internal states within the bounds of a given homeostatic setpoint over time. In other
       words, allostatic prior beliefs set expectations about the space of bodily states that the
       organism ought to inhabit (i.e. that delimited set of attracting states which engender low
       entropy), which homeostatic systems subsequently attempt to realize. Importantly, this
       generic active inference scheme is extended beyond the context of low-​level homeostatic
       reflexes to encompass the higher-​level implementation of flexible behavioral policies
       designed to avoid homeostatic surprise (in a similar vein to Pezzulo et al., 2015).
          Stephan and colleagues (2016) present the first mathematically concrete account of
       allostatic control within the context of free energy minimization. Although more work
       needs to be done to flesh out this formal scheme with respect to the complex dynamics
       involved in the integrated regulation of complex physiological systems, it provides a plau-
       sible theoretical framework for explaining a number of core allostatic phenomena. The
       notion of a Bayesian reflex arc whose setpoint is adaptively defined and constrained by
       higher-​order (allostatic) dynamics provides an elegant explanation of setpoint variability;
       one that seems equally capable of incorporating other (i.e. non-​allostatic) accounts of
       flexible setpoint control (e.g. Cabanac, 2006). Embedding this arc within a hierarchical
       architecture also provides a principled mechanistic explanation of how certain higher-​
       order parameters might be prioritized at the expense of less-​urgent homeostatic needs,
       and how maladaptive psychological states might be entrained by persistent interoceptive
       prediction error. This perspective thus offers a deeply unifying picture of homeostatic
       and allostatic control as a dynamic coupling or closed loop, with lower-​level homeostatic
       inferences and higher-​level allostatic predictions reciprocally informing and modulating
       one another as the joint conditions of the agent−niche dyad evolve.
          Aside from some minor technicalities concerning the precise definitional boundaries of
       homeostatic and allostatic control, we consider the diachronic theories reviewed in this
       section to be broadly compatible and complementary. We prefer Stephan and colleagues’
       (2016) Bayesian reflex formulation insofar as it expands the scope of allostatic control to
       the modulation of internal conditions (rather than limiting it to the domain of external,
       goal-​directed behavior). This perspective is more consistent with the historical develop-
       ment of the allostatic framework (as examined in section 15.3), all prominent versions of
       which assume allostasis to consist of a repertoire of mechanisms that include the capacity
       to influence internal conditions directly by harnessing physiological effectors. Happily,
       the Bayesian reflex account invokes a principled distinction between homeostatic and
       allostatic control which succeeds in preserving the key functional characteristics of both
       modes of regulation (i.e. it neither collapses one concept into the other, nor relies on ar-
       bitrary or vague criteria for distinguishing their respective remits), while still allowing for
       the kind of higher-​level, temporally-​extended allostatic behavior articulated by Pezzulo
       and colleagues (2015). Furthermore, we find Stephan and colleagues’ (2016) framework
       a potentially more useful starting point for future inquiry into the general nature of bi-
       ological regulation, insofar as it affords the basic computational elements for scaffolding
       the emergence of less flexible, non-​counterfactual forms of allostatic regulation (e.g.
28




     288   Allostasis, interoception, and the free energy principle


           circadian, circannual, and ontogenetic). By integrating the complementary perspectives
           provided by both diachronic theories, we arrive at a nuanced and fecund account of self-​
           regulation that accommodates multiple scales of biological and cognitive complexity.

           15.5  The future of the history of allostasis
           Our review of the origins of allostasis, and analysis of its recent uptake in theories of
           interoceptive inference, might give the impression that the concept is as protean as the
           phenomena which inspired its coinage. This may be a consequence of zealous category
           splitting on our part, motivated by our intent to differentiate meaningful distinctions
           amongst a cluster of intersecting (and not entirely consistent) theoretical perspectives.
           However, the various interpretations and treatments allostasis has received over the
           years have tended to congeal around a more or less stable core of organizing princi-
           ples (e.g. Schulkin, 2004). Mature versions of Sterling’s (2004, 2012) and McEwen’s (e.g.
           2004, 2007) frameworks have understandably evolved into more expansive and nuanced
           iterations of their progenitors, benefitting from empirical advances and critical discus-
           sion. These influential accounts have thus reached a point of quasi-​consensus, in as much
           as they lack the diversity of a genuine pluralism, but fail to converge fully on a coherent,
           unified account of what allostasis is or does. This leaves us in the somewhat precarious
           position of possessing a theoretical construct that appears well established and valid, but
           comprises a heterogeneous and not entirely coherent set of commitments. Part of the
           motivation of this chapter was therefore to highlight this situation, given that free energy
           theorists have started helping themselves to aspects of the allostasis construct without nec-
           essarily being explicit about which particular interpretation(s) of it they wish to endorse.
              A useful illustration might be drawn from our distinction between what we dubbed the
           teleological and the diachronic interpretations of allostasis. Indeed, those familiar with
           the former might protest that it too invokes a hierarchical architecture which, much like
           the diachronic accounts, also admits of higher generative models encoding predictions
           extending across increasingly extended temporal windows. As such, it might seem some-
           what disingenuous to exclude this model from our favored diachronic category. Our
           point, however, is that these frameworks are founded on rather different understandings
           of allostasis, giving rise to subtle but deep conceptual disagreements. The teleological per-
           spective considers exteroception as secondary to interoception, which in turn emerges as
           a consequence of allostasis. The diachronic perspectives, on the other hand, seem to hold
           each domain of sensory information in equal standing; interoception, exteroception, and
           proprioception are blended together at a suitably high level of hierarchical modelling and
           without any indication that any stream is more fundamental than the others.
              We urge care about which aspects of allostatic theory are imported into predictive
           model-​based accounts of interoception. Indeed, it is notable that none of the interoceptive
           inference theories reviewed in this chapter acknowledge the accusations of redundancy,
           inconsistency, and ambiguity that have been levelled against the allostasis literature, even
           after some of these authors had substantially revised their own application of the concept.
 289




                                                                                                        References     289


       Ignoring such issues not only belies the contested nature of allostatic control, it has the
       potential to propagate further confusion as disparate elements of the construct are selec-
       tively sampled and fused together.
          If the future of allostasis is to disclose meaningful theoretical insights concerning the
       predictive processes that support biological regulation and interoceptive inference, then
       the next phase of its conceptual development requires us to work out a clear and precise
       understanding of its core principles and entailments. We have tried to clarify some of
       the confusion that has plagued the allostasis literature since its inception, and argued in
       favor of an inclusive view that reconciles homeostasis and allostasis as complementary
       strategies for sustaining biological viability. We have also attempted to shed light on some
       of the idiosyncratic ways in which allostasis has been deployed in recent characterizations
       of interoceptive inference, and suggest that future progress in this line of research will be
       hindered if these conceptual inconsistencies are not subject to critical scrutiny.

       Acknowledgments
       We thank the anonymous reviewer for their suggested improvements to an earlier version
       of this chapter. AWC is supported by an Australian Government Research Training
       Program (RTP) scholarship. JH is supported by The Australian Research Council
       DP160102770 and by the Research School Bochum and the Center for Mind, Brain and
       Cognitive Evolution, Ruhr-​University Bochum. Author ORCIDs are as follows: AWC is
       0000-​0002-​0449-​4883; JH is 0000-​0003-​3906-​3060.

       References
       Adolph, E. F. (1961). Early concepts of physiological regulations. Physiological Reviews, 41(4), 737–​70.
       Allen, M. and Friston, K. J. (2018). From cognitivism to autopoiesis: Towards a computational
           framework for the embodied mind. Synthese, 195(6), 2459–82.
       Ashby, W. R. (1947). The nervous system as physical machine: With special reference to the origin of
           adaptive behavior. Mind, 56(221),  44–​59.
       Ashby, W. R. (1956). An Introduction to Cybernetics. London: Chapman & Hall Ltd.
       Ashby, W. R. (1960). Design for a Brain: The Origin of Adaptive Behaviour, 2nd edn. London: Chapman
           & Hall Ltd.
       Ashby, W. R. (1962). Principles of the self-​organizing system. In: H. Von Foerster and G. W. Zopf Jr.
           (eds), Principles of Self-​Organization: Transactions of the University of Illinois Symposium.
           London: Pergamon Press, pp. 255–​78.
       Barrett, L. F. and Simmons, W. K. (2015). Interoceptive predictions in the brain. Nature Reviews
           Neuroscience, 16(7), 419–​29.
       Barrett, L. F., Quigley, K. S., and Hamilton, P. (2016). An active inference theory of allostasis and
           interoception in depression. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 371(20160011),  1–​17.
       Barrett, L. F. (2017). The theory of constructed emotion: An active inference account of interoception
           and categorization. Social Cognitive & Affective Neuroscience, 12(1),  1–​23.
       Boulos, Z. and Rosenwasser, A. M. (2004). A chronobiological perspective on allostasis and its
           application to shift work. In: J. Schulkin (ed.), Allostasis, Homeostasis, and the Costs of Physiological
           Adaptation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 228–​301.
290




      290   Allostasis, interoception, and the free energy principle


            Cabanac, M. (2006). Adjustable set point: To honor Harold T. Hammel. Journal of Applied Physiology,
                100(4), 1338–​46.
            Cannon, W. B. (1929). Organization for physiological homeostasis. Physiological Reviews, 9(3),
                399–​431.
            Cannon, W. B. (1939). The Wisdom of the Body. New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Company, Inc.
            Cariani, P. A. (2009). The homeostat as embodiment of adaptive control. International Journal of
                General Systems, 38(2), 139–​54.
            Carpenter, R. H. S. (2004). Homeostasis: A plea for a unified approach. Advances in Physiology
                Education, 28,  180–​7.
            Chanes, L. and Barrett, L. F. (2016). Redefining the role of limbic areas in cortical processing. Trends in
                Cognitive Sciences, 20(2), 96–​106.
            Clark, A. (2013). Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and the future of cognitive science.
                Behavioral Brain Sciences, 36(3), 181–​253.
            Clark, A. (2016). Surfing Uncertainty: Prediction, Action, and the Embodied Mind. Oxford: Oxford
                University Press.
            Cooper, S. J. (2008). From Claude Bernard to Walter Cannon. Emergence of the concept of
                homeostasis. Appetite, 51(3), 419–​27.
            Dallman, M. F. (2003). Stress by any other name? Hormones & Behavior, 43(1),  18–​20.
            Day, T. A. (2005). Defining stress as a prelude to mapping its neurocircuitry: No help from allostasis.
                Progress in Neuro-​Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry, 29(8), 1195–​200.
            Friston, K. J. and Stephan, K. E. (2007). Free-​energy and the brain. Synthese, 159(3), 417–​58.
            Friston, K. J. (2010). The free-​energy principle: A unified brain theory? Nature Reviews Neuroscience,
                11(2), 127–​38.
            Friston, K. J. (2012). Embodied inference and spatial cognition. Cognitive Processing, 13(Suppl. 1) S171–77.
            Friston, K. J. (2013). Life as we know it. Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 10(86), 20130475.
            Friston, K. J., Rosch, R., Parr, T., Price, C., and Bowman, H. (2017). Deep temporal models and active
                inference. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 77, 388–​402.
            Friston, K. J., Schwartenbeck, P., FitzGerald, T., Moutoussis, M., Behrens, T., and Dolan, R. J. (2014).
                The anatomy of choice: Dopamine and decision-​making. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
                Society B, 369(20130481),  1–​12.
            Gu, X. and FitzGerald, T. H. B. (2014). Interoceptive inference: Homeostasis and decision-​making.
                Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 18(6), 269–​70.
            Hohwy, J. (2013). The Predictive Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
            Hohwy, J. (2016). The self-​evidencing brain. Noûs, 50(2), 259–​85.
            Hohwy, J. (2017). How to entrain your evil demon. In: T. Metzinger and W. Wiese (eds), Philosophy and
                Predictive Processing. Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group, pp. 1–​15.
            Khalsa, S. S., Adolphs, R., Cameron, O. G., Critchley, H. D., Davenport, J. S., Feinstein, J. S., et al. (in
                press). Interoception and mental health: A roadmap. Biological Psychiatry: Cognitive Neuroscience &
                Neuroimaging.
            Kleckner, I. R., Zhang, J., Touroutoglou, A., Chanes, L., Xia, C., Simmons, W. K., et al. (2017).
                Evidence for a large-​scale brain system supporting allostasis and interoception in humans. Nature
                Human Behaviour, 1(0069),  1–​14.
            Lowe, R., Almér, A., and Dodig-​Crnkovic, G. (2017). Predictive regulation in affective and adaptive
                behaviour: An allostatic-​cybernetics perspective. In: J. Vallverdú, M. Mazzara, M. Talanov, S.
                Distefano, and R. Lowe (eds), Advanced Research on Biologically Inspired Cognitive Architectures.
                Hershey, PA: IGI Global, pp. 148–​77.
 291




                                                                                                     References      291


       McEwen, B. S. and Stellar, E. (1993). Stress and the individual: Mechanisms leading to disease. Archives
          of Internal Medicine, 153(18), 2093–​101.
       McEwen, B. S. (1998). Stress, adaptation, and disease: Allostasis and allostatic load. Annals of the
          New York Academy of Sciences, 840,  33–​44.
       McEwen, B. S. (2000a). Protective and damaging effects of stress mediators: Central role of the brain.
          In: E. A. Mayer and C. B. Saper (eds), Progress in Brain Research, Vol. 122. Amsterdam: Elsevier
          Science, pp. 25–​34.
       McEwen, B. S. (2000b). The neurobiology of stress: From serendipity to clinical relevance. Brain
          Research, 886(1–​2), 172–​89.
       McEwen, B. S. and Wingfield, J. C. (2003). The concept of allostasis in biology and biomedicine.
          Hormones & Behavior, 43(1),  2–​15.
       McEwen, B. S. (2004). Protective and damaging effects of mediators of stress: Allostasis and allostatic
          load. In: J. Schulkin (ed.), Allostasis, Homeostasis, and the Costs of Physiological Adaptation.
          Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 65–​98.
       McEwen, B. S. (2007). Physiology and neurobiology of stress and adaptation: Central role of the brain.
          Physiological Reviews, 87(3), 873–​904.
       McEwen, B. S. and Wingfield, J. C. (2010). What is in a name? Integrating homeostasis, allostasis and
          stress. Hormones & Behavior, 57(2), 105–​11.
       Michael, J., Modell, H., McFarland, J., and Cliff, W. (2009). The “core principles” of physiology: What
          should students understand? Advances in Physiology Education, 33(1),  10–​16.
       Michael, J. and McFarland, J. (2011). The core principles (“big ideas”) of physiology: Results of faculty
          surveys. Advances in Physiology Education, 35(4), 336–​341.
       Modell, H., Cliff, W., Michael, J., McFarland, J., Wenderoth, M. P., and Wright, A. (2015). A
          physiologist’s view of homeostasis. Advances in Physiology Education, 39(4), 259–​66.
       Moran, R. J., Symmonds, M., Dolan, R. J., and Friston, K. J. (2014). The brain ages optimally to model
          its environment: Evidence from sensory learning over the adult lifespan. PLoS Computational
          Biology, 10(1), e1003422.
       Peters, A., McEwen, B. S., and Friston, K. J. (2017). Uncertainty and stress: Why it causes diseases and
          how it is mastered by the brain. Progress in Neurobiology, 156, 164–​88.
       Pezzulo, G. (2013). Why do you fear the bogeyman? An embodied predictive coding model of
          perceptual inference. Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 14(3), 902–​11.
       Pezzulo, G., Rigoli, F., and Friston, K. J. (2015). Active inference, homeostatic regulation and adaptive
          behavioural control. Progress in Neurobiology, 134,  17–​35.
       Pezzulo, G. (2017). Tracing the roots of cognition in predictive processing. In: T. Metzinger and W. Wiese
          (eds), Philosophy and Predictive Processing. Frankfurt am Main: MIND Group, pp. 1–​20.
       Power, M. L. (2004). Commentary: Viability as opposed to stability: An evolutionary perspective on
          physiological regulation. In: J. Schulkin (ed.), Allostasis, Homeostasis, and the Costs of Physiological
          Adaptation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 343–​64.
       Power, M. L. and Schulkin, J. (2012). Maternal obesity, metabolic disease, and allostatic load. Physiology
          & Behavior, 106(1),  22–​8.
       Richter, C. P. (1942–​43). Total self-​regulatory functions in animals and human beings. Harvey Lecture
          Series, 38, 63–​103.
       Rosen, J. B. and Schulkin, J. (2004). Adaptive fear, allostasis, and the pathology of anxiety and
          depression. In: J. Schulkin (ed.), Allostasis, Homeostasis, and the Costs of Physiological Adaptation.
          Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 164–​227.
       Schulkin, J., McEwen, B. S., and Gold, P. W. (1994). Allostasis, amygdala, and anticipatory angst.
          Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 18(3), 385–​96.
29




     292   Allostasis, interoception, and the free energy principle


           Schulkin, J. (2003a). Allostasis: A neural behavioral perspective. Hormones & Behavior, 43(1),  21–​7.
           Schulkin, J. (2003b). Rethinking Homeostasis: Allostatic Regulation in Physiology and Pathophysiology.
               Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
           Schulkin, J. (2004). Introduction. In: J. Schulkin (ed.), Allostasis, Homeostasis, and the Costs of
               Physiological Adaptation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 1–​16.
           Schulkin, J. (2011). Social allostasis: Anticipatory regulation of the internal milieu. Frontiers in
               Evolutionary Neuroscience, 2(111),  1–​15.
           Seth, A. K. (2013). Interoceptive inference, emotion, and the embodied self. Trends in Cognitive
               Sciences, 17(11), 565–​73.
           Seth, A. K. (2015). The cybernetic Bayesian brain: From interoceptive inference to sensorimotor
               contingencies. In: T. Metzinger and J. M. Windt (eds), Open Mind. Frankfurt am Main: MIND
               Group, pp. 1–​24.
           Seth, A. K. and Friston, K. J. (2016). Active interoceptive inference and the emotional brain.
               Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 371(1708),  1–​10.
           Smith, R., Thayer, J. F., Khalsa, S. S., and Lane, R. D. (2017). The hierarchical basis of neurovisceral
               integration. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 75, 274–​96.
           Stephan, K. E., Manjaly, Z. M., Mathys, C. D., Weber, L. A. E., Paliwal, S., Gard, T., et al. (2016).
               Allostatic self-​efficacy: A metacognitive theory of dyshomeostasis-​induced fatigue and depression.
               Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 10(550),  1–​27.
           Sterling, P. and Eyer, J. (1988). Allostasis: A new paradigm to explain arousal pathology. In: S. Fisher
               and J. Reason (eds), Handbook of Life Stress, Cognition and Health. John Wiley & Sons Ltd, pp.
               629–​49.
           Sterling, P. (2004). Principles of allostasis: Optimal design, predictive regulation, pathophysiology and
               rational therapeutics. In: J. Schulkin (ed.), Allostasis, Homeostasis, and the Costs of Physiological
               Adaptation . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 17–​64.
           Sterling, P. (2012). Allostasis: A model of predictive regulation. Physiology & Behavior, 106(1),  5–​15.
           Sterling, P. and Laughlin, S. (2015). Principles of Neural Design. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
           Woods, S. C. and Ramsay, D. S. (2007). Homeostasis: Beyond Curt Richter. Appetite, 49(2), 388–​98.
           Yates, F. E. (1996). Homeostasis. In: J. E. Birren (ed.), Encyclopedia of Gerontology: Age, Aging, and the
               Aged, Vol. 1. San Diego, CA: Academic Press, pp. 679–​86).
 293




                    Chapter 16

                    Subjectivity as a sentient perspective
                    and the role of interoception
                    Helena De Preester



                    The essence of subjectivity is affectivity.
                    (Henry, 1973, p. 476)


       16.1 Introduction
       Subjects and objects are radically different beings, distinguished by a basic feature that all
       subjects have in common and that all objects seem to lack. Objects seem to rest in them-
       selves, unaware of, not sensitive to, and unconcerned about what is happening to them
       or in the environment. A subject, by contrast, is a sentient perspective that breaches the
       self-​enclosed state of objects and opens up a world.1
          This chapter argues that the most basic form of subjectivity is different from and more
       fundamental than having a self. It also posits a hypothesis about the origin of subjec-
       tivity in terms of interoception. Both topics have been on the agenda of philosophers,
       psychologists, and neuroscientists before, but now a consensus concerning the
       homeostatic-​interoceptive origin of subjectivity is growing in these domains of research.
       This chapter critically explores that growing consensus. In particular, it argues that the
       idea that the brain topographically represents bodily states is unfit for thinking about the
       coming about of subjectivity. The reason is that representation implies objectification—​
       and thus the irreparable disappearance—​of subjectivity. We therefore present an approach
       that preserves the importance of interoceptive processes for the coming about of subjec-
       tivity, but gives due attention to its inherent characteristics.
          In the first part, four inherent characteristics of subjectivity are discussed from a philo-
       sophical point of view. First, the most basic form of subjectivity consists in being a sentient
       perspective. Second, subjectivity necessarily implies self-​awareness but not necessarily
       the existence of a self. Third, in contrast to a self, subjectivity in its most basic form lacks

       1
        	 There are different possible ways of characterizing objects in opposition to subjects. One may argue
          that objects cannot be self-​enclosed because they lack a proper self-​identity. In that case, objects are
          considered as mere nexuses in a causal network. If we oppose objects and subjects in that way, subjects
          would differ from objects in the sense that the network matters to them; this means, it matters to them
          from their perspective. Objects, by contrast, would not take a stance toward the network. What is im-
          portant in either characterization, however, is that subjectivity and having a world are co-​originary.
294




      294   Subjectivity as a sentient perspective and the role of interoception


            spatial extension. Finally, it is marked by self-​affectivity. The second part explores whether
            an approach to subjectivity in which interoception maintains its crucial role is possible
            without relying on topographic representations of the in-​depth body, and giving due
            attention to the inherent characteristics of subjectivity.

            16.2  Four inherent characteristics of subjectivity
            16.2.1  Subjectivity      as a sentient perspective
            Subjectivity is a sentient form of being a perspective. Sentience, or awareness, refers to the
            capacity to feel or to be affected—​internally by one’s own body or externally by the envi-
            ronment. We use the terms “sentience” and “awareness” interchangeably, and we prefer to
            avoid the term “consciousness” for the basic form of subjectivity discussed here. A graded
            approach to subjectivity allows the conceptual and terminological distinction between a
            basic form of subjectivity in terms of a sentient perspective, characterized by the four in-
            herent characteristics discussed in this chapter, and the full-​fledged and articulate form
            we often associate with human consciousness. Whereas the existence of a sentient per-
            spective may be a necessary condition for consciousness, we do not claim that its four
            characteristics fully capture it or are sufficient for it.
               Subjectivity is difficult to grasp without changing the way it manifests itself to us when
            it is not observed but lived through while it is unfolding in time. Subjectivity is not only
            impossible to grasp from a third-​person approach but even a first-​person thematic or
            reflective access to it is hard as well. As the point of view that makes things visible, a per-
            spective is itself not visible as a thing. “Perspective,” from the Latin perspicere or “looking
            through,” is etymologically indeed related to the idea of transparency or invisibility.
            Therefore, when subjectivity is observed or made thematic, it is not grasped the way in
            which it pre-​reflectively unfolds (Legrand, 2007). The shift from lived-​through subjec-
            tivity to the objectification of it in an act of reflection turns a perspective into something it
            is not, losing sight of its inherent characteristics. Objectification, however, does not mean
            that subjectivity is turned into an object in the way that stones and tables are objects. It
            means that we approach the subjective perspective from another point of view, stepping
            out of the former and losing its lived-​through, unmediated presence.

            16.2.2  Subjectivity,     self-​awareness, and self
            The lived-​through presence of subjectivity is not wholly inaccessible from a first-​person
            perspective, however. In a non-​thematical or non-​reflective way, subjectivity is aware of
            itself as sentient. In other words, to be sentient or to feel would imply to be aware of this
            feeling. For the sake of conceptual clarity, we use “self-​awareness” in the sense of being
            aware of feeling, not in the sense of an articulate form of reflective self-​consciousness.
            Moreover, on the basic level of subjectivity, there is no divide between awareness and
            its so-​called object (the “self ” of self-​awareness). Self-​awareness is built into subjectivity
            itself. A subjective perspective is like a beam of light in which a world appears, but this
            beam of light does not need to shine on itself in order to appear in awareness. Many
 295




                                                       Four inherent characteristics of subjectivity        295


       philosophers have tried to point out exactly this, but in the context and terminology of
       consciousness: consciousness is self-​consciousness; self-​awareness is an intrinsic feature
       of consciousness (see, e.g. Legrand, 2007; Zahavi, 2005; Shoemaker, 1996; Frankfurt,
       1988). Language somehow leads us astray in separating awareness from self-​awareness.
       The conceptual and terminological distinction between sentience and the awareness of
       being sentient, or between feeling and the feeling that one feels, may be unwarranted.
          Many philosophers of consciousness have tried to spell out that strictly speaking, self-​
       consciousness is not consciousness of itself, because it does not follow the perception
       model in which an act of consciousness is directed toward an object (see Frank, 2007).
       Consciousness does not stand in a subject-​object relation to itself but is non-​relational;
       consciousness and self-​consciousness coincide at the pole of subjectivity. That explains
       why, in order to explore the phenomenon of subjectivity, we should not shift from lived-​
       through subjectivity to the objectification of it in an act of reflection (see section 16.2.1).
       Philosophers sometimes use the term “pre-​          reflective self-​
                                                                           consciousness” (Legrand,
       2007) in order to refer to self-​consciousness in the sense of consciousness of the self as the
       subject (and not the object) of experience. The term “first-​person perspective” is also often
       used in order to emphasize that dimension of consciousness (Zahavi, 2005).
          That the full-​fledged form of subjectivity called “consciousness” is capable of an artic-
       ulate, reflective, and relational mode of self-​consciousness hinders a good understanding
       of basic self-​awareness. The articulate mode of self-​consciousness is active when a sub-
       ject, from a first-​person perspective (“I”), turns to itself and takes itself reflectively as the
       object of thinking or feeling, resulting in a “me” or a self that is the object of a thought, a
       feeling, etc. When I consider myself clumsy, recognize myself in the mirror, or remember
       myself as a child, a reflective mode of self-​consciousness is active. That mode of con-
       sciousness relates to a self—​my self—​with all the characteristics proper to it: self-​identity,
       individuation, biographic narrative, etc.
          Self-​awareness, by contrast, does not require the existence of a person, an “I,” or a sub-
       ject (we talk about “subjectivity,” not about “subjects”) that reflects on itself. Too often,
       the notion of “self ” evokes the idea of a self as in reflective self-​consciousness, leaping
       over the minimal notion of “self ” involved in self-​awareness. The following descriptions
       aim to point out such a minimal notion of “self.” For example, Zahavi concludes that
       “there is a minimal sense of self present whenever there is self-​awareness. Self-​awareness
       is there . . . whenever there is something it is like for me to have the experience. In other
       words, pre-​reflective self-​awareness and a minimal sense of self are integral parts of our
       experiential life” (Zahavi, 2005, p.  146). “Minimal self ” refers to the basic, immediate,
       or primitive self, devoid of anything that is not essential to a self. It is defined as a bare
       locus of consciousness, devoid of personality. It is “a consciousness of oneself as an im-
       mediate subject of experience, unextended in time” (Gallagher, 2000, p.  15; see also
       Strawson, 1999).
          Whereas these philosophers, in trying to get down to the bedrock of subjectivity, care-
       fully avoid a too inflated notion of self, elements from the complex and sophisticated
       phenomenon of self-​consciousness are too often incorporated. As the second part of this
296




      296   Subjectivity as a sentient perspective and the role of interoception


            chapter shows, that happens in a number of influential neuroscience approaches to self
            and subjectivity. A careful consideration of the idea that in its most basic form, subjectivity
            is a sentient perspective that is non-​relationally self-​aware, may advance neuroscience
            and neuropsychological approaches of subjectivity. However, most research in cognitive
            science still focuses on the self as the result of a relation between a subject (“I”) and itself
            (“me”), such as the self as object of perception in self-​recognition (Legrand, 2007). It is
            the self to which acts of consciousness, such as perception, attention, or representation,
            are directed. Any of these acts objectifies the self, and that is why neuro(psycho)logical
            research needs a shift away from the self-​as-​object to the self-​as-​subject (Legrand, 2007;
            Christoff et al., 2011). In the vein of William James’ (1893) classical distinction between
            “me” and “I,” Christoff, Cosmelli, Legrand, and colleagues (2011) focus on the “I” as agent
            (of perception, action, cognition, and emotion) instead of the “me” as object (of percep-
            tion, action, cognition, and emotion). This is a step in a much-​needed direction in the
            scientific study of subjectivity.
               However, if we want to study the most basic form of subjectivity, the notion of “I”
            already suggests too much, such as a central, unified, or unifying point of experience,
            somehow “owning” consciousness (or “owning” a subjective perspective). A  subjective
            perspective, however, does not need an owner in order to exist. Subjectivity as such does
            not presuppose an ego or an “I” standing above or floating along with the stream of con-
            sciousness. In terms of the distinction between egological and non-​egological theories of
            consciousness (see Gurwitsch, 1941), the subjective perspective is ego-​less or anonymous.

            16.2.3  Temporalextension of the subjective perspective versus
            spatial extension of the self
            A third basic characteristic of basic subjectivity is its temporal extension. This may be
            surprising because it is often stated that a minimal form of consciousness is present in
            singular and transitory experiences and that it does not enjoy any diachronic persistency
            or identity in a plurality of experiences (see Damasio, 1999; Gallagher, 2000). In contrast,
            more sophisticated versions of consciousness and self, such as a narrative or autobio-
            graphic self, are considered as extended over periods of time, ranging from seconds to
            decades.
              This marked contrast between minimal and more extended interpretations of the self
            hides the fact that basic subjectivity too is temporally extended over small stretches of
            time. These small stretches of time can be identified as instances of the specious pre-
            sent (James, 1893, p. 609). The temporal structure of the most basic layer of subjectivity
            was also analysed in great detail by the phenomenological philosopher Edmund Husserl
            (1859−1938). His analysis, which happens in terms of “consciousness,” not only explains
            how we can be conscious of temporal objects (e.g. a piece of music) but also how con-
            sciousness is a phenomenon of time (and not only in time). The question of how the
            stream of consciousness inevitably is conscious of itself is tackled in a reflection on the
            temporal nature of consciousness (De Preester, 2007; Kortooms, 2002; Husserl, 1991).
            Husserl speaks of “inner” consciousness when he emphasizes the self-​conscious nature of
 297




                                                             Four inherent characteristics of subjectivity            297


       consciousness. In his account, consciousness is not only responsible for its objects of per-
       ception but it also constitutes itself as a temporally extended unity2 (for technical details
       see De Preester, 2007; Zahavi, 2005; Kortooms, 2002). The crucial idea is that in this op-
       eration of auto-​constitution, the stream appears to itself (Selbsterscheinung, Husserl, 1966,
       p. 83). Consciousness exists as a stream, and it appears to itself as a stream. Whatever the
       value of the details of his account, and of his explanation for the self-​conscious nature
       of consciousness, Husserl gives due  attention to the temporal nature of the subjective
       perspective.
          Many objects of consciousness (including the self) are experienced as spatially existing,
       whereas the subjective perspective itself cannot be experienced as extended in space. Since
       it is the point of origin where experience starts from and which opens up onto a world,
       it itself cannot appear in a perspective, enjoying spatial extension. Spatial appearance is
       impossible for the most basic form of subjectivity. The subjective perspective’s temporal
       nature, its irreducibility to objecthood, and its self-​awareness (or self-​consciousness, in
       Husserl’s account) inherently cohere.
          The self, in contrast, in its articulate form of self-​consciousness, does not resist spatial-
       ization. On the contrary, the self as object of reflection, memory, perception, etc., and
       spatial extension of the self often go hand in hand. Even the bodily roots of the self in
       the body image (conceptually or perceptually related to the self) or the body schema (re-
       lated to the self via movement and proprioception) enjoy spatial extension (De Preester
       & Knockaert, 2005).

       16.2.4  Subjectivity,        self-​affectivity, and sensibility
       We pointed out that the stream of consciousness not only makes a world appear but also
       appears to itself in a process of auto-​constitution (see Husserl’s Selbsterscheinung). In this
       section we have a closer look at this self-​awareness proper to subjectivity, relying on the
       work of another phenomenological philosopher, Michel Henry (1922–​2002). A  notion
       central to Henry’s phenomenology is “self-​affectivity.” Whereas “affection” implies a
       difference between an object sensed/​affecting and an affected/​sensing pole (a subject),
       self-​affection does not imply a relation between two poles. There is no subject−object di-
       chotomy on the level of self-​affection (Henry, 1973; Zahavi, 2005).
         That means that there is more than one way of appearing or manifestation. To
       appear is not always to be given as an object (to a subject). The subjective perspective
       too appears to itself, but not in terms of a splitting between an object and a subject.

       2
        	 The idea of auto-​constitution is Husserl’s solution for the problem of an infinite regress of layers of
          consciousness responsible for the unity on higher levels of consciousness. The infinite regress is re-
          lated to the thought that a succession of phases of consciousness is not yet in itself a consciousness of
          a succession. The problem has the shape of an infinite regress because we have to presuppose again
          and again an underlying “absolute” consciousness constituting units of the level above. According to
          Husserl, consciousness, implying self-​consciousness, constitutes itself as a temporal unity on the basis
          of an interweaving of the formal-​temporal structure the stream of consciousness (for more details see
          De Preester, 2007).
298




      298   Subjectivity as a sentient perspective and the role of interoception


            Subjectivity presents itself to itself, not as a foreign reality (i.e. as an object) but as the
            reality it itself is (i.e. as subjectivity). We already indicated this mode of appearing in
            self-​awareness as ‘non-​relational’ (see section 16.2.2). This mode of appearing is pos-
            sible because of self-​affectivity (Henry, 1973, p. 243). As the idea of self-​affectivity will
            play a major part when we discuss the issue of interoception in relation to subjectivity,
            three features of it are briefly discussed here. Central to Henry’s (1963) idea of self-​
            affection is that “the self-​manifestation of subjectivity is an immediate, non-​objectifying
            and passive occurrence” (Zahavi, 2007, p. 137). First, the immediacy of the occurrence
            means that there is no difference, distance, or mediation between that which affects
            and that which is affected. In that sense, self-​affection is non-​relational. Second, the
            self-​manifestation of subjectivity does not objectify the subjective perspective precisely
            because it is non-​relational. Third, the passivity of the occurrence implies that the sub-
            jective perspective affects itself and cannot break this bond. It is unfree, delivered to
            self-​experience, and bound to itself (Henry, 1973, p. 468, pp. 470−1). Henry calls this
            the “helplessness of feeling” (not to be confused with a feeling of helplessness) because
            in feeling, subjectivity cannot free itself from itself (Henry, 1973, p. 473). Feeling is a
            gift that cannot be refused (Henry, 1973, p. 457). The “helplessness of feeling” deepens
            the idea that feeling implies the feeling of this feeling or, in other words, that awareness
            implies self-​awareness.
               In line with the idea that subjectivity is self-​aware in a non-​relational way, Henry states
            that subjectivity affects itself without the mediation of a sense (Henry, 1973, p. 461). Two
            kinds of feeling are distinguished. On the one hand, there is sensibility, or affection that
            takes place through the intermediary of a sense. On the other hand, there is feeling of self
            or auto-​affection (Henry, 1973, p. 463). The two should not be confused, and Henry re-
            serves the term “sensibility” for the former kind of feeling, and “affectivity” for the latter.
            Nonetheless, affectivity is always present in sensibility because what constitutes the feeling
            aspect of any sensation or perception is not sensation or perception itself, but affectivity.
            “Affectivity is the condition of sensibility” (Henry, 1973, p. 479, see also p. 481, p. 498,
            p.  502). In other words, the possibility of being aware of an object depends on being
            self-​aware. Without self-​affectivity, perception would lack feeling (the so-​called qualia
            of today’s analytic philosophy) or subjectivity. Without it, there may be a machine-​like
            perspective, a registering and interpretation of signals, but such a perspective would lack
            self-​affectivity and thus subjectivity or feeling.
               The reverse, however, is not true:  affectivity is never sensible! Henry criticizes both
            common sense and the “positive” sciences that attempt to found affectivity in sensibility
            or the senses (Henry, 1973, p. 498). According to Henry, it is not possible to found feeling
            on a part of the sensible organic body (Henry, 1973, p. 606 ff.) He does not deny that we
            feel in our bodies; whereas sensation and perception are localizable in body parts, he
            denies that the foundation of the feeling aspect lies there too. The reason is that feeling
            of self or self-​affectivity is not extended: “it results from the fact that the original revela-
            tion of feeling to itself constitutive of its affectivity consists in its very affectivity which,
            considered in itself and as such, is nothing extended” (Henry, 1973, p.  607, see also
 29




                                                                  A modified neuroscience account        299


      p. 609). Although played out in (organic) space, feeling itself is not spatial; it is a dynamic,
      invisible phenomenon. Pain, for example, is never in the first place “there,” in my organic
      body (although I can localize it in organic space because of the aspect of sensation/​per-
      ception), but it sticks to my subjectivity as something I cannot escape (on pain see Henry,
      1973, pp. 621−2).
         Together, the four characteristics of subjectivity and Henry’s consequential refusal to
      found affectivity on sensibility form an important challenge for recent approaches that
      situate the origin of subjectivity and awareness in interoception. In the second half of this
      chapter, we examine two recent prominent accounts in the light of the phenomenological
      interpretation of basic subjectivity and its characteristics.


      16.3  Subjectivity: A modified neuroscience account
      16.3.1  Neuroscientific       accounts of awareness, consciousness,
      and the self
      Seminal neuroscientific accounts formulated by Damasio (1999) and Craig (2002,
      2003)  situate the roots of awareness, consciousness, and the self in the topographic
      mapping of the inner dimension of the body. For example, Craig (2002) identifies the
      foundation of (self-​) awareness in a homeostatic afferent pathway that conveys signals
      about the physiological status of all tissues of the body to the brain. This homeostatic
      afferent system constitutes a representation of the “material me,” and includes not only the
      viscera, but also pain and temperature, mechanical stress, local metabolism, cell rupture,
      cutaneous parasite penetration, mast cell activation, and immune and hormonal activity
      (Craig, 2002, p.  657). In humans, these ascending pathways eventually lead to a re-​
      representation in the anterior insular cortex (AIC). Both the re-​representation in the AIC
      and intermediate representations topographically represent aspects of the “material me.”
      For example, two rostrocaudally organized thalamic nuclei, representing all homeostatic
      afferent inflow project in a rostrocaudally topographic fashion to a field of the (dorsal)
      insular cortex (Craig, 2002, p. 659). According to Craig, evidence suggests that the final
      representation of the sentient self in the AIC consists of “one coherent somatotopic map”
      (Craig, 2009, p. 68). He considers the AIC, as the locus of a somatotopic-​interoceptive
      map of the body, as the potential neural correlate of consciousness (Craig, 2009, p. 65),
      indicating, however, that the associations between body parts and emotions need further
      investigation (Craig, 2009, p. 68).
         Craig’s account has both strengths and weaknesses. First, he offers a plausible account of
      the bodily roots of the self, explaining how a self comes about, but leaping over the issue of
      sentience. How a sentient self is constructed remains unexplained in his model. That is prob-
      lematic because it is not clear how sentience and consciousness differ in Craig’s account.
      Second, Craig’s focus seems rather on the coming about of the self of self-​awareness, and
      on the idea that the basis of this self (the “material me”) is to be found in the brain’s top-
      ographic representations of the inner body. That is notable where he refers to the fact that
      some species are capable of self-​recognition in the mirror. Whereas one can recognize
30




     300   Subjectivity as a sentient perspective and the role of interoception


           oneself in a mirror, basic subjectivity is not “something” that is recognizable in a mirror
           image but rather underlies this capability. Craig, however, does not differentiate between
           self and subjectivity, and focuses, for example, on the demonstration that the AIC is en-
           gaged during self-​recognition in the mirror test (Craig, 2009, p. 65). Third, whereas there is
           no objection to the idea that a “material me” is founded on topographic (and thus spatially
           extended) representations of the in-​depth body, it is unclear whether these representations
           could constitute a basic subjective perspective, which resists spatialization and is the point
           from where all spatial extension is laid out. Fourth, the issue of self-​awareness in the sense
           of self-​affectivity remains untouched. Craig’s approach of an embodied self is consistent
           with Henry’s idea of sensibility, but not with the idea of affectivity. Although Craig’s account
           refers to a “feeling of self,” the self involved does not seem to address the basic form of sub-
           jective and non-​relational self-​awareness that underlies sensibility.
              Interestingly, this basic form of subjectivity is approached by Damasio (in terms
           of consciousness). In his account, the deep roots of the self (the “proto-​self ”) are also
           situated in brain representations of the homeostatic condition of the body. The “proto-​
           self ” is the non-​conscious forerunner of consciously experienced levels of the self. It is
           “a coherent collection of neural patterns which constantly map, moment by moment,
           the state of the physical structure of the organism in its many dimensions” (Damasio,
           1999, p. 154). Damasio’s question is how this proto-​self can become conscious (or, as we
           would say, (self-​aware). Also, in his account as well as in others we need to assume a kind
           of inner sense based on the regulation and representation of the body’s internal states.
           Consciousness is characterized here too as a kind of feeling. Although consciousness is
           not equated with the existence of a self, the problem is that here too, we cannot explain
           how a feeling arises (Damasio, 1999, p. 314). It turns out that what a feeling is cannot
           be solved in an account based on topographic, somatopic, or, in short, representational
           mapping of body dimensions. How we can get from a representational mapping of the
           inner body to a feeling remains mysterious.
              To invoke a feeling or sentience actually repeats what needs to be explained: the coming
           about of subjectivity itself. Both Damasio and Craig face the fundamental problem that
           Henry clarified: in feeling or self-​affectivity, there is no subject−object dichotomy. Recent
           neuroscience accounts have discovered exactly this: the topographic representation in the
           brain of inner body states installs a dichotomy between a representing pole (the brain) and a
           represented object (the inner body). Neuroscience accounts arrive at an impasse when they
           discover that feeling does not fit in this dichotomy, and that it is in feeling that subjectivity
           resides. What becomes manifest in these neuroscience accounts is that feeling is the phe-
           nomenon where subjectivity manifests itself (to itself), and that any objectification of sub-
           jectivity (such as happens in the topographic mapping of inner bodily processes) estranges
           subjectivity from itself and makes it evasive. An explanation in which the subject−object
           dichotomy is not installed may approach the non-​relational nature of subjectivity.
              The remainder of this chapter therefore explores whether a modified neuroscience
           model of subjectivity could preserve the role of interoception, but without the mediation
           of spatially extended, topographic representations of the inner body.
 301




                                                                 A modified neuroscience account        301


       16.3.2  Homeostasis       and subjectivity
       Subjectivity as the basic trait that sets subjects apart from objects may be a phylogenet-
       ically primitive phenomenon arising quite early in animal life, since the physiological
       parameters of any animal organism have to be maintained within a narrow homeostatic
       range. This homeostatic dimension offers an organism criteria for assessing whatever is
       relevant for its own maintenance and survival. In other words, the homeostatic dimen-
       sion establishes a perspective from which the environment is continually assessed. That
       requires a living system to be interoceptively informed about its internal milieu and how
       this deviates from the setpoints for maintenance and survival. Being a perspective is in-
       separable from the struggle between life and death, but does this imply subjectivity? Is
       each perspective established on an interoceptive-​homeostatic basis a sentient perspective?
          In these and similar discussions, sentience or feeling often slips in in an unnoticed
       manner. For example, discussing the coming about of a self, Christoff and colleagues
       (2011) refer to homeostatic regulation, in which self-​        specifying reafferent/​efferent
       processes would be central. Homeostatic regulation would give rise to a distinction be-
       tween I and not I on the very basic level of life preservation. Their central idea is that
       “afferent signals conveying information about the organism’s internal state are continually
       coupled with corresponding efferent regulatory processes that keep afferent parameters
       within a tight domain of possible values” (Christoff et al., 2011, p. 106). These reafferent/​
       efferent processes would not only specify a perspective but this perspective is also
       affective or based on feeling:  “homeostatic regulation specifies a unique affective per-
       spective based on the inner feeling of one’s body” (Christoff et al., 2011, p. 107). This idea
       presents the problem nicely: homeostatic processes are deemed to specify a perspective
       proper to an organism. However, the reason why this perspective is subjective or sentient
       is much harder to capture. Would one say, for example, that the immune system specifies
       a subjective perspective? Certainly, it could be said to establish a perspective (and it also
       contributes to homeostasis), but the system is much less present in attempts to explain
       feeling or sentience. It seems, once more, that feeling is the bedrock of subjectivity, but it
       remains difficult to point out its exact relation with homeostatic-​interoceptive processes.
       In Henry’s terms, the current approaches to homeostatic-​interoceptive processes rely on
       the idea of sensibility (see section 16.2.4). For homeostatic bodily life to be (self-​)aware,
       self-​affectivity needs to be present too. The central question therefore is how homeostatic
       bodily life and interoception can be intertwined with self-​affectivity.

       16.3.3  Interoception,      body representations in the brain,
       and feeling
       If interoception is indispensable for subjectivity, interoceptive processes should not
       only result into topographic representations of the in-​depth body in the brain but they
       should also make up the basis of a true subject pole (cf. feeling or sentience). In other
       words, interoception should at least partly remain on the side of subjectivity itself and not
       wholly be turned into representations in the brain. As long as interoception is exclusively
       approached in terms of topographic representations of the in-​depth body in the brain, we
302




      302   Subjectivity as a sentient perspective and the role of interoception


            need the magical transition from the representation of body states to feelings. A solution
            may lie in a different processing of interoceptive material on its way from the in-​depth
            body to subjectivity, avoiding an appeal to a miracle in the face of an infinite regress of
            non-​conscious representations. We turn to Damasio’s influential account to clarify this in
            more detail and to highlight the possibility of a modified approach to interoception and
            subjectivity.
              Damasio uses the metaphor of the brain as a skilled cartographer, creating topo-
            graphic maps of objects and actions, and also of the body, including the internal milieu
            and the viscera. The first whole-​body maps would be situated in two upper-​brainstem
            nuclei. Next to mapping the whole body, their activity also corresponds to so-​called
            primordial feelings. These are elementary feelings of being alive (including feelings like
            pain and pleasure, comfort and discomfort), and they are closely connected to home-
            ostatic processes. Those elementary feelings are based on the mapping of the internal
            milieu and viscera. However, Damasio (2010) is well aware that these felt aspects are
            not explicable on the basis of the mapping activity of the brain. The reason is that car-
            tographic maps or representations inevitably take the body as an object of representa-
            tion, blocking the way for the induction of subjectivity on the basis of interoception.
            Again, “object” or “objectification” does not mean that the body is represented as any
            inanimate object whatsoever. It means that aspects of bodily life become the content
            of an act of representation, and that in this relation between an act representing (brain
            activity) on the one hand and a content represented (bodily aspects) on the other hand,
            they hold the position not of the subject but of an object (given to a subject) (see also
            section 16.2.4).
              In an attempt to solve this problem, Damasio (2010) considers primordial feelings as a
            byproduct of mapping activity of the brain, and accordingly, he switches from the meta-
            phor of the cartographer to the terminology of “treating” of body signals. How “treating”
            differs from “mapping” remains unclear. Both the mapping and the “treating” happen
            at the level of the proto-​self, the forerunner of the core self. According to Damasio, and
            importantly for what follows, the level of the proto-​self already manifests a form of con-
            sciousness in numerous living species because of the qualitative, felt aspects that arise as
            byproducts of the mapping of the in-​depth body. Damasio calls this primitive form of
            subjectivity present in the proto-​self “sentience.” Here again, we see the divide between
            sensibility (interoceptive mapping) and affectivity (feeling). Moreover, as in Henry’s phe-
            nomenological approach, both are distinguishable but coupled.
              Let us first focus on his proposal about the “treating” of body signals. In spite of the
            vague terminology, what happens in the treating of body signals is particularly inter-
            esting. Despite Damasio’s initial and guiding metaphor of the brain as cartographer, the
            “treating” of body signals does not take the in-​depth body as the content of representations
            in the brain. At this point, Damasio abandons his metaphor of the cartographer-​brain. In
            more philosophical terms, the dichotomy of mapping/​mapped, representing/​represented,
            sensing/​sensed, or subjectivity/​object (body) is left behind. That is exactly what we were
            looking for (see section 16.3.1): the possibility of approaching the non-​relational nature of
 30




                                                                  A modified neuroscience account        303


      subjectivity on the basis of an explanation in which the subject−object dichotomy is not
      installed. More concretely, we were looking for a model of subjectivity without the medi-
      ation of spatially extended, topographic representations of the inner body. The contours
      of such a modified model become visible where Damasio says that in the “treating” of
      body signals, the brain mapping of the in-​depth body state on the one hand and the ac-
      tual in-​depth body state on the other hand are intimately associated such “that the signals
      conveyed would not be merely about the state of the flesh but literally extensions of the
      flesh” (Damasio, 2010, p. 294). Also, “the information from the body’s interior is conveyed
      directly to the brain by numerous chemical molecules that course in the bloodstream
      and bathe parts of the brain that are devoid of blood-​brain barrier” (Damasio, 2010,
      p. 297). The borders between brain mapping and actual bodily state, between mapping
      and what is being mapped, are blurred here. Body and body maps become virtually fused
      (Damasio, 2010, p. 121). It is from this unique, peculiar arrangement where there is no
      divide between subject and object that primordial feelings, or sentience, are said to arise.
      Remarkably, Damasio’s way out of the difficulty to explain feelings closely corresponds
      to Henry’s characterization of self-​affectivity. Feelings seem to have a non-​relational or-
      igin: what is mapped and what is mapping is no longer a matter of a relation between
      two poles.

      16.3.4  Interoception,      body representations in the brain,
      and the self
      However, the story does not end here, because the notion of “self ” enters the scene again.
      Sentience, on the level of the proto-​self, is a sense of pure experience, which is on a next
      level—​the level of the core self—​claimed by an owner. This owner is the self, the protag-
      onist in the play of consciousness. For Damasio, a sense of self is indispensable for con-
      sciousness; the self is the protagonist of experience, no matter how subtle this “self-​sense”
      may be. Clearly, Damasio is not willing to consider the idea that subjectivity without
      a self is possible. However, on the level of Damasio’s proto-​self, there already is a sen-
      tient perspective from which an organism feels and acts. Somehow, his account fails to
      acknowledge the consequences of his newly introduced primordial level on which the
      boundaries between brain (mapping) and body (mapped) are blurred, for it is exactly
      here that there seems to be a level of basic subjectivity that does not include a self but
      “merely” instantiates a subjective perspective. This sentient subjective perspective is not
      based on a topographic representation of the in-​depth body, but originates on a level
      where the dichotomy between subjectivity and object pole collapses, such that another
      mode of appearing—​the mode proper to subjectivity—​is possible. What happens on
      this level where sentience arises is remarkably similar to the self-​manifestation of sub-
      jectivity in Henry: an immediate, non-​objectifying, and passive occurrence. Similarly to
      the self-​manifestation of subjectivity, the “treating” is non-​relational (cf. the blurring of
      the boundaries between mapping and mapped) and is not mediated by an interoceptive
      sense that then transmits its signals to the brain. The receptors are parts of the brain itself.
      Consequently, it is also non-​objectifying, because the body is not taken as an object of
304




      304   Subjectivity as a sentient perspective and the role of interoception


            representation or mapping. Finally, it is a passive occurrence in the sense that this bond
            cannot be broken without resulting in the death of the organism.
              In a more recent contribution, Damasio and Carvalho (2013) explicitly hold onto the
            idea that awareness is related to topographic maps of the body. “[I]‌n keeping with the
            notion that feelings are likely to arise from maps of body states, it is sensible to focus the
            search for neural substrates of feelings on the regions exhibiting topographically organized
            somatic maps” (Damasio and Carvalho, 2013, p. 145−6, emphasis added). If we keep in
            mind the basic characteristics of subjectivity, however, topographically organized maps
            of the body may exactly be where we should not look. On the contrary, those functions in
            the brain where body and brain are so intimately interwoven at the point of homeostasis
            and interoception that it is difficult to tell where the boundaries between mapping and
            mapped are, may be of particular interest for the coming about of subjectivity.

            16.3.5  A non-​topographic         basis for subjectivity
            The metaphor of the cartographer-​brain thus neglects the fact that dozens of transmitters
            and hormones from the blood immediately activate neurons in the brain. They reach the
            brain not via nerves but via the blood. The bloodstream is a chemical mirror of the in-
            ternal milieu in which all body cells bathe. Cardiovascular, pulmonary, respiratory, and
            gastrointestinal dimensions of the body are not exclusively topographically mapped in the
            brain via neural mechanisms. In-​depth bodily dimensions should also be conceived in
            terms of non-​neural and non-​spatially laid out parameters, which are normatively organ-
            ized around certain setpoints. After all, homeostasis is primarily about maintaining phys-
            ical parameters of the internal milieu, including temperature, pH, and nutrient levels.
            Deviations from these setpoints can only happen within the small range of survival and
            integrity of the organism. Some chemoreceptors (including receptors that respond to os-
            motic changes) and some thermoreceptors also reside within the central nervous system
            (Cameron, 2002, p. 60) and do not lead to topographic mapping. Moreover, some nerve
            endings of interoceptors are often diffuse and do not differentiate one organ from another
            (Cameron, 2002, p.  60). A  differentiation of organs is not always necessary in a non-​
            topographic account. What is more important, is high fidelity for the measured physi-
            ological parameter—​probably a dynamic one fluctuating with biological rhythms (e.g.
            circadian rhythms) (see Cameron, 2002, p.  75). In short, substances circulate through
            our bodies and the brain is sensitive to these substances and exerts homeostatic control
            through chemical and other interoceptors not only in the body but also in the brain itself.
            It might be this tight coupling between in-​depth body and brain functioning in the main-
            tenance of a set of physiological parameters within a narrow range of values that is at the
            heart of sentience. Therefore, it seems that an alternative for explaining basic subjectivity
            is situated where the dichotomy between subjectivity and the object (body) pole collapses,
            keeping in mind that interoception is not wholly reducible to cartographic mapping and
            neural transmission but should also be thought in terms of a set of non-​topographically
            laid out physiological parameters that need to be kept within the small range of norms for
            integrity and survival of the organism.
 305




                                                                                                  References    305


       16.4 Conclusion
       This chapter offered a philosophical account of the most basic form of subjectivity and
       discussed four characteristics inherent to it: it is a sentient perspective, it does not nec-
       essarily imply the existence of a self, it resists spatial extension, and it is marked by self-​
       affectivity. Whereas these four basic characteristics are conceptually distinguishable, a
       subjective perspective is only conceivable when we consider them as different facets of the
       same phenomenon. Together, they are necessary but perhaps not sufficient conditions for
       the more articulate form of subjectivity that is called “consciousness.”
          Philosophy, and phenomenology in particular, has a rich and complex tradition of con-
       sidering the phenomenon of subjectivity. The drawback of that is that it requires time
       and effort from other disciplines to get acquainted with philosophical interpretations of
       subjectivity. In addition, phenomenology has always been wary of the familiar but tricky
       notion of representations in the mind or the brain. The metaphysics of representation
       most often implies a subject−object dichotomy, and stepping out of this dichotomy goes
       against common sense. Phenomenology has argued that such a dichotomy is especially
       hindering in discussions of awareness and subjectivity, and this chapter tried to show this
       for recent accounts of subjectivity in neuroscience. Equipped with the four basic charac-
       teristics of subjectivity from phenomenology, two related proposals about the interocep-
       tive origin of awareness or sentience from the side of neuroscience have been discussed.
       Their heavy reliance on the notions of self and representation has been criticized, and
       their potential for developing an alternative has been highlighted. This chapter offered
       a first but limited idea of how the basic characteristics of subjectivity are in accordance
       with the non-​topographic dimension of interoception. A further investigation of the nor-
       mative, non-​representational intertwining of body and brain and its consequences for the
       coming about of basic subjectivity might open up new avenues in this exciting domain of
       research into interoception.

       References
       Cameron, O. G. (2002). Visceral Sensory Neuroscience—​Interoception. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
       Christoff, K., Cosmelli, D., Legrand, D., and Thompson, E. (2011). Specifying the self for cognitive
          neuroscience. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 15(3),  104–​12
       Craig, A. D. (2002). How do you feel? Interoception: The sense of the physiological condition of the
          body. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 3(8), 655–​66.
       Craig, A. D. (2003). Interoception: The sense of the physiological condition of the body. Current
          Opinion in Neurobiology, 13(4),  500–​5.
       Craig, A. D. (2009). How do you feel—​now? The anterior insula and human awareness. Nature Reviews
          Neuroscience, 10(1),  59–​70.
       Damasio, A. (1999). The Feeling of What Happens: Body and Emotion in the Making of Consciousness.
          New York, NY: Harcourt Brace.
       Damasio, A. (2010). Self Comes to Mind: Constructing the Conscious Brain. New York,
          NY: Pantheon Books.
       Damasio, A. and Carvalho, G. B. (2013). The nature of feelings: Evolutionary and neurological origins.
          Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 14(2), 143–​52.
306




      306   Subjectivity as a sentient perspective and the role of interoception


            De Preester, H. and Knockaert, V. (2005). Body Image & Body Schema—​Interdisciplinary Perspectives on
                the Body. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
            De Preester, H. (2007). The deep bodily origins of the subjective perspective: Models and their
                problems. Consciousness and Cognition, 16(3), 604–​18.
            Frank, M. (2007). Non-​objectal subjectivity. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 14(5–​6), 152–​73.
            Frankfurt, H. (1988). The Importance of What We Care About: Philosophical Essays.
                Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
            Gallagher, S. (2000). Philosophical conceptions of the self: Implications for cognitive science. Trends in
                Cognitive Sciences, 4(1),  14–​20.
            Gurwitsch, A. (1941). A non-​egological conception of consciousness. Philosophy and Phenomenological
                Research, 1(3), 325–​38.
            Henry, M. (1963). L’essence de la manifestation. Paris: PUF.
            Henry, M. (1973). The Essence of Manifestation (trans. G. Etzkorn). The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
            James, W. (1893). The Principles of Psychology. New York, NY: H. Holt and Company.
            Husserl, E. (1966). Zur Phänomenologie des inneren Zeitbewusstseins. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
            Husserl, E. (1991). On the Phenomenology of the Consciousness of Internal Time (1893–​1917).
                Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
            Kortooms, T. (2002). Phenomenology of Time, Edmund Husserl’s Analysis of Time Consciousness.
                Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
            Legrand, D. (2007). Pre-​reflective self-​as-​subject from experiential and empirical perspectives.
                Consciousness and Cognition, 16(3), 583–​99.
            Shoemaker, S. (1996). The First-​Person Perspective and Other Essays. Cambridge: Cambridge
                University Press.
            Strawson, G. (1999). The self and the SESMET. In: S. Gallagher and J. Shear (eds), Models of the Self.
                Thorverton: Imprint Academic, pp. 483–​518.
            Zahavi, D. (2005). Subjectivity and Selfhood: Investigating the First-​Person Perspective. Cambridge,
                MA: The MIT Press.
            Zahavi, D. (2007). Subjectivity and Immanence in Michel Henry. In: A. Grøn, I. Damgaard, and S.
                Overgaard (eds), Subjectivity and Transcendence. Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, pp. 133–​47.
 307




                  Chapter 17

                  Inside insights: A phenomenology
                  of interoception
                  Drew Leder



       17.1  The phenomenological notion of the lived body
       Phenomenology is a philosophical method, also employed within other disciplines,
       that begins by “suspending” conventional understandings of the world derived from
       science and metaphysical systems. This opens up the possibility of exploring without
       preconceptions (or at least with fewer preconceptions) the structure of human experi-
       ence from which arises our sense of self, and of the “life-​world” in which it is embedded
       (Moustakas, 1994).
          In this regard, Husserl (1989), Merleau-​Ponty (1962), Straus (1963, 1966), and many
       others have explored a conception of embodiment that differs from that conventionally
       presented within modern science. The “lived body,” that is, the body as both experiencer
       and experienced, is not just an object in the world like any other. It is that by which we
       have an experienced world (life-​world) to begin with. As I sit here in my chair, the scene
       I apprehend is organized around my corporeal position: my cup of tea to the left, my com-
       puter mouse to the right, ceiling above, and so on. Husserl calls the body a “null-​point”
       (1989) like the zero point on a graph, around which is organized our up and down, front
       and back, above and below, left and right.
          This is more than a world of oriented space and objects, however. These things take on
       specific meaning in relation to my bodily capabilities and desires. I made the cup of tea
       and placed it within my reach to provide a little pleasure and stimulation for my weary
       morning self. The computer mouse is on my right because I am right-​handed, and it is
       shaped to my hand, as is my keyboard, so that I might write these words that we can then
       see with our eyes. Husserl and Merleau-​Ponty speak of the lived body as involving the
       principle of the I can (Merleau-​Ponty, 1962, p. 137), an interwoven system of capabilities.
       All that I can apprehend and can do, actually or potentially, arises out of the integrated
       modes of perception, desire, movement, language, sexual expression, social interaction,
       and so on, that my body makes possible.
          This lived body does not float free like an immaterial soul. Rather, to perceive and act
       in the world it must be embedded within it, partaking of the same materiality that it
       apprehends. As such, the lived body is also an object body, with size, weight, and other
       such physical attributes. For example, I can stare at my image in a mirror, and see my
308




      308   Inside insights


            half-​lidded greenish eyes looking back at me, yet there remains an experiential gap, a
            non-​coincidence, between my eyes lived out as a power-​of-​vision, orienting, and giving
            rise to the visible world around me, and the eyes I find in the mirror, one small element
            within that visual landscape. The lived body ever manifests this two-​leaved structure,
            both subject and object, experiencer and experienced (Merleau-​Ponty, 1962, 1968).
               Such phenomenological explorations have tended to focus on our sensorimotor grasp
            of the world, paying some but relatively little attention to the field of interoception. Then
            too, as taken up in psychology and the neural sciences, the term “interoception” has been
            used in a variety of ways, leading to crucial ambiguities. Sherrington (1906) introduced
            the notion of “interoceptors” to refer specifically to receptors on, and perceptions of, the
            visceral region (as opposed to proprioception and exteroception). Over time, though, the
            term has also been given an expanded meaning and used to refer to all perceptions of
            our own body, including those with a musculoskeletal or skin origin (Ceunen, 2016).
            Different usages can be justified in relation to the physiology of the body; for example,
            distinctions between smooth and striated muscle, types of receptors, and the afferent and
            efferent pathways that innervate different organs (Ceunen, 2016).
               However, proceeding phenomenologically we find that the lived body operates as an
            integrated whole, often undermining any clear and fast distinction between the fields
            of visceral interoception, proprioception, body-​surface sensation, even exteroception.
            For example, when feeling low in blood sugar there is a bit of ache in my stomach, a
            generalized feeling of trembling weakness, a craving for food, a fuzziness to my thinking
            such that the words on my computer screen no longer make sense, a tendency toward
            irritability, and so on (I’ll return to this example in section 17.4). Sharp distinctions be-
            tween what would count as visceral or non-​visceral, even between the interoceptive and
            exteroceptive realms, blur. We should not allow categories derived from the dissection of
            corpses, and the accumulation of laboratory data, however scientifically useful, to obscure
            the unities of the lived body in action. Still, the threads that woven together form the tap-
            estry of experience can, to a degree, be pulled apart and separately examined—​as long as
            we don’t lose sight of their interweavings.
               It would be impossible in a short chapter like this to examine all the variegated forms that
            interoception, broadly defined as perception of one’s own body, can take. That said, I will
            often place a special focus on visceral interoception, and for four reasons. This accords
            with Sherrington’s original coining of the term; this allows us to explore a region of expe-
            rience that has been relatively neglected by phenomenology with its historical focus on
            the outer-​directed senses; the visceral dimension will prove to have important medical
            relevances; and finally, examining the most “internal” realm of experience will allow us
            to challenge the very distinction between inner and outer: even visceral sensations will
            prove to be intertwined with the life-​world in multiple ways. At times my focus will be on
            sensation arising from visceral organs, such as those in the thorax and abdomen. More
            broadly, however, I am exploring functional systems with a prominent visceral dimen-
            sion, such as digestion, respiration, and circulation, which yet surface in various ways
            both experientially and anatomically.
 309




                                                               The personal, pre-personal, and impersonal           309


       17.2  The personal, pre-​personal, and impersonal
       Initially, one attribute that distinguishes “interoceptive” from “exteroceptive” experience
       is that the former is private and personal. To a degree, one might say the same of outer-​
       directed experience. If I gaze at a tree across an open plaza I have my own perception of
       it that no-​one else exactly shares. I see it from a certain angle at a certain moment, and it
       may summon up meanings, emotions, associations, particular to me—​yet the tree does
       remain publicly available. Others view it, and we can compare, and for the most part agree
       upon, many of our perceptions: for example that it is a green, roughly 20-​foot tall, maple
       tree. The interoceptive world is not shared in the same way. You cannot experience the
       queasiness I feel in my stomach. Only I directly apprehend it. What Scarry writes about
       pain, noting an epistemic divergence, could be generalized to the interoceptive field:
          Pain enters into our midst as at once something that cannot be denied and something that cannot
          be confirmed (thus it comes to be cited in philosophic discourse as an example of conviction, or
          alternatively as an example of skepticism). To have pain is to have certainty; to hear about pain is to
          have doubt. (Scarry, 1985, p. 13)

       That interoception constitutes a private, personal field of experience has a number of
       ramifications. Research has shown that there is a good deal of variability in the levels
       of sensitivity and vigilance individuals have relative to their inner body (Herbert and
       Pollatos, 2012). We cannot assume that the same processes will elicit similar inner
       experiences for different individuals, or even for the same individual at different times. In
       a medical context, this contributes to the difficulty of deducing the nature and severity of
       disease simply from a patient’s report of interoceptive symptoms.
          Moreover, the personal nature of interoception can make it hard for a patient even
       to communicate these experiences. When seeing a clinician I  might point toward the
       relevant bodily region, and describe interior sensations—​“there’s a kind of dull aching
       I feel around here, now and then, and sometimes a sharp pain”—​but this all verges on
       the incommunicable (Scarry, 1985, p. 162). The other cannot directly share the object of
       reference as they could if I were pointing toward that maple tree we both see. He or she
       must “take my word for it,” but the words I have at my disposal are disappointingly crude.
       “Aching,” “sharp,” “bloated,” “crampy”: such language seems to lack precision. Contrast
       this, for example, with the ability of a paint store to present hundreds of slightly different
       color shades, each with its own designator, such as “teal,” “turquoise,” “aqua,” “jade,” “sage,”
       “edgewater,” “valley mist,” and so on. This kind of subtlety of discrimination and verbal
       labelling is possible because these colors manifest in a shared world. We can see and name
       them together. By comparison, our speech about the interoceptive field, private to each
       person, remains relatively impoverished. (In section 17.3 I will discuss how this is also an
       offshoot of the vague and generalized nature of much interoceptive experience, especially
       that drawn from visceral regions.)
          While personal to each individual, interoception also gives us glimpses of a pre-​personal
       level of embodiment. Organismic functions of circulation, respiration, digestion, produc-
       tion of blood cells, filtering of toxins, and so on, largely proceed without the need, and
310




      310   Inside insights


            often the possibility, of conscious perception and control (Leder, 1990, pp. 36−68; Ricoeur,
            1966). Our life arose from a pre-​personal process of embryological organ growth, and
            each night we lapse back into a blind reliance upon these organs to sustain us even when
            we fall into a deep sleep.
               Interoception, particularly of visceral regions (organs of the thorax/​abdomen) or
            functions (circulation, digestion, respiration) provides hints and reminders of the pre-​
            personal dimension that subtends our existence. I  might, for example, experience a
            fullness or burning that indicates it is time to find a bathroom, and quick. This may not
            have been part of my “personal” agenda—​perhaps I am in the middle of an engrossing
            movie—​but embodied messages can override personal wishes. The pre-​personal or-
            ganism demands my attention.
               This way of speaking can sound dualistic. Paradoxically, interoceptive experience can
            both subvert and reinforce a sense of self-​body dualism (Leder, 2016a). On the one hand,
            the embodied self radically coincides with itself through interoceptive experience in a way
            it doesn’t through exteroception. Vis-​à-​vis exteroception, as mentioned earlier, the round,
            small eyes I see looking back at me in the mirror don’t experientially coincide with my
            eyes-​as-​lived, the power of sight that organizes the visible world. Similarly, Merleau-​Ponty
            discusses how, when touching one hand with another, we still experience each hand as
            either the one doing the touching or the fleshy object being touched; right and left hands
            can switch off roles, but there is always a non-​coincidence, a gap, between the part of the
            body used as perceiver and the part perceived (1962, p. 92; 1968, 147−8). This is not so
            in the same way for the interoceptive field. When I have a cramp in my midsection I feel
            it from within. There may be no clear divergence of perceiving and perceived body, but
            simply the sensation of cramping. While there are modes of meditation that welcome
            and focus on such “non-​dual” experiences (Loy, 1988), these can also take on a threat-
            ening quality. Inner pain and discomfort can feel trapping, overwhelming, inescapable. It
            is hard to establish distance from that which seizes you from within.
               While exhibiting our inescapable embodiment, paradoxically visceral interoception
            can also provoke a sense of self−body dualism. In the West we tend to identify our core
            self as somewhere up in our head, where our brain and certain exteroceptive senses re-
            side. From this vantage point what unfolds in the stomach can seem distant, something
            non-​I. Moreover, we are receiving messages from a pre-​personal, organismic level. The
            bodily I can Merleau-​Ponty refers to is here replaced by a kind of it can (e.g. my stomach
            can digest food), or in some cases, an it cannot—​(this food won’t go down right; I am
            about to throw up).
               The conscious self can thus feel separate from what it apprehends, neither fully under-
            standing nor in control of visceral signals and functions. The pre-​personal world is then
            revealed as having an estranging impersonal character. The Latin word, impersonalis, is
            derived from the roots in, meaning “not” and personalis (personal, relating to an indi-
            vidual). Visceral sensations can seem radically non-​personal, almost anti-​personal, for-
            eign to our individual agenda. This is true not only in deeply disruptive cases, like that of
            a kidney stone or congestive heart failure, but even with something as innocuous as the
 31




                                                       The inaccessible, indistinct, and intermittent    311


      gurglings of a hungry stomach. (I hope these are not audible to my co-​workers because
      they are embarrassing, they undercut my self-​presentation.)
         Philosophical dualisms, such as Descartes’ famous mind/​body split, may have their
      origins, or at least part of their appeal, in such experiences of divergence between the in-
      tellectual, volitional self and our necessary, but often burdensome, viscerality. As I explore
      elsewhere (Leder, 1990, pp. 126−48), the Western philosophical tradition often valorizes
      faculties such as reason and will associated with an immaterial, immortal soul. In con-
      trast, the body can surface to awareness at times it presents an impediment, as the source
      of lethargy, distraction, lust, and illusion, and that part of us that must necessarily die.
         This dualist split is not present within all cultures. Nor must the volitional and pre-​
      personal levels of the embodied self necessarily clash or coexist uneasily. Physiologically,
      they are in a communicative relationship which can certainly take positive form. For ex-
      ample, the meditator practicing abdominal breathing and progressive muscle relaxation
      can increase oxygenation, slow the heart, lower blood pressure, improve digestion, and
      provoke other salutary effects mediated through the parasympathetic nervous system.
      One can not only send messages to, but be receptive to signals from, the inner body.
      To head for bed when fatigued; lay off a food that always causes stomach upset; notice
      the signs of a building anxiety, and take remedial measures; all these are ways of posi-
      tively attending to and learning from interoceptive cues—​about which I will say more in
      section 17.5.


      17.3  The inaccessible, indistinct, and intermittent
      I will now turn more explicitly to what is distinctive about visceral interoception, as
      opposed to surface sensations and exteroceptive experience. Of course, it is impossible
      in a short chapter to do full justice to the range of visceral experience: how different, for
      example, is the feeling of being overfull from a big meal; the light-​headedness induced
      by inadequate oxygenation; the sharp pain of an appendicitis; and so on. I will note a few
      general features, however, that are often characteristic and distinctive concerning visceral
      experience.
         First, there are regions of inaccessibility, a kind of organismic null-​point at the heart of
      our biological life. This is not exactly the same null-​point mentioned in section 17.1: there
      I discussed how the eyes do not themselves appear within the visual field they create but
      form an absent center. This sensorimotor surface-​body effaces itself in the act of projecting
      toward an experienced world. I gaze upon the computer screen; my hand reaches for the
      teacup. Yet my eyes, my hands, are not what I focus on, but what I focus from as I interact
      with the world around me (Polanyi, 1969). As I will discuss in section 17.5, this can some-
      times be true of our visceral states as well, but our visceral body is often less projective
      than it is “recessive” (Leder, 1990, pp. 36−68). Hidden in the depths of pre-​personal an-
      onymity, certain organs, tissues, and functions, may disappear almost entirely from con-
      scious perception. Important regions of the visceral body, such as the alveoli of the lung or
      the parenchyma of the liver, are virtually insensate and unavailable to direct experience.
312




      312   Inside insights


            This constitutes a different kind of experiential “null-​point” within one’s own body; parts
            are so pre-​personal as to be inaccessible.
               In some ways, this recessive absence is salutary. It frees us up to focus on our conscious
            projects as vital processes are silently managed by our body. In other ways, such intero-
            ceptive gaps can prove problematic. For example, certain cancers are more deadly because
            they progress asymptomatically. By the time a patient experiences problems, the growth
            of a large mass, and metastases to distant regions, may already have occurred.
               While the inner body is not entirely inaccessible, what interoceptive awareness we
            have, when compared to exteroception, is often marked by a variety of forms of indis-
            tinctness. We scan the outer world with our classical five senses, each with modes of
            acuity which synesthetically supplement one another (Merleau-​Ponty, 1962; Jonas, 1966;
            Straus, 1963). Through vision we survey a world of objects seamlessly arrayed in depth.
            We can gaze at galaxies billions of light years away or hone in on the minute patterns
            and colors of a single flower. Hearing alerts us in all directions to passing events; I hear
            the whispering of leaves in the wind behind me, or distinguish the subtle complexities of
            spoken language. With touch I experience with precision the proximate; our fingertips
            can distinguish stimuli to the accuracy of a millimeter. By contrast, the inner body yields
            a far more indistinct landscape. Physiologically, our bodily interior is replete with a
            host of specialized sensors that minutely monitor the slightest variations of the inner
            milieu. However, on the subjective level we remain largely unaware of most of these
            measurements and adjustments.
               What surfaces to consciousness can also be indistinct in the sense of spatial ambiguity.
            Having a “stomach-​ache” we may point toward our midsection but this hardly coincides
            with the outlines of a particular organ. Neither does the “ache” have anything like the
            qualitative precision that exteroceptive senses, used singly and in combination, yield
            (Leder, 1990, pp.  39−42). Moreover, due to the complexity of our organs’ spatial and
            physiological relationships, and neural distortions like referred pain, we may not even
            be sure if what we experience reliably correlates with the “what” and “where” of organic
            processes. In clinical situations the patient and doctor alike are involved in a herme-
            neutic process, trying to decode and supplement through laboratory tests and diagnostic
            imaging, indistinct interoceptive messages (Svenaeus, 2001; Gogel & Terry, 1987; Leder,
            2016, pp. 87−105).
               Then too, interoceptive experience often exhibits what Ricoeur calls the “strange mix-
            ture of the local and the non-​local” (1966, p. 412) that attends vital functions. A chest pain
            may be “right here” in a certain sense but also be experienced as reverberating throughout
            the discomforted body, and even, as I will discuss in section 17.5, distorting the outer
            world. Proust, that consummate literary phenomenologist, poses an interesting question
            in The Guermantes Way: “Is there not such a thing as diffused bodily pain, radiating out
            into parts outside the affected area, but leaving them and disappearing completely the
            moment the practitioner lays his finger on the precise spot from which it springs?” (2002,
            p.  114). The interoceptive field may combine specific pains, tickles, and spasms with
            diffused, even confusing, regional effects.
 31




                                                                                 The exterior interior     313


         This sensory field is often not only spatially and qualitatively indistinct in the ways
      mentioned, but temporally intermittent. By way of contrast, the world of vision exhibits a
      sense of constancy and completion. As long as our eyes are open and our vision intact the
      world fills in around us, continuous in time. Within that world we can see our external
      body, also always there, yet interoception yields a more intermittent register, surfacing to
      and disappearing from awareness at different times. For example, though I take more than
      20,000 breaths a day I do not consciously attend to the vast majority, nor to my shifting ox-
      ygen/​carbon dioxide balance. This can be altered to a degree by deliberate attention—​with
      discipline and practice, the vipassana (insight) meditator learns to focus on the breath
      and other subtle bodily sensations for hours, but for most of us, most of the time, visceral
      interoception remains intermittent, often reaching awareness mostly at times of demand.
      “I’m really hungry,” or “need to find a bathroom,” or “am having an allergy attack,” or “may
      be getting my period.”
         Interoceptive cues thus do at times grab hold of the conscious mind. Taking an evolu-
      tionary viewpoint, it seems logical that this would be particularly the case when conscious
      awareness and volition are needed to aid in the preservation of bodily homeostasis. By
      way of contrast, although we may occasionally notice sensations of unusual health and
      vigor—​”I feel really energetic today”—​often states of health manifest in a lack of inter-
      oceptive focus. We are freed up by our well-​functioning body to focus outward on life-​
      world activities (Leder & Jacobson, 2014).
         Interoception is “intermittent” also vis-​à-​vis the life-​course insofar as it is more or less
      prominent at different developmental stages: for example, puberty, pregnancy, old age. To
      take the latter example, the system failures associated with old age and dying can provoke
      strong, often unpleasant, inner experiences. Hence the “organ recitals” of certain older
      individuals who share tales of their latest visceral pains and procedures, and attend minutely
      to the particulars of digestion and bowel movements—​yet this enhanced inner awareness is
      not only a negative thing. In later life one may (out of maturity or necessity) become more
      cognizant of the wisdom of the inner body which guides one toward healthier patterns
      of eating, rest, activity, and substance use. The young can blithely ignore or override such
      messages. This is harder to do as the years go by and we pay heavier prices for inattention.


      17.4  The exterior interior: Interpretive, emotive,
      purposive, projective
      My treatment heretofore is somewhat provisional and oversimplified. I have portrayed
      visceral interoception as involving the “inaccessible, indistinct, and intermittent.” It has
      been taken up as a sensory field, and a rather deficient one at that.
        While useful to a degree, this analysis needs to be expanded to address the complexity
      of the relationship between sensations and cognitive interpretations, emotive responses,
      action-​oriented purposes, that is, all the ways in which visceral processes arise from and
      return to the life-​world. I will treat these as aspects of the “exterior interior” which to-
      gether challenge the very notion of a pure “interoceptive” field.
314




      314   Inside insights


               One popular mode of research on interoception explores the degree to which individuals
            apprehend their own heartbeat and/​or can be trained to do so (Herbert & Pollatos, 2012,
            p. 693). While interesting results ensue, this is an example of a case of visceral interoception
            treated qua sensation, largely isolatable from the rest of the sensory field, and more im-
            portantly, from the interpretive and practical contexts of everyday life. This does allow for
            protocols that can be standardized and yield measurable results. However, the interocep-
            tive field-​as-​lived is more than just an amalgam of individual sensations.
               Let us consider instead a life-​world context in which heartbeat sensitivity might nat-
            urally rise. A woman has a light breakfast with coffee and goes to the gym for an early
            morning swim. By the end she notices that her heart is racing. What is going on? Perhaps
            it was too much coffee—​if so, better cut back on the caffeine buzz. Or she might interpret
            this as the sign of a good aerobic workout—​you’re supposed to get your heart rate up.
            Perhaps she is worried—​is this pounding in her chest a sign of how out of shape she is?
            She might even fear that this is truly a cause for alarm—​could this be an arrhythmia, or
            even the start of a heart attack?
               In all cases she is not simply experiencing a pure sensation but a sensation-​as-​interpreted
            and thereby resonant with a certain quality and meaning. The elevated heart rate, when
            taken as signifying a healthy aerobic workout, feels very different from that associated
            with danger, even if the interoceptive stimulus is the same. In the latter case, the heart
            pounds with an ominous, distressing quality like a stranger knocking on the door in the
            middle of the night. This is heartbeat-​as-​threat, each pulsation feeling like a potential
            assault.
               A number of points might here be made. First, and most obviously, interoceptive ex-
            perience is never “pure sensation” but always shaped by interpretation. In this it is not
            different from exteroception; as Heidegger (1962) and Gadamer (1984) suggest, all expe-
            rience is necessarily “hermeneutical,” that is, interpretive (Palmer, 1969). The swimmer’s
            various interpretations of her heartbeat are not purely personal but draw upon Western
            understandings of anatomy and physiology. She may have seen pictures of the heart,
            studied it in classes, and understands that life depends on its mechanical pump function.
            Cultural training feeds into our interoceptive experience. (Phenomenology itself has
            moved in this existential, hermeneutical direction, realizing that cultural presumptions
            can never be fully suspended, but we can do our best to be aware of and examine them.)
               This is part of what I  have in mind when referring to the “exterior interior.” Our
            body is turned inside out, so to speak. Interoception is shaped by information we re-
            ceive from outside sources. Moreover, in the West, the body (even the bodily interior)
            is largely thematized qua externalized object, that thing which can be opened on the
            pathologist’s table, or imaged through magnetic resonance imagery (MRI) (Foucault,
            1973, pp. 124−72; Leder, 1990, pp. 146−8.) Hence the swimmer does not simply feel a se-
            ries of sensory impressions; rather, she feels her heart, that quasi-​external object residing
            within her chest.
               Sensations not only provoke such interpretations, but interpretations can provoke sen-
            sation. A vivid example is provided by Groopman, himself an oncologist who, in being
 315




                                                                                  The exterior interior     315


       treated for a hand problem, received a bone scan which seemed to show metastatic rib
       cancer. “I generally think of myself as reasonably well put together psychologically, but
       within moments my chest began to ache. When I  touched my ribs, they hurt” (2007,
       pp. 265−66). Even when further tests showed he was cancer-​free, the pain continued for
       several hours afterwards. Fortunately, he recovered from this distressing experience which
       mimicked the disease he feared. Certain individuals, often labeled hypochondriacs, suffer
       from an over-​vigilant and catastrophizing turn of mind which can make the interoceptive
       field nightmarish in a continuing way.
          For sensation is not only interpretive but also emotive. For the swimmer, we have seen
       that her pounding heart may be suffused with an aura of elation, worry, or terror. At
       times, this emotional tone is even the predominant quality and significance of inner-​
       body experience. For example, we speak of having a “heavy heart,” “heartache,” or even
       a “broken heart.” These expressions relate to real sensations in the chest area that can ac-
       company grief. The heart is often experienced/​understood as the emotional center of love;
       we say “you’re in my heart,” or send a heart-​shaped Valentine’s Day card. The heart is also
       viewed as a place of intuitive knowledge, as in “I know in my heart.” Others might refer
       to having a “gut feeling,” or a “gut-​wrenching” experience. Where cognitive/​emotional
       responses are felt can differ among individuals and cultures. For example, the Chinese
       refer to xin, the “heart-​mind,” and to the lower dantian, below the navel, as crucial energy
       centers. Hindus describe a series of chakras (energy wheels) running up and down the
       spine, mediating, for example, sexual urges or interpersonal love.
          These examples also suggest that interoceptive experience is not only interpretive and
       emotive but also purposive (Herbert & Pollatos, 2012), that is, generative of urges and
       actions. Depending on her processing of the heartbeat, the swimmer may feel the need
       to catch her breath, moderate her caffeine intake, swim a few more laps to get in better
       shape, or immediately exit the pool and phone her doctor. She may later talk with friends,
       conduct Internet searches, and in other ways arrive at a rational plan, but the sense of a
       pre-​reflective call to action, a push or pull in certain directions, is felt right within intero-
       ceptive experience itself. Fatigue beckons us to sit down. Heartburn calls out for a glass of
       milk. Here, too, we see the principle of the “exterior interior” at play, for the inner body is
       both affected by, and motivates actions in, the external world.
          Taken collectively, this suggests the projective nature of interoception. This word is de-
       rived from the Latin jacere, “to throw,” and pro, “forth.” Interoception is not simply in-
       ternal sensation but also “throws us forth” into the life-​world and its projects. Earlier, in
       section 17.3 I contrasted the recessive features of visceral experience with the richness of
       exteroception, yet we should be careful not to overemphasize such splits. The lived body
       is not simply a collection of discrete regions and organs but operates in an unified fashion
       vis-​à-​vis the life-​world. Interoceptive experience is shaped by that world, and helps deter-
       mine how we perceive and respond to our surroundings.
          Let me return to another example mentioned in section 17.1, that of a mild hypo-
       glycemic state (to which I am prone). Working too long on this chapter I begin to feel
       fatigued. My head swims; the words I am writing no longer come easily. I begin to feel a bit
316




      316   Inside insights


            distracted and irritable. I have some stomach queasiness from the tea I’ve been drinking.
            Am I hungry? Not sure. What time is it? Past noon. Though confused, tired, and a bit de-
            pressed, I don’t want to knock off before finishing a section—​but I’m having trouble even
            parsing the words on the computer screen. Time to take a break; better have some lunch.
               In this example, I note certain interoceptive cues (queasy stomach, fatigue, irritability,
            depression), yet these are blended with alterations in my life-​world. To use Heidegger’s
            term, the world is always experienced through a certain mood (1962, pp.  172−9)—​in
            this instance, irritation and confusion. We encounter the world filtered not only through
            our external senses but through our inner-​body states as well. In many cases one comes
            to know one’s internal states only indirectly through noting changes in how the world
            around oneself appears. As Sartre writes, “ ‘coenesthesia’ rarely appears without being
            surpassed toward the world by a transcendent project” (1966, p. 436). For example, the
            fact that the words on the computer screen no longer make sense clarifies to me that I am
            growing hypoglycemic. Again, this is a manifestation of how the internal body pro-​jects,
            is thrown forth into the surrounding world.
               This involves a temporal, not merely a spatial self-​transcendence, casting us into past
            and future. When regarded as a collection of isolable sensations interoception seems to
            manifest as pure presence. I feel a tickle now. A pain now. Everything is simply now. In
            the life-​world, however, interoceptive experience has a thick temporality—​my hypogly-
            cemic state gradually developed, imperceptibly unfolding until it pushed through into
            self-​awareness. Moreover it refers to the past—​when did I last eat?—​and the future—​
            what should I have for lunch? If my issues were more serious than transitory low blood
            sugar, the horizon of futurity might take on even greater meaning. For example, the
            return of pain for someone with a chronic condition can raise the specter of continued
            disability, deterioration, even death. Again, these resonances are not simply subsequent
            to the sensation but felt within it, adding ominous weight to what otherwise might be a
            minor tug.
               A projective temporality manifests even on the pre-​personal interoceptive level, com-
            posed of habits and anticipations. For example, prone to acid reflux, I have noticed that
            simply thinking of drinking a glass of orange juice will provoke acid release and a burning
            sensation in my throat. On a visceral level, my body has been shaped by past experiences,
            anticipates the citric bolus it is about to receive, and responds accordingly. The visceral
            body has its own sensorimotor pro-​jects, cast forth across space and time.


            17.5  The inferior interior: Overlooking, overriding, and
            gaining insight
            The previous analyses have hovered ambiguously between the universal and the culturally/​
            historically specific. Some features, such as the inaccessiblity to consciousness of certain
            bodily regions due to the limited nature of their sensory innervation, would presumably
            apply to humans in general. Other aspects of the interoceptive landscape—​for example,
            our degree of awareness, the places in the body we most sense, and the interpretive models
 317




                                                                                         The inferior interior    317


       we use—​not only differ among individuals but also among different cultures and histor-
       ical periods. This is a job for medical anthropologists, cultural historians, and others, to
       investigate. I have focused on contemporary Western experience, yet it is valuable to re-
       flect on how this itself was historically shaped, and therefore what may be peculiar to it,
       and even problematic.
          Beginning in the seventeenth century a new conception of the material world, and
       the human body, was proposed and gained a certain ascendency. This has been referred
       to as “the death of nature”(Merchant, 1980)—​that is, nature, and most particularly the
       human body, comes to be understood according to the analogy of a lifeless machine.
       For Descartes, the mind or soul (res cogitans) is the repository of conscious thought, in-
       cluding perceptual experience, imagination, rationality, memory, and the like. The body
       (res extensa), like the rest of the natural world, simply operates as a machine, according
       to material properties and forces (Burtt, 1952; Descartes, 1911). For example, the heart
       eventually comes to be understood as a mechanical pump, using muscular force triggered
       by electrical impulses. This soul/​body dualism also gave rise to a monistic variant, popular
       in contemporary science, in which the mind or soul disappears entirely, or is considered
       simply as an epiphenomenon of mechanistic processes. L’Homme Machine (Man-​the-​
       Machine) by La Mettrie, eighteenth century French physician and philosopher, is one
       famous example of this position (1996). Foucault comments,
          The great book of Man-​the-​Machine was written simultaneously in two registers: the anatomico-​
          metaphysical register, of which Descartes wrote the first pages and which the physicians and
          philosophers continued, and the technico-​political register, which was constituted by a whole set of
          regulations and by empirical and calculated methods relating to the army, the school and the hos-
          pital, for controlling or correcting the operations of the body. (1979, p. 136)

       Once the body is reconceived as a machine, its placement and action can be minutely
       controlled, made to serve the end of military, educational, medical, or industrial
       institutions.
         To an extent we still live in such an era, and this shapes our interoceptive experience in
       crucial ways. First, it fosters a tendency to overlook the inner-​body’s sensory field. Insofar
       as we inhabit something like a body-​machine, we need not attend to its messages. Again,
       wisdom and experience are the possession of the mind, while the body is a mechanism
       devoid of higher consciousness. Thus we are acculturated to overlook interoceptive expe-
       rience; that is, look elsewhere, look above, in our hierarchy of value, to messages from the
       external world or from our own intellect.
         For the interoceptive field comes to be regarded as what I will term the inferior interior.
       Descartes and other philosophers valorized the rational powers of the mind. Theologians
       looked to the soul that human beings uniquely possess, with its capacity to worship the
       Divine, read Scripture, exercise moral judgment. Here, then, is the superior interior, that
       belonging to “mind,” or “soul.” This is where rational reflection takes place, meditative
       prayer, and the deliberative processes now necessary to function well in our complex,
       bureaucratized, and technologized world. In school, we are trained to think much, and
       think better. All the input we receive from the external world—​a ceaseless flow of language,
318




      318   Inside insights


            data, images, needing absorption and processing–​—​leads us back into that thinking
            mind, rehearsing its sub-​vocalized language, memories, and symbolic representations.
               By contrast with this superior interior, that of the “mind,” messages arising from our
            bodily interior take on secondary status. Schools do not teach us, for the most part, to
            pay attention to our interoceptive sensations. They are not publicly available, nor do they
            contribute to the required studies and activity patterns. Employers are not interested in
            hearing about our aches and twinges. They wish us to be present for and focused on
            outward tasks.
               Without coaching and validation, it is difficult to pick up on and understand intero-
            ceptive messages. They are non-​verbal, private, and, as we have seen, often subtle, inter-
            mittent, ambiguous. It is not necessarily that we lack knowledge per se about our inner
            physiology—​for example, we may have learned a lot about diet, digestion, and gut bac-
            teria from classes and Internet searches. At the same time, however, we may lack the
            practices and training that help us notice and utilize signals from within.
               In addition to overlooking inner-​body messages, we often energetically override them.
            Foucault, in the quote earlier mentioned in this section, writes of the “technico-​political
            register” according to which man-​the-​machine is disciplined. School attendance is man-
            datory, as are the rooms you occupy at which times, the chairs you should sit in, and how
            to face and address your teachers. Prisons engage in their own modes of intensive sur-
            veillance and bodily restriction. So too, workplaces filled with time clocks to be punched,
            phone conversations to be recorded, work spaces to be divided, and productivity to be
            measured. The body, as Foucault writes, is micromanaged, rendered docile in the face of
            power, even while its utility is maximized (1979, pp. 135−69).
               Discipline, according to Foucault, is most effective when it is internalized such that
            the individual manages one’s own body in accordance with the larger systems in which
            one is embedded. Again, this leads many of us not only to overlook but actively over-
            ride interoceptive messages. True, we may have thoughts like “I’m tired of sitting in this
            office chair—​I need to go for a run,” or “My stomach is cramping, I  don’t want to go
            to work,” or “I have a headache; this project is stressing me out,” but such interoceptive
            messages threaten one’s conformity to a role and thus are overridden in the name of being
            a good worker, parent, or volunteer. Even our consumerist modes of entertainment—​also
            mandatory for the capitalist engine to hum at full throttle—​involve overriding internal
            messages. We drink too much, exhaust ourselves in travel to distant destinations where
            we seek relaxation, get too little sleep and are too sedentary as we interface with our elec-
            tronic screens, even over-​exercise, trying to “get back in shape.” (This of course refers to
            the shape of our outer body, whose appearance is viewed as of paramount importance,
            especially for women in our sexist culture.) All the while we “lose touch” with the inner
            body, and whatever wisdom could be derived from its messages.
               Hence the import of gaining, or recovering, what I  will call inside insight. There are
            interoceptive cues that suggest what will support or deplete our energy and spirit, what
            assists or impairs digestion, the effects of different types of breathing, with their poten-
            tial to increase or relieve stress, and on and on. In clinical research, a pattern of “body
 319




                                                                                             The inferior interior     319


       awareness” and “somatic awareness” has sometimes been associated with anxiety, bodily
       hypervigilance, and catastrophizing, of a sort that can intensify pain and distress, but
       there are positive modes of body awareness that should be distinguished from those that
       are dysfunctional (Mehling et al., 2012). If we develop in-​sight—​learn to look within—​—​
       the inner-​body offers up a wealth of information and requests valuable for our health and
       welfare. Yes, this body itself has insights, often “knowing” more than our preoccupied,
       driven mind. As Nietzsche writes, “There is more reason in your body than in your best
       wisdom” (1954, pp. 146-​147).
          But to do us any good we have to recover the capacity to attend to these bodily messages,
       even if intermittent and indistinct. There are many cultures and traditions more focused
       on this than ours, and their methods have now become available in the West. To name but
       a few, there is Buddhist vipassana meditation which teaches careful, sustained attention to
       the breath and other bodily sensations; this has given rise to mindfulness protocols now
       popular in integrative medicine (Kabat-​Zinn, 2013). There are Chinese medical practices
       such as acupuncture, and meditative/​martial art/​exercise/​dance forms like qigong and
       taiji (Jahnke, 2002) that work with the bodily qi (vital energy). Hinduism has given rise to
       hatha yoga poses, and pranayama—​breath-​control techniques (Rosen, 2002)—​to render
       the body strong and flexible, tone inner organs, and move prana (vital energy) through
       the different chakras (energy centers).
          Admittedly, such systems may map the inner body in ways that differ from Western
       anatomy and physiology. Some may or may not be shown to have direct medical ben-
       efit; studies are beginning to explore the mechanisms and clinical efficacy of “alterna-
       tive” treatments such as acupuncture and yogic practices. It is unclear whether “qi” or
       the “chakras” will ever register as anatomico/​     physiological realities in the Western
       sense. But they do speak to the phenomenological experience of the inner body as
       interpreted by different cultures, and for those interested, increasingly within our own.
       This is accompanied by a proliferation of Western holistic body-​centered therapies such
       as Alexander Technique, Feldenkreis, Healing Touch, massage therapy, and reflexology.
       Again, regardless of their medical efficacy, such treatment systems are indications of a
       growing desire to get back “in touch” with the body rather than ignoring and overriding
       its messages (Mehling et al., 2011).
          Whether through these systems, or in ways more personal and informal, gaining in-
       side insight might do a good deal to assist the health of both individuals and society. It
       was actually health concerns that motivated Descartes to develop his mechanical view of
       the body:
          They caused me to see that it is possible to attain knowledge which is very useful in life . . . princi-
          pally because it brings about the preservation of health, which is without doubt the chief blessing
          and the foundation of all other blessings in this life . . . we could be free of an infinitude of maladies
          both of body and mind, and even also possibly of the infirmities of age, if we had sufficient knowl­
          edge of their causes, and of all the remedies with which nature has provided us. (1911, pp. 119−20)

       While it is true that Cartesian-​style medicine, with its diagnostic technologies, chem-
       ical pills, and surgical repairs or transplants, has offered great relief of suffering and
320




      320   Inside insights


            helped prolong the human lifespan, this model also has its shadow side. In addition to
            contributing to a depersonalized style of medicine, the Cartesian notion of the body-​
            machine, and the repairs thereto, can distract focus from the development of an inner-​
            body awareness that could prevent certain disease processes for which medicine offers
            end-​stage treatment (Leder, 2016b, 56−83). There is a temptation, when downing another
            cheeseburger and fries, to believe that one can always take a cholesterol-​lowering statin,
            or have a cardiac procedure to open up or replace clogged arteries. This is symptomatic
            of an exaggerated cultural fantasy of a fix-​all medicine. Greater awareness and valuing of
            inner-​body signals (I feel sickish when I eat that burger and fries) might forestall the need
            for some of those pills and procedures.
               To pay greater attention to interoceptive messages—​what kind of foods sit well, how
            much sleep and movement we need, what subtle symptoms of imbalance are manifesting
            that might lead to chronic problems if left unattended—​constitutes an ever-​available re-
            source in preventive medicine. Such inside insights are free; they demand no costly in-
            surance premiums and co-​pays. These might forestall expensive and burdensome doctor
            visits, invasive laboratory studies, prescription drugs laden with side effects, emergency
            organ repairs and transplants. Even those already struggling with chronic diseases or age-​
            related debilities may find ways to monitor and moderate these, improving quality of life
            and reducing medical services. Those who are healthy may remain so longer, and improve
            the texture of day-​to-​day life; such are potential benefits of inside insights.
               Some of what I assert here is common sense, some more speculative or challengeable.
            The debate concerning the relative benefits of preventive science and curative healthcare
            is complex and contentious and ultimately beyond the scope of this chapter. For certain
            diseases, a personal preventive approach is crucial but may be less effective with ones
            where a genetic trigger predominates, or an environmental factor the individual is pow-
            erless to alter. Ideally, we can incorporate the best of what Western medicine has to offer,
            distributed through a rational, affordable healthcare system. Twenty-​first century med-
            icine surely offers miracles of healing. (I myself have benefitted dramatically from two
            surgeries, including an innovative process involving a cadaver nerve-​sheath transplant.)
            We need also address the environmental and social causes of many disease such as obe-
            sity, diabetes, asthma, lead-​poisoning, certain cancers, etc. But we should not overlook
            the medical and personal import of our inside insights. Our inner body can sometimes be
            a stranger, or a threat—​but we may also discover it to be a close friend and wise counselor.

            References
            Burtt, E. A. (1952). The Metaphysical Foundations of Modern Science. Atlantic Highlands,
                NJ: Humanities Press.
            Ceunen, E., Vlaeyen, J. W. S., and Van Diest, I. (2016). On the origin of interoception. Frontiers in
                Psychology, 7, 743.
            de La Mettrie, J. O. (1996). Machine Man and Other Writings. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
            Descartes, R. (1911). The Philosophical Works of Descartes, Vol. 1 (E. Haldane and G. R. T. Ross, eds).
                Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 321




                                                                                                   References     321


       Foucault, M. (1973). The Birth of the Clinic. New York, NY: Vintage Books.
       Foucault, M. (1979). Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. New York, NY: Vintage Books.
       Gadamer, H.-​G. (1984). Truth and Method. New York, NY: Crossroad.
       Gogel, E. and Terry, J. (1987). Medicine as interpretation: The uses of literary metaphors and methods.
          Journal of Medicine and Philosophy, 12, 205–​17.
       Groopman, J. (2007). How Doctors Think. New York, NY: Houghton Mifflin.
       Heidegger, M. (1962). Being and Time. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
       Herbert, B. M. and Pollatos, O. (2012). The body in the mind: On the relationship between
          interoception and embodiment. Topics in Cognitive Science, 4, 692–​704.
       Husserl, E. (1989). Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy.
          Second book: Studies in the Phenomenology of Constitution. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
       Jahnke, R. (2002). The Healing Promise of Qi: Creating Extraordinary Wellness through Qigong and Tai
          Chi. New York, NY: McGraw-​Hill.
       Jonas, H. (1966). The Phenomenon of Life: Toward a Philosophical Biology. Chicago, IL: University of
          Chicago Press.
       Kabat-​Zinn, J. (2013). Full Catastrophe Living: Using the Wisdom of your Body and Mind to Face Stress,
          Pain, and Illness. New York, NY: Bantam.
       Leder, D. (1990). The Absent Body. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
       Leder, D. and Jacobson, K. (2014). Health and disease: The experience of health and illness. In: B.
          Jennings (ed.), Bioethics, Vol. 3, 4th edn. Farmington Hills, MI: Macmillan Reference, pp. 1434–​43.
       Leder, D. (2016a). The Distressed Body: Rethinking Illness, Imprisonment, and Healing. Chicago,
          IL: University of Chicago Press.
       Leder, D. (2016b). The experiential paradoxes of pain. Journal of Medicine and Philosophy, 41(5),
          444–​60.
       Loy, D. (1988). Nonduality: A Study in Comparative Philosophy. Atlantic Highlands,
          NJ: Humanities Press.
       Mehling, W. E., Wrubel, J., Daubenmier, J. J., Price, C. J., Kerr, C. E., Silow, T., et al. (2011). Body
          awareness: A phenomenological inquiry into the common ground of mind-​body therapies.
          Philosophy, Ethics, and Humanities in Medicine, 6, 6
       Mehling, W. E., Price, C., Daubenmier, J. J., Acree, M., Bartmess, E., and Stewart, A. (2012). The
          multidimensional assessment of interoceptive awareness (MAIA). PLoS One, 7(11), e48230.
       Merchant, C. (1980). The Death of Nature. San Francisco, CA: Harper and Row.
       Merleau-​Ponty, M. (1962). Phenomenology of Perception. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
       Merleau-​Ponty, M. (1968). The Visible and the Invisible. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
       Moustakas, C. (1994). Phenomenological Research Methods. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
       Nietzsche, F. (1954). Thus Spoke Zarathustra. In: W. Kaufman (ed.), The Portable Nietzsche.
          New York: Viking Press, pp. 112–​442.
       Palmer, R. (1969). Hermeneutics: Interpretation theory in Schleiermacher, Dilthey, Heidegger, and
          Gadamer. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
       Polanyi, M. (1969). Knowing and Being. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
       Proust, M. (2002). Guermantes Way. New York, NY: Penguin.
       Ricoeur, P. (1966). Freedom and Nature: The Voluntary and the Involuntary. Evanston, IL: Northwestern
          University Press.
       Rosen, R. (2002). The Yoga of Breath: A Step-​by-​Step Guide to Pranayama. Boston,
          MA: Shambhala Press.
       Sartre, J.-​P. (1966). Being and Nothingness. New York, NY: Pocket Books.
32




     322   Inside insights


           Scarry, E. (1985). The Body in Pain: The Making and Unmaking of the World. New York, NY: Oxford
               University Press.
           Sherrington, C. S. (1906). The Integrative Action of the Nervous System. New Haven, CT: Yale
               University Press.
           Straus, E. (1963). The Primary World of Senses: A Vindication of Sensory Experience. (trans. J.
               Needleman) New York, NY: The Free Press of Glencoe.
           Straus, E. (1966). Phenomenological Psychology. New York, NY: Basic Books.
           Svenaeus, F. (2001). The Hermeneutics of Medicine and the Phenomenology of Health: Steps Towards a
               Philosophy of Medical Practice, 2nd edn. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
 32




                    Author Index


      Abraira, VE, 106                                             Bastiaansen, J, 230
      Ackerley, R, 106                                             Bear, M F, 10
      Adam, G, vi                                                  Bechara, A, 69, 150
      Adolfi, F, 4, 192, 201, 203, 204                             Beck, A T, 154
      Adolph, E R, 273                                             Beckes, L, 113
      Adolphs, R, 150, 204                                         Beglinger, C, 168
      Agostoni, E, 50                                              Beissner, F, 50
      Ainley, V, 28, 30, 109, 112, 115, 128, 175, 176, 177,        Benarroch, E E, 6
        179, 228                                                   Benson, H, 159
      Akins, K, 268, 269                                           Bercik, P, 92
      Albe-​Fessard, D, 50                                         Berlin, HA, 69
      Allen, G V, 9                                                Bermúdez, J L, v
      Allen, M, 28, 30, 31, 33, 38, 284                            Bernard, C, 4, 273
      Almér, A, 274                                                Berntson, G G, 7, 10, 12, 247
      Altschuler, S M, 81                                          Berthoud, H R, 6
      Amianto, F, 176, 177                                         Berthoz, S, 125
      Anderson, A K, 15, 55, 72, 230                               Bessou, P, 104, 105–​6
      Andor, T, 230                                                Billon, A, 263
      Andrew, D, 106                                               Birch, L L, 171
      Andrews, P L, 87                                             Bird, G, 15, 41, 128
      Annoni, J M, 6                                               Bird, P, 11
      Apharian, A V, 200                                           Birn, R M, 50
      Apkarian, A V, 110, 111                                      Bishop, S R, 89, 232
      Apps, M A, ix, 28, 33, 34, 35, 179                           Bisschops, R, 82
      Arcelus, J, 173                                              Blakemore, S J, 47
      Armstrong, D, 262                                            Blanke, O, 47–​8, 55
      Ashby, W R, 278, 280                                         Blankstein, U, 95
      Aspell, J E, 15, 35, 36                                      Bléfari, M L, 15, 35, 55
      Aston-​Jones, G, 50                                          Bliksted, V, 39
      Attuquayefio, T, 172                                         Bloch, E, 228
      Augustine, J R, 9                                            Block, R A, 65, 67
      Avery, J A, 168                                              Boettcher, H, 159
      Azevedo, A D, 6                                              Bogaerts, K, 212, 220, 221
      Azevedo, R T, 15, 36, 52                                     Bohon, C, 173
      Aziz, Q, 81, 82, 83, 84, 89, 92                              Bonaz, B, 83, 90–​1
                                                                   Boring, E G, 16
      Babo-​Rebelo, M, 50, 51, 53f, 54, 57, 261                    Bosch, J A, 10, 12
      Backhed, F, 92                                               Botha, C, 91
      Badoud, D, 15, 41                                            Botvinick, M, 14, 35
      Baer, R A, 232                                               Bozler, E, 48
      Báez, S, 197, 204                                            Bradley, M M, 249
      Baier, B, 15, 55                                             Braith, J, 91
      Bain, D, 263                                                 Brake, C A, 159
      Baliki, M N, 110, 111, 200                                   Bramen, J, 65
      Bandler, R, 84                                               Brass, M, 55
      Bantick, S J, 84                                             Brewer, R, 41
      Banzett, 214                                                 Broca, P, 9
      Barbas, H, 4                                                 Brooks, J C W, 104, 105, 230
      Barlow, D H, 159                                             Brosschot, J F, 72
      Barrett, L F, vi, ix, 13, 28, 30, 108, 129, 130, 136, 144,   Browning, K N, 82
        145, 150, 154, 179, 218, 219, 228, 272, 282, 283           Bruch, H, 165, 173, 176, 178, 180, 181
      Barsky, A J, 214, 215                                        Bruineberg, J, 30
      Bartholdy, S, 175                                            Brunot, S, 67
324




      324   Author Index


            Brushnell, C M, 111                              Corbucci, G, 155
            Büchel, C, 220                                   Coricelli, G, 28
            Bueti, D, 65                                     Coslett, H B, 66
            Buhusi, C V, 64                                  Costantini, M, 35
            Buonomano, D V, 65                               Couli, J T, 66
            Burger, K S, 171                                 Couto, B, 51, 187, 189, 201
            Burr, D, 133                                     Craig, A D, 4, vi, 10, 14, 34, 50, 55, 68, 71, 81, 84, 102,
            Burtt, E A, 317                                    103–​4, 149, 150, 167, 187, 200, 212, 227, 229, 230,
            Bushnell, M C, 94                                  233, 262, 299
            Bylsma, L M, 136                                 Craske, M G, 159
            Bystritsky, A, 154                               Creed, F, 214
                                                             Criaud, M, 198
            Cabanac, M, 287                                  Critchley, H D, 4, 6, vi, 9, ix, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16, 30,
            Cacioppo, J T, 7, 12, 16, 247                      50, 55, 67, 68, 103, 108, 111, 124, 125, 127, 128,
            Cameron, O G, vi, 304                              134, 144, 149, 189, 200, 217, 227, 228, 230, 238,
            Cameron, W B, 3, 6                                 247, 248, 261
            Camilleri, M, 95                                 Cronbach, L J, 217
            Camm, A J, 155                                   Crucianelli, L, 15, 176, 260
            Canales-​Johnson, A, 123                         Cryan, J F, 92, 250
            Cannon, W B, 4, 5f, 7, 103, 108, 255, 273, 275   Cui, H, 169
            Cariani, P A, 280                                Cuthbert, B N, 144
            Carmody, J, 232
            Carpenter, R H S, 275                            Dagher, A, 87
            Carrive, P, 84                                   Dallman, M F, 276
            Carvalho, G B, 227, 304                          D’Allonnes, G-​R, 72
            Catania, J J, 136                                Damasio, A, vi, 31, 46, 48, 67, 102, 130, 147, 148, 149,
            Caterina, M J, 104                                 150, 227, 259, 299, 300, 302, 303, 304
            Catmur, C, 15, 41, 128                           Dampney, R A, 6, 12
            Cechetto, D E, 5, 6, 9, 49                       Dantzer, R, 249
            Cellini, N, 72                                   Danziger, N, 265
            Ceunen, E, 81, 102, 103, 212, 260, 308           Daubenmier, J, 14
            Chacko, T P, 231                                 Daunizeau, J, 144
            Chang, L J, 56                                   Davenport, P W, 228
            Charles, L, 282                                  Davidson, R J, 114–​15, 245
            Charmandari, E, 249                              Davis, J L, 123
            Chauhan, B, 11                                   Davis, M, 150
            Cheng, R-​K, 66                                  Dawson, M E, 136
            Christoff, K, 47, 54, 296, 301                   Deacon,B J, 159
            Christopher, L, 198, 203, 206                    Decety, J, 113
            Chrousos, G, 249                                 Deen, B, 55, 124
            Church, R M, 65                                  Degen, L, 168
            Cisamole, D, 247                                 De Preester, H, 296, 297
            Clark, A, ix, 28, 124, 128, 130, 132, 135, 272   Derbyshire, S W, 80, 83
            Clausen, L, 173                                  De Vadder, F, 92
            Coan, J A, 113, 114–​15                          De Wandele, I, 91
            Coen, S J, 81, 83, 85, 89, 91                    Di Lernia, D, 200
            Cogliano, R, 10                                  Dinan, T G, 92, 250
            Cohen, J, 14, 35                                 Dodig-​Crinkovic, G, 274
            Cohen, J D, 50                                   Dolan, R J, 11, 134
            Cohen, S, 12                                     Domes, G, 66
            Cole, J, v                                       Dominguez-​Bello, M G, 92
            Collado, D, 173                                  Domschke, K, 135, 219, 229
            Colombetti, G, 245                               Downar, J, 168
            Colonnello, V, 66                                Drescher, V M, 167​
            Colucci, R, 95                                   Drew, R, 173
            Connors, B W, 10                                 Droit-​Voler, S, 67
            Constantini, M, 14                               Drossman, D A, 89, 94
            Constantinou, E, 222                             Du, A-​T, 206
            Conti, J B, 155                                  Dubin, A E, 104
            Cooper, J, 229                                   Dubois, B, 195
            Cooper, S J, 273, 274                            DuBois, F S, 6
 325




                                                                                                       Author Index       325


       Dum, R P, 5, 50                                       Freund, H J, 105
       Duncan, J, 56                                         Frijda, N H, 253
       Dunckley, P, 85                                       Friston, H D, 145, 217, 218, 222, 227, 231, 272, 278,
       Dunn, B D, 15, 136, 201                                 284, 285
       Duschek, S, 200                                       Friston, K J, ix, 28, 29, 30, 31, 33, 41, 56, 104, 107–​8,
       Dworkin, B R, 6, 212                                    112, 133, 134, 136, 144, 145, 176, 178, 179, 276,
       Dworkin, R H, 265                                       284, 285
       Dymond, S, 152                                        Frith, C D, 28, 47
                                                             Frokjaer, J B, 83
       Eagleman, D, 64–​5                                    Frot, M, 115
       Ebisch, S J, 134                                      Fuchs, T, 72, 176, 178
       Edwards, M J, 220                                     Fudge,J L, 169
       Effron, D A, 67                                       Fukodo, S, 90
       Ehm, W, 64                                            Furlan, A D, 8
       Ehrsson, H H, 264                                     Furman, D J, 136
       Eisenberger, N I, 115                                 Furman, E, 168
       Ellingsen, D M, 112                                   Füstös, J, 168
       Emanuelsen, L, 173, 177
       Ernst, J, 126, 128                                    Gadamar, H-​G, 314
       Eshkevari, E, 176                                     Gadsby, S, 178
       Eyer, J, 12, 108, 275, 276, 282                       Gaete, M I, 176, 178
                                                             Gales, J, 265
       Fairborn, C G, 173                                    Gallace, A, 212
       Fairhurst, M, 89                                      Gallagher, M, 87
       Faith, M S, 169                                       Gallagher, S, v, 15, 27, 28, 47, 54, 295
       Fan, J, 50                                            Gallese, V, v
       Farb, N A S, 15, 55, 72, 227, 230, 231, 233, 238      Galloway, A T, 171
       Fardo, F, 29                                          Gandola, M, 10
       Farias, M, 232                                        Ganhi, P, 135–​6
       Farmer, A D, 83, 86, 87, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93, 94       Garcia, A M, 10
       Farmer, M A, 200                                      Garcia-​Cordero, I, 187–​8, 192, 195, 197, 201, 203,
       Farrer, C, 10                                           206, 207
       Farrow, C V, 171                                      Garcia-​Larrea, L, 115, 124
       Faulk, M E, 10                                        Garfinkel, S N, vi, ix, 13, 16, 41, 68, 72,
       Faull, O, 30                                            123, 126, 127, 128, 134, 165, 167,
       Feinstein, J S, 149, 150, 159                           168, 174, 180, 188, 206, 212, 227,
       Feldman, H, 107, 108                                    228, 247, 261
       Feldman, R, 29, 31, 40                                Garimella, R S, 155
       Filippetti, M J, 35                                   Garner, D M, 137
       Fiorillo, C D, 112                                    Gasquoine, P G, 9
       Fischer, F, 72                                        Gaudio, S, 174
       Fishbein, S, 227                                      Geisler, W S, 219
       Fisher, J O, 171                                      Geliebter, A, 168, 171, 175
       Fisher, J P, 13                                       Georgiou, E, 175
       Fitzgerald, T H B, 278, 280, 281                      Gerlach, A J, 230
       Foley, J O, 6                                         Gianaros, P J, 12, 13, 150
       Fontanini, A, 9                                       Gibbon, J, 65
       Foster, J A, 250                                      Giersch, A, 72
       Fotopoulou, A, 30, 40, 41, 109, 111, 112, 113, 114,   Gill, C, 247
          115, 178                                           Ginty, A T, 12, 13
       Foucault, M, 314, 317                                 Ginty, D D, 106
       Fowles, D C, 249                                      Giraud, A L, 66
       Fox, E, 251                                           Gjedde, A, 200
       Fox, N A, 40                                          Gleichgerrcht, E, 189
       Fracasso, M P, 40                                     Glover, G H, 50
       Frances, A, 265                                       Goadsby, P, 204
       Frankfurt, H, 295                                     Gogel, E, 312
       Frank, M, 295                                         Gold, P W, 276
       Frank, S, 9                                           Goldsmith, H H, 245
       Frankum, S, 214                                       Goldstein, D S, 8, 11
       Freire-​Maia, I, 6                                    Goldstein, J M, 263
326




      326   Author Index


            Gordon, I, 92, 106, 107                                Hotopi, M, 214
            Goswani, R, 6                                          Hume, D, 251
            Gotink, R A, 11                                        Hurter, S, 113, 114
            Goyal, M, 232                                          Husserl, E, 63, 296, 297, 307
            Gramann, K, 167
            Graver, M R, 251                                       Ibanez, A, 187, 189, 192, 204, 206
            Gregory, L J, 84                                       Insel, T, 187
            Grewe, O, 246                                          Inzlicht, M, 221
            Groopman, J, 314–​15                                   Ivry, R B, 65
            Grothe, M J, 195
            Gurwitsch, A, 296                                      Jabbi, M, 230
            Gu, X, 108, 230, 278, 280, 281                         Jackson, J H, 11
            Gybels, J M, 200                                       Jacobson, K, 313
                                                                   Jahnke, R, 319
            de Haan, S, 72                                         Jakus, J, 87
            Häbler, H-​J, 6                                        James, C, 50, 238
            Hackley, S A, 227                                      James, W, 7, 46, 63, 102, 123, 253, 296
            Haggard, P, v, 55                                      Jänig, W, 6
            Hahn, U, 219, 221                                      Janssen, C W, 160
            Haigh, E A, 154                                        Janssens, T, 213
            Hakamata, Y, 145                                       Jasper, H, 6, 10
            Haley, M, 9                                            Jater, P E, 160
            Haller, H, 214                                         Jennings, J R, 13
            Hamilton, P, 136, 154, 228                             Jimenez, A T-​M, 35
            Hariri, A R, 221                                       Joffily, M, 28
            Harkins, S W, 91                                       Jones, C A, 254
            Harmon-​Jones, E, 221                                  Jonsson, K, 159
            Harris, A J, 219, 221                                  Joshi, S, 50
            Harrison, N A, 14, 103, 126, 137, 247, 248, 249, 261
            Harrison, P J, 173                                     Kabat, H, 6
            Harshaw, C, 154                                        Kabat-​Zinn, J, 72, 232, 319
            Hartocollis, P, 72                                     Kanai, R, 29
            Harver, A, 228                                         Kanazawa, M, 90
            Hashim, S A, 168, 175                                  Kano, M, 90, 91
            Hasler, W L, 89, 94                                    Karnath, H-​O, 10, 15, 55
            Hassanpou, M S, 149, 150                               Katkin, E S, 126, 227, 228, 251
            Hauser, T U, 39                                        Kaye, W H, 169, 170, 175
            Haxlett-​Stevens, H,  91–​2                            Kearney, C A, 229
            Hayen, A, 30                                           Kell, C A, 66
            Head, H, 105                                           Kemmerer, D, 263
            Heidegger, M, 27, 314                                  Kern, M K, 50, 51, 88, 89
            Heinbecker, P, 6                                       Kersten, D, 219
            Heinrichs, M, 66                                       Keysers, C, v, 230
            Henderson, L, 50                                       Khalsa, S S, 144, 149, 154, 155, 165, 174, 177, 180,
            Henry, M, 297, 298, 301, 303                             187, 188, 189, 195, 201, 204, 228
            Herbert, B M, 14, 127, 166, 167, 168, 169, 170, 171,   Khodadadifar, M, 65
              176, 177, 180, 228, 260, 309, 314, 315               Kiebel, S J, 144
            Herbert, H, 150                                        Kifle, Y, 228
            Hernadez, S E, 11                                      Kilpatrick, L A, 90
            Hess, W R, 6                                           Kirk, U, 168
            Hetherington, M M, 171                                 Kirsch, W, 51
            Heydrich, L, 55                                        Kiverstein, J, 30, 63, 64
            Hillyard, S A, 230                                     Kjellgren, A, 159
            Hinton, S C, 66                                        Klabunde, M, 173
            Hobson, A R, 81                                        Klabunde, R E, 49, 175
            Hoff, D A, 91                                          Klechner, I R, vi
            Hohwy, J, 28, 129, 133, 217, 222, 272, 284             Kleckner, L, 109, 282, 283
            Holland, P C, 87                                       Kling, M A, 187
            Holmes, G, 105                                         Kober, H, 124
            Holsen, L M, 263                                       Koch, A, 172
            Hölzel, B K, 72                                        Koch, C, 48
 327




                                                                                      Author Index   327


       Koh, S D, 48                             Macefield, V G, 50
       Kolk, A M, 215                           Mach, F, 64
       Kononowicz, T W, 65                      MacLean, P, 9
       Korn, H, 50                              Madden, C E, 169
       Kortooms, T, 296, 297                    Madl, T, 68
       Koster-​Hale, J, 28                      Maffei, A, 9
       Köteles, E, 173                          Magoun, H W, 6
       Kox, M, 160                              Magyar-​Russell, G, 155
       Kozak, MJ, 144                           Mahmut, M, 171
       Kragel, P A, 251                         Mailis, A, 8
       Krahé, C, 112, 113, 114, 115             Mancini, F, 262
       Kreibig, S D, 248                        Manes, F, 189, 206
       Kriegel, U, 254                          Manuck, S B, 12
       Kringelbach, M L, 84                     Marchetti, G, 64
       Kruglanksi, A W, 217                     Marks, L E, 104, 105
       Kulkarm, B, 84                           Maron, B J, 155
       Kullmann, S, 9                           Martz, D M, 172
       Kumari, V, 91                            Massin, O, 261
       Kumfor, F, 206                           Matell, M S, 65
       Kupers, R C, 200                         Mathias, C J, 11
       Kupke, C, 72                             Matthias, C J, 11, 134
       Kuppens, P, 245                          Matthias, E, 72
                                                Mayer, E A, 92, 95, 96, 250
       LaBar, K S, 251                          Mazzola, L, 10, 105
       Labus, J S, 84–​5, 90, 95, 96            McCabe, C, 107, 112
       Lalanne, L, 72                           McEwan, B S, 12, 145, 276, 277, 282, 288
       Lam, C, 92                               McFarland, L, 274
       Lane, R D, 167                           McGlone, F, 106
       Laneri, D, 11                            McKinley, N M, 177
       Lange, C, 7                              McLaughlin, K A, 40
       Lange, C G, 238                          McMahon, T P, 231
       Langley, J N, 6                          McVey Neufeld, K-​A, 250
       Lang, P J, 249                           Meck, W H, 64, 65, 66, 67
       Lapidus, R C, 165, 174, 180, 187, 228    Medford, N, 111
       Laubrock, J, 67                          Meehl, P E, 217
       Laurent, B, 124                          Mehling, W E, 200, 319
       Lawson, R P, 133, 176                    Meissner, K, 69, 72
       Lazar, S W, 233                          Melloni, M, 204
       Leder, D, 212, 310, 311, 312, 313, 320   Melzack, R, 81, 85, 86, 105, 265
       Lee, C L, 104                            Mendel, L M, 104
       Legrain, V, 105, 111, 115                Menon, V, 56, 68
       Legrand, D, 47, 54, 294, 295, 296        Merchant, C, 317
       Lenggenhager, B, 35, 51                  Meredith, P, 114
       Levinthal, DJ, 5                         Merleau-​Ponty, M, 27, 64, 307, 308, 310, 312
       Lewis, M, 39                             Merwin, R M, 168, 173–​4, 175, 228
       Lewis, P A, 66                           Metzger, F G, 195
       Ley, R E, 92                             Metzinger, T, 47–​8, 63, 64
       Lichstein, L, 265                        Mezzacappa, E S, 126, 251
       Lilenfeld, L R, 170                      Miall, R C, 28, 66
       Lister, R G, 159                         Michael, J, 274
       Li, T Q, 50                              Miller, A D, 87, 221
       Lloyd, D M, 63, 267                      Mineka, S, 154
       Loewy, A D, 6                            Mishara, A, 72
       Lohoff, F W, 66                          Modell, H, 274
       Löken, L S, 106                          Moga, M M, 150
       López, M, 169                            Moisset, X, 95
       Lopez, V, 204                            Montague, P R, 168
       Lowe, R, 274                             Montavont, A, 10
       Luck, S J, 230                           Montero, C L, 200
       Lundberg, K, 238                         Moran, R J, 29, 278
       Lynn, S K, 219                           Morey, R D, 227
328




      328   Author Index


            Morillon, B, 66                 Papez, J, 9
            Moro, V, 10                     Paradiso, M A, 10
            Morris, B H, 136                Pariyadath, V, 64–​5
            Morrison, J F B, 6              Park, H-​D, 15, 47, 48, 50, 51, 52, 53f, 55, 57, 69
            Morrison, T, 176                Patapoutian, J, 104
            Moseley, G L, 14, 212           Pattinson, K, 30
            Moustakis, C, 307               Paulus, M P, 67, 134, 135, 144, 145, 153, 169, 228,
            Muller, L E, 187, 201              229, 230, 231
            Murialdo, G, 137                Pavlov, 5–​6, 5f
            Murphy, J, 133, 165, 167, 168   Payne, K, 238
            Myers, B, 6                     Pedersen, B K, 160
                                            Pellicano, E, 133
            Nagai, Y, 50                    Pelphrey, K A, 55, 124
            Nagasako, E M, 265              Penfield, W, 6, 10
            Nagel, T, 63                    Pennebaker, J W, 214
            Naqvi, N H, 263                 Perl, E R, 104
            Naragon-​Gainey, K, 153, 231    Peters, A, 145, 276
            Neafsey, E J, 5, 6              Petersen, S, 216, 217, 219, 220, 221
            Nemiah, J C, 126                Peterson, C, 221
            Nettleton, S, 214               Peterson, D A, 92
            Neuhuber, W L, 6                Petzschner, F H, 144, 145
            Newman, P P, 50                 Peyron, R, 124
            Nickerson, R S, 221             Pezawas, L, 85
            Niedenthal, P M, 67             Pezzulo, G, 108, 144, 145, 285, 286, 287
            Nieuwenhuys, R, 9               Phan, K L, 125
            Nimuan, C, 214                  Philips, R J, 49
            Nishimura, K, 217               Phillippot, P, 247
            Nonaka, S, 87                   Pitskel, N B, 55, 124
            Norman, G J, 7, 16              Plailly, J, 9
            Northoff, G, 63                 Ploghaus, A, 89, 105
            Nosaka, S, 49                   Ploner, M, 84, 105
            Noulhiane, M, 67                Polak, T, 195
            Nummenmaa, L, 68, 246           Polanyi, M, 311
                                            Poldrack, R A, 56
            Oaklander, A L, 265             Polivy, J, 137
            Obrist, P A, 13                 Pollatos, O, 15, 51, 67, 68, 72, 127, 136, 137, 167, 170,
            Ochsner, K N, 123                  172, 174, 175–​6, 177, 180, 200, 230, 309, 314, 315
            Ogden, J, 214                   Pöppel, E, 63, 66
            Öhman, A, 227                   Porges, S, 126
            Olatunji, B O, 153              Pothoulakis, C, 92
            Olausson, H, 106, 107           Power, M L, 274, 277
            O’Leary, J, 6                   Powley, T L, 49
            Olmstead, M P, 137              Preuschoff, K, 67, 128, 144
            Olson, J M, 229                 Price, D D, 91, 213
            O’Mahony, S M, 92               Prince, M, 217
            Omran, Y A, 83                  Proulx, T, 221
            Oppenheimer, S M, 9
            O’Shaughnessy, B, 266           Quattrocki, E, 41, 107–​8, 112, 133, 178, 231
            Otten, S, 69, 72                Quigley, K S, 136, 154, 228
            Owen, A M, 56
            Ownsworth, T, 114               Raffone, A, 232
                                            Rahmouni, K, 169
            Padeletti, L, 155               Rainville, P, 105
            Page, K A, 171                  Rammsayer, T, 66
            Paine, P, 91                    Ramsay, D S, 273, 274
            Palmer, C J, 133                Randall, H A, 92
            Palmer, R, 314                  Ranson, S W, 6
            Paloyelis, Y, 113               Rapaport, M H, 160
            Pandaya D, 50                   Razran, G, 31
            Panksepp, J, 114                Reddy, V, 40
            Papagapious, M, 8               Ress, D, 50
 329




                                                                                                  Author Index       329


       Revonsuo, A, 63                                     Schell, A, 136
       Reyes del Paso, D J, 200                            Scherer, K J, 246
       Rhee, S H, 92                                       Scherer, K R, 245
       Ricciardi, L, 198                                   Schlimme, J E, 176
       Richter, C G, 50, 274, 281                          Schmidt, U, 175
       Ricoeur, P, 310                                     Schnitzler, A, 105
       Rief, W, 215                                        Schulkin, J, 12, 274, 276, 277, 288
       Rietveld, E, 30                                     Schultz, A, 247
       Rigoli, F, 108, 144, 145, 285                       Schultz, W, 112
       Riley, J L, 213                                     Schulz, S M, 155
       Rimé, B, 247                                        Schwartz, M A, 72
       Rinaman, L, 40                                      Scott, T H, 265
       Rist, F, 230                                        Sears, S E, 155
       Ritter, A M, 104                                    Sedeno, L, 201, 204
       Riva, G, 200                                        Seely, W W, 206
       Rivest, S, 249                                      Segal, Z V, 15, 55, 72, 230, 232
       Rizzoltti,G, v                                      Sel, A, 15, 35, 36, 52, 54
       Rochat, P, 39                                       Seminowicz, D A, 95
       Rolls, E T, 9, 69, 107                              Serinio, S, 200
       Romanovsky, A A, 249                                Serino, A, 48
       Ronchi, R, 15, 35, 55                               Seth, A K, vi, ix, 28, 30, 35, 56, 72, 108, 124, 125,
       Rooney, K, 171                                         128, 129, 130, 132, 133, 134, 136, 137, 144, 145,
       Rosch, E, 64                                           176, 179, 217, 222, 227, 259, 261, 272, 278, 280–​1,
       Rosene, D L, 50                                        283, 284
       Rosen, J B, 277                                     Shackman, A J, 150
       Rosen, R, 319                                       Shah, A K, 134
       Rosenwasser, A M, 277                               Shah, P, 15, 41, 128
       Rottenberg, J, 136                                  Shaker, R, 88
       Rouder, J N, 227                                    Shany-​Ur, T, 195
       Royet, J-​P, 9                                      Shepard, R N, 219
       Roy, M, 150                                         Sherrington, C, 7, 102, 260, 308
       Rubin, G J, 216                                     Shmueli, K, 50
       Ruby, P, 47, 54                                     Shoemaker, J K, 6, 295
       Rudrauf, D, 195                                     Silani, G, 128, 228
       Ruffle, J K, 83, 89, 90, 91, 92, 94, 95             Simmons, A N, 150, 269
       Russell, J A, 245, 251                              Simmons, W K, ix, 13, 15, 28, 30, 108, 129, 130, 144,
       RutseIn, J, 227                                        145, 150, 179, 218, 282
                                                           Singer, J, 227, 248, 255
       Sacco, R L, 189                                     Singer, S E, 124, 132
       Sackett, G P, 265                                   Singer, T, 67, 128, 144
       Saive, A-​L, 9                                      Slater, M, 48
       Salamone, P, 197, 201, 203                          Sloan, D M, 136
       Salomon, R, 55                                      Smith, R, 149, 167, 272
       Salter, M W, 110                                    Sokolov, E N, 31
       Saltin, B, 160                                      Sommer, F, 92
       Sambo, C F, 114                                     Soudry, Y, 9
       Sanders, K M, 48                                    Sparrer, B, 51
       Sandt, A R, 136                                     Spaziani, R, 91
       Sanger, G J, 87                                     Spence, C, 212
       Saper, C B, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10, 49, 150, 249            Spiga, F, 249
       Sarnelli, G, 82                                     Spiller, R, 92
       Saxe, R, 28                                         de Spinoza, B, 46
       Scammell, T E, 249                                  Squire, L, 4
       Scarantino, A, 245                                  Srinivasan, N, 232
       Scarry, E, 309                                      Staddon, J E R, 64
       Schachter, R, 124, 132, 251, 255                    Steinbrecher, N, 214
       Schachter, S, 227, 248                              Stein, J L, 84, 85
       Schandry, R, 14, 51, 72, 123, 126, 127, 136, 137,   Stein, M B, 108, 134, 135, 144, 228, 229, 230, 231
         167, 168                                          Stein, M S, 144, 145, 153
       Schaub, N, 90                                       Stellar, E, 276
       Schauder, K B, 15, 35                               Stephan, K E, 30, 108, 144, 145, 154, 284, 286, 287
30




     330   Author Index


           Sterling, P, 12, 108, 130, 145, 275, 276, 282, 288          Van Diest, J, 102
           Stevenson, R J, 171                                         van Dyck, Z, 166, 168, 170, 175
           Stice, E, 171                                               Van Oudenhove, L, 83, 84
           Stocker, S D, 3                                             van Rijn, H, 65
           Straus, E, 307                                              van Wassenhove, V, 64, 65
           Strawson, G, 295                                            Varela, F J, 63, 64
           Strick, P L, 5                                              Veit, R, 9
           Strigo, I A, 10, 227, 229, 231                              Vera-​Portocarrero, L P, 110
           Strong, J, 114                                              de Vignemont, F, 261, 264, 265
           Sudo, N, 250                                                Villemure, C, 111
           Sugiuyra, Y, 104                                            Vlaeyen, J W S, 81, 102, 212, 260
           Suzuki, K, 15, 30, 35–​6, 108, 125, 145, 217                Vogel, E K, 230
           Svenaeus, F, 312                                            Vogeley, K, 72
           Sysoeva, O V, 66                                            Vogt, B A, 50
                                                                       von Hohr, M, 114
           Tack, J, 82, 90                                             Von Leopoldt, A, 217, 221
           Tajadura-​Jiménez, A, 14, 15, 177, 178
           Tallon-​Baudry, C, 47, 48, 50, 55, 57                       Wackermann, J, 64, 66, 67
           Tate, C M, 171                                              Wade, J B, 213
           Taylor, S, 152–​3                                           Wager, T D, 12
           Teasdale, J D, 232                                          Walentynowicz, M, 221, 222
           Teipel, S J, 195                                            Wallbott, H G, 246
           Terasawa, Y, 125, 127, 128                                  Waller, G, 176
           Terhune, D B, 66                                            Wall, P D, 81, 85, 86, 105, 110
           Terry, J, 312                                               Walsh, V, 65
           Thayer, J F, 72, 250, 255                                   Ward, S M, 48
           Thompson, D G, 82, 83                                       Watson, D, 214
           Thompson, E, 64                                             Watters, C A, 200
           Tillisch, K, 85, 95, 96                                     Wearden, J, 65, 67
           Tobier, P N, 112                                            Webster, R K, 216
           Tonevitsky, A, 66                                           Weinman, J, 216
           Tononi, G, 48                                               Weitkunat, R, 51
           Tracey, I, 86, 93, 94, 105, 111, 249                        Wendt, R, 50
           Tracy, C M, 155                                             Wessberg, J, 106
           Tranel, D, 150                                              Wessley, S, 214
           Tranel, J S, 195                                            White, G L, 227
           Traut-​Mattausch, E, 136                                    Whitehead, W E, 167–​8
           Travagli, R A, 82                                           Wiech, K, 111
           Treasure, J, 175                                            Wiener, M, 66
           Treisman, M, 65                                             Wiens, S, 126, 227, 251
           Trigos, C, 249                                              Wierenga, C E, 169, 170
           Tsakiris, M, 4, v, 9, ix, 10, 11, 14, 15, 28, 33, 34, 35,   Willer, J C, 265
             36, 40, 41, 52, 113, 114, 128, 176, 177, 178, 179,        Williams, J M G, 232
             180, 228, 238, 259, 261, 267, 268                         Williams, L M, 124
           Turel, O, 69                                                Wingfield, J C, 276, 277, 282
           Turkeltaub, P, 66                                           Winklemann, T, 91
           Tylee, A, 135–​6                                            Wittmann, M, 64, 66, 67, 68, 69, 71, 72
           Tylka, T L, 169                                             Wolitzky-​Taylor, K B, 153
           Ty, T C, 105                                                Wolpert, D M, 28, 47
                                                                       Woods, S C, 273, 274
           Uddin, L Q, 10, 56, 68                                      Woolf, C J, 110
           Ulbrich, P, 168                                             Woolley, J D, 197
                                                                       Wright, C J, 231
           Valentini, E, 115
           Valerian, M, 115                                            Xie, C, 203
           Vallbo, A B, 106
           Valle-​Inclán, F, 227                                       Yates, B J, 3
           Van den Bergh, O, 145, 212, 213, 214, 215, 216, 217,        Yates, F E, 272
             220, 221, 222, 223                                        Yokum, S, 171
           Van Diest, I, 81, 212                                       Yoris, A, 187, 201, 204
 31




                                                                     Author Index   331


      Zahavi, D, 27, 47, 54, 63, 295, 297, 298   Zinbarg, R, 154
      Zakay, D, 65, 67                           Zotterman, Y, 105
      Zaki, J, 123, 125                          Zucker, N L, 175
      Zanna, M P, 229                            de Zwaan, M, 137
      Zaytesva, Y, 72
32
 3




                  Subject Index


     Notes
     vs. indicates a comparison
     Tables and figures are indicated by an italic t or f following the page number.

     ACC see anterior cingulate cortex (ACC)                    AN see anorexia nervosa (AN)
     accuracy, symptom perception, 219–​20                      anorexia nervosa (AN), 165, 173
     acetylcholine,  250–​1                                        bulimia nervosa vs., 181​
     action–​perception loops,  107–​9                             cardiorespiratory interoceptive processing, 174
     action readiness awareness, 253                               cross-​sectional studies, 174
     active binding, 268                                           experience of body vs. self, 178
     active inference, 104                                         false-​self,  176
        skin feelings, 110–​11                                     self-​focus,  175
     active interoceptive inference, 131f                          somatic errors, 154–​5, 154f
        skin,  109–​12                                          ANS see autonomic nervous system (ANS)
     actual metabolic demands, predicted demands vs., 13        anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), 123–​4, 167
     acupuncture, 319                                              emotion processing, 125
     AD see Alzheimer’s disease (AD)                               interoceptive interactions in socio-​emotional
     adaptive behaviors, 165                                           processes, 203
     adaptive eating, 168–​72                                      multiple sclerosis, 201
        body weight regulation, 168                                neurologic disorders, 201
     affective aspects of pain, sensory aspects vs., 111           physiological stress, 12–​13
     affective background, bodily awareness, 259–​71               pleasant touch, 106–​7
     affective states, subjective time, 67                         somatic errors, 150
     A-​fiber afferents, 229                                       stroke, 189
     A-​fiber nociceptors, 104                                     see also ventral anterior cingulate/​ventromedial
     agoraphobia, 147, 153                                             prefrontal cortex (vACC/​vmPFC)
     AIC see anterior insular cortex (AIC)                      anterior insular cortex (AIC)
     Alexander technique, 319                                      emotion processing, 125
     alexithymia, 133                                              gustatory cortex, 9
     allostasis,  274–​8                                           self-​awareness/​consciousness, 299–​300
        behavioral allostasis, 278, 279f,  280–​2               anticipatory behavior in allostasis, reactive behavior
        control by proxy, 112–​15                                      vs., 281
        cross-​species analysis,  276–​7                        anxiety
        development of, 12, 130, 276–​7                            case study, 151–​2
        diachronic (see diachronic allostasis)                     chronic, development of, 151–​2
        free energy principle, 287                                 depression and, 136
        future work, 288–​9                                        emotions, 135
        homeostasis vs., 108–​9, 130, 272–​3, 275                  fMRI studies, 230–​1
        homoeostatic ends, 275–​6                                  interoceptive appraisal dysfunction, 228–​9
        interoceptive inference, 278–​88, 279f                     interoceptively focused model, 147–​8
        reactive vs. anticipatory behavior, 281                    psychotherapy,  158–​9
        stability through change, 275                              sensitivity definition, 152–​3
        teleological allostasis, 279f, 282–​5, 288                 social anxiety disorder, 153
     allostatic load, 276                                          somatic error hypothesis (see somatic errors)
     allostatic loops, 280                                         see also generalized anxiety disorder (GAD)
     altered thoughts, somatic errors, 153–​4                   anxiolytic medications, short-​acting, 159
     Alzheimer’s disease (AD), 195, 197                         appraisal theories, emotion, 124
        insulo-​temporal drainage, 203                          arginine vasopressin (AVP), 86–​7
        interoceptive accuracy, 201, 206                        arousal,  245–​58
        interoceptive interactions in socio-​emotional             definition,  245–​7
           processes,  203–​4                                      experience arousal (see experienced arousal)
        social cognition skills, 204                               physiological (see physiological arousal)
     amygdala                                                   ascending pain pathways, gastrointestinal system, 81
        somatic errors, 150                                     ASD (Autism Spectrum Disorder), 167
        visceral pain processing, 84                            as-​if body loop, 148
34




     334   Subject Index


           asomatognosic patients, 48                             self vs. in anorexia nervosa, 178
           assessment of interoceptive pathways, 204            bodyguard hypothesis, 263–​6
           attachment insecurity, eating disorders, 178         body image, eating disorders, 173
           attachment style, pain perception differences, 114   body loop, 147–​8
           attention,  67–​9                                    body ownership
              interoceptive frameworks, 232–​3                    bodyguard hypothesis, 263–​6
           autism                                                 borderline cases, 264
              emotions,  133–​5                                   changes in, predictive coding and, 34
              interoceptive appraisal dysfunction, 228–​9         predictive self-​models,  34–​6
           Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), 167                  Body Perception Questionnaire, 126
           autobiographical self, 46–​7                         body representation
           autonomic nervous system (ANS), 3–​23, 80              brain in, 301–​4
              biochemical markers, 4                              interoceptive awareness, 14–​15
              case report, 7–​8                                 body-​time,  67–​9
              failure of, 11                                      climbing activation, 71–​2, 74
              future work, 15–​16                                 fMRI, 70–​1f,  71–​2
              gastrointestinal system, 83                       bodyweight regulation, 168
              homeostasis,  4–​5                                borderline cases of body ownership, 264
              motor system as, 6–​7                             BPC see Bayesian Predictive Coding (BPC)
              neurobehavioral processes, 12                     brain
              physiological arousal, 247, 248                     activation in obesity, 171
           autonomic physiology, visceral signals, 90–​1          allostasis in evolution, 282
           autonomic reflexes, homeostasis, 280                   body representation, 301–​4
           aversion machinery, 110                                computational architecture, 282–​4
           AVP (arginine vasopressin), 86–​7                      damage, cardiac interoception in, 187–​8
                                                                  regulation mechanisms, 277
           baroreceptors, 11–​12, 49                              role in pain, 105
           Bayesian decision-​making, 218                         self-​related information, visceral signals and, 57
           Bayesian hallucination, 38                             somatic errors, 149–​50
           Bayesian Predictive Coding (BPC), 28–​9                time perception, 65
              eating disorders, 179                               topographic bodily representation, 293, 302–​4
           BDNF (brain-​derived neurotrophic factor), 93f       brain-​derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), 93f
           behavior                                             brain dynamics, 46–​62
              adaptive behaviors, 165                             visceral signal pathways, 50–​1
              complex behavior, 285                             brain–​external world loops, 280
              eating behavior, 165–​86                          brain–​gut axis,  82–​3
              interoceptive awareness, 14                       brain–​internal world loops, 280
              maladaptive behavior, 165                         brainstem
              performance accuracy, 123                           cell group projections, 4
              reactive behavior, 281                              sensory channels, 149
           behavioral allostasis, 278, 279f,  280–​2              visceral signal pathways, 49
           behavioral variant fronto-​temporal dementia         breathing, 313
                 (BvFTD), 196f,  197–​8                         bulimia nervosa (BN), 165, 173
              interoceptive interactions in socio-​emotional      anorexia nervosa vs., 181​
                 processes,  203–​4                               binging and purging, 180
           binding, active, 268                                   gastric perception reduction, 175
           binging, bulimia nervosa, 180                          Interoceptive Accuracy, 175–​6
           biochemical markers, autonomic nervous system, 4       Interoceptive Emotional Evaluation, 176
           biological implementation of self, 48–​9, 56–​7      BvFTD see behavioral variant fronto-​temporal
           biological viability, free energy principle, 278          dementia (BvFTD)
           bladder fullness example, 261–​2
           blood–​brain humoral pathway, 81–​2                  C afferents, 229
           blood glucose concentration, 274                     CAN see central autonomic network (CAN)
           BN see bulimia nervosa (BN)                          cardiac cycle, emotions, place in, 125
           bodily self-​awareness, ix, 47–​8                    cardiac interoception, 35–​6
              affective background, 259–​71                       cortical/​subcortical damage assessment, 193f
           body                                                   fronto-​insular stroke assessment, 193f
              mind connection, vi                                 mental disorders, 187–​8
              ownership (see body ownership)                      neurologic disorders and, 187–​211
              representation (see body representation)          Cardiac Interoceptive Accuracy
              self-​awareness (see bodily self-​awareness)        eating disorders, 177
 35




                                                                                                       subject Index   335


         future work, 205–​7                                 conscious pain
      cardiomyopathy, 158                                       control in social context, 112–​13
      cardiorespiratory interoceptive processing, anorexia      nociception, 105
            nervosa,  173–​4                                 construct validity, symptom perception, 217–​18
      cardiovascular capacity, Alzheimer’s disease and,      contemplative interventions, 231–​2
            195, 196f                                        COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary
      cardiovascular disease, symptom perception                   disorder),  213–​14
            accuracy, 214                                    corrective action failure, 147–​9
      cardiovascular system, vi                              cortical area, gastrointestinal system, 81
         gastrointestinal system overlap, 168                cortical damage assessment, cardiac
         Interoceptive Accuracy development, 172                   interoception, 193f
         signal importance, 47–​8                            cortical hierarchy
         variables, caregiving in, 40                           regulation of, 33
      caregiving, cardiovascular variables in, 40               visceral (bodily) signal status, 30–​1, 32f,  37–​8
      case study                                             cortico-​striatal circuits, time perception, 65
         anxiety,  151–​2                                    corticotrophin releasing factor (CRF), 82
         iatrogenic somatic errors, 158                      cortisol, 87
      CCK (cholecystokinin), 82                              counterfactual nature, diachronic allostasis, 286
      cells of Cajal, 48, 49                                 CP see chronic pain (CP)
      central autonomic network (CAN), 11                    CRF (corticotrophin releasing factor), 82
         homeostatic function modulation, 13–​14             criterion validity, symptom perception, 217
      central command hypothesis, 13                         Crohn’s disease (CD) see inflammatory bowel
      central neurophysiology, skin, 104–​7                        disease (IBD)
      central sensitization, skin feelings, 110              cross-​sectional studies, anorexia nervosa, 173–​4
      central targets, visceral signal pathways, 49–​50      CT fibers
      central visceral pathways, 8–​11                          metalization of, 112–​15
         general visceral pathways, 9–​11                       microneurography, 106
         special visceral afferents, 9                          pathways of, 106
      cerebellum, time perception, 65                        CT-​optimal touch, 112
      C-​fiber nociceptors, 104, 105–​6                      cultural dualist split, 311
      chakras, 319                                           cutaneous pain, 103–​4
      cholecystokinin (CCK), 82                                 components of, 107–​15
      chronic anxiety, development of, 151–​2                   neuroimaging studies, 111–​12
      chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder                    role of others, predictions of, 114–​15
            (COPD),  213–​14                                    salience network, 111
      chronic pain (CP), 200                                    signals of danger, 110
         gastrointestinal system signals, 94
         interoceptive accuracy, 201, 206                    danger signals, 110
      classification models of psychiatric disorders, 144    definition of interoception, 3, v, 80, 260, 308
      C-​LTMs (low threshold mechanosensitive                dementia
            C-​fibers),  105–​6                                 interoceptive interactions in socio-​emotional
      cognition, ix                                                processes,  203–​4
         exteroception, 4                                       see also behavioral variant fronto-​temporal
         interoception, 4, 41–​2                                   dementia (BvFTD)
         visceral afference, 7                               depersonalization syndrome, 75
      cognitive–​emotional processes, insula, 10             depression
      cognitive phenomenology, 254–​5                           anxiety and, 136
      communication of experiences, 309                         emotions,  135–​7
      complex behavior, diachronic allostasis, 285              interoceptive appraisal dysfunction, 228–​9
      complex endophenotypes, visceral signals, 93–​4           see also major depressive disorder (MDD)
      computational architecture, brain, 282–​4              descending analgesia, gastrointestinal system, 85–​6
      confidence-​accuracy correspondence, 126               development of interoception, 39–​40, 102–​4
      confirmation bias, medically unexplained               diachronic allostasis, 279f,  285–​8
            symptoms, 221                                       complex behavior, 285
      congenital pain insensitivity, bodyguard                  counterfactual nature, 286
            hypothesis,  264–​5                                 definition, 286
      consciousness                                             development, 285
         definition, 295                                        homeostatic reflexes vs.,  286–​7
         neuroscience, 299–​300                                 timing of, 286
         objects of, 297                                     dieting,  171–​2
         tripartite structure of, 64                         diffusor tensor imaging, visceral signals, 95
36




     336   Subject Index


           diPFC (dorsolateral prefrontal cortex), 84            regulation by interoceptive awareness, 14
           discipline, 318                                       sensory pathways, 103
           disembodied interoception, 266–​7                     social domain, 128
           distorted body image, eating disorders, 165           studies of physiological arousal, 247–​8
           dopaminergic system                                   visceral feedback in, 7, 67–​8
              physiological arousal, 250–​1                   empirical prior beliefs, 107
              time perception, 65–​6                          enactive/​embodied model of subjectivity, 64
           dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC), 84         endoscopic thoracic sympathectomy (ETS), 8
           dual klepsydra model, 64–​5                        Enfacement Illusion, 177
           dynamic self-​model, 36–​7, 37f                       cardiac interoceptive signals, 35–​6
                                                                 heartbeat-​evoked responses, 52, 54
           eating behavior, 165–​86                           enhanced affective motivational responding,
           Eating Disorder Inventory (EDI), 137, 173–​4             medically unexplained symptoms, 221
           eating disorders (EDs), 165–​86                    EPIC (Embodied Predictive Interoception Coding
              attachment insecurity, 178                            model), 282
              cardiac Interoceptive Accuracy, 173, 177        error feedback, medically unexplained symptoms, 221
              development issues, 172                         error modules, 179
              distorted body image, 165                       ETS (endoscopic thoracic sympathectomy), 8
              emotions,  137–​8                               exercise, 160
              extremes of behavior, 170                       experience communication, 309
              interoceptive appraisal dysfunction, 228–​9     experienced arousal, 246–​7, 251–​5
              interoceptive dissociability, 167, 168             action readiness awareness, 253
              interoceptive predictive coding, 179–​80           bodily feelings, 254
              neural encoding of interoception, 175              emotional intensity, 252–​3
              physiological reactions, 169                       intensity, 252
              self, disorders of, 176–​9                         physiological arousal vs.,  246–​7
              self-​objectification,  177–​8                     sensations, 252
              symptoms,  178–​9                                  Stoics, 251
              see also anorexia nervosa (AN); bulimia            visceral sensations, 253
                 nervosa (BN)                                 experience of self, v
           EDI (Eating Disorder Inventory), 137, 173–​4       exterior interior, 313–​16
           EDs see eating disorders (EDs)                     exteroception
           EEG (electroencephalography), 51, 52f                 information, 4
           Ehlers–​Danlos syndrome,  90–​1                       interoception vs., 132, 267, 284, 309
           electroencephalography (EEG), 51, 52f                 model of self, 34
              see also intracranial                              proprioception vs., 132
                 electroencephalography (iEEG)                extreme sports, 265
           electrophysiology, multiple sclerosis, 199f
           embodied cognition, v                              false-​self, anorexia nervosa, 176
           embodied precision, 30–​3                          fasting,  171–​2
           Embodied Predictive Interoception Coding model        short-​term,  166
                 (EPIC), 282                                  Feldenkreis, 319
           embodied self, 46–​9, 259                          first-​person perspective, 47
           embodied subjective frames, 34                     flotation Reduced Environment Stimulation Therapy
           embodied time, 74–​5                                      (flotation-​REST),  159–​60
           embodiment, pre-​personal level, 309–​10           fMRI see functional magnetic resonance
           emotions, 123–​43, 315                                    imaging (fMRI)
              appraisal theories, 124                         Free Energy Principle (FEP), 30, 272–​92
              bodily states, 123, 130                            allostasis, 287
              cardiac cycle, place in, 125                       biological viability, 278
              clinical implications, 132–​8                      conceptual apparatus, 272, 284–​5
              experienced arousal, 252–​3                        definition, 272
              exteroceptive effects, 4                           development, 28
              heartbeat-​evoked potentials,  127–​8              interoceptive prediction error, 280–​1
              individual differences, 126–​8                     pain and pleasant touch, 107
              inflammation effects, 126                          self-​model, 35,  41–​2
              interoception role, 4, 41–​2, 125–​6            frontal ischemic stroke, interoception, 192
              interoceptive predictive processing (see        fronto-​insular stroke, assessment by cardiac
                 interoceptive predictive processing (IPP))          interoception, 194f
              peripheral signals, 109                         fronto-​temporal dementia, behavioral see behavioral
              recognition in ischemic stroke, 192                    variant fronto-​temporal dementia (BvFTD)
 37




                                                                                                 subject Index   337


      Full-​Body Illusion,  35–​6                             time estimation, 74
      functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)         heartbeat-​as-​threat,  314
        anxiety studies, 230–​1                            heartbeat detection (HBD), 188t
        body-​time, 68–​9,  70–​1f                            brain damage diagnosis, 188
        insula, 55, 230                                       stroke, 189, 192
        interoceptive interactions in socio-​emotional     Heartbeat Evoked Potentials (HEP), 36
            processes, 205f                                   emotions,  127–​8
        nausea, 87                                            frontal ischemic stroke, 192
        visceral signals, 91                                  multiple sclerosis, 199f
      functional motor disorders, 198, 200                 heartbeat-​evoked responses (HERs), 51–​6, 53f
                                                              amplitude vs. self, 56
      GABA                                                    bodily awareness, 51–​2, 54
         physiological arousal, 250–​1                        physiological change absence, 56
         time perception, 66                                  spontaneous thought, 54
      GAD see generalized anxiety disorder (GAD)              visual perception, 55
      gaining insight, 316–​20                             heart rate, 50
      gastric perception reduction, bulimia nervosa, 176   Heart Rate Variability (HRV), 40
      gastrointestinal system signals, vi, 80–​101            visceral signals, 91
         ascending pain pathways, 81                       HEP see Heartbeat Evoked Potentials (HEP)
         autonomic nervous system, 83                      HERs see heartbeat-​evoked responses (HERs)
         brain–​gut axis,  82–​3                           Hinduism, 319
         brain processing, 83–​5 (see also visceral pain   historical perspective of interoception, 4–​7
            processing)                                    homeostasis,  273–​4
         cardiovascular system overlap, 168                   allostasis vs., 108–​9, 130, 272–​3, 275
         descending analgesia, 85–​6                          allostatic methods of, 276–​7
         diseases/​disorders in,  94–​6                       autonomic nervous system, 4–​5, 280
         humoral signaling, 81–​2                             control by proxy, 112–​15
         inter-​individual factors,  89–​94                   definition, 108, 272
         interoceptive awareness, 14                          perception by peripheral signals, 109
         measuring of, 170–​1                                 reflexes vs. diachronic allostasis, 286–​7
         sensory signaling pathways, 80–​1                    subjectivity, 301
         signal importance, 47–​48                         homeostatic control, definition, 108
         visceral threat anticipation, 89                  homeostatic loops, 280
      gender, visceral signals, 89–​90                     HPA (hypothalamic pituitary axis), 83
      gene polymorphisms, serotonergic (5-​HT)             HRV see Heart Rate Variability (HRV)
            transmitter system, 66                         humoral signaling, gastrointestinal system, 81–​2
      generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), 153              hunger, 87, 88f
         interoceptive appraisal, 230                         signals from, 171–​2
      general self-​model, visceral perception, 30         5-​hydroxytryptamine (5-​HT),  90
      general visceral afferents (GVAs), 3–​4, 9–​11       hypercapnia, 216
      genetics, visceral signals, 90                       hyperventilation, 216
      ghrelin, 87                                          hypodipsia, 263
      giveness,  63–​4                                     hypoglycemia, 171, 315–​16
      GLP-​1 (glucagon-​like peptide 1), 82                hyposensitivity, 180
      glucagon-​like peptide 1 (GLP-​1), 82                hypothalamic pituitary axis (HPA), 83
      gray matter density (GMD)                            hypothalamus
         irritable bowel syndrome, 95                         sensory channels, 149
         see also periaqueductal gray (PAG)                   visceral pain processing, 84
      gray matter volume, fMRI, 68
      The Guermantes Way (Proust), 312                     IA (Interoceptive Awareness), 14–​15, 165–​6
      gustation, 9                                         IAcc see Interoceptive Accuracy (IAcc)
      GVAs (general visceral afferents), 3–​4, 9–​11       iatrogenic somatic errors, 155, 156–​7t, 158
                                                           IBD (inflammatory bowel disease), 90–​1, 95–​6
      hatha yoga, 319                                      iBEAT task, 40–​1
      HBD see heartbeat detection (HBD)                    IBS (irritable bowel syndrome), 83, 94–​5
      Healing Touch, 319                                   I can principle, 307
      heartbeat(s)                                         ICD (implantable cardioverter defibrillator), 155
        interoceptive awareness, 14                        IE see Interoceptive Emotional Evaluation (IE)
        neural responses, 51 (see also heartbeat-​evoked   iEEG see intracranial electroencephalography (iEEG)
           responses (HERs))                               IES (Intuitive Eating Scale), 169
        self-​knowledge of, 314                            illness-​related bodily sensations, 219
38




     338   Subject Index


           imagination, physiological effects, 316                    short-​term fasting, 166
           impersonal character, 310–​11                           interoceptive feelings, 262–​3
           impersonalism, phenomenology, 309–​11                      interoceptive sensations vs., 262
           implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD), 155       interoceptive focused model of self, 34
           inaccessible regions, 311–​12                           interoceptive inference, 272
           indistinct regions, 312                                    allostasis, 278–​88, 279f
           inertia effect, medically unexplained symptoms, 221        primacy of, 283–​4
           infants, responses to physiological changes, 114           social origins of, 113–​14
           inferential leap effect, medically unexplained          interoceptive precision, ontogenetic origins, 39–​41
                 symptoms, 221                                     interoceptive prediction
           inferior interior, 316–​20                                 coding in eating disorders, 179–​80
           inflammation, emotion, effects on, 126                     free energy principle, 280–​1
           inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), 90–​1, 95–​6          interoceptive predictive processing (IPP), 27–​45,
           inside insight, 318–​19, 319–​20                              124–​5, 128–​32
           insider, interoception definition, 260                     exteroceptive vs. proprioceptive vs. interoceptive
           insight                                                       processes, 132
              gaining of, 316–​20                                     see also predictive processing (PP)
              inside insight, 318–​19, 319–​20                     Interoceptive Sensitivity (IS), 165
           insight (vipassana) meditation, 313, 319                   interoceptive feelings vs., 262
           insula, 8–​9, 10                                           interoceptive interactions in socio-​emotional
              atrophy in mild cognitive impairment, 203                  processes,  203–​4
              emotion processing, 125                              interoceptive trait prediction error (ITPE), 134
              interoceptive interactions in socio-​emotional       interpretative sensations, 314–​15
                 processes, 203                                    interpretive interoception, 313–​15
              lesions of, 10                                       intracranial electroencephalography (iEEG)
              multiple sclerosis, 201                                 insula role, 55
              neuroimaging, 230                                       self-​identification,  36
              physiological stress, 12–​13                         introspection, 260
              role of, 50, 55–​6                                   intuitive eating, 169
              stroke, 189                                          Intuitive Eating Scale (IES), 169
           insular cortex, 8, 69, 124, 167                         inverse problem, 129
              anterior (see anterior insular cortex (AIC))         IPP see interoceptive predictive processing (IPP)
              exteroceptive vs. proprioceptive vs. interoceptive   irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), 83, 94–​5
                 processes, 132                                    IS see Interoceptive Sensitivity (IS)
              meditation, 74                                       ischemic stroke, 192
              time perception, 68                                  ITPE (interoceptive trait prediction error), 134
              visceral pain processing, 84
           insulo-​temporal drainage, Alzheimer’s disease, 203     James–​Lange theory of interoception, 16, 130, 132
           intensity, experienced arousal, 252
           intermittent sensory field, 313                         laser-​evoked potentials (LEPs), pleasant touch
           Interoceptive Accuracy (IAcc), 14–​15, 165                     effects,  114–​15
              attenuated cardiac, obesity and, 170                 lateral pain systems, visceral pain processing, 84
              bulimia nervosa, 175–​6                              L’Homme Machine (Man-​the-​Machine) La
              cardiovascular system signal development, 172               Mettre, 317
              definition of, 126                                   life course, intermittent interoception, 313
              eating disorders, 1780                               lifeless machine analogy, 317
              intuitive eating, 169                                life-​threatening illnesses, 75
              obesity, 171                                         life-​world,  307
              primary vs. secondary deficits, 206                  lived body, phenomenology, 307–​8
           interoceptive appraisal                                 low threshold mechanosensitive C-​fibers
              definition of, 228                                          (C-​LTMs),  105–​6
              dysfunction in, 228–​9
              mental disorders, 230–​1                             magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 314
              mental health, 227–​41                                multiple sclerosis, 199f
              physiological change awareness, 228                  magnetoencephalography (MEG), 51, 52f
              respiration-​based task, 233–​8, 236f, 236t          major depressive disorder (MDD)
           Interoceptive Awareness (IA), 14–​15, 165–​6             emotions,  135–​6
           Interoceptive Classification Task, 220                   interoceptive appraisal, 231
           Interoceptive Emotional Evaluation (IE), 166            maladaptive behavior, 165
              bulimia nervosa, 176                                 massage therapy, 319
              negative evaluation, 169                             material me, 259
 39




                                                                                               subject Index   339


      MBCT (Mindfulness Based Cognitive Therapy), 232      interoceptive interactions in socio-​emotional
      MBSR (Mindfulness Based Stress Reduction),              processes,  203–​4
           232, 233                                        vagal evoked potential, 195
      MCI see mild cognitive impairment (MCI)             multisensory integration
      MDD see major depressive disorder (MDD)              bodily-​self,  48
      mechanical esophageal distension, 91                 Rubber Hand Illusion, 267
      medial pain systems, visceral pain processing, 84   multisensory self, predictive self-​models, 34–​6
      medically unexplained symptoms (MUS), 214,          MUS see medically unexplained symptoms (MUS)
           220–​2,  223
        error feedback, 221                               narcissistic functions, 268–​9
        prediction errors, 221                            nationalistic feelings, 263–​4
        predictive coding, 220, 222                       nausea,  86–​7
        somatic decision-​making,  220–​1                 negative evaluation, Interoceptive Emotional
        state of the body model, 220–​1                        Evaluation, 169
        traditional views, 215–​16, 216t                  neural feedback pathways, physiological
      meditation, 74                                           arousal,  248–​9
        vipassana (insight) meditation, 313, 319          neural responses, heartbeats, 51
      Meditations on First Philosophy (Descartes), 259      see also heartbeat-​evoked responses (HERs)
      MEG (magnetoencephalography), 51, 52f               neurobehavioral processes, autonomic nervous
      memory decay, 64                                         system, 12
      mental disorders, ix                                neurobiology
        cardiac interoception, 187–​8                       mental health model, 229–​30
        contemplative interventions, 231–​2                 nausea, 87
        definition, 187                                   neuroimaging
        interoception assessment, 187, 190–​1t              cutaneous pain studies, 111–​12
        interoceptive appraisal, 230–​1                     multiple sclerosis, 199f
        see also neurologic disorders; psychiatric          nausea, 87
           disorders                                        pleasant touch, 106–​7
      mental health                                         time perception, 66–​7
        interoceptive appraisal, 227–​41                    see also functional magnetic resonance imaging
        neurobiological model, 229–​30                         (fMRI); magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
      metabolic demands, actual vs. predicted, 13         neurologic disorders
      metacognitive process, 261                            cardiac interoception and, 187–​211
      metacognitive self-​model, 36–​9, 37f                 definition, 187
        performance-​specific module,  37–​9                diagnosis,  187–​8
        signal detection theory, 38                         interoceptive models as, 201, 202f, 203
        task-​specific modules,  37–​9                      time perception, 74–​5
      microbiota,  250–​1                                   see also mental disorders; psychiatric disorders
        visceral signals, 92, 93f                         neuromodulatory systems, autism spectrum
      microneurography, CT fibers, 106                         conditions, 134
      mild cognitive impairment (MCI)                     neurophysiology, central, 104–​7
        insular atrophy, 203                              neuroscience, development of, 63–​4
        interoceptive interactions in socio-​emotional    nocebo effects, 216
           processes,  203–​4                             nociception
        vagal evoked potential, 195                         conscious pain perception, 105
      mind–​body therapies,  238–​9                         metalization of, 112–​15
      Mindfulness Based Cognitive Therapy (MBCT), 232     nociceptors, 104
      Mindfulness Based Stress Reduction (MBSR),          non-​relational self-​awareness,  296
           232, 233                                       non-​topographic model, subjectivity, 304
      mindfulness meditation, 74                          non-​visceral sensations, experienced arousal, 253
      mineness,  63–​4                                    noradrenaline,  250–​1
      modality-​related processes, time perception, 65    NTS see nucleus tractus solitarius (NTS)
      moods, 316                                          nucleus tractus solitarius (NTS), 4, 49, 124
        rating of, 237                                      gastrointestinal system, 81
      motor disorders, functional, 198, 200                 sensory channels, 149
      MRI see magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
      MS see multiple sclerosis (MS)                      obesity, 171
      multimodal unity of interoception, 167                 cardiac Interoceptive Accuracy, 169
      multiple sclerosis (MS), 197–​8                     observed body states, somatic errors, 149–​50
        brain areas, 201                                  obsessive-​compulsive disorder (OCD), 39
        electrophysiology and neuroimaging, 199f          olfaction, 9
340




      340   Subject Index


            optimal decision-​making, symptom perception, 219    physiological relaxation response, 159
            orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), 106–​7                   physiological state control, action–​perception
            overlooking,  316–​20                                      loops,  107–​9
            overriding,  316–​20                                 physiological stress, 12–​13
            oxytocin                                             physiology
              autism spectrum conditions, 133–​4                    eating disorders, 169
              social context, 112–​13                               emotion effects, 123
              time perception, 66                                   experienced arousal, 254
                                                                    interoception, 260, 261
            pacemaker accumulator clock, 65                         self-​awareness effects, 47
            pacemaker cells, 48                                     sensations vs., 262
            PAG see periaqueductal gray (PAG)                    pleasant touch, 103–​4
            pain                                                    components of, 107–​15
              affective aspects of, 111                             role of others, predictions of, 114–​15
              brain role, 105                                    PNS (parasympathetic nervous system), 83
              chronic pain (see chronic pain (CP))               posterior cingulate cortex/​supplementary motor area
              conscious pain (see conscious pain)                      (PCC/​SMA), 52, 53f
              cutaneous (see cutaneous pain)                     posterior insula, 230
              sensory vs. affective aspects, 111                 post-​traumatic disorder (PTSD), 153
              visceral pain processing (see visceral pain        PP see predictive processing (PP)
                 processing)                                     pranayama, 319
            panic disorders, 153                                 precise learning example, 33
            parasympathetic nervous system (PNS), 83             precision
            Parkinson’s disease (PD), 198                           embodied precision, 30–​
            Patriotic War (Russia) (1812) example, 263–​4           interoceptive frameworks, 232–​3
            PCC (posterior cingulate cortex/​supplementary          optimization in predictive processing, 28–​30
                 motor area), 52, 53f                            predicted body states
            PE see prediction errors (PE)                           generation of, 147
            perception, Bayesian hallucination as, 38               somatic errors, 149–​50
            performance-​specific module, metacognitive          predicted metabolic demands, actual vs., 13
                 self-​model,  37–​9                             prediction errors (PE)
            periaqueductal gray (PAG)                               action–​perception loops, 108
              somatic errors, 150                                   eating disorders, 179–​80
              visceral pain processing, 84                          medically unexplained symptoms, 221
              see also gray matter density (GMD)                    processing in autism spectrum conditions, 134–​5
            peripheral endocrine immunology,                     predictive coding models, ix
                 depression,  136–​7                                body ownership changes, 34
            peripheral neurophysiology, skin, 104–​7                medically unexplained symptoms, 220, 222
            personal phenomenology, 309–​11                         symptom perception, 218
            PFC (prefrontal cortex), 84                          predictive processing (PP), 124–​5, 129
            phenomenology, 27–​8, 63–​,  307–​22                    definition, 128
              cognitive phenomenology, 254–​5                       elements of, 28
              definition, 307                                       precision optimization, 28–​30
              impersonal,  309–​11                                  prediction errors, 29
              interoception, 260                                    see also interoceptive predictive processing (IPP)
              lived body, 307–​8                                 predictive regulation, 130
              personal,  309–​11                                 predictive self-​models,  33–​9
              pre-​personal,  309–​11                               body ownership, 34–​6
            physical processes, time perception, link with, 68      multisensory self, 34–​6
            physical symptoms, time perception, 75               prefrontal cortex (PFC), 84
            physiological arousal, 246, 247–​51                     see also ventral anterior cingulate/​ventromedial
              autonomic nervous system, 247, 248                       prefrontal cortex (vACC/​vmPFC)
              bacterial infections, 250–​1                       pre-​personal level, embodiment, 309–​10
              boundaries, 251                                    pre-​personal phenomenology,  309–​11
              emotion studies, 247–​8                            primary interoceptive cortex, 230
              experienced arousal vs.,  246–​7                   primary visual cortex (V1), 29
              neural feedback pathways, 248–​9                   projective sensations, 315
              psychoneuroendocrinology,  249–​50                 proprioceptive processes, exteroceptive vs.
              psychoneuroimmunology,  249–​50                          interoceptive vs., 132
            physiological change                                 protective body map, 264
              awareness in interoceptive appraisal, 228          proto-​self, 46, 259, 300
              medically unexplained symptoms, 215                psychiatric disorders
 341




                                                                                                       subject Index   341


         anticipated–​incoming signal mismatches, 145              disorders of in eating disorders, 176–​9
         classification models, 144                                embodied self, 46–​9, 259
         interoceptive accuracy variation, 201                     experience of, v
         time perception, 74–​5                                    learning in infants, 40
         treatment of, 39                                          models (see self-​models)
         see also mental disorders; neurologic disorders           multisensory self, 34–​6
       psychological dimensions of interoception, 123              predictive models (see predictive self-​models)
       psychology, symptom perception accuracy, 213                sentient self, 259
       psychoneuroendocrinology,  249–​50                          spatial extension of, 296–​7
       psychoneuroimmunology,  249–​50                          self-​affectivity,  300
       psychophysiology, visceral signals, 91–​2                   subjectivity,  297–​9
       psychotherapy, anxiety, 158–​9                           self-​awareness,  v
       PTSD (post-​traumatic disorder), 153                        development of, 39–​40
       purging, bulimia nervosa, 180                               neuroscience, 299–​300
       purposive sensations, 315                                   non-​relational,  296
                                                                   subjectivity,  294–​6
       qigong, 319                                              self-​body dualism, 310
       quantification of interoception, 123, 126                self-​consciousness,  295
                                                                self-​focus, anorexia nervosa, 175
       RDoC see Research Domain Criteria (RDoC)                 self-​identification, intracranial
       reactive behavior, anticipatory vs. in allostasis, 281          electroencephalography, 36
       rectal distension, 88–​9                                 self-​models,  27–​8
       regulator, interoception definition, 260                    dynamic self-​model, 36–​7, 37f
       reliability expectations (precision), symptom               exteroceptive vs. interoceptive, 34
             perception, 218                                       metacognitive (see metacognitive self-​model)
       Research Domain Criteria (RDoC), 144, 205–​6                predictive models (see predictive self-​models)
          mental disorders, 187                                 self-​objectification, eating disorders, 177–​8
       respiration                                              self-​reference, self-​specificity vs., 266
          based tasks, 233–​8, 236f, 236t                       sensations
          fluctuation, 50                                          bodily feelings vs., 262
          interoceptive awareness, 14                              emotive, 315
       respiration rate change (ΔRR), 234–​5, 236–​7,              experienced arousal, 252
             236f, 236t                                            interpretative,  314–​15
       respiratory resistance, 228                                 projective, 315
       respiratory system, vi                                      purposive, 315
       RHI see Rubber Hand Illusion (RHI)                       sensibility, subjectivity, 297–​9
       rhinencephalon, 9                                        sensitization, central, 110
       right anterior insula, 15                                sensory aspects of pain, affective aspects vs., 111
       right posterior parietal cortex, 65                      sensory signaling pathways
       root mean square of successive differences                  emotion, 103
             (RMSSD), 74                                           gastrointestinal system, 80–​1
       Rubber Hand Illusion (RHI), 177, 261, 264                   interoceptive awareness, 88–​9
          cardiac interoceptive signals, 35–​6                  sentient perspective, subjectivity as, 294
          interoceptive awareness, 14–​15                       sentient self, 259
          multisensory integration, 267                         serotonergic (5-​HT) transmitter system, 66
          multisensory self/​body ownership, 34–​5              serotonin,  250–​1
                                                                short-​acting anxiolytic medications, 159
       salience                                                 short-​term fasting, Interoceptive Emotional
          cutaneous pain networks, 111                                 Evaluation, 166
          prediction errors, 30                                 short-​term synaptic plasticity, 65
       SAME (somatovisceral model of emotion), 16               signal detection theory (SDT), 38
       satiation volume, 175                                    signals of danger, cutaneous pain, 110
       satiety, signals from, 171–​2                            SII (second somatosensory cortex), 124
       Schandry task, 72                                        Sixth Meditation (Descartes), 268–​9
       SDT (signal detection theory), 38                        skin conductance, 50
       secondary visual cortex (V2), 29                         skin receptors, 102–​20
       second somatosensory cortex (SII), 124                      active interoceptive inference, 109–​12
       self                                                        central & peripheral neurophysiology, 104–​7
          autobiographical self, 46–​7                             see also cutaneous pain; pleasant touch
          biological implementation of, 48–​9, 56–​7            SMA (posterior cingulate cortex/​supplementary
          bodily state changes, 47                                     motor area), 52, 53f
          body vs. in anorexia nervosa, 177                     SNS (sympathetic nervous system), 83
342




      342   Subject Index


            social anxiety disorder, 153                            non-​topographic model, 304
            social cognition skills, Alzheimer’s disease, 204       self-​affectivity,  297–​9
            social context                                          self-​awareness,  294–​6
               conscious pain control, 112–​13                      sensibility,  297–​9
               emotions, 128                                        sentient perspective as, 294
               pain/​pleasure inferential processes, 112–​13        temporal extension vs. spatial extension of self, 296–​7
            social modulation, 112–​13                            superior interior, 317–​18
            socio-​emotional processes, interoceptive             sustained viability models, 277–​8
                  interactions, 203–​4, 205f                      SVAs (special visceral afferents), 4
            sole object, interoception definition, 260            Swedish massage, 160
            somatic afference, visceral afference vs., 3          Sympathetic Association (FfSo), 8
            somatic decision-​making, medically unexplained       sympathetic nervous system (SNS), 83
                  symptoms,  220–​1                               symptom(s)
            somatic errors, 144–​64                                 medically unexplained (see medically unexplained
               altered thoughts, 153–​4                                symptoms (MUS))
               anxiety in, 151–​2                                   perception (see symptom perception)
               brain in, 149–​50                                    physical symptoms and time perception, 75
               clinical implications, 158–​60                     symptom perception, 212–​26
               definition, 145, 146f, 147                           accuracy of, 213–​14
               iatrogenic, 155, 156–​7t, 158                        adaptive sense making, 217–​18
               predicted vs. observed body states, 149–​50          categorical decision making as, 218–​20
               processing/​regulation,  148                       synaptic plasticity, short-​term, 65
               somatic markers vs.,  150–​1
               visceral illusions, 154–​5                         taiji, 319
            somatic markers, 31, 130, 132                         task-​specific modules, metacognitive
               somatic errors vs.,  150–​1                               self-​model,  37–​9
            somatic prediction error, medically unexplained       teleological allostasis, 279f, 282–​5, 288
                  symptoms, 222                                   temporal expansion, allostasis, 277
            somatosensory cortex, 50                              temporal extension of subjectivity perspective, spatial
               sensory channels, 149                                     extension of self vs.,  296–​7
            somatovisceral model of emotion (SAME), 16            tenth cranial nerve (CNX), 81
            spatial ambiguity, 312                                thalamus
            spatial extension of self, 296–​7                        sensory channels, 149
            special visceral afferents (SVAs), 4                     visceral pain processing, 84
            specific food consumption, 172                        theory of mind (ToM), 192
            spinal pathway, gastrointestinal system, 81           three-​level model of interoception, 127–​8, 127f
            spoilt food analogy, 33                               time
            state of the body model, medically unexplained           embodied time, 74–​5
                  symptoms,  220–​1                                  estimation by heartbeat, 74
            Stoics, experienced arousal, 251                         perception (see time perception)
            stress                                                   subjective time, 67
               physiological stress, 12–​13                          see also body-​time
               related arousal in medically unexplained           time perception, 63–​79
                  symptoms, 215                                      body time (see body-​time)
            stroke                                                   neural models, 64–​7
               damage assessment by cardiac interoception, 194f      physical processes, link with, 68
               frontal ischemic stroke, 192                          physical symptoms, 75
               fronto-​insular stroke, 194f                       top-​down attention, 261
               interoception disruption, 189, 192                 topographic bodily representation, brain in, 302–​4
               ischemic stroke, 192                               touch see pleasant touch
            subcortex                                             traditional Chinese medicine (TCM), 319
               damage assessment by cardiac interoception, 193f   trait-​like impulsivity, 69
               gastrointestinal system, 81                        Treatise of Human Nature (Hume), 251–​2
            subjective arousal see experienced arousal
            subjective feeling states, 148–​9                     ulcerative colitis (UC) see inflammatory bowel
            subjective measures, quantification of                     disease (IBD)
                  interoception, 123                              urogenital system, vi
            subjective time, affective states, 67
            subjectivity, 293–​303                                V1 (primary visual cortex), 29
               enactive/​embodied model, 64                       V2 (secondary visual cortex), 29
               homeostasis, 301                                   vagal evoked potential (VSEP), Alzheimer’s
               neuroscience, 299–​304                                  disease, 195
 34




                                                                                                      subject Index   343


      Vagal Tone, 40                                          visceral perception, general self-​model, 30
      vagus nerve, 81                                         visceral prediction errors, 13–​14
      ventral anterior cingulate/​ventromedial prefrontal     visceral (bodily) signals
            cortex (vACC/​vmPFC), 50                             conditions, variation in, 57
         heartbeat-​evoked responses, 55                         experienced arousal, 253
      ventricular humoral pathway, gastrointestinal system,      hyper-​precision of,  31–​32
            81, 82f                                              inter-​individual factors,  89–​94
      ventromedial prefrontal cortex see ventral anterior        self-​related information in brain, 57
            cingulate/​ventromedial prefrontal cortex            self-​specification signals as, 46–​49
            (vACC/​vmPFC)                                        status in cortical hierarchy, 30–​31, 32f,  37–​38
      verbal prosody, ischemic stroke, 192                    visceral (bodily) signals pathways, 49–​51
      vipassana (insight) meditation, 313, 319                   brain dynamic effects, 50–​51
      visceral afference, 3, 9, 310                              central (see central visceral pathways)
         cognition and emotion, 7                                central targets of, 49–​50
         general visceral afferents (GVAs), 3–​4, 9–​11          periphery to brainstem, 49
         somatic afference vs., 3                             visual perception, heartbeat-​evoked responses, 55
      visceral cortex, 8–​11                                  VSEP (vagal evoked potential), Alzheimer’s
      visceral definition, interoception of, 260                    disease, 195
      visceral feedback, emotions in, 7, 67–​
      visceral illusions                                      Western-​style diet, 172
         life-​threatening changes to                         whole body hypothermia (WBH), 160
            body state, 155                                   wide dynamic (WDR) neurons, 104
         somatic errors, 154–​5                               window of presence, 63
      visceral interoception, 311                             The Wisdom of the Body (Cannon), 6
      visceral pain processing, 83–​4
         anticipation of, 91–​2                               yoga, 160
         brain networks, 84–​5, 85t, 86f                        hatha yoga, 319
34
 345
346
 347
348
 349
350
