Copyright © 2017 by Althea Press, Berkeley, California

No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or
otherwise, except as permitted under Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976 US Copyright Act,
without the prior written permission of the publisher. Requests to the publisher for
permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, Althea Press, 918 Parker
Street, Suite A-12, Berkeley, CA 94710.

Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: The publisher and the author make no
representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents
of this work and specifically disclaim all warranties, including without limitation warranties
of fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales or
promotional materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for
every situation. This work is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged
in rendering medical, legal or other professional advice or services. If professional
assistance is required, the services of a competent professional person should be sought.
Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for damages arising herefrom. The fact
that an individual, organization, or website is referred to in this work as a citation and/or
potential source of further information does not mean that the author or the publisher
endorses the information the individual, organization, or website may provide or
recommendations they/it may make. Further, readers should be aware that websites listed
in this work may have changed or disappeared between when this work was written and
when it is read.

For general information on our other products and services or to obtain technical support,
please contact our Customer Care Department within the United States at (866) 744-2665,
or outside the United States at (510) 253-0500.

Althea Press publishes its books in a variety of electronic and print formats. Some content
that appears in print may not be available in electronic books, and vice versa.

TRADEMARKS: Althea Press and the Althea Press logo are trademarks or registered
trademarks of Callisto Media, Inc., and/or its affiliates, in the United States and other
countries, and may not be used without written permission. All other trademarks are the
property of their respective owners. Althea Press is not associated with any product or
vendor mentioned in this book.

ISBN: Print 978-1-93975-407-3 | eBook 978-1-62315-881-1
CONTENTS
Introduction


1     DISCOVERING
      THE SELF

2     THE ENNEAGRAM
      IN PRACTICE

3     THE ENNEAGRAM
      AT WORK

4     THE ENNEAGRAM
      IN RELATIONSHIPS

5     GROWTH AND
      CHANGE
Conclusion
Appendix: Shortcuts for Breaking Out of Your Box
Resources
References
Acknowledgments
About the Authors
INTRODUCTION
Have you ever had an experience of realization—where you
understood something about yourself and the world on a deeper
level than you ever had before? Maybe this insight came from a
moment of contemplation, or from new information that led you to
look at things with fresh eyes. We’d like to introduce you to a
personality system that has had this profound eﬀect on us: the
Enneagram.


Melanie’s Story
When I ﬁrst learned about the Enneagram, I was si ing with my
friends at a long table in a college cafeteria, eating forkfuls of fried
tofu and undercooked rice. I was a newly independent
undergraduate student, fascinated by a personality workshop I’d just
experienced in class and the discussion that had ensued—a
discussion about how each participant saw the world diﬀerently. I
wondered if personality psychology held the key I’d been seeking to
understanding myself, making congruent choices, and connecting
with others.
    “Have you heard of the Enneagram?” one of my friends asked.
He proceeded to give one-sentence descriptions of each type, and
when I was unsure of mine, he handed me an Enneagram book to
borrow. The system seemed complicated, and its geometric layout a
li le intimidating, until I started reading about the types. Not this
one, not this one. . . Oh. Wait a minute. Had the authors been
following me around with a video camera?
   Ten years of Enneagram study and teaching later, this apt
personality system maintains its power to surprise.


Kacie’s Story
My story of self-discovery started on the Internet. My fascination
with learning about how others worked began at a young age. By
reading about various systems of personality and taking tests to
determine my own type, I started to piece together why I, and others
around me, acted in the way they did.
    But everything deepened when a friend suggested I look into the
Enneagram. A quick Internet search took me to The Enneagram
Institute’s website—and a powerful understanding. Coming face to
face with the Enneagram descriptions, a whole new world opened
up into the whys of my actions. It seemed like the Enneagram knew
me be er than I knew myself! As I dove into exploring the
Enneagram and ﬁnding myself, the other personality systems I’d
learned from, such as the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator and DiSC (an
assessment that focuses on the traits of dominance, inducement,
submission, and compliance), almost instantaneously dissolved into
the background.
    Fast forward over a decade, and I ﬁnd that no ma er how much
inner work I’ve done and how much I think I know, I continue to be
astonished and awed by the Enneagram’s power and ability to know
me.


A Tool for Growth
So what exactly does the Enneagram do? In short, it oﬀers insight
into nine distinct personality types. In a way, it’s a window into why
people do what we do.
    The Enneagram explains how diﬀerent people see the world,
allowing us to understand where other people are coming from.
From that standpoint, it’s helpful for communication, workplace
interaction, and relationship building. It’s also a deeply growth-
oriented concept, in that it describes habits of thought and behavior
for each personality type—habits that keep many people stuck
under day-to-day stresses— and oﬀers ways to break out of those
boxes. These growth paths are, in our opinion, one of the most
important ways people can apply the system to themselves.
    The Enneagram has been used to build understanding between
family members and coworkers, forge bonds between South African
leaders of diﬀerent racial backgrounds post-apartheid, reduce
recidivism rates for parolees, and open paths of communication
between Israelis and Palestinians. For the two of us, it’s helped with
emotion management, self-acceptance, career development,
relationship dynamics, and understanding our families. When used
to promote understanding rather than stereotypes, the Enneagram is
an immensely powerful tool.
    A lot of our Enneagram learning came from books that remain
fantastic and relevant, but haven’t quite kept up with our fast-paced
modern life. The world is changing quickly, and there are new ways
to apply the Enneagram in our increasingly globalized, digitally
connected world. The Enneagram is used in more business and
personal contexts with every passing year.
    In this book, you’ll learn the basics of the history and theory of
the Enneagram, as well as how its intricate parts work together.
Then, you’ll discover how to apply these insights to your work,
relationships, and daily life. We’ll give you a very practical overview
of what the Enneagram is and what it does. We’ll point you to
resources where you can learn more, including personality tests that
will help you discover your type. We encourage you to read about all
nine personality types with an open mind, and pay a ention to
which one resonates with you the most.
    Are you ready to join us on an Enneagram journey? Let’s get
started!
DISCOVERING THE SELF
The Enneagram is more than a ﬂash-in-the-pan
personality test. With historical roots dating back to at
least the fourteenth century, the modern Enneagram has
helped thousands of people discover truths about
themselves and their life’s purpose. Not only is it an
interesting way to learn about yourself, but it’s also a
catalyst for inspiration and transformation.
    The insights that the Enneagram oﬀers can help with
many practical life decisions, such as ﬁnding a career or
lifestyle that suits your personality best. As you learn
about your type and watch how it shows up in your life,
you may discover that you thrive in a calmer
environment than you’re currently living in or that your
talents would be best used in more people-oriented work
than you’re doing now. You might recognize habits that
get in the way of being your best self, and, as a result,
make changes over time.
   You’ll also ﬁnd the Enneagram useful as a guide for
understanding others. Knowing the personality types of
the people around you can help you be er understand
your family, resolve conﬂict with your partner, and
communicate more eﬀectively with your coworkers. The
  Enneagram oﬀers such a vast amount of wisdom that
  these days, many therapists, coaches, business
  consultants, and spiritual teachers choose to use this
  system to support the people they serve.
      In this chapter, we’ll talk a li le bit about the history
  of the Enneagram and how it developed from an ancient
  symbol into the practical psychospiritual tool we use
  today. We’ll look at the various parts of the Enneagram
  symbol and their signiﬁcance. Then, we’ll give an
  overview of the nine Enneagram types, as well as the
  core motivations, gi s, and challenges each type
  possesses. Read on for a deep dive into the human
  psyche, and a ﬁrst glimpse at how to harness this
  powerful knowledge for your own personal growth.


Spiritual Roots: The Enneagram in
History
The nine-pointed Enneagram symbol is said to originate from
Suﬁsm, a mystical branch of Islam, and was ﬁrst popularized in the
West by Russian spiritual teacher G. I. Gurdjieﬀ in the early
twentieth century. He taught the Enneagram as a way of
understanding the movements and changes that constitute the
spiritual dimension of life. The Enneagram also formed the
foundation of some of the sacred dances he guided his students to
perform. Gurdjieﬀ’s dances, based on precise and intentional
movements, aimed to cultivate a ention and awareness. A key
aspect of Gurdjieﬀ’s teaching was identifying his students’ “chief
feature,” a prominent psychodynamic behavior pa ern that kept
them “asleep” to their true nature. He used this knowledge to
personalize his teaching to each student, guiding them on individual
paths toward spiritual growth that balanced their mental, physical,
and emotional faculties.
    Bolivian transpersonal teacher Oscar Ichazo incorporated the
idea of people having a weakness or ﬂaw in their point of view into
the Enneagram itself. In the 1950s, he developed a system of
mapping personality types around the Enneagram, creating the
foundation for today’s widespread Enneagram teachings. His system
was predicated on opposites: For each of the nine personality types,
he assigned a corresponding passion (or emotional imbalance) and
virtue.

PSYCHOLOGICAL INSIGHTS

In the 1970s, psychiatrist Claudio Naranjo developed Ichazo’s ideas
further, sketching proﬁles of each type’s psychodynamics and
describing common type-related pathologies. For each type, he
identiﬁed motivations, cognitive biases, and neurotic tendencies,
such as narcissism or histrionic traits. He was also the ﬁrst person to
use the panel method of teaching. He grouped individuals by type
and asked them questions, enabling both Naranjo and his students
to get a be er understanding of each Type. For example, he would
assemble a group of individuals who identiﬁed with Type One and
ask them questions, illuminating aspects of the type for his audience.
This approach to the Enneagram is widely used today.
    Naranjo taught his Enneagram material to students in Berkeley,
California, as he developed it. His insights spread to Jesuit
seminaries where they were further disseminated. The ﬁrst
generation of Enneagram authors learned the Enneagram mostly
from this transmission. Maria Beesing, Robert Nogosek, and Patrick
O’Leary published the ﬁrst book on the Enneagram as a personality
system, called The Enneagram, in 1984. You may be familiar with the
others that followed, such as Don Riso’s Personality Types and Helen
Palmer’s The Enneagram: Understanding Yourself and Others in Your
Life.

THE ENNEAGRAM TODAY

Both Riso and Palmer became leaders in the ﬁeld and founders of the
world’s most prominent Enneagram school. Don Riso expanded
descriptions of the psychology of each type to include nine Levels of
Development, diﬀerentiating healthy, average, and unhealthy
manifestations of the types. These span the whole range of human
potential, from optimal functioning to psychological pathology. Riso
founded The Enneagram Institute and partnered with Russ Hudson
to further develop his work. Riso’s contemporary Helen Palmer
wrote additional books about practical Enneagram applications and
founded the Narrative Tradition. In this inﬂuential school, Palmer
and her teaching partner David Daniels reﬁned Naranjo’s panel
approach—where groups of a certain type were brought together—
using personal stories to provide both an understanding of type and
a healing experience for panelists.
    Knowledge of the Enneagram as a personality system has spread
beyond its esoteric roots and entered the mainstream. Across the
globe, therapists, coaches, and corporate trainers use the Enneagram
with their clients. While we are certiﬁed and authorized teachers
with The Enneagram Institute and our understanding is deeply
inﬂuenced by this school’s psychodynamic approach, we have
studied with Enneagram professionals who apply the system to
ﬁelds as diverse as executive coaching and hypnosis. Over the next
few chapters, we’ll give you a sense of the diverse ways the
Enneagram can be applied.
The Structure of the Enneagram
Though represented as a simple ﬁgure, the Enneagram’s numbers,
circles, and lines can be interpreted many diﬀerent ways. Let’s take a
look at the Enneagram form most people know:




CIRCLE The nine points of the Enneagram figure (each representing one of the nine types) are
enclosed within a circle. The circle represents unity, showing that all nine Enneagram types are
equal and connected to one another.
TRIANGLE The Enneagram’s inner triangle, which connects three points, represents a dynamic
interaction of three forces. Think of any pair of opposites; the third point, or force, represents a
synthesis or middle ground that brings them together. Three Enneagram types—Types Three, Six,
and Nine—are connected by the triangle.




HEXAD The hexad is an irregular figure that connects the other six points. Its structure represents
dynamism and change. While we all have a dominant personality type, we are also in constant
flux. Six Enneagram types—Types One, Two, Four, Five, Seven, and Eight—are connected by the
hexad.
NUMBERS The nine numbers around the circle represent the nine Enneagram personality types.
Each Enneagram type has a different core motivation that drives behavior. Every person has
aspects of all the types within them, but everyone also has a primary Enneagram type—a type that
impacts an individual’s perceptions, actions, and interpretations of the world.




              THE ENNEAGRAM’S ARROWS
   Many types on the Enneagram are interconnected, sometimes with arrows. These arrows
   follow a precise structure that reflects the shifts people go through under stress, in secure
   situations, and as they follow a path of personal growth. When we move to one of our
   connecting points, we take on some of that type’s behaviors. This movement is seamless
   and can happen multiple times in any given day.




       The backward-pointing arrows show each type’s Stress Point, the type we move to when
   we feel under stress. Moving to our Stress Point can give us a break from our usual way of
   acting and prevent us from becoming less healthy. Under severe stress, some people can
   move to their Stress Point and stay there for months or years.
       The forward-pointing arrows show each type’s Security Point, which allows us to act out
   the behaviors of another type for a while. Security Point movement usually happens in
   situations that feel familiar and trustworthy or when we are healthy, a movement known as
  our Integration Point. We integrate qualities of that type that help balance our own, such as
  confidence or structure. To change and grow, we need to develop our Security Point’s
  healthy behaviors in our daily lives.



THE CENTERS AND TRIADS

The Enneagram types can be organized into several diﬀerent triads,
or groupings of three. These triads describe commonalities between
types, such as their dominant intelligence, social style, conﬂict
resolution style, and object relations. A summary of each group of
triads and how each triad works is given next.




THE THREE CENTERS
The nine Enneagram types are represented by three diﬀerent centers
of intelligence: the Gut Center, Heart Center, and Head Center.
When we are balanced, we have equal use and access to all three
intelligence centers, allowing us to access powerful strengths. All of
us possess these three centers, but one of them is dominant in
shaping our personality type’s strengths and challenges. While the
dominant center holds powerful abilities, it also has the most
potential to be overused or misused.
THE GUT CENTER focuses on our physical instincts and bodies. Noticing our bodily sensations
brings us incredible somatic intelligence. When we listen to our physical instincts, we feel strong,
physically embodied, and anchored in the present moment. When our Gut Center is underused,
we feel ungrounded and have a difficult time asserting ourselves. Types One, Eight, and Nine
comprise the Gut Triad. These types, at their best, are independent with strong physical
boundaries. When out of balance, they feel they must assert their will over others, and they
struggle with anger.

THE HEART CENTER focuses on our personal identity and values. Listening to our hearts gives us
strong emotional intelligence. When we open up and listen to our hearts, we become
compassionate, feel our own personal sense of self, and release our past hurts. When our Heart
Center is underused, we feel cut off from our feelings and have trouble seeing who we truly are.
Types Two, Three, and Four comprise the Heart Triad. These types, at their best, are
compassionate and have a strong sense of self. When out of balance, they feel they must develop
an identity through outside validation, and they struggle with shame.

THE HEAD CENTER focuses on obtaining knowing and support. Quieting our minds brings us
powerful internal guidance. When we clear our heads, we gain contact with our inner knowing,
learning the best way for us to move forward into the future. When our Head Center is underused,
our minds are foggy, and we follow external guidance instead of our inner guide. Types Five, Six,
and Seven comprise the Head Triad. These types, at their best, are clear-minded and in touch with
their powerful inner guidance. When out of balance, they believe they must seek security through
other means, and they struggle with anxiety.


THE SOCIAL STYLES
Named by Don Riso and Russ Hudson, the Hornevian Triads
describe three distinct social styles the Enneagram types tend to use
as they move through life. It uses psychologist Karen Horney’s three
trends of moving against, moving toward, and moving away to
describe assertive, compliant, and withdrawn personalities on the
Enneagram.
THE ASSERTIVE TRIAD. Types Three, Seven, and Eight fit Horney’s classic social style of moving
against others. Types that use this style tend to be doers and bring the strength of getting things
moving. They focus on taking action and resolving situations quickly. Interpersonally, their
assertiveness gives them the easiest time of the styles confronting and speaking their minds with
other people. Sometimes, people of these types, in particular, can come off as overly brusque,
with the potential to hurt others’ feelings.




THE COMPLIANT TRIAD. Types One, Two, and Six fit Horney’s classic social style of moving
toward others. Types that use this style tend to be dutiful and bring the strength of strong
cooperation with others. They focus on providing support and assistance. Interpersonally, these
types tend to convey warmth and a desire to please, and they can “lean in” in order to read your
needs. Sometimes these types can come off as overly focused on social rules in interactions, with
the potential of irritating others.




THE WITHDRAWN TRIAD. Types Four, Five, and Nine fit Horney’s classic social style of moving
away from others. Types that use this style tend to have a focus that is at once internal, and also
broad, strategic, and global. Interpersonally, these types tend to be thoughtful, self-contained, and
are often (although not always) more introverted than the other two styles. Sometimes, these
types have a difficult time speaking up and expressing themselves in social situations, leaving
others confused as to their needs and desires.


THE CONFLICT RESOLUTION STYLES
All of us encounter conﬂict, challenges, and decisions in our lives.
We react to these events unconsciously and according to our
Enneagram type. There are three basic styles we use to manage day-
to-day conﬂicts. These styles—Competency, Emotional Realness, and
Positive Outlook—form what Riso and Hudson call the Harmonic
Triads. Three Enneagram types each prefer one of the harmonic
styles, and all of the styles have valuable strengths and challenges
associated with them.
THE COMPETENCY TRIAD. Competency Types—One, Three, and Five—are natural problem
solvers. When faced with a conflict or challenge, they aim to stay civil and immediately strategize
to find solutions. These types are excellent at long-term planning and keeping themselves or a
group on track to reaching a goal. The downside is that these types can be overly focused and
emotionally restricted. When we solve conflicts analytically, we avoid either feeling immediate
emotions or viewing the situation positively. This means these types don’t always take emotional
needs and the broader context of the problem into account when decisions are made, making
some solutions less useful than they could be.
THE EMOTIONAL REALNESS TRIAD. Emotional Realness Types—Four, Six, and Eight—are
skilled at drawing out emotions and feelings. In conflicts and challenges, they first want to
process their feelings and hear emotional responses from others, in order to bring pressing needs
to the surface. This allows difficult feelings, conflicts, and challenges out into the open, clearing
the air to move forward. The downside is that these types can have difficulty moving forward;
addressing feelings is productive initially, but has the potential to spiral into endless conflict and
emotional processing, making it hard to see the positivity in the situation or implement solutions.




THE POSITIVE OUTLOOK TRIAD. Positive Outlook Types—Two, Seven, and Nine—excel at
making the best out of any challenge and having a broad view—a view where the problem is not
such a big deal. Seeing positivity and finding hope in even dark times helps us keep our spirits up
and keep going under duress. The downside to this style is that it can lead to denial that a conflict
or challenge is even taking place. Denial makes it hard to air out feelings or develop solutions to
the challenge. Not addressing a conflict can cause it to grow bigger than it would have if it had
been acknowledged right away.


THE OBJECT RELATIONS TRIADS
All of us have certain ways of relating to other people. These tend to
be unconscious and deeply ingrained in us from a young age. First
described in psychodynamic theory, object relations pa erns can be
categorized into three groups: a achment, rejection, and frustration.
Each of these is a dominant pa ern of relating to others for three
Enneagram types. When we overidentify with these pa erns, it’s
diﬃcult for us to act consciously in our relationships. By
understanding these pa erns in ourselves, we can start to identify
when our reactions to others come from our own deeply held
psychological defense strategies rather than from the interaction
itself.




THE ATTACHMENT TRIAD reflects how we all attach and attempt to remain in a flow with the
world around us. Types Three, Six, and Nine tend to focus on attaching to and then maintaining a
certain internal state. This ranges from attachment to others’ desires, to attachment to external
support, to attachment to a sense of inner peace. These types’ defense mechanisms strive to keep
things just the way they are.
THE REJECTION TRIAD reflects the strategies we use for survival in the world. Types Two, Five,
and Eight feel rejected by the world and like they need to bring something to others. Their
strategies include offering people their love and service, their knowledge and expertise, and their
strong protection. These types’ defense mechanisms attempt to gain acceptance while assuming
the individual will not receive it.




THE FRUSTRATION TRIAD describes how all of us try to get what we want from the world. Types
One, Four, and Seven tend to feel chronically frustrated—like they are never able to get their needs
met. This frustration may stem from the world’s lack of morality, other people’s deviation from an
idealized view of them, or a low supply of excitement. These types’ defenses seek an ideal rather
than savoring lived experience.




        TEST TAKING AND FINDING YOUR
                     TYPE
   This book doesn’t offer a self-test, but taking a type assessment is a shortcut that can point
   you toward a likely Enneagram type. If you don’t know your type, there is a variety of
   resources you can check out before digging into this book. Here are a few:

   ENNEAGRAM TYPING TESTS

      The Enneagram Institute’s RHETI (Riso-Hudson Enneagram Type Indicator) is a
      scientifically validated Enneagram assessment, available for $10 at
      enneagraminstitute.com. We recommend it if you’re interested in a thorough test, but
      you’ll have to read about your type on the website or elsewhere since the assessment
      doesn’t include a detailed report.

      Enneagram in the Narrative Tradition offers a scientifically validated, paragraph-based
      Enneagram assessment initially developed by David Daniels, MD, and Virginia Price,
      PhD. It includes educational videos about your top type results as a tool to guide your
      selection. It’s available at enneagramworldwide.com for $10.

      Jerry Wagner, PhD, developed the WEPSS (Wagner Enneagram Personality Style Scales),
      a scientifically standardized, reliable, and validated assessment. In addition to covering
      your primary type, it explains your connections to other types through the Enneagram’s
      arrows and wings. It’s available for $10 at WEPSS.com.

      Integrative Enneagram Solutions offers an Enneagram test using Integrative Intelligent
      Questionnaire Technology. The test and a brief type report are $15 at integrative.co.za.
      The company also offers Enneagram-based assessment of teams and their level of
      functioning.

      Ginger Lapid-Bogda, PhD, developed an app with an animated Enneagram test called
      Know Your Type. The app also features videos, personal development activities, and tips
      for interacting with other types. Download it for $3.99 at enneagramapp.com.
  OTHER WAYS TO DISCOVER YOUR TYPE

    Get feedback from family and friends. Sometimes our loved ones see our patterns more
    clearly than we do. Don’t be afraid to ask trusted confidantes what strengths, gifts, and
    traits you bring to the world.

    Consult an expert. Many certified Enneagram teachers offer typing interviews that assist
    you in discovering your type. Since these consultations are tailored to you, this is often a
    quick way to find your type.

    Read the descriptions in this book. If one of the type descriptions stands out and
    resonates with you, it just might be your type!

    Test results vs. self-knowledge. In some cases, an Enneagram test will indicate one type
    for you, but you may identify more strongly with a different type after reading the
    descriptions. No Enneagram test is completely accurate, and self-recognition is the best
    way to find your type. We recommend reading up on your top three test results, as there
    are many reasons you might test as one type while being another: cultural or family
    expectations, gender roles, a more positive view of certain traits, and so on. Look for the
    type that resonates with you at your best and worst. It’s also useful to get feedback from
    friends and family members, who may know you better than you know yourself!




THE WINGS

The Enneagram may only have nine basic types, but each type has a
number of variations. The wings are one factor that brings diversity
to how we each express our dominant Enneagram type. Your wing is
one of two types next to your dominant Enneagram type. For
example, if you are a Three, your two possible wings are Type Two
and Type Four. Most people only have one dominant wing, although
some Enneagram teachers believe there are people who use both
wings equally.
Your wing does not change our dominant Enneagram type’s core
motivations or traits. However, it does modify the way your type
appears, adding a certain “ﬂavor” of a secondary personality type.
Two people with the same type and diﬀerent wings can look quite
distinct. A Four with a Three Wing, for example, may appear
dramatic and ﬂamboyant next to a more reserved and intellectually
oriented Four with a Five Wing.
    The wings are stronger and more visible in some people than
others. A Six, for example, with a particularly strong Five or Seven
Wing will appear closer to Type Five or Seven in behavior and
personality traits, although they will still be a dominant Type Six. On
the other hand, some Sixes will have a much weaker wing, to the
point that the wing is diﬃcult to see or discern.
    Once you discover your wing, you can write your full type in
shorthand as (dominant type)w(wing type). For example, a Six with a
Five Wing is a 6w5, and a Six with a Seven Wing is a 6w7. Wings add
diversity and precision to Enneagram types and help explain some
of the variety we see within each type. As we introduce each
personality type, we’ll also highlight and diﬀerentiate between its
wings.
The Nine Types
The nine Enneagram types are motivated by diﬀerent core desires
and use diﬀerent strategies to meet these desires. They also have
distinct gi s and challenges. While most Enneagram experts agree
that people remain as one type through their lives, it is possible for
anyone to manifest healthy, average, and unhealthy versions of their
dominant type at diﬀerent points in their lives—or even at diﬀerent
points of the day.
    The following descriptions give an overview of what drives each
personality type as well as various ways the types may act. They also
diﬀerentiate between the most adaptive, balanced, and mindful
(healthy) manifestations of the type; the day-to-day, functional
“autopilot” (average) manifestations of the type; and the
unbalanced, struggling (unhealthy) manifestations of each type. No
Enneagram type exists in a void, so the proﬁles also illuminate each
type’s connections to other types through wings and arrows.

Why Nine? The use of nine in the modern Enneagram personality
system is rooted in a convergence of spiritual traditions. The idea of
nine manifestations of divinity, reflected in nine “flavors” of
humanity, dates back to The Enneads by the philosopher Plotinus.
It’s also reflected in the Kabbalistic Tree of Life, which has 10
sephiroth, or spheres, that souls originate from: Nine types of people,
plus one sphere reserved for the Messiah. Ichazo synthesized the
spheres of the Tree of Life with the Seven Deadly Sins, plus two
additional sins (original to the source material), to map nine
personality types around the Enneagram.

TYPE ONE: SEEKING INTEGRITY
Ones on the Enneagram are motivated by strong principles and a
desire for goodness. They envision a world that is ethical, just, and
improved—a world that could be. No two Ones have the same
vision. Some rally allies to reduce pollution and clean up habitats.
Others maintain a vision of how to keep an ideal home, down to the
details of proper towel folding and the organization of their spice
racks. You can, and will, ﬁnd Ones at all points on the political
spectrum. What brings them together is their integrity and
conscientiousness.

HEALTHY
Balanced Ones set a principled example for all of us. They “walk the
talk” and live their values with grounded, embodied commitment.
Their ability to instruct and speak to people’s higher aspirations can
motivate many to follow their ideals. In addition to being eﬀective
crusaders for change, their fairness and wisdom make them
wonderful judges and impactful teachers. They are idealistic and
continually touched by humanity’s eﬀorts toward improvement and
truth.

AVERAGE
While balanced Ones bring acceptance and ﬂexibility into their work
and lives, average Ones feel a constant sense of personal
responsibility. High-minded and idealistic, they feel dissatisﬁed with
how things are in the present. This causes them to strive harder
toward causes and ways of living that embody their personal ideals
—not just a be er future, but a perfect future. Their posture and
mindset o en become rigid and tense. Ones can become critical of
small errors by anyone, including themselves. When stressed, their
excessive moralizing and criticisms of others who do the “wrong”
thing causes others to be resentful of them.
UNHEALTHY
When especially out of balance, Ones will go to extremes to enforce
their version of “The Truth” on others. At this point, they may justify
their own errors and secretly do the opposite of what they prescribe.
This behavior can lead to severe obsessive-compulsive tendencies
and nervous breakdowns.
    It’s helpful for Ones to adopt a more relaxed, patient outlook.
Taking time to themselves and le ing go of the li le things will
lessen the sense of pressure and self-criticism, allowing them to
bring their mission more eﬀectively into fruition.

WINGS
One with a Nine Wing (1w9): More aloof and intellectual, these Ones
are o en motivated by philosophical ideals. When balanced, they
command an impartial sense of justice.
    One with a Two Wing (1w2): More active and interpersonal, these
Ones’ principles tend to be more directly involved with people. The
desire to help reinforces their desire for change.

ARROWS
Type One’s Stress Point is the self-indulgent Type Four. Tired of
being responsible, stressed-out Ones succumb to depressive feelings
or indulge their cravings.
    Type One’s Security Point is the spontaneous Type Seven. In safe
situations, Ones let their carefree, rebellious side ﬂy free. Growth
toward their Seven Integration Point allows Ones to get in touch
with joy, humor, and a sense of lightness that relieves their
conscientious striving.

TYPE TWO: SEEKING CONNECTION
Twos on the Enneagram are motivated by a desire to connect with
others through loving, mutually nurturing relationships. They care
deeply about other people and are adept at recognizing and meeting
their needs. They might, for instance, learn and ask about the
families of all the service people they see in their daily life. They may
extend a helping hand by cooking special meals, connecting
members of their network who will beneﬁt from knowing each
other, giving personalized a ention, or oﬀering heartfelt support in
various other ways.

HEALTHY
Balanced Twos are open and naturally empathetic. Deeply a uned to
others, they are generous and know how to a une to people with
kindness. They derive selﬂess joy from these connections. In work
se ings, they excel at mentoring and coaching. Their altruism
extends to themselves as well; they value self-love and know when
and how to nurture themselves. Many healthy Twos become
teachers of self-care and are free to develop complementary, less
interpersonal gi s, such as scholarship or artistry.

AVERAGE
Average Twos are warm and friendly toward others. Rather than
giving openly and selﬂessly, they “lean in” to others and seek needs
to fulﬁll. This can manifest through traditional caregiving or other
forms of help. They derive a strong sense of value from pleasing and
serving others and start to desire approval in return. Twos can
become manipulative, creating and fulﬁlling needs for others and
wanting others to be dependent on their help. Overbearing and self-
important behavior can cause others to be exasperated by Twos’
“help” and reject their advances.
UNHEALTHY
When unhealthy, Twos seek love and appreciation at all costs and
will aggressively coerce others into feeling guilty and taking their
help. At this point, Twos can resort to extreme “give to get” behavior
that can lead to stalking and victimizing others, or physically falling
apart from self-neglect.
    It’s useful for Twos to make a habit of tuning in to their own
feelings and physical impulses when they feel their energy ﬂowing
outward. Connecting with themselves allows for authentic
connections to develop.

WINGS
Two with a One Wing (2w1): These Twos tend to be more dutiful
and directly service-focused people. They feel their helping is
serving a cause. Some take pride in simplicity.
    Two with a Three Wing (2w3): These Twos are more image-
oriented people, and their helping is o en more outward. They use
charm and ﬂair to engage others.

ARROWS
Type Two’s Stress Point is the aggressive Type Eight. When
exhausted from tending to other people’s needs, Twos become bossy
and overbearing toward others.
    Type Two’s Security Point is the self-aware Type Four. In safe
situations, Twos feel comfortable expressing their more diﬃcult
emotions. Growth toward their Four Integration Point allows Twos
to connect deeply with who they are and balance their love of others
with self-healing.

TYPE THREE: SEEKING VALUE
Enneagram Threes are driven by a need to shine, to exemplify and
embody a personal sense of value. We see Threes who are proﬁcient
in many disciplines. The Three umbrella includes eﬃcient and
accomplished businesspeople, athletes, celebrities, spiritual guides,
rebels, and parents. In any area of life that can be done well, you
likely know of a Three who excels. Self-assured and adaptable,
Threes wow others with their achievements and grace. They are
o en inspirations for others to believe in themselves and follow their
own dreams.

HEALTHY
Healthy Threes shine with authentic value. Their actions and
behaviors reﬂect their truest inner selves. They have open hearts,
and combine their talents with humility and service. They are aware
of their adaptability and ease with ﬂexible self-presentation. Some
Threes use this gi playfully, engaging performance techniques to
open people’s eyes to a world of gli ering possibilities. Some employ
it persuasively as spokespeople or advocates. Hardworking and
driven toward their dreams, balanced Threes bring out the best in
themselves and others.

AVERAGE
Average Threes are goal-oriented and o en accomplished, but they
deﬁne their success in terms of external measures rather than their
own hearts. They are a uned to the desires of others around them
and will easily adapt themselves to other’s expectations in order to
succeed. Highly focused on outcomes, they will do what’s needed to
get things done. Even so, their facade can start to seem overly glossy.
They may come oﬀ as phony and overly status-oriented to others,
while losing touch with their own authentic personal desires in the
name of external success. They can become narcissistic, arrogant
show-oﬀs with grandiose views of themselves.
UNHEALTHY
Unhealthy Threes seek success at all costs, going to extreme lengths
to avoid public failure, including behind-the-scenes behaviors that
are “dirty” and exploitive of others. At this point, they can become
malicious and vengeful, destroying anyone in the way of their
success and goals.
    It’s important for Threes to connect with their own feelings and
desires, especially in ways that don’t involve the public eye.
Listening to their hearts will thaw Threes’ coolness and unleash their
deepest, most powerfully real potential.

WINGS
Three with a Two Wing (3w2): More outgoing and aﬀable, Threes
with a Two Wing enjoy motivating and inspiring others. They are
skilled at being “the face” of things.
    Three with a Four Wing (3w4): More reserved and polished,
Threes with a Four Wing enjoy presenting themselves in a distinctive
way. They o en have a professional edge.

ARROWS
Type Three’s Stress Point is the passive Type Nine. When burnt out
from striving for success, Threes grow listless and numb themselves
by disengaging.
    Type Three’s Security Point is the commi ed Type Six. In safe
situations, Threes let their anxiety show and may wonder if they’re
good enough. Growth toward their Six Integration Point helps
Threes recognize the value of working for a greater good and
become true team players.

TYPE FOUR: SEEKING IDENTITY
Enneagram Fours are motivated by the desire to know themselves
fully. They are seekers a uned to the realm of subjectivity. Willing to
delve into the depths of their emotions, they possess resilience and
creativity. Through art, teaching, emotional connection, and other
forms of engagement in the world, Fours point others toward
universal truths of internal life. Their self-awareness o en results in
meaningful and uniquely personal forms of expression. They
recognize and share the beauty they ﬁnd in the inner and outer
worlds.

HEALTHY
All Fours have innate sensitivity. In healthy Fours, this sensitivity is
accompanied by emotional fortitude. Balanced Fours are supportive
companions in facing your darkest shadows; they know and accept
the terrain. Whether a friend, therapist, manager, or other conﬁdant,
a Four is emotionally honest and apt to handle other people’s
feelings with gentleness and compassion. They live in a way that’s
true to themselves. Their ability to connect with their own hearts
creates an easy ﬂow of expression. With the help of grounded self-
discipline, balanced Fours can create resonant works of art and
express mysterious, hard-to-deﬁne truths.

AVERAGE
While the creativity of balanced Fours is grounded in reality, average
Fours are oriented to aesthetics and the imaginative. They are
sensitive to their inner emotional landscape and will cultivate certain
feelings as a way of maintaining a self-image. They o en fantasize—
a form of escapism that allows them to long for and seek a rescuer.
They can become withdrawn, emotionally precious, and
hypersensitive to any perceived slight from others. They may begin
to feel that others are “normal” and they are not, driving envy and
resentment toward others, as well as self-isolation, self-indulgence,
and impracticality.
UNHEALTHY
Unhealthy Fours become increasingly emotionally unstable while
a empting to preserve their identity. They can grow frozen, self-
hating, depressed, and unable to function. At this point, they can
become self-abusive and hateful toward others, and are at risk for
emotional breakdowns.
   Fours beneﬁt from creating structure in their lives. Using self-
discipline, rather than following their feelings, will allow them to do
what they truly want to do. Service and engagement with others will
help them express their gi s in the world.

WINGS
Four with a Three Wing (4w3): These showier Fours are able to cra
images and works that express their personal ﬂair while connecting
eﬀectively with audiences.
   Four with a Five Wing (4w5): These more intellectual Fours
express their own ideas uncompromisingly, following an eclectic
personal vision.

ARROWS
Type Four’s Stress Point is the people-pleasing Type Two. When
isolated and self-conscious, Fours move ingratiatingly toward others
and try to meet their needs to regain connection.
    Type Four’s Security Point is the conscientious Type One. In safe
situations, Fours feel comfortable expressing criticism of others.
Growth toward their One Integration Point leads Fours to step into
alignment with a sense of mission that extends beyond the self.

TYPE FIVE: SEEKING CLARITY

Fives on the Enneagram are in search of clarity and masterful
knowledge. They are perceptive and able to bring together ideas, or
generate new ones, in ﬂashes of insight that appear surprisingly
simple. Think of the simultaneous simplicity and inventiveness of
recognizing gravity, or realizing that a minor key could make a tune
convey a completely diﬀerent eﬀect. Fives are innovative and
inventive, delighting in learning new things about areas of interest,
commi ed to the meticulous reality testing and questioning process
of discovery.

HEALTHY
Healthy Fives are highly original, with the potential to make
discoveries that move humanity forward. They develop insightful
theories and observations of the world. They are open-minded, and
their deep understanding breeds compassion for others. They
possess an objectivity that recognizes the transience of life and the
importance of truth. Rather than ge ing a ached to particular ideas,
they look for what’s real. While they are o en specialists,
researchers, and thinkers, the scope of their curiosity is wide. They
learn from engagement and experience as much as they learn from
study.

AVERAGE
Average Fives remain intellectually studious and mentally curious,
but their scope is narrower. Highly focused, they become experts at
whatever interests them. Their focus is learning, and they have
trouble pu ing their ideas into action. Engaging in the external
world becomes increasingly diﬃcult, and they can grow detached,
withdrawing into mental worlds and interests. Their isolation causes
them to start to lose touch with reality. They may become mentally
agitated and paranoid, developing extreme theories and views of
reality that can provoke and disturb others.
UNHEALTHY
Unhealthy Fives a empt to preserve their view of reality at any cost.
They completely cut themselves oﬀ from others—and their own
needs. At this point, their highly distorted thinking can cause
delusions, depression, and self-destructive behavior, leaving them at
risk for psychotic breaks.
    Fives beneﬁt from challenging themselves to take action before
they’ve thought everything through. Fives never feel quite ready to
act, but acting is o en their richest path to discovery and clarity.

WINGS
Five with a Four Wing (5w4): These more inward-looking Fives
bring subjective awareness to their process of analysis and discovery.
They may enjoy the overtly bizarre.
   Five with a Six Wing (5w6): These more outward-looking Fives
bring rigorous, process-oriented thinking to their analytic methods.
They may prefer systematizing or hands-on means.

ARROWS
Type Five’s Stress Point is the sca ered Type Seven. When tired out
from being hyperfocused, Fives seek out sources of excitement and
stimulation in the external world.
    Type Five’s Security Point is the conﬁdent Type Eight. In safe
situations, Fives reveal their pushy, aggressive side. Growth toward
their Eight Integration Point allows Fives to gain a stronger sense of
groundedness and embodiment, taking action on their insights.

TYPE SIX: SEEKING GUIDANCE

Sixes on the Enneagram are motivated by a search for guidance. At
their best, they connect with a clear sense of orientation and trust of
themselves, which helps show others the way as well. Commi ed
and stable, Sixes are dedicated allies and strong team-builders. They
value collaboration and recognize that we are all interdependent. As
leaders, they cultivate a spirit of teamwork. You can recognize the
gi s of Type Sixes behind the trend of ﬂat, nonhierarchical
organizations, where members make decisions collectively and
elevate each other.

HEALTHY
Healthy Sixes are exceedingly courageous people. They recognize
when they are called toward a mission and bring tenacity and
determination to see it through. Fully aware of their fear and
apprehension, they do not let it stop them from taking vital action.
Through this lesson, they teach others to trust their own internal
GPS and to diﬀerentiate true guidance from less accurate sources of
advice—rightfully regarded with skepticism. Balanced Sixes are
engaging, warm, and likeable. They have a sense of humor and
relatability that people love being around.

AVERAGE
While healthy Sixes trust that things will work out, average Sixes
worry about what could go wrong. They are hard workers who
create systems and troubleshoot in organizations. They begin
looking for external sources of security and guidance. By commi ing
to too many things, Sixes can become overworked and spread too
thin. They start to test what they’ve commi ed to, to see if it can be
trusted. Ambivalence, reactivity, and push-pull behaviors make
others uncertain where Sixes stand with them. Suspicion and
paranoia lead to hostile, defensive behavior, blaming and instilling
fear in others.
UNHEALTHY
Unbalanced Sixes will try to preserve their security at any cost. They
become increasingly anxious, volatile, and fearful of others, while
seeking out an even stronger authority ﬁgure. At this point, they can
become distraught and wildly erratic, leaving them at risk for cults
and self-destructive behavior.
    It’s useful for Sixes to adopt practices that ease mental cha er,
allowing them to access their internal sense of where to go and what
to do. Rather than consulting others for advice, they can make a
habit of consulting themselves ﬁrst.

WINGS
Six with a Five Wing (6w5): These Sixes may have a scholarly bent
and are o en drawn to systems of thought, method, or philosophy.
They appear more se led and rational.
    Six with a Seven Wing (6w7): These Sixes are o en interested in
exploring and participating, seeking guidance through interaction.
They are more outwardly energetic and sca ered.

ARROWS
Type Six’s Stress Point is the boastful Type Three. When they’ve had
enough of taking one for the team, stressed Sixes draw a ention to
themselves by showing oﬀ.
    Type Six’s Security Point is the peaceful Type Nine. In safe
situations, Sixes trade working hard for daydreaming and lounging.
Growth toward their Nine Integration Point allows Sixes to
genuinely relax their guard and trust that things will work out.

TYPE SEVEN: SEEKING FREEDOM

Sevens on the Enneagram are motivated by the pursuit of freedom
and possibility. This can make them delightful people to be around.
They have wide-ranging interests and enjoy trying new things. Even
something as simple as a trip to the laundromat can become an
adventure through a Seven’s eyes. If it weren’t for the energy of
Sevens in the world, we wouldn’t have vacations or parties. They
show us all that the world can be a buﬀet of rich experiences to
explore. They bring spontaneity, fun, and a boundless sense of joy to
life.

HEALTHY
Healthy Sevens are deeply inspired by all the wonderful things in
life. Jacks and Jills of all trades, they’re wonderfully productive and
accomplished. They o en integrate ideas and skills across
disciplines, creating surprising hybrids. They excel at brainstorming
and planning. Sevens seek to live a life of fulﬁllment, appreciating
every moment they experience in their lives. Balanced Sevens make
lemonade out of lemons. They are highly resilient people who are
able to ﬁnd personal freedom even in harrowing circumstances.

AVERAGE
Average Sevens are adventurous and seek to have a wide variety of
experiences. Variety and novelty are important to them, and their
a empts to experience everything cause them to lose focus. To run
away from inner feelings of anxiety and sadness, they can sometimes
take on too much, bouncing from one thing to another and not
ﬁnishing what they start. A life of excess can cause cynicism: “I have
or have done all these things, so why am I so unfulﬁlled?” Self-
centered, demanding, and insensitive behavior may leave others
frustrated with them.
UNHEALTHY
Unhealthy Sevens seek to avoid pain at all costs. They run away
from all responsibilities and participate in extreme, risky activities in
order to seek stimulation. This can lead to erratic, dangerous
behavior. Unhealthy Sevens are at risk for addictions, depression,
and complete burnout.
    Sevens beneﬁt from channeling focus into a small number of
streams at a time rather than multitasking. Sevens o en ﬁnd they
can be more productive and grounded this way. Practices like
mindfulness can also help in bringing truly appreciative a ention to
the present.

WINGS
Seven with a Six Wing (7w6): With a lighter, more whimsical vibe,
these Sevens charm and connect with others easily. They o en
gravitate to mystical ideas like synchronicity.
   Seven with an Eight Wing (7w8): With a more pragmatic
approach, these Sevens are not afraid to hustle and get things done.
They tend to be ambitious and straightforward.

ARROWS
Type Seven’s Stress Point is the critical Type One. When they’re
drained from being relentlessly positive, Sevens become judgmental
of others and themselves.
    Type Seven’s Security Point is the focused Type Five. In safe
situations, Sevens withdraw from the overwhelming stimulations
they’ve surrounded themselves with. Growth toward their Five
Integration Point lets Sevens concentrate on the speciﬁc projects they
care about.

TYPE EIGHT: SEEKING POWER
Eights are motivated by the desire to have power and impact. They
take a no-holds-barred approach to life and relish risk. Because of
this, they act in ways that have wide-reaching eﬀects. Eights have a
palpable energy, what some call “executive presence”—when they
walk into a room, people take notice. Supremely self-conﬁdent,
Eights can o en be found in leadership positions, whether in
business, family, socially, or other spheres of inﬂuence. They are
people of action who value results and speak their minds.

HEALTHY
Healthy Eights are openhearted and courageous. They use their
commanding presence and strength for good by taking a stand for
others who are weaker than them. Balanced Eights are natural
protectors, keeping an eye on the people they care about and
employing their inﬂuence to mentor and upli . They have high
energy, resilience, and determination both physically and
psychologically. While driven and powerful, they know when to
exercise compassion and restraint.

AVERAGE
Average Eights feel like they need to be sturdy and strong at all
times. Hardened, energetic, and savvy, they use their strength and
resourceful know-how to take charge of situations and manage
resources. They’re skilled at starting and maintaining enterprises,
whether it is founding a company or taking leadership of their
family unit. They can become imposing, ge ing into others’ faces
and intimidating or even threatening them in order to get their way.
Others may become afraid of them and begin to ﬁght back against
their need for control.

UNHEALTHY
Unhealthy Eights will resort to any measures to stay in control,
including possible unethical and criminal behavior. At this point,
their need for power and dominance causes them to act recklessly.
Unhealthy Eights can be highly destructive and antisocial.
   Eights beneﬁt from paying a ention to their energy and dialing
back when they are expending more than they need to. It’s easier for
their true strength to shine when they aren’t pushing as hard. Service
and relationship building help Eights connect with their own
powerful hearts.

WINGS
Eight with a Seven Wing (8w7): Playful and roguish, these Eights
live large and express their ﬁery side. They are outwardly ambitious
and value their independence.
    Eight with a Nine Wing (8w9): Gentler and steadier, these Eights
wield a solid sense of conﬁdence and groundedness. They are o en
quietly protective.

ARROWS
Type Eight’s Stress Point is the detached Type Five. When they’re
worn from action and exertion, Eights retreat into isolation and
strategizing.
    Type Eight’s Security Point is the nurturing Type Two. In safe
situations, Eights show their neediness and lean on their intimates.
Growth toward their Two Integration Point leads Eights to connect
with the heartfelt caring, love, and generosity beneath their steel.

TYPE NINE: SEEKING HARMONY

Nines on the Enneagram are motivated by the desire for harmony.
They are able to see the interconnection between all aspects of life—
the wonderful and the diﬃcult, humanity, nature, and the cosmos.
Everything is united in a symbiotic whole, as balanced as a
symphony. When connected to this truth, Nines feel an abiding inner
peace. They bring this sense of serenity into their dealings with the
world. They excel at se ing people at ease and creating
environments where all feel welcome.

HEALTHY
Healthy Nines provide a reassuring, steady presence. Deep
connectedness with self and others lets them be a source of calm and
quiet strength. A powerful, grounded inner core belies their gentle
nature. No one can push a balanced Nine around. Their accepting,
nonjudgmental nature makes them wonderful mediators who are
able to listen to multiple sides of the story and empathize with
diﬀering perspectives. They o en rise to leadership because they are
so likeable and able to bridge divides.

AVERAGE
While healthy Nines incorporate all sides of life into their sense of
inner peace, average Nines feel like they need to avoid conﬂict and
get along with others at all times. Kind and complacent, their
harmonious and pleasant nature makes them likeable friends or
colleagues. They begin to go along with what others around them
want in order to keep the peace, disregarding their own needs and
desires. As Nines “check out,” they become increasingly oblivious to
others and disengaged from the world around them. Extreme
passivity and unresponsiveness can cause others to become
frustrated with them.
UNHEALTHY
Unhealthy Nines will go to any lengths to avoid conﬂict and will
dissociate to the point of becoming extremely neglectful of
themselves and others. At this point, they can become completely
numb, confused, and split oﬀ from themselves.
   Nines beneﬁt from cultivating assertiveness. When they ﬁnd
themselves going along with others, they can ask themselves if they
really don’t care or if they have an unstated opinion. By paying
a ention to their own desires, they can identify and pursue the goals
that ma er to them.

WINGS
Nine with an Eight Wing (9w8): More grounded and embodied,
these Nines o en exude a sense of laid-back cool. They are stubborn
and quicker to anger when provoked.
   Nine with a One Wing (9w1): More lo y and idealistic, these
Nines o en manifest their a ention to unity through ideas and
imagination. They seem gentler on the surface.

ARROWS
Type Nine’s Stress Point is the anxious Type Six. Under stress, Nines
shed their typical calm and grow nervous, worrying and scanning
the environment for potential threats.
    Type Nine’s Security Point is the driven Type Three. In safe
situations, Nines’ desire for a ention comes through, and they adopt
show-oﬀy behavior. Growth toward their Three Integration Point
helps Nines show up in the world in a way that’s authentic and
valuable.


Toward Self-Discovery
Now that we’ve covered the nine Enneagram types, as well as the
diﬀerent components that make up the system, maybe one of the
types sounds a lot like you, or maybe a few diﬀerent types sound
like possible ﬁts. If that’s the case, try them on as you read through
the rest of the book, and see which one clicks.
    Many people describe feeling a sense of relief when they ﬁnd
their Enneagram type, as they ﬁnally have an explanation for why
they keep ge ing caught in the same traps. Through the Enneagram,
people not only learn that their personality challenges are not their
own fault, but they also get glimpses of their greatest possibilities
and gi s. As individuals, we can stop blaming ourselves for our
shortcomings and begin to see the beauty in our true selves.
    Keep your eyes open and read on with a spirit of self-discovery.
As you learn more about your dominant Enneagram type, you’ll
gain access to a road map of your gi s and challenges. You’ll begin
to notice when your type’s defense mechanisms—the “average type”
mindsets that keep you stuck in limiting pa erns of behavior—arise.
Noticing your reactions and actions as they arise is the ﬁrst step
toward living a free and mindful life. You’ll realize that, instead of
following the script you’re used to, you can make a diﬀerent choice.
    In the next few chapters, we’ll take a look at how the diﬀerent
types operate in the workplace, in relationships, and in day-to-day
life. You’ll gain tools for understanding your own type in context
and interacting with others in clear, empathetic, productive ways.
Through exploring how the Enneagram can be used in the real
world, you’ll discover more about yourself and the many ways this
system can help you grow.
THE ENNEAGRAM IN PRACTICE
As we just discussed, when you identify your type, the
Enneagram gives you a road map—one applicable to
your own personal goals and unique life circumstances.
The most powerful thing this does is to show you your
ultimate potential.
    Without actively working on personal growth, many
people move through life by merely reacting to the
external circumstances around them, simply trying to
survive. When in survival mode, it’s possible to get small
peeks into your talents and gi s, but it’s easy to fall back
into old pa erns of simply making do. By learning your
Enneagram type, you get an incredible opportunity to
bring your ultimate human potential squarely into your
consciousness. This kind of awareness helps motivate
you to put the work in to become your best, happiest
self. At your healthiest and most present, you have the
information needed to make decisions that actively
empower you, no ma er what your external life
circumstances look like.
   Once you learn the basics and start practicing, the
Enneagram isn’t too diﬃcult to interpret. However, with
nine diﬀerent types (not to mention each type’s wings
  and arrows and a bunch of diﬀerent triads), sometimes it
  can feel a li le confusing, especially at ﬁrst. To help you
  get started, let’s get to know Julia.


Meet Julia
At 33, Julia has built a life that many would envy. She has a great job,
a supportive boyfriend, and the ability to aﬀord her own apartment
in a large, expensive city. She lives a 30-minute drive from the
suburban area where she grew up. She feels like she has many great
options in her life. She is able to enjoy visiting her parents every
weekend, but can also live an adventurous life in an urban se ing.
With a large circle of friends, including coworkers and some
schoolmates she grew up with, Julia spends her a er-work hours
taking advantage of the endless opportunities for entertainment that
exist in her city.
    Although things are largely going well in Julia’s life right now,
she also faces some personal challenges. There are a few areas of her
life she’d like to improve.

WORK

A er working in an administrative role for a few years, Julia was
promoted to a managerial position at her branding company about
two years ago. Now she manages a team of graphic designers. Julia
was frustrated to be “just an administrator” a er working hard to
get a college degree, but ended up being a natural ﬁt for the role.
She’s talented at work that requires her to “wear many hats,” and
handles the complex administrative tasks with ease. Her natural
sense of humor and ease with people convinced her bosses to
promote her when a managerial position opened up. Julia ﬁnds she
loves motivating and cheering up her staﬀ. Her optimism and
energy translate well to leading a team.
    Sometimes, though, Julia feels frustrated by the people she
manages. Most of Julia’s talented, creative designers are more
introverted than she is, and can’t keep up with her fast pace. They
produce work more slowly than she would like, sometimes missing
deadlines she imposes. Many of them prefer to keep their oﬃce
doors shut, rather than cha ing with her. Julia loves her employees,
but feels bored easily without the opportunity to work as quickly
and do as many things as she’d like. On particularly trying days,
Julia ﬁnds herself spending work hours searching online for jobs she
thinks would be fun and bring in more money, or complaining with
her old friends over Facebook messages. She daydreams about the
wonderful things a new job would bring, but also feels a bit guilty
about considering leaving her work family.

RELATIONSHIPS

Julia met her boyfriend, Miguel, just under a year ago. Despite an
active social and dating life, Miguel is the ﬁrst person Julia has been
truly exclusive with since her college boyfriend. Prior to meeting
him, she spent a lot of time perusing dating apps and websites and
meeting dates at the festivals and bars she frequents. But she never
moved beyond casual dating with anyone. She dated numerous
interesting people, but she kept wondering if someone be er was
out there and she was wary to commit. This time is diﬀerent, though:
she really values Miguel’s caring, steady, and supportive personality,
which has se led her down a bit. And it doesn’t hurt that her family
and friends love him, too.
    But Miguel wants to take their exclusivity further. He dreams of
se ling down with Julia. A successful professional himself, he
knows they can aﬀord to buy a house within commuting distance to
their jobs. He has an eye on se ling down soon, wanting the
commitment of marriage and children in the near future. Julia loves
Miguel, but she keeps wondering if he’s really “the one.” She is
anxious about ge ing tied down by one person when so many other
great ones could be out there. While she likes the idea of living in a
bigger space, she also wonders if she wants to be permanently tied to
the city she’s lived in her whole life, when there are so many other
fun places out there (places she’s already explored on vacation). She
also worries that buying a house would limit her career and the
companies where she could get hired. And while she enjoys seeking
jobs in new cities, she isn’t sure how a move would impact her
relationship.

WHAT IS JULIA HOPING TO GET FROM THE
ENNEAGRAM?

A er discovering the Enneagram, Julia hopes this new knowledge of
herself and others will help her achieve certain goals. She aims to use
the system to improve her work life and relationship in the
following ways.

AT WORK
Julia wants to learn how to more eﬀectively work with the creative
designers she manages—people whose personalities are mostly very
diﬀerent from hers. She wants to learn to manage them in a way that
they can meet their deadlines eﬀectively and stay engaged at work.
She wants them to have more fun in the oﬃce, too.
    Instead of whiling away on social media at work, Julia would like
to use her energy and creativity to ﬁnd and take on more projects
that would be interesting to her. She realizes her fun, spontaneous
personality means it’s diﬃcult for her to ﬁnish projects she starts,
and she would like structure and support from upper management.
   Julia would also like to work toward a promotion at her current
company or see what other positions are out there in her ﬁeld. As
discussed previously, she’s exploring and applying to jobs in her
current city and out of town, wanting to keep her career options
open.

IN RELATIONSHIPS
Although Julia loves Miguel, she feels anxious when thinking about
making a bigger commitment in her relationship. She’d like to ﬁgure
out if she should stay with him or move on and try to ﬁnd a diﬀerent
partner, perhaps one who doesn’t want to se le down as quickly.
   As Miguel talks more and more about marriage and buying a
house, Julia realizes she needs to have an honest conversation with
him about her anxieties and see how he feels about her desires.




  FOUNDING THINKERS AND MODERN
         COUNTERPARTS
  This wouldn’t be much of an Enneagram book without acknowledging the founding
  thinkers associated with it, as well as their modern counterparts. Here are a few of the
  heavy hitters:

  G. I. Gurdjieff taught the Enneagram as a model of processes, connecting it to sacred
  dancing. He taught a method of spiritual practice called the Fourth Way, or the “Way of the
  Sly Man,” which involved working on all three Centers at once—the Gut, Heart, and Head
  Center—while living a regular life engaged in the world. For a modern take on the
  kinesthetic Enneagram, Brazilian teacher Uranio Paes’ trainings incorporate movement
  work around the nine-pointed symbol. Additionally, Russ Hudson sometimes coleads
  retreats with Gurdjieff movement teacher Jason Stern.

  Oscar Ichazo: Ichazo was the one to synthesize the Enneagram symbol and psychospiritual
  categorization (even though his ideas of the nine types differ from many modern
  interpretations). He described each type as an “ego-fixation” that tends to act out a
  particular sin or imbalance. His creation of the nine types was informed by research on
  various other spiritual systems. Without Ichazo, there would be no Enneagram of
  personality.

  Claudio Naranjo: Naranjo wrote books that offer a detailed look at the psychological
  defense mechanisms and patterns of the nine types. He views the types’ character
  structures as different forms of neurosis, and his descriptions highlight their pathological
  side rather than touching on any positive attributes. Naranjo also developed the idea of
  “subtypes,” describing three instincts and how they interact with each type. Any type can
  have any dominant instinct. Psychologist Beatrice Chestnut has expanded on Naranjo’s
  work with subtypes.

  Don Riso and Russ Hudson: Riso was the first to flesh out the “gray area” of type by writing
  about nine Levels of Development that describe the type’s full potential, from serious
  mental illness to illuminated presence and awareness. Hudson worked with Riso to
  integrate a Gurdjieffian emphasis on spiritual practice and balancing the Centers. He
  remains one of the world’s most renowned Enneagram teachers. The Enneagram Institute
  carries on Riso and Hudson’s legacy through workshops and trainings.

  Helen Palmer and David Daniels: Palmer’s Enneagram books are accessible to a broad
  audience, describing the Enneagram types as they operate in daily life, including the realms
  of romance and career. Many authors have followed in her footsteps and written about
  Enneagram applications ranging from classroom learning to job selection. Palmer, Daniels,
  and their Enneagram school have fine-tuned the Narrative Tradition approach to the
  Enneagram—a tradition that dates back to Naranjo, using panels of people who share types
  or triads to illuminate type patterns in their own words.




A Closer Look
A er taking an Enneagram test and closely reading descriptions of
the diﬀerent Enneagram types, Julia identiﬁed herself as an
Enneagram Type Seven, with a Six Wing. Though we’ll learn more
details about the types in chapters to follow, we’ll focus on what a
Seven, and a 7w6, may do in Julia’s situation.

ENNEAGRAM TYPE: SEVEN
As an Enneagram Seven, Julia is particularly a uned to seeking out
freedom and possibilities. We can see this in the many ways Julia
savors and appreciates her life. By choosing life in a large city, she’s
able to entertain herself with endless things to do every weekend.
Her large circle of friends gives her the chance to experience life with
many diﬀerent people. Her apartment is ﬁlled with collections and
the curios she loves to buy. By living near but not right next to her
family, she gives herself the freedom to live independently with the
option of easily spending time with them when she chooses.
    Many Seven’s strengths come into play in Julia’s career. In her
previous and current jobs, Julia impressed her bosses with the ability
to eﬀortlessly handle several tasks at once. Healthy Sevens are
highly productive and able to produce a great deal of work across a
breadth of disciplines. She gets enjoyment from her work and knows
how to make her job fun. This leads to her interpersonal talent of
ge ing others in her workplace to enjoy themselves, too. Julia always
has a smile on her face, even during tougher days at the oﬃce, and
knows how to motivate employees by ge ing them to feel great. She
throws parties that boost staﬀ morale.
    We also see Julia’s enjoyment and desire for freedom in her
romantic life. Although Julia went several years without a
commi ed relationship, she showed continued motivation and
versatility in ﬁnding potential suitors through apps, online dating,
and the local community. She has shown resilience, another trait in
healthy Sevens, by bouncing back when her dating life didn’t go as
planned. As a partner to Miguel, Julia brings a sense of adventure
and excitement to their relationship, introducing spontaneity to his
normally se led life.
    Julia’s challenges are also typical of Sevens in the average range
of health. Sevens are natural optimists, but they can become
frustrated and cynical when life doesn’t work out as positively as
they’d dreamed. Julia’s life is generally positive, but she becomes
frustrated about the aspects of her life that are diﬃcult, such as
managing more introverted and slower-paced coworkers and being
in a relationship with someone she feels wants to commit too quickly
for her.
    As a Seven, it can be diﬃcult for Julia to stick with these
frustrations long enough to create solutions that work for everyone.
Sticking with challenges requires Sevens to process their own
frustrations and unhappiness—feelings that are particularly diﬃcult
for them to experience. They also can have a hard time experiencing
others’ negative emotions, such as Julia’s employees who are
unhappy with her fast way of doing things or her boyfriend being
disappointed she hasn’t commi ed.
    Instead, it can be easy for Sevens to distract themselves. At work,
Julia looks at social media sites for much of the day instead of
engaging in productive projects. Going to local events can be a way
of distracting herself and seeking stimulation, rather than sources of
genuine enjoyment. On a larger scale, Julia engages in “grass is
greener” behavior; instead of staying happy with her current life
circumstances, she spends a lot of time looking for something
diﬀerent, while not maintaining a connection to her present.

WING: SIX

While all Sevens have the same core motivations and desires, wings
create some diﬀerences in the “ﬂavoring” of the core Enneagram
type. With a Six Wing, Julia remains a Seven, but some of the
Enneagram Type Six traits come in to ﬂavor and subtly inﬂuence her
core Seven traits. Outwardly, she may appear quite diﬀerent to an
impartial observer from a Seven with an Eight Wing.
    The Six Wing brings qualities of loyalty and warmth to Julia’s
personality. She is dependable at her job, having demonstrated
commitment by working there for years, and is also loyal to her
friends and family. She appreciates the security of her regular salary
and the relationships she’s developed. The warmth of Type Six adds
a sense of so ness and charm to the independent and sometimes
pushy Type Seven, making it easier for Julia to get along with her
colleagues, make friends, and ﬁnd relationships.
    In the more average range of health, Julia is anxious. This can
make her appear endearing, but is also makes it even harder to make
decisions about her future. She also can feel an increased sense of
suspicion around her intimates. When she feels frustrated by her
employees and her boyfriend, Julia ﬁnds herself questioning
whether they’re really commi ed to her. Under stress, this
uncertainty is more likely to make Julia act out by moving on to
what she believes is the next best thing.

CENTER: THE HEAD CENTER

Type Seven, along with Types Five and Six, is most focused on the
Head Center. As a Head Type, Julia is particularly focused on
ﬁnding clarity around the future. Speciﬁcally, Julia would like to
make positive decisions in her present to ensure she enjoys her
career, has a satisfying love life, and feels happiness in her daily life.
    Like all Head Types, Julia is particularly prone to feelings of
anxiety and uncertainty around the future. She worries about
making the wrong decisions, fearing that they’ll leave her trapped in
a situation that doesn’t work for her. Sometimes, Julia will ﬁnd
herself pu ing oﬀ making decisions out of this fear, choosing her
many distractions instead.

SOCIAL STYLE: ASSERTIVE

Along with Types Three and Eight, Type Seven has an assertive way
of relating with others. Julia is what you’d describe as a go-ge er:
she likes to get things done. Her style makes Julia a natural “mover
and shaker”; she speaks up in meetings, initiates projects, and asks
for what she wants. She’s o en the person deciding what she and her
friends will do on the weekends.
    On the downside, it can be diﬃcult for Julia to slow down and
reﬂect, an o en-necessary trait when making decisions. She gets
impatient with her slower-paced coworkers when they don’t move
and act as quickly as she would like. Her natural assertiveness
sometimes makes it harder for others speak up.

CONFLICT RESOLUTION STYLE: POSITIVE OUTLOOK

Like Twos and Nines, Sevens look on the brighter side of life. Julia’s
positivity and enthusiasm helps her see the best in her coworkers,
friends, and boyfriend, even when they’re frustrating her. Her
natural good spirits help smooth conﬂicts over at work and help
boost morale with her team on diﬃcult days.
    Julia also has a hard time addressing conﬂicts. She tends to
ignore the discontent from her boyfriend and employees, focusing
instead on what’s going well or distracting herself with other
activities. The downside is that, when conﬂicts go unaddressed, they
have the potential to grow bigger, ultimately leading to more
frustration and unhappiness.

OBJECT RELATIONS STYLE: FRUSTRATION

Julia’s Type Seven joins Ones and Fours in focusing on ideals they
want in the world: in Julia’s case, she’s particularly focused on a
world where she has the freedom to buy what she wants and needs,
pursue stimulating activities, and have endless friends, while also
ﬁnding the ultimate job and relationship. Sevens like Julia tend to
idealize a lifestyle that will bring them frequent happiness and joy.
    The downside is that idealized lives are almost impossible to
achieve. This leaves Julia frequently frustrated—with her boyfriend,
her job, the place she lives, et cetera—even when much in her life is
going well. Instead, she focuses on trying to achieve what she feels
she doesn’t have.




             UNDERSTANDING NUANCES
  Here are some factors to pay close attention to when interpreting the Enneagram.

  Consider the “Why”: Often, people of two different types will take identical actions, but for
  different reasons. For example, Julia and her friend Lakesha from the marketing department
  are both eyeing promotions at work. As a Seven, Julia sees a promotion as an exciting
  opportunity to experience new kinds of work, to bring variety into her professional life.
  Lakesha, a Three, sees a promotion as a way to advance her standing, reach a long-desired
  professional goal, and feel like a valuable, worthy contributor in her workplace.

  Triad Look-Alikes: Types that share a triadic grouping on the Enneagram have attributes in
  common. For instance, an energetic go-getter might be any of the Assertive Types, while a
  person who insists on keeping conflict resolution civil and detached is likely one of the
  Competency Types. When they share a style of being in the world, it can be hard to tell types
  apart. Luckily, there are four sets of triads to take into account. If you have a good sense
  that someone is in one triad, take a look at the other triadic groupings to see which ones fit
  best, and narrow down type possibilities from there.

  Movement Along the Arrows: Especially when you’re typing family members, who you see
  at their most uninhibited, it’s easy to confuse the manifestations of their Security Point for
  their core type. For instance, a Six will often daydream and seek comfort around intimates
  in a way that resembles a Nine. Stress Points are also a factor to consider, with many of us
  acting on stress multiple times a day. Under major stress, someone can move to their
  Stress Point type for years. To differentiate core type from movement along the arrows, look
  for consistent threads of behavior and preoccupation across all areas and eras of a person’s
  life.




Practical Applications
Julia has spent time reading and reﬂecting about her Enneagram
type. She has some solid guesses about the types of her partner and
colleagues as well. Now she’s ready to apply the Enneagram toward
her goals.

AT WORK

Julia wants to understand where her colleagues are coming from and
create an eﬀective balance between their diﬀerent work styles. As a
Seven, she recognizes that she lives life at a fast pace. If she has one
creative idea, it’s not long before her focus has shi ed to another. She
actively enjoys having multiple projects on the go. This is not the
case for the designers she manages. She’s identiﬁed many of them as
Withdrawn Types (Types Four, Five, and Nine), predominantly
Fours. When she’s in a generous mood, she describes her team to
Miguel as “liking to take their time,” and when she’s frustrated, she
complains to him about the team’s disconnect with her time
management eﬀorts. Why can’t they come up with ideas on the spot,
the way she does? Why do they approach deadlines as if they were
just suggestions? Why are they all so quiet?
    A er learning more about the Withdrawn Types she works with,
Julia recognizes that their minds operate diﬀerently than hers. They
need time to think their concepts through before pursuing them, and
the quiet that pervades the oﬃce comes from their deep
concentration. Rather than pushing them to work more quickly or
making the oﬃce more “fun,” she will be a more eﬀective manager if
she gives them the space they need—to think and to work.
    In terms of deadlines, she recognizes that the Fours on her team
are motivated by the drive to be individuals, connected to their
personal subjectivity. Some of them are resistant when she imposes a
uniform structure on their work without recognizing the
individuality and unique needs of their projects. Realizing this, Julia
starts to bring a more personal touch to her meetings with her Type
Four designers. They come to a consensus around the needs of the
client and the project and agree on a deadline. Julia listens with
greater a ention to the designers’ creative needs and concerns. This
acknowledgment makes it easier for the designers to follow Julia’s
structure and understand its importance.
     In her own quest to trade workplace distraction for engagement
in more interesting projects, Julia acknowledges that focus will help.
It’s easy and fun to check her Facebook feed during downtime, but
in the long term, she feels like she’s wasted a lot of time and
recognizes that it would be more rewarding to try out a new task.
She uses her strength of generating possibilities to brainstorm
projects that she might like to try on the job. Knowing that a
supporter will help her focus, she meets with her friend Lakesha to
talk through the list together. One option that they decide is both
reasonable and exciting involves approaching a senior colleague
about participating in the Women’s Leadership Commi ee. This
colleague is stepping down from her role as the commi ee’s co-
organizer and looking for a replacement. Julia asks the remaining co-
organizer if she is willing to mentor her, and the co-organizer
accepts. Julia now has an appealing new role and a supporter to help
keep her structured. As she connects with the women on the
Leadership Commi ee, many of whom have seniority in her ﬁeld,
she asks them questions about their roles and responsibilities.
Recognizing her tendency to make quick decisions, she challenges
herself to be more deliberate in exploring diﬀerent career
possibilities for herself. She plans to keep looking into future work
options while commi ing to her current role and new responsibility
for the time being. She will aim to ﬁnd something that will provide
both variety and long-term reward.

IN RELATIONSHIPS
Before learning about the Enneagram, Julia had no idea how many
of her actions were driven by anxiety. Now, she realizes that her fear
is a driving force behind her eﬀorts to escape from commitment with
Miguel. It’s not that her relationship is particularly problematic. She
would be nervous about commi ing to any relationship. The next
time Miguel brings up his house-and-marriage goals, she decides
that she owes him a conversation.
    She has identiﬁed Miguel as a Two on the Enneagram, a
connection-oriented romantic. He wants her to commit in order to be
assured that she loves him. The more he pushes her, the more
conﬁned she feels, and the more she questions whether she wants to
stay with him. But when they aren’t le ing their insecurities get in
the way, they have a great relationship. They enjoy cooking and
going to festivals together, watching TV shows, and discussing
ideas. They are aﬀectionate and supportive of each other’s goals. She
realizes that she can’t entirely blame him for their relationship
disconnect. By distracting herself with activities that don’t involve
him and hiding her interest in jobs outside the city, she’s been
treating him as a threat to avoid rather than as a teammate.
    As a Heart Triad type, Miguel responds to the language of
feelings. Despite her anxiety about doing so, Julia opens up to him
about her recent emotions. She tells him that, while she loves him
very much, she’s been feeling nervous about the many levels of
commitment that he wants from her. She isn’t sure if she wants to
stay in the area indeﬁnitely, or have kids, and she’s terriﬁed by the
thought of commi ing to a marriage, house, and family all at once.
She understands that he wants a commitment from her, and she’s
wondering if he would be willing to take things more slowly.
    To her relief, Miguel wraps her in a big hug. He, too, hadn’t
realized the extent of her anxiety. He had assumed that a home and
family were goals she aspired toward as clearly as he did, and that
her doubts came from not loving him enough. He’s reassured by her
explanation of how much she does love him, and while he’d like to
build a life together, he is open to exploring diﬀerent lifestyle
options with her. They decide to compromise and try out living
together by renting a house on the outskirts of the city, rather than
buying property immediately. They set a ﬂexible timeline with goals
for their work lives and their life together. They also commit to a
weekly date night. Julia will use her gi for coming up with
activities that are fun and stimulating, and their dates will give
Miguel the opportunity to connect with his partner and demonstrate
their caring for each other.

IN DAILY LIFE

Julia has several framed prints in her apartment that feature
inspirational messages. “Dance like no one is watching.” “Live the
life you’ve dreamed of!” “Don’t worry, be happy!” Se ing down her
Enneagram book, she laughs at the typical Type Seven philosophy
reﬂected all over her walls. She has no problem keeping possibility
and positivity in mind, but maybe her life could use a new slogan.
     She orders a pre y print that says, “Take time to smell the roses.”
It’s a reminder of her intention to live deliberately rather than le ing
her own impatience and stimulation seeking get in the way of her
real desires. It’s also an acknowledgment that others in her life need
time and space. For Julia, as well, these things are useful. She’s tried
having a daily meditation practice before as a way to connect with
herself, but she hasn’t maintained it. She starts se ing her alarm a
half hour early every morning to create structure for meditation.
Si ing on the mat, being mindful of her thoughts and feelings as
they arise, is initially a dull and anxiety-producing process. As
weeks go by, she ﬁnds her thoughts calming down. She begins to
have more clarity about the choices that truly speak to her. She feels
proud of her ability to take time for herself and to commit to a
practice that supports her.
    When planning her move with Miguel, she realizes she has a lot
of clu er in her apartment that she doesn’t really need. She spends a
few days ﬁlling donation bags with old clothes and sentimental
items that she hadn’t necessarily wanted to get rid of, but which she
realizes no longer bring her genuine joy. The next time she’s tempted
to buy something extra at the store, she ﬁnds herself being mindful
of the impulse and asking herself whether it’s an item she will value
or another momentary distraction.




         SPIRITUAL APPLICATION OF THE
                 ENNEAGRAM
  The Enneagram is a wonderful personality typology. But using it solely from this perspective
  keeps us from gaining the full benefit the system can bring. It makes a great foundation for,
  or addition to, a spiritual practice. No matter your worldview or spiritual inclination, the
  Enneagram brings insights that complement your beliefs. This versatility is not surprising
  for a system with origins that blend Sufism (Islamic mysticism), mystical Judaism and
  Christianity, esoteric philosophy, and modern psychology.
      Through its unifying circle, the Enneagram shows that all of us are connected. But it
  truly enhances our spiritual practice by highlighting our differences. Religions and spiritual
  practices often prescribe a specific path for growth. Even so, the reality is that we all have
  different needs. A spiritual practice that works well for a Five may be very different than
  what supports an Eight. For example, some of us benefit profoundly from reflection or
  meditation, while others get more deeply in touch with a sense of something greater
  through service or direct action. The Enneagram allows us to celebrate our differences and
  customize a personal plan for spiritual growth.
      Your Enneagram type gives you direction to get in touch with your true self. Even though
  we all have a core personality type, everyone is really much more than their personality. The
  spiritual path gives you the opportunity to wake up to a deeper reality, and the Enneagram
  helps by showing you which patterns of thinking and behavior take you away from that
  reality. The key to waking up is to “catch ourselves in the act,” as Riso and Hudson call it: to
  be aware of our thoughts and emotions as we experience them. This mindfulness allows
  you to catch glimpses of your true, observing self, operating beneath your habitual
  psychological patterns. With time, these glimpses increase, giving deeper and fuller contact
  with your true nature.
      To learn more about the spiritual roots and applications of the Enneagram, check out
  the Spiritual Growth portion of the Resources section (here).




Becoming Your Whole Self
With an understanding of her Enneagram type and its meaning,
Julia can approach life from a clearer perspective than she did
before. She has learned that her usual ways of making decisions
stem from bias in favor of the next exciting thing. What she really
wants is freedom and joy, but these are deeper qualities than the
momentary stimulation she substitutes for them. With the
Enneagram in mind, she has a map for making life choices that
satisfy her true needs.
    Learning about her Type Seven pa erns has taught her to be
mindful of her daily habits. She now knows how easily she gets
distracted, and how o en she abandons potentially promising
pursuits the moment they stop feeling stimulating or start feeling
like commitment. When she catches herself falling into any of these
habits (which she does, several times a day), she asks herself, “Will
this really make me ha ppy?” If the answer is “no,” she considers her
choice more carefully. Sometimes she takes the action anyway, but
now she is more mindful of consequences. Sometimes she chooses to
do something diﬀerent, and she is o en satisﬁed with the results of
these diﬀerent choices.
    Julia also realizes that the people in her life are so diﬀerent from
her that the Golden Rule doesn’t always apply. The team of
designers she manages doesn’t urgently need to have more fun;
what they want is time and space for their creative processes to
unfold. Her boyfriend isn’t trying to trap her; he’s trying to connect
more deeply and know that he is loved. With the Enneagram as a
map, she seeks to understand others’ viewpoints and needs rather
than assuming that they share hers.
    Julia is at a point in her life where she has a lot of decisions to
make. With the help of the Enneagram, she will make them with her
best self in mind.
    In this chapter, we took a deep dive into how one person applied
the Enneagram in her life. In the next chapter, we’ll take a closer look
at how the Enneagram can be applied in a professional context.
  THE ENNEAGRAM AT WORK
  Many companies make use of the Enneagram to ﬁnd
  ways to create harmony among employees—people who
  are all working toward the same goal, but may have
  vastly diﬀerent ways of ge ing there. Individuals can
  also use the Enneagram to ﬁnd a good career ﬁt, help set
  professional goals, and advance in their chosen vocation.
  You may have picked up this book because you want
  guidance in your own career journey, or because you
  want to learn to communicate and get along with
  coworkers who don’t see eye-to-eye with you. This
  chapter can help. In the next few pages, we’ll review
  how each Enneagram type functions in a work
  environment, how each type may approach a career, and
  how you can avoid your type’s common pitfalls on the
  job.


Solving Problems at Work
The Enneagram is a popular way for businesses to help their teams
understand each other and improve their performance and
communication. It’s a useful tool for mediating disputes and
resolving interpersonal conﬂicts on the job.
    A er learning about the nine types, Julia, an Enneagram Type
Seven, started applying her new knowledge to her job of managing a
team of graphic designers at a branding ﬁrm. She had her colleagues
take an Enneagram type assessment, and they now have a common
language to talk about each other’s personalities and viewpoints.
Let’s take a look at a scenario where the Enneagram helped solve a
problem involving a diverse group of people in Julia’s workplace.
    Bob is a repeat client of the ﬁrm where Julia works. He has
contracted with the company to rebrand his business, including a
new logo and marketing strategy. Exacting and critical, he has many
speciﬁcations for the project. Having worked with Bob before, Julia
believes him to be a Type One.
    Kevin, a Type Four, is the designer in charge of visual branding
for Bob’s company. He completed a logo and portfolio of visual
material for the rebranding project, but Bob is dissatisﬁed with
Kevin’s colorful, free-form designs. He wants the whole portfolio
redesigned, and he has many speciﬁc changes that he would like
Kevin to make. Being a One, he has high expectations and desires a
brand identity that gets all the details right. He tells Julia that he
wants the new portfolio within a set timeline, and says that if it isn’t
up to his standards, he will not work with the company in the
future. As a Seven, Julia wants to keep interactions optimistic—and
she does not want to lose a valuable client. She assures Bob that
Kevin will give him what he wants.
    Kevin, however, says the timeline is unrealistic. It’s just too tight
for him to redesign all the material required. Julia does not have a
background in graphic design, and her knowledge of the ﬁeld comes
from working with designers rather than from ﬁrsthand experience.
She doesn’t understand why a redesign can’t be done quickly.
    Kevin explains that Bob’s expected timeline will not result in the
powerful visual brand identity his company desires. At best, it will
result in some slapdash materials that don’t reﬂect the quality the
branding ﬁrm is known for. As a Four, Kevin takes the creative
process seriously and values producing well-developed and eye-
catching work. Kevin needs more time to come up with new
concepts that will ﬁt Bob’s precise speciﬁcations and still stand out in
the market.
     Lakesha, who heads the marketing department, is also
advocating quick turnaround. She needs to have the visual branding
ﬁnished in order for her department to complete the marketing
strategy for Bob’s company and have it ready for an upcoming
launch party. As a Three on the Enneagram, she wants the branding
ﬁrm to put their best foot forward, and she sees satisfying the client
as part of that.
     Julia feels caught between Kevin’s request for more time, and Bob
and Lakesha’s requests for more speed. She expresses her frustration
to Lakesha—who has more design knowledge than Julia—and they
decide to problem solve together. When she hears about the level of
changes that Bob wants Kevin to make to the visual branding
portfolio, Lakesha agrees that the timeline is unrealistic. Julia is
resistant at ﬁrst. A er all, managing interactions with designers is
her job, and she wants to make the customer happy. When Lakesha
suggests negotiating a compromise with Bob, Julia realizes that she
has some workable ideas (and strategies to deliver them) that will
please both Bob and Kevin.
     Julia contacts Bob and tells him that she respects the integrity of
his vision for his company (a strong value for Bob as a One), and her
branding ﬁrm is commi ed to representing this vision in the world.
She uses her Type Seven strength of positivity to emphasize the
advantages of Kevin’s design, and explains that, in order to get the
new portfolio completed in time, Bob will need to compromise on
some of the changes he wants. She speaks to the eﬀort Kevin is
pu ing in and the high standards of the ﬁrm’s design process. Bob is
still grumpy, but Julia’s upbeat manner and understanding of his
values assuage him somewhat. He is willing to compromise on
certain aspects of the redesign, though not on the timeline.
    Julia and Lakesha talk to Kevin together about the compromises
Bob is willing to make. Kevin is relieved that, with a less intensive
redesign, the timeline is closer to being workable. Lakesha proposes
a structured plan for completing the project on time, and Julia
expresses full conﬁdence in his work. With Julia motivating him,
Kevin is able to complete the redesigned logo and portfolio, and
Lakesha’s team moves ahead with the marketing strategy.
    Ultimately, Bob feels that his company’s rebrand is in good hands
because Julia used honesty and integrity when dealing with him.
Kevin feels like his creative process has been respected. Lakesha is
happy to have achieved her client’s goal of a successful launch, and
kept the ﬁrm’s good standing in Bob’s eyes. Julia is relieved that
everyone involved with the redesign conﬂict is satisﬁed and on good
terms. Thanks to the Enneagram, their needs and viewpoints have
all been heard. They can move on to the next project harmoniously,
without any lingering tension.


Enneagram Types on the Job
When applying the Enneagram to a professional se ing, it’s helpful
to look at the types of the people you work with as well as your own
type. Each personality has distinctive ways of approaching work.
When you can understand where your colleagues are coming from,
as Julia and her team did, you can solve complex problems more
readily. The proﬁles given next present the gi s and challenges each
type brings to a job, as well as tips for pu ing their best foot forward
in the workplace.

TYPE ONE: THE MISSION-DRIVEN PERFECTIONIST
Ones are largely motivated by their principles and a desire for
goodness. This may result in integrity and conscientiousness or in a
tendency to be critical.

   Strengths: Ones bring integrity and commitment to their work.
   Responsible and conscientious, they excel at making sure things
   are done right. They contribute an eye for detail and are willing
   to go the extra mile. At their best, Ones’ professional lives
   exemplify the term “mission-driven.” They are o en the people
   who set standards for their team.

   Challenges: Ones struggle with perfectionism, both inward and
   outward. It can be a challenge for Ones not to expect too much
   from themselves, or from the people they work with. They may
   become critical and frazzled. They may also get stressed by
   pu ing in more eﬀort than others, trying to ensure quality
   control by taking on extra work.

   Tips: Ones can be their best selves at work by cultivating a stance
   of acceptance toward workplace realities. There are imperfect
   aspects to every workplace, and these can be managed more
   eﬀectively when Ones relax a li le. Recognizing others’ eﬀorts
   will help Ones see how much their colleagues care, and trusting
   this will lighten their load. Bonding with coworkers and allowing
   themselves to have fun will make their mission a lot more
   enjoyable.

TYPE TWO: THE EMPATHETIC CONNECTOR

Twos are real people persons, motivated by the desire to build
loving, mutually nurturing relationships. In the workplace, their
striving to connect can be both a boon and a burden.
   Strengths: Empathetic, emotionally intelligent Twos excel at
   bringing a personal touch to their work. Many are gi ed at
   cultivating relationships with clients and colleagues. They go the
   extra mile to show the people they work with how much they
   mean to them, and are quick to lend a hand when needed.
   Valuable mentors and networkers, Twos can contribute greatly to
   the cohesion of their team.

   Challenges: Twos can focus so much on others’ needs that they
   lose touch with their own. O en comfortable in support roles,
   they may put in extra work behind the scenes and feel resentful
   when their contributions go unacknowledged. They may become
   overbearing in their eﬀorts to help, or be distracted from tasks
   and goals by interpersonal interaction.

   Tips: Twos can be their best selves at work by being a entive to
   their own needs before commi ing to help. It can be easy for
   Twos to volunteer for things, or to step in to ﬁll a perceived need,
   without checking in with their time and energy. Being centered in
   themselves at work will ensure Twos don’t overcommit. Further,
   cultivating balanced self-care in general will help Twos excel on
   the job. It’s also helpful for Twos to cultivate interests and
   projects at work that don’t directly involve people.

TYPE THREE: THE ADAPTABLE PERFORMER

Threes are motivated by success and recognition. They tend to be
self-assured and adaptable at work, at the risk of valuing image over
substance. In the workplace, these characteristics lend themselves to
both positives and negatives.

   Strengths: Adaptable Threes are able to quickly assess others’
   desires and make changes accordingly, creating a natural aﬃnity
   for marketing and presentation in multiple capacities. At work,
   Threes are dedicated and eﬃcient. They focus on achieving goals
   and are motivated by tasks and recognition. At their best, they
   bring their true selves to their work and excel at inspiring others.

   Challenges: Stressed Threes may be tempted to take shortcuts or
   overwork to get results. They may present an image of high
   achievement, while overlooking less visible yet equally important
   aspects of the job. Threes can also be resistant to delegating
   because they believe they will do a be er job with the work than
   their colleagues. Burnout is possible under high pressure.

   Tips: To bring out their best at work, it’s useful for Threes to learn
   to recognize when they are overworking, and create breaks for
   themselves. Delegating can stress Threes in the short term, but
   ultimately prove helpful. Honoring their own integrity is also
   important for this type. Threes beneﬁt from paying a ention to
   their own interests and choose work that is in line with these,
   rather than seeking to do whatever will get the highest
   recognition.

TYPE FOUR: THE COMPASSIONATE CREATOR

Motivated by desires to know and express themselves, Fours bring
creativity and sensitivity to their work, with the danger of being
overly emotional.

   Strengths: Expressive Fours bring a creative touch to their work.
   They may create unique products or distinctive designs, drawing
   inspiration from their emotions and imagination. High-
   functioning Fours can a une to the emotions of their clients or
   colleagues and empathize with their deepest challenges. Fours
   bring emotional intelligence to their teams, along with a
   willingness to identify and face problems.

   Challenges: The daily grind of work can be a struggle for Fours
   to sustain. When under stress or emotionally provoked, they may
   retreat and look to process their feelings before they are able to
   move on and be productive. Their emotional outbursts and
   touchiness can create workplace drama. Four may also
   procrastinate when nervous about projects.

   Tips: To bring their gi s out at work, Fours beneﬁt from
   implementing structure and regularity. Deadlines and schedules
   are useful, and checking in regularly with colleagues helps hold
   them accountable. When their sensitivities or negative emotions
   are provoked, they might beneﬁt from taking a time-limited
   break and engaging their body in a way that grounds them in
   reality, such as taking a short walk.

TYPE FIVE: THE INNOVATIVE SPECIALIST

In search of clarity and masterful knowledge, Fives are keenly
perceptive and innovative, seeing connections overlooked by others
and sometimes neglecting the interpersonal sphere.

   Strengths: Gi ed with curiosity and focus, Fives make natural
   experts. Their analytical minds allow them to take in vast
   amounts of information, make new connections, and innovate.
   Fives are o en the experts or specialists on their team,
   accumulating and applying encyclopedic knowledge. High-
   functioning Fives bring an objectivity and eye for detail that
   allow for perceptive problem solving.

   Challenges: Dealing with people does not come naturally to
   reserved Fives. They are easily overwhelmed by what they
   perceive as others’ demands, and may retreat from interaction.
   Alternately, they may only want to talk about speciﬁc interests.
   These behaviors can make them seem unavailable or uncaring to
   colleagues, challenging team morale and cohesion.

   Tips: Fives can be their best selves at work by becoming part of a
   support network, even in small ways. They beneﬁt from learning
   how to connect with others without becoming overwhelmed.
   Fives might set a goal of talking every week at the meeting, or
   going to lunch with a group of coworkers. Building connections
   makes Fives feel more appreciated and less isolated and thus
   more likely to make valuable, creative contributions.

TYPE SIX: THE COMMITTED EGALITARIAN

Sixes are the Enneagram’s team-builders, placing huge value on
collaboration and interconnection. Their tendency to be skeptical
leads to masterful troubleshooting but also, sometimes, paranoia.

   Strengths: Naturally collaborative, Sixes lead from within a
   group, inspiring equality and collegiality. Once commi ed to a
   venture, they put in the hard work to see it through. They are
   o en the troubleshooters of the team, anticipating risks and
   coming up with solutions in advance. High-functioning Sixes are
   courageous advocates for people and causes they care about.

   Challenges: Sixes worry about negative outcomes and focus on
   how to avoid them. They may get caught up in worry at work
   and get sidetracked from the job that needs to get done. This can
   result in them pu ing in a lot of eﬀort without necessarily
   fulﬁlling their goals. Stressed Sixes may complain on the job and
   raise others’ suspicions about threats that may not be accurate.
   Tips: To bring out their best selves at work, Sixes beneﬁt from
   thinking about how to optimize their chances of success, rather
   than minimize their chances of failure. They can use their natural
   gi for support-seeking to set up networks of peers who will
   motivate each other and keep each other on task. When
   opportunities to use their gi s present themselves, Sixes beneﬁt
   from facing any nervousness head-on and embracing the chance
   to grow and shine.

TYPE SEVEN: THE ENERGETIC EXPLORER

Freedom, possibility, and adventure motivate Sevens in their lives
and work. Their drive toward novelty can bring both innovation and
distraction.

   Strengths: Sevens bring joy and liveliness to their work. Clients
   and colleagues o en love their sense of fun and creative ideas.
   Quick moving and engaging, they may be proﬁcient in several
   areas, which they’re able to combine in exciting ways. At their
   best, their positivity keeps them resilient. If one thing doesn’t
   work out, they’re willing to try another.

   Challenges: New possibilities catch a Seven’s a ention easily.
   They may begin one project and then get distracted by another.
   Sometimes they take on so many responsibilities that they are
   unable to fulﬁll their obligations to all of them. Stressed Sevens
   may present an upbeat facade, telling tales of exciting futures
   while evading present problems.

   Tips: Sevens can bring out their best at work by cultivating focus.
   Their challenge is to learn when to commit to the enterprise at
   hand rather than pursue the next big thing. It can help for Sevens
   to set schedules for themselves for important projects while
   allowing space for their other ideas to develop. For instance, they
   could commit to a month of working toward one deadline, while
   keeping a notebook or ﬁle of potential projects for the future.

TYPE EIGHT: THE IMPACTFUL DOER

People of action, Eights have a tendency to wind up in leadership
positions. However, their risk-taking nature can be equal parts
exhilarating and unnerving in the workplace.

   Strengths: Street-smart Eights have a knack for making things
   happen. Commanding a room comes naturally to them. Due to
   their powerful presence and interest in having a big impact, they
   o en seek out leadership positions on a team. They are people of
   action, unafraid to make decisions. High-functioning Eights
   exhibit immense courage, and are able to empower others as well
   as themselves.

   Challenges: Eights don’t always realize how strongly they come
   oﬀ to others, and may unwi ingly intimidate people. When
   stressed, they can act aggressively and become more hardheaded
   than compassionate, making harsh decisions and ge ing into
   ﬁghts. They may ﬁnd their work relationships strained because
   colleagues are afraid of them.

   Tips: At work, Eights can be their best selves by noticing how
   much energy they’re pu ing into interactions, and learning when
   to dial it down. “Lowering the volume” will create a more
   harmonious, pleasant work environment. Working on emotional
   intelligence is also helpful. A li le bit of gentleness and
   compassion goes a long way, allowing Eights to bring out their
   natural strengths of protectiveness and merciful leadership.
TYPE NINE: THE EASYGOING MEDIATOR

Harmony-seekers, Nines on the Enneagram are able to see that we’re
all connected. Their desire for peace may result in serenity or
passivity in their workplace dealings.

   Strengths: These patient personalities are gi ed at seeing both
   sides of an issue and guiding others toward consensus. Because
   of these talents, Nines are able to connect with others easily. Even
   in fraught situations, high-functioning Nines have a knack for
   pu ing people at ease. They create relaxing work environments
   —ones where everyone feels comfortable and included.

   Challenges: Nines have a slow, gentle, accommodating approach
   that can result in them not speaking their minds or sharing their
   ideas. They can ﬂy under the radar at work, resulting in their
   valuable creativity going unused. Nines may even get into
   trouble by refusing to take a stand. When stressed, they may
   stubbornly refuse to participate.

   Tips: Nines can be their best selves at work by learning to access
   their own strong will and make tough decisions. They beneﬁt
   from practicing assertiveness, and gaining comfort with actions
   that may rock the boat but move their work ahead. Taking the
   lead and allowing themselves to be visible at times are both
   beneﬁcial for Nines. So is taking action on endeavors they have
   always wanted to do but are nervous about or procrastinating on.




             COMMUNICATING WITH
                COLLEAGUES
  Many conflicts at work arise from differing communication styles. Our most popular
  workshop, Communication Styles for Success, introduces the Enneagram’s social styles as a
  way of understanding how our colleagues prefer to convey and receive information. When
  you use the social styles to communicate, you’ll have an easier time speaking your
  coworkers’ language and getting your point across effectively.
      The Assertive Types (Three, Seven, and Eight) are Initiators at work. They relish taking
  on challenges and making quick decisions. Initiators are often the first ones to speak up,
  employing an energetic, direct style and “thinking aloud.” When working with Initiators, be
  direct and confident with your communication. These colleagues appreciate a forthright
  perspective and respect those who are willing to debate with them.
      The Compliant Types (One, Two, and Six) are Cooperators at work. Their idealistic,
  naturally collaborative style means they often take on support roles; they focus on drawing
  out others’ participation or following a set of responsibilities. It’s helpful to ask Cooperators
  for their own opinions, which they may not think to volunteer on their own. They benefit
  from being acknowledged and appreciated for the work they contribute.
      The Withdrawn Types (Four, Five, and Nine) are Soloists at work. They take a strategic,
  long-range perspective and often prefer to work independently. Soloists are innovative and
  think their ideas through before speaking. When you’re working with Soloists, it helps to
  alert them to upcoming discussions and give them time to prepare their comments, such
  as by sending the agenda for a meeting out beforehand. Encourage them to contribute in a
  way that makes space for them to collect their thoughts rather than pushing for immediate
  input.




Common Careers for the Enneagram
Types
There are no direct correlations between Enneagram types and jobs,
but the innate interests and preferences of each type mean they
gravitate toward certain ways of working. In this section, we’ll take
note of industries where we commonly see speciﬁc Enneagram
types. Notice that many industries overlap and many types excel in
them. Also, be aware that these are general observations and trends.
You can ﬁnd any type working in any ﬁeld successfully, thriving by
tailoring the job to their personality. If you’re looking for a career
launch or transition, you might ﬁnd professions correlated with your
type to be good ﬁts for you. Other important factors to consider
when selecting a career include your hobbies, talents, and personal
interests.

TYPE ONE

Ones are o en drawn to professions that strongly involve their sense
of personal ethics, mission, and purpose, such as:

   The Legal System: Ones are frequently lawyers, judges, or
   paralegals who work to reform rules and standards to bring
   justice to the world.

   Education: We see Ones who are principals, academic
   administrators, and teachers. These professions allow Ones to
   imbue future generations with values.

   Nonproﬁts and Social Justice: Ones are o en involved in
   activism and social justice, areas they believe in strongly. We
   o en see Ones doing macro-level work in these organizations,
   where their sense of detail and big-picture rules and ideals
   beneﬁt the organizations.

   Politics: The same strong sense of social justice and principles
   o en calls Ones to work in policy, government positions, or run
   for oﬃce themselves.

   Religious Occupations: As religious clergy or employees in a
   religious institution, many Ones ﬁnd a career path in line with
   their values, where they can share their sense of mission with a
   larger community.
   Health Professionals: Type One doctors, nutritionists, and other
   health industry professionals are drawn to the profession’s sense
   of ethics, a entiveness to details, and high standards.

    Famous Ones in these occupations include Al Gore and Joan of
Arc.
    It’s also common to see Ones in professions that make use of their
strong organizational skills and analytical thinking.

   Scientiﬁc Professions: Ones o en work as scientists, engineers,
   and architects. Strong a ention to detail, combined with high
   standards and goals, makes Ones interested and excellent in
   these professions.

   Tax Professionals: Ones make wonderful accountants, tax
   preparers, and auditors, where they can work carefully and
   adhere to given standards.

   The Financial Industry: Ones excel in banking, the mortgage
   industry, and other positions in ﬁnance that require a careful
   a ention to detail.

   Home Organization: Ones can be excellent general contractors
   and professional organizers, ensuring the work is done
   thoroughly and to high standards and quality.

   Quality Assurance: Strong a ention to detail makes Ones great
   editors and inspectors, among other positions that require a
   similar knack for ﬁnding errors.

   Administrative Professionals: Ones can apply their detail-
   oriented outlook to positions in administration, administrative
   support, and executive assistance.
  Famous Ones in these occupations include Martha Stewart and
Tom Brokaw.

TYPE TWO

Twos are frequently a racted to people- and service-oriented
professions where they provide direct support and care to others.

   Healthcare Industry: Positions on the front lines of care—nurses,
   occupational therapists, and doctors—are o en staﬀed by Twos
   —people who love giving a personal touch and warm care to
   their patients.

   Therapeutic Professionals: Many Twos work as psychologists,
   therapists, social workers, speech language pathologists, and
   personal coaches, where they can use their a unement to people
   and relationships to help others.

   Education and Child Development: Special education teacher,
   postsecondary student services professional, career counselor,
   educator, and childcare worker are great choices for Twos, who
   can help students develop intellectual curiosity combined with
   personal support.

   Hospitality: The food service and hospitality industries staﬀ
   many Twos, who can provide direct support, service, and
   enjoyment in these roles.

   Administrative Support: Front-facing support positions, such as
   receptionists and executive assistants, allow Twos to provide
   excellent service and relationally oriented help.
   Famous Twos in these occupations include Richard Simmons and
Florence Nightingale.
   We also see Twos working in professions that allow them to
directly manage and support the relationships between other people:

   Business Managers: Twos make excellent managers and
   supervisors in a business or corporate environment, where they
   can help manage relationships between teams or between
   diﬀerent levels of management.

   Ministry: Twos do well as ministers and in other religious
   positions that involve direct contact and managing relationships
   with congregations.

   Relationship Counselors: Twos are o en excellent in professions
   such as couples counselor, family therapist, business coach, or
   relationship coach, where they can help others communicate and
   get along with each other.

   Professional Networker: Positions like volunteer coordinator,
   professional recruitment, or any oﬃce position that involves
   introducing and connecting professionals allow Twos to utilize
   their strengths of connecting others.

   Customer Service: Working in direct customer service allows
   Twos to use their strength of managing relationships, while
   working to keep customers and employees happy.

   Famous Twos in these occupations include Bishop Desmond
Tutu and Byron Katie.

TYPE THREE
Threes are o en drawn to positions that involve high visibility and
are goal-oriented, with a ladder of achievement they can climb to
succeed.

   Business Professionals: Many Threes are successful at all levels
   of business, ranging from oﬃce staﬀ all the way to independent
   consultants and executives. Business environments give Threes
   the structure to create outstanding, successful work.

   High-Visibility Professions: It’s common to see Threes in high-
   proﬁle occupations that also support others, such as doctors,
   lawyers, and dentists. Threes are able to meet measurable goals
   of success in these professions, while helping others.

   Politics: A sense of wanting to help others, combined with the
   ability to know what it takes to win, gives many Threes an
   interest in running for oﬃce, running political campaigns, and
   other related positions.

   Communications: High-visibility mass communication positions,
   such as those in broadcast and radio journalism, public aﬀairs,
   newspaper reporting, and social media, ﬁt the Three’s polished
   image and assertive, goal-oriented mindset.

   Marketing and Sales: Positions in marketing and sales
   departments, as well as independent positions like real estate
   agents, allow Threes to perform and sell, and to use their sense of
   polish to meet goals and sell quality products.

   Human Resource Professionals: Many Threes end up combining
   their strong business sense with a desire to support other
   professionals in the HR department.
   Performers, Entertainers, and Athletes: An interest in
   entertaining others and knowing how to meet goals and succeed
   o en make Threes polished stars in the entertainment and
   performance industries, and extremely successful athletes.

   Famous Threes in these occupations include Mi Romney and
Taylor Swi .
   Other Threes bring their strong sense of knowing how to polish,
support, and motivate others into various forms of success.

   Public Relations: Threes are o en successfully employed as
   agents, spokespeople, and public relations managers who use
   their image awareness to present companies and individuals in
   ways that create success.

   Coaches: Threes make excellent personal and business coaches,
   and are particularly good at inspiring people to set goals and
   present their best, most authentic selves to succeed in their
   chosen ﬁelds.

   Image Consultant: Threes know how to create the polish
   necessary to help others succeed, and make excellent suggestions
   in areas like personal grooming, polished manners, and high-
   impact speaking.

   Motivational Speaker: Threes can be wonderful motivational
   speakers who inspire others to go forth and achieve their own
   dreams.

   Athletic Support Professional: Athletic coaches, personal
   trainers, sports medicine doctors, and other careers in sports and
   ﬁtness give Threes a place to help teams and individuals meet
   their athletic goals.

   Famous Threes in these occupations include motivational
speaker Tony Robbins and fashionista Stacy London.

TYPE FOUR

Fours are o en found in positions that allow for creativity and self-
expression, with some ﬂexibility to work on their own timeline.

   Creative Performers: Fours are particularly interested in
   developing their own creative expression through creative
   professions, such as actors, artists, musicians, and dancers.

   Writers and Researchers: Fours with talent in writing, or
   intellectual pursuits, bring polish, creativity, and self-motivation
   as copywriters, novelists and memoir writers, curriculum
   developers, researchers, and journalists.

   Designers: Fours can bring their orientation to depth and beauty
   as website and graphic designers, animators, fashion designers,
   interior decorators, or landscapers.

   Marketing and Recruiting: O en, Fours do wonderful work in
   the marketing or staﬀ recruitment departments in businesses, as
   they add their creativity to sales, and are o en highly personally
   a uned to who will ﬁt a particular corporate role.

   Entrepreneurs: Although Fours succeed in traditional corporate
   positions, many prefer the creative ﬂexibility and independence
   that comes from freelancing, consulting, founding a business, or
   combining part-time positions.
   Famous Fours in these occupations include Johnny Depp and
Anne Rice.
   Other Fours are drawn to careers with an interest in supporting
people and relationships and adding a personal touch.

   Directors and Managers: Fours bring sensitivity and caring to
   managing others in business, and a personal touch to leadership
   positions. O en, but not always, they direct creatively oriented
   businesses.

   Teachers: Fours make a entive and caring teachers of all age
   groups, and are particularly seen teaching creative professions in
   which they excel.

   Therapeutic Professionals: The ability to listen a entively to
   others’ personal stories and a desire to support others in working
   through their feelings make Fours excellent therapists and
   coaches.

   Healing Practitioners: Fours are seen in many healing roles,
   including traditional medical professions (to which they may
   bring a holistic approach), instructing yoga, and self-created
   healing roles that combine modalities.

   Humanitarian Work and Activism: Strong feelings o en make
   Fours passionate about causes. They can be seen working in
   various roles in nonproﬁts, social justice, activism, and other
   forms of personal support for what they believe in.

   Famous Fours in these occupations include Don Riso (founder of
The Enneagram Institute) and Jackie Kennedy Onassis.
          OTHER FACTORS TO CONSIDER
  The Wings: Your type’s wing may also influence your career choice and leadership style at
  work. For example, a Five with a Four Wing may be more drawn to bringing creative and
  holistic analysis to their work, and working independently. A Five with a Six Wing may be
  more drawn to fine-tuned technical or financial analysis in their profession, and work in an
  independent niche in a larger team.

  The Arrows: Recall that each type has an arrow to two other types: their Stress Point and
  Security Point. You may enjoy elements of careers and working styles types that your arrows
  enjoy. A One, for example, may want to bring creative freedom into their work from Type
  Four, or spontaneity, fun, and possibilities from Type Seven.

  Your Personal Interests and Abilities: As you’ve seen, there is a wide variety of careers on
  each type’s list—and many people succeed in type atypical careers, too. Your style—as well
  as your working and career choices—also depends on your own interests, what you excel at,
  and your own personal history. These characteristics are sometimes, but not always, type
  related.




TYPE FIVE

Many Fives choose specialized professions, using their strong
informational and analytical skills to provide knowledge.

   Technical Professions: Many Fives excel in professions that
   allow for technical problem solving, such as computer science,
   coding, app and website development, technical support,
   technical writing, and mechanical skills.

   Professor or Instructor: Fives enjoy teaching their area of
   expertise and commonly ﬁnd careers in science, mathematics,
   philosophy, business, and law.
   Thought Leaders: Some Fives are happily employed in think
   tanks or long-range policy positions, where they can use their
   independent thinking and long-range strategic analysis to solve
   large global problems.

   Researchers: Their strong curiosity leads many Fives to conduct
   or assist with many kinds of research. Fives thrive in science labs,
   ﬁeldwork in psychology or archeology, theoretical explorations in
   mathematics or philosophy, or practical research that helps solve
   medical, business, or legal problems.

   Engineers and Architects: Both these positions require big-
   picture systematizing, original planning, and analytical skills,
   areas where many Fives excel.

   Analyst: A Five’s patience and ability to synthesize large
   amounts of information makes them excellent at data, ﬁnancial,
   or big-picture organizational analysis.

   Public Information Provider: More talkative Fives enjoy
   providing specialized information to the public as docents, tour
   guides, information booth a endants, and other similar roles.

   Famous Fives in these occupations include Bill Gates and Marie
Curie.
   Fives also commonly choose to work in positions where they can
be highly independent, o en bringing originality to the role.

   Management Consultant or Business Coach: A Five’s long-term
   approach makes them excellent at developing long-term
   strategies for businesses and employees, either as independent
   consultants or in an independent role in a company.
   Writer: Many Fives are excellent writers, and enjoy the
   independence of the role. It’s common to see Fives write
   nonﬁction, particularly around specialized knowledge or
   investigative research that they can condense for the public.

   Artistic/Creative Professions: Some Fives bring their strong
   originality and independent spirit to the arts, becoming ﬁlm
   directors, novelists, artists, and musicians.

   Startup Founder: When Fives combine originality, independence,
   and a unique skillset, they’re o en very successful at founding
   startups, particularly in technical knowledge, or another area of
   special interest.

   Remote Work: Many Fives enjoy se ing their own hours and
   taking on work they can do independently, such as grading, data
   entry, and proofreading.

   Famous Fives in these occupations include Tim Burton and Joan
Didion.

TYPE SIX

Sixes o en end up in positions that have a deﬁned structure and
security, creating an environment where they can manage risk, or
support others in doing so.

   Finance: Some Sixes are wonderful bankers, actuaries, or
   ﬁnancial managers, providing a careful and structured approach
   that clients can trust.

   Government: Government positions at all levels allow Sixes to be
   the stewards of time-honored institutions that also provide a
   certain degree of job security.

   Education: As teachers, professors, and administrators, Sixes
   provide trustworthy care to the people or data they support,
   ensuring educational opportunities for future generations.

   Science, Engineering, and Research: Similar to academia, these
   ﬁelds come with established rules and standards to which Sixes
   can adhere while making their own contributions.

   Ministry: As ministers or clergy, Sixes protect religious traditions
   and provide caring pastoral support to the community at large.

   Quality Assurance: Sixes do a wonderful job as inspectors of
   health and safety facilities, or company auditors, carefully
   ensuring that health and quality standards are in place.

   Project Management and Administrative Professionals: Sixes
   make excellent project managers, as they can create structures
   that minimize risk and ensure all bases are covered by the team.

    Famous Sixes in these occupations include George H. W. Bush
and Princess Diana of Wales.
    On the other hand, some Sixes thrive in high-pressure situations
where they can get “down in the trenches” and provide high-volume
action.

   First Responders: Sixes are o en drawn to being ﬁreﬁghters,
   paramedics, and emergency room doctors and staﬀ—people who
   can respond adeptly in times of crisis.

   Mental Health and Addiction Support: Some Sixes enjoy being
   active, hands-on, unshakeable support for people as
   psychologists, therapists, social workers, addiction counselors,
   and crisis hotline staﬀ.

   Police and Military: Both of these positions combine
   participating in culturally deﬁned and structured positions,
   while also oﬀering the opportunity for risk, excitement, and
   saving lives.

   Professional Advocates: Sixes do a wonderful job defending
   those in need, whether they’re directly involved in positions that
   support individuals (such as providing defense in a courtroom or
   other formal se ing, or as healthcare advocates), or se ing high-
   level policy.

   Performers: By combining toughness and vulnerability, many
   Sixes make excellent actors, comedians, and other performers—
   people who remind us of the full range of humanity in their
   delivery.

    Famous Sixes in these occupations include David Le erman and
Julia Roberts.

TYPE SEVEN

Sevens are o en drawn to positions that allow for them to have
maximum ﬂexibility, spontaneity, and ability to generate endless
possibilities on the job.

   Directors: It’s particularly common to see Sevens directing
   ventures with a sense of fun, such as media agencies, retreat
   centers, or summer camps. Sevens in charge come up with
   numerous great ideas and have staﬀ to execute them.
   Entrepreneurs: Many Sevens have the ability to generate endless
   ideas, and enjoy taking the kind of risks that starting a business
   requires. It’s not uncommon to see Sevens as “serial
   entrepreneurs”—people who found one company or startup,
   make it successful, then move on to the next venture.

   Generalist Professionals: The gi of breadth and the ability to
   accomplish many things at once mean we see many Sevens in
   roles where they wear many hats, such as internal and
   emergency medicine, multilinguists, and managerial roles in
   business.

   Marketing and Sales: In both of these roles, Sevens can use their
   strengths for generating ideas and entertaining others to make
   sales, as well as to multitask and have variety in their workday.

   Communication and Media: Many Sevens enjoy the variety of
   interacting with others in ﬁelds such as social media, journalism,
   and other forms of mass communication.

   Campaigners: Particularly in new campaigns, Sevens get to
   create or execute ambitious plans from the ground up with
   freedom and spontaneity in their movements. These types of
   roles also allow them to be idealistic activists.

   Travel-Related Professions: As pilots, ﬂight a endants, tour
   guides, travel writers, language teachers, and translators, Sevens
   get a sense of adventure and open-ended career potential.

   Famous Sevens in these occupations include Richard Branson
and Amelia Earhart.
   Other Sevens are drawn speciﬁcally to roles where they can li
others up, using their ability to spread joy and happiness.

   Helping Professions: Certain Sevens are drawn to being
   therapists, counselors, and medical professionals, as they enjoy
   seeing the best in people and upli ing their spirits.

   Event Planning and Executing: Planning and fulﬁlling various
   event roles, such as catering or DJing, give Sevens the
   opportunity to create events that are fun and upli ing for others
   and themselves.

   Work with Children: Children are full of potential and fun to be
   with, so it’s not surprising many Sevens enjoy working as child
   psychologists, pediatricians, teachers, special education
   professionals, childcare workers, and camp counselors.

   Entertainers: A sense of what they, and others, ﬁnd amusing or
   thrilling makes Sevens engaging performers, musicians,
   comedians, and clowns—entertainers of any type.

   Hospitality Industry: Jobs like hotel employee, bartender, and
   restaurant server allow Sevens endless variety on the job, as well
   as opportunities to meet and entertain new people nightly.

   Assistant: A good a itude and the ability to do many things at
   once—and to make plans at the drop of a hat—make Sevens
   great personal assistants, stylists, gophers, or front-facing
   administrative professionals in oﬃces.

   Famous Sevens in these occupations include Robin Williams and
Katy Perry.
TYPE EIGHT

Many Eights are drawn to occupations where they get to do
impactful work from the top down, o en in leadership positions.

   Executive or CEO: Whether in business, government, education,
   or nonproﬁts, the natural conﬁdence and executive presence of
   Eights o en leads them to high-level leadership positions.

   Managers: Eights o en enjoy leading and being “on the ground”
   with people. They also have great energy and do well in
   managerial positions in business.

   Business Founder or Entrepreneur: The desire to call the shots
   and make immediate impact and change o en leads Eights to
   start their own companies or move into entrepreneurial roles.

   Political Organizers: A desire to protect and support others
   means some Eights are drawn to work in policy or as campaign
   organizers—roles where they can create big changes.

   Motivational Speaker: Eights are wonderful at empowering and
   li ing people up. Motivational speeches allow them to deliver
   their message to large groups of people.

    Famous Eights in these professions include Sheryl Sandberg and
Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.
    Other Eights like positions where they can feel immediacy and
life through physical work or on-the-ground work with people.

   Executive and Leadership Coaches: Their innate conﬁdence and
   natural ability to lead means Eights are excellent at coaching
   others to be be er leaders or advance their rank at the oﬃce.
   Property-Related Professions: As general contractors, house
   ﬂippers, property and commercial managers, handypeople, and
   landlords, Eights can work independently and on the ground in a
   way that creates a big impact and supports others.

   Pilots and Truck Drivers: Both these positions combine physical
   immediacy with big-impact, adventurous travel, and the ability
   to be one’s own boss.

   Military Oﬃcers: In the military, Eights are given the
   opportunity to advance in leadership, protect and strengthen
   others, and ﬁnd adventure.

   Public Safety and Service: As police oﬃcers, ﬁreﬁghters,
   paramedics, and other public safety oﬃcers, Eights have the
   opportunity to use their strengths to respond in crisis and help
   others in an immediate way.

   Fitness Professionals: Many Eights enjoy working with
   physicality and strength. It’s not uncommon to see Eights
   excelling as athletes, athletic coaches, personal trainers, and gym
   teachers.

   Security Guards: Regardless of their physical stature, Eights
   know how to present a conﬁdent face. Many enjoy using their
   skills to protect banks, public areas, and entertainment venues.

   Famous Eights in these professions include Napoleon Bonaparte
and Serena Williams.

TYPE NINE
O en, Nines succeed in long-range, strategic work where they’re
able to create change in a slow, careful manner.

   Leadership Positions: Nines are so likeable that they o en ﬁnd
   themselves promoted to leadership positions in many industries:
   traditional business, government agencies, nonproﬁt
   organizations, et cetera. They excel in established institutions that
   need a consistent, steady, and slower-paced form of leadership.

   Historians and Scientists: Working as a historian, scientist, or in
   other academic and research-oriented ﬁelds allows Nines to
   create uniﬁed, holistic theories and observations—observations
   that require a deep understanding of how the past impacts the
   present. They’re also patient teachers in their areas of strength.

   Financial Positions: Many Nines can be seen in various banking
   and other ﬁnance-related positions—positions that involve a
   conservative, long-range vantage point to make careful and
   important decisions. They can also make excellent business
   analysts.

   Community Organizer: An ability to bring others together,
   combined with patience and long-term strategizing skills, allows
   Nines to develop relationships and long-range planning that
   create change where it’s needed.

   Creative and Technical Professions: Nines who are creatively or
   technically inclined have the patience and dedication needed to
   excel in art, music, web or graphic design, app development,
   writing, and other creative endeavors.
   Outdoor Occupations: Many Nines feel very connected to
   nature. They use their strengths in long-term planning to excel in
   agricultural ﬁelds, as park rangers, landscapers, and even
   construction workers.

   Famous Nines in these occupations include Ronald Reagan and
Whoopi Goldberg.
   Other Nines enjoy working in occupations where they create a
sense of harmony and peace for those around them.

   Legal Mediator: As mediators, Nines ensure that conﬂicts are
   resolved and harmony is maintained in diﬃcult legal disputes.
   Nines can also be seen in other positions in the legal system.

   Managers: Nines are gentle and caring managers who tend to be
   popular with their employees. In managerial roles, they ensure
   conﬂict is minimized and harmony is maintained in the oﬃce.

   Therapists: It’s particularly common to see Nines working as
   family therapists or couples’ counselors—professions where they
   help create and maintain harmonious relationships. Nines also
   are patient, caring individual psychologists and therapists.

   Early Childhood Professionals: With seemingly endless
   patience, some Nines get great enjoyment out of helping young
   children grow. Nines can be drawn to working with young kids
   as educators, childcare workers, therapists, or pediatricians.

   Animal Professionals: Nines can feel an intuitive connection to
   animals, and may be drawn to working as veterinarians or
   animal trainers, or at zoos or in outdoor professions with nearby
   wildlife.
   Athletic Professions: Like Eights, Nines o en feel connected to
   their bodies. They can be excellent athletes, o en in individual
   sports. Their athletic knowledge and caring also lead them to be
   sports medicine doctors, physical therapists, and others who care
   for athletes.

   Famous Nines in these occupations include Fred Rogers and Carl
Jung.

THE ENNEAGRAM APPLIED

Work is just one of the practical arenas where people ﬁnd the
Enneagram useful. In learning about your type, you get a clearer
sense of the personality-based skills you bring to your job and the
ways you can best contribute. You also gain a be er understanding
of the people you work with, which is invaluable for resolving the
high-stress situations that arise so o en in collaborative
environments. In the next chapter, we’ll move from the oﬃce to the
domestic sphere and look at another of the Enneagram’s areas for
practical application: relationship dynamics.
THE ENNEAGRAM IN
RELATIONSHIPS
Humans are inherently social creatures. Our lives are
deeply intertwined with the lives of others. We have
long-standing, complex ties with our families. We value
our friendships and collaborate with teams and
colleagues in the oﬃce. We navigate networks in our
workplaces and communities. Most of us seek out
romantic relationships and partnerships. In our
increasingly globalized world—a world where our
online experiences intersect with in-person connections
—managing our relationships has become more complex
and important than ever. Relationships are important
parts of our lives, and they come with their own sets of
rewards and challenges.
    When we talk with people about the Enneagram, the
most common way they want to apply it is in their
personal relationships. O en, they want to know what
type their spouse or child is; they want to use the
Enneagram as a springboard for understanding how to
be er connect with their loved ones. If they’re single,
they want to know what type of partner they should seek
  (more about that later). The good news is that the
  Enneagram can help with all of this.
     In this chapter, we’ll look at how each Enneagram
  type acts in relationships. We’ll explore the gi s each
  type brings, and illuminate ways to connect with them.
  We’ll dive into the world of dating and wade into the
  waters of family dynamics.
      There’s a lot to learn, so let’s get started.


Overcoming Dating Fears
What do you do when you’re hoping to ﬁnd a romantic relationship,
but aren’t sure how? Julia’s sister Mary provides a perfect example of
this dilemma. A Type Six on the Enneagram, 30-year-old Mary
works as a ﬁnancial advisor in a diﬀerent city from her family. She
broke up with her longtime girlfriend a year ago and is looking to
date again.
    At her friends’ suggestion, she’s created a proﬁle on one app,
where she matched with an intriguing young therapist named
Dasha. Suddenly, she has a message from Dasha waiting in her
inbox, asking about some of the interests Mary listed on her proﬁle
and wondering if she would like to meet for coﬀee.
    Mary worries that dating norms have changed since she last
sought out romance. She fears that she’ll make a faux pas, and
wonders if she has what it takes to a ract a good partner. What if
Dasha meets her and decides Mary isn’t as interesting as her proﬁle?
She can’t help dreaming up worst-case scenarios. She wonders if she
should decline the invitation. On her weekly Skype call with Julia,
she asks for advice.
    Julia isn’t the ﬁrst person Mary has asked for input. A er a few
leading inquiries, she ﬁnds out that Mary has asked several friends
the same questions. “What should I do? What should I say? Should I
pretend I didn’t see the message?” Julia asks Mary if she would
genuinely like to meet Dasha. “Of course!” Mary answers. “I’m just
scared that I’ll screw it up.” Julia reminds Mary to listen to her inner
voice—a voice that, at the moment, is encouraging her to get out
there and meet people. If things don’t work out with Dasha, there
are many others she can connect with on the dating app.
    Mary messages Dasha back, and they meet at her favorite coﬀee
shop. In person, Dasha is more reserved than Mary, who ﬁnds
herself doing most of the talking. At a few points, she stumbles over
her words. Rather than laugh, Dasha smiles encouragingly. An
apparent Nine on the Enneagram, Dasha has a gentle, reassuring
manner that gradually puts Mary at ease. Mary ﬁnds herself
drawing Dasha out in conversation. She is surprised to catch herself
initiating plans for a second date, with eager anticipation and
minimal worry about how it will go.




                           MEETING PEOPLE
  No matter your type, you may be at a time in your life when you’re seeking a new
  relationship. With networks of contacts and dating apps accessible at the flick of a finger,
  we have more tools at our disposal for finding romance than we’ve ever had before. Still,
  putting yourself out there can be nerve-racking. Here are some tips to guide each type in
  taking the plunge.

  Type One: Ones tend to seek an ideal relationship, in line with their principles. Their “by the
  book” approach to dating means they often have a list of criteria they’re looking for in a
  partner. Even so, the people Ones are drawn to rarely check all the boxes. Ones don’t need
  to be perfect to attract the right mate: It may come as a surprise that dating can be fun.
  Rather than seeking a perfect match, Ones might try reaching out to people who seem
  intriguing. Stay open to the unexpected.
Type Two: To find love, Twos believe that they need to be loving and generous. Thus, Twos
focus a lot on pleasing romantic prospects, adapting to others’ needs and interests. They
concentrate on getting to know, attracting, or showing appreciation for their dates rather
than letting their own uniqueness shine through. Twos might try things the other way
around: seek out people who share your passions; plan dates you’ll personally find fun; and
see what happens.

Type Three: Drawn to success and image, Threes value putting their best foot forward. They
may focus on cultivating a particular look or persona to come across as desirable and
admirable to their dates. However, too much image management may come at the expense
of true connection. Focus less on impressing your dates and more on being genuine. Relax
and let your guard down when you go out.

Type Four: Like Ones, Fours seek an ideal partner, but they’re motivated by imagination
rather than principles. They often fantasize about potential dates and may find themselves
falling for a persona before getting to know the real person. Online dating or blind dates are
particularly dangerous, so it’s best to meet as early as feasible since the reality may not
match the fantasy. Focus on genuinely connecting with your date. Be aware of your
tendency to idealize.

Type Five: Passionate about their interests but awkward interpersonally, Fives tend to be
reserved and take time to open up. It’s helpful for Fives to build rapport by communicating
for a while before meeting in person. Online dating can be a great fit. When you meet, try
either a date around a mutual interest or a fun-filled activity where you let loose. Bringing
delight into the equation will reduce nerves and discomfort. Bond around a subject of
interest and conversation will flow easily.

Type Six: In search of a sure thing, Sixes seek a partner who’s committed and dependable
yet tend to be skeptical of finding one. They can be uncertain about the people they are
seeing, asking others for their opinion. However, Sixes do best when listening to their
internal response to dates instead of doubting themselves or consulting others. Rather than
getting input from your “committee,” go on a few dates where you focus on trusting your
gut. Who and what feels right?

Type Seven: Sevens are drawn to options and dislike feeling pinned down. For some people
of this type, dating seems like an exciting game, ripe with possibility. So many prospective
dates, so little time! To get the most out of your dating experience, it’s best to target your
energy and explore purposefully. Focus on contacting just a few people at a time, and follow
up if you’d like to pursue things further. If you’re busy, take a break from looking into
additional prospects.
  Type Eight: Eights may enjoy the energy of dating, but when things get more personal or
  emotional, they often feel like fish out of water. Eights like being in charge on dates, but can
  sometimes seem intimidating or walled off, making it harder to establish relationships.
  Build connection by asking your dates about themselves. Show openness and caring, and
  allow your softer side to come out: it will be appreciated.

  Type Nine: Nines go with the flow, making them laid-back dates and appealing to many.
  However, they find it challenging to take action toward their desires—or to even recognize
  their desires. Nines may want to date but hesitate to do so. If you’re a Nine, assertiveness
  and momentum will go far. Try making the first move by contacting someone interesting.
  Then, make a concrete commitment to do something together.




The Types in Relationships
Let’s take a look at what each type is looking for in a relationship, as
well as their common relational strengths and pitfalls. Although this
information is oriented toward romantic relationships, it can also be
applied to your friendships, family connections, and professional
relationships. Like the previous chapter on careers, these proﬁles
look at common features and generalities within the Enneagram
types. Speciﬁc details and behaviors can vary between individuals of
the same type, depending on life experience, interpersonal
dynamics, and each individual’s level of psychological health.
Healthier people are more resilient, understanding, and open in
their relationships. Individuals at average levels of health and below
are more likely to get into conﬂicts.

TYPE ONE: HIGH IDEALS

All the Enneagram types tend to look for partners who manifest the
healthiest traits of their own type, and Ones are no exception. They
tend to look for romantic relationships with people who conduct
themselves with great integrity—people who are striving toward
inherent goodness and improvement of themselves or the world
around them. Ones are o en drawn to partners with similar high-
minded values, whether they’re invested in political causes or a
speciﬁc way of homemaking or raising children.
    O en, Ones have a very speciﬁc idea of what they’d like in a
partner, depending on what they personally view as a “good” or
“right” match. The stereotype of creating a long list of criteria for an
“ideal” partner comes from this type. This doesn’t always have to be
a wri en checklist. O en, it’s something informal that’s in the One’s
head.

ATTRIBUTES AND ATTITUDES
Healthy Ones are highly conscientious partners who aim to do the
right thing in their relationships. They have a strong sense of
morality and fairness, and consistently hold themselves to these
standards with their partners. They are caring, compassionate, and
appreciative of the eﬀorts others make.
    Average Ones can take out their frustrations on partners, being
critical when they don’t live up to their high ideals and standards in
relationships. This can cause partners to feel hurt and unappreciated,
particularly if the Type One partner doesn’t always live up to the
high standards that they preach themselves.

BUILDING A HEALTHY RELATIONSHIP
If you’re partnered with a One, it’s important to remember that
criticisms and “you should” language directed toward you are o en
a sign of caring. Ones want their loved ones to be at their best at all
times. Your partner is just trying to give you helpful suggestions.
Usually, Ones aren’t aware that their loving suggestions can be
perceived as critical commentary.
    Helping your One partner relax will ease their tension and
rigidity. Many Ones can be physically tense: if your partner is one of
them, oﬀer to give them a massage, prepare a bath, or support them
in ﬁnding another somatically relaxing activity. Find things you can
do with your partner that they ﬁnd fun. Give them permission to let
loose a li le bit by initiating and planning activities you both enjoy.

TYPE TWO: HEARTFELT BONDING

Twos are looking, ﬁrst and foremost, for a heart-centered connection
with their partners. Twos would like to build relationships with
people who are genuinely loving—people who bring a sense of
caring and appreciation to their relationships. Twos also appreciate
partners who have a strong sense of empathy and are interested in
developing relationships and connections.
    Twos can also be drawn, intentionally or unintentionally, to
relationships with people who they feel that they can help—they can
“ﬁx.” For example, if a Two has a large network and enjoys
developing relationships, they may be a racted to a partner who is
shy or socially awkward. Or, if they enjoy caring for others through
domestic tasks, they might partner with someone who has diﬃculty
with or dislikes housework or outdoor ﬁx-it work. This a raction of
opposites helps a Two feel like they have something to oﬀer in
exchange for love.

ATTRIBUTES AND ATTITUDES
Healthy Twos tend to show a lot of warmth and appreciation for
their partners, both verbally and through their actions. They tend to
be intuitive about ensuring their needs are met. Twos will provide
support in whatever genuine ways their partner needs help, and do
so in a selﬂess and humble manner. They are sweet, emotionally
connected, and inherently generous partners.
    Average Twos can become manipulative in relationships.
Sometimes, they can go overboard in their “helping,” doing things
their partners didn’t need or ask for. They may expect excessive
appreciation and help for their actions, becoming resentful and
needy when their partner does not provide the kind of love they
want.

BUILDING A HEALTHY RELATIONSHIP
When Twos start to help excessively, it’s important to remember that
what they’re really seeking is emotional reassurance and love—
whether or not they consciously realize it. Support your partner by
appreciating them for the supportive help you need. When the
behavior feels manipulative, determine what your partner’s needs
are and work to meet them.
    Twos can be so focused on romantic relationships and caregiving
that they neglect their own needs. Encourage your partner to explore
their own interests. Genuinely compliment them for their skills
unrelated to helping (for example, their intellectual prowess). Give
them the opportunity to try new things by themselves, even if these
things don’t interest you. Gently nudge them toward self-care
activities that interest them.

Busting Myths About Compatibility “What type am I most
compatible with?” If we had a quarter for every time we’ve heard
that question, we could treat ourselves to dinner. Compatibility is
complex. While relationships between any two types have predictable
highs and lows (see the Resources section, here) people of the same
type may be drawn to different personalities, depending on formative
experience and personal preference. It’s most important to find a
partner who shares your values and goals. As Enneagram teacher
Tom Condon suggests, look for “a healthy type and one who loves
you!”
TYPE THREE: THE REAL DEAL

Threes are drawn to partners who value authenticity. They
appreciate partners who are motivated, goal-oriented, and
commi ed to a life that reﬂects themselves. Threes appreciate
partners who work hard, but also those who create a harmonious
work/life balance and demonstrate eﬀort and sincerity in making the
relationship work.
    Threes are o en looking for an “ideal” person to be their partner.
What “ideal” means can vary based on family and cultural
expectations. For example, some Threes may want a partner who is a
quiet, domestically oriented homemaker, while others may prefer
someone in a high-powered career who “does it all.” Average Threes
may also seek out relationships that look good externally: a partner
their family approves of, someone who looks good for the Three’s
professional image, or even a relationship that appears “edgy.”

ATTRIBUTES AND ATTITUDES
Healthy Threes bring their best selves to relationships, oﬀering value
to their partners by doing whatever it is they do best. They remain
inspired to work on themselves and their relationships, o en
motivating their partner to do the same. They’re proud of what their
partner brings. They know how to compliment their partners and
make them feel valued.
    Average Threes can become slippery in relationships. They can
seem like they’re trying to “sell” themselves to a partner, leaving the
partner to wonder who their loved one really is. They also tend to be
workaholics, neglecting their relationships at the expense of
achieving their own success.

BUILDING A HEALTHY RELATIONSHIP
Remember that when your Three partner is demanding a ention for
themselves, what they really seek is validation and approval.
Appreciate your Three partner when they do something valuable,
whether it’s helping out around the house or giving a successful
presentation at work. Create a safe space where they can express
uncertainty and doubt with you. Invite them to open up and connect
with you.
    Encourage your Three partner to unplug from time to time. Plan
a relaxing day for them to spend with you, or suggest they
participate in practices to connect with themselves. Eschewing lavish
or fast-paced dates for quieter activities can help Threes stay aligned
with their hearts, making them deeply commi ed and caring
romantic partners.

TYPE FOUR: DIVING DEEP

Fours appreciate romantic partners who bring emotional depth to
their relationships. They look for relationships where heartfelt
honesty is shared between both partners, and value partners who are
interested in pursuing their own personal growth. Fours are also
looking for partners who can mirror them—partners who can help
them feel seen and acknowledged in the relationship.
    Fours are prone to fantasizing, and a common fantasy is that of a
perfect partner who will save them. Like the Three, the ideal partner
will vary from Four to Four. A common theme among Fours is that
their partner will be perfect and ultimately complete them. When
entering relationships, Fours are prone to idealizing their new
partners in this way.

ATTRIBUTES AND ATTITUDES
Healthy Fours are deeply devoted partners who inspire rich
creativity and growth in the relationship. They encourage their
partners to seek and ﬁnd themselves. They allow for vulnerable and
honest sharing from their partners and fundamentally understand
the emotional ups and downs of relationships.
   Average Fours can become frustrated with their partners because
they don’t live up to the ideal lover they envisioned. As a result,
Fours can become critical of their partners. They can also be
emotionally volatile and hard to pin down, potentially leaving their
partners confused and upset.

BUILDING A HEALTHY RELATIONSHIP
Beneath the emotional volatility Fours sometimes show, they’re
ultimately looking to be seen and validated by their partners.
Approaching a Four who is acting moody with your own display of
emotional volatility will just amp them up more. Instead, do your
best to remain steadfast, conﬁdent, and grounded through
challenges. Providing your Four partner with calm, soothing
validation will help them calm down and be able to see themselves
in a way that’s less self-critical.
    Physically grounding or soothing activities will help bring your
Four partner out of their fantasies and down to earth, more engaged
in and appreciative of the immediate relationship they have with
you. You can also encourage your Four partner to express their
emotions through a creative project of their choice, giving them a
supportive outlet for their feelings.

TYPE FIVE: MEETING OF MINDS

Fives are a racted to partners who bring intellectual depth and
clarity to the relationship. They enjoy a natural exchange of ideas in
relationships, o en gravitating toward those where their partner
shares their same special interests—or that at least allow them an
opportunity to pursue their own interests.
    Commonly, Fives look for relationships where they can have a lot
of time and space to themselves. O en Fives feel easily
overwhelmed by the demands of life. Space in relationships helps
them feel less overwhelmed by their partner. They can also have a
lack of interest in handling the practical and social aspects of life,
and look for partners who are able to help them in these areas.

ATTRIBUTES AND ATTITUDES
Healthy Fives are endlessly curious, bringing all kinds of interesting
information and innovative ideas to their partners. They are
supportive, share openly about themselves, and can laugh with at
the absurdities of life. They are patient with their partners and take a
long-range view of the relationship.
    Average Fives can be distant and unavailable to their partners,
ge ing too distracted by their minds and interests to participate in
family or emotional life. Their partners can feel like they need to get
these needs met elsewhere. Average Fives can also be cynical,
bringing argumentativeness and a general negative a itude about
people into their romantic partnership.

BUILDING A HEALTHY RELATIONSHIP
When Fives become emotionally unavailable, it’s usually because
they’re overwhelmed, rather than trying to be intentionally hurtful.
When Fives close up, patience and support is key, as is creating an
environment that makes them feel emotionally safe about opening
up in the relationship. Ask them to open up one-on-one, in an
intimate se ing, rather than, say, in a loud restaurant with a group of
friends.
    One way to get Fives to open up and trust you is to ask them
about their favorite intellectual interests. From there, conversations
can grow more intimate and personal. Fives also beneﬁt from
physical activities—activities that allow them to be grounded and
connect with their bodies. Participate in these activities with your
partner, or encourage your partner to do them independently. Fives
who are grounded in this way become more conﬁdent and open in
their romantic relationships.

TYPE SIX: THROUGH THICK AND THIN

Sixes look for partners who bring a sense of deep, unshakeable
support and direction into the relationship. All types desire partners
who are commi ed to them, but Sixes are particularly interested in
knowing their relationship will be with them through thick and thin.
Sixes appreciate partners who are trustworthy, hardworking, and
steadfast.
    Sixes can have a sense of uncertainty and anxiety about their
relationships, even if they’ve been married for decades. The
nervousness that their partner isn’t supporting them and isn’t
commi ed enough to the relationship always exists. Sixes look for
partners who are unwavering, even as the Six questions their
partner’s commitment to them.

ATTRIBUTES AND ATTITUDES
Healthy Sixes bring a deep sense of guidance, grounded love, and
commitment into relationships. They are able to lead the
relationship, and their romantic partner, in directions that best
support them. They are team-oriented people, and typically work for
what is best for the common good of the relationship.
    Average Sixes can be erratic partners, constantly worried about
worst-case scenarios and what might go wrong in a relationship.
Fear and paranoia may cause them to make unfounded accusations
of disloyalty toward their partners, causing their partners, ironically,
to develop mistrust of the Six.

BUILDING A HEALTHY RELATIONSHIP
The anxiety and doubt Sixes can feel about their relationship comes
from their own “swinging pendulum” and racing thoughts—which
then get projected onto their partner. As the partner to a Six,
remember not to take this personally. The best thing you can do for
your partner is to stay conﬁdent, solid, and unwavering in the face of
their uncertainty and doubt.
   Sixes become more solid in relationships through their own
grounding, through connecting with their bodies and “checking in”
with logic and reason. Resist the urge to get argumentative. Doing so
will only make your partner more anxious. Instead, counter their
fears with calmness and clear logic. Encourage your partner to use
their nervous energy to get physically active, and to focus and
accomplish key tasks.

TYPE SEVEN: ADVENTURE TOGETHER

Sevens look for relationships that bring a sense of fun and joy to
their lives. Sevens can see life as a great adventure. As a result, they
o en look for romantic partners who will live out adventures with
them, bringing life to something as routine as a trip to a grocery
store. Sevens value upbeat, positive people who can also be there
with them in diﬃcult times.
    With desire for novelty and variety, Sevens are stereotyped as
having a diﬃcult time commi ing to monogamous relationships. In
fact, some Sevens may prefer casual dating or open relationships to
monogamy. Other Sevens, however, are very commi ed to one
partner. Instead, they look for novelty within their relationship or in
other areas of their life.

ATTRIBUTES AND ATTITUDES
Healthy Sevens are delightful partners who create boundless
opportunities in their lives. They can li the spirits of their partner,
and are able to be enthusiastic about every aspect of their
relationship and life together. Partners of healthy Sevens will rarely
be bored by their relationships.
    Average Sevens can be highly distractible, sometimes over-
commi ing and neglecting their partners as a result. They can get
frustrated quickly and have a diﬃcult time listening to any
negativity from their partners, or admi ing to negative feelings
within themselves.

BUILDING A HEALTHY RELATIONSHIP
It can be diﬃcult for Sevens to be satisﬁed by what’s in front of them,
leading to a “grass is greener” mentality. When Sevens appear
bored, frustrated, or ﬁckle in relationships, it’s the result of this
mindset, not because their partner has limited their options or held
them back.
    Sevens become happier and more stable partners when they take
the time to go inward and connect with themselves, particularly
their feelings and emotions. Don’t try to stop your partner’s desire to
do many things at once. Instead, encourage them to cultivate a
regular gratitude practice, or something similar that they enjoy. If
they stick to this, Sevens will calm down and ground, becoming
deeply appreciative of their feelings and their romantic
relationships.

TYPE EIGHT: MOVING AND SHAKING

Eights look for romantic partners who can live fully and be real with
them. Natural leaders, Eights o en like to feel like they’re in charge
in relationships. However, they also appreciate partners who value
and support their emotional needs.
    Eights like to support people who they see as being “weaker”
than themselves and can be drawn to partners whom they feel they
can protect. They desire romantic relationships where they feel
strong, conﬁdent, and in control. As movers and shakers, they also
like it when their partner can keep up with their active, fast-paced
lives.

ATTRIBUTES AND ATTITUDES
Healthy Eights are conﬁdent and inspiring partners, grounded and
solid in their relationships and lives. They work hard to provide
unshakeable support for their partners, whether ﬁnancial, physical,
or whatever else is needed. They are openhearted souls, and gentle
under their tough exteriors.
    Average Eights can become aggressive and confrontational in
relationships, asserting themselves to make sure they get their way
in relationships. Their bravado, tough talking, and self-conﬁdence
can be intimidating or even scary for their romantic partners.

BUILDING A HEALTHY RELATIONSHIP
Eights become intimidating and confrontational in relationships
because they secretly fear not being strong or tough enough—that, in
turn, people will reject them. Eights respect people who are
conﬁdent themselves, and respond positively to a partner who can
appear unﬂinching during a conﬂict. An Eight who respects their
partner will be more egalitarian in how they view their relationship.
    It also helps to be so and tenderhearted with your Eight partner,
as this can break down their defenses. Be gentle and reassuring to
the Eight in your life. Encourage them to do activities that really
make them feel nurtured. You can also support them in developing
regularity and routine in their lives—both of which help regulate
their anger and keep them on a more even keel, emotionally.

TYPE NINE: PEACE AND UNITY
Nines seek out partners with whom they feel they can have peaceful,
harmonious relationships. Most Nines desire uniﬁed and stable
partnerships, where they can feel calm, reassured, and in balance.
O en, they like partners who take the lead in relationships, whose
lives they can join and become a part of. Some Nines are very
physically active and like partners who can do physical activities
with them.
    It’s not uncommon to see Nines choose partners who they can
feel merged with, sharing values and life desires. Although all
Enneagram types desire this, in Nines this can be more extreme.
They fear any disagreement could lead to a lack of harmony in the
relationship.

ATTRIBUTES AND ATTITUDES
Healthy Nines are calm, gentle, and supportive partners. They have
positive outlooks. They know how to smooth over diﬃcult situations
and keep the peace. They can be stabilizing for partners who are
naturally more emotionally reactive or pessimistic. Many of them
bring creativity and a connectedness to nature into their
relationships.
    Average Nines can be overly conﬂict-avoidant in romantic
relationships. Sometimes, they may not even want to admit that
there’s a conﬂict in the ﬁrst place. At times, Nines will say they agree
with their partners, while dragging their feet or lashing out in anger,
causing their partners to get irritated and angry with them.

BUILDING A HEALTHY RELATIONSHIP
Nines can be self-eﬀacing in relationships, engaging in passive-
aggressive behavior because they genuinely want happy partners
and harmonious relationships. Nines can also feel unimportant and
unseen. In this case, give your partner compliments and recognition,
assuring them that you want to hear their voice and opinions as
much as needed.
   Many Nines love physical activity. It can help ground them and
give them the opportunity to express their own needs. Encourage
your partner to participate in slow-paced, intentional movement,
such as karate, or they may check out and become disengaged in
their activity. Many Nines also ﬁnd spending time outdoors
grounding and soothing. Spend time in nature with your partner,
and support them conﬁdently in their own personal endeavors.




               RESOLVING RELATIONSHIP
                     CONFLICTS
  Part of the beauty of relationships is that each participant brings a different perspective.
  This, of course, also means that our perspectives sometimes clash. Think of the last time a
  conflict arose in an important relationship for you: Did one person want to use logic, while
  the other focused on emotions? Maybe one of you urged the other to look on the bright
  side.
      When a clash of perspectives gets out of control, it can leave scars in our relationships.
  When approached with attention and empathy, conflicts become opportunities for
  understanding each other and deepening our bonds. The Enneagram’s conflict resolution
  styles are useful tools for keeping relationship conflicts positive and solution-focused. As
  you review the styles below, consider which approaches you and your loved ones lead with.
     The Competency Types (One, Three, and Five) bring an analytical approach to conflict.
     Their style might be stated succinctly as, “Let’s act like adults here and solve things
     logically.” Their rational solution strategy maintains civility at the risk of seeming overly
     cool. People with other styles may find themselves frustrated by a Competency-based
     loved one’s detachment.

     The Emotional Realness Types (Four, Six, and Eight) seek to bring emotional truths into
     the open. This style is helpful for unearthing the underlying dynamics of conflicts, but
     risks creating a cycle of reactivity. People with other styles may be annoyed by a loved
     one’s Emotional Realness focus on problems over solutions.
     The Positive Outlook Types (Two, Seven, and Nine) look at the larger context of a
     problem, focusing on existing positives and seeking the best possible outcome. While
     this style raises morale, it may also overlook or neglect a conflict’s knotty aspects.
     People with other styles may be irritated when a loved one sweeps the problem under
     the rug.

      When used individually, each conflict resolution style is wonderful for addressing one
  aspect of a problem, but tends to neglect other important elements. In order to effectively
  resolve conflict, it’s best to use the three styles together. If you and your loved one have
  different styles, rather than clashing over your divergent approaches, recognize that they
  bring different valuable tools to the table. When things get tough between you, make a
  conscious effort to use the third style to address your collective blind spot. If you share a
  style, try consciously bringing in the other two perspectives.
     You can approximate the approaches of all three styles by following a three-step conflict
  resolution process. First, tap into the strengths of the Emotional Realness style by
  identifying underlying tensions and naming the roots of the conflict. Next, use the
  Competency style’s focus on logical problem solving to brainstorm potential solutions.
  Finally, as the Positive Outlook Types do, look at the larger context, e.g., asking yourself,
  “Will this matter in five years?” Seek a way to address the conflict that will yield positive
  results for all parties.




Communication Styles
Communication is one of the most important skills for building and
sustaining interpersonal relationships. Each type has its own way of
communicating and trying to get its needs met. Sometimes, conﬂicts
can arise when people with diﬀerent Enneagram types
misunderstand each other and jump to conclusions—o en assuming
that a person with a diﬀerent type communicates similarly to how
they do!
   By learning how each style communicates, you’ll become more
understanding and be er able to resolve disagreements and
breakdowns in communication. Here’s a breakdown of each type’s
communication style.
    Ones communicate directly and precisely. Their communication
can include a lot of “shoulds,” and their voices can display tension
and frustration. A challenge for Ones is to avoid being too preachy
in conversations and displaying irritation with others who are not
“right.” Ones should aim to speak in a way that is relaxed and
accepting toward others. To communicate with Ones, speak to the
eﬀort you are making, and ground your conversation in common
values.
    Twos o en communicate in a way that is warm and enticing.
They have a tendency to focus on others, with ﬂa ery and gushy
expressions. A challenge for Twos is to avoid “leaning in” too much
to other people, making them uncomfortable. Twos should aim to
communicate with others in a way that displays compassion through
thoughtful, targeted directives and emotional restraint. To
communicate with Twos, show appreciation and be a entive to your
personal connection.
    Threes communicate in a way that is competent, eﬃcient, and
smooth. They can be chameleonic and highly adaptable to their
audience. A challenge for Threes is to avoid making conversations
into “sales pitches” that draw a ention to themselves. Threes should
aim to communicate in a tone that is genuine, caring, and a uned to
the emotional needs of other people. When communicating with
Threes, take a direct, goal-oriented approach. Tactful honesty is
appreciated.
    Fours typically communicate in a way that is personal and
emotionally honest. Fours can speak at length about feelings, to get
emotional responses from others. A challenge for Fours is to avoid
speaking in a way that is dramatic but also erratic and ungrounded.
Fours should aim to communicate in a way that is physically
embodied and uses rationality to back up feelings. When
communicating with Fours, acknowledge their emotions and be up
front about your own. Show that you respect them as individuals.
    Fives communicate in a way that tends to be speciﬁc and
cerebral, focused on thoughts and ideas. A challenge for Fives is to
avoid speaking in a way that is emotionally dry and detached. It’s
helpful for Fives to cultivate interest and conversational a ention to
others’ thoughts and feelings. Fives should aim to meet other people
from a place of heartfelt care and engagement in their stories. To
communicate with Fives, engage them intellectually and show an
interest in their ideas. If you’re curious, you may learn a lot.
    Sixes are typically warm and engaged. Sixes o en speak
nervously and are self-eﬀacing. A challenge for Sixes is to avoid
displaying anxiety about where they stand with others by testing
and challenging people in conversations. Sixes should aim to speak
in a way that is grounded and displays conﬁdence in what they are
saying. To communicate with Sixes, be steady in your decisions and
reassuring toward them. Show that you are loyal and reliable.
    Sevens typically communicate fast and enthusiastically. Sevens
are upbeat and o en spin stories. A challenge for Sevens is to avoid
speaking in a way that sounds demanding, impatient, and focused
on their immediate needs at the expense of the other person. They
should aim to speak in a way that is calm, focused, and accepting of
others. When communicating with Sevens, echo their enthusiasm
and share your own, while being pragmatic about needs and goals.
    Eights communicate in a way that is ﬁlled with energy. Eights
tend to be straightforward and blunt; others will know where they
stand with them. A challenge for Eights is to avoid being overly
callous and argumentative with others. They should aim to
communicate in a way that is heartfelt and compassionate toward
others’ feelings and needs. When communicating with Eights, be
direct and match their energy level. Don’t be afraid to get into a good
debate.
    Nines communicate gently and reﬂectively. They can have a
tendency to ramble, telling long stories or sagas before ge ing to the
point. A challenge for Nines is to avoid being too passive and going
along with others in conversations. Nines should aim to speak in a
way that is conﬁdent and directly expresses themselves. To
communicate with Nines, be accepting and patient in your
approach. Allow them space to get in touch with and express their
opinions.


Family Relationships and Roles
Navigating our family dynamics can sometimes be even more
complex than ﬁnding and maintaining a romantic relationship.
Generally, we choose our spouse or romantic partner, but not our
parents, siblings, children, or extended family members. At times,
we have wonderful organic compatibility with our family of origin.
But, in other cases, our loved ones are quite diﬀerent from the
people we choose to befriend or date. Most of us will change friends
or romantic relationships at some point in our life, but our families
typically stay with us for life. Learning how to navigate these
relationships is especially important.
    All families are unique, but each Enneagram type tends to play a
particular role in their individual family dynamic. Understanding
the role you usually fall into around your family can shed light on
new options and alternative ways of interacting with them.

   Type One: Ones ﬁll the role of the family perfectionist, fulﬁlling
   parents’ expectations to the le er or instilling values and
   standards in their children.

   Type Two: Twos fall into the role of family helper, pleasing their
   parents or diligently looking a er their children’s needs.

   Type Three: Threes fulﬁll the role of family star, embodying their
   parents’ values and dreams or encouraging their kids to succeed.
  Type Four: Fours shed light on the family’s problems,
  encouraging their loved ones to address diﬃcult familial
  shadows.

  Type Five: Fives prefer to have some space from family
  dynamics, and seek the role of family expert in areas of interest.

  Type Six: Sixes move between building family unity and
  rebelling against the family unit. They’re o en rebellious children
  and protective parents.

  Type Seven: Sevens ﬁll the role of family cheerleader, bringing
  smiles to family members and seeking to minimize pain.

  Type Eight: Eights become family protectors, exerting power as
  children or parents and taking on responsibility for loved ones.

  Type Nine: Nines act as family peacemakers, mediating conﬂicts
  between parents or children and refusing to take sides.




      STRENGTHENING CONNECTIONS
 Think of the relationships that are important to you. How does your Enneagram type
 impact the way you interact with these key people? What gifts does it bring to your
 relationships? What habits do you have that make it challenging for you to connect?
     Consider the Enneagram types of others who are important in your life. How are they
 seeing the world differently from you? What do they most want out of their relationship with
 you? What’s one thing you can do for each important person this week to show them that
 you get them and appreciate the connection you share? Commit to taking one small action
 for each person you care about.



NAVIGATING FAMILY DYNAMICS
In order to see how the Enneagram can help improve family
dynamics, let’s return to Julia as she spends time with her immediate
family during the holiday season.
    Julia is excited for the winter holidays because her sister, Mary, is
visiting from out of town. Her boyfriend, Miguel, is going to
celebrate with her family, too, rather than with his parents as he
usually does. Julia and Miguel pick Mary up at the airport, and Julia
immediately launches into plans of all the fun activities they’ll do
together: baking, skiing, playing long rounds of family card games. .
.
    Her enthusiasm dims when her parents and Mary greet each
other. Their mother, Evelyn, is a Type Eight, and orders Mary to put
her things away while brusquely telling her the plans for the day.
Always the family rebel, Mary resists, refusing some activities and
suggesting alternatives to others. “I’m your mother,” Evelyn insists.
“You do what the family wants, and we’ll have a good holiday
together!” “No,” Mary insists, beginning to regret her decision to
stay at her parents’ house. “I need to se le in ﬁrst. And I see no
reason the rest of us have to watch that same holiday special for the
10 millionth time when no one but you even likes it!” Her father,
Steve, an Enneagram Five, hangs back from the argument as usual.
As the two women’s voices grow heated, he retreats into the living
room.
    Miguel’s ﬁrst holiday with Julia’s entire immediate family proves
challenging. True to his type as a Two, he tries to be useful by
mediating between Evelyn and Mary. Both resist what they see as a
pushy outside inﬂuence. Julia suggests a diﬀerent set of holiday
activities to the family and is able to get everyone engaged.
However, by the ﬁ h energetic game, Steve is overwhelmed and
heads to bed early. Mary is disappointed that her father would
rather go oﬀ by himself than spend time with her when she has
come to visit from far away. Does he not care about her enough?
    Family dynamics are tricky to navigate because they develop
over the course of years and involve deep emotional investment
from all parties. O en, diﬀerent family members want diﬀerent
things, but without knowing each other’s motivations, everyone
imagines their family members are just “being obnoxious.” An
Enneagram intervention can help clarify and address the underlying
dynamics.
    Julia introduces the Enneagram types to her feuding family, and
they laugh in recognition. Evelyn wants to be in charge. Steve wants
space and hates being overwhelmed. Mary wants reassurance and
autonomy. Julia wants things to be fun, and Miguel wants to
establish connections with his partner’s family. How can everyone
get what they want?
    Steve’s analytical mind comes up with a solution. Maybe Evelyn
can suggest activities with the understanding that the others will
choose which ones they want to participate in. He reassures Mary
and Julia that he loves seeing them, but also doesn’t want to do
energy-draining activities the whole time they’re there, a stance they
can understand. Evelyn suggests that Steve lead an activity he
prefers, and he entertains everyone with tales of holiday history.
Miguel ﬁnds a new way of connecting and being helpful by pitching
in with kitchen duties rather than trying to mend relationships. With
a clearer understanding of each other, Julia’s family members are
free to divide and participate in activities as they please. Rather than
pushing each other, they respect each other’s boundaries, leading to
a more fun and pleasant time for all.
    Your family, like Julia’s, is probably full of diverse personalities
with very diﬀerent needs. The Enneagram can be useful for
understanding where everyone is coming from and ensuring these
needs get met. Look beyond the surface and seek compromises that
satisfy diﬀerent people’s core motivations. You might ﬁnd that your
family dynamic changes for the be er.
   In the next chapter, we’ll look beyond family and work to ways
the Enneagram can help you grow as a person.
  GROWTH AND CHANGE
  On this Enneagram journey, we’ve talked about diﬀerent
  aspects of the system and discovered ways you can
  apply them to improve your career and relationships.
  Along with using your Enneagram knowledge in
  practical ways, you may also be interested in applying it
  on a deeper level. There are many ways you can use the
  Enneagram to notice and change unhelpful habits, build
  resilience, and cra a more balanced, happier life for
  yourself. This chapter will explore a few starting points
  for creating a solid foundation of ongoing personal
  growth.


The Enneagram and Growth
Some people new to the Enneagram mistakenly believe that once
they discover their type, they have exhausted the system’s
usefulness. While it can be tempting to feel like we’re “ﬁnished”
a er learning our type, there’s more to it than that. Besides, if we
learn our own personality type without using that knowledge to
work on ourselves, we won’t grow. By working on ourselves, we’re
able to ﬁnd freedom from our ingrained habits and pa erns.
    The Enneagram is a uniquely useful tool for growth and change
because it delves deeply into our core motivations. While other well-
known personality typologies do an excellent job measuring and
explaining human behaviors and personality traits, the Enneagram
describes us at a deeper level. It explains why we act in certain ways.
Seeing what drives our behavior allows us to examine our deeply
held beliefs, a itudes, and choices, oﬀering a level of insight that’s
hard to reach without this kind of road map.
    The Enneagram also brings amazing breadth and depth to
personal development. When used correctly, as a dynamic system
for change rather than as a means of stereotyping and judging, it
describes the full range of our behaviors. Along with the insights we
get from learning our primary Enneagram type, we gain additional
wisdom about ourselves when we learn about our connections to
other types through wings, Stress Points, and Security Points. When
we consider the healthy, average, and unhealthy sides of our type, or
look at these in more detail using Riso and Hudson’s Nine Levels of
Development (see Personality Types and Understanding the Enneagram
for further reading), we have a map that describes ourselves from
our absolute best to very worst days.
    Regardless of cultural background and life experiences, the core
psychological structure of our Enneagram type remains consistent.
This makes the Enneagram a growth tool that works for all
demographics and can facilitate understanding between them. You
can be any race, gender, socioeconomic status, and religion, and still
beneﬁt from the Enneagram. All that’s needed is a desire to grow.
    The Enneagram is a great tool for facilitating change. What’s just
as important is the fact that the self-awareness Enneagram work
brings is a doorway to self-acceptance. Many people describe feeling
a sense of relief when they ﬁnd their Enneagram type. Most of us
feel a great sense of reassurance when we ﬁnally gain an explanation
for why we keep ge ing caught in the same traps. Through the
Enneagram, not only do we learn that our personality’s challenges
aren’t our fault, we also get glimpses of our greatest possibilities and
gi s. We stop blaming ourselves for our shortcomings and see the
beauty in our true selves. We begin to love ourselves for exactly who
we are.




   HOW NOT TO USE THE ENNEAGRAM
  “I’m a Seven, so I can never finish what I start!”
      “Of course you’re angry at me. You’re an Eight!”
       We’ve heard sentences like these in the Enneagram world, and they tend to make us
  cringe. While the Enneagram types are incredible tools for understanding human behavior,
  it’s not unusual for people to grab ahold of them as ways of excusing that behavior rather
  than as tools for change. If you notice yourself using your knowledge of the Enneagram
  types to stereotype or write off actions—yours or someone else’s—take a second look.
  Having a certain type doesn’t mean that your behavior is set in stone. Think about the
  unhealthy, average, and healthy ranges in each type: They’re all part of that type’s potential.
  How can you look beyond the annoying habits sometimes found at the types’ average levels
  toward the possibility of dynamism and growth?




Living with Accountability
We are all works in progress. Some areas of life are easy for us, while
other domains present obstacles. We have many traits and habits
that we’re conscious of, and others that are hard for us to see. The
Enneagram empowers us to get more in touch with our internal
states, desires, and needs. If you’re looking to use the Enneagram to
create positive change in your life, one of the keys to doing this is
knowing yourself and becoming accountable to yourself.
    As you learn about your type, look out for desires and
motivations that you’ve been discounting in yourself. For example,
are you a people person working in a ﬁeld with li le interpersonal
interaction? Do you want more power or visibility, but hold yourself
back from pursuing these things in a satisfying way? Due to various
forms of cultural conditioning, many of us write oﬀ important parts
of ourselves because they’re “inappropriate,” “undesirable,” “too
much” this, or “not enough” of that. When we do this, we deny the
gi s that we could bring into the world. We can only bring balance
into our lives if we accept the people we are in the ﬁrst place, and
make choices that ﬁt our personality’s needs. Listen to your type’s
desire for integrity, clarity, harmony, or whatever is at the core, and
look for healthy ways to let it guide you.
    Just as we deny some of our gi s, we also tend to overlook our
own unhelpful habits. Take an honest look at the descriptions of
your type’s average and unhealthy sides. Which tendencies do you
see in yourself? Take a day to observe your Enneagram pa erns at
work. Notice whenever you’re acting out your type’s habits in a way
that’s detrimental. Riso and Hudson call this “catching yourself in
the act.” Practice this type of awareness every day. With time, your
ability to observe yourself will grow. You’ll develop an ability that
Helen Palmer calls the “inner observer”—that quiet place inside
yourself, distinct from your reactions, that watches your mind
without participating in its cha er. As you think and act, the inner
observer takes everything in. It brings critical distance and the ability
to pause, rethink, and change your usual way of doing things. The
more you ﬂex the muscles of the inner observer, the more control
you will have over your habits and the more conscious choices you
will make.
    Living in harmony with your type’s motivations and developing
an inner observer are ways of being accountable to yourself.
However, it’s challenging to do these things alone. The path to
personal growth gets much easier when you enlist some traveling
companions. It’s helpful to have a partner, family member, or friend
(or more than one) to do Enneagram work with. Together, you can
candidly talk type, call each other out when needed, and support
each other’s eﬀorts to live with accountability. It’s even more
supportive to ﬁnd a community of people commi ed to personal
growth. Some people ﬁnd this in religious or spiritual groups, or in
groups focused on a speciﬁc practice. These bring support,
community, alternative perspectives, and a place to focus on
yourself. Seek out a group that meets regularly—one you can be
open with and whose principles you ﬁnd supportive. Seeking a mix
of personal connections and a wider group context oriented to
growth brings guidance and support as you connect with yourself
and move forward.




    THE BENEFITS OF SELF-AWARENESS
  The road to self-realization is not always obstacle free. When we work on ourselves, we see
  things about ourselves that we didn’t see before. While these things can be positive and
  heartwarming, sometimes we learn things about ourselves that we don’t like. Other times,
  we uncover past hurt and sorrow. The journey is unpredictable.
      Luckily, the rewards for doing this work are immense. Below are five benefits you will get
  from working on yourself and developing self-awareness.

  1. Your coping skills will improve. Life will always throw challenges at you. When you lack
     self-awareness, you may address obstacles from a place of reactivity, and it becomes
     much harder to cope. With awareness, you can handle these difficulties from a place of
     grace and acceptance, and it becomes easier to remain positive and relaxed, and to
     make empowering choices.

  2. You will heal yourself. When pain remains buried and unaddressed, hurt lingers on in
     your body, making you more likely to react to the present from the place of your past
     pain. Working through your challenges makes it easier to act consciously and frees you
     from the burdens you carry. People tend to feel much better each time an issue gets
     resolved.

  3. Your internal sense of balance will increase. Sometimes, you may feel as if you are on an
     emotional tightrope. Each emotion and reaction has the potential to hit you like a
     strong gust of wind, leaving you struggling to cling to the delicate balance you’ve
     created. Self-awareness gives you strength, and acceptance makes you even stronger.
     You can maintain your balance and weather internal storms.
       Your relationships will get better. You can make it easy for others to enjoy your company
  4.
       when you relate to them from a place of awareness. When you react to others from a
       place of unconsciousness, you have more conflicts, and greater hurt may arise in
       relationships. With self-awareness, you develop compassion for others’ pain. It is easier
       to connect with others from a place of kindness.

  5. You will develop presence and mindfulness. Being present allows people to live in the
     here and now. When we are focused on only the current moment, we don’t need to feel
     hurt by the wounds from the past or fear the unknown in the future. We find acceptance
     and joy in everything. We simply are. In presence, we see others and ourselves fully and
     compassionately.




RECOGNIZING AND CHANGING BAD HABITS

Let’s get back to the inner observer for a minute. It’s a tricky thing to
develop because we’re used to acting out our habits rather than
noticing them. All of us live our daily lives as creatures of our habits,
from our morning coﬀee, to our work schedules, all the way down to
our preferred bedtime. Our habits are external, what we do in our
daily lives, and internal, as driven by our personalities. Our egos
dictate our habitual inner self-talk, driven by our personality type
and personal life experiences. This self-talk is largely unconscious,
and when we react to this talk instead of cultivating an awareness of
the immediate world around us, it’s harder to make the right choices
to support our own lives.
    As you begin paying a ention to these daily habits, the things
you do when you aren’t making deliberate choices, you’ll hear self-
talk in the back of your mind. As with your habits, this dialogue has
probably been following you around all your life without you
paying much a ention to it. It sounds like the voice of “the way
things are.” Listen to it without judgment, bringing gentleness and
curiosity. While your own personal dialogue will be unique, here are
some common themes that appear in the unconscious talk of each
type:
Type One: Ones have strong inner critics, and their internal voice
can sound particularly parental. There’s a strong sense of
responsibility, and of things that they “must” do in order to be a
good person. Ones are driven to act in the world largely based on
this heavy internal dialogue of inner criticism.

Type Two: The Two inner voice o en speaks about other people
the Two is in relationship with. Twos will focus on the “other”—
what that person needs, and how to provide support. This
encourages Twos to provide acts of services, in the hope that true
love will come from their eﬀorts.

Type Three: Threes unconsciously are always looking for ways
they can be the best at whatever they’re doing. They hear their
family’s voice: speciﬁcally, what they perceived their family
wanted them to do to be successful. This causes them to go out
and achieve in ways they believe will make them valuable.

Type Four: A er taking action or having intimate conversations,
Fours will instantly check in with how they’re doing emotionally.
The current feelings get absorbed into the Four’s internal self-
image. Fours will then react based on their most current self-
perception, which frequently involves negative comparisons or
idealization.

Type Five: A Five’s inner dialogue will always be looking for
ways they can learn or know more about a subject or situation,
usually in great depth. By continuing to dig deeper and deeper
for knowledge, Fives hope that they will ﬁnally feel like they
know enough to conﬁdently take action in the world.

Type Six: Russ Hudson describes the Six inner voice as being like
a pendulum: anxiously swinging from place to place, looking for
a true source of safety, security, and guidance. Their anxiety-
   producing inner dialogue causes them to look outside of
   themselves for a stable, reassuring place of security.

   Type Seven: A Seven’s self-talk is o en extremely positive,
   seeking out the next fun, exciting source of stimulation. A Seven’s
   thoughts commonly move rapidly, looking for satisfaction and
   fulﬁllment from a wide variety of sources. They react by going
   out into the world and looking for new ways to ﬁnd happiness.

   Type Eight: The habitual dialogue of Eights gets bigger and
   bigger: looking to sound bolder, stronger, and more conﬁdent
   with each thought. By creating dialogue that’s full of conﬁdence
   and bluster, Eights are trying to drown out the voices of
   sensitivity and doubt, and the fear they aren’t strong enough.

   Type Nine: Nines talk to themselves in a way that’s relatively
   positive (“I’m okay, you’re okay”), but can also feel secretly
   resigned to the way things are. They’ll imagine what is nice in
   their present lives. This kind of talk keeps them in a bubble of
   internal comfort, stopping them from taking possibly earth-
   ra ling risks.

    The ﬁrst step to changing your inner habits is just being aware of
what they are. Through awareness, you can make a conscious eﬀort
to introduce diﬀerent self-talk that slowly changes your internalized
beliefs. This kind of change takes time: you’ve been doing your
type’s pa erns for years, a er all, and research shows it typically
takes a couple of months to change any habit. A commi ed daily
practice, which we’ll help you develop later in this chapter, will be
the most powerful tool in your arsenal for changing bad habits.

IDENTIFYING AND USING YOUR STRENGTHS
The other side of living with accountability involves being true to
our best selves. Sure, the Enneagram teaches us to pinpoint and
work on what’s diﬃcult for us, but it’s also important to stay
positive. Chugging through our daily lives and simply trying to
survive, we o en get se led into routines that don’t always serve us.
The career choices, relationships, and lifestyles we choose aren’t
always in accordance with our strengths, and don’t always allow us
to tap into our most powerful gi s. Too o en, we make our choices
around what gives us immediate satisfaction, doing what someone
else thought would be good for us, or simply because we’ve always
done things this way and change hasn’t occurred to us.
    Learning the Enneagram is frequently a happy experience.
Discovering our type gives us a clear road map to our deepest
essential qualities and gi s—qualities we may have seen in our lives
but haven’t been able to put our ﬁnger on completely. These qualities
are broad. For example, there are many ways one can embody
essential strength. We have endless possibilities for creating a life
where we can embody these strong core abilities. Cultivating your
Enneagram type’s highest gi s can be done in any kind of life
circumstances.
    Even so, it takes work to create a life that feels deeply aligned to
your inner self, especially if you, like many of us, haven’t always
made choices that are in service of your personal path and are
looking at making signiﬁcant life changes to correct these. In the
earlier chapters of this book, we’ve discussed the healthy, high-level
qualities of each type, as well as the strengths your type possesses in
careers and intimate relationships—strengths that can be
individualized to your own situation. To discover your own ideal life
path, some deep self-examination is in order.
    To start, look at your life as it is now. For example:

   What is your living situation?
   What are your most important relationships?

   What is your career path?

   What are your hobbies and interests outside of work?

   Are you satisﬁed with your life as it is in the present?

    It’s common to have aspects of your life that you really enjoy and
others that you want to change. For example, you may love your
profession, but have a diﬃcult time ge ing along with your boss, or
not like the city where your job is located. Or perhaps you’re a high-
energy person in a low-energy job or family, but you make up for it
by volunteering many hours at a high-impact organization. Make
two columns in a journal or word processing document with the
following titles: What about my life feels aligned with me? What
feels oﬀ course?
    To work on making a vision of a deeply aligned life, along with
considering your Enneagram type’s gi s, think about the feedback
you’ve go en from your loved ones and in the workplace. It’s
common for themes to emerge. Perhaps numerous bosses have
complimented you on your impeccable paperwork, or your family
members notice how well you comfort the young children in your
extended family. Consider, as well, what you dreamed about as a
young child, and what activities you truly enjoy. Perhaps you really
love going to the theater or leading meetings. All of these provide
hints for discovering and following your strengths.
    As you work on identifying your strengths and creating a life
that uses them, keep the following things in mind:
    Using your gi s is about empowering yourself. The best goals are
ones that are completely in our control. Wanting our loved ones or
our coworkers to change will only lead to disappointment. They
need to live their own lives and make their own choices.
   Your life path may be diﬀerent than the advice you get from your
parents, friends, or even your mentors. Deep personal inquiry is the
best way to get these kinds of answers, and our own clear, present,
inner knowing is our best guide.
   A deeply aligned life will be fulﬁlling on many levels, but it
doesn’t always create instant happiness. All of us have ups and
downs and unpredictable forks in the road that we don’t expect. As
the old chestnut says, “Life is what happens when we’re busy
making other plans.” The good news is this: we can still embody our
highest selves and best qualities, and be walking our highest path, in
an unpredictable world.


Developing a Daily Growth Practice
In addition to observing your habits and self-talk and bringing your
life into alignment with your strengths, another key way to build a
foundation of personal growth is to develop a daily practice. In
order to grow and change, you can beneﬁt from the consistency that
a daily practice brings. Like building muscle at the gym, a daily
practice strengthens the inner observer every day and is easily
integrated into your everyday routine.
    The idea of adding a daily practice into your busy life can be
intimidating to those who are just starting out. The good news is that
it doesn’t have to be scary. Especially when you’re ﬁrst starting out, a
daily practice can be brief. Even a practice of just a few minutes ﬁrst
thing in the morning every day will help you develop self-awareness
and presence! A personal practice should be something you look
forward to doing, so you’re more likely to stick to it.
    Here are some suggestions for daily practices:

   Keep a journal. Many Enneagram books include inquiry
   questions speciﬁc to your type that you can journal about. We’ve
   included some questions in the Appendix (here) as a starting
   point for inquiry. You can also ﬁnd general thought-provoking
   questions in spiritually oriented Enneagram books and other
   books about spirituality. If you prefer an approach that is less
   structured, writing about whatever is on your mind will help you
   gain clarity into yourself and purge negative thoughts and
   emotions.

   Meditate. Experienced meditators may meditate for long periods
   of time, but you can beneﬁt from practicing for 10 minutes a day.
   Make sure to ﬁnd a position that’s comfortable for you, and don’t
   worry if you experience a “monkey mind”—an unse led,
   restless, distracted mind that hops about among thoughts and
   topics—while you meditate. The thoughts and feelings that arise
   in this space will teach you a lot about yourself. Just remember to
   breathe through it!

   Create art. If you’re a highly visual person, you may love
   drawing or painting every day and seeing what symbolism arises
   in your work—and how you feel as you create it. If you’re a
   musician, try consciously playing or singing a simple note or
   scale. Expressive dance is another wonderful creative practice,
   particularly for a kinesthetically oriented artist.

   Move your body. Physical movement is another great practice,
   especially if you tend to feel ungrounded and out of touch with
   your body. Conscious walking, stretching, yoga, or other
   deliberate movement allows a great space for your true self to
   emerge.

   Most importantly, ﬁnd a practice that works for you! Aim to ﬁnd
a practice that you ﬁnd engaging and fun. Don’t be afraid to play
around with diﬀerent practices until you ﬁnd one that sticks.
                  THREE CENTERS GUIDED
                       MEDITATION
  If you like, you can use a guided meditation like this one to get in touch with the energy and
  intelligence of all three Centers:
      As you take a deep breath in and let it out, feel your feet on the floor. Sense the
  solidness and strength of your body. Notice any areas of discomfort and breathe into them.
  Notice the boundary where your body ends and the world begins.
       Move into the space in your heart, pulling your shoulders back with a deep breath and
  letting your chest open. Breathe and feel any emotions that are there. Let them move
  through you. Breathe into this connection with yourself.
       Take another deep breath, in and out, and notice what’s happening in your mind. Let
  thoughts come and go, and see that there’s a part of you holding and observing them.
  Notice the spaciousness and clarity that are there to support you when your mind is still.
     Breathe in deeply. Feel your grounded body, your open heart, and your spacious mind
  working together. Take another deep breath and come back to the room.



BALANCING THE CENTERS IN YOUR PRACTICE

Practices come in many forms. Some build on our natural strengths,
while others bring out capacities that we usually overlook. If you’re
looking to bring your life into balance, consider choosing a daily
practice that connects with your underdeveloped capabilities, using
the Centers as a shortcut.
    Remember the Enneagram’s three Centers from chapter 1 (here)?
The Gut Center (dominant for Types One, Eight, and Nine) brings
somatic intelligence, grounding, and action. The Heart Center
(dominant for Types Two, Three, and Four) oﬀers a sense of identity,
connection, and emotional intelligence. The Head Center (dominant
for Types Five, Six, and Seven) encompasses clarity, critical thinking,
and guidance. We possess the intelligences of all three Centers, but
we tend to be most comfortable and well-versed in our own type’s
“home base.”
    Just as we have a dominant Center, we also have one that we
access least o en. (See Understanding the Enneagram, listed in the
Resource section here, for further reading. It’s the source of the
Centers theory we use throughout the book.) Unlike our dominant
Center, our underused Center is relatively free from our
personality’s agenda. We don’t think about it much at all, and we
o en feel uncomfortable when we consider engaging with it.
Because its abilities are so diﬀerent from our usual picture of
ourselves, they bring enormous potential for freedom and balance.
This makes our underused Center a wonderful guide for creating
growth practices. As we work with this Center, we develop new
abilities and get a nice “break” from our typical way of doing things.
We feel more relaxed, centered, and whole. Here are some ideas for
using your least-accessed Center to balance out your life. Keep them
in mind as you choose a daily practice.

TYPES FOUR, FIVE, AND NINE UNDERUSE THE GUT CENTER
These types tend to focus ﬁrst and foremost on their thoughts and
feelings. They may get up and move around, but they tend to resist
feeling the full weight and physicality of their bodies. Here are ideas
for practices to help these types get grounded:

   Maintaining an exercise routine

   Participating in movement-based practices, such as tai chi, yoga,
   or walking meditation

   Consciously feeling the weight of your legs and feet as you go
   about your day

   Deep breathing and breath-based meditation
   Taking action on something you’ve been pu ing oﬀ

TYPES THREE, SEVEN, AND EIGHT UNDERUSE THE HEART CENTER
These types are o en quite busy and focus on their physical bodies
and thoughts. They frequently resist feeling their feelings and
emotional needs at the expense of running around and ge ing
things done. Here are some practices to help these types connect
with their feelings and true selves:

   Taking daily quiet time to connect with yourself

   Journaling

   Taking part in compassion-based practices, such as loving-
   kindness meditation—a type of meditation where you send good
   wishes to other people

   Expressing gratitude to others or keeping a gratitude log

   Sharing your feelings with someone you trust

TYPES ONE, TWO, AND SIX UNDERUSE THE HEAD CENTER
These types feel a strong sense of duty and use their feelings and
physical bodies to meet their responsibilities. These types may be
highly intelligent, but they focus on standards and rules at the
expense of pursuing their ideas. The following practices can help
these types step back from commitments and clear their minds:

   Meditating

   Reading and researching topics of interest

   Following curiosity rather than an agenda
   Debating and discussing ideas

   Doing daily chores or actions mindfully




                     JULIA’S GROWTH PATH
  Julia, our spirited Type Seven, is enjoying the calm that her daily meditation practice brings.
  She finds that taking quiet time to herself every day slows her overall pace of life and
  reconnects her with a loving, and often overlooked, Heart Center. As time goes by, she
  notices herself feeling less pressure to complete projects quickly and find exciting things to
  do. The more aware she is of her frenetic self-talk, the more she tells herself that she
  doesn’t have to seek out sources of happiness. She experiences more joy in the here and
  now, even in simple activities like cleaning or walking to the supermarket. At work, she
  shows accountability to herself by engaging in projects like the Women’s Leadership
  Committee that satisfy her craving for variety. The Enneagram has taught her that she
  values freedom and possibilities, and there’s nothing wrong with holding these values. They
  can be honored in ways that bring her happiness rather than indulged through bad habits,
  such as buying things she doesn’t truly value or spending time on social media at work. Her
  boyfriend, Miguel, and her friend Lakesha are a good support system, and she talks
  honestly with both of them about the work she’s doing to bring balance and happiness into
  her life, the challenges she encounters with it, and the progress she’s making. She also
  joins some friends in a weekly meditation group.
      Your personal growth path may have commonalities with Julia’s, or it may look quite
  different. Even if many of us are ultimately looking for the same things in life, such as
  happiness, success, and balance, the paths that will bring us to these results vary widely,
  and the needs that we must meet to get there are equally diverse. The important thing is to
  be true to you and find support for your own unique values and goals.




Working Through Hard Times
When we begin to work with the Enneagram or pursue another
personal or spiritual growth path, it’s tempting to believe the tough
times have passed us by for good. In reality, all of us have good
times and diﬃcult times in our lives, no ma er how much inner
work we do. Certain life experiences, positive or negative, are great
equalizers in life.
     Commi ed work with the Enneagram gives us the ability to
handle the challenges life throws at us. All of us know how diﬃcult
it is to stay centered and present when we experience tragedy. When
we encounter life diﬃculties, it’s very easy to “fall oﬀ the wagon,” or
to end up making a series of poor choices that have a snowball eﬀect
in our lives. The good news is, we all have the potential to make
grounded, compassionate, and discerning decisions under duress.
     This is why Enneagram expert Russ Hudson likes to say,
“Practice when it’s easy so it’ll be there when it’s hard.” Under
extreme stress, people tend to fall back on old pa erns, and it’s
extremely diﬃcult to suddenly start doing centering practices when
you don’t have a history of doing them previously. When your life is
generally going well (like our friend Julia—going well doesn’t have
to mean everything is perfect!), you have the coping skills to develop
internal coping mechanisms and ﬁnd external support—support that
will help you cope with life when things aren’t so good.
     If you’re picking up this book during trying times, here are some
suggestions for coping:

   Stick to a Routine: Regardless of Enneagram type, all of us have
   our stress levels increase as more changes get thrust upon us.
   Even if it’s something as simple as continuing to get coﬀee at 8:30
   a.m. before work, do regular rituals that support and sustain you.
   If you’ve come up with an Enneagram-based practice, or
   something else that supports your inner life, keep doing it even if
   it feels hard. It may not always feel good when we do this, but
   this time will allow you to check in with yourself and become
   more grounded and aware of what you really need. This is also a
   safe space for you to process the diﬃcult emotions that inevitably
   come up in diﬃcult times.
   Rally Your Troops: John Donne famously wrote, “No man is an
   island.” In other words, no person, regardless of gender or
   privilege, can get through rough times on their own, and
   everyone needs a team of supporters. Supportive family
   members, friends, and partners will be there to love and
   encourage you through the darkness, and provide suggestions
   and perspective. If you’re involved in any supportive community,
   whether oriented toward personal growth, spirituality, or
   otherwise, stay involved in this group in any way you can, and
   don’t be afraid to ask for the help you need. You’ll be able to give
   back when your life situation has improved.

   Appreciate the Impermanence of Life: It’s human to want the
   good times in our life to remain, while hoping the diﬃcult ones
   pass quickly or don’t come at all. Even when we’re on the right
   path, though, our lives will inevitably have their ups and downs.
   Real presence comes from simply being with whatever life
   throws at us, and having the courage to be radically alive with
   whatever happens to be unfolding. During good times,
   appreciate them, but know that nothing in life is permanent.
   During the tough times, comfort yourself in knowing that this,
   too, will pass.

HANDLING ADVERSITY WITH RESILIENCE

The Enneagram’s way of recognizing our pa erns and pointing us
toward behavioral changes can help us care for ourselves when the
going gets rough. Let’s look at the story of Julia’s boyfriend Miguel,
who leaned on the Enneagram during a family health crisis.
   Miguel has always been close to his mother, Esperanza. They live
near each other and visit regularly. When his usually healthy,
vivacious mother is diagnosed with breast cancer, he is shocked and
upset. His Type Two helping instincts go into overdrive. He wants to
drop his other responsibilities and spend his time caring for and
supporting her.
    In the past, when family members or other loved ones were in
crisis, Miguel would take on the primary responsibility for their care.
He oﬀered money, took leaves from work when possible, and when
he couldn’t, he spent most of his evenings and weekends caretaking.
He was le sleep-deprived, low on funds, and burnt out. Thanks to
his work with the Enneagram, Miguel realizes that his nurturing
tends to go overboard when he feels that a loved one is suﬀering.
While he deeply values caring for his mother during her illness, he
realizes that his responsibilities extend further. He has a team at
work that depends on him, even if their health is not at risk. He has a
relationship with Julia that requires time and care, but also oﬀers
much-needed support. Most importantly, he needs to take care of
himself in order to eﬀectively support his mother.
    Miguel connects with his father and local family members, and
leads them in organizing a care schedule. This creates a network of
people who each take responsibility for aspects of caretaking, and
ensures that responsibility doesn’t fall solely on Miguel’s shoulders.
Miguel takes responsibility for accompanying his mother to
important medical appointments, while his father ensures that she
receives regular treatment at home. Miguel and his siblings take
turns helping with domestic tasks, with Julia and his siblings’
partners pitching in.
    Maintaining his regular habits helps Miguel manage his energy
and emotions while supporting his mother. In the past, he’d found it
diﬃcult to be productive at work when caretaking for a loved one,
but his job now requires more responsibility and the welfare of his
team o en rests on his decisions. He makes sure to stick to his
regular sleep and exercise schedules rather than staying up
caretaking or worrying about his mother. Prior to her diagnosis, he
had started meditating with Julia, and she encourages him to
continue. Si ing quietly on a cushion brings Miguel into close
contact with painful thoughts and feelings that he’d rather avoid.
There’s nowhere for him to run from them. Rather than acting strong
and stoic, he o en ﬁnds himself breaking down into tears. Julia sits
with him and listens. Prior to the Enneagram, she would have tried
to cheer him up; now, she oﬀers support by being there for Miguel as
he expresses and processes his feelings rather than pushing them
aside to act.
    Thanks to his foundation of self-care, Miguel’s Type Two
strengths of empathy and a entiveness shine through in supporting
his mother through treatment. He asks her how she is doing
whenever they are together, listens to her feelings, and shows love in
any way he can. Rather than treating her as helpless, like he is
tempted to do, he makes sure that she has primary input in her
treatment. They have long conversations about the parts of life that
are important to each of them. No ma er what happens with her
health, Miguel realizes he can oﬀer his mother genuine, loving
presence.


Toward Change
As you can see, the Enneagram is not only a powerful tool to apply
to our relationships and career, but a way for us to do deep inner
work and create powerful, long-lasting change. By making one small
change in our actions or perspective at a time, all of us will step into
awareness and presence. Present, radical change isn’t always easy,
but deep self-compassion and commitment to our inner work allows
us to move with the ﬂow of life, rather than ﬁghting against it. We all
have a meaningful path in our lives that exists for us to discover and
follow.
CONCLUSION
Throughout this book, we’ve covered some basics of Enneagram
theory and explored applications for the system—applications that
range from career choice to dating to toughing out life’s rough
patches. In writing about these applications, we hoped to give you a
toolbox to help with the daily challenges you face. In our experience,
there’s no substitute for the Enneagram as a shortcut to self-
awareness. Once you discover your type, you uncover previously
hidden motivations behind your behavior. You come face to face
with what you want, unearth the ineﬀective strategies that your ego
uses to chase that desire, and start to think about ways to fulﬁll this
craving that are diﬀerent from your ordinary habits. The journey is
both sobering and illuminating.
   The Enneagram is a wonderful tool, but a tool is only as good as
the purposes it’s used for. As you discern the types of other people in
your life, you can use the Enneagram to navigate interactions, being
mindful of your own biases and tailoring communication to their
goals and perspectives. You can introduce the system to groups,
creating a common language for members to understand each other.
(Make sure to frame it as a tool rather than a way of deﬁning people;
most of us don’t want to be “put in a box.”) As you learn about
yourself, you may ﬁnd inspiration in designing a life that best ﬁts
your needs and brings your gi s into the world. The most fruitful
applications of the Enneagram come from using it for growth.
Observe the ways your personality’s desires shape your actions.
Notice when its self-talk is monopolizing your a ention, taking you
out of the moment, and preventing you from fully engaging. Use
these moments of observation as a wake-up call to return your
a ention to the world around you and make active, conscious
choices. It’s up to you to take what you’ve learned from the
Enneagram and apply it in the ways that best ﬁt your personal needs
and circumstances.
    We encourage you to continue your Enneagram journey beyond
these pages. This book is just the tip of the iceberg when it comes to
the insights the Enneagram has to oﬀer. Take your time learning
about the nine personality types and ﬁnding your own. If it’s feasible
for you, explore the Enneagram in person through a workshop,
conference, or training. Read about the areas that you’d like to use
the Enneagram for, whether they’re parenting, business, or spiritual
growth. Learn about additional aspects of the theory that interest
you. Riso and Hudson’s theory of the Levels of Development,
mentioned in chapter 1 (here), and the Instincts/Subtypes theory
proposed by Naranjo and expanded on by other teachers, are rich
areas for self-exploration beyond the scope of introductory theory. In
the Resources section (here), we’ve listed a few recommendations
out of the many sources available for deepening your Enneagram
knowledge.
    The more you learn about the Enneagram, the deeper your
understanding, and the more tools you will have at your disposal for
navigating the highs and lows of life. It’s hard to go back once
you’ve seen your pa erns and motivations clearly. Your
misconceptions about who you are fall away and a new, more
deliberate way of living becomes possible. We hope that discovering
the Enneagram brings you as much clarity and guidance as it’s
brought to us!
APPENDIX

SHORTCUTS FOR BREAKING OUT
OF YOUR BOX
The following questions and practices interrupt your type’s usual
way of seeing and engaging with the world. We’re sharing them in
order to give you new ways of looking at things and open up
possibilities. Use them as a jump-start for living in a more balanced
way.

TYPE ONE

QUESTIONS
Is this my responsibility alone, or are there ways I can ﬁnd help and
support?

What do I want to do that’s fun, and how can I make it happen?

PRACTICE
Break a rule or principle. It doesn’t have to be major, but it should be
something that pushes your limits. Choose something you believe
you shouldn’t do, and do it. Notice what the experience is like.

TYPE TWO

QUESTIONS
What do I need right now?

How can I show care for myself the way I do for my loved ones?
PRACTICE
Take a “helping vacation.” Set aside a stretch of time (longer than is
comfortable for you) when you won’t check in with or help anyone.
Say “no” if asked. Pay a ention to what feelings and needs arise in
you.

TYPE THREE

QUESTIONS
What would I do with my time if no one was watching me?

What connects me with my heart?

PRACTICE
Unplug. Set aside a period when you won’t answer the phone, check
e-mail, post on social media, or otherwise see, share, or answer any
messages. Tune in to yourself and reﬂect on any insights that come
up.

TYPE FOUR

QUESTIONS
What are the realistic desires behind my fantasies, and what steps
can I take to make them come true?

What can I do right now to bring goodness into the world?

PRACTICE
Engage with the world around you. Choose a productive activity
that involves other people and commit to doing it for a set period of
time. Notice the abilities that you show as you take action rather
than living in your head.
TYPE FIVE

QUESTIONS
Do I actually need to know more about this, or can I get started and
learn as I go along?

What can I do to feel connected right now?

PRACTICE
Start something. Choose an idea or project that you’ve been thinking
about and begin step one: no research or deliberation allowed.
Schedule time to complete steps 2, 3, etc. What’s it like to act without
overthinking?

TYPE SIX

QUESTIONS
What decision feels right to me?

What would I do if I weren’t afraid, and how can I do it anyway?

PRACTICE
Choose a situation you’re on the fence about. If you were the
authority, what would you advise yourself to do? Have a talk with
your “inner guide,” and implement their advice. Consult this guide
whenever you want input on something.

TYPE SEVEN

QUESTIONS
What do I enjoy about what I’m doing or where I am right now?
Which of my ideas is worth focusing on?

PRACTICE
Out of many possible activities, choose one that holds meaning for
you. Commit to doing it for a set period of time. If you start thinking
about something else, remind yourself of the activity’s intrinsic
meaning.

TYPE EIGHT

QUESTIONS
What support do I need from others, and how can I receive it?

How can I show caring toward the people who mean a lot to me?

PRACTICE
Do something relaxing for a set period of time. Choose an activity
that’s quiet and reﬂective rather than stimulating. Use the time to
connect with yourself and your heart. What’s it like to take a break
from expending energy?

TYPE NINE

QUESTIONS
How do I want to be seen in the world, and how can I shine right
now?

Is this a situation where I’m truly ﬁne with any outcome, or do I
have an opinion?

PRACTICE
Identify something you want and speak up about it. Ask for help if
possible. If it’s an action you want to take or a project you want to
do, determine and initiate the ﬁrst steps. What’s it like to rock the
boat rather than smoothing the waters?
RESOURCES
RECOMMENDED BOOKS AND WEBSITES

The Complete Enneagram: 27 Paths to Greater Self-Knowledge, by
Beatrice Chestnut

Enneagram in the Narrative Tradition.
www.enneagramworldwide.com

The Enneagram Institute. www.enneagraminstitute.com

The Enneagram Made Easy: Discover the 9 Types of People, by Elizabeth
Wagele and Renee Baron

Enneagram Spectrum of Personality Styles, by Jerry Wagner

The Enneagram: Understanding Yourself and the Others in Your Life, by
Helen Palmer

The Essential Enneagram: The Deﬁnitive Personality Test and Self-
Discovery Guide, by David Daniels and Virginia Price

Understanding the Enneagram: The Practical Guide to Personality Types,
by Don Riso and Russ Hudson

The Wisdom of the Enneagram: The Complete Guide to Psychological and
Spiritual Growth, by Don Riso and Russ Hudson

BUSINESS AND CAREER
Awareness to Action: The Enneagram, Emotional Intelligence, and Change,
by Robert Tallon and Mario Sikora
Bringing Out the Best in Yourself in Work: How to Use The Enneagram
For Success, by Ginger Lapid-Bogda

The Career Within You: How to Find the Perfect Job for Your Personality,
by Elizabeth Wagele and Ingrid Staﬀ

PERSONAL GROWTH
Deep Living: Transforming Your Relationship To Everything That Ma ers
Through The Enneagram, by Roxanne Howe-Murphy

My Best Self: Using the Enneagram to Free the Soul, by Kathleen Hurley
and Theodore Dodson

Personality Types, by Don Riso and Russ Hudson

RELATIONSHIPS
Are You My Type, Am I Yours? Relationships Made Easy Through The
Enneagram, by Elizabeth Wagele and Renee Baron

The Enneagram in Love and Work: Understanding Your Intimate and
Business Relationships, by Helen Palmer

Sex, Love, and Your Personality: The 9 Faces of Intimacy, by Mona
Coates and Judith Searle

Understand Yourself, Understanding Your Partner: The Essential
Enneagram Guide to a Be er Relationship, by Jennifer P. Schneider and
Ron Corn

SPIRITUAL GROWTH
Facets of Unity: The Enneagram of Holy Ideas, by A. H. Almaas

From Fixation to Freedom: The Enneagram of Liberation, by Eli Jaxon-
Bear
The Enneagram: A Christian Perspective, by Richard Rohr and Andreas
Ebert

Enneagram Transformations, by Don Riso

The Road Back to You: An Enneagram Journey to Self-Discovery, by Ian
Morgan Cron and Suzanne Stabile

The Spiritual Dimension of the Enneagram: Nine Faces of the Soul, by
Sandra Maitri

The Wisdom of the Enneagram: The Complete Guide to Psychological and
Spiritual Growth, by Don Riso and Russ Hudson

PARENTING AND YOUTH
The Enneagram for Teens: Discover Your True Personality Type and
Celebrate Your True Self, by Elizabeth Wagele

The Enneagram of Parenting: The 9 Types of Children and How to Raise
Them Successfully, by Elizabeth Wagele

ENNEAGRAM TESTS
Essential Enneagram Online Test, by David Daniels and Virginia
Price. www.enneagramworldwide.com. Cost: $10

EnneaApp Personality Test, by Ginger Lapid-Bogda, PhD.
Download for iPhone or Android at www.enneaapp.com. Cost: $3.99

Enneagram test using Integrative Intelligent Questionnaire
Technology, by Dirk Cloete. integrative.co.za. Cost: $15

The RHETI, by Don Riso and Russ Hudson.
www.enneagraminstitute.com. Cost: $10

The WEPSS, by Jerry Wagner, PhD. www.wepss.com. Cost: $10
REFERENCES
Beesing, Maria, Robert J. Nogosek, and Patrick H. O’Leary. The
  Enneagram: A Journey of Self-Discovery. Denville, NJ: Dimension
  Books, 1984.

Bell, Melanie, and Kacie Berghoef. Berghoef & Bell Innovations.
   Accessed November 5th, 2016. www.berghoe ell.com.
Bell, Melanie, and Kacie Berghoef. Decoding Personality in the
   Workplace. San Francisco: Berghoef & Bell Innovations, 2015.
Chernick Fauvre, Katherine, and David Fauvre. “The Enneagram
  ‘Tritype’: Exploring the Hierarchy of Your Three Centers of
  Intelligence.” Presentation, International Enneagram Association
  Global Conference 2008, Atlanta, GA, August 2, 2008.

Chestnut, Beatrice. The Complete Enneagram: 27 Paths to Greater Self-
  Knowledge. Berkeley, CA: She Writes Press, 2013.
Coates, Mona, and Judith Searle. Sex, Love, and Your Personality: The 9
  Faces of Intimacy. Santa Monica, CA: Therapy Options Press, 2011.

Condon, Tom. The Changeworks. Accessed September 8th, 2016.
  www.thechangeworks.com.
Daniels, David N., and Virginia Ann Price. The Essential Enneagram:
  The Deﬁnitive Personality Test and Self-Discovery Guide. New York:
  HarperOne, 2000.

Dash, Barbara, and Richard Dash. “Use of the Enneagram in
  Deepening Your Relational Communications.” Presentation,
  International Enneagram Association Global Conference 2016,
  Minneapolis, MN, July 23, 2016.
The Enneagram Institute. Accessed October 12th, 2016.
  www.enneagraminstitute.com/

Levine, Janet. The Enneagram Intelligences: Understanding Personality
  for Eﬀective Teaching and Learning. Westport, CT: Bergin & Garvey,
  1999.
Naranjo, Claudio. Character and Neurosis: An Integrative View. Nevada
  City, CA: Gateways/IDHHB, 1994.

Olesek, Susan. Enneagram Prison Project. Accessed in 2016.
  www.enneagramprisonproject.org.

Ouspensky, P. D. In Search of the Miraculous. New York: Harcourt,
  Brace, 1949.

Paes, Uranio. “Endnote Address.” Presentation, International
  Enneagram Association Global Conference 2015, Burlingame, CA,
  August 2, 2015.

Palmer, Helen. The Enneagram in Love and Work: Understanding Your
   Intimate and Business Relationships. San Francisco:
   HarperSanFrancisco, 1995.

Palmer, Helen. The Enneagram: Understanding Yourself and the Others
   in Your Life. San Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco, 1991.
Richardson, Cheryl. “Self-Care and the Enneagram.” Lecture,
   Enneagram Global Summit 2015, Online, June 3–5, 2015.

Riso, Don Richard, and Russ Hudson. The Enneagram Institute
   Training Program. 2008–2013.

Riso, Don Richard, and Russ Hudson. Personality Types: Using the
   Enneagram for Self-Discovery. New York: Houghton Miﬄin, 1996.

Riso, Don Richard, and Russ Hudson, with Paula Warner. The Riso-
   Hudson Enneagram Workshop ResourceBook. Stone Ridge, NY: The
   Enneagram Institute, 2010.

Riso, Don Richard, and Russ Hudson. Understanding the Enneagram:
   The Practical Guide to Personality Types. New York: Houghton
   Miﬄin, 2000.

Riso, Don Richard, and Russ Hudson. The Wisdom of the Enneagram:
   The Complete Guide to Psychological and Spiritual Growth for the Nine
   Personality Types. New York: Bantam Books, 1999.

Sikora, Mario, and Maria Jose Munita. Awareness to Action
   International Certiﬁcation Program Level 1. Burlingame, CA, 2015.

Siudzinski, Robert M., and Robert A. Siudzinski. “The Use of the
   Enneagram in Higher Education: Powerful Insights for Young
   Adult Learning, Career Cra ing, and Community Engagement.”
   Presentation, International Enneagram Association Global
   Conference 2014, Burlingame, CA, July 25, 2014.

Tallon, Robert, and Mario Sikora. Awareness to Action: The Enneagram,
   Emotional Intelligence, and Change. Scranton, PA: University of
   Scranton Press, 2004.

Wagele, Elizabeth, and Ingrid Stabb. The Career Within You: How to
  Find the Perfect Job for Your Personality. New York: HarperOne,
  2009.

Wagele, Elizabeth. The Enneagram of Parenting: The 9 Types of Children
  and How to Raise Them Successfully. New York: HarperOne, 1997.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank the late Don Riso and Russ Hudson, for
introducing and teaching us the intricacies of the Enneagram as a
tool for inner work. Our gratitude goes out also to The Enneagram
Institute faculty and staﬀ—Lynda Roberts, Gayle Sco , Michael
Naylor, Brian Taylor, Katy Taylor, Donna Teresi, Jen Jeglinski, Patrice
Heber, and Elyse Nakajima—for your help and support through
Enneagram Institute certiﬁcation and teaching.
    We’re thankful as well to Mario Sikora and Maria Jose Munita for
your Awareness to Action teachings on applying the Enneagram to
business and coaching in an accessible way.
    Thank you to Deb Ooten, Beth O’Hara, Tom Condon, David
Daniels, and Jessica Dibb for your insightful workshops and wise
counsel and support.
    Big thanks to Nana K. Twumasi and the Callisto Media team for
giving us a wonderful opportunity to write about the Enneagram
and oﬀer a fresh take on its valuable teachings.
    Gratitude to Shut Up and Write San Francisco for being a
welcoming environment to get much of this book wri en.
    Our parents and brothers have been supportive of our interest in
the Enneagram and put up with a lot of “number conversations”
over the years. A huge thank you to them all!
    Melanie would like to thank Katherine Fauvre and David Fauvre
for their early mentorship, the Renaissance College faculty and staﬀ
for nurturing the exploration of leadership in diﬀerent contexts, and
Thomas Mengel for supervising my ﬁrst Enneagram research and
workshops. Thank you to Ricky Germain for introducing me to the
Enneagram and for many interesting discussions, and to Aine ni
Cheallaigh for writing and type talk.
    Kacie would like to thank Earl Wagner and Anne Geary for
collaboration, discussion, and friendship. Our discussions over the
years have been enriching and fulﬁlling. Thank you to Bonnie
Hamilton, Richelle and Fo McKinley, and Sco Valeri for friendship
and support at Enneagram events and beyond.
    Last but not least, we would like to thank each other for the years
of collaboration, innovation, love, and support. May there be many
more!
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Melanie Bell, MA, is an Enneagram Institute Authorized Teacher,
writer, and international speaker. As Director of Teaching for
Berghoef & Bell Innovations, she has created curricula and led
workshops across disciplines and continents. A coach and university
writing instructor, she holds degrees in Interdisciplinary Leadership
from the University of New Brunswick and in Creative Writing from
Concordia University. Her creative writing and columns have
appeared in a number of publications including xoJane, Grain, The
Fiddlehead, and Autostraddle.

Kacie Berghoef, MSW, is an Enneagram Institute Authorized
Teacher, freelance writer, and international speaker. As Director of
Management for Berghoef & Bell Innovations, she has planned and
co-facilitated workshops for business, spiritual, and community
audiences. Kacie holds an MSW from UC Berkeley and a BA in
Philosophy from Scripps College. She works as a professional
blogger and copywriter for businesses and Enneagram clients. Her
writing has appeared in Personality Revealed, The Billfold, Mapquest,
Skirt Collective, and Nine Points Magazine. She enjoys developing and
researching new Enneagram applications.
