
THE  COMPLETE WORKS  OF 
SAINT JOHN OF THE CROSS 
DOCTOR  OF  THE  CHURCH 
P.  SILVERIO  DE  SANTA  TERESA,  C.D. 
E.  ALLISON  PEERS 
VOLUMB  I 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
NIHIL  OBSTAT: 
GZORGJUS  D.  SMITH,  S. TR.D.,  PB.D., 
Censor  del  11.11",,". 
IMPRIMATUR: 
    J OSZPHUS  BUTT, 
Vic,,"us  generalis. 
W  ••  l'IIO ....  l'.RII, 
du 178 NtIII,mbr'"  1933. 
TO  THE 
D1SCALCED  CARMELITES  OF  CASTILE, 
WITH  ABIDING  MEMORIES  OF  THEIR  HOSPITALITY  AND  KINDNESS 
IN  MADRID,  AVILA  AND  BURGOS. 
BUT  ABOVE  ALL  OF  THEIR  DEVOTION  TO 
SAINT  JOHN  OF  THE  CROSS, 
I  DEDICATE  THIS  NEW  TRANSLATION. 
CONTENTS 
TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE 
AN  OUTLINE  OF  TIlE  LIFE  OF  S.  JOHN  OF  THE  CROSS 
PAGE 
xvii 
xxv 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  \\'ORKS  OF  S.  JOHN  OF  TilE  CROSS  xxxi 
INTRODUCT(O!ll 
ARGUMENT 
PROLOGUE 
ASCEKT  OF             CAK\IEL 
BOOK  I 
CHAPTER  I.-Sets down  the  fiTlit  stanza.  Describes  the  differences 
between  two  nights  through  which  spiritual  persons  pass, 
according  to  the  two  parts  of  man,  the  lower  and  the  higher. 
I 
9 
II 
Expounds the stanza which follows  17 
CHAPTER  H.-Explains the nature of this dark night through which 
the soul  says that it hal'  passed  on  the road  to union  (9 
CHAPTER  IlL-Speaks of the  first  cause  of this  night,  which  is  that 
of  the  privation  of  the desire  in all things, and gives the reason 
for which it is called night  21 
CHAPTER  IV.-Wherein is  declared  how  necessary  it is  for  the  soul 
truly to pass through this dark night of sense, which is mortifica-
tion of desire, in order that it may journey  to  union  with  God.  24 
CHAPTER  V.-Wherein  the  aforementioned  subject  is  treated  and 
continued,  and  it is  shown by passagcs  and  figures  from  Holy 
Scripture  how  necessary  it  is  for  the  soul  to  journey  to  God 
through  this  dark  night  of  the  mortification  of  desire  in  all 
W.  q 
CHAPTER  VL-Whercin  arc  treated  two  serious  cvils  callsed  in 
the  soul  by  the  desires,  the  one  evil  being  privative  and  the 
other positive  34 
CHAPTER  VII.-Wherein is shown  how the desires torment the soul. 
This is proved likewise  by comparisons and quotations  38 
CHAPTER  VIII.-Wherein  is  shown  how  the  desires  darken  and 
blind  the soul  41 
CHAPTER  IX.-Wherein is described  how  the  desires  defile  the soul. 
This  is  proved  by  comparisons  and  quotations  from  Holy 
Scripture  45 
CONTENTS 
CHAPTER  X.-Wherein  is  described  how  the  desires  weaken  the  PAGII 
soul in virtue and  make it lukewarm  49 
CHAPTER  XL-Wherein  it  is  proved  necessary  that  the  soul  that 
would  attain  to  Divine  union  should  be  free  from  desires, 
howsoever small  .  S I 
CHAPTER  XII.-Which  treats  of  the  answer  to  another  question, 
explaining  what  the  desires  are  that  suffice  to  cause  the  evils 
aforementioned in the soul  .  S6 
CHAPTER  XIII.-Wherein  is  described  the  way  and  manner  which 
the soul  must observe in order to enter this night of sense  S9 
CHAPTER  XIV.-\Vherein is expounded  the second line of the stan!  63 
CHAPTER  XV.-Wherein  are  expounded  the  remaining  lines  of  the 
aforementioned stanza  6s 
BOOK  n 
CHAPTER  I  66 
CHAPTER  n.-Which begins  to  treat of  the second  part or cause  of 
this  night,  which  is  faith.  Proves  by  two  arguments  how  it is 
darker than the first and than the third  68 
CHAPTER  IlL-How faith  is  dark night to the soul.  This is  proved 
with arguments and quotations and figures  from  Scripture  70 
CHAPTER  IV.-Treats in general of how the soul likewise must be in 
darkness, in so far as this rests with itself, to the end that it may 
be effectively  guided  by faith  to the highest  contemplation  73 
CHAPTER  V.-Wherein is described  what  is  meant  by  union  of  the 
soul with God,  and a  comparison is given  78 
CHAPTER  VI.-Wherein  is  described  how  it is  the  three  theological 
virtues that perfect the  three faculties  of the soul,  and how the 
said virtues produce emptiness and darkness within them  84 
CHAPTER  VI I.-Wherein  is  described  how  strait  is  the  way  that 
leads  to  eternal  life  and  how  completely  detached  and  dis-
encumbered  must  be  those  that  will  walk  in  it.  We  begin  to 
speak of the detachment of the understanding  87 
CHAPTER  VIII.-Which describes in a  general  way how  no creature 
and  no  knowledge  that  can  be  comprehended  by  the  under-
standing  can  serve  as  a  proximate  means  of  Divine  union 
with God  93 
CHAPTER  IX.-How  faith  is  the  proximate  and  proportionate 
means  to  the  understanding  whereby  the  soul  may  attain  to 
the  Divine  union  of  love.  This  is  proved  by  passages  and 
figures  from  Divine Scripture  .  .  .  •  •  •  98 
CHAPTER X.-Wherein distinction is made between all apprehensions 
and  types  of  knowledge  which  can  be  comprehended  by  the 
understanding.  •  .  •  •  .  .  .  •  100 
CHAPTER  XL-Of  the  hindrance  and  harm  that  may  be  caused 
by  apprehensions  of  the  understanding  which  proceed  from 
what  is  supernaturally  represented  to  the  outward  bodily 
senses;  and how the soul is  to conduct itself therein  101 
CONTENTS 
CRAPTER  XII.-Which  treats  of  natural  imaginary  apprehensions.  PAGE 
Describes  their  nature  and  proves  that  they  cannot  be  a  pro-
portionate  means  of  attainment  to  union  with  God.  Shows 
the  hanD  which  results  from  inability  to  detach  oneself  from 
them.  109 
CHAPTER  XIII.-Wherein are set down the signs which the spiritual 
person  will  find  in  himself  and  whE'!reby  he  may  know  at what 
season  it  behoves' him  to  leave  meditation  and  reasoning  and 
pass to the state of contemplation  II4 
CHAPTER XIV.-Wherein is proved the fitness of these signs. and the 
reason  is  given  why  that  which  has  been  said  about  them  is 
necessary to progress  .  I  17 
CHAPTER  XV.-Wherein  is  explained  how  it is  sometimes  well  for 
progressives  who  are  beginning  to  enter  upon  this  general 
knowledge  of  contemplation  to  profit  by  natural  meditation 
and the work of the natural faculties  127 
CHAPTER  XVI.-Which  treats of the imaginary apprehensions  that 
are  supernaturally  represented  in  the  fancy.  Describes  how 
they cannot serve the soul as a  proximate means to union with 
God  •  130 
CHAPTER  XVII.-Wherein  is  described  the  purpose  and  manner  of 
God  in  His communication of  spiritual  blessings  to the soul  by 
means  of  the  senses.  Herein  is  answered  the  question  which 
has  been referred  to  ..  138 
CHAPTER  XVII I.-Which  treats  of  the  harm  that  certain  spiritual 
masters  may do to  souls  when  they direct  them  not  by  a  good 
method  with  respect  to  the  visions  aforementioned.  Describes 
also  how  these  visions  may  cause  deception  even  though  they 
be  of God  .  144 
CHAPTER  XIX.-Wherein  is  expounded  and  proved  how.  although 
visions  and  locutions  which  come  from  God  are  true.  we  may 
be  deceived  about  them.  This  is  proved  by  quotations  from 
Divine Scripture.  149 
CHAPTER  XX.-Wherein is  proved  by  passages  from  Scripture how 
the  sayings  and  words  of  God,  though  always  true.  do  not 
always rest upon stable causes  158 
CHAPTER  XXI.-Wherein is  explained  how  at times,  although  God 
answers the prayers that are addressed to Him. He is not pleased 
that  we  should  use  such  methods.  It is  also  proved  how, 
although  He condescend to us and answer  us,  He is oftentimes 
wroth  163 
CHAPTER  XXII.-Wherein  is  solved  a  question.  namely,  why  it is 
not lawful.  under  the law of grace.  to ask anything of God  by 
supernatural  means,  as  it  was  under  the  ancient  law.  This 
solution is proved  by a  passage from  S.  Paul  172 
CHAPTER  XXIII.-Which  begins  to  treat  of  the  apprehensions  of 
the  understanding  that  come  in  a  purely  spiritual  way,  and 
describes their nature  •  185 
CHAPTER XXIV.-Which treats of two  kinds of spiritual vision that 
come supernaturally  187 
CHAPTER  XXV.-Which  treats  of  revelations,  describing  their 
nature and making a  distinction between them  193 
CONTENTS 
CHAPTER  XXVI.-Which  treats  of the  intuition of  naked  truths in  PAGE 
the  understanding,  explaining  how  they  are  of  two  kinds  and 
how the soul is to conduct itself with respect to them  194 
CHAPTER  XXVII.-Which  treats  of  the  second  kind  of  revelation, 
namely,  the  disclosure of  hidden  secrets.  Describes the way in 
which  these  may  assist  the  soul  toward  union  with  God,  and 
the  way  in  which  they  may  be  a  hindrance;  and  how  the 
devil may deceive the soul  greatly in this matter  204 
CHAPTER  XXVIII.-Which  treats  of  interior  locutions  that  may 
come  to the spirit supernaturally.  Says of what kinds they are  207 
CHAPTER  XXIX.-Which  treats  of  the  first  kind  of words  that the 
recollected  spirit  sometimes  forms  within  itself.  Describes  the 
cause  of these and  the profit  and the harm which  there  may be 
in them  209 
CHAPTER  XXX.-Which  treats  of  the  interior  words  that  come  to 
the  spirit  formally  by  supernatural  means.  Warns  the  reader 
of  the  harm  which  they  may  do  and  of  the  caution  that  is 
necessary in order that the soul may not be  deceived  by them  215 
CHAPTER  XXXI.-Which treats of the  substantial  words that come 
interiorly  to  the  spirit.  Describes  the  difference  between  them 
and  formal  words,  and  the  profit  which  they  bring  and  the 
resignation  and  respect  which  the  soul  must  observe  with 
regard  to them  2 I 8 
CHAPTER  XXXII.-Which  treats  of  the  apprehensions  received  by 
the  understanding  from  interior  feelings  which  come  super-
naturally  to  the  soul.  Describes  their  cause,  and  the  manner 
wherein  the  soul  must  conduct  itself  so  that  they  may  not 
obstruct its road to union  with God  221 
BOOK  III 
CHAPTER  I  225 
CHAPTER  II.-Which  treats  of  the  natural  apprehensions  of  the 
memory  and  describes  how  the  soul  must  be  voided  of  them 
in  order  to  be  able  to  attain  to  union  with  God  according  to 
this faculty  226-
CHAPTER  111.-Wherein  are  described  three  kinds  of  evil  which 
come  to  the  soul  when  it  enters  not into darkness  with  respect 
to knowledge and reflections in the memory.  Herein is described 
the first  234 
CHAPTER  IV.-"Which  treats  of  the  second  kind  of  evil  that  may 
come to the soul from the devil by way of  the natural apprehen-
sions  of the memory  236-
CHAPTER  V.-Of the  third  evil  which  comes  to  the  soul  by  way  of 
the distinct  natural knowledge  of  the memory  238 
CHAPTER VI.-Of the benefits which come to the soul from  forgetful-
ness  and  emptiness  of  all  thoughts  and  knowledge  which  it 
may have in a  natural way with  respect  to the memory  .  239 
CHAPTER  VII.-Which treats  of  the  second  kind  of apprehension  of 
the memory-the imaginary-and of supernatural knowledge.  241 
CONTENTS 
CHAPTER  VIIL-Of  the  evils  which  may  be  caused  to  the  soul  by  PACE 
the  knowledge  of  supernatural  things,  if  it  reflect  upon  them. 
Says how many these  evils are  242 
CHAPTER  IX.-Of  the  second  kind  of  evil,  which  is  the  peril  of 
falling  into self-esteem  and  vain  presumption  243 
CHAPTER  X.-Of  the  third  evil  that  may  come  to  the  soul  from 
the devil,  through the imaginary apprehensions  of the memory  245 
C H   P T E ~   XL-Of  the  fourth  evil  that  comes  to  the  soul  from  the 
distinct  supernatural  apprehensions  of  the  memory,  which  is 
the hindrance that it interposes to union  247 
CHAPTER  XIJ.-Of the fifth  evil  that may come to the soul in super-
natural  imaginary forms  and  apprehensions,  which  is  a  low  and 
unseemly  judgement of God  247 
CHAPTER  XIII.-Of  the  benefits  which  the  soul  receives  through 
banishing  from  itself  the  apprehensions  of  the  imagination. 
This  chapter  answers  a  certain  objection  and  describes  a 
difference  which  exists  between  apprehensions  that  are 
imaginary,  natural  and  supernatural  249 
CHAPTER  XIV.-\Vhich  treats of spiritual  knowledge  in  so far  as  it 
may concern  the memory  255 
CHAPTER  XV.-Which  sets  down  the  general  method  whereby  the 
spiritual  person  must govern himself with respect to this sense  :lS6 
CHAPTER  XVI.-Which begins to treat of the dark  night of the will. 
l\lakcs a  division  between the affections of the will  .  258 
CHAPTER  XVII.-Which begins  to  treat of  the  first  affection  of the 
will.  Describes  the  nature  of  joy  and  makes  a  distinction 
between  the things in which the will  can  rejoice  261 
CHAPTER  XVIII.-Which  treats  of  joy  with  respect  to  temporal 
blessings.  Describes how  joy in them must be  directed  to God  262 
CHAPTER  XIX.-Of the  evils  that  may  befall  the  soul  when  it sets 
its rejoicing upon temporal  blessings  266 
CHAPTER  XX.-Of the benefits that come to the soul  from  its  with-
drawal of joy from  temporal things  271 
CHAPTER  XXL-Which describes how it is vanity to set the rejoicing 
of  the  will  upon  the  good  things  of  nature, and how  the soul 
must direct itself,  by means of them,  to God  :l74 
CHAPTER  XXII.-Of the  evils  which  come  to  the  soul  when  it sets 
the rejoicing of its will  upon  the  good  things  of  nature  276 
CHAPTER  XXIIL-Of the  benefits  which  the  soul  receives  from  not 
setting its rejoicing upon the good  things of nature  280 
CHAPTER  XXIV.-Which  treats  of  the  third  kind  of  good  thing 
whereon  the will  may  set  the  affection  of  rejoicing,  which  kind 
pertains to sense.  Indicates  what  these  good things are and  of 
how many kinds,  and how the will has to be directed to God and 
purged of this rejoicing  2&2 
CHAPTER  XXV.-Which  treats  of  the  evils  that  afflict  the  soul 
when  it  desires  to  set  the  rejoicing  of  its  will  upon  the  good 
things of sense  285 
CONTENTS 
CHAPTER  XXVI.-Of the  benefits  that come to the  soul  from  self- PAG8 
denial  in  rejoicing  as  to  things  of  sense,  which  benefits·  are 
spiritual and temporal  •  .  •  •  •  •  •  281 
CHAPTER  XXVII.-Wbich  begins  to  treat  of  the  fourth  kind  of 
good-namely, the moral.  Describes  wherein this consists, and 
in what manner joy of the will therein is lawful  290 
CHAPTER  XXVIII.-Of seven  evils into which a  man may fall  if he 
set the rejoicing of his will upon moral good  •  .  .  293 
CHAPTER  XXIX.-Of the  benefits  which  come  to the soul  through 
the withdrawal of its rejoicing from moral good  297 
CHAPTER  XXX.-Which  begins  to  treat  of  the  fifth  kind  of  good 
thing  wherein  the  will  may rejoice,  which  is  the  supernatural. 
Describes the nature of these supernatural good things, and how 
they are distinguished  from  the spiritual,  and how joy in them 
is to be directed to God  •  •  •  •  •  .  •  299 
CHAPTER  XXXI.-Of the evils which come to the soul when it sets 
the rejoicing of the will upon this kind of good  301 
CHAPTER  XXXII.-Of  two  benefits  which  are  derived  from  the 
renunciation  of  rejoicing  in  the  matter  of  the  supernatural 
graces  306 
CHAPTER  XXXII I.-Which  begins  to  treat  of  the  sixth  kind  of 
good  wherein  the  soul  may  rejoice;  Describes  its  nature  and 
makes the first division under this head  .  •  .  .  307 
CHAPTER  XXXIV.-Of those good  things of the spirit which can be 
distinctly apprehended  by the understanding and the memory. 
Describes  how  the  will  is  to  behave in the matter of rejoicing 
in them  309 
CHAPTER  XXXV.-Of  the  delectable  spiritual  good  things  which 
can be distinctly apprehended by the will.  Describes the kinds 
of these  309 
CHAPTER  XXXV I.-Which  continues  to  treat  of  images,  and 
describes the ignorance which certain persons have with respect 
to them  31 3-
CHAPTER  XXXVII.-Of  how  the  rejoicing  of  the  will  must  be 
directed,  by way of the images, to God, so that the soul may not 
go astray because of them or be hindered by them  •  3 I  6 
CHAPTER  XXXVIII.-Continues to  describe  motive  good.  Speaks 
of oratories and places dedicated to prayer  318 
CHAPTER  XXXIX.-Of  the  way  in  which  oratories  and  churches 
should  be used, in order to direct the spirit to God  321 
CHAPTER  XL.-Which  continues  to  direct  the  spirit  to  interior 
recollection with reference to what has been said  322 
CHAPTER  XLI.-Of certain  evils  into  which  those  persons  faU  who 
give themselves to pleasure in sensible objects and who frequent 
places of devotion in the way that bas been described  .  .  323 
CHAPTER  XLII.-Of three different kinds of place of devotion and of 
how the will should conduct itself with regard  to them.  324 
CHAPTER  XLIII.-Wbich  treats  of  other  motives  for  prayer  that 
many persons use-namely, a  great variety of ceremonies  321 
CONTENTS 
CHAPTER  XLIV.-Of the manner wherein the rejoicing and strength  PAGE 
of the will must be directed to God through these devotions  328 
CHAPTER  XLV.-Which treats  of the second kind  of distinct good. 
wherein the will  may rejoice vainly  331 
INTRODUCTION 
PROLOGUE 
DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
BOOK  I 
CHAPTER  I.-Sets  down  the  first  line  and  begins  to  treat  of  the 
335 
341 
imperfections of beginners  350 
CHAPTER  II.-Of  certain  spiritual  imperfections  which  beginners 
have with respect to the habit of pride.  352 
CHAPTER  IlI.-Of some imperfections which some of these  souls are 
apt  to  have,  with  respect  to  the  second  capital  sin,  which  is 
avarice, in the spiritual sense  356 
CHAPTER  IV.-Of  other  imperfections  which  these  beginners  are 
apt to have with respect to the third sin,  which is luxury  358 
CHAPTER  V.-Of  the  imperfections  into  which  beginners  fall  with 
respect to the sin of wrath  .  363 
CHAPTER  VI.-Of imperfections with respect to spiritual gluttony  •  364 
CHAPTER  VII.-Of imperfections with respect  to spiritual envy  and 
sloth  368 
CHAPTER  VII I.-Wherein  is  expounded  the  first  line  of  the  first 
stanza,  and a  beginning is made of  the explanation of this dark 
night  371 
CHAPTER  IX.-Of  the  signs  by  which  it  will  be  known  that  the 
spiritual  person  is  walking  along  the  way  of  this  night  and 
purgation of sense  373 
CHAPTER  X.-Of the way in which these souls are to conduct them-
selves in this dark night  378 
. 
CHAPTER  XI.-Wherein are expounded the three lines of the stanza  381 
CHAPTEJ1.  XII.-Of the benefits which this night causes in the soul  384 
CHAPTER  XIII.-Of other  benefits  which  this  night of  sense  causes 
in the soul  •  389 
CHAPTER  XIV.-Expounds this last verse of the first stanza  •  394 
BOOK  II 
CHAPTER  I.-Which  begins  to  treat of  the  dark  night  of  the  spirit 
and says at what time it begins  398 
CHAPTER  H.-Describes  other  imperfections  which  belong  to  these 
proficients  .  '.  400 
CONTENTS 
CHAPTER  I1I.-Annotation for  that which follows. 
PAGB 
4
02 
CHAPTER  IV.-Sets down the first stanza and the exposition thereof  404 
CHAPTER  V.-Sets  down  the  first  line  and  begins  to  explain  how 
this  dark  contemplation  is  not  only  night  for  the  soul  but  is 
also grief and purgation  405 
CHAPTER  VI.-Of other  kinds  of  pain  that  the  soul  suffers  in  this 
night  409 
CHAPTER  VII.--Continues  the  same  matter  and  considers  other 
afflictions and trials of the will  412 
CHAPTER  VIII.-Of other pains which afflict  the soul in this state.  418 
CHAPTER  IX.-How,  although  this  night  brings  darkness  to  the 
spirit, it does so in order to illumine it and give it light  .  422 
CHAPTER  X.-Explains this purgation fully  by a  comparison  •  429 
CHAPTER  XI.-Begins to explain the  second line of the first  stanza. 
Describes how,  as the fruit of these rigorous afflictions,  the soul 
finds  itself with the vehement passion of Divine love  433 
CHAPTER  XII.-Shows how this horrible night is purgatory, and how 
in  it the  Divine  wisdom  illumines  men  on  earth  with  the same 
illumination that purges and illumines the angels in Heaven  436 
CHAPTER  XII I.-Of other delectable effects which are wrought in the 
soul  by this dark night of contemplation  440 
CHAPTER  XIV.-Wherein are set down and explained  the last three 
lines of the first  stanza  445 
CHAPTER  XV.-Sets down the second  stanza and its exposition  447 
CHAPTER  XVI.-Explains how,  though  in  darkness,  the  soul  walks 
securely  448 
CHAPTER  XVII.-Explains how this dark contemplation is secret  455 
CHAPTER  XVII I.-Explains  how  this  secret  wisdom  is  likewise  a 
ladder  460 
CHAPTER  XIX.-Begins  to  explain  the  ten  steps  of  the  mystic 
ladder of  Divine  love,  according to S.  Bernard  and  S.  Thomas. 
The first five  are here treated  463 
CHAPTER  XX.-Wherein are treated the other five  steps of love  467 
CHAPTER  XXI.-Which  explains  this  word  • disguised:  and  de-
scribes the colours of the disguise of the soul  in  this night  470 
CHAPTER  XXII.-Explains the third line of the second  stanza.  475 
CHAPTER  XXII I.-Expounds  the  fourth  line  and  describes  the 
wondrous hiding-place wherein the soul is set during this night. 
Shows how,  although the devil has an entrance into other places 
that are very high,  he has none into this  476 
CHAPTER  XXIV.--Complctes the explanation of the second stanza.  483 
CHAPTER  XXV.-Wherein is expounded  the third stanza  485 
TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE 
I 
FOR  at  least  twenty  years,  a  new  translation  of the  works 
of S.  John of the Cross  has  been an  urgent  necessity.  The 
translations  of the  individual  prose  works  now  in  general 
use  go  back  in  their  original  form  to  the  eighteen-sixties, 
and,  though  the  later  editions  of  some  of them  have  been 
submitted  to  a  certain  degree  of  revision,  nothing  but  a 
complete  retranslation  of  the  works  from  their  original 
Spanish could be satisfactory.  For this there are two reasons. 
First,  the  existing  translations  were  never  very  exact 
renderings  of  the  original  Spanish  text  eyen  in  the  form 
which  held  the field  when  they were  first  published.  Their 
great  merit  was  extreme  readableness:  many  a  disciple  of 
the Spanish mystics,  who is  unacquainted with  the language 
in  which  they  wrote,  owes  to  these  translations  the  com-
parative ease  with  which  he  has  mastered  the  main lines  of 
S.  John  of  the  Cross's  teaching.  Thus  for  the  general 
reader  they  were  of great  utility;  for  the  student,  on  the 
other hand,  they  have  never  been  entirely  adequate.  They 
paraphrase  difficult  expressions,  omit  or  add  to  parts  of 
individual  sentences  in  order  (as  it  seems)  to  facilitate 
comprehension  of the general  drift  of the passages  in  which 
these  occur,  and  frequently  retranslate  from  the  Vulgate 
the  Saint's  Spanish  quotations  from  Holy  Scripture instead 
bf  turning  into  English  the  quotations  themselves,  using 
the  text  actually  before  them. 
A  second  and  more  important  reason  for  a  new  trans-
lation,  however,  is  the  discovery  of fresh  manuscripts  and 
the              improvements which have been made in the 
Spanish  text of the works  of S. John of the Cross  during the 
present  century.  Seventy  years  ago,  the  text  chiefly  used 
was  that  of the  collection  known  as  the  Biblioteca  de  Autores 
Espanoles  (1853),  which  itself  was  based,  as  we  shall  later 
see,  upon  an  edition  going  back  as  far  as  1703,  published 
TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE 
before modern methods of editing were so much as imagined. 
Both  the  text  of the  B.A.E.  edition  and  the  unimportant 
commentary  which  accompanied  it  were  highly  unsatis-
factory,  yet  until  the  beginning  of  the  present  century 
nothing  appreciably  better  was  attempted. 
In the last twenty years,  however,  we  have  had two  new 
editions,  each based upon a  close study of the extant manu-
scripts  and  each  representing  a  great  advance  upon  the 
editions  preceding it.  The  three-volume  Toledo  edition  of 
P.  Gerardo  de  San Juan  de  la  Cruz,  C.D.  (1912-14),  was 
the  first  attempt  made  to  produce  an  accurate  text  by 
modern  critical  methods.  I ts  execution  was  perhaps  less 
laudable  than  its  conception,  and  faults  were  pointed  out 
in it from  the time  of its  appearance,  but it served as  a  new 
starting-point for Spanish scholars and stimulated them to  a 
new  interest  in  S.  John  of  the  Cross's  writings.  Then, 
seventeen  years  later,  came  the  magnificent  five-volume 
edition  of P.  Silverio  de  Santa Teresa,  C.D.  (Burgos,  1929-
31),  which  forms  the  basis  of  this  present  translation. 
So  superior  is  it,  even  on  the  most  casual  examination,  to 
all its predecessors that to eulogize it in detail is superfluous. 
It is  founded  upon a  larger number of texts  than has  previ-
ously  been  known  and  it  collates  them  with  greater  skill 
than that of any earlier editor.  It can hardly fail  to  be the 
standard  edition  of the  works  of S.  John  of the  Cross .for 
generations. 
Thanks  to  the labours  of these  Carmelite scholars  and  of 
others  whose  findings  they  have  incorporated  in  their 
editions,  Spanish  students  can  now  approach  the  work  of 
the  great  Doctor  with  the  reasonable  belief  that  they  are 
reading,  as  nearly  as  may  be,  what  he  actually  wrote. 
English-reading  students,  however,  who  are  unable  to 
master  sixteenth-century  Spanish,  have  hitherto  had  no 
grounds for  such a  belief.  They cannot tell  whether, in any 
particular  passage,  they  are  face  to  face  with  the  Saint's 
own  words,  with  a  translator's  free  paraphrase  of them  or 
with  a  gloss  made  by  some  later  copyist  or  early  editor  in 
the  supposed  interests  of orthodoxy.  Indeed,  they  cannot 
be sure that some whole paragraph is  not one of the numer-
ous  interpolations  which  has  its  rise  in  an  early  printed 
edition-i.e.,  the  timorous  qualifications  of  statements 
which  have  seemed  to  the  interpolator  over-bold.  Even 
some of the most  distinguished writers in English on S. John 
TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE 
of  the  Cross  have  been  misled  in  this  way  and  it  has 
been  impossible  for  any  but  those  who  read  Spanish  with 
ease  to  make  a  systematic  and  reliable  study  of  such  an 
important  question  as  the  alleged  dependence  of Spanish 
quietists  upon  the  Saint,  while  his  teaching  on  the  mystical 
life  has  quite  unwittingly  been  distorted  by  persons  who 
would  least  wish  to  misrepresent  it in  any  particular. 
It  was  when  writing  the  chapter  on  S.  John  of  the 
Cross  in  the  first  volume  of  my  Studies  of  the  Spanish 
Mystics  (in  which,  as  it  was  published  in  1927,  I  had  not 
the  advantage  of  using  P.  Silverio's  edition)  that  I  first 
realized  the  extent  of the  harm  caused  by  the  lack  of  an 
accurate  and  modern  translation.  Making  my  own 
versions of all the passages quoted, I  had sometimes occasion 
to  compare them  with  those  of other  translators,  which  at 
their  worst  were  almost  unrecognizable  as  versions  of the 
same originals.  Then and there I  resolved  that,  when time 
allowed,  I  would  re-translate the works  of a  saint to whom 
I  have  long  had  great  devotion-to  whom,  indeed,  lowe 
more  than  to  any  other  writer  outside  the  Scriptures. 
Just  at  that  time  I  happened  to  visit  the  Discalced  Car-
melite  monastery  at  Burgos,  where  I  first  met  P.  Silverio, 
and found,  to  my  gratification,  that  his  edition  of S.  John 
of  the  Cross  was  much  nearer  publication  than  I  had 
imagined.  Arrangements  for  sole  permission  to  translate 
the  new  edition  were  quickly  made  and  work  on  the  early 
volumes  was  begun  even  before the  last  volume  was  pub-
lished. 
II 
These  preliminary  notes  will  explain  why  my  chief pre-
occupation  throughout  the  performance  of  this  task  has 
been to present as  accurate and reliable a  version of S. John 
of the  Cross's  works  as  it is  possible  to  obtain.  To keep  the 
translation,  line  by  line,  au  pied  de  fa  lettre,  is,  of course, 
impracticable:  and  such  constantly  occurring  Spanish 
habits  as  the  use  of abstract  nouns  in  the  plural  and  the 
verbal  construction  'ir  +  present  participle'  introduce 
shades  of  meaning  which  cannot  always  be  reproduced. 
Yet  wherever,  for  stylistic or other reasons,  I  have departed 
from  the  Spanish  in any way  that could  conceivably  cause 
a  misunderstanding,  I  have scrupulously indicated  this  in  a 
footnote.  Further,  I  have  translated,  not only  the  text,  but 
TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE 
the  variant  readings  as  given  by  P.  Silverio,!  except  where 
they  are  due  merely  to  slips  of the  copyist's  pen  or  where 
they differ so  slightly from  the readings  of the text that it is 
impossible to render the differences in English.  I beg students 
not  to  think  that  some  of the  smaller  changes  noted  are 
of no importance;  closer examination will  often show  that, 
however slight they  may seem,  they are,  in relation to  their 
context, or to some particular aspect of the Saint's teaching, 
of real interest;  in other places they help to give the reader 
an idea, which may be useful to him in some crucial passage, 
of the  general  characteristics  of the  manuscript  or  edition 
in  question.  The  editor's  notes  on  the  manuscripts  and 
early  editions  which  he  has  collated  will  also  be  found,  for 
the  same  reason,  to  be  summarized  in  the  introduction  to 
each  work;  in consulting  the variants,  the English-reading 
student has the maximum aid to a judgement of the reliabil-
ity of his  authorities. 
Concentration upon the aim of obtaining the most precise 
possible rendering of the  text has led  me  to sacrifice stylistic 
elegance  to  exactness  where  the two  have  been in conflict; 
it has  sometimes  been  difficult to  bring oneself to reproduce 
the Saint's often  ungainly,  though often forceful,  repetitions 
of words or his  long,  cumbrous parentheses,  but the tempta-
tion to take refuge in graceful paraphrases has  been steadily 
resisted.  In  the  same  interest,  and  a,lso  in  that of space,  I 
have  made  certain  omissions  from,  and  abbreviations  of, 
other parts of the edition than the text.  Two of P.  Silverio's 
five  volumes  are  entirely  filled  with  commentaries  and 
documents.  I  have  selected  from  the  documents  those  of 
outstanding interest  to  readers  with  no  detailed  knowledge 
of Spanish  religious  history  and have  been  content  to  sum-
marize  the  editor's  introductions  to  the  individual  works, 
as  well  as  his  longer footnotes  to  the  text,  and  to  omit such 
parts  as  would  interest  only  specialists,  who  are able,  or at 
least should be obliged, to study them in the original Spanish. 
The  decision  to  summarize  in  these  places  has  been 
made  the  less  reluctantly  because  of  the  frequent  un-
suitability of P.  Silverio's style to English readers.  Like that 
of many Spaniards, it is so discursive, and at times so baroque 
in its  wealth  of epithet  and its  profusion  of imagery,  that a 
literal  translation,  for  many  pages  together,  would  seldom 
1  The  footnotes  are  P.  Silverio's  except  where  they  are  enclosed  in 
square brackets, 
TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE 
have  been  acceptable.  The  same  criticism  would  have 
been  applicable  to  any  literal  translation  of  P.  Silverio's 
biography of S. John of the. Cross  which  stands  at the head 
of his  edition  (Vol.  I,  pp.  7-130).  There  was  a  further 
reason  for  omitting  these  biographical  chapters.  The long 
and fully  documented  biography  by  the  French  Carmelite, 
P.  Bruno  de  Jesus-Marie,  C.D.,  written  from  the  same 
standpoint as  P.  Silverio's,  has recently been translated into 
English,  and  any  attempt  to  rival  this  in  so  short  a  space 
would  be foredoomed  to failure.  I  have  thought,  however, 
that a  brief outline of the principal  events  in S.  John of the 
Cross's  life  would  be  a  useful  preliminary  to  this  edition  ; 
this  has  therefore  been  substituted  for  the  biographical 
sketch  referred  to. 
In language,  I  have tried  to reproduce  the atmosphere of 
a  sixteenth-century  text  as  far  as  is  consistent  with  clarity. 
Though following  the  paragraph divisions  of my original,  I 
have not scrupled, where this has seemed to facilitate under-
standing,  to  divide  into  shorter  sentences  the  long  and 
sometimes straggling periods in which the Saint so frequently 
indulged.  Some attempt has been made to show the contrast 
between  the  highly  adorned,  poetical  language  of much  of 
the  commentary  on  the  '  Spiritual  Canticle'  and  the  more 
closely shorn and eminently practical,  though  always  some-
what  discursive  style  of the  Ascent  and  Dark  Night.  That 
the  Living  Flame  occupies  an  intermediate  position  in  this 
respect should also be clear from  the style  of the  translatiori. 
Quotations,  whether  from  the  Scriptures  or  from  other 
sources, have  been  left strictly as  S. John of the  Cross  made 
them.  Where  he  quotes  in  Latin,  the  Latin  has  been 
reproduced;  only  his  quotations  in  Spanish  have  been 
turned  into  English.  The  footnote  references  are  to  the 
Vulgate, of which the Dauai Version  is  a  direct translation; 
if the  Authorized  Version  differs,  as  in  the  Psalms,  the 
variation  has  been  shown  in  square  brackets  for  the  con-
venience of those who  use  it. 
A  word  may  not  be  out  of place  regarding  the  transla-
tions of the poems as  they appear in the prose commentaries. 
Obviously,  it  would  have  been  impossible  to  use  the  com-
paratively free  verse renderings which appear in  Volume  II 
of this  translation,  since  the commentaries  discuss  each line 
and often each word  of the poems.  A  literal version  of the 
poems  in  their  original  verse-lines,  however,  struck  me  as 
TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE 
being  inartistic,  if not  repellent,  and  as  inviting  continual 
comparison  with  the more polished verse  renderings  which, 
in  spirit,  come  far  nearer  to  the  poet's  aim.  My  first 
intention  was  to  translate  the  poems,  for  the  purpose  of 
the commentaries, into prose.  But later I  hit upon the long 
and  metrically  unfettered  verse-line,  suggestive  of Biblical 
poetry in its English dress,  which  I  have employed through-
out.  I  believe  that,  although  the  renderings  often  suffer 
artistically  from  their  necessary  literalness,  they  are  from 
the artistic standpoint at least  tolerable. 
m 
The  debts  I  have  to  acknowledge,  though  few,  are  very 
large ones.  My gratitude to P.  Silverio de Santa Teresa for 
telling  me so  much  about his  edition  before its  publication, 
granting  my  publishers  the  sole  translation  rights  and 
discussing  with  me  a  number  of crucial  passages  cannot  be 
disjoined  from  the  many  kindnesses  I  have  received  during 
my  work  on  the  Spanish  mystics,  which  is  still  proceeding, 
from  himself and from  his  fellow-Carmelites  in the province 
of Castile.  In dedicating  this  translation  to  them,  I  think 
particularly  of  P.  Silverio  in  Burgos,  of  P.  Florencio  del 
Nino Jesus  in  Madrid,  and  of P.  Cris6gono  de Jesus  Sacra-
mentado,  together  with  the  Superior  and  brethren  of the 
, Convento de la Santa' in S.  Teresa's  beloved  Avila. 
The  long  and  weary  process  of revising  the  manuscript 
and  proofs  of this  translation  has  been  greatly lightened  by 
the co-operation and companionship ofP. Edmund Gurdon, 
Prior of the Cartuja de Miraflores,  near Burgos,  with whom 
I  have  freely  discussed  all  kinds  of  difficulties,  both  of 
substance  and  style,  and  who  has  been  good  enough  to 
read  part  of  my  proofs.  From  the  quiet  library  of  his 
monastery,  as  well  as  from  his  gracious  companionship,  I 
have  drawn  not  only  knowledge,  but  strength,  patience 
and  perseverance.  And  when  at length,  after  each  of my 
visits,  we  have had to  part,  we  have  continued  our labours 
by  correspondence,  shaking  hands,  as  it  were,  'over  a 
vast' and embracing' from the ends of opposed winds.' 
Finally,  lowe a  real  debt  to  my  publishers  for  allowing 
me  to  do  this  work  without  imposing  any  such  limitations 
of  time  as  often  accompany  literary  undertakings.  This 
and other  considerations  which  I  have  received  from  them 
TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE 
have  made  that  part  of  the  work  which  has  been  done 
outside  the  study  unusually pleasant  and  I  am correspond-
ingly grateful. 
UNIVERSITY  OF  LIVERPOOL. 
Feast of S. John of the Cross, 
November  24,  1933. 
E ..  ALLISON  PEERS. 
NOTE.-Wherever a  commentary by S. John of the Cross 
is  referred  to,  its  title  is  given  in  italics  (e.g.  Spiritual  Can-
ticle);  where  the corresponding poem is  meant,  it is  placed 
between  quotation  marks  (e.g.  '  Spiritual  Canticle ').  The 
abbreviation' e.p.' stands for  editio princeps  throughout. 
AN  OUTLINE  OF  THE  LIFE  OF  S.  JOHN  OF  THE 
CROSSl 
1542.  Birth  of Juan de' Yepes  at Fontiveros  (Hontiveros), 
near Avila. 
The  day  generally  ascribed  to  this  event  is  June  24 
(S.  John  Baptist's  Day).  No  documentary  evidence  for 
it,  however,  exists,  the  parish  registers  having  been 
destroyed  by  a  fire  in  1546.  The  chief evidence  is  an 
inscription,  dated  1689,  on  the  font  of the  parish  church 
at Fontiveros. 
? c.  1549.  Death  of Juan's  father.  'After  some  years' 
(?  c.  1551)  the  mother  removes,  with  her  family,  to 
Arevalo,  and later to  Medina del  Campo. 
? c.  1552-6.  Juan  goes  to  school  at  the  Colegio  de  los 
Ninos  de la Doctrina,  Medina. 
c.  1556-7.  Don Antonio Alvarez  de Toledo  takes  him into 
a  Hospital to  which he has  retired,  with the idea of his 
(Juan's)  training for  Holy Orders under his  patronage. 
? c.  1557-61.  Juan  attends  the  School  of  the  Society  of 
Jesus at Medina. 
c.  1562.  Leaves  the  Hospital and the patronage of Alvarez 
de  Toledo. 
1563.  Takes  the  Carmelite  habit  in  the  Monastery  of 
Santa  Ana,  Medina  del  Campo,  as  Juan  de  San 
Matias  (or  de Santo Matia). 
The  day  is  considered  by  most  biographers  to  have 
been  that  of S.  Matthias  (February  24),  but  P.  Silverio 
postulates a  day in August  or September. 
1564.  Professes  in  the  same  monastery-probably  in 
August  or  September  and' certainly  not  earlier  than 
May 2 I  and not later than October. 
1  CL  p.  xxi. 
THE  LIFE  OF  S.  JOHN  OF  THE  CROSS 
1564  (November).  Enters  the  University  of Salamanca  as 
an artisla.  Takes  a  three-year course in Arts  (1564-7). 
1567.  Receives  priest's  orders  (probably in  the summer). 
1567  (?  early  in  September).  Meets  S.  Teresa  at  Medina 
del  Campo.  Juan  is  thinking  of  transferring  to  the 
Carthusian  Order.  S.  Teresa  asks  him  to  join  her 
Discalced  Reform  and  the  projected  first  foundation 
for monks.  He agrees  to do so,  provided the foundation 
is soon made. 
. 
1567  (November).  Returns to the University of Salamanca, 
where he takes a year's course in theology. 
1568.  Spends  parts  of  the  Long  Vacation  at  Duruelo, 
Medina and Avila. 
1568  (November  28).  Takes  the  vows  of  the  Reform  at 
Duruelo as  S. John of the Cross,  together with Antonio 
de  Heredia  (Antonio  de  Jesus),  Prior  of the  Calced 
Carmelites  at  Medina,  and  Jose  de  Cristo,  another 
Carmelite from  Medina. 
1570  (June  I I).  The  Durue10  monastery  is  transferred  to 
Mancera. 
1570  (October).  Founds  the  second  monastery  of  the 
Reform at Pastrana. 
1571  (? January  ? April).  Goes  to  Alcala  de  Henares 
where  he  founds  the  third  (a  collegiate)  monastery  of 
the  Reform  and  directs  the  Carmelite  nuns. 
1571  (October).  S.  Teresa  becomes  Prioress  of  the 
Convent  of the  Incarnation,  Avila,  and  holds  this  office 
till  1573. 
1572  (shortly  after April  23).  Recalled  to  Pastrana. 
1572.  Goes  to  Avila  as  confessor  to  the  Convent  of the 
Incarnation. 
The  month  generally  given  is  May,  but  P.  Silverio 
thinks  (and  I  entirely agree  with  him)  that  it  must  have 
been  considerably  later.  It  was,  however,  certainly 
before  September 27. 
1572-7.  Remains  at  Avila. 
This is  the  period  of open  hostility  between  the  Calced 
and  Discalced  Carmelites. 
THE  LIFE  OF  S.  JOHN  OF  THE  CROSS 
1575.  A General Chapter of the Carmelites determines 
on  the  suppression  of all  houses  of the  Reform  but  two. 
S.  Teresa  Writes  to  Philip  II,  asking  that  the  Discalced 
may  be  made  into  a  separate  province.  Envoys  with 
petitions  to  the  same  effect  are  sent  by  the  Discalced  to 
the Vatican. 
1577  (October).  The  election  of  a  new  prioress  at 
Avila  leads  to  a  display  of intolerance  against  the  Dis-
calced  on  the  part  of  the  Provincial  of  the  Calced 
Carmelites. 
1577  (night  of December  3-4).  S.  John  of  the  Cross  is 
carried off to Toledo by the Calced  as  a  prisoner,  with 
Fray  Germano  de  Santo  Matia.  He  is  imprisoned  in 
the  Calced  Carmelite  monastery  at Toledo. 
1577-8.  Composes  in  prison  17  (or  perhaps  30)  stanzas  of 
the  'Spiritual  Canticle'  (i.e.,  as  far  as  the  stanza: 
'Daughters  of Jewry ');  the  poem  with  the.  refrain 
, Although  'tis  night';  and  the  stanzas  beginning' In 
principio  erat  verbum.'  He  may also  have  composed 
the paraphrase of the  psalm Super jlumina  and the poem 
, Dark Night.'  (Note:  All these  poems,  in verse  form, 
will  be found  in Vol.  II of this  edition.) 
1578  (c.  March  II).  Fray Germano  de  Santo  Matia is  no 
longer a  prisoner. 
1578  (night of August  IS).  S. John of the Cross has a vision 
of Our Lady, instructing him to escape. 
1578.  Escapes  to  the  Convent of the  Carmelite  nuns  (San 
Jose)  in  Toledo,  and  is  thence  taken  to  his  house 
by  D.  Pedro  Gonzalez  de  Mendoza,  Canon  of 
Toledo. 
This  occurred  either  on  the  night  of August  16  or  on 
a  later night within  the  Octave of the Assumption. 
1578  (October  9).  Present  at  a  Chapter  General  of the 
Discalced  at  Almodovar.  Is  sent  to  Monte  Calvario 
as  Vicar, in the absence in Rome of the Prior. 
1578  (October  16).  A  Papal  Decree  submits  the  Dis-
calced  Carmelites  to  the  Calced. 
1578  (end  of October).  Stays for' a  few  days.'  at Beas  de 
Segura,  near  Monte  Calvario.  Confesses  the  nuns  at 
the  Carmelite Convent of Beas. 
THE  LIFE  OF  S.  JOHN  OF  THE  CROSS 
1578-9.  Remains  at  Monte  Calvario  as  Vicar.  For 
a  part  of  this  time  (probably  from  the  beginning 
of 1579),  goes  weekly  to  the  convent  of Beas  to  hear 
confessions.  During  this  period,  begins  his  commen-
taryentitled  The  Ascent of Mount  Carmel  (Cf.  pp.  1-334, 
below)  and  also  the  Spiritual  Canticle  (translated  in 
Vol.  II). 
1579  (June 14).  Founds a  house of the Reform at Baeza. 
1579-81.  Resides  at  Baeza  as  Rector  of  the  Carmelite 
house.  Visits  the  Beas  convent  occasionally  (some-
times  every fortnight).  Writes  more of the prose works 
begun  at  Monte  Calvario  and  the rest  of the stanzas of 
the  Spiritual  Canticle  except  the  last  five,  possibly  with 
the commentaries  to  the stanzas. 
1580  (June  22).  The  Discalced  Reform  is  recognized 
by a  bull of Gregory  XIII. 
1581  (March  3).  'Chapter  of  the  Separation'  (of 
Calced  and  Discalced)  at  Alcala.  P.  Gracian  is  elected 
provincial  by a  majority of one. 
1581  (March 3).  Attends  the Alcahi  Chapter. 
Appointed  Prior  of  the  Granada  Monastery  of 
Los  Martires. 
1582  (January  20).  Arrives  at  Los  Martires. 
1582  (October  15).  Death of S.  Teresa. 
1582-8.  Prior  at  Granada.  Resides  there  continuously 
till  1584  and  intermittently  afterwards.  Visits  the 
Beas  convent  occasionally.  Writes  the last  five  stanzas 
of  the  '  Spiritual  Canticle'  during  one  of these  visits. 
At Lo"  Martircs,  finishes  the Ascent of Mount  Carmel  and 
composes  his  remaining  prose  treatises.  The  Living 
Flame  of Love  is  written  in  1585,  in  fifteen  days,  at  the 
request  of Dona Ana  de  Penalosa . 
.  1583  (May  I).  Provincial  Chapter of Almodovar. 
1585.  Chapter  of  Lisbon  (May  10;  continued  at 
Pastrana  on  October  17)  divides  the  one  Discalced 
province  into  four  vicariates.  S.  John  of  the  Cross 
becomes  Vicar-Provincial  of  Andalusia.  P.  Gracian's 
provincialate  comes  to  an end.  P.  Doria succeeds  him. 
1585-7.  s.  John  of  the  Cross  Vicar-Provincial  of Anda-
lusia.  Numerous  foundations,  notably:  San Jose  de 
Malaga,  February  17,  1585;  Cordoba,  May 18,  1586  ; 
THE  LIFE  OF  S.  JOHN  OF  THE  CROSS 
Manchuela deJaen, October 1586;  Caravaca, Decem-
ber  18,  1586;  Bujalance, June 24,  1587. 
1587  (June 27).  P.  Doria obtains  the  new  Constitution 
of the  Reform  by  a  brief of Sixtus  V. 
1587  (April).  Chapter of Valla  do  lid.  S. John of the Cross 
is  re-elected  Prior of Granadk. 
1588  (May).  P.  Gracian  is  deprived  of his  offices  in 
the  Order.! 
1588  (June  19)'  Opening  of the  first  Chapter  General  of 
the  Reform,  which  S.  John  of the  Cross  attends.  P. 
Doria  becomes  Vicar-General.  Consulta 
2 
formed. 
S. John of the Cross  is  elected  the first  of the consiliarios. 
1588  (August  10).  Is  made  Prior  of  the  Monastery  of 
Segovia,  which  becomes  the  central  house  of  the 
Reform  and  the  headquarters  of  the  Consulta.  (In 
the  absence  of  the  Vicar-General,  he  would  govern 
both  the  Consulta  and  the  house).  He  remains  Prior 
till  February  1589. 
I 590  (June).  Re-elected  first  consiliario  at  the  Chapter  of 
Madrid. 
1591  (June).  Deprived of his  offices  and elected  Provincial 
of Mexico.  (N.B.  This  appointment  was  revoked.) 
1591  (end  of July).  Goes  to  La Peiiuela. 
1591  (September  12).  Attacked  by fever.  (September  22) 
~ c   v e s   La Peiiuela for  Obeda.  (December  14)  Dies  at 
Ubeda. 
January 25,  1675.  Beatified  by  Clement X. 
December 26,  1726.  Canonized by Benedict XIII. 
August 24,  1926.  Declared Doctor of the Church Universal 
by  Pius  XI. 
1  [Cf.  E.  Allison  Peers,  Studies  of the  SPanish  Mystics,  Vol.  II,  p.  156.J 
2  [Ibid.] 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  WORKS  OF 
S.  JOHN  OF  THE  CROSS 
I 
DATES  AND  METHODS  OF  COMPOSITION.  GENERAL 
CHARACTERISTICS 
WITH  regard  to  the  times  and  places  at  which  the  works 
of S.  John of the  Cross  were  written,  and  also  with  regard 
to the number of these works, there have existed, from a very 
early date,  considerable differences  of opinion.  Of internal 
evidence  from  the  Saint's  own  writings  there  is  practically 
none,  and  such  external  testimony as  can  be found  in con-
temporary documents  needs  very careful  examination. 
There was  no period in the life  of S. John of the  Cross  in 
which he devoted  himself entirely  to  writing.  He does  not, 
in  fact,  appear  to  have  felt  any  inclination  to  do  so:  his 
books  were  written in response  to the insistent  and repeated 
demands  of  his  spiritual  children.  He  was  very  much 
addicted,  on  the  other  hand,  to  the  composition  of apo-
thegms  or  maxims  for  the  use  of  his  penitents  and  this 
custom  he  probably began  as  early as  the days  in  which  he 
was  confessor  to  tbe  Convent  of the  Incarnation  at  Avila, 
though  his  biographers  have  no  record  of any  maxims  but 
those  written  at  Beas.  One  of his  best  beloved  daughters, 
however,  Ana  Maria  de Jesus,  of the  Convent  of the  In-
carnation,  declared  in her deposition,  during the process  of 
the  Saint's canonization,  that he  was  accustomed  to  '  com-
fort  those  with  whom  he had to do,  both  by  his  words  and 
by his  letters,  of which  this  witness  rec:ived  a  number,  and 
also  by  certain  papers  concerning  holy  things  which  this 
witness  would  greatly  value  if she  still  had  them.'  Con-
sidering the number of nuns to whom the Saint was  director 
at Avila,  it is  to  be  presumed  that  M.  Ana  Maria  was  not 
the  only  person  whom  he  favoured.  We  may  safely  con-
clude,  indeed,  that there  were  many others  who  shared  the 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
same  privileges,  and  that,  had  we  all  these' papers,'  they 
would  comprise  a  large  volume,  instead  of the  few  pages 
which  we  reproduce  elsewhere  in  this  translation. 
There is  a  well-known  story,  preserved  in  the  documents 
of the  canonization  process,  of how,  one  night,  S.  John  of 
the  Cross  was  kidnapped  by  the  Caked  Carmelites  and 
carried  off  from  the  Incarnation  to  their  convent  in  the 
same  city.  Realizing  that  he  had  left  behind  him  some 
important  papers,  he  contrived,  on  the  next  morning,  to 
escape,  and  returned  to  the  Incarnation  to  destroy  them 
while  there  was  time  to  do  so.  He  was  missed  almost 
immediately  and  he  had  hardly  gained  his  cell  when  his 
pursuers were on his heels.  In the few  moments that remained 
before  they  forced  open  the  door  he  had  time  to  tear  up 
these  papers  and  swallow  some  of the  most  compromising. 
As  the  original  assault  had  not  been  unexpected,  though 
the time of it \A;as  uncertain,  they would  not have been very 
numerous.  It  is  generally  supposed  that  they  concerned 
the  business  of  the  infant  Reform,  of  which  the  survival 
was  at  that  time  in  grave  doubt.  But  it  seems  at  least 
equally  likely  that  some  of  them  might  have  been  these 
spiritual  maxims,  or  some  more  extensive  instructions 
which  might  be  misinterpreted  by  any  who  found  them. 
I t  is  remarkable,  at  any  rate,  that  we  have  none  of  the 
Saint's  writings  belonging  to  this  period  whatever. 
All  his  biographers  tell  us  that  he  wrote  some  of  the 
stanzas  of  the  'Spiritual  Canticle,'  together  with  a  few 
other  poems,  while  he  was  imprisoned  at Toledo.  'When 
he  left  the  prison,'  says  M.  Magdalena  del  Espiritu  Santo, 
, he  took  with  him  a  little  book  in  which  he  had  written, 
while  there,  some  verses  based  upon  the  Gospel  In  principio 
erat  Verbum,  together  with  some  couplets  which  begin: 
"  How well  I  know  the fount  that freely  flows,  Although  'tis 
night,"  and  the  stanzas  or  liras  that  begin  "  Whither  hast 
vanished? "  as  far  as  the stanzas  beginning  "  Daughters  of 
Jewry."  The  remainder  of them  the  Saint  composed  latp.r 
when  he  was  Rector  of the  College  at Baeza.  Some  of the 
expositions  were  written  at  Beas,  as  answers  to  questions 
put  to  him  by  the  nuns;  others  at  Granada.  This  little 
book,  in  which  the  Saint  wrote  while  in  prison,  he  left  in 
the  Convent  of Beas  and  on  various  occasions  I  was  com-
manded  to  copy  it.  Then someone  took  it from  my  ceIl-
who,  I  never  knew.  The  freshness  of  the  words  in  this 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
book,  together  with  their  beauty  and  subtlety,  caused  me 
great  wonder,  and  one  day  I  asked  the  Saint  if God  gave 
him  those  words  which  were  so  comprehensive  and  so 
lovely.  And  he  answered:  "Daughter,  sometimes  God 
gave  them to me  and at other times  I  sought them."  '1 
M.  Isabel  de Jesus  Maria,  who  was  a  novice  at  Toledo 
when  the  Saint  escaped  there  from  his  prison,  wrote  thus 
from Cuerva on  November 2,  1614.  'I remember,  too, that, 
at the  time  we  had  him hidden in the  church,  he  recited  to 
us  some lines  which he had composed  and kept in  his  mind, 
and  that  one  of the  nuns  wrote  them  down  as  he  repeated 
them.  There  were  three  poems-all  of  them  upon  the 
Most  Holy  Trinity,  and  so  sublime  and  devout  that  they 
seem  to  enkindle  the  reader.  In  this  house  at  Cuerva  we 
have some  which  begin: 
"  Far away in the  beginning, 
Dwelt  the  Word,  in God  on  high."'2 
The frequent             to keeping his verses in his  head and 
the  popular  exaggeration  of  the  hardships  (great  though 
these  were)  which  the  Saint  had  to  endure in  Toledo  have 
led  some  writers  to affirm  that he did  not in fact  write  these 
poems in prison  but committed  them to  memory and  trans-
ferred  them  to  paper at some  later date.  The  evidence  of 
M.  Magdalena, however,  would appear  to  be  decisive.  We 
know,  too,  that  the  second  of S. John of the  Cross's  gaolers, 
Fray Juan  de  Santa  Maria,  was  a  kindly  man  who  did  all 
he could to lighten his captive's sufferings;  and his superiors 
would  probably  not  have  forbidden  him  writing  materials 
provided he wrote no letters. 
It seems,  then,  that  the  Saint  wrote  in  Toledo  the  first 
seventeen  of  the  thirty-nine  stanzas  of  the  'Spiritual 
Canticle,'  the  nine  parts  of  the  poem' Far  away  in  the 
1  :\1.  !\Iagdalena is  a  very reliable witness,  for  she  was  not only a  most 
discreet  and  able  woman,  but  was  also  one  of  those  who  were  very  near 
to  the  Saint and gained  most from  his spiritual direction.  The quotation 
is from         I.lC)H. 
2  MS.  12738,  fol.  835.  Fr.  Jeronimo de S.  Jose,  too,  says  that the nuns 
of  Toledo  al:;o  copied  certain  poems  from  the  Saint's  dictation.  M.  Ana 
de  S.  Alberto  heard  him  sa.y  of  his  imprisonment:  'God  sought  to  try 
me,  but  His  mercy  forsook  me  not.  I  ma.de  some  stanzas  there  which 
begin:  "Whither hast vanished,  Beloved";  and also those other verses, 
beginning  "  Far  above  the  alien  rivers  That  in  Babylon  abound."  All 
these  verses  I  sent to  Fray Jose de Jesus Maria,  who  told  me that he  was 
interested in  them and  was keeping them in his  memory in order  to write 
them out: 
c 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
beginning  .  .  .,'  the  paraphrase of the  psalm  Super jlumina 
Babylonis  and the poem' How well  I  know  the fount ....  ' 
This  was  really  a  considerable  output  of work,  for,  except 
perhaps  when  his  gaoler  allowed  him  to  go  into  another 
room,  he  had  no  light  but  that  of  a  small  oil-lamp  or 
occasionally  the  infiltration  of daylight  that  penetrated  a 
tiny  window. 
Apart  from  the  statement  of  M.  Magdalena  already 
quoted,  little  more  is  known  of what  the  Saint  wrote  in 
El  Calva rio  than  of what  he  wrote  in  Toledo.  From  an 
amplification  made  by herself of the  sentences  to  which  we 
have  referred  it  appears  that  almost  the  whole  of what she 
had  copied  was  taken  from  her;  as  the  short  extracts 
transcribed  by  her  are  very  similar  to  passages  from  the 
Saint's  writings  we  may perhaps  conclude  that much of the 
other material  was  also  incorporated in them.  In that case 
he  may  well  have  completed  a  fair  proportion  of the  Ascent 
of Mount  Carmel  before  leaving  Beas. 
It was  in  El  Calvario,  too,  and for  the nuns  of Beas,  that 
the  Saint  drew  the  plan  called  the  '  Mot!nt  of Perfection' 
(referred  to  by  M.  Magdalena
l 
and  in  the  Ascent  of Mount 
Carmel  and  reproduced  as  the  frontispiece  to  this  volume) 
of which  copies  were  afterwards  multiplied  and  distributed 
among  Discalced  houses.  Its  author  wished  it  to  figure  at 
the  head  of all  his  treatises,  for  it is  a  graphical  representa-
tion  of the  whole  mystical  way,  from  the  starting-point  of 
the  beginner  to  the  very  summit  of  perfection.  His  first 
sketch,  which  still  survives,  is  a  rudimentary  and  imperfect 
one;  before  long,  however,  as  M.  Magdalena  tells  us,  he 
evolved  another  that  was  fuller  and  more  comprehensive. 
Just as  we  owe to  PP.  Gracian and Salazar many precious 
relics  of S.  Teresa,  so  we  owe  others  of S. John of the  Cross 
to  M.  Magdalena.  Among  the  most  valuable  of these  is 
her own  copy of the  '  Mount,'  which,  after her death,  went 
to  the  'Desert'2  of  Our  Lady  of  the  Snows  which  the 
Discalced  province  of Upper  Andalusia  had  established  in 
the  diocese  of Granada.  It  was  found  there  by  P.  Andres 
de  la  Encarnacion,  of whom  we  shall  presently  speak,  and 
1  1\1S.  12944.  • He  also  occasiona.lIy  wrote  spiritual  things  tha.t  were 
of  grcat  benefit.  There,  too,  he  composed  the  Mount  and  drew  a  copy 
with  his  own  hand  for  each  of  our  breviaries;  later,  he  added  to  these 
copies  and made some changes.' 
2  [See,  on this  tcrm,  Studies  of the  Spa"ish Mystics,  Vol.  II, p.  282,  and 
Catholic  EncycloptZdia,  sub' Carmelites.'] 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
who  immediately  made  a  copy  of it,  legally  certified  as 
an  exact  one  and  now  in  the  National  Library  of  Spain 
(MS.  6296). 
The  superiority  of the  second  plan  over  the  first  is  very 
evident.  The  first  consists  simply  of  three  parallel  lines 
corresponding  to  three  different  paths-one  on  either  side 
of the  Mount,  marked  '  Road  of the spirit of imperfection t 
and  one  in  the  centre  marked' Path  of  Mount  Carmel. 
Spirit  of perfection.'  In  the  spaces  between  the  paths  are 
written  the  celebrated  maxims  which  appear  in  Book  I, 
Chapter  xiii,  of the  Ascent  of Mount  Carmel,  in  a  somewhat 
different  form,  together  with  certain  others.  At the  top  of 
the  drawing  are  the  words  'Mount  Carmel,'  which  are 
not found in the second plan, and below them is  the legend  : 
, There is  no  road here,  for  there is  no law for  the righteous 
man,'  together  with  other  texts  from  Scripture. 
The  second  plan  represents  a  number  of  graded 
heights,  the  loftiest  of which  is  planted  with  trees.  Three 
paths,  as  in  the  first  sketch,  lead  from  the  base  of  the 
mount,  but  they  are  traced  more  artistically  and  have 
a  more detailed ascetic and mystical application.  Those on 
either  side,  which  denote  the  roads  of  imperfection,  are 
broad  and  somewhat  tortuous  and  come  to  an  end 
before  the  higher  stages  of the  mount  are  reached.  The 
centre  road,  that  of perfection,  is  at  first  very  narrow  but 
gradually  broadens  and  leads  right  up  to  the  summit  of 
the              which  only  the  perfect  attain  and  where 
they  enjoy  the  iuge  convivium-the  heavenly  feast.  The 
different  zones  of religious  perfection,  from  which  spring 
various  virtues,  are  portrayed  with  much  greater  detail 
than in  the  first  plan.  As  we  have  reproduced  the second 
plan in  this  volume,  it need  not be described  more fully. 
We  know  that  S.  John  of the  Cross  used  the' Mount' 
very  frequently  for  all  kinds  of religious  instruction.  'By 
means  of  this  drawing,'  testified  one  of his  disciples,  'he 
used  to  teach  us  that,  in  order  to  attain  to  perfection,  we 
must  not  desire  the  good  things  of  earth,  nor  those  of 
heaven;  but that  we  must  desire  naught  save  to  seek  and 
strive  after  the  glory  and  honour  of God  our  Lord  in  all 
things  .  .  .  and  this  "Mount  of Perfection"  the said  holy 
father  himself expounded  to  this  witness  when  he  was  his 
superior in  the said Convent of Granada.' 
1 
I  Fray MartIn de San  Jose in :MS.  12738,  fol.  125. 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
It seems  not improbable  that the Saint continued writing 
chapters  of  the  Ascent  and  the  Spiritual  Canticle  while  he 
was  Rector  at  Baeza,  whether  in  the  College  itself,  or  in 
EI  Castellar,  where  he  was  accustomed  often  to  go  into 
retreat.  I t  was  certainly  here  that he wrote  the  remaining 
stanzas of the Canticle  (as  M.  Magdalena explicitly tells  us  in 
words  already  quoted)  except  the  last  five,  which  he  com-
posed  rather  later,  at  Granada.  One  likes  to  think  that 
these  loveliest  of  his  verses  were  penned  by  the  banks  of 
the  Guadalimar,  in  the woods  of the  Granja de  Santa Ana, 
where  ·he  was  in  the  habit  of passing  long  hours  in  com-
munion  with  God.  At  all  events  the  stanzas  seem  more  in 
harmony  with  such  an  atmosphere  than  with  that  of the 
College. 
With  regard  to  the  last  five  stanzas  we  have  definite 
evidence  from  a  Beas  nun,  M.  Francisca  de  la  Madre  de 
Dios,  who testifies in the Beatification process  (April 2,  1618) 
as  follows: 
And so,  when  the said  holy friar John of the  Cross  was  in  this 
convent one Lent  (for  his great Jove  for  it brought him here from 
the said city of Granada, where he was prior,  to confess  the  nuns 
and  preach  to  them)  he  was  preaching  to  them  one  day  in  the 
parlour, and this witness  observed that on two separate occasions 
he ,vas  rapt and lifted  up from  the ground;  and when  he came 
to  himself he  dissembled  and  said;  'You have  seen  how  sleep 
has overcome  me  !'  And one day  he  asked  this  witness  in what 
her  prayer  consisted,  and  she  replied:  'In  considering  the 
beauty of God  and  in  rejoicing  that  He  has  such  beauty.'  And 
the  Saint  was  so  pleased  with  this  that  for  some  days  he  said 
the most sublime  things  concerning the  beauty of God,  at which 
all  marvelled.  And  thus,  under  the  influence  of this  love,  he 
composed  five  stanzas,  beginning' Beloved,  let  us  sing,  And  in 
thy  beauty see  ourselves  portray'd.'  And  in  all  this  he  showed 
that  there  was  in  his  breast  a  great  love  of God. 
f'rom  a  letter which  this  nun wrote  from  Beas  in  1629  to 
P.  Jeronimo  de  San Jose,  we  gather  that  the  stanzas  were 
actually  written  at  Granada  and  brought  to  Beas,  where 
•  .  .  with  every  word  that  we  spoke  to  him  we  seemed  to  be 
opening  a  door  to  the  fruition  of the  great  treasures  and  riches 
which  (;od  had stored  up  in  his  soul. 
If there  is  a  discrepancy  here,  however,  it  is  of small  im-
portance;  there  is  no doubt as  to  the  approximate  date of 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
the composition of these stanzas and of their close connection 
with Beas. 
The  most  fruitful  literary  years  for  S.  John  of the  Cross 
were those  which he spent at Granada.  Here he completed 
the  Ascent  and  wrote  all  his  remaining  treatises.  Both 
M.  Magdalena  and  the  Saint's  closest  disciple,  P.  Juan 
Evangelista,  bear  witness  to  this.  The  latter  writes  from 
Granada  to  P.  Jeronimo  de  San Jose,  the  historian  of the 
Reform: 
With  regard  to  having  seen  our  venerable  father  write  the 
books,  I  saw  him  write  them  all;  for,  as  I  have  said,  I  was 
ever  at his  side.  The  Ascent  of Mount  Carmel  and  the  Dark Night 
he  wrote  here  at  Granada,  little  by  little,  continuing them  only 
with  many  gaps.  The  Living  Flame  of Love  he  also  wrote  in  this 
house, when he was Vicar-Provincial, at the request of Doiia Ana 
de  Peiialosa,  and  he  wrote  it  in fifteen  days  when  he  was  very 
busy  here  with  an  abundance  of occupations.  The  first  thing 
that  he  wrote  was  Whither  hast  vanished?  and  that  too  he  wrote 
here;  the stanzas  he  had written in  the  prison at Toledo.
1 
In  another  letter  (February  18,  1630),  he  wrote  to  the 
same  correspondent: 
With  regard  to  our  holy  father's  having  written  his  books  in 
this  house,  I  will  say  what  is  undoubtedly  true-namely,  that 
he  wrote  here  the  commentary  on  the  stanzas  Whither  hast 
vanished?  and  the  Living  Flame  of Love,  for  he  began  and ended 
them in  my  time.  The Ascent  of Mount  Carmel  I  found  had  been 
begun  when  I  came  here  to  take  the  habit,  which  was  a  year 
and  a  half after  the  foundation  of this  house;  he  may  have 
brought  it  from  yonder  already  begun.  But  the  Dark  Night  he 
certainly wrote  here,  for  I  saw him writing a  part of it,  and this 
is  certain,  because  I  saw  it.
2 
These  and  other  testimonies  might  with  advantage  be 
fuller  and  more  concrete,  but  at  least  they  place  beyond 
doubt the facts that we  have already set down.  Summarizing 
our total findings,  we  may  assert  that part of the' Spiritual 
Canticle,' with perhaps the' Dark Night,' and the other poems 
enumerated, were  written in  the Toledo prison;  that at the 
request of the nuns at EI  Calvario he wrote there  (1578-79), 
a  few  chapters  of the  Ascent'  and  commentaries  on  some  of 
the  stanzas  of the  'Canticle';  that  he  composed  further 
1  !\IS.  12738,  fo!'  1431.  The letter is  unda.ted  as to the year. 
I  MS.  12738,  fol.  I,US. 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
stanzas  at  Baeza  (1579-81),  perhaps  with  their  respective 
commentaries;  and  that,  finally,  he  completed  the  Canticle 
and  the  Ascent  at  Granada  and  wrote  the  whole  of  the 
Dark Night and of the Living Flame-the latter in a fortnight. 
All  these  last  works  he  wrote  before  the  end  of 1585,  the 
first  year in which  he was  Vicar-Provincial. 
Other  writings,  most  of  them  brief,  are  attributed  to 
S.  John  of  the  Cross;  they  will  be  discussed  in  a  later 
volume  of this  edition,  in which  we shall  publish  the  minor 
works  which  we  accept  as  genuine.  The authorship  of his 
four  major  prose  works-the  Ascent,  Dark  Night,  Spiritual 
Canticle  and  Living  Flame-no  one  has  ever  attempted  to 
question,  even  though  the  lack  of extant  autographs  and 
the large number of copies  have made it difficult to establish 
correct texts.  To this  question  we  shall  return later. 
The  characteristics  of  the  writings  of  S.  John  of  the 
Cross .. are  so  striking  that  it  would  be  difficult  to  confuse 
them with those of any other writer.  His literary personality 
stands  out  clearly  from  that  of his  Spanish  contemporaries 
who  wrote  on  similar  subjects.  Both  his  style  and  his 
methods  of exposition  bear the  marks  of a  strong individu-
ality. 
If  some of these derive from his  native genius and tempera-
ment,  others  are  undoubtedly  reflections  of his  education 
and  experience.  The  Aristotelian-Thomistic  philosophy, 
then  at  the  height  of its  splendour,  which  he  learned  so 
thoroughly  in  the  classrooms  of  Salamanca  University, 
characterizes  the  whole  of  his  writings,  giving  them  a 
granite-like  solidity  even  when  their  theme  is  such  as  to 
defy  human  speculation.  Though  the  precise  extent  of 
his  debt  to  this  Salamancan  training  in  philosophy  has 
not  yet  been  definitely  assessed,  the  fact  of its  influence 
is  evident  to  every  reader.  It gives  massiveness,  harmony 
and  unity  to  both  the  ascetic  and  the  mystical  work  of 
S.  John  of  the  Cross-that  is  to  say,  to  all  his  scientific 
writing. 
Deeply,  however,  as  S.  John  of  the  Cross  drew  from 
the  Schoolmen,  he  was  also  profoundly  indebted  to  many 
other  writers.  He was  distinctly  eclectic in his  reading and 
quotes  freely  (though  less  than  some  of  his  Spanish  con-
temporaries)  from  the  Fathers  and  from  the  medireval 
mystics,  especially  from  S.  Thomas,  S.  Bonaventura,  Hugh 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
of S.  Victor and the pseudo-Areopagite.  All that he quotes, 
however,  he makes his own,  with the result that his chapters 
are  never  a  mass  of citations loosely  strung together,  as  are 
those  of many other Spanish mystics  of his  time. 
When  we  study his  treatises-principally that  great com-
posite  work  known  as  the  Ascent  of Mount  Carmel  and  the 
Dark  Night-we have the  impression  of a  master-mind  that 
has  scaled  the  heights  of mystical  science  and  from  their 
summit  looks  down  upon  and  dominates  the  plain  below 
and the paths leading upward.  We  may well  wonder what 
a  vast  contribution to the subject he would  have made had 
he  been  able  to  expound  all  the  eight  stanzas  of his  poem 
since  he  covered  so  much  ground  in  expounding  no  more 
than two.  Observe with  what assurance and what mastery 
of subject  and  method  he  defines  his  themes  and  divides 
his  arguments,  even  when  treating  the  most  abstruse  and 
controversial  questions.  The  most  obscure  phenomena  he 
appears  to  illumine,  as  it  were,  with  one  lightning  flash  of 
understanding,  as  though  the  explanation  of  them  were 
perfectly  natural  and  easy.  His  solutions  of  difficult 
problems  are  not  timid,  questioning  and  loaded  with 
exceptions,  but  clear,  definite  and  virile  like  the  man  who 
proposes  them.  No  scientific  field,  perhaps,  has  so  many 
zones  which  are  apt  to  become  vague  and  obscure  as  has 
that  of mystical  theology;  and  there  are  those  among  the 
Saint's  predecessors  who  seem  to  have  made  their  per-
manent  abode  in  them.  They  give  the  impression  of 
attempting  to  cloak  vagueness  in  verbosity,  in  order  to 
avoid  being  forced  into  giving  solutions  of problems  which 
they find insoluble.  Not so S.John of the Cross.  A scientific 
dictator,  if such  a  person  were  conceivable,  could  hardly 
express  himself  with  greater  clarity.  His  phrases  have  a 
decisive,  almost  a  chiselled  quality;  where  he  errs  on  the 
side  of redundance,  it  is  not  with  the  intention  of hiding 
uncertainty,  but  in  order  that  he  may  drive  home  with 
double force  the truths which he desires  to impress. 
No  less  admirable  are,  on  the  one  hand,  his  synthetic 
skill  and  the  logic  of his  arguments,  and,  on  the  other,  his 
subtle  and  discriminating  analyses,  which  weigh  the  finest 
shades  of  thought  and  dissect  each  subject  with  all  the 
accuracy of science.  To his  analytical genius  we  owe  those 
finely  balanced  statements,  orthodox  yet  bold  and  fearless, 
which  have  caused  clumsier  intellects  to  misunderstand 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
him.  I t  is  not  remarkable  that  this  should  have  occurred. 
The  ease  with  which  the  unskilled  can  misinterpret  genius 
is  shown  in the history of many a  heresy. 
How  much  of all  this  S.  John  of the  Cross  owed  to  his 
studies  of scholastic  philosophy  in  the  University  of  Sala-
manca,  it  is  difficult  to  say.  If \ve  examine  the  history 
of that  University  and  read  of its  severe  discipline  we  shall 
be  in  no  danger  of  under-estimating  the  effect  which  it 
must  have  produced  upon  so  agile  and  alert  an  intellect. 
Further,  we  note  the  constant  parallelisms  and  the  in-
frequent  divergences  between  the  doctrines  of S.  John  of 
the Cross  and S.  Thomas,  to  say  nothing. of the close  agree-
ment  between  the  views  of S.  John  of the  Cross  and  those 
of  the  Schoolmen  on  such  subjects  as  the  passions  and 
appetites,  the  nature  of the  soul,  the  relations  between  soul 
and  body.  Yet  we  must  not  forget  the student  tag:  Quod 
natura  non  dat,  Salmantica  non  prt£stat.  Nothing  but  natural 
genius  could  impart  the  vigour  and  the  clarity  which 
enhance  all  S.  John  of the  Cross's  arguments  and  nothing 
but  his  own  deep  and  varied  experience  could  have  made 
him what he may  well  be termed-the greatest psychologist 
in  the history of mysticism. 
Eminent,  too,  was  S. John ofthe Cross in sacred theology. 
The  close  natural  connection  that  exists  between  dogmatic 
and  mystical  theology  and  their  continual  interdependence 
in  practice  make  it  impossible  for  a  Christian  teacher  to· 
excel  in  the  latter  alone.  Indeed,  more  than  one  of  the 
heresies  that have  had  their  beginnings  in  mysticism  would 
never  have  developed  had  those  who  fell  into  them  been 
well  grounded  in  dogmatic  theology.  The  one  is,  as  it 
were,  the  lantern  that  lights  the  path  of the  other,  as  S. 
Teresa  had  realized  when  she  began  to  feel  the  continual 
necessity  of consulting  theological  teachers.  If S.  John  of 
the  Cross  is  able  to  climb  the greatest heights  of mysticism 
and  remain  upon  them  without  stumbling  or  dizziness 
it  is  because  his  feet  are  invariably  well  shod  with  the 
truths  of  dogmatic  theology.  The  great  mysteries-those 
of  the  Trinity,  the  Creation,  the  Incarnation  and  the 
Redemption-·and  such  dogmas  as  those  concerning  grace, 
the  gifts  of the  Spirit,  the  theological  virtues,  etc.,  were  to 
him  guide-posts  for  those  who  attempted  to  scale,  and  to 
lead  others  to scale,  the symbolic  mount of sanctity. 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
It  will  be  remembered  that  the  Saint  spent  but  one 
year  upon  his  theological  course  at  the  University  of Sala-
manca,  for  wh.ich  reason  many  have  been  surprised  at  the 
evident  solidity  of  his  attainments.  But,  apart  from  the 
fact  that a  mind  so  keen  and  retentive  as  that of Fray Juan 
de  Santo  Matia  could  absorb  in  a  year  what  others  would 
have  failed  to  imbibe  in  the  more  usual  two  or  three,  we 
must  of necessity  assume  a  far  larger  time  spent  in  private 
study.  For  in  one  year  he  could  not  have  studied  all  the 
treatises  of which  he  clearly  demonstrates  his  knowledge-
to  say  nothing  of many  others  which  he  must  have  known. 
His oWjl  works,  apart from any external evidence, prove him 
to have  been a  theologian  of distinction. 
In  both  fields,  the  dogmatic  and  the  mystical,  he  was 
greatly  aided  by  his  knowledge  of  Holy  Scripture,  which 
he  studied  continually,  in  the  last  years  of his  life,  to  the 
exclusion,  as  it would  seem,  of all  else.  Much of it he  knew 
by  heart;  the  simple  devotional  talks  that  he  was  accus-
tomed  to  give  were  invariably  studded  with  texts,  and  he 
made  use  of passages  from  the  Bible  both  to justify  and  to 
illustrate  his  teaching.  In  the  mystical  interpretation  of 
Holy  Scripture,  as  every  student  of  mysticism  knows,  he 
has  had  few  equals  even  among  his  fellow  Doctors  of the 
Church  Universal. 
Testimonies to his  mastery of the Scriptures  can be found 
in abundance.  P.  Alonso de la Madre de -Dios,  for example, 
who was personally acquainted with him, stated in  1603  that 
, he  had  a  great  gift  and  facility  for  the  exposition  of the 
Sacred  Scripture,  principally  of the  Song  of Songs,  Eccle-
siasticus,  Ecclesiastes,  the  Proverbs  and  the  Psalms  of 
David.' 1  His  spiritual  daughter,  that same  Magdalena  del 
Espiritu  Santo  to  whom  we  have  several  times  referred, 
affirms  that  S.  John of the  Cross  would  frequently  read  the 
Gospels  to  the  nuns  of Beas  and expound  the letter and  the 
spirit of them.
2 
Fray Juan Evangelista says in a  well-known 
passage: 
He  was  very  fond  of reading  in  the  Scriptures  and  I  never 
once  saw  him  read  any  other  books  than  the  Bible,:!  almost  all 
1  !'.IS.  12738,  fa!.  3.  Cf.  a  letter  of  April  28,  1614,  by  the  same  friar 
(ibid.,  fol.  8(5),  which  describes  the            knowledge  of  the  Holy 
             and skill in expounding them,  as  • inspired' and' Divine.' 
2  Ibid.,  fa!.  18. 
3  Jer6nimo de la Cruz  (ibid.,  fol.  G39)  describes the Saint on his journeys 
as' frequently  reading  the Bible' as he  went along on his' beast.' 
, 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
of which  he knew by heart,  S.  Augustine  Contra    ~ r e s e s   and  the 
Flos  Sanctorum.  When  occasionally  he  preached  (which  was 
seldom)  or gave  informal  addresses  [pldticas],  as  he  more  com-
monly  did,  he  never  read  from  any  book  save  the  Bible.  His 
conversation,  whether at recreation  or  at other  times,  was  con-
tinually of God,  and  he  spoke  so  delightfully  that,  when  he  dis-
coursed  upon  sacred  things  at  recreation,  he  would  make  us 
all laugh and we  used greatly to enjoy going out.  On occasions 
when we held chapters, he would usually give devotional addresses 
[pldticas  divinas]  after  supper,  and  he  never  failed  to  give  an 
address  every  night.
1 
Fray Pablo de Santa Maria,  who had also  heard  the Saint's 
addresses,  wrote  thus  : 
He was  a  man of the  most enkindled spirituality and of great 
insight  into  all  that  concerns  mystical  theology  and  matters  of 
prayer;  I  consider  it impossible  that  he  could  have  spoken  so 
well  about  all  the  virtues  if he  had  not  been  most  proficient  in 
the spiritual life,  and I  really think he  knew  the  whole  Bible  by 
heart,  so  far  as  one  could  judge  from  the  various  Biblical  pas-
sages  which  he  would  quote  at  chapters  and  in  the  refectory, 
without  any  great  effort,  but  as  one  who  goes  where  the  Spirit 
leads him.
2 
Nor was this admiration for  the expository ability ofS. John 
of the  Cross  confined  to  his  fellow-friars,  who  might  easily 
enough  have  been  led  into  hero-worship.  We  know  that 
he was  thought highly of in this respect by the University of 
Alcala de Henares,  where  he was consulted as  an authority. 
A  Dr.  Villegas,  Canon  of Segovia  Cathedral,  has  left  on 
record  his  respect  for  him.  And  Fray  Jeronimo  de  San 
Jose relates the esteem in which he was held at the University 
of Baeza, which in his day enjoyed a  considerable reputation 
for Biblical studies  : 
There  were  at  that  time  at  the  University  of Baeza  many 
learned  and  spiritually minded  persons,  disciples  of that  great 
father  and  apostle Juan de  Avila
3 
•••• All  these  doctors  ... 
would repair to our venerable father as to  an oracle  from  heaven 
1  MS.  12738,  fo1.  559.  P.  Alonso  writes  similarly  in  a  letter  to  Fray 
Jer6nimo  de  San  Jose:  'And  in  this  matter  of  speaking  of  God  and 
expounding  passages  from  Scripture  he  made  everyone  marvel,  for  they 
never  asked  him  about  a  passage  which  he  could  not  explain  in  great 
detail,  and sometimes  at recreation  the  whole  hour and much more  went 
by in the explanation of passages about which they asked him' (fol.  1431). 
I  Ibid.,  fo1.  847. 
a  [Cf.  Studies  of the  SPanish  Mystics,  Vol.  II, pp.  123-48.] 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
and  would  discuss  with  him  both  their  own  spiritual  progress 
and that of souls  committed to their charge,  with  the  result  that 
they were  both edified  and astonished  at his  skill.  They  would 
also  bring  him  difficulties  and  delicate  points  connected  with 
Divine  letters,  and  on  these,  too,  he  spoke  with  extraordinary 
energy  and  illumination.  One  of these  doctors,  who  had  con-
sulted  him  and  listened  to  him  on  various  occasions,  said  that 
although  he  had  read  deeply  in  S.  Augustine  and  S.  John 
Chrysostom  and  other  saints,  and  had  found  in  them  greater 
heights  and  depths,  he  had  found  in  none  of  them  that  par-
ticular  kind  of spirituality  in  exposition  which  this  great  father 
applied  to  Scriptural passages.
1 
The  Scriptural  knowledge  of S.  John  of the  Cross  was, 
as  this  passage  makes  clear,  in  no  way  merely  academic. 
Both  in  his  literal  and  his  mystical  interpretations  of the 
Bible:  he  has  what  we  may  call  a  '  Biblical  sense,'  which 
saves  him  from  such  exaggerations  as  we  find  in  other 
expositors,  both earlier and contemporary.  One would  not 
claim,  of course,  that among the many hundreds of applica-
tions  of  Holy  Scripture  made  by  the  Carmelite  Doctor 
there are none  that can be objected  to  in this  respect;  but 
the  same  can  be  said  of  S.  Augustine,  S.  Ambrose,  S. 
Gregory  or S.  Bernard, and no one  would assert that, either 
with  them or with  him,  such  instances  are other than  most 
exceptional. 
To the three sources  already mentioned in which S. John 
of the  Cross  found  inspiration  we  must  add  a  fourth-the 
works  of ascetic  and mystical  writers.  It is  not yet  possible 
to  assert  with  any  exactness  how far  the Saint made  use  of 
these;  for,  though partial studies of this  question have been 
attempted, a  complete and unbiased  treatment of it has still 
to  be  undertaken.  Here  we  can  do  no  more  than  give  a 
few  indications of what remains  to  be done  and summarize 
the present content of our knowledge.· 
We  may  suppose  that,  during  his  novitiate  in  Medina, 
the  Saint read  a  number of devotional  books,  one  of which 
would almost certainly have been the Imitation  of Christ,  and 
othei'"S  would  have  included  works  which  were  translated 
into  Spanish  by order of Cardinal  Cisneros.  The demands 
1  Vida.  Bk.  IV.  Chap.  xiv.  § I. 
I  [On  this subject of  P.  Cris6gono de  Jesus  Sacramentado:  San  Juan 
tU  la Cruz,  Madrid,  1929.  Vol.  II, pp.  17-34 et  passim.] 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
of a  U niversi ty  course  would  not  keep  him  from  pursuing 
such  studies  at Salamanca;  the friar  who chose  a  cell  from 
the window of which he could see  the Blessed  Sacrament,  so 
that he  might spend  hours  in its  company,  would  hardly be 
likely  to  neglect  his  devotional  reading.  But  we  have  not a 
syllable  of direct  external  evidence  as  to  the  titles  of any  of 
the books  known to him. 
Nor,  for  that  matter,  have  we  much  more  evidence  of 
this  kind  for  any  other  part  of  his  life.  Both  his  early 
Carmelite  biographers  and  the  numerous  witnesses  who 
gave  evidence  during  the  canonization  process  describe  at 
great  length  his  extraordinary  penances,  his  love  for  places 
of retreat beautified by Nature,  the long hours  that he spent 
in  prayer  and  the  tongue  of angels  with  which  he  spoke 
on  things  spiritual.  But  of his  reading  they  say  nothing 
except to  describe  his  attachment to  the Bible,  nor have we 
any  record  of  the  books  contained  in  the  libraries  of the 
monasteries  that  he  visited.  Yet  if,  as  we  gather  from  the 
process,  he  spent  little  more  than  three  hours  nightly  in 
sleep,  he  must  have read  deeply  of spiritual  things  by  night 
as  well  as  by  day. 
Some  clues  to  the  nature  of his  reading  may  be  gained 
from  his  own  writings.  It is  true that the clues  are slender. 
He  cites  few  works  apart  from  the  Bible  and  these  are 
generally liturgical  books,  such  as  the  Breviary.  Some  of 
his  quotations  from  S.  Augustine,  S.  Gregory  and  other  of 
the  Fathers  are  traceable  to  these  sources.  Nevertheless, 
we  have  not  read  S.  John  of the  Cross  for  long  before  we 
find  ourselves  in  the  full  current  of  mystical  tradition. 
It is  not  by  means  of more or less  literal  quotations  that the 
Saint  produces  this  impression;  he  has  studied  his 
precursors  so  thoroughly  that  he  absorbs  the  substance  of 
their  doctrine  and  incorporates  it  so  intimately  in  his  own 
that it becomes  flesh  of his  flesh.  Everything in  his  writings 
is  fully  matured:  he  has  no  juvenilia.  The  media::val 
mystics whom he uses  are too often vague and undisciplined; 
they  need  someone  to  select  from  them  and  unify  them,  to 
give  them  clarity  and  order,  so  that  their  treatment  of 
mystical  theology  may  have  the  solidity  and  substance  of 
scholastic  theology.  To have done this is  one of the achieve-
ments  of S. John of the  Cross. 
We  are  convinced,  then,  by  an  internal  evidence  which 
is  chiefly  of a  kind  in  which  no  chapter  and  verse  can  be 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
given,  that  S.  John  of the  Cross  read  widely  in  medi:eval 
mystical  theology  and  assimilated  a  great  part  of what  he 
read.  The  influence  of  foreign  writers  upon  Spanish 
mysticism,  though  it  was  once  denied,  is  to-day  generally 
recognized.  It  was  inevitable  that  it  should  have  been 
considerable  in  a  country  which  in  the  sixteenth  century 
had  such  a  high  degree  of culture  as  Spain.  Plotinus,  in  a 
diluted  form,  made  his  way  into  Spanish  mysticism  as 
naturally as  did  Seneca  into Spanish  asceticism.  Plato and 
Aristotle  entered  it  through  the  two  greatest  minds  that 
Christianity  has  known-So  Augustine  and  S.  Thomas. 
The  influence  of the  Platonic  theories  of love  and  beauty 
and  of  such  basic  Aristotelian  theories  as  the  origin  of 
knowledge  is  to  be  found  in  most  of the  Spanish  mystics, 
S. John of the Cross  among them. 
The  pseudo-Dionysius  was  another  writer  who  was 
considered  a  great  authority  by  the  Spanish  mystics.  The 
importance. attributed  to  his  works  arose  partly  from  the 
fact  that  he  was  supposed  to  have  been  one  of  the  first 
disciples  of  the  Apostles;  many  chapters  from  mystical 
works  of  those  days  all  over  Europe  are  no  more  than 
glosses  of  the  pseudo-Areopagite.  He  is  followed  less, 
however,  by  S.  John  of  the  Cross  than  by  many  of  the 
latter's  contemporaries. 
Other  influences  upon  the  Carmelite  Saint  were  S. 
Gregory,  S.  Bernard  and  Hugh  and  Richard  of S.  Victor, 
many of whose  maxims were in the mouths of the mystics in 
the sixteenth century.  More important,  probably,  than any 
of these  was  the  Fleming,  Ruysbroeck,  between  whom  and 
S.  John  of the  Cross  there  were  certainly  many  points  of 
contact.  The Saint would have read him, not in the original, 
but in  Surius'  Latin translation of 1552,  copies  of which  are 
known  to  have  been  current  in  Spain.
l 
.  Together  with 
Ruysbroeck  may  be  classed  Suso,  Denis  the  Carthusian, 
Herp,  Kempis and various  other writers. 
Many  of the  ideas  and  phrases  which  we  find  in  S. John 
of the  Cross,  as  in other  writers,  are,  of course,  traceable  to 
the  common  mystical  tradition  rather  than  to  any  definite 
individual  influence.  The  striking  metaphor  of the  ray  of 
light  penetrating  the  room,  for  example,  which  occurs  in 
1  On  Flemish  influences  on  Spanish  mysticism,  see  Groult:  Les 
;'t1ystiq1li:s des  Pays-lias et In titterature espagnote du seiziemc siee/e,  Louvain, 
lC;) l 7· 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
the  first  chapter  of  the  pseudo-Areopagite's  De  Mystica 
Theologia,  has  been  used  continually  by  mystical  writers 
ever since  his  time.  The figures  of the  wood  consumed  by 
fire,  of the  ladder,  the  mirror,  the  flame  of love  and  the 
nights of sense  and spirit had long since become  naturalized 
in mystical literature.  There are many more such examples. 
The  originality  of  S.  John  of  the  Cross  is  in  no  way 
impaired  by  his  employment  of  this  current  mystical 
language:  such  an  idea  might  once  have  been  commonly 
held,  but  has  long  ceased  to  be  put  forward  seriously. 
His originality, indeed, lies precisely in the use which he made 
of language  that  he  found  near  to  hand.  It is  not  going 
too  far  to  liken  the  place  taken  by  S.  John  of the  Cross  in 
mystical  theology  to  that  of  S.  Thomas  in  dogmatic; 
S.  Thomas  laid  hold  upon  the  immense  store  of material 
which had accumulated in the domain of dogmatic theology 
and  subjected  it  to  the  iron  discipline  of reason.  That  he 
did  the  same  for  mystical  theology  is  the  great  claim  of 
S.  John  of  the  Cross  upon  our  admiration.  Through 
S.  Thomas  speaks  the  ecclesiastical  tradition  of many  ages 
on  questions  of religious  belief;  through S. John speaks  an 
equally  venerable  tradition  on  questions  of  Divine  love. 
Both writers combined sainthood with genius.  Both opened 
broad  channels  to  be  followed  of  necessity  by  Catholic 
writers  through  the  ages  to  come  till  theology  shall  lose 
itself in  that  vast  ocean  of truth  and  love  which  is  God. 
Both  created  instruments  adequate  to  the  greatness  of their 
task:  S.  Thomas'  clear,  decisive  reasoning  processes  give 
us  the  formula  appropriate  to  each  and  every  need  of the 
understanding;  S.  John  clothes  his  teaching  in  mellower 
and  more appealing language,  as  befits  the exponent of the 
science oflove.  We  may describe the treatises  of S. John of 
the Cross  as  the true Summa  Angelica  of mystical  theology. 
II 
OUTSTANDING  Q.UALITIES  AND  DEFECTS  OF  THE  SAINT'S  STYLE 
THE  profound  and  original  thought  which  S.  John  of the 
Cross  bestowed  upon so  abstruse a  subject and upon one on 
which  there  was  so  little  classical  literature  in  Spanish 
when  he  wrote,  led  him  to  clothe  his  ideas  in  a  language 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
at  once  energetic,  precise  and  of a  high  degree  of individu-
ality.  His  style  reflects  his  thought,  but it reflects  the style 
of no school and of no other writer whatsoever. 
This  is  natural  enough,  for  thought  and  feeling  were 
always  uppermost  in  the  Saint;  style  and  language 
take  a  place  entirely  subordinate  to  them.  Never  did  he 
sacrifice  any  idea  to  artistic  combinations  of words;  never 
blur  over  any  delicate  shade  of  thought  to  enhance 
some  rhythmic  cadence  of  musical  prose.  Literary  form 
(to use a  figure  which he  himself might have  coined)  is  only 
present at all in his works in the sense in which the industrious 
and  deferential  servant  is  present  in  the  ducal  apartment, 
for  the  purpose  of rendering faithful  service  to  his  lord  and 
master.  This  subordination  of  style  to  content  in  the 
Saint's  work  is  one  of its  most  eminent  qualities.  He  is  a 
great  writer,  but  not  a  great  stylist.  The  strength  and 
robustness  of his  intellect  everywhere  predominate. 
This  to  a  large  extent  explains  the  negligences  which 
we  find  in  his  style,  the  frequency  with  which  it is  marred 
by  repetitions  and  its  occasional  degeneration  into  diffuse-
ness.  The  long,  unwieldy  sentences,  one  of  which  will 
sometimes run to the length of a reasonably sized paragraph, 
are certainly a  trial to many a  reader.  So intent is  the Saint 
upon  explaining,  underlining  and  developing  his  points  so 
that they shall  be  apprehended as  perfectly as  may  be,  that 
he  continually  recurs  to  what  he  has  already  said,  and 
repeats  words,  phrases  and  even  passages  of considerable 
length without scruple.  It is  only fair  to  remind  the  reader 
that  such  things  were  far  commoner  in  the  Golden  Age 
than  they  are  to-day;  most  didactic  Spanish  prose  of that 
period  would  be  notably  improved,  from  a  modern  stand-
point,  if its  volume  were  cut down  by  about one-third. 
Be  that  as  it  may,  these  defects  in  the  prose  of S.  John 
of  the  Cross  are  amply  compensated  by  the  fullness  of 
his  phraseology,  the  wealth  and  profusion  of his  imagery, 
the  force  and  the  energy  of his  argument.  He  has  only  to 
be  compared  with  the  didactic  writers  who  were  his  con-
temporaries  for  this  to  become  apparent.  Together  with 
Luis  de  Granada,  Luis  de  Leon,  Juan  de  los  Angeles  and 
Luis  de la Puente,l he created  a  genuinely  native language, 
purged  of Latinisms,  precise  and  eloquent,  which  Spanish 
1  [Cf.  Studies  of  the  Spanish  Mystics,  Vol.  I,  pp.  33-76,  291-405; 
Vol.  II, pp.  309-43.J 
GE:"lER:\L                
writers  have  used  ever  since  in  writing  of  mystical 
theology. 
The  most  sublime  of  all  the  Spanish  mystics,  he  soars 
aloft on the wings  of Divine love  to  heights known  to  hardly 
any  of them.  Though  no  words  can  express  the  loftiest  of 
the  experiences  which  he  describes,  we  are  never  left  with 
the  impression  that  word,  phrase  or  image  has  failed  him. 
If it  docs  not  exist,  he  appears  to  invent  it,  rather  than 
pause in his  description  in  order  to  search for  an expression 
of the  idea  that  is  in  his  mind  or  be  satisfied  with  a  prolix 
paraphrase.  True  to  the  character  of  his  thought,  his 
style is  always forceful  and energetic, even to a  fault. 
We  have  said  nothing  of his  poems,  for  indeed  they  call 
for  no  purely  literary  commentary.  How  full  of life  the 
greatest  of them  are,  how  rich  in  meaning,  how  unforget-
able  and  how  inimitable,  the  individual  reader  may sec  at 
a  glance  or  may  learn  from  his  own  experience.  Many  of 
their exquisite figures their author owes, directly or indirectly, 
to his  reading and assimilation  of the Bible.  Some of them, 
however,  have acquired  a  new life  in the form  which he has 
given  them.  A  line  here,  a  phrase  there,  has  taken  root in 
the  mind  of some  later  poet  or  essayist  and  has  given  rise 
to a  new work of art,  to many lovers  of which the Saint who 
lies  behind  it is  unknuwn.  . 
It is  perhaps  not  an  exaggeration  to  say  that  the  verse 
and  prose  works  combined  of  S.  John  of  the  Cross  form 
at once  the most grandiose and  the most  melodious spiritual 
canticle  to  which  anyone  man  has  ever  given  utterance. 
I t is  impossible,  in the space at our disposal,  to quote at any 
length  from  the  Spanish critics  who  have  paid tribute to  its 
comprehensiveness  and  profundity.  We  must  content  our-
selves  with  a  short  quotation  characterizing  the  Saint's 
poems,  taken  from  the  greatest  of these  critics,  Marcelino 
Menendez  y  Pelayo,  who,  besides  referring  frequently  to 
S.  John  of  the  Cross  in  such  of his  mature  works  as  the 
Heterodo xos,  Ideas  Esteticas  and  Ciencia  Espanola,  devoted  to 
him  a  great  part  of the  address  which  he  delivered  as  a 
young man at his official reception into the Spanish Academy 
under  the  title  of' Mystical  Poetry.' 
, So  sublime,'  wrote  Menendez  y  Pelayo,  '  is  this  poetry 
[of S. John of the Cross]  that it scarcely seems  to  belong to 
this  world  at all;  it is  hardly capable of being  assessed  by 
literary  criteria.  More  ardent  in  its  passion  than  any 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
profane  poetry,  its  form  is  as  elegant  and  exquisite,  as 
plastic  and  as  highly  figured  as  any  of the  finest  works  of 
the                 The  spirit  of  God  has  passed  through 
these  poems  every  one,  beautifying  and  sanctifying  them 
on its  way.' 
III 
DIFFUSION  OF  THE  WRITINGS  OF  S.  JOHN  OF  THE  CROSS--
LOSS  OF  THE  AUTOGRAPHS-GENERAL  CHARACTERISTICS 
, 
OF  THE  MANUSCRIPTS 
THE  outstanding qualities  of S. John of the  Cross's  writings 
were  soon  recognized  by  the earliest  of their few  and  privi-
leged  readers.  All  such  persons,  of course,  belonged  to  a 
small  circle  composed  of the  Saint's  intimate  friends  and 
disciples.  As  time  went on,  the  circle  widened  repeatedly  ; 
now  it  embraces  the  entire  Church,  and  countless  indi-
vidual souls  who  are filled  with the spirit of Christianity. 
First  of all,  the  works  were  read  and  discussed  in  those 
foci  of  evangelical  zeal  which  the  Saint  had  himself  en-
kindled,  by  his  word  and  example,  at  Beas,  EI  Calvario, 
Baeza  and  Granada.  They  could  not  have  come  more 
opportunely.  S.  Teresa's Reform had engendered a spiritual 
alertness  and  energy  reminiscent  of  the  earliest  days  of 
Christianity.  Before this could in any way diminish, her first 
friar presented the followers  of them both with spiritual food 
to nourish and re-create their souls and so  to sustain the high 
degree of zeal for Our Lord which he had bestowed upon them. 
In  one  sense,  S.  John  of the  Cross  took  up  his  pen  in 
order  to  supplement  the  writings  of S.  Teresa;  on  several 
subjects,  for  example,  he  abstained  from  writing  at  length 
because  she  had  already  treated  of  them.
l 
Much  of the 
work  of  the  two  Saints,  however,  of necessity  covers  the 
same  ground,  and  thus  the  great  mystical  school  of  the 
Spanish  Carmelites  is  reinforced  at its  very  beginnings  in  a 
way  which  must  be  unique  in  the  history  of  mysticism. 
The writings ofS. Teresa and S.John of the Cross, though of 
equal  value  and  identical  aim,  are  in  many  respects  very 
different  in  their  nature;  together  they  cover  almost  the 
entire  ground  of orthodox  mysticism,  both  speculative  and 
lOne  well-known  example  will  be  found  in  the  commentary  on  the 
• Spiritual Canticle,'  Chap.  xii  (cf.  p.  lxi,  below). 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
experimental.  The  Carmelite  mystics  who  came  after 
them were able to  build  upon a  broad and sure foundation. 
The writings  of S. John of the  Cross  soon  became known 
outside  the  narrow  circle  of  his  sons  and  daughters  in 
religion.  In a  few  years  they  had  gone  all  over  Spain  and 
reached  Portugal,  France  and  Italy.  They  were  read  by 
persons  of every  social  class,  from  the  Empress  Maria  of 
Austria,  sister  of Philip  II,  to  the  most  unlettered  nuns  of 
S.  Teresa's  most  remote foundations.  One of the  witnesses 
at the process for  the beatification declared  that he knew of 
no  works  of which  there  existed  so  many  copies,  with  the 
exception  of the Bible. 
We  may fairly  suppose  (and  the supposition is  confirmed 
by  the  nature  of the  extant  manuscripts)  that  the  majority 
of the  early  copies  were  made  by  friars  and  nuns  of  the 
Discalced Reform.  Most Discalced convents mllst have had 
copies and others were probably in the possession of members 
of  other  Orders.  We  gather,  too,  from  various  sources, 
that even lay persons managed to make or obtain copies of the 
manuscripts. 
How  many  of these  copies,  it  will  be  asked,  were  made 
directly  from  the  autographs?  So  vague  is  the  available 
evidence  on  this  question  that it is  difficult  to  attempt  any 
calculation  of  even  approximate  reliability.  All  we  can 
say  is  that  the  copies  made  by,  or for,  the  Discalced  friars 
and  nuns  themselves  are  the earliest  and  most  trustworthy, 
while  those  intended  for  the  laity  were  frequently  made  at 
third  or  fourth  hand.  The  Saint  himself  seems  to  have 
written  out  only  one  manuscript  of each  treatise  and  none 
of these has  come down to  us.  Some think that he destroyed 
the  manuscripts  copied  with  his  own  hand,  fearing  that 
they  might  come  to  be  venerated  for  other  reasons  than 
that  of  the  value  of  their  teaching.  He  was,  of  course, 
perfec.tly  capable  of such  an  act  of abnegation;  once,  as 
we  know,  in accordance  with  his  own  principles, he  burned 
some  letters  of S.  Teresa,  which  he  had  carried  with  him 
for  years,  for  no  other  reason  than  that he  realized  that he 
was  becoming  attached  to  them.l 
The  only  manuscript  of his  that  we  possess  consists  of a 
few  pages of maxims, some letters and one or two documents 
which he wrote when he was Vicar-Provincial of Andalusia.
s 
1  MS.  J2738,  fol.  639. 
I  To these we shall refer in the third volume of this edition. 
GENERAL  INfRODUCfION 
So  numerous and so  thorough  have  been the searches  made 
for  further  autographs  during  the  last  three  centuries  that 
further  discoveries  of any  importance  seem  most  unlikely. 
We  have,  therefore,  to  console  ourselves  with  manuscripts, 
such  as  the  Sanlucar  de  Barrameda  Codex  of the  Spiritual 
Canticle,  which  bear  the  Saint's  autograph  corrections  as 
warrants  of their  integrity. 
The  vagueness  of much  of the  evidence  concerning  the 
manuscripts  to  which  we  have  referred  extends  to  the 
farthest  possible limit-that of using  the word' original'  to 
indicate' autograph'  and' copy'  indifferently.  Even  in 
the  earliest  documents  we  can  never  be sure  which  sense  is 
intended.  Furthermore,  there  was  a  passion  in  the  seven-
teenth  and  eighteenth  centuries  for  describing  all  kinds  of 
old  manuscripts  as  autographs,  and  thus  we  tind  copies  so 
described  in  which  the  hand  bears  not  the  slightest  resem-
blance  to  that of the  Saint,  as  the  most superficial  collation 
with  a  genuine  specimen  of  his  hand  would  have  made 
evident.  We  shall  give  instances  of this  in  describing  the 
extant  copies  of  individual  treatises.  One  example  of  a 
general  kind,  however,  may  be  quoted  here  to  show  the 
extent  to  which  the  practice  spread.  In a  statement made, 
with  reference  to  one  of  the  processes,  at  the  Convent  of 
Discalced Carmelite Nuns of Valladolid,  a  certain M.  Maria 
de la Trinidad deposed' that a servant of God,  a  Franciscan 
tertiary  named  Ana  Maria,  possesses  the  originals  of  the 
books  of our  holy  father,  and  has  heard  that  he  sent  them 
to  the  Order.'  Great  importance  was  attached  to  this 
deposition  and every possible  measure  was  taken to find  the 
autographs-needless to say,  without result. 
1 
With  the  multiplication  of  the  number  of  copies  of  S. 
John of the Cross's writings, the number of variants naturally 
multiplied  also.  The  early  copies  having  all  been  made 
.  1  If any single person could have spoken from  knowledge of this mattcr 
It would  be  P.  Alonso  de  130  ~ l   d r e   de  Vios,  as  all  papers  connected  with 
S.  John  of  the  Cross  passed  through  his  hands  and  he  took  hundreds  of 
depositions in connection  with  the  Beatification process.  His statements, 
however  pIS.  19404,  fol.  176  [Po  Silverio,  I,  179J),  are  as  vague  as  any 
others.  Hather  more  reliable  are  the  Saint's  two  early  bIographers, 
P.  Jose  de  Jcsus  Maria  (Quiroga)  and  P.  Jeronimo  de  Sa.n  Jose.  The 
former  states  in  one  place  that he  is  using  an  autograph  of  the  Ascen'  of 
Moun'  Carmel,  but again  it seems  likely  that  he  was  mistaken,  since  the 
archives of the  Heform  were still intact in the next century and no genuine 
autograph of a.ny  length  was  found  in them. 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
for  devotional  purposes,  by  persons  with  little  or  no  p     ~ o ­
graphical  knowledge,  many  of whom  did  not  even  exercise 
common  care,  it  is  not  surprising  that  there  is  not  a  single 
one which can compare in punctiliousness with certain extant 
eighteenth-century  copies  of documents  connected  with  S. 
John  of  the  Cross  and  S.  Teresa.  These  were  made  by  a 
painstaking  friar  called  Manuel  de  Santa  Maria,  whose 
scrupulousness  went  so  far  that  he  reproduced  imperfectly 
formed  letters exactly as  they were written, adding the parts 
that were  lacking  (e.g.,  the  tilde  over  the letter  Ii)  with  ink 
of another colour. 
We  may lament that this  good father had no predecessor 
like himself to  copy  the  Saint's  treatises,  but it is  only  right 
to say that the  copies we  possess  are sufficiently faithful  and 
numerous  to  give  us  reasonably  accurate  versions  of  their 
originals.  The  important  point  about  them  is  that  they 
bear  no  signs  of bad  faith,  nor  even  of the  desire  (under-
standable  enough  in  those  unscientific  days)  to  clarify  the 
sense  of their  original,  or  even  to  improve  upon  its  teach-
ing.  Their  errors  are  often  gross  ones,  but  the  large 
majority  of them  are  quite  easy  to  detect  and  put  right. 
The  impression  to  this  effect  which  one  obtains  from  a 
casual perusal of almost any of these copies is  quite definitely 
confirmed  by  a  comparison  of them  with  copies  corrected 
by  the  Saint  or  written  by  the  closest  and  most  trusted  of 
his  disciples.  It may  be  added  that  some  of the  variants 
may, for aught we know to  the contrary,  be  the Saint's  own 
work,  since it is  not improbable that he may have corrected 
more  than  one  copy  of some  of his  writings,  and  not  been 
entirely consistent. 
There  are,  broadly  speaking,  two  classes  into  which  the 
copies  (more  particularly  those  of the  Ascent  and  the  Dark 
Night)  may  be  divided.  One  class  aims  at  a  more  or  less 
exact transcription;  the other definitely sets  out to abbrevi-
ate.  Even  if the  latter  class  be  credited  with  a  number  of 
copies  which  hardly  merit  the  name,  the  former  is  by  far 
the  larger,  and,  of course,  the  more  important,  though  it 
must not be supposed  that the latter  is  unworthy  of notice. 
The abbreviators generally omit whole chapters, or passages, 
at  a  time,  and,  where  they  are  not  for  the  moment  doing 
this,  or  writing  the  connecting  phrases  necessary  to  repair 
their mischief,  they are often quite faithful  to their originals. 
Since  they  do  not,  in  general,  attribute  anything  to  their 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
author that is  not his,  no objection  can  be  taken,  on  moral 
grounds,  to  their  proceeding,  though,  in  actual  fact,  the 
results  are  not  always  happy.  Their  ends  were  purely 
practical  and devotional  and  they  made no  attempt to pass 
their  compendia  as  full-length  transcriptions. 
With  regard  to  the  Spiritual  Canticle  and  the  Living  Flame 
of Love,  of each  of which  there  are  two  redactions  bearing 
indisputable  marks  of the author's own  hand,  the classifica-
tion of the copies will naturally depend upon which redaction 
each  copy  the  more  nearly  follows.  This  question  will  be 
discussed  in the  necessary  detail  in  the  introduction to  each 
of these  works,  and  to  the  individual  introductions  to  the 
four  major  treatises  we  must  refer  the  reader  for  other 
details  of the  manuscripts.  In  the  present  pages  we  have 
attempted  only  a  general  account  of  these  matters.  It 
remains  to  add  that  our  divisions  of  each  chapter  into 
paragraphs  follow  the  manuscripts  throughout  except 
where  indicated.  The  printed  editions,  as  we  shall  see, 
suppressed  these  divisions,  but,  apart  from  their  value  to 
the  modern  reader,  they  are  sufficiently  nearly  identical  in 
the  various  copies  to  form  one  further  testimony  to  their 
general  high  standard of reliability. 
IV 
INTEGRITY  OF  THE  SAINT'S  WORK-INCOMPLETE  CONDITION 
OF  THE  'ASCENT'  AND  THE  'NIGHT' -DISPUTED  Q.UESTIONS 
THE  principal  lacuna  in  S.  John  of  the  Cross's  writings, 
and,  from  the  literary  standpoint,  the  most  interesting,  is 
the lack  of any  commentary to  the  last  five  stanzas
l 
of the 
'Dark  Night.'  Such  a  commentary  is  essential  to  the 
completion  of the  plan  which  the  Saint had  already  traced 
for  himself in what was  to  be,  and,  in spite of its  unfinished 
condition,  is  in  fact,  his  most  rigorously  scientific  treatise. 
, All  the doctrine,'  he wrote  in  the  Argument  of the  Ascent, 
,  whereof I  intend  to  treat  in  this  Ascent  of Mount  Carmel  is 
included in the following stanzas, and in them is also described 
the  manner  of  ascending  to  the  summit  of  the  Mount, 
J  [The  commentary  on  the  third  stanza  is  begun  in  II,  xxv  (p.  485, 
below).  If this  be  not  counted,  the  number of stanzas  left  uncommented 
is six.] 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
which  is  the  high  estate  of perfection  which  we  here  call 
union of the soul with God.'  This leaves  no doubt but that 
the  Saint  intended  to  treat  the  mystical  life  as  one  whole, 
and to deal in turn with each stage of the road to perfection, 
from  the beginnings of the Purgative Way to the crown and 
summit of the life of Union.  After showing the need for such 
a  treatise as  he proposes  to write,  he divides the chapters on 
Purgation  into  four  parts  corresponding  to  the  Active  and 
Passive  nights  of  Sense  and  of  Spirit.  These,  however, 
correspond  only  to  the first  two  stanzas  of his  poem;  they 
are  not,  as  we  shall  shortly  see,  complete,  but their incom-
pleteness is  sJight compared with that of the work as a whole. 
Did S. John of the  Cross,  we  may ask,  ever  write a  com-
mentary  on  those  last  five  stanzas,  which  begin  with  a 
description  of the state  of Illumination: 
'Twas that light guided  me, 
More  surely  than  the  noonday's  brightest  glare-
and end with that of the life of Union  : 
All  things for  me  that day 
Ceas'd,  as  I  slumber'd there, 
Amid the lilies  drowning all my  care? 
If we  suppose  that  he  did,  we  are faced  with  the  question 
of its  fate  and  with  the  strange  fact  that  none  of his  con-
temporaries  makes  any  mention  of  such  a  commentary, 
though  they are all  prolific  in details of far  less  importance. 
Conjectures  have  been  ventured  on  this  question  ever 
since  critical  methods  first  began  to  be  applied  to  S.  John 
of the  Cross's  writings.  A  great  deal  was  written  about  it 
by  P.  Andres  de  la  Encarnacion,  to  whom  his  superiors 
entrusted  the  task  of  collecting  and  editing  the  Saint's 
writings,  and  whose  findings,  though  they  suffer  from  the 
defects  of an  age  which  from  a  modern standpoint  must  be 
called  unscientific,  and  need  therefore  to  be  read  with  the 
greatest  caution,  are  often  surprisingly  just  and  accurate. 
P.  Andres  begins  by  referring  to  various  places  where 
S.  John  of  the  Cross  states  that  he  has  treated  certain 
subjects  and  proposes  to  treat  others,  about  which  nothing 
can  be  found  in  his  writings.  This,  he  says,  may  often  be 
due  to  an  oversight  on  the  writer's  part  or  to  changes 
which  new  experiences  might  have  brought  to  his  mode  of 
thinking.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  sometimes  signs 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
that  these  promises  have  been  fulfilled:  the  sharp  trunca-
tion of the argument, for  example,  at the end of Book  III of 
the  Ascent,  suggests  that  at least  a  few  pages  are  missing,  in 
which  case  the  original  manuscript  must  have  been  muti-
lated,
l 
for  almost  all  the  extant  copies  break  off  at  the 
same  word.  It is  unthinkable,  as  P.  Andres  says,  that  the 
Saint  'should  have  gone  on  to  write  the  Night  without 
completing  the  Ascent,  for  all  these  five  books!  are  integral 
parts of one whole,  since  they all  treat  of different  stages  of 
one  spiritual  path.'3 
I t may be argued in the same way that S. John of the Cross 
would  not  have  gone  on  to  write  the  cdmmentaries  on  the 
, Spiritual Canticle' and the' Living Flame of Love' without 
first  completing the Dark  Night.  P.  Andres goes  so  far  as  to 
say  that  the  very  unwillingness  which  the  Saint· displayed 
towards  writing  commentaries  on  the  two  latter  poems 
indicates  that he  had  already completed  the others;  other-
wise,  he could easily have excused himself from the later task 
on the plea that he had still  to finish  the earlier. 
Again,  S.  John  of the  Cross  declares  very  definitely,  in 
the  prologue  to  the  Dark  Night,  that, after describing in the 
commentary  on  the  first  two  stanzas  the  effects  of the  two 
passive  purgations  of the  sensual  and  the  spiritual  part  of 
man, he will devote the six remaining stanzas to expounding 
, various  and  wondrous  effects  of the  spiritual  illumination 
and  union  of love  with  God."  Nothing  could  be  clearer 
than  this.  Now, in  the commentary on  the' Living  Flame,' 
argues  P.  Andres,  he  treats  at considerable length of simple 
contemplation  and  adds  that  he  has  written  fully  of it  in 
several chapters of the Ascent and the Night,  which he names; 
but  not  only  do  we  not  find  the  references  in  two  of the 
chapters  enumerated  by  him,  but  he  makes  no  mention  of 
several  other  chapters  in  which  the  references  are  of con-
siderable  fullness.  The  proper  deductions  from  these 
facts  would  seem  to  be,  first,  that  we  do  not  possess  the 
Ascent  and  the  Night  in  the  form  in  which  the  Saint  wrote 
them,  and,  second,  that in  the  missing  chapters  he  referred 
1  This  is  not  so  unlikely  as  it  may  seem.  for  the  early  manuscripts 
were  all  either  unbound,  or  very  roughly  stitched  together,  and  several 
of  the  extant copies  have  leaves  missing.  It was  not  till  the  time  of  the 
Beatification  Process  that  greater  care  began  to  be  taken  of  the  Saint's 
writings,  and  they  were  bound  strongly  and  even  luxuriously. 
2  i.e .•  the three books of the Ascent and the two of the  Night. 
I  1\1S.  3180.  Adici6n  B.  4  Cf.  p.  347.  below. 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
to the subject under discussion  at much greater length than 
in the chapters we have. 
Further,  the  practice  of  S.  John  of  the  Cross  was  not 
to  omit  any  part of his  commentaries  when  for  any  reason 
he  was  unable  or  unwilling  to  write  them  at  length,  but 
rather  to  abbreviate  them.  Thus,  he  runs  rapidly  through 
the third stanza of the Night  and  through  the fourth  stanza 
of the Living Flame:  we should expect him in the same way 
to  treat  the  last  three  stanzas  of  the  Night  with  similar 
brevity and rapidity,  but not to  omit them altogether. 
Such  are  the  principal  arguments  used  by  P.  Andres 
which  have inclined  many critics  to  the  belief that  S.  John 
of the  Cross  completed  these  treatises.  Other  of his  argu· 
ments,  which  to  himself were  even  more  convincing,  have 
now lost much weight.  The chief of these are the contention 
that because a  certain Fray Agustin Antolinez  (b.  1554),  in 
expounding  these  same  poems,  makes  no  mention  of  the 
Saint's having failed  to expound five  stanzas of the Night,  he 
did  therefore  write  an  exposition  of them; 1  and  the  sup· 
position that the Living Flame  was  written before the Spiritual 
Canticle,  and that therefore,  when  the prologue  to  the Living 
Flame  says  that the author has  already described  the highest 
state of perfection attainable in this life,  it cannot be referring 
to  the  Canticle  and  must  necessarily  allude  to  passages,  now 
lost,  from  the Dark  Night. 
2 
Our own judgement upon  this  much debated question  is 
not  easily  delivered.  On  the  one  hand,  the  reasons  why 
S.  John  of the  Cross  should  have  completed  his  work  are 
perfectly  sound  ones  and  his  own  words  in  the  Ascent  and 
the  Dark  Night  are  a  clear  statement  of  his  intentions. 
Furthermore,  he  had  ample  time  to  complete  it,  for  he 
wrote  other  treatises  at  a  later  date  and  he  certainly  con· 
sidered the latter part of the Dark Night to be more important 
than  the  former.  On the  other hand,  it is  disconcerting  to 
1  It would  be  natural  enough,  of  course,  for  Fray  Agustin  Antolinez 
to  have  noted  this  fact,  but,  as  he  makes  no  mention  of  S.  John  of  the 
Cross  at  all,  nothing  can  be  safcly  inferred  from  his  silence.  It may  be 
added  that Fray Agustin's commentary is to be published  by the Spanish 
Augustinians  [and  that P.  Silverio  (I,  190-3)  gives  a  specimen  of it which 
shows  how wcll it deserves  publication]. 
I  As  we  shall  later  sec,  the  Living  Flame  was  written  after  the  first 
redaction of the Spiritual Canticle,  but before the second  redaction, which 
mentions  the  Living  Flame  in  the  exposition  of  Stanza  XXXI,  thus  mis-
leading P.  Andres as to its date.  There is no doubt, in our mind, that the 
reference  in  the  preface  to  the  Living  Flame  is  to  the  Canticle:  the 
description  fits  it exactly. 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
find  not  even  the  briefest  clear  reference  to  this  latter 
part in any of his subsequent writings,  when both the Living 
Flame  and  the  Spiritual  Canticle  offered  so  many  occasions 
for  such  a  reference  to  an  ·author  accustomed  to  refer  his 
readers  to  his  other  treatises.  Again,  his  contemporaries, 
who  were  keenly  interested  in  his  work,  and  mention  such 
insignificant  things  as  the  Cautions,  the  Maxims  and  the 
,  Mount of Perfection,'  say  nothing whatever of the missing 
chapters.  None of his  biographers speaks of them,  nor does 
P.  Alonso  de  la  Madre  de  Dios,  who  examined  the  Saint's 
writings  in  detail  immediately  after  his  death  and  was  in 
touch  with  his  closest  friends  and  companions.  We  are 
inclined,  therefore,  to  think  that  the  chapters  in question 
were  never  written.!  Is  the following  sequence of probable 
facts  not  the  most  tenable?  We  know  from  P.  Juan  Evan-
gelista  that  the  Ascent  and  the  Dark  Night  were  written  at 
different times, with many intervals of short or long duration. 
The Saint may well  have entered  upon the Spiritual  Canticle, 
which  was  a  concession  to  the  affectionate  importunity  of 
M.  Ana de Jesus,  with  every  intention  of returning  later  to 
finish  his  earlier  treatise.  But,  having  completed  the 
Canticle,  he  may  equally  well  have  been  struck  with  the 
similarity  between  a  part of it and  the  unwritten  commen-
tary  on  the  earlier stanzas,  and this  may have  decided  him 
that the Dark  Night  needed  no completion,  especially  as  the 
Living  Flame  also  described  the  life  of Union.  This  hypo-
thesis  will  explain  all  the  facts,  and  seems  completely  i!l 
harmony  with  all  we  know  of S.  John  of the  Cross,  who 
was  in  no  sense,  as  we  have  already  said,  a  writer  by  pro-
fession.  If we  accept  it,  we  need  not  necessarily  share  the 
views  which  we  here  assume  to  have  been  his.  Not  only 
would  the  completion  of the  Dark  Night  have given  us  new 
ways  of approach  to  so  sublime  and  intricate  a  theme,  but 
this would have been treated in a way more closely connected 
with  the  earlier stages  of the  mystical  life  than  was  possible 
in either the Living Flame  or the Canticle. 
We  ought  perhaps  to  notice  one  further  supposition  of 
P.  Andres,  which  has  been  taken  up  by  a number  of later 
critics:  that S.John of the Cross completed the commentary 
1  [1'.  Silverio's words are:  • For my own  part,  I  think it very probable 
that  he  never  composed  them.'  I  myself  give  a  little  less  weight  to 
the  negative  evidence  brought  forward,  and,  though  I  too  am  inclined  to 
the  nega.tive  solution,  I  should  hold  the  scales  between  the  two  rather 
more  evenly.] 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
which  we  know  as  the  Dark  Night,  but  that  on  account 
of the distinctive nature of the contents  of the part now lost 
he  gave  it  a  separate  title.
1 
The  only  advantage  of this 
theory seems  to be that it makes  the hypothesis of the loss  of 
the commentary less  improbable.  In other respects  it  is  as 
unsatisfactory  as  the theory of P.  Andres,2  of which  we  find 
a  variant  in  M.  Baruzi,
3 
that  the  Saint  thought  the  com-
mentary  too  bold,  and  too  sublime,  to  be  perpetuated,  and 
therefore destroyed it, or, at least, forbade its being copied.  It 
is  surely unlikely that the sublimity of these missing chapters 
would exceed  that of the Canticle  or the Living Flame. 
This  seems  the  most  suitable  place  to  discuss  a  feature 
of the  works  of S.  John  of the  Cross  to  which  allusion  is 
often  made-the  little  interest  which  he  took  in  their 
division  into  books  and  chapters  and his  lack of consistency 
in  observing  such  divisions  when  he  had  once  made  them. 
A  number  of examples  may  be  cited.  In  the  first  chapter 
of the  Ascent  of Mount  Carmel,  using  the  words  '  part'  and 
C  book'  as  synonyms,  he  makes  it clear  that  the  Ascent  and 
the  Dark  Night  are  to  him  one  single  treatise.  'The first 
night or purgation,'  he  writes,  '  is  of the  sensual  part of the 
soul,  which  is  treated  in  the  present  stanza,  and  will  be 
treated in the first  part of this  book.  And  the second  is  of 
the  spiritual  part;  of this  speaks  the  second  stanza,  which 
follows;  and  of this  we  shall  treat  likewise,  in  the  second 
and the third  part,  with  respect  to  the  activity  of the soul  ; 
and in  the fourth  part,  with  respect  to  its  passivity."  The 
author's  intention  here  is  evident.  Purgation  may  be 
sensual  or  spiritual,  and  each  of these  kinds  may  be  either 
active  or  passive.  The  most  logical  proceeding  would  be 
to divide the whole of the material into four parts or books  : 
two  to  be  devoted  to  active  purgation and  two  to  passive. 
6 
1  If this were so,  we  might even  hazard a  guess that the title was that 
given in the Living Flame  (I,  21)  and not exactly applicable to any of the 
existing treatises,  viz.  The  Dark  Night of the  Ascent of Mount Carmel. 
a  Memorias  Historiales,  C.  13. 
3  Saint Jean  de  la  Croix,  pp.  13-15.  '  Cf.  p.  18,  below. 
6  Some  manuscripts  do  in  fact  divide  the  treatise  in  this  way;  but 
apart  from  the  fact  that  we  have  the  authority  of  S.  John  of  the  Cross 
himself,  in  the  passage  just  quoted  (confirmed  in  Ascent,  I,  xiii),  for  a 
different  division,  the  Alcaudete  MS.,  which  we  belieVE:  to  be  the  most 
reliable,  follows  the  division  laid  down  by  the  Saint.  We  may  add  that 
S.  John of  the Cross is not always a  safe guide in these matters,  no  doubt 
because he trusted too much to  his memory;  in Ascent.  II. xi  (p.  106).  for 
example.  he calls the fourth  book  the  third. 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
S.  John  of the  Cross,  however,  devotes  two  parts  to  active 
spiritual  purgation-one  to  that  of the  understanding  and 
the other to that of the memory  and the will.  In the Night, 
on the  other hand,  where  it would  seem  eSllential  to  devote 
one  book  to  the  passive  purgation  of sense  and  another  to 
that of spirit, he includes both in one pat:t, the fourth.  In the 
Ascent,  he  divides  the  content  of  each  of  his  books  into 
various  chapters;  in  the  Night,  where  the  argument  is 
developed  like  that  of the  Ascent,  he  makes  a  division  into 
paragraphs only, and a  very irregular division  at that, if we 
may judge by the copies that have reached us.  In the Spiritual 
Canticle  and the Living Flame  he dispenses with both chapters 
and  paragraphs.  The  commentary  on  each  stanza  here 
corresponds to a  chapter. 
Another  example  is  to  be  found  in  the  arrangement  of 
his  expositions.  As  a  rule,  he  first  writes  down  the  stanzas 
as  a  whole,  then repeats  each in turn  before  expounding it, 
and  repeats  each  line  also  in  its  proper  place  in  the  same 
way.  At  the  beginning  of  each  treatise  he  makes  some 
general  observations-in  the  form  either  of an  argument 
and  prologue,  as  in  the  Ascent;  of a  prologue  and  general 
exposition,  as  in  the  Night;  of a  prologue  alone,  as  in  the 
first redaction of the Canticle  and in the Living Flame;  or of a 
prologue  and  argument,  as  in  the  second  redaction  of the 
Canticle.  In  the  Ascent  and  the  Night,  the  first  chapter  of 
each  book  contains  the' exposition  of the  stanzas,'  though 
some  copies  describe  this,  in  Book  III  of the  Ascent,  as  an 
, argument.'  In the Night,  the book dealing with  the Night 
of Sense  begins  with  the  usual  'exposition';  that  of the 
Night  of  the  Spirit,  however,  has  nothing  to  correspond 
with  it. 
In  the  first  redaction  of the  Spiritual  Canticle,  S.  John  of 
the  Cross  first  sets  down  the  poem,  then  a  few  lines  of 
, exposition'  giving  the  argument of the stanza,  and finally 
the  commentary  upon  each line.  Sometimes  he  comments 
upon  two  or three  lines  at once.  In the  second  redaction, 
he  prefaces  almost  every  stanza  with  an  'annotation,'  of 
which  there is  none in the first  redaction  except  before  the 
commentary on  the thirteenth and fourteenth  stanzas.  The 
chief purpose of the' annotation' is  to link the argument of 
each stanza with that of the stanza preceding it;  occasion-
ally the annotation and the exposition  are combined. 
It is  clear from  all  this  that,  in spite of his  orderly  mind, 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
S. John of the Cross  was  no  believer in strict  uniformity in 
matters  of  arrangement  which  would  seem  to  demand 
such  uniformity  once  they  had  been  decided  upon.  They 
are,  of course,  of secondary  importance,  but  the  fact  that 
the  inconsistencies  are  the  work  of  S.  John  of  the  Cross 
himself,  and  not  merely  of  careless  copyists,  who  have 
enough else to account for,  is of real moment in the discussion 
of critical  questions  which  turn  on  the  Saint's  accuracy. 
Another  characteristic  of  these  commentaries  is  the 
inequality  of length  as  between  the  exposition  of  certain 
lines  and stanzas.  While some of these  are dealt with fully, 
the exposition  of others is  brought to a  close  with surprising 
rapidity,  even  though  it  sometimes  seems  that  much  more 
needs to  be said:  we  get the impression that the author was 
anxious to push his work forward or was pressed for time.  He 
devotes  fourteen  long  chapters  of the  Ascent  to  glossing  the 
first  two  lines  of  the  first  stanza  and  dismisses  the  three 
remaining lines  in  a  few  sentences.  In both  the  Ascent  and 
the  Night,  indeed,  the  stanzas  appear  to  serve  only  as  a 
pretext  for  introducing  the  great  wealth  of  ascetic  and 
mystical  teaching  which  the  Saint  has  gathered  together. 
In the  Canticle  and  the  Living  Flame,  on  the  other  hand,  he 
keeps  much  closer  to  his  stanzas,  though  here,  too,  there  is 
a  considerable  inequality.  One  result  of the  difference  in 
nature between these  two  pairs of treatises  is  that the Ascent 
and  the  Night  are  more  solidly  built  and  more  rigidly 
doctrinal,  whereas  in  the  Canticle  and  the  Flame  there  is 
more  movement and  more poetry. 
v 
HISTORY  OF  THE  PUBLICATION  OF  S.  JOHN  OF  THE  CROSS'S 
WRITINGS-THE  FIRST  EDITION 
IT  seems  strange  that  mystical  works  of  such  surpassing 
value  should  not  have  been  published  till  twenty-seven 
years after their author's death, for not only were the manu-
script  copies  insufficient  to  propagate  them  as  widely  as 
those  who made them would  have desired,  but the multipli-
cation  of  these  copies  led  to  an  ever  greater  number  of 
variants  in  the  text.  Had  it  but  been  possible  for  the first 
edition  of them  to  have  been  published  while  their  author 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
still  lived,  we  might  to-day  have  a  perfect  text.  But  the 
probability is  that,  if such  an idea had  occurred  to  S. John 
of the  Cross,  he  would  have  set  it aside  as  presumptuous. 
In allowing copies  to  be  made  he doubtless  never             
their going beyond the limited circle of his Order. 
We  have found  no  documenta.ry  trace  of any  project  for 
an edition of these works during their author's lifetime.  The 
most  natural time for  a  discussion  of the matter would  have 
been  in  September  1586,  when  the  Superiors  General  of 
the  Order,  among  whom  was  S. John  of the  Cross,  met  in 
Madrid  and  decided  to  publish  the  works  of  S.  Teresa. 
Tw6 years earlier,  when he was  writing the Spiritual Canticle, 
S.  John of the  Cross  had  expressed  a  desire for  the publica-
tion of S.  Teresa's writings  and assumed  that this  would not 
long  be delayed.
1 
As  we  have seen,  he  considered  his  own 
works  as  complementary  to  those  of S.  Teresa,2  and  one 
would.  have  thought  that  the  simultaneous  publication  of 
the  writings  of the  two  Reformers  would  have  seemed  an 
excellent idea to the Superiors. 
After  his  death,  it  is  probable  that  there  was  no  one 
at  first  who  was  both  able  and  willing  to  undertake  the 
work  of editor;  for,  as  is  well  known,  towards  the  end  of 
his  life  the  Saint  had  many  and  powerful  enemies  within 
his  Order who might well  have opposed the project, though, 
to  do  the  Discalced  Reform  justice,  it  was  brought  up  as 
early  as  ten  years  after  his  death.  A  resolution  was  passed 
at  the  Chapter-General  of the  Reform  held  in  September 
1601,  to the effect' that the works of Fr. Juan de la Cruz be 
printed and that the definitors,  Fr. Juan de Jesus  Maria and 
Fr.  Tomas  [de Jesus],  be instructed to examine and approve 
them.'3  Two years  later  (July 4,  1603),  the same  Chapter, 
also  meeting  in  Madrid,  'gave  leave  to  the  definitor, 
Fr.  Tomas  [de Jesus],  for  the  printing  of the  works  of Fr. 
Juan de la Cruz, first  friar of the Discalced  Reform."  . 
It is  not  known  (since  the  Chapter  Book  is  no  longer 
extant)  why the matter lapsed for  two  years,  but Fr.  Tomas 
de Jesus,  the  definitor  to  whom  alone  it  was  entrusted  on 
the second  occasion,  was  a  most able  man,  well  qualified  to 
1  Spiritual  Canticle,  Stanza  XII,  § 6  [Second  Redaction,  XIII,  § 7] . 
•  2.  In  the  same  passage  as  that  referred  to in  the  last  note  he  declares 
hiS  mtention of not repeating what she has said (cf.  p.  xlix, above). 
3  Our  authority  for  this  statement  is  P.  Andres  de  la  Encarnaci6n 
(Memorias  Historiales.  B.  32),  who found  the Chapter Book in the General 
Archives of the  Reform  at Madrid.  '  Op.  cit.  (B.  33). 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
edit  the  works  of  his  predecessor.
l 
Why,  then,  we  may 
wonder,  did he  not do so?  The story of his  life in the years 
following  the  commission  may  partly  answer  this  question. 
His  definitorship  came  to  an  end  in  1604,  when  he  was 
elected  prior  of the' desert'  of  San Jose  de  las  Batuecas. 
Mter  completing  the  customary  three  years  in  this  office, 
during which  time he could  have done no  work at all  upon 
the edition,  he was  elected prior of the Discalced  monastery 
at Zaragoza.  But at this point Paul V sent for him to Rome 
and from  that time onward his  life  followed  other channels. 
The next attempt to accomplish the project was successful. 
The story  begins  with  a  meeting  between  the  Definitofs  of 
the  Order  and  Fr.  Jose  de  Jesus  Maria,  the  General,  at 
Velez-MaIaga,  where a new decision to publish the works of 
S.John of the Cross was  taken and  put into effect  (as  a  later 
resolution  has  it)  'without  any  delay  or  condition  what-
soever.' 2  The  enterprise  suffered  a  setback,  only  a 
week  after it had been  planned,  in the death of the learned 
Jesuit  P.  Suarez,  who  was  on terms  of close  friendship  with 
the  Discalced  and  had  been  appointed  one  of the  censors. 
But  P.  Diego  de Jesus  (Salablanca),  Prior of the  Discalced 
house  at Toledo,  to  whom  its  execution  was  entrusted,  lost 
no  time  in  accomplishing  his  task;  indeed,  one  would 
suppose  that he had begun it long  before,  since  early in  the 
next  year  it was  completed  and  published  in  Alcala.  The 
volume,  entitled  Spiritual  Works  which  lead  a  soul  to  perfect 
union  with  God,  has  720  pages and bears  the date  1618.  The 
works  are  preceded  by  a  preface  addressed  to  the  reader 
and a  brief summary of the author's' life  and virtues.'  An 
engraving of the '  Mount of Perfection' is  included. 
3 
There are several peculiarities about this editio princeps.  In 
the  first  place,  although  the  pagination  is  continuous,  it 
was  the  work  of two  different  printers;  the  reason  for  this 
is  quite  unknown,  though  various  reasons  might  be  sugges-
ted.  The  greatest  care  was  evidently  taken  so  that  the 
work should be well and truly approved  :  it is recommended, 
in  terms  of  the  highest  praise,  by  the  authorities  of  the 
University  of Alcala,  who,  at the  request  of the  General  of 
the :piscalced  Carmelites,  had submitted  it for  examination 
to four  of the  professors  of that  University.  No  doubt for 
1  [For a study of Fr. Tomas de Jesus, see Studies of the  Spanish Mystics, 
Vol.  II, pp.  281-306.] 
I  Memcwias  Histo,iales,  B.  35.  3  Cf.  p.  xxxiv,  above. 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
reasons  of safety,  the  Spiritual  Canticle  was  not  included  in 
that  edition:  it  was  too  much  like  a  commentary  on  the 
Song  of Songs for such  a  proceeding to be just then advisable. 
We  have now  to enquire  into  the  merits  of the  edition of 
P.  Salablanca,  which  met  with  such  warm  approval  on  its 
publication, yet very soon afterwards began to be recognized 
as  defective  and  is  little  esteemed  for  its  intrinsic  qualities 
to-day. 
It must,  of course,  be  realized  that  critical  standards  in 
the  early  seventeenth  century  were  low  and  that  the  first 
editor of S.  John of the Cross  had  neither  the  method  nor 
the  available  material  of the  twentieth  century.  Nor  were 
the  times  favourable  for  the  publication  of the  works  of a 
great  mystic  who  attempted fearlessly  ana fully  to  describe 
the  highest  stages  of perfection on  the road  to  God.  These 
two  facts  are  responsible  for  most  of  the  defects  of  the 
edition. 
For  nearly  a  century,  the  great  peril  associated  with 
the  mystical  life  had  been that  of Illuminism,  a  gross  form 
of  pseudo-mysticism  which  had  claimed  many  victims 
among  the  holiest  and  most  learned,  and  of which  there 
was  such  fear  that  excessive,  almost  unbelievable,  pre-
cautions  had  been  taken  against  it.  Thes.e  precautions, 
together  with  the  frequency  and  audacity  with  which 
Illuminists  invoked  the  authority  and  protection  of  well-
known  contemporary  ascetic  and  mystical  writers,  give 
reality  to  P.  Salablanca's  fear  lest  the  leaders  of the  sect 
might shelter  themselves  behind  the  doctrines  of S. John of 
the  Cross  and  so  call  forth  the  censure  of the  Inquisition 
upon  passages  which  seemed  to  him  to  bear  close  relation 
to  their erroneous  teaching.  It was  for  this  definite  reason, 
and  not  because  of  an  arbitrary  meticulousness,  that 
P.  Salablanca  omitted  or  adapted  such  passages  as  those 
noted  in Book  I,  Chapter xiii  of the  Ascent  of Mount  Carmel 
and in a  number of chapters in Book  II.  A  study of these, 
all  of which are indicated in the footnotes  to  our text,  is  of 
great interest. 
Less  important  are  a  large  number  of minor  corrections 
made with  the intention  of giving greater precision  to some 
theological  concept;  the  omission  of lines  and  even  para-
graphs  which  the  editor  considered  redundant,  as  in  fact 
they frequently  are;  and corrections  made with  the aim of 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
lending greater clearness  to  the argument  or improving  the 
style.  A  few  changes  were  made out of prudery:  such  are 
the  use  of  sensitivo  for  sensual,  the  suppression  of  phrases 
dealing  with  carnal  vice  and  the  omission  of several  para-
graphs from  that chapter of the Dark  Night  which speaks  of 
the  third  deadly  sin  of beginners.  There was  little  enough 
reason  for  these  changes:  S.  John  of the  Cross  is  particu-
larly  inoffensive  in  his  diction  and  may,  from  that point  of 
view,  be read  by a  child. 
The  sum  total  of  P.  Salablanca's  mutilations  is  very 
considerable.  There are more  in  the  Ascent  and  the  Living 
Flame  than  in  the  Dark  Night;  but  hardly  a  page  of the 
editio  princeps  is  free  from  them  and  on  most  pages  they 
abound.  It  need  not  be  said  that  they  are  regrettable. 
They  belong  to  an  age  when  the  garments  of dead  saints 
were  cut  up  into  small  fragments  and  distributed  among 
the  devout  and  when  their  cells  were  decked  out  with 
indifferent  taste  and  converted  into  oratories.  It would 
not  have  been  considered  sufficient  had  the  editor  printed 
the text of S. John of the  Cross  as  he found  it and glossed it 
to  his  liking  in  footnotes;  another  editor  would  have  put 
opposite  interpretations  upon  it,  thus  cancelling  out  the 
work  of his  predecessor.  Even  the  radical  mutilations  of 
P.  Salablanca did not suffice,  as will now be seen,  to protect 
the works  of the  Saint from  the Inquisition. 
VI 
DENUNCIATION  OF THE' WORKS'  TO THE INQUISITION-DEFENCE 
OF  THEM  MADE  BY  FR.  BASILIO  PONCE  DE  LEON- EDITIONS 
OF  THE  SEVENTEENTH  AND  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURIES 
NEITHER  the  commendations  of  University  professors  nor 
the  scissors  of a  meticulous  editor  could  save  the  treatises 
of S.  John of the Cross  from  that  particular  form  of attack 
which,  more  than  all  others,  was  feared  in  the  seventeenth 
century.  We  shall  say  nothing  here  of the  history,  nature 
and procedure of the Spanish Inquisition, which  has  had its 
outspoken antagonists  and its unreasoning defenders but has 
not  yet  been  studied  with  impartiality.  It mnst  suffice  to 
set down the facts  as  they here affect our subject. 
Forty propositions,  then,  were  extracted from  the  edition 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
of 1618 and  presented  to  the  Holy Office  for  condemnation 
with  the  object  of causing  the  withdrawal  of  the  edition 
from  circulation.  The  attempt  would  probably  have 
succeeded  but for  the  warm,  vigorous  and  learned  defence 
put  up  by  the  Augustinian  Fray  Basilio  Ponce  de  Leon,  a 
theological  professor  in  the  University  of Saiamanca  and  a 
nephew  of the  Luis  de  Leon  who  wrote  the  Names  of Christ 
and  took  so  great  an interest  in  the  works  of S.  Teresa.
1 
It  was  in  the  very  convent  of  San  Felipe  in  Madrid 
where  thirty-five  years  earlier  Fray  Luis  had  written  his 
immortal  eulogy of S.  Teresa 
2 
that Fray Basilio,  on July  II, 
1622,  signed  a  most  interesting' Reply'  to  the  objections 
which  had  been  raised  to  the  Alcala  edition  of S.  John  of 
the  Cross.  Although  we  propose,  in  our  third  volume,  to 
reproduce  Fr.  Basilio's  defence,  it is  necessary  to  our narra-
tive  to  say  something of it here,  for  it is  the most  important 
of all  extant documents  which  reveal  the vicissitudes  in  the 
history  of the Saint's teaching. 
Before  entering  upon  an  examination  of  the  censured 
propositions,  the  learned  Augustinian  makes  some  general 
observations,  which  must  have  carried  great  weight  as 
coming  from  so  high  a  theological  authority.  He  recalls 
the  commendations  of the  edition  by  the  professors  of the 
University  of Alcala' where  the  faculty  of  theology  is  so 
famous,'  and  by  many  others,  including  several  ministers 
of  the  Holy  Office  and  two  Dominicans  who  'without 
dispute are among the most learned of their Order.'  Secondly, 
he  refers  to  the  eminently saintly character of the first  friar 
of  the  Discalced  Reform:  'it is  not  to  be  presumed  that 
God  would  set  a  man  whose  teaching  is  so  evil  .  .  .  as  is 
alleged,  to  be  the  corner-stone  of  so  great  a  building.' 
Thirdly,  he  notes  how  close  a  follower  was  S.  John  of the 
Cross  of S.  Teresa,  a  person  who  was  singularly  free  from 
any taint of unorthodoxy.  And finally  he recalls  a  number 
of similar  attacks  on  works  of  this  kind,  notably  that  on 
Laredo's  Ascent  of Mount  Sion,
3 
which  have  proved  to  be 
devoid  of founda.tion,  and  points  out that isolated  '  p r o p o s   ~  
tions'  need  to  be  set  in  their  context  before  they  can  be 
fairly judged. 
1  [Cf.  Studies  of the  Spa11ish  Mystics,  Vol.  I, pp.  291-344.  An abridged 
English  edition  of  the  Names  of  Christ.  hanslated  by  a.  Benedictine  of 
Stan brook,  was  published  by  Messrs.  Hurns  Oates  and  \Vashbourne  in 
19.!6.]  I  [Cf.  Studies  of the  Spanish  Mystics,  Vol.  I,  pp.  295-6.] 
3  [Cf.  Studies of the  SPanish Mystics,  Vol.  II, pp.  'P-76.] 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
Fray Basilio  next refutes  the charges  brought  against  the 
works  of S. John of the  Cross,  nearly  all  of which  relate  to 
his  teaching  on  the  passivity  of  the  faculties  in  certain 
degrees  of contemplation.  Each  proposition  he  copies  and 
afterwards  defends,  both  by  argument  and  by  quotations 
from  the  Fathers,  from  the  medireval  mystics  and  from  his 
own  contemporaries.  It is  noteworthy  that  among  these 
authorities  he invariably includes  S.  Teresa,  who  had  been 
beatified  in  1614,  and  enjoyed  an  undisputed  reputation. 
This  inclusion,  as  well  as  being  an  enhancement  of  his 
defence,  affords  a  striking  demonstration  of  the  unity  of 
thought existing  between  the two  great  Carmelites. 
Having  expounded  the  orthodox  Catholic  teaching  in 
regard  to  these  matters,  and  shown  that  the  teaching  of 
S.  John  of the  Cross  is  in  agreement  with  it,  Fray  Basilio 
goes  on  to  make  clear  the  true  attitude  of the  Illuminists 
and  thus  to  reinforce  his  contentions  .by  showing  how  far 
removed from  this  is  the Saint's doctrine. 
Fray  Basilio's  magnificent  defence  of  S.  John  of  the 
Cross  appears  to  have  had  the  unusual  eHect  of quashing 
the attack entirely:  the excellence  of his arguments, backed 
by his  great authority,  was  evidently unanswerable.  So  far 
as  we  know,  the Inquisition took no proceedings  against the 
Alcala  edition  whatsoever.  Had  this  at any time  been  pro-
hibited,  we  may  be  sure that Llorente would  have  revealed 
the fact,  and,  though he refers  to  the persecution of S. John 
of the Cross  during his lifetime,l he is  quite silent about any 
posthumous  condemnation  of his  writings. 
The editio  princeps  was  reprinted  in  1619,  with  a  different 
pagination  and  a  few  corrections,  in  Barcelona. 
2 
Before 
these  two  editions  were  out  of print,  the  General  of the 
Discalced  Carmelites  had  entrusted  an  able  historian  of 
the  Reform,  Fray Jeronimo  de  San Jose,  with  a  new  and 
improved  one.  This  was  published  at  Madrid,  in  1630. 
It has  a  short introduction  describing its  scope  and general 
nature,  a  number  of new  and  influential  commendations 
and an admirable fifty-page' sketch' of S. John of the Cross 
1  Historia  Critic a de  la  Inquisicion  de  Espana,  Vol.  V,  Chap.  xxx,  and 
elsewhere.  [The  original  of  this  work  is  in  French:  Histoire  critique  de 
I'Inquisition  d'Espagne,  1817-18.] 
I  Here we have a  curious parallelism  with  the  works of  S.  Teresa,  first 
published  at  ::ialamanca  in  1588  and  also  reprinted  in  Barcelona  in  the 
year following. 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
by      editor which has been reproduced in most             
editions  and has  probably done  more  than any other sIngle 
work  to  make  known  the  facts  of  the  Saint's  biography. 
The  great feature  of this  edition,  however,  is  the  inclusion 
of the  Spiritual  Canticle,  placed  (by  an  error,  as  a  printer's 
note  explains)  at  the  end  of the  volume,  instead  of before 
the  Living  Flame,  which  is,  of course,  its  proper  position. 
The inclusion  of the  Canticle  is  one  of the  two merits  that 
the editor claims in his introduction for his new edition.  The 
other is  that he '  prints both the Canticle  and the other works 
according to their original manuscripts, written in the hand of 
the same venerable author.'  This claim is,  of course,  greatly 
exaggerated,  as  what  has  been  said  above  with  regard  to 
the manuscripts will indicate.  Not only does Fray Jeronimo 
appear  to  have  had  no  genuine  original  manuscript  at  all, 
but  of the  omissions  of the editio  princeps  it is  doubtful  if he 
makes  good  many  more  than  one  in  a  hundred.  In fact, 
with  very  occasional  exceptions,  he  merely  reproduces  the 
princeps-omissions, interpolations, well-meant improvements 
and all,1 
In  Fray  Jeronimo's  defence  it  must  be  said  that  the 
reasons  which  moved his  predecessor  to  mutilate his  edition 
were still potent, and the times had not changed.  It is  more 
surprising  that for  nearly  three centuries  the edition of 1630 
should  have  been followed  by later editors.  The numerous 
versions  of the  works  which  saw the light in the later seven-
teenth and the eighteenth century added a few poems, letters 
and  maxims  to  the corpus of work  which he            and 
which  assumed  great importance as the Saint became better 
known and more deeply venerated.  But they did  no  more. 
I t suffices  therefore  to enumerate the chief of them. 
The  Barcelona  publisher  of the  1619  edition  produced  a 
new  edition  in  1635,  which  is  a  mere  reproduction  of that 
of 1630.  A  Madrid edition of 1649,  which adds nine letters, 
a  hundred  maxims  and  a  small  collection  of poems,  was 
reproduced  in  1672  (Madrid),  1679  (Madrid),  1693 
(Barcelona)  and  1694  (Madrid),  the  last  reproduction 
being  in  two  volumes.  An  edition  was  also  published 
in  Barcelona in 1 700. 
1  He also supplies the Latin text of Scriptural quotations which S.  John 
of  the Cross  gives in  the vernacular,  corrects the punctuation and spelling 
    the  princeps  and  substitutes  his' Sketch'  of  the  Saint's  life  for  the 
blOgraphical notes of  that edition.  The treatise in which  he corrects most 
of the defects of the princeps is the A.scent of l1i.olmt  Carmel. 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
If we  disregard  a  '  compendium'  of the  Saint's  writings 
published  in  Seville  in  1701,  the  first  eighteenth-century 
edition was published in Seville in I  703-the most interesting 
of those  that  had  seen  the  light  since  1630.  It  is  well 
printed  on  good  paper  in  a  folio  volume  and  its  editor, 
Fr. Andres de Jesus  Maria,  claims it,  on several grounds,  as 
an  advance  on  preceding  editions.  First,  he  says  ,'in-
numerable errors of great importance'  have  been corrected 
in it;  then, the Spiritual Canticle has been amended according 
to  its  original  manuscript  'in the  hand  of the  same  holy 
doctor,  our  father,  kept  and  venerated  in  our  convent  of 
Discalced  Carmelite  nuns  at Jaen ';  next,  he  adds  two 
new  poems  and  increases  the  number  of maxims  from  100 
to  365;  and  lastly,  the  letters  are  increased  from  nine  to 
seventeen,  all  of which  are  found  in  P.  Jeronimo  de  San 
Jose's  history.  The  first  of  these  claims  is  as  great  an 
exaggeration  as  was  P. Jeronimo's;  to  the second  we  shall 
refer  in  our  introduction  to  the  Spiritual  Canticle.  The 
third  and  fourth,  however,  are justified,  and  for  these,  as 
for  a  few  minor  improvements,  the  editor  deserves  every 
commendation. 
The remaining  years  of the eighteenth century produced 
few  editions;  apart  from  a  reprint  (1724)  of  the  com-
pendium of 170 I, the only one known to us is  that published 
at Pamplona in  1774,  after which  nearly eighty  years  were 
to pass  before any earlier edition was  so  much as  reprinted. 
Before  we  resume  this  bibliographical  narrative,  however, 
we  must go back over some earlier history. 
VII 
NEW  DENUNCIATIONS  AND  DEFENCES-FRAY  NICOLAs  DE 
JESUS  MARlA-THE  CARMELITE  SCHOOL  AND  THE  IN-
Q.UISITION 
WE  remarked,  apropos  of  the  edition  of  1630,  that  the 
reasons  which  led  Fray Diego  de Jesus  to  mutilate his  texts 
were  still  in  existence  when  Fray  Jeronimo  de  San  Jose 
prepared  his  edition  some  twelve  years  later.  If any 
independent  proof of  this  statement  is  needed,  it  may  be 
found in the numerous apologias that were published during 
the  seventeenth  century,  not  only  in  Spain,  but  in  Italy, 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
France,  Germany  and  other  countries  of  Europe.  If 
doctrines  are  not  attacked,  there  is  no  occasion  to  write 
vigorous  defences  of them. 
Following  the  example  of Fray  Basilio  Ponce  de  Leon, 
a  professor  of  theology  in  the  College  of  the  Reform  at 
Salamanca, .Fray  Nicohis  de Jesus  Maria,  wrote  a  learned 
Latin defence of S. John of the  Cross  in  163 I, often referred 
to  briefly  as  the  Elucidatio.
1 
It  is  divided  into  two  parts, 
the  first  defending  the  Saint  against  charges  of a  general 
kind  that were  brought against  his  writings,  and  the second 
upholding  censured  propositions  taken  from  them.  On 
the  general  ground,  P.  Nicolas  reminds  his  readers  that 
many writers who now enjoy the highest possible  reputation 
were  in  their  time  denounced  and  unjustly  persecuted. 
S. Jerome was  attacked for  his  translation of the  Bible from 
Hebrew  into  Latin;  S.  Augustine,  for  his  teaching  about 
grace  and  freewill.  The  works  of  S.  Gregory  the  Great 
were  burned  at  Rome;  those  of  S.  Thomas  Aquinas  at 
Paris.  Most  mediceval  and  modern  mystics  have  been  the 
victims  of  persecution-Ruysbroeck,  Tauler  and  even  S. 
Teresa.  Such happenings,  he maintains,  have done nothing 
to  lessen  the  eventual  prestige  of these  authors,  but  rather 
have added to it. 
Nor,  he continues,  can  the  works  of any author fairly  be 
censured  because  misguided  teachers  make  use  of them  to 
propagate  their  false  teaching.  No  book  has  been  more 
misused  by  heretics  than  Holy  Scripture  and  few  books  of 
value would escape if we  were to condemn all that had been 
so  treated.  Equally worthless  is  the  objection  that mystical 
literature is  full  of difficulties  which  may  cause  the ignorant 
and  pusillanimous  to  stumble.  Apart  from  the  fact  that 
S. John  of the Cross  is  clearer and  more lucid than most  of 
his contemporaries, and that therefore  the  works  of many of 
them would  have  to follow  his  own  into  oblivion,  the same 
argument  might  again  be  applied  to  the  Scriptures.  Who 
can estimate the good imparted by the sacred  books  to those 
who  read  them  in  a  spirit  of  uprightness  and  simplicity? 
Yet what books  are  more  pregnant  with  mystery  and  with 
truths  that  are  difficult  and,  humanly  speaking,  even 
inaccessible? 
But  (continues  P.  Nicolas),  even  if we  allow  that  parts 
1  Phrasium  mystiCal  Theologial  V.P.  Fr.  Joam/is  a Cruce,  Carmelitarum 
excalceatorum  Parentis  primi elucidatio.  Compluti,  16Jl. 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
of the  work  of S.  John of the Cross,  for  all  the clarity of his 
exposition,  are  obscure  to  the  general  reader,  it  must  be 
remembered  that  much  more  is  of the  greatest  attraction 
and profit to all.  On the one hand, the writings of the Saint 
represent  the  purest  sublimation  of  Divine  love  in  the 
pilgrim  soul,  and  are  therefore  food  for  the  most  advanced 
upon the mystic  way.  On the other,  every reader,  however 
slight  his  spiritual  progress,  can  understand  the  Saint's 
ascetic teaching:  his chapters on the purgation of the senses, 
                 detachment  from  all  that  belongs  to  the 
earth,  purity  of conscience,  the  practice  of the  virtues,  and 
so  on.  The  Saint's  greatest  enemy  is  not  the  obscurity  of 
his  teaching  but the inflexible  logic  with  which  he  deduces, 
from  the  fundamental  principles  of evangelical  perfection, 
the  consequences  which  must  be  observed  by  those  who 
would scale  the  Mount.  So straight and so  hard is  the road 
which  he  maps  out  for  the  climber  that  the  majority  of 
those  who see it are at once dismayed. 
These  are  the  main  lines  of P.  Nicolas'  argument,  which 
he  develops  at  great  length.  We  must  refer  briefly  to  the 
chapter in which he makes a careful synthesis of the teaching 
of the Illuminists,  to show how far it is  removed from  that of 
S.  John of the  Cross.  He divides  these  false  contemplatives 
into  four  classes.  In  the  first  class  he  places  those  who 
suppress  all  their acts,  both interior and exterior,  in prayer. 
In  the  second,  those  who  give  themselves  up  to  a  state  of 
pure quiet,  with  no  loving  attention  to  God.  In  the  third, 
those  who  allow  their  bodies  to  indulge  every  craving  and 
maintain  that,  in  the  state  of spiritual  intoxication  which 
they  have  reached,  they  are  unable  to  commit sin.  In the 
fourth,  those  who  consider  themselves  to  be  instruments  of 
God  and adopt an attitude of complete  passivity,  maintain-
ing  also  that  they  are  unable  to  sin,  because  God  alone  is 
working in them.  The division is more subtle than practical, 
for  the  devotees  of this  sect,  with  few  exceptions,  professed 
the same erroneous beliefs  and tended  to the same degree  of 
licence  in  their  conduct.  But,  by  isolating  these  tenets, 
P.  Nicolas  is  the  better able  to  show  the  antithesis  between 
them and those of S. John of the Cross. 
In the second  part of the  Elucidatio,  he  analyses  the  pro-
positions  already  refuted  by  Fray  Basilio  Ponce  de  LeOn, 
reducing them to  twenty and demolishing them in the same 
number  of chapters.  His  defence  is  clear,  methodical  and 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
convincing  and  follows  similar  lines  to  those  adopted  by 
Fray Basilio,  to whom its  author acknowledges his  indebted-
ness. 
Another  of S.  John  of the  Cross's  apologists  is  Fray Jose 
de Jesus  Maria  (Quiroga),  who,  in  a  number of his  works, 
1 
both  defends  and  eulogizes  him,  without  going  into  any 
detailed examination of the propositions.  Fray Jose is  an out-
standing  example  of  a  very  large  class  of  writers,  for,  as 
Illuminism  gave  place  to  Quietism,  the  teaching  of S. John 
of  the  Cross  became  more  and  more  violently  impugned 
and  almost  all  mystical  writers  of the  time  referred  to  him. 
Perhaps we should single out, from among his defenders outside 
the  Carmelite Order,  that Augustinian father,  P.  Antolinez, 
to whose  commentary on  three of the  Saint's works  we  have 
already made reference. 
As  the  school  of  mystical  writers  within  the  Discalced 
Carmelite  Reform gradually grew-a school  which  took  the 
Saint  as  its  leader  and  is  one  of the  most  illustrious  in  the 
history  of mystical  theology-it  began  to  share  in  the  same 
persecution  as  had  befal1en  its  founder.  It is  impossible,  in 
a  few  words,  to describe this  epoch of purgation, and indeed 
it  can  only  be  properly  studied  in  its  proper  context-the 
religious  history  of the  period as  a  whole.  For our purpose, 
it suffices  to say  that the works  of S.  John of the  Cross  were 
once  more  denounced  to  the  Inquisition,  though,  once 
more,  no notice appears to have been taken of the denuncia-
tions,  for  there  exists  no  record  ordering the  expurgation  or 
prohibition  of  the  books  referred  to.  The  Elucidatio  was 
also  denounced,  together  with  several  of  the  works  of 
P.  Jose  de Jesus  Maria,  at various  times  in  the seventeenth 
century,  and  these  attacks  were  of  course  equivalent  to 
direct  attacks  on  S.  John  of the  Cross.  One  of the  mQst 
vehement  onslaughts  made  was  levelled  against  P.  Jose's 
Sub ida  del  Alma  aDios  ('  Ascent of the Soul  to  God '),  which 
is  in  effect  an  elaborate  commentary  on  S.  John  of  the 
Cross's  teaching.  The  Spanish  Inquisition  refusing  to 
censure  the  book,  an  appeal  against  it  was  made  to  the 
Inquisition  at  Rome.  When  no  satisfaction  was  obtained 
in  this  quarter,  P. Jose's  opponents  went  to  the  Pope,  who 
1  5l1bida  del  A lma  aDios..  Apologia  mistica  en  defensa  de  fa  con-
templacion  divina;  Don  que  tuvo  San  Juan  de  fa  Cruz  para  guiar  las 
almas,  etc. 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
referred the matter to the Sacred Congregation of the Index; 
but  this  body  issued  a  warm  eulogy  of the  book  and  the 
matter thereupon  dropped. 
In  spite  of such  defeats,  the  opponents  of the  Carmelite 
school  continued  their  work  into  the  eighteenth  century. 
In 1740,  a  new appeal was  made to the Spanish  Inquisition 
to  censure  P.  Jose's  Subida.  A  document  of seventy-three 
folios  denounced  no  less  than  one  hundred  and  sixty-five 
propositions  which  it claimed  to  have  taken  direct from  the 
work  referred  to,  and  this  time,  after  a  conflict  extending 
over  ten  years,  the  book  (described  as  ' falsely  attributed' 
to  P. Jose
l
)  was  condemned  (July 4,  1750),  as  '  containing 
doctrine  most  perilous  in  practice,  and  propositions  similar 
and  equivalent  to  those  condemned  in  Miguel  de  Molinos.' 
We  set  down  the salient facts  of this  controversy,  without 
commenting  upon  them,  as  an  instance  of the  attitude  of 
the eighteenth  century  towards  the  mystics  in general,  and, 
in  particular,  towards  the  school  of  the  Discalced  Car-
melites.  In view  of the  state  and  tendencies  of thought  in 
these  times,  the  fact  of the  persecution,  and  the  degree  of 
success  that  it  attained,  is  not  surprising.  The  important 
point  to  bear  in  mind  is  that  it  must  be  taken  into 
account  continually  by  students  of  the  editions  of  the 
Saint's writings and of the  history of his  teaching throughout 
the eighteenth  and  nineteenth  centuries. 
VIII 
FURTHER  HISTORY  OF  THE  EDITIONS-P.  ANDRES  DE  LA 
ENCARNACICJN-EDITIONS  OF THE  NINETEENTH AND  TWEN-
TIETH  CENTURIES 
WHAT  has  just  been  said  will  fully  explain  the  paucity  of 
the  editions  of S.  John  of the  Cross  which  we  find  in  the 
eighteenth  century.  This  century,  however,  was,  scientifi-
cally  speaking,  one  of great  progress.  Critical  methods  of 
study developed  and  became widespread;  and  there  was  a 
great  desire  to  obtain  purer  and  more  nearly  perfect  texts 
and  to  discover  the  original  sources  of the  ideas  of great 
1  This  phrase,  no  doubt,  was  inserted  in  order  to  save  the  reputation 
of  P.  Jose's  earlier  supporters,  and  out  of  respect  to  his  uncle,  who  had 
been a  Cardinal and  Inqui:;itor-Gcncral, 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
thinkers.  These  tendencies  made  themselves  felt  within 
the Discalced  Carmelite Order,  and  there also  arose a  great 
ambition to republish in  their original forms  the works  both 
o[S. Teresa and S.John of the Cross.  The need was greater 
in  the  latter case  than in  the  former;  so  urgent  was  it  felt 
to  be as  to admit of no delay.  'There have been discovered 
in  the  works  [of S.  John of the  Cross],'  says  a  document  of 
about  I7j3,  'many  errors,  mutilations  and  other  defects 
the  existence  of which  cannot  be  denied.' 1  The  religious 
who  wrote  thus  to  the  Chapter-General  of the  Reform  set 
out  definite  and  practical  schemes  for  a  thorough  revision 
of these  works,  which  were  at  once  accepted.  There  thus 
comes  into  our  history  that  noteworthy  friar,  P.  Andres  de 
la Encarnacion,  to whom we  owe so  much of what we  know 
about the Saint to-day.  P.  Andres was  no  great stylist,  nor 
had  he  the  usual  Spanish  fluency  of diction.  But  he  was 
patient,  modest  and  industrious,  and  above  all  he  was 
endowed  with  a  double  portion  of the  critical  spirit  of the 
eighteenth  century.  He  was  selected  for  the  work  of in-
vestigation  as  being  by  far  the  fittest  person  who  could  be 
found  for  it.  A  decree  dated  October 6,  1754  ordered  him 
to  set  to  work.  As  a  necessary  preliminary  to  the  task  of 
preparing a  corrected  text  of the Saint's  writings,  he  was  to 
spare  no  effort  in  searching  for  every  extant  manuscript; 
accordingly  he  began  long  journeys  through  La  Mancha 
and  Andalusia,  going  o\·er  all  the  ground  covered  by  S. 
John of the  Cross  in his  travels  and  paying special  attention 
to the places where he had lived for any considerable period. 
In those  days,  before  the  religious  persecutions  of the  nine-
teenth  century  had  destroycd  and  scattered  books  and 
manuscripts,  the  archives  of  thc  various  religious  houses 
were  intact.  P.  Andres  and  his  amanuensis  were  therefore 
able to copy and collate valuable manuscripts  now lost  to us 
and  they at once  began  to  replace  the  phrases  and  passages 
omitted  from  the  editions.  Unhappily,  their  work  has 
disappeared  and  we  can judge  of it  only  at  second  hand; 
but  it  appears  to  have  been  in  c\·cry  way  meritorious.  So 
far  as  \\'e  can gather from  thc documents  which  have  come 
down  to  us,  it failed  to  pass  thc  rigorous  censorship  of the 
Order.  In other  words,  the  ccnsors,  who  were  professional 
theologians,  insisted  upon  making  so  many corrections  that 
the Superiors,  who shared the enlightened critical opinions of 
1  Quoted  by  P.  Andres  de  la  Encarnaci6n  (:\IS.  3553.  Previo  I). 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
P.  Andres,  thought it  better to  postpone  the  publication  of 
the  edition indefinitely. 
The  disastrous  failure  of the  project,  however,  to  which 
P.  Andres  devoted  so  much  patient labour,  did  not  wholly 
destroy  the  fruits  of his  skill  and  perseverance.  He  was 
ordered  to  retire  to  his  convent,  where  he  spent  the  rest  of 
his  long  life  under  the  burden  of a  trial  the  magnitude  of 
which  any  scholar  or  studiously  minded  reader  can  esti-
mate.  He  did  what  he  could  in  his  seclusion  to  collect, 
arrange  and  recopy  such  notes  of  his  work  as  he  could 
recover  from  those  to  whom  they  had  been  submitted. 
His  defence  of this  action to the  Chapter-General is  at once 
admirable  in  the  tranquillity  of its  temper  and  pathetic  in 
the  eagerness  and  affection  which  it  displays  for  the  task 
that he has been forbidden  to continue: 
Inasmuch  as  I  was  ordered,  some  years  ago  .  .  .  to  prepare 
an exact edition of the  works  of our holy father,  and afterwards 
was  commanded  to  suspend  my  labours  for  just  reasons  which 
presented  themselves  to  these  our  fathers  and  prevented  its 
accomplishment at the time,  I  obeyed forthwith with the greatest 
submissiveness,  but, as I  found  that I  had a  rich store of informa-
.  tion which at some future  time  might contribute  to  the  publica-
tion  of a  truly  illustrious  and  perfect  edition,  it  seemed  to  me 
that it would  not  be  running  counter  to  the  spirit  of the  Order 
if I  gave  them  some  serviceable  form,  so  that  I  should  not  be 
embarrassed  by seeing them in a  disorderly  condition  if at some 
future  date  it  should  be  proposed  to  carry  into  effect  the 
original  decisions  of the  Order. 
With  humility  and  submissiveness,  therefore,  I  send  to  Your 
Reverences  these  results  of my  private  labours,  not  because  it 
is  in  my  mind  that  the  work  should  be  recommenced,  or  that, 
if this  is  to  be done,  it should  be at any particular time,  for  that 
I  leave  to  the  disposition  of  Your  Reverences  and  of  God,  but 
in  order  that  I  may  return  to  the  Order  that  which  belongs  to 
it; for,  since  I  was  excused  from religious observances  for  nearly 
nine years in order  that  I  might labour in  this  its  own  field,  the 
Order  cannot  but  have  a  right  to  the  fruits  of my  labours,  nor 
can I  escape  the obligation of delivering what  I  have  discovered 
into  its  hand.  .  .  .1 
We  cannot  examine  the  full  text  of the  interesting  reply 
to  the  Censors  which  follows  this  humble  exordium.  One 
of their  allegations  had  been  that  the  credit  of the  Order 
would  suffer if it became known  that passages  of the Saint's 
1  1\1S.  3653.  Previo  I. 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
works had been suppressed by Carmelite editors.  P.  Andres 
makes  the sage  reply:  'There is  certainly the risk  that this 
will  become known if the edition is  made;  but there is  also 
a  risk  that  it  will  become  known  in  any  case.  We  must 
weigh  the  risks  against  each  other  and  decide  which  pro-
ceeding will bring the Order into the greater discredit if one 
of them  materializes.'  He  fortifies  this  argument  with  the 
declaration  that  the  defects  of  the  existing  editions  were 
common  knowledge  outside  the  Order  as  well  as  within  it, 
and that, as  manuscript copies of the Saint's works were also 
in the possession  of many others  than Carmelites,  there  was 
nothing to prevent a  correct edition being made at any time. 
This must suffice as a  proof that P.  Andres could  be as  acute 
as  he  was  submissive. 
Besides  collecting  this  material,  and  leaving  on  record 
his  opposition  to  the  short-sighted  decision  of the  Censors, 
P.  Andres  prepared  'some  Disquisitions  on  the  writings 
of the  Saint,  which,  if a  more  skilful  hand  should  correct 
and  improve  their  style,  cannot  but  be  well  received.' 
Closely  connected  wjth  the  Disquisitions  are  the  Preludes  in 
which  he  glosses  the  Saint's  writings.  These  studies,  like 
the  notes  already  described,  have  all  been  lost-no doubt, 
together with many other documents from  the archives of the 
Reform  in  Madrid,  they disappeared  during the pillaging of 
the religious  houses  in  the early nineteenth century. 
The  little  of  P.  Andres'  work  that  remains  to  us  gives 
a  clear.  picture  of  the  efforts  made  by  the  Reform  to 
bring  out  a  worthy  edition  of  S.  John  of  the  Cross's 
works  in  the  eighteenth  century;  it  is  manifestly  in-
sufficient,  however,  to  take  a  modern  editor  far  along 
the  way.  Nor,  as  we  have  seen,  are  his  judgements  by 
any  means  to  be  followed  otherwise  than  with  the greatest 
caution;  he  greatly  exaggerates,  too,  the  effect  of  the 
mutilations  of  earlier  editors,  no  doubt  in  order  to 
convince  his  superiors  of  the  necessity  for  a  new  edition. 
The  materials  for  a  modern  editor  are  to  be  found,  not  in 
the  documents  left  by  P.  Andres,  but  in  such  Carmelite 
archives as  still  exist,  and  in  the National  Library of Spain, 
to  which  many  Carmelite  treasures  found  their  way  at 
the beginning of the last century. 
The  work  sent  by  P.  Andres  to  his  superiors  was  kept 
in  the  archives  of  the  Discalced  Carmelites,  but  no  new 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
edition  was  prepared  till  a  hundred  and  fifty  years  later. 
In  the  nineteenth  century  such  a  task  was  made  consider-
ably more difficult  by  religious  persecution,  which  resulted 
in  the  loss  of many  valuable  manuscripts,  some  of which 
P.  Andres must certainly have examined.  For a  time,  too, 
the  Orders  were  expelled from  Spain,  and,  on their return, 
had neither the necessary freedom,  nor the time or material 
means for such undertakings.  In the twenty-seventh volume 
of  the  well-known  series  of  classics  entitled  Biblioteca  de 
Autores  Espaiioles  (1853)  the  works  of S.  John  of the  Cross 
were  reprinted  according  to  the  1703  edition,  without  its 
engravings, indices and commendations, and with a' critical 
estimate'  of  the  Saint  by  Pi  y  Margall,  which  has  some 
literary value  but in other respects fails  entirely to do justice 
to  its  subject. 
Neither  the  Madrid  edition  of  1872  nor  the  Barcelona 
edition  of 1883  adds  anything to  our knowledge  and it was 
not till  the  Toledo  edition  of  1912-14  that a  new  advance 
was made.  This edition was the  work  of a  young  Carmelite 
friar,  P. Gerardo de Sanjuan de la Cruz, who died soon after 
its completion.  It aims, according to its title, which is certainly 
justified,  at  being  , the  most  correct  and  complete  edition 
of all  that  have  been  published  down  to  the  present  date.' 
If it  was  not  as  successful  as  might  have  been  wished,  this 
could perhaps hardly have been expected of a comparatively 
inexperienced  editor  confronted  with  so  gigantic  a  task,-a 
man,  too,  who  worked  almost  alone  and  was  by  tempera-
ment  and  predilection  an  investigator  rather  than  a  critic. 
Nevertheless,  its  introductions,  footnotes,  appended  docu-
ments,  and  collection  of apocryphal  works  of the  Saint,  as 
well as its text,  were all  considered worthy of extended study 
and  the  edition  was  rightly  received  with  enthusiasm.  Its 
principal merit will  always lie in its  having restored  to  their 
proper  places,  for  the  first  time  in  a  printed edition,  many 
passages  which  had  heretofore  remained  in  manuscript. 
We  have  been  anxious  that  this  new  edition  [Burgos, 
1929-31]  should  represent  a  fresh  advance  in  the  task  of 
establishing  a  definitive  text  of  S.  John  of  the  Cross's 
writings.  For this  reason  we  have  examined,  together  with 
two  devoted  assistants,  every  discoverable  manuscript, 
with the result,  as it seems  to us,  that both the form and the 
content of our author's works  are as  nearly as  possible as  he 
left them. 
GENERAL  INTRODUCTION 
In  no  case  have  we  followed  anyone  manuscript  ex-
clusively,  preferring  to  assess  the value  of each  by a  careful 
preliminary study and to consider each on its  merits,  which 
are described  in  the introduction  to  each  of the individual 
works.  Since  our  primary  aim  has  been  to  present  an 
accurate  text,  our  footnotes  will  be  f01;lnd  to  be  almost 
exclusively  textual.  The  only  edition  which  we  cite,  with 
the occasional exception of that of 1630,  is  the princeps,  from 
which  alone  there is  much to  be learned.  The Latin quota-
tions  from  the  Vulgate  are  not,  of  course,  given  except 
where they appear in the manuscripts, and, save for the occa-
sional correction of a  copyist's error,  they are reproduced in 
exactly  the  form  in  which  we  have  found  them.  Ortho-
graphy and punctuation have had perforce to be modernized, 
since  the  manuscripts  differ  widely  and  we  have  so  few 
autographs  that  nothing  conclusive  can  be  learned  of the 
Saint's own practice.! 
1  [The  last  two  paragraphs  form  P.  Silverio's  description  of  his  own 
edition.  The lines followed  in the present translation have been described 
in the Translator's Preface.] 
THE  COMPLETE  WORKS  OF 
SAINT  JOHN  OF  THE  CROSS 
ASCENT  OF' MOUNT  CARMEL 
INTRODUCTION 
&  will  be  seen  from  the  biographical  outline  which  we 
have given  of the  life  of S.  John  of the  Cross,  this  was  the 
first  of the  Saint's  treatises  to  be  written;  it was  begun  at 
EI Calvario,  and, after various intervals,  due to the author's 
preoccupation  with  the  business  of  government  and  the 
direction and care of souls,  was  completed at Granada. 
The  treatise  presents  a  remarkable  outline  of Christian 
perfection from  the point at which the soul first  seeks  to rise 
from  the  earth  and  soar  upward  towards  union  with  God. 
It is  a  work  which shows  every sign of careful planning and 
great  attention  to  detail;  as  an  ascetic  treatise  it  is  note-
worthy for  its  detailed  psychological  analysis;  as  a  contri-
bution to mystical theology, for the skill  with which it treats 
the most complicated and delicate questions  concerning the 
Mystic  Way. 
Both the great Carmelite reformers  pay close    t ~ n t i o n   to 
the  early  stages  of the  mystical  life,  beyond  which  many 
never pass,  and both give  the primacy to prayer as  a  means 
of attaining perfection.  To S.  Teresa  prayer is  the greatest 
of all  blessings  of this life,  the channel through which all the 
favours of God pass to the soul, the beginning of every virtue 
and the plainly marked highroad which leads to the summit of 
Mount Carmel.  She can hardly conceive of a  person in full 
spiritual health whose life is not one of prayer.  Her coadjutor 
in the  Carmelite Reform writes in the same spirit.  Prayer, 
for  S. John of the  Cross  as  for  S.  Teresa, is  no mere eX,ercise 
made up of petition and meditation, but a complete spiritual 
life  which  brings  in its  train all the virtues,  increases  all  the 
I 
2  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
soul's potentialities and may ultimately lead to '  deification' 
or transformation in God  through love.  It maybe said  that 
the exposition of the life of prayer, from its lowest stages to its 
highest, is  the common aim of these  two  Saints,  which  each 
pursues and accomplishes in a peculiarly individual  manner. 
S. John of the Cross  assumes his  reader to be familiar with 
the  rudiments  of  the  spiritual  life  and  therefore  omits 
detailed  description  of the  most  elementary  of the  exercises 
incumbent  upon  all  Christians.  The  plan  of the  Ascent  of 
Mount  Carmel  (which, properly speaking, embraces its sequel, 
the Dark Night),  follows  the lines of the poem with the latter 
title  (p.  10).  Into   w ~   stanias of five  lines  each,  S.  John of 
the Cross has condensed all the instruction which he develops 
in  this  treatise.  In order  to  reach  the  Union  of Light,  the 
soul  must  pass  through  the  Dark  Night-that  is  to  say, 
through a  series of purifications,  during  which  it is  walking, 
as  it  were,  through  a  tunnel  of impenetrable obscurity  and 
from which it emerges to bask in the sunshine of grace and to 
enjoy the Divine intimacy. 
Through  this  obscurity  the  thread  which  guides  the soul 
is  that of' emptiness'  or 'negation.'  Only by voiding our-
selves of all that is  not God can we attain to the possession of 
God, for two contraries cannot co-exist in one individual and 
creature-love  is  darkness,  while  God  is  light,  so  that  from 
any  human  heart  one  of the  two  cannot fail  to  drive  out 
the other.l 
Now  the  soul,  according  to  the  Saint's  psychology,  is 
made  up of interior and exterior senses  and  of the faculties. 
All  these  must  be  free  from  creature impurities  in  order to 
be prepared for  Divine  union.  The necessary self-emptying 
may  be  accomplished  in  two  ways:  by  our  own  efforts, 
with  the  habitual  aid  of grace,  and  by  the  action  of God 
exclusively,  in which  the individual has no part whatsoever. 
Following  this  order,  the  Ascent  is  divided  into  two  parts, 
which  deal  respectively  with  the  'Active'  night  and  the 
'Passive.'  Each  of  these  parts  consists  of  several  books. 
Since  the  soul  must  be  purified  in  its  entirety,  the  Active 
Night  is  logically  divided  into  the  Night  of Sense  and  the 
Night of the Spirit;  a similar division is observed in treating 
of the  Passive  Night.  One  book  is  devoted  to  the  Active 
Night of Sense;  two  are needed for  the Active  Night of the 
Spirit.  Unhappily, however, the treatise was never finished; 
1  A scent,  Bk. Ill, Chap. ii. 
INTRODUCTION 
3 
not only was its author unable to take us out of the night into 
the day,  as  he certainly intended  to do,  but he has  not even 
space  to  describe  the  Passive  Night  in  all  the  fullness  of its 
symbolism. 
A  brief glance  at  the  outstanding  parts  of the  Ascent  of 
Mount  Carmel  will  give  some  idea  of its  nature.  The  first 
obstacle  which  the  pilgrim  soul  encounters  is  the  senses, 
upon which  S. John of the Cross expends his  analytical skill 
in  Book  I.  Like  any  academic  professor  (and  it  will  be 
recalled that he had undergone a  complete university course 
at Salamanca), he outlines and defines  his subject, goes  over 
the  necessary  preliminary  ground  before  expounding  it, 
and treats it, in turn, under each of its  n ~ t u r   l   divisions.  He 
tells  us,  that  is  to  say,  what  he  understands  by  the' dark 
night';  describes  its  causes  and  its  stages;  explains  how 
necessary  it  is  to  union  with  God;  enumerates  the  perils 
which  beset  the  soul  that  enters  it;  and  shows  how  all 
desires  must  be  expelled,  'however  small  they  be,"  if the 
soul  is  to  travel  through  it  safely.  Finally  he gives  a  com-
plete synthesis of the procedure that must be adopted by the 
pilgrim  in relation  to  this  part of his journey:  the force  of 
this  is  intensified  by  those  striking  maxims  and  distichs 
which  make  Chapter xiii of Book  I  so  memorable. 
The  first  thirteen  chapters  of the  Ascent  are  perhaps  the 
easiest  to  understand  (though  they are anything but easy  to 
put into practice)  in the entire works  ofS.John of the Cross. 
They are all a commentary on the very first line of the poem. 
The last two chapters of the first  book glance at the remain-
ing lines,  rather than expound  them,  and the Saint takes  us 
on  at  once  to  Book  II,  which  expounds  the  second  stanza 
and enters  upon the Night of the Spirit. 
Here  the  Saint  treats  of the  proximate  means  to  union 
with God-namely, faith.  He uses  the same careful method 
of exposition,  showing  clearly  how  faith  is  to  the  soul  as  a 
dark  night,  and  how,  nevertheless,  it is  the  safest  of guides. 
A parenthetical chapter (v)  attempts to give some idea of the 
nature of union,  so  that the reader may recognize from  afar 
the  goal  to  which  he  is  proceeding.  The author  then  goes 
on to describe how  the three theological virtues-faith, hope 
and  charity-must  ' void  and  dispose  for  union '  the  three 
faculties  of the soul-understanding,  memory and will. 
He shows how narrow is  the way that leads to life and how 
nothing that belongs to the understanding  can guide the soul 
F 
4 
ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
to union.  His illustrations and arguments are far more com-
plicated  and subtle  than are  those of the first  book, and give 
the reader some idea of his knowledge, not only of philosophy 
and  theology,  but  also  of individual  souls.  Without  this 
last qualification he could never  have written  those  penetra-
ting  chapters  on  the  impediments  to  union-above all,  the 
passages  on  visions,  locutions  and  revelations,-nor  must 
we  overlook  his  description  (Chapter xiii)  of the  three signs 
that the soul  is  ready  to  pass  from  meditation  to contempla-
tion.  It may be doubted  if in its  own field  this  second  book 
has  ever  been  surpassed.  There  is  no  mystic  who  gives  a 
more  powerful  impression  than  S.  John  of the  Cross  of an 
absolute  mastery of his  subject.  No  mistiness,  vagueness  or 
indecision clouds his writing:  he is  as  clear-cut and definite 
as  can be. 
In his  third book S. John of the Cross goes  on  to  describe 
the obstacles to union which come from  the memory and the 
will.  As  we  have  observed  elsewhere,  he  considered  the 
memory  as  a  distinct  and  separate  faculty  of  the  soul. 
Having  written,  however,  at  such  length  of  the  under-
standing,  he  found  it  possible  to  treat  more  briefly  of  that 
other  faculty,  which  is  so  closely  related  to  it.l  Fourteen 
chapters  (ii-xv)  describe  the dark night  to  be  traversed  by 
the  memory;  thirty  (xvi-xlv)  the  passage  of the  will,  im-
pelled  by  love.
2 
The  latter  part  is  the  'more  strikingly 
developed.  Four  passions-joy,  hope,  sorrow  and  fear-
invade the  will,  and  may  either encompass  the soul's  perdi-
tion, or, if rightly directed, lead it to virtue and union.  Once 
more  S.  John of the  Cross  employs  his  profound  familiarity 
with  the human soul  to turn it away from  peril and guide it 
into the path of safety.  Much  that he says,  in dealing with 
passions so familiar to us  all, is  not only purely ascetic,  but is 
even  commonplace  to  the  instructed  Christian.  Yet  these 
are but parts of a  greater whole. 
Of particular  interest,  both  intrinsically  and  as  giving  a 
picture  of the  Saint's  own  times,  are  the  chapters  on  cere-
monies  and  aids  to  devotion-the  use  of rosaries,  medals, 
pilgrimages,  etc.  It must be remembered, of course,  t h   ~   he 
spent  most  of his  active  life  in  the  south  of Spain,  where 
exaggerations  of all  kinds,  even  to-day,  are  more  frequent 
than in the more sober north.  In any case there is  less  need, 
1  Ascent,  Bk.  III, Chap.  iii,  §  I. 
I  Cf.  Ascent,  Bk.  III, Chap.  xvi, §§  1-2. 
INTRODUCTION 
5 
in this lukewarm age, to warn Christians against the abuse of 
these  means  of grace, and  more need, perhaps, to urge them 
to employ aids that will stimulate and quicken their devotion. 
In the seventeenth  chapter of this  third  book,  S.  John  of 
the Cross enumerates the' six kinds of good  '  which can give 
rise  to rejoicing and sets  down  his  intention of treating each 
of them in its turn.  He carries out his purpose, but, on enter-
ing his last division,  subdivides it at considerable length and 
subsequently breaks off with some brusqueness while dealing 
with one of these sub-heads, just as he is introducing another 
subject  of  particular  interest  historically-namely,  pulpit 
methods  considered  from  the  standpoint  of  the  preacher. 
In all  probability  we  shall  never know  what  he  had  to  say 
about  the  hearers  of sermons,  or  what  were  his  considered 
judgeme'nts  on confessors  and  penitents-though of these  he 
has  left  us  examples  elsewhere  in  this  treatise,  as  well  as  in 
others. 
We cannot estimate of how  much the sudden curtailment 
of the Ascent  oj Mount  Carmel  has  robbed  us.  Orderly as was 
the mind of S. John of the Cross,  he was  easily carried away 
in  his  expositions,  which  are  apt  to  be  unequal.  No  one 
would  have  suspected,  for  example,  that,  after  going  into 
such  length  in  treating  the  first  line  of his  first  stanza,  he 
would  make  such  short  work  of the  remaining  four.  Nor 
can  we  disregard  the significance  of his  warning that much 
of what he had written on the understanding was applicable 
also  to  the  memory  and  the  will.  He  may,  therefore,  have 
been nearer the end of his  theme than is  generally supposed. 
Yet  it  is  equally  possible  that  much  more  of the  author's 
typical subtlety of analysis  was in store for  his  readers.  Any 
truncation,  when  the author is  a  S. John of the  Cross,  must 
be considered  irreparable. 
THE  MANUSCRIPTS 
Unfortunately  there  is  no  autograph  of  this  treatise 
extant,  though  there  are  a  number of early  copies,  some  of 
which have been made with great care.  Others, for  various 
reasons,  abbreviate  the  original  considerably.  The  MSS. 
belonging  to  both classes  will  be enumerated. 
Alba  de  Tormes.  The  Discalced  Carmelite  monastery  of 
Alba de Tormes has  a  codex which contains the four princi-
pal  treatises  of  S.  John  of the  Cross  (Ascent,  Dark  Night, 
6  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
Spiritual  Canticle  and  Living  Flame).  This  codex  belonged 
from  a  very early date  (perhaps from  a  date not much later 
than  that of the Saint's death)  to  the family  of the Duke of 
Alba,  which  was greatly devoted  to the Discalced  Carmelite 
Reform and  to  S.  Teresa,  its  foundress.  It remained in the 
family  until  the  beginning  of the  eighteenth  century,  when 
it came into the hands of a learned Carmelite, Fray Alonso de 
la  Madre  de  Dios,  who  presented  it  to  the Alba  monastery. 
on April  15,  1705.  The details  of this  history  are given  by 
Fray Alonso himself in a  note of this  date. 
For  over  half a  century  the  MS.  was  believed  to  be  an 
autograph,  partly,  no  doubt,  on  account  of its  luxurious 
binding  and  the  respect  paid  to  the  noble  house  whence  it 
came.  In February  q6I,  however,  it was  examined  care-
fully  by  P.  Manuel  de  Santa  Maria,  who,  by his  Superior's 
orders,  was  assisting  P.  Andres  de  la  Encarnacion  in  his 
search  for  manuscripts  of the  Saint's  writings.  P.  Manuel 
soon  discovered  that  the  opinion  commonly  held  was 
erroneous,-greatly,  it  would  seem,  to  the  disillusionment 
of his  contemporaries.  Among  the  various  reasons  which 
he gives  in  a  statement supporting his  conclusions  is  that in 
two  places  the  author is  described  as  ' santo' -a proof not 
only  that  the  MS.  is  not  an  autograph  but  also  that  the 
copyist had no intention  of representing it as  such. 
Although  this  copy is  carefully  made and richly  bound-
which suggests that it was a gift from the Reform to the house 
of Alba-it  contains  many errors,  of a  kind  which  indicate 
that the copyist, well educated as he was, knew little of ascetic 
or  mystical  theology.  A  number  of  omissions,  especially 
towards  the  end  of the  book,  give  the  impression  that  the 
copy  was  finished  with  haste  and  not  compared  with  the 
original on its completion.  There is  no  reason,  however,  to 
suppose  that  the  errors  and  omissions  are ever intentional; 
indeed,  they are of such a  kind  as  to suggest that the copyist 
had not the skill  necessary for successful adulteration. 
MS.  6624.  This  copy is  in the  National  Library  of Spain 
(Madrid)1,  and  contains  the  same  works  as  that  of Alba 
de  Tormes.  It was  made  in  1755,  under  the  direction  of 
P.  Andres  de la Encarnacion,  from  a  manuscript,  now lost, 
which  was  venerated  by  the  Benedictines  of Burgos:  this 
information  is  found  at the  end  of the  volume.  P.  Andres 
had evidently a good opinion of the Burgos MS., as he placed 
1  [Abbreviated' N.L.M.'  iD  this edition.] 
INTRODUCTION 
7 
this  copy in the archives of the Discalced  Reform, whence it 
passed tothe.National Library early in the nineteenth century. 
As  far  as  the Ascent is  concerned,  this  MS.  is  very  similar 
to  that  of Alba.  With  a  few  notable  exceptions,  such  as 
the  omission  of the  second  half of Book  I,  Chapter  iv,  the 
errors  and  omissions  are  so  similar  as  to  suggest  a  definite 
relationship  between  the two-perhaps  a  common  source. 
MS.  13498.  This  MS.,  which  gives  us  the  Ascent  and  the 
Dark  Night,  also  came from  the Archives  of the Reform  and 
is  now in the National Library.  The handwriting might  be 
as  early as  the end of the sixteenth century.  The author did 
not attempt to  make a  literal transcription of the Ascent,  but 
summarized  where  he  thought  advisable,  reducing  the 
number  of chapters  and  abbreviating  many  of them-this 
last not so much  by the method of paraphrase as  by the free 
omission  of phrases  and sentence!:. 
MS.  2201.  This,  as  far  as  the  Ascent  is  concerned,  is  an 
almost literal transcription of the last  MS., in a  seventeenth-
century hand;  it was bound in the eighteenth century, when 
a  number of other  treatises  were  added  to  it,  together with 
some poems by S. John of the Cross and others.  The variants 
as  between  this  MS.  and  13498  are numerous,  but of small 
importance and seem mainly to have been due to carelessness. 
MS.  18160.  This  dates  from  the  end  of  the  sixteenth 
century and contains the four treatises named above,  copied 
in  different  hands  and  evidently  intended  to  form  one 
volume.  Only the first four chapters of the Ascent are given, 
together  with  the  title  and  the  first  three  lines  of the  fifth 
chapter.  The transcription is  poorly done. 
MS.  13507.  An  unimportant  copy,  containing  only  a 
few  odd chapters of the Ascent and others from the remaining 
works of S. John of the Cross and other writers. 
Pamplona.  A  codex in an excellent state of preservation is 
venerated  by  the  Discalced  Carmelite  Nuns  of Pamplona. 
It was  copied,  at  the  end  of the  sixteenth  century,  by  a 
Barcelona Carmelite, Madre Magdalena de la Asuncion, and 
contains  a  short summary  of the  four  treatises  enumerated 
above,  various poems  by S. John of the Cross and some  mis-
cellaneous  writings.  The Ascent  is  abbreviated  to  the same 
extent  as  in  13498  and  2201  and  by  the  same  methods; 
many chapters,  too,  are omitted in their entirety. 
Alcaudete.  This  MS.,  which  contains  the  Ascent  only,  was 
copied  by S. John of the Cross's  close friend and companion, 
8  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
P.  Juan  Evangelista,  as  a  comparison  with  manuscripts 
(N.L.M.,  12738)  written  in  his  well-known  and  very  dis-
tinctive  hand,  puts  beyond  all  doubt.  P.  Juan  knew  the 
Saint  before  entering  the  Order;  was  professed  by  him  at 
Granada  in  1583;  accompanied  him  on  many  of  his 
journeys;  saw  him  write  most  of his  books;  and,  as  his 
close  friend  and  confessor,  was  consulted  repeatedly  by  his 
biographers.  It is  natural that he should  also  have acted  as 
the  Saint's  copyist,  and,  in  the  absence  of autographs,  we 
should  expect  no  manuscripts  to  be  more  trustworthy 
than  copies  made  by  him.  Examination  of this  MS.  shows 
that  it  is  in  fact  highly  reliable.  It corrects  none  of those 
unwieldy  periods  in  which  the  Saint's  work  abounds,  and 
which  the  editio  princeps  often  thought  well  to  emend,  nor, 
like  the  early  editions  and  even  some  manuscripts,  does  it 
omit  whole  paragraphs  and  substitute  others  for  them. 
Further,  as  this  copy  was  being  made  solely  for  the  use  of 
the  Order,  no  passages  are  omitted  or altered  in it because 
they  might  be  erroneously  interpreted  as  iIIuministic.  It is 
true  that  P.  Juan  Evangelista  is  not,  from  the  technical 
standpoint,  a  perfect  copyist,  but,  frequent  as  are  his  slips, 
they  are  always  easy  to  recognize. 
The Aleaudete  MS.  was  found  in  the  Carmelite  convent 
in  that  town  by  P.  Andres  de  la  Encarnacion,  who  first 
made  use  of  it  for  his  edition.  When  the  convent  was 
abandoned  during  the  religious  persecutions  of  the  early 
nineteenth  century,  the  MS.  was  lost.  Recently,  however, 
it  was  re-discovered  by  P.  Silverio  de  Santa  Teresa  in  a 
second-hand  bookshop  and forms  a  most  important contri-
bution  to  that scholar's  edition,  which  normally  follows  it. 
It bears many signs offrequent use;  eleven folios  are missing 
from  the  body  of the  MS.  (corresponding  approximately 
to Book III, Chapters xxii to xxvi)  and several more from its 
conclusion. 
In the footnotes  to the Ascent,  the following  abbreviations 
are used: 
A=MS. of the  Carmelite Friars of Alba. 
Ale. =AIcaudete  MS. 
B =  MS.  of the Benedictines of Burgos. 
C=National Library,  Madrid,  MS.  13498. 
D =National Library,  Madrid,  MS.  2201. 
P =MS. of the Carmelite Nuns of Pamplona. 
E.p. =  Editio princeps  (AlcaIa,  1618). 
ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
Treats  of how  the  soul  may  prepare  itself in  order  to  attain  in  a 
short  time  to  Divine  union.  Gives  very  profitable  counsels 
and  instruction,  both  to  beginners  and  to  proficients,  that  they 
may know how to  disencumber  themselves of all that is temporal 
and  not  to  encumber  themselves  with  the  spiritual,l  and  to 
remain  in  complete  detachment  and  liberty  of spirit,  as  is 
necessary for  Divine  union. 
2 
ARGUMENT 
All  the  doctrine  whereof I  intend  to  treat
3 
in  this  Ascent 
of A10unt  Carmel  is  included  in  the following  stanzas,  and in 
them is also described the manner of ascending to the summit 
ofthe Mount, which is  the high estate of perfection which we 
here call  union  of the soul  with  God.  And  because  I  must 
continually  base  upon  them  that  which  I  shall  say,  I  have 
desired  to  set  them  down  here together,  to  the  end  that all 
the substance of that which is  to be written may be seen  and 
comprehended  together;  although  it  will  be  fitting  to  set 
down each stanza separately before expounding it,  and like-
wise  the  lines  of  each  stanza,  according  as  the  matter 
and  the  exposition  require.  The  poem,  then,  runs  as 
follows  :t 
1  A omits:  • and not  .  .  .  spiritual.' 
2  So  Ale.  On  his own  account  P.  Juan  Evangelista adds:  'composed 
by  P.  Fray  Juan  de  la  Cruz,  Discalced  Carmelite.'  Other  codices,  like 
Ale.,  give  the  name  of  the author.  E.p.  alone  reads:  • Ascent  of Mount 
Cunnel,  composed  by  the  Venerable  Father  Fr.  Juan  de  la  Cruz,  first 
Viscalced  friar  of  the  Reform  of  Our  Lady  of  Carmel  founded  by  the 
virgin  Saint Teresa.' 
3  So  Ale.,  e.p.-A, Bread:  • All  the doctrine which is to be treated.' 
,  [Lit.:  • It says,  then,  thus.']  Only Ale.  has these  words. 
IO  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
STANZAS 
1 
Wherein  the  soul  sings  of  the  happy  chance  which  it  had  in 
passing  through  the  dark  night  of  faith,  in  detachment  and 
purgation  of itself,  to  union with  the Beloved.
2 
1.  On  a  dark  night,  Kindled 
3 
in  love  with  yearnings-oh,  happy 
ehance!-
I  went  forth  without  being  observed,  My house  being  now  at 
rest . ., 
2.  In  darkness  and  secure,  By  the  secret  ladder,  disguised-
oh, happy chance!- . 
In darkness and in concealment,  My house  being now at rest. 
3.  In the happy night,  In secret, when none saw me, 
Nor  I  beheld  aught,  Without  light  or  guide,  save  that  which 
burned in  my  heart. 
4.  This light guided me  More surely than the light of noonday, 
To  the  place  where  he  (weIll knew who  !)  was  awaiting  me-
A place where Done  appeared. 
5.  Oh, night that guided me,  Oh, night more lovely than the dawn, 
Oh,  night that  joined  Beloved with lover,  Lover transformed 
in the Beloved  ! 
8.  Upon my flowery breast,  Kept wholly for himself alone, 
There he stayed sleeping,  and I  caressed him,  And the fanning 
of the cedars made a breeze. 
7.  The  breeze  blew from  the turret  As I  parted his locks  ; 
With his gentle hand he wounded my neck  And caused all my 
senses  to  be  suspended. 
8.  I  remained,  lost  in  oblivion; 5  :My  face  I  reclined  on  the 
Beloved. 
All  ceased  and  I  abandoned  myself,  Leaving  my  cares  for-
gotten among the lilies. 
1  For a  verse translation in the metre of the original, see Vol.  II. 
I  Several editions  read:  'to union of love.'  E.p.,  Alc.,  A.  B  have  all 
the reading of the text above. 
I  [The adjectives  are feminine  throughout.) 
,  [The  word  translated' at  rest'  is  a  past  participle:  more  literally, 
, stilled.') 
6  (Lit.:  • I  remained and forgot.') 
PROLOGUE 
I.  In  order  to  expound  and  describe  this  dark  night, 
through  which  the  soul  passes  in  order  to  attain  to  the 
Divine light of the perfect union of the love  of God, as far as 
is  possible in  this life, it would be necessary to have illumina-
tion of knowledge and experience other and far greater than 
mine;  for  this  darkness  and these  trials,  both spiritual  and 
temporal,l  through  which  happy  souls  are  wont  to  pass  in 
order  to  be  able  to  attain  to  this  high  estate  of perfection, 
are so  numerous  and  so  profound  that  neither  does  human 
knowledge suffice for  the understanding of them,  nor experi-
ence  for  the  description  of them;  for  only  he  that  passes 
this  way can understand it,  and  even  he  cannot describe  it. 
2.  Therefore, in order to say a little about this  dark night, 
I  shall  trust  neither  to  experience  nor  to  knowledge,  since 
both  may  fail  and  deceive;  but,  while  not  omitting  to 
make  such  use  as  I  can  of these  two  things,  I  shall  avail 
myself,  in all that,  with  the Divine favour,  I  have  to  say,  or 
at the least, in that which  is  most  important and dark to  the 
understanding, of Divine Scripture;  for, if we guide ourselves 
by this, we shall be unable to stray, since He Who speaks there-
in is  the Holy Spirit.  And if in aught I stray, whether through 
my imperfect understanding of that which  is  said  in  it  or of 
matters unconnected with it, it is  not my intention 
2 
to depart 
from  the sound  sense  and  doctrine  of our Holy  Mother  the 
Catholic  Church;  for  in  such  a  case  I  submit  and  resign 
myself wholly,  not  only  to  her  command,
3 
but  to  whatever 
better judgement she  may  pronounce  concerning it. 
1  E.p.:  'both  spiritual  and  corporal.'  The  correction  was  no  doubt 
made  because' corporal'  is  the  usual  antithesis  of  '  spiritual';  all  the 
1I15S.,  however,  have' temporal.' 
2  E.p.  modifies:  'Since  both  may  fail  and  deceive;  but  to  Divine 
Scripture,  for,  if  we  guide  ourselves  by  this,  we  cannot  stray,  since 
He  Who  speaks therein is  the Holy Spirit.  Nevertheless  I  shall  make use 
of  these  two  things-knowledge  and  experience-whereof  I  speak.  And 
if in aught I  stray, it is not my intention, etc.' 
8  E.p.:  'to her light and command.'  A,  B:  'to her opinion.'  There 
are  slight  variations in  these  last  few  lines  in  different  1I1SS.  We  follow 
Ale.,  with which  A and  B  agree very closely. 
II 
12  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
3.  For this  cause  I  have  been  moved,l  not  by any possi-
bility that I see in myself of accomplishing so  arduous  a task, 
but by the confidence which I  have in the Lord  that He will 
help  me  to  say  something  to  relieve  the  great  necessity 
which is  experienced by many souls,  who,  when they set  out 
upon the road of virtue,  and Our Lord desires  to bring them 
into this  dark night that they may pass  through it to  Divine 
union,  make no progress.  At times this is  because they have 
no  desire  to  enter it  or  to  allow  themselves  to  be  led  into 
it;  at other times,  because  they understand  not themselves 
and  lack  competent  and  alert  directors
2 
who  will  guide 
them  to  the  summit.  And  so  it  is  sad  to  see  many souls  to 
whom  God  gives  both  favour  and  capacity  for  making 
progress  (and  who,  if  they  would  take  courage,  could 
attain  to  this  high  estate),  remaining  in  an  elementary 
stage
3 
of communion with  God, for  want  of will,  or know-
ledge,  or  because  there  is  none  who  will  lead  them  in  the 
right  path or teach  them  how  to  get  away  from
t 
these  be-
ginnings.  And  at  length,  although  Our  Lord  grants them 
such  favour  as  to  make  them  to  go  onward  without  this 
hindrance  or  that,  they  arrive at  their goal  exceeding late, 
and  with  greater  labour,  yet  with  less  merit,  because  they 
have  not  conformed  themselves  to God,  and  allowed  them-
selves  to  be  brought freel y5  into  the  pure  and  sure  road  of 
union.  For,  although  it  is  true  that  God  is  leading  them, 
and  that  He  can  lead  them  without  their  own  help,  they 
will not allow themselves to be led;  and thus they make less 
progress,  because they resist  Him  Who is  leading them,  and 
they have less  merit,  because  they apply  not their  will,  and 
on  this  account they  suffer  more.  For there  are souls  who, 
instead of committing themselves  to  God and making use  of 
His  help,  rather  hinder  God  by  the  indiscretion  of their 
actions  or  by  their  resistance;  like  children  who,  when 
their  mothers  desire  to  carry  them  in  their  arms,  kick  and 
cry,  insisting  upon  being  allowed  to  walk,  with  the  result 
that they can make no progress;  and, if they advance at all, 
it is  only at the pace of a  child. 
4.  Wherefore,  to  the  end  that  all,  whether  beginners  or 
proficients,  may  know  how  to  commit  themselves  to  God's 
1  A,  B:  'In order to write this  I  have been moved.' 
a  [Lit.  . and  wideawake  guides.']  E.p.  reads' skilled,'  and  B  'pre-
pared: for' alert:  3  [Lit.,  '  a  low  manner.'] 
•  So  c.p.  [p.  Silverio's  text,  following  Ale.,  reads:  'disengage them-
selves  from.']      E.p.  omits' freely.' 
PROLOGUE 
13 
guidance,  when  His  Majesty  desires  to  lead  them  onward, 
we  shall  give  instruction  and  counsel,  by  His  help,  so  that 
they  may  be  able  to  understand  His  will,  or,  at  the  least, 
allow  Him to lead them.  For some confessors  and spiritual 
fathers,l  having  no  light  and  experience  concerning  these 
roads,  are  wont  to  hinder and  harm such  souls  rather  than 
to  help  them along the road;2  they are like  the  builders  of 
Babel, who, when  told to furnish  suitable material, gave and 
applied  other  very  different  material,  because  they  under-
stood not the language, and  thus  nothing was  done.  Where-
fore,  it is  a  difficult  and  troublesome  thing  at such  seasons
3 
for  a  soul not to understand itself or to find  none who under-
stands  it.  For  it  will  come  to  pass  that  God  will  lead  the 
soul' by a  most lofty path of dark contemplation and aridity, 
wherein  it seems  to  be lost,  and,  being  thus full  of darkness 
and trials, afflictions and temptations, will meet one who will 
speak to it like Job's comforters,  and say  that
5 
it is  suffering 
from  melancholy  or  low  spirits,  or  morbidity  of tempera-
ment,  or  that  it  may  have  some  hidden  sin,  and  that  it  is 
for  this  reason that God has forsaken it.  Such comforters are 
wont  to  infer  immediately  that  that  soul  must  have  been 
very evil,  since such  things  as  these  are  befalling  it. 
5.  And  there  will  likewise  be  those  who  tell  the  soul  to 
retrace its  steps,  since  it is  finding  neither pleasure nor con-
solation in the things of God as it did aforetime.  And in this 
way they double the  trials  of the  poor soul;  for  it may well 
be that the greatest affliction  which  it is  feeling is  that of the 
knowledge of its own miseries, thinking that it sees itself,  more 
clearly  than  daylight,  to  be  full  of evils  and  sins,  for  God 
gives  it that light of knowledge
6 
in that night of contempla-
tion,  as  we  shall  presently  show.  And  when  the  soul  finds 
someone  whose  opinion  agrees  with  its  own,  and  who  says 
that  these  things  must  be due  to  its  own  fault,  its  affliction 
and trouble increase infinitely and are wont to become more 
grievous  than death.  And,  not content with this,  such con-
fessors,  thinking  that  these  things  proceed  from  sin,  make 
these  souls  go  over  their  lives  and  cause  them  to  make 
many  general  confessions  and  crucify  them  afresh;  not 
1  Alc.  omits:  • confessors  and.' 
2  E.p.  omits:  • along the road.' 
3  •  Reasons' is a  copyist's or printer's error.  E.p.  has' occasions.' 
,  E.p.:  • For it will happen that God  will lead it.' 
6  E.p.:  • who  will  say to it what Job's comforters said to Job,  that it, 
etc.'  G  E.p.:  • for  God  gives it to understand  this.' 
14  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
understanding that this may quite well not be the time for any 
of such things,  and  that their penitents should  be  left  to  the 
purgation which God gives them, and  be comforted  and  en-
couraged  to  desire  it until  God  be pleased  to  dispose  other-
wise;  for until that time, no matter what the souls themselves 
may do  and their confessors  may say,  there is  no remedy for 
them. 
6.  This,  with  the  Divine  favour,  we  shall  consider  here-
after,  and  also  how  the  soul  should  conduct itself at such  a 
time,  and  how  the  confessor  must  treat  it,  and  what  signs 
there will be whereby it may be known if this is the purgation 
of the  soul;  and,  in such  case,  whether it  be  of sense  or of 
spirit  (which  is  the dark night whereof we  speak),  and how 
it  may  be  known  if it be  melancholy  or some  other imper-
fection  with  respect to sense  or to spirit.  For there  may be 
some  souls  who  will  think,  or  whose  confessors  will  think, 
that  God  is  leading  them  along  this  road  of the  dark  night 
of spiritual purgation, whereas they may possibly be suffering 
only from  some of the imperfections  aforementioned.  And, 
again,  there  are  many  souls  who  think  that  they  have  no 
aptitude for  prayer, when  they have very much;  and  there 
are  others
l 
who  think that they  have  much  when  they  have 
hardly any. 
7.  There are other souls who labour and weary themselves 
to  a  piteous  extent,  and  yet  go  backward,  seeking  profit  in 
that which is  not profitable,  but is  rather a  hindrance;  and 
there are still others who,  by remaining at rest and in quiet-
ness,  continue  to  make  great  progress.  There  are  others 
who  are  hindered  and  disturbed  and  make  no  progress, 
because  of the  very  consolations  and  favours  that  God  is 
granting  them in order that they  may  make  progress.  And 
there  are  many  other  things  on  this  road  that  befall  those 
who follow it, both joys and afflictions, both hopes and griefs: 
some  proceeding  from  the  spirit  of  perfection  and  others 
from imperfection.  Of all these,  with the Divine favour,  we 
shall  endeavour  to  say  something,  so  that  each  soul!  who 
reads  this  may  be  able  to see  something of the  road  that he 
ought  to  follow,  if he aspires  to attain to  the summit of this 
Mount. 
8.  And  since  this  instruction  relates  to  the  dark  night 
through  which  the soul  must go  to  God,  let  not the  reader 
1  E.p.:  • and others,  on the contrary.' 
•  E.p.:  • each one.' 
PROLOGUE 
15 
marvel ifit seem to him somewhat dark also.  This, I  believe, 
will  be so  at the beginning when he begins to  read;  but, as 
he passes on, he will find  himself understanding the first part 
better,  since  one part will  explain another.  And then,  if he 
read it a second time, I  believe it will seem clearer to him and 
the  instruction  will  appear  sounder.l  And  if any  persons 
find  themselves  disagreeing  with  this  instruction,2  it  will  be 
due to my ignorance and poor style;  for  in itself the matter 
is  good  and  of the first  importance.  But  I  think that,  even 
were it written in a  more excellent and perfect manner than 
it is,  only  the  minority would  profit  by it,
3 
for  we  shall  not 
here  set  down  things  that  are  very  moral  and  delectable' 
for  all  spiritual  persons  who  desire  to  travel  toward God by 
pleasant  and  delectable  ways,5  but solid  and substantial in-
struction, as well suited to one kind of person as  to another if 
they desire  to  pass  to the detachment of spirit  which  is  here 
treated. 
g.  Nor  is  my  principal  intent  to  address  all,  but  rather 
certain  persons  of our  sacred  Order  of  Mount  Carmel  of 
the  primitive  observance,  both  friars  and  nuns-since they 
have  desired  me  to  do  so-to  whom  God  is  granting  the 
favour  of setting them on the road to this  Mount;  who,  as 
they  are  already  detached from  the temporal  things  of this 
world,  will  better  understand  the  instruction  concerning 
detachment of spirit. 
1  E.p.:  • will  appear more  certain.' 
Z  So  Alc.  [and  P.  Silverio).  The  other  codices  and  editions  have 
• reading'  [i.e.,  '  that which they read  '). 
3  E.p.:  'than it is,  it would  not be appreciated  by many.' 
,  Needless to say, the Saint does  not here mean that he will not write in 
conformity  with  moral  standards-no  writer  is  more  particular  in  this 
respect-nor that he will deal  with no delectable matters at all,  but rather 
that he will  go to the very roots of moral teaching and expound the' solid 
and  substantial instruction,' which  not only  forms  its  basis  but also  leads 
the soul toward  the most intimate union  with God  in love. 
I  E.p.:  • for  spiritual persons who desire  to travel,  by [ways]  that are 
pleasant,  to  God.'  There  are  various  other  readings  in  these  lines--all 
of  them,  however,  differing from  the text extremely slightly. 
BOOK  THE  FIRST 
Wherein  is  described  the  nature  of  the  dark  night  and  how 
necessary it  is  to  pass  through  it to  Divine  union;  and in par-
ticular  this  book  describes  the  dark  night  of sense,  and  desire, 
and the  evils  which  these  work  in  the  souP 
CHAPTER  I 
Sets  down  the  first  stanza.-Describes  the  differences  between 
two  nights  through  which  spiritual persons  pass,  according  to 
the  two parts  of man, the  lower and the  higher.  Expounds  the 
stanza  which follows. 
STANZA  THE  FrRsT2 
On  a  dark  night,  Kindled  in love  with  yearnings-oh,  happ, 
chance!-
I  went  forth  without  being  observed,  My  house  being  now  at 
rest. 
I.  In this first  stanza 
3 
the soul sings  of the happy fortune 
and  chance  which  it  experienced  in  going  forth  from  all 
things  that  are  without,'  and  from  the  desires
5 
and 
impcrfections
6 
that are in the sensuaP part of man because of 
the  disordered  state  of his  reason.  For  the  understanding 
of this it must be known that, for a soul  to attain to the state 
of perfection,  it has  ordinarily  first
8 
to  pass  through  two 
1  The codices give neither title nor sub-title:  both were inserted in e.p. 
[' Desire'  is  to  be  taken  as  the  direct  object  of  '  describes';  'these' 
refers  to  '  sense'  and' desire "  not to the dark night.] 
I  So e.p.,  A,  D.  Omitted from  Ale.,  B,  C. 
•  Alc.:  'In this happy stanza.' 
,  E.p. omits:  'that are without.' 
6  [Lit.,  '  appetites:  but  this  word  is  uniformly  translated' desires:  as 
the  Spanish  context  frequently  will  not  admit  the  use  of  the  stronger 
word  in  English.]  •  A,  B:  'and  affections.' 
7  [The  word  translated' sensual'  is  sometimes,  as  here,  sensual,  and 
sometimes,  as at the  beginning of  §4,  scnsitivo  (in  e.p.).  The  meaning  in 
either case is simply' of sense'.] 
•  E.p.  omits' first.' 
17 
18  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
principal  kinds  of night,  which  spiritual  persons  call  pur-
gations or purifications  of the soul;  and  here  we  call  them 
nights,  for  in both  of them the soul journeys,  as  it  were,  by 
night, in darkness. 
2.  The first  night  or
l 
purgation  is  of"the  sensual  part  of 
the soul,  which  is  treated in  the  present  stanza  and  will  be 
treated  in  the first  part of this  book.  And  the  second  is  of 
the  spiritual  part;  of this  speaks  the  second  stanza,  which 
follows;  and  of this  we  shall  treat  likewise,  in  the  second 
and the third part,2 with respect to the activity of the soul; 
and in the fourth  part,  with  respect to its  passivity. 
3.
3 
And  this  first  night  pertains  to  beginners,  occurring 
at the  time  when  God  begins  to  bring  them  into  the  state 
of contemplation;  in  this  night  the  spirit  likewise  has  a 
part,  as  we  shall say  in due course.  And the second  night, 
or purification, pertains to those who  are already proficient, 
occurring  at the  time  when  God  desires  to  set  them in  the 
state  of union  with  God.  And  this  latter  night  is  a  more 
obscure  and  dark  and  terrible  purgation,  as  we  shall  say 
afterwards. 
EXPOSITION  OF  THE  STANZA 
4.  Briefly,  then,  the  soul  means  by  this  stanza  that  it 
went  forth  (being  led  by  God)  for  love  of Him  alone,  en-
kindled  in  love  of Him,  upon  a  dark  night,  which  is  the 
privation  and  purgation  of  all  its  sensual  desires,  with 
respect  to  all  outward  things  of  the  world  and  to  those 
which  were delectable  to  its  flesh,  and  likewise  with  respect 
to  the  desires  of its  will.  This  all  comes  to  pass  in  this 
purgation  of sense;  wherefore  the  soul  says  that  it  went 
forth  while  its  house  was  still  at rest';  which  house  is  its 
sensual part, the desires being at rest and asleep in it, and it 
in  them.  For  there  is  no  going  forth  from  the  pains  and 
1  So  Ale.  The other authorities  read' and' for' or.' 
I  So  Ale.  The  other  authorities  read:  'and  of  this  we  shall  treat 
likewise.  in  the  second  part  with  respect  to  the  activity  [of  the  soul] 
[these  last  three  words  are  1I0t  cO?lt{/incd  in  the  Spanish  of  allY  authority]. 
and  in  the  third  and  the  fourth  part  with  respect  to  its  passivity.'  E.p. 
follows  this  division.  Ale.,  however,  seems  to  correspond  more  closely 
with  the  Saint's  intentions;  for  he  did  not  divide  each  of  his  '  books' 
into' parts'  and  appears  therefore  to  indicate  by  .  part'  what  we  know 
as  • book.'  Now  Book  I  is  in  fact  devoted  to  the  active  purgation  of 
sense.  as are  Books  II and  III  to the  active  purgation  of  the  spirit.  For 
the  '  fourth  book,'  see  Introduction.  pp.  Iviii-ix  above. 
3  This  paragraph  is  omitted  from  e.p. 
•  [On the phrase' at rest,'  cf.  p.  10,  n. 2,  above.] 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  II 
19 
afflictions  of the  secret  places  of the  desires  until  these  be 
mortified  and  put  to  sleep.  And  this,  the  soul  says,  was  a 
happy chance  for  it-namely, its  going  forth  without  being 
observed:  that is,  without any desire of its flesh  or any other 
thing  being  able  to  hinder  it.  And  likewise,  because  it 
went  out  by  night-which  signifies  the  privation  of  all 
these  things  wrought  in  it  by  God,  which  privation  was 
night  for  it. 
5.  And  it  was  a  happy  chance  that  God  should  lead  it 
into this night,  from  which  there  came  to it so  much good; 1 
for  of itself the  soul  would  not  have  succeeded  in  entering 
therein,  because  no  man  of himself can  succeed  in  voiding 
himself of all  his  desires  in order to  come  to  God.
2 
6.  This is,  in brief,  the exposition  of the stanza;  and  we 
shall  now  have  to  go  through  it,  line  by  line,  setting  down 
one line after another,  and expounding that which  is  to our 
purpose. 
3 
And  the  same  method  is  followed  in  the  other 
stanzas,  as  I  said  in  the  Prologue
4
-namely,  that  each 
stanza  will  be  set  down  and  expounded,  and  afterwards 
each  line.
6 
CHAPTER  II 
Explains  the  nature  of this  dark  night  through  which  the  soul  says 
that  it has passed on  the  road  to  union. 
6 
On  a dark  night 
I.  We  may  say  that  there  are  three  reasons
7 
for  which 
this  journeyS  made  by  the  soul  to  union  with  God  is  called 
night.  The  first  has  to  do  with  the  point  from  which  the 
soul  goes  forth,  for  it has  gradually to deprive itself of desire 
for  all  the  worldly  things  which  it  possessed,  by  denying 
them to  itself;9  the  which  denial  and  deprivation are,  as  it 
were,  night  to  all  the senses
10 
of man.  The  second  reason 
1  A,  e.p.:  • from  which  there comes so  much  good.' 
S  E.p.:  • to go to  God.' 
a  The  rest  of  the  paragraph  is  omitted  from  e.p.,  possibly  because  it 
was already in the' Argument'  above  (p.  9). 
,  i.e.,  in the' Argument.' 
6  A:  'each  line  separately.' 
•  So  A,  Ale.,  C,  D.  B,  e.p.  read:  • to  union  with  God.'  A,  13,  C,  D, 
e.p.  add further:  • Sets down  the causes thereof.' 
7  Ale.,  D:  'three things.' 
•  [More  exactly,  this' passage' or • transition'  (trdnsito).] 
•  [Lit.,  , in negation of them.'] 
10  E.p.:  'for all  the desires and senses.' 
G 
20  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
has to do with the mean,
l 
or the road along  which the soul 
must  travel  to  this  union-that is,  faith,  which  is  likewise
2 
as  dark as  night to the understanding.  The third has  to do 
with  the  point  to  which  it  travels,-namely  God,  Who, 
equally,  is  dark night to  the soul  in this  life. 
3 
These  three 
nights  must pass  through the soul,-or rather, the soul  must 
pass  through  them-in  order  that  it  may  come  to  Divine 
union  with  God.' 
2.  In  the  book  of the  holy  Tobias  these  three  kinds  of 
night were shadowed forth  by the three nights which,  as  the 
angel commanded, were to pass ere the youth Tobias should 
be united with his  bride.  In the first he commanded him to 
burn the heart of the fish  in the fire,  which signifies the heart 
that is  affectioned to,  and set upon,  the things of the world; 
which,  in order that one may begin to journey toward God, 
must be burned and purified from all that is  creature, in the 
fire  of the love of God.  And in this purgation the devil flees 
away, for he has power over the soul only when it is attached 
to things
5 
corporal and temporal. 
3.  On the second night the angel  told  him that he would 
be  admitted  into  the  company  of the  holy  patriarchs,  who 
are  the  fathers  of the  faith.  For,  passing  through  the  first 
night,  which is  the  privation of all objects  of sense,  the soul 
at once  enters into the second night,  being alone in faith  to 
the  exclusion,  not  of  charity,  but  of  other  knowledge 
acquired  by  the  understanding,  as  we  shall  say  hereafter, 
6 
which is  a  thing that pertains not to sense. 
4.  On  the  third  night  the  angel  told  him  that he would 
obtain  blessing,  which  is  God;  Who,  by  means  of  the 
second  night,  which  is  faith,  continually  communicates 
Himself  to  the  soul  in  such  a  secret  and  intimate  manner 
that  He  becomes  another  night  to  the  soul,  inasmuch  as 
this  said  communication  is  far  darker  than  those  others,  as 
we  shall  say  presently.  And,  when  this  third  night  is 
past,  which  is  the  complete  realization  of  the  communi. 
cation  of God  in  the  spirit,  which  is  ordinarily  wrought  in 
great darkness  of the soul,  there  then follows  its  union  with 
1  E.p.:  'the manner.'  [By' the mean' is meant the middle,  or main 
part,  of the journey.]  2  E.p.  omits' likewise.' 
3  E.p.  glosses the  text  by substituting:  'Who, since  He is  incompre-
hensible  and infinitely  transcendent,  may also  be called  dark night.' 
.,  E.p.  shortens  this  sentence:  'Through  these  three  nights  the  soul 
must pass in order to come to Divine union with  God.' 
6  E.p.:  'to the pleasures of things.' 
,  The  words  ' to the exclusion  .  .  .  hereafter' are found  only in Alc. 
BOOK  1.  CHAPTER  III  21 
the Bride,  which  is  the  Wisdom  of God.  Even so  the angel 
said  likewise  to Tobias that,  when  the  third  night  was  past, 
he should  be  united  with  his  bride in the fear  of the  Lord  ; 
for,  when this fear of God is  perfect,  love is  perfect,  and this 
comes to pass when the transformation of the soul is  wrought 
through its  love.
l 
5.  These  three  parts  of the  night  are  all  one  night;  but 
like night itself,  it has three parts. II  For the first  part, which 
is  that of ... ense,  is  comparable to  the  beginning of night,  the 
point  at  which  things  begin  to  fade  from  sight.  And  the 
second  part,  which  is  faith,  is  comparable  to  midnight, 
which is  total darkness.  And  the third part is  like  the close 
of night,  which  is  God,  the  which  part is  now  near  to  the 
light of day.  And,  that we  may understand  this  the better, 
we  shall  treat  of  each  of  these  reasons  separately  as  we 
proceed. 
3 
CHAPTER  III 
Speaks  of the first  cause  of this  night,  which  is  that  of the privation 
of the  desire  in  all  things,  and gives  the  reason  for  which  it  is 
called  night. 
4 
I.  We  here  describe  as  night  the  privation  of every  kind 
of pleasure which  belongs to the desire;  for  even  as  night is 
naught  but  the  privation  of light,  and,  consequently,  of all 
objects that can be seen by means oflight, whereby the visual 
faculty5  remains  unoccupied  and  in  darkness,  even  so  like-
wise  the  mortification  of desire  may  be  called  night  to  tHe 
soul.  For,  when  the  soul  is  deprived  of the  pleasure  of its 
desire  in  all  things,  it  remains,  as  it were,  unoccupied  and 
in  darkness.  For  even  as  the  visual  faculty,  by  means  of 
light,  is  nourished and fed  by objects which can be seen,  and 
which,  when  the  light  is  quenched,  are  not  seen,6  even  so, 
by means  of the  desire,  the soul  is  nourished  and fed  by all 
1  E.p.  reads:  'for, when  this is perfect,  the love of God is'so likewise, 
and  this  comes  to  pass  when  the  transformation  of  the  soul  is wrought 
through  its love for  God.' 
a  E.p.  reads:  'And,  that  we  may  the  better  understand  it,  we  shall 
treat  of  each one  of  these  reasons  separately as  we  proceed.  And  it will 
be  noted  that these three nights are all  one night,  which has  three parts.' 
3  E.p.  omits  this  sentence,  which  it  has  prefixed  to  the  beginning  of 
the  paragraph.  Ale.  alone  reads' reasons';  the  other  authorities  have 
, things.'  4  Ale.  alone has  the words  . and  .  .  .  night.' 
6  A  adds:  • as to all  things.' 
•  E.p.  has:  'and, when the light is quenched,  this  ceases.' 
22  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
things  wherein  it can  take  pleasure  according  to  its  facul-
ties;  and, when this  also is quenched, or rather, mortified,! 
the  soul  ceases  to  be  fed  upon  the  pleasure  of all  things, 
and  thus,  with  respect  to  its  desire,  it  remains  unoccupied 
and in darkness. 
2.  Let  us  take  an  example  from  each  of the  faculties. 
When  t   ~   soul  deprives  its  desire  of  the  pleasure  of all 
that can  delight  the  sense  of hearing,  the  soul  remains  un-
occupied  and in darkness  with  respect to  this faculty.  And 
when it deprives  itself of the pleasure  of all  that can please 
the  sense  of sight,  it  remains  unoccupied  and  in  darkness 
with respect to this faculty also. I  And when it deprives itself 
of the  pleasure  of all  the  sweetness  of perfumes  which  can 
give it pleasure through the sense of smell,  it remains equally 
unoccupied and in darkness  according to this faculty.  And 
if it also denies itself the pleasure of all food  that can satisfy 
the  palate,  the  soul  likewise  remains  unoccupied  and  in 
darkness.  And  finally,  when  the  soul  mortifies  itself with 
respect  to  all  the  delights  and  pleasures  that it can  receive 
from  the  sense  of touch,  it remains,  in  the  same  way,  un-
occupied  and  in  darkness  with  respect  to  this  faculty.  So 
that the soul that has denied and thrust away from itself the 
pleasures which come from all these things, and has mortified 
its desire with respect to them, may be said to be,  as it were, 
in  the  darkness  of  night,  which  is  naught  else  than  an 
emptiness within itself of all  things. 
3 ..  The reason for  this is  that,  as  the philosophers say,  the 
soul, as soon as God infuses it into the body, is like a smooth, 
blank  board
3 
upon  which  nothing  is  painted;  and,  save 
for  that which  it experiences  through  the  senses;  nothing is 
communicated to it, in the course of nature, from  any other 
source.  And  thus,  for  as  long  as  it is  in the  body,  it is  like 
one  who  is  in  a  dark  prison  and  who  knows  nothing,  save 
what he is able to see through the windows of the said prison; 
and, if he saw nothing through them,  he would see  nothing 
in any other way.  And thus the soul,  save for  that which is 
communicated  to  it  through  the  senses,  which  are  the 
windows of its prison, could acquire nothing, in the course of 
nature, in any other way. 
1  E.p.:  'and when  this is mortified: 
I  E.p.  omits the next ten lines,  continuing thus:  • And  the same  may 
be said of the other senses.  So that the soul that has denied.  etc: 
a  ['  Blank board':  Sp., tabla  rasa;  Lat., tabula rasa.] 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  III 
23 
4.  Wherefore,  if the soul  rejects  and  denies  that which  it 
can  receive  through  the  senses,  we  can  quite  well  say  that 
it  remains,  as  it  were,  dark  and  empty;  since,  as  appears 
from  what has  been said,  no light can enter it,  in the course 
of nature,  by  any  other  means  of illumination  than  those 
aforementioned.
l 
For,  although it is  true that the soul  can-
not  help  hearing  and  ~     i n g   and  smdling  and  tasting  and 
touching,  this  is  of no  import,  nor,  if the  soul  denies  and 
rejects  the  object,  is  it hindered  more  than  if it saw  it  not, 
heard it not,  etc.  Just so  a  man who desires to shut his  eyes 
will  remain  in  darkness,  like
2 
the  blind  man  who  has  not 
the  faculty  of sight.  And  to  this  purpose  David  says  these 
words:  Pauper sum  ego,  et  in  lahorihus  a juventute  mea.
3 
Which 
signifies:  I  am  poor  and  in  labours  from  my  youth.  He 
calls  himself poor,  although  it is  clear that he  was  rich,  be-
cause  his  will  was  not  set  upon  riches,  and  thus  it  was  as 
though he were really poor.  But if he had been really poor 
and had not been so in his will, he would not have been truly 
poor,  for  his  soul,  as  far  as  its  desire  was  concerned,  would 
have  been  rich  and  replete.  For  this  reason  we  call  this 
detachment  the  night  of the  soul,  for  we  are  not  treating 
here  of the  lack  of things,  since  this  implies  no detachment 
on the part of the soul if it has a  desire for them;  but we are 
treating of the detachment from them of the taste and desire, 
for  it  is  this  that  leaves  the  soul  free  and  void  of  them, 
although it may have  them;  for  it is  not the things  of this 
world  that  either  occupy  the  soul  or  cause  it  harm,  since 
they  enter  it  not,  but  rather  the  will  and  desire  for  them, 
for  it is  these  that dwell  within it. 
5.  This  first  kind  of  night,  as  we  shall  say  here-
after,  belongs  to  the  soul  according  to  its  sensual  part,' 
which  is  one  of  the  two  parts,  whereof  we  spoke  above, 
through  which  the  soul  must  pass  in  order  to  attain  to 
union. 
6 
6.  Let us  now  say how  meet it is  for  the  soul  to go  forth 
from its house into this dark night of sense,  in order to travel 
to union with  God. 
1  E.p.  omits:  • than those aforementioned: 
•  E.p. has' as much as • for' like.' 
8  Psalm lxxxvii.  16 [A.V.  lxxxviii.  15].  E.p. omits the Latin text  and 
the words' Which signifies.' 
,  E.p.  omits the rest of  this paragraph. 
I  Only Ale.  gives:  • in order to attain to union.' 
24  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
CHAPTER  IV 
Wherein  is  declared  how  necessary  it  is for  the  soul  truly  to  pass 
through  this  dark  night  of sense,  which  is  mortification  of 
desire,  in  order  that it may journey  to  union  with God.
1 
I.  The  reason  for  which  it  is  necessary  for  the  soul,  in 
order  to  attain  to    i v i n ~   union  with  God,  to  pass  through 
this  dark  night of mortification  of the  desires  and  denial  of 
pleasures  in  all  things,  is  because  all  the  affections  which  it 
has for  creatures are pure darkness  in the  eyes  of God,  and, 
when the soul is clothed in these affections, it has no capacity 
for  being enlightened  and possessed  by the pure and simple 
light  of  God,2 if it  cast  them  not  first  from  it;  for  light 
cannot  agree  with  darkness;  since,  as  S.  John  says: 
Tenebr(JJ  eam  non  comprehenderunt.
3 
That  is:  The  darkness 
could  not receive  the light. 
2.  The reason  is  that two  contraries  (even  as  philosophy 
teaches us)  cannot coexist in one person;  and that darkness, 
which is  affection for  the creatures, and light, which is  God, 
are contrary to  each  other,  and  have no  likeness  or accord 
between  one  another,  even  as  S.  Paul  explained  to  the 
Corinthians,  saying:  QU(JJ  conventio  luci  ad tenebras?'  That is 
to say:  What communion can  there  be  between  light  and 
darkness?  Hence it is  that the light of Divine union cannot 
dwell  in the soul if these  affections  first  flee  not away  from 
it. 
3.  In order that  we  may  the  better  prove what has been 
said,  it must  be  known  that  the  affection  and  attachment 
which  the  soul  has  for  creatures  renders  the  soul  like  to 
these  creatures;  and  the  greater is  its  affection,  the  closer 
is  the equality  and  likeness  between  them;  for  love creates 
a likeness  between that which loves and that which is  loved. 
For  which  reason  David,  speaking  of those  who  set  their 
affections  upon  idols,  said  thus:  Similes  illis fiant  qui faciunt 
ea:  et  omnes  qui confidunt  in  eis.
5 
Which signifies:  Let them 
that set  their heart upon  them be like  to  them.  And thus, 
1  A  adds:  • This  is  proved  by  comparisons  of  passages  and  figures 
from  Sacred Scripture, etc.' 
I  E.p.:  • for  being possessed in the pure and simple light of God.' 
a  S.  John  i,  5.  Neither this  nor  any of  the  other  Latin  texts  in  this 
chapter is fOllnd  in e.p. 
•  2  Corinthians vi,  14.  I  Psalm cxiv,  8  [A.V.  cxv,  8]. 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  IV 
25 
he that loves  a  creature  becomes  as  low  as  is  t   ~ t   creature, 
and, in some ways,  lower;  for love not only makes the lover 
equal  to  the object  of his  love,  but even  subjects  him  to it. 
Wherefore  in  the  same  way  it  comes  to  pass  that  the  soul 
that  loves  anything  else
l 
becomes  incapable  of pure  union 
with  God  and  transformation  in  Him.  For  the  low  estate 
of the creature is  much  less  capable of union  with  the high 
estate  of the  Creator  than  is  darkness  with  light.  For  all 
things  of  earth  and  heaven,  compared  with  God,  are 
nothing,  as Jeremiah  says  in  these  words:  Aspexi  tmam,  et 
ecce  vacua erat,  et nihil;  et c(Elos,  et non erat lux in eis.1  I  beheld 
the earth, he says,  and it was void, and it was nothing;  and 
the heavens,  and saw that they had no light.  In saying that 
he beheld the earth void, he means that all its creatures were 
notbi"ng,  and  that the earth was  nothing likewise.  And,  in 
saying that he beheld  the heavens and saw no light in them, 
he  says  that  all  the  luminaries  of heaven,  compared  with 
God, are pure darkness.  So that in this sense all the creatures 
are nothing;  and their affections,  we  may say,  are less  than 
nothing,  since  they are an impediment to transformation  in 
God  and  the  loss  thereof,  even  as  darkness  is  not  only 
nothing  but less  than  nothing,  since it is  loss  of light.  And 
even  as  he that is  in darkness  comprehends  not the light,  so 
the soul that sets its affections upon
3 
creatures will be  unable 
to comprehend God;  and, until it be purged, it will  neither 
be able to possess Him here below, through pure transforma-
tion  of love,  nor  yonder  in  clear  vision.  And,  for  greater 
clarity,  we  will  now speak in greater detail. 
4.  All  the  being  of  creation,  then,  compared  with  the 
infinite Being of God, is nothing.  And therefore the soul that 
sets  its  affections  upon  the  being  of  creation  is  likewise 
nothing  in  the  eyes  of God,  and  less  than  nothing;  for,  as 
we  have said,  love  makes  equality and similitude,  and even 
sets  the  lover  below  the  object  of his  love.  And  therefore 
such  a  soul  will  in  no  wise  be  able  to  attain  to  union  with 
the infinite Being of God;  for that which  is  not can have no 
agreement with  that which is.  And,  coming down in detail 
to  certain  examples,4  all  the  beauty  of the  creatures,  com-
pared  with  the  infinite  beauty  of  God,  is  the  height  of 
1  The  editions  add,  for  a  better  understanding  of  the  phrase,  • apart 
from  God.' 
2  Jeremiah iv,  2].  3  A,  B, e.p.:  • that has affection for: 
4  The words' And  ... examples' are found  in Ale.  only. 
26  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
deformity,l  even  as  Solomon  says  in  the  Proverbs:  Fallax 
gratia,  et  van a est pulchritudo. 2  Favour is  deceitful  and beauty 
is  vain.  And  thus  the soul  that is  affectioned  to the beauty 
of any  creature is  as  the  height  of deformity3  in  the  eyes  of 
God.  And therefore this soul that is deformed will  be unable 
to  become  transformed  in  beauty,  which  is  God,  since 
deformity  cannot  attain  to  beauty;  and  all  the  grace  and 
beauty  of the  creatures,  compared  with  the  grace  of God, 
is  the height of misery'  and of unattractiveness.  Wherefore 
the  soul  that  is  ravished  by  the  graces  and  beauties  of the 
creatures  has  only  supreme
5 
misery  and  unattractiveness  in 
the  eyes  of God;  and  thus it cannot be capable of the infi-
nite  grace  and  loveliness  of God;  for  that  which  has  no 
grace is  far removed from  that which  is  infinitely  gracious; 
and  all  the  goodness  of the  creatures  of the  world,  in  com-
parison with the infinite goodness  of God,  may be described 
as  wickedness.  For there is  naught good,  save  only  God.
8 
And therefore the soul that sets its heart upon the good things 
of the world is supremely7  evil in  the eyes of God.  And, even 
as  wickedness  comprehends  not  goodness,  even  so  such  a 
soul cannot be united  with  God, II  Who is  supreme goodness. 
All  the  wisdom  of the  world  and  human  ability,  compared 
with  the  infinite  wisdom  of  God,  are  pure  and  supreme 
ignorance,9  even  as  Saint  Paul  writes  ad  Corintkios,  saying: 
Sapientia  hujus mundi  stuliilia  est apud  Deum.
10 
The wisdom  of 
this  world  is  foolishness  in  the eyes  of God. 
5.  Wherefore any soul  that makes account of all  its know-
ledge and ability in order to  come to  union with the wisdom 
of God  is  supremely  ignorant  in  the  eyes  of God  and  wiII 
remain  far  removed  from  that  wisdom;  for  ignorance 
knows  not  what  wisdom  is,  even  as  S.  Paul  says  that  this 
1  (The  words  often  translated' deformity.'  '  deformed.'  or  'vileness: 
,  vile.'  are  the ordinary  contrarics  of  '  beauty.'  '  heautiful:  and  might  be 
rendered,  more literally  but lcss  elegantly,  .  ugliness.'  '  ugly.'] 
2  Proverbs  xxxi,  30. 
3  E.p.  softens this  phrase  to:  'has its share of deformity.' 
•  [For  'grace  .  .  .  misery'  the  Spanish  has  'gracia  .  .  .  dcsgracia.' 
The  latter word,  however,  docs  not,  as  might  be  supposed,  correspond  to 
English  '  disgrace. '] 
5  E.p.  omits' supreme';  the  Spanish  word  [having  a  more  literally 
superlative forcc than the EnglishJ can hardly be applied, save in a restricted 
sense.  to  what is  finite.  6  S.  Luke xviii,  19. 
7  This again is omitted  from  c.p. 
I  Lp. adds:  'in perfect  union.' 
B  Ii  abbrcviates  g n ~   t l y   here  and  then  omits  the  remainder  of  the 
chapll·r.  I"  1  Corinthians iii,  IY. 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  IV 
wisdom  seems  foolishness  to  God;  since,  in  the  eyes  of 
God,l  those  who  consider  themselves  to  be  persons  with  a 
certain  amount  of knowledge  are  very  ignorant,  since  the 
Apostle,  writing to  the Romans, says of them:  Dicentes enim 
se  esse  sapientes,  stulti facti  sunt.  That is:  Considering them-
selves  to  be  wise,  they  became  foolish. II  And  those  alone 
gain  the  wisdom  of  God  who  are  like  ignorant  children, 
and,  laying aside  their  knowledge,  walk  in  His  service  with 
love.  This  manner  of wisdom  S.  Paul  taught  likewise  ad 
Corintkios:  Si  quis  videtur  inter  vos  sapiens  esse  in  hoc  stEculo, 
stullus fiat  ut  sit  sapiens.  Sapientia  enim  hujus  mundi  stultitia  est 
apud  Deum.
3 
That  is:  If any  among  you  seemeth  to  be 
wise,  let him become ignorant that he may be wise;  for  the 
wisdom  of this  world  is  foolishness  with  respect  to  God. 
So  that,  in order to come to  union  with  the wisdom of God, 
the soul has  to proceed  rather by unknowing than by know-
ing;  and  all  the  dominion  and  liberty  of the  world,  com-
pared  with  the liberty  and  dominion  of the spirit of God,  is 
the  most  abject· slavery,  affliction  and  captivity. 
6.  Wherefore  the  soul  that  is  enamoured  of prelacy,5  or 
of any  other  such  office,  and  longs  for  liberty  of desire,  is 
considered and treated, in the sight of God, not as  a son,  but 
as a  base slave and captive,
6 
since it has  not  been  willing  to 
accept  His  holy  doctrine,  wherein  He  teaches  us  that  he 
who  would  be  greater  must  be  less,  and  he  who  would  be 
less  must  be  greater. 
7 
And  therefore  such  a  soul  will  be 
unable  to  attain  to  that  true  liberty  of spirit  which  is  en-
compassed  in  His  Divine  union.  For  slavery  can  have  no 
part with liberty;  and liberty cannot dwell  in  a  heart that 
is  subject  to  desires,  for  this  is  the  heart of a  slave;  but  it 
dwells  in  the  free  man,  because  he  has  the  heart  of a  son. 
lt was for this reason that Sarah bade her husband Abraham 
cast out the  bondwoman and her son, saying that the son of 
the  bondwoman  should  not  be  heir  with  the  son  of  the 
free  woman. 
8 
7.  And all the delights  and pleasures of the will  in all  the 
things  of the  world,  in  comparison  with  all  those  delights 
1  E.p.  abbreviates:  • knows  not  what  wisdom  is,  and.  in  the  eyes  of 
God ... .'  I  Romans i,  22.  I  1 Corinthians iii,  18-19. 
,  [Lit.,  • is supreme.'] 
•  [The word is applicable to any kind of preferential position.] 
•  E.p.  reads:  'not as a  dear son,  but as a  base person, a  captive of its 
passions,' etc. 
7  E.p.:  '  ... doctrine which teaches us that he who  wO\lld  be greater 
must be less:  I  Genesis  xxi,  10, 
28  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
which  are  God,  are  supreme  affliction,  torment  and  bitter-
ness.  And thus he that sets his heart upon them is considered, 
in the sight of God, as  worthy of supreme affliction,  torment 
and bitterness;  and thus  he will  be unable to attain to the 
delights  of  the  embrace  of  union  with  God,  since  he  (is 
worthy of affliction and bitterness. 
1 
All the wealth and glory 
of  all the creatures, in comparison with the wealth  which  is 
God,  is  supreme  poverty and wretchedness.  Thus the soul 
that  loves  and  possesses  creature  wealth  is  supremely  poor 
and  wretched  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  for  this  reason 
will be unable to attain to that wealth and glory which is  the 
state of transformation in God;2  since  that which  is  miser-
able  and  poor is  supremely far  removed  from  that which  is 
supremely rich and glorious. 
8.  And therefore Divine Wisdom, grieving for such as these, 
who make themselves vile,  low,  miserable and poor,  because 
they love this  world which seems to them so  rich and beauti-
ful,  addresses  an  exclamation  to  them  in  the  Proverbs, 
saying:  0  viri,  ad  vos  clamito,  et  vox  mea  ad filios  hominum. 
Intelligite,  parvuli,  astutiam,  et  insipientes,  animadvertite.  Audite 
quia de rebus magnis locutura sum.  And farther on he continues  : 
Mecum  sunt  divitite,  et  gloria,  opes  superbte  et  justitia.  Melior 
est  fructus  meus  auro,  et  lapide  pretioso,  et  genimina  mea  argenta 
electo.  In  viis justitidJ  ambulo,  in  medio  semitarumjudicii, ut ditem 
diligentes  me,  et  thesauros  eorum  repleam.
3 
Which  signifies: 
Unto you, 0  men,  I  call, and my voice is  to the sons of men. 
Attend,4  little  ones,  to  subtlety  and  sagacity;  ye  that  are 
foolish,  pay heed.  Hear, for  I  have to speak of great things. 
With me are riches and glory,  high riches  and righteousness. 
Better is the fruit that ye will find in me than gold and precious 
stones;  and  my  generation-namely,  that  which  ye  will 
engender  of me  in  your  souls-is  better  than  choice  silver. 
I  go  in  the  ways  of righteousness,  in the  midst  of the  paths 
of judgement,  that I  may enrich those that love  me  and fillS 
their  treasures  perfectly.-Herein Divine  Wisdom  speaks  to 
all  those  that set  their  hearts  and  affections  upon  anything 
of the  world,  according  as  we  have  already  said.  A.nd  she 
1  E.p.  omits:  'since  ... bitterness: 
2  The remainder of the paragraph is found  only in  A  and  e.p. 
3  Proverbs viii,  4-6,18-21. 
,  So  A,  Ale.  E.p.:  'Understand.'  The  other  authorities  omit  this 
passage. 
&  A,  Ale.  both have' fulfil'  [cumplirJ  but in  the  archaic  Spanish sense 
of' swell,' which is the reading of e.p. and later editions.  [For the rendering 
of the text cf.  A. V.:  'I will  fill  their treasures.'] 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  V 
29 
calls  them '  little ones,' because they make themselves like to 
that which they love,  which is  little.  And therefore she tells 
them to be wise  and to take note that she is  treating of great 
things  and  not  of  things  that  are  little  like  themselves. 
That the great  riches  and the glory  that ·they love  are  with 
her  and  in  her,  and  not  where  they  think.  And  that high 
riches  and  justice  dwell  in  her;  for,  although  they  think 
the  things  of this  world  to  be  such,  she  tells  them  to  take 
note  that  her  things  are  better,  saying  that  the  fruit  that 
they will  find  in them will  be  better for  them than gold  and 
precious stones;  and that that which  she  engenders in souls 
is  better than the choice silver which they love;  by which  is 
understood any kind of affection that can be possessed in this 
life. 
CHAPTER  V 
Wherein  the  aforementioned  subject  is  treated  and  continued,  and 
it  is  shown  by  passages  and figures  from  Holy  Scripture  how 
necessary  it  is  for  the  soul  to  journey  to  God  through  this 
dark  night  of the  mortification  of desire  in  all things. 
I.  From what has been said it may be seen to some extent 
how great a  distance  there is  between  all  that the creatures 
are in themselves and that which God is in Himself, and how 
souls 
1 
that  set  their  affections  upon  any  of these  creatures 
are  at  an  equal  distance  from  God;  for,  as  we  have  said, 
love  produces  equality  and  similarity.  This  distance  was 
clearly  realized  by  S.  Augustine,  who  said  in  the Soliloquies, 
speaking  with  God:
2 
Miserable  man  that I  am,  when  will 
my littleness  and imperfection agree  with Thy uprightness ? 
Thou  indeed  art good,  and  I  am  evil;  Thou  art  merciful, 
and  I  am unholy;  Thou art  holy,  I  am  miserable;  Thou 
art just,  I  am unjust;  Thou  art light,  I  am blind;  Thou, 
life,  I,  death;  Thou,  medicine,  I,  sick;  Thou,  supreme 
truth,  I,  utter vanity. 
3 
All  this is  said by this  Saint.4 
2.  Wherefore, it is  supreme ignorance for the soul to think 
that it will  be able  to  pass  to  this  high  estate  of union  with 
1  E.p.:  '\Ve have already spoken of the distance that there is between 
the creatures and  God,  and  how  souls,' etc. 
2  A,  B  omit:  'speaking with God.' 
3  A,  B,  C:  'universal vanity.'  D:  'supreme vanity.' 
4  Soliloq.,  chap. ii (:\Iigne:  Patr. lat.,  vol.  xl,  p.  866).  E.p.  adds:  • The 
which this Saint says co.neerning the inclination of man for  the creatures.' 
30  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
God if first  it void  not the  desire  of all  things,  natural  and 
supernatural,  which  may  hinder  it,  according  as  we  shall 
declare hereafter ;1  for there is  the greatest possible distance 
between  these  things  and  that  which  comes  to  pass  in  this 
estate,  which  is  naught  else  than  transformation  in  God. 
For this  reason  Our Lord,  when  instructing us  in this  way, 
said  through S.  Luke:  Qui  non  renuntiat  omnibus  qUIB  possidet, 
non  potest  meus  esse  discipulus.
2 
This  signifies:  He  that  re-
nounCes not all things that he possesses with his will cannot be 
My disciple.  And  this is  evident;  for  the doctrine that the 
Son  of God  came  to  teach 
3 
was  contempt for  all  things,  so 
that a  man  might  receive  as  a  reward  the  spirit  of God  in 
himself.  For,  as  long  as  the  soul  rejects  not  all  things,  it 
has  no  capacity  to  receive  the  spirit  of God in  pure  trans-
formation. 
3.  Of this  we  have  a  figure  in  Exodus,  wherein  we  read 
that  God'  gave  not  the  children  of Israel  the  food  from 
Heaven,  which  was  manna,  until  the  flour  which  they had 
brought  from  Egypt  failed  them.  By  this  is  signified  that 
first  of all  it is  meet  to  renounce  all  things,  for  this  angels' 
food  is  not fitting  for  the  palate that  would  find  delight in 
the  food  of men.  And  not  only  does  the  soul  become  in-
capable  of receiving  the  Divine  Spirit  when  it  stays  and 
pastures  on  other strange  pleasures,  but those  souls  greatly 
offend  the Divine  Majesty who desire spiritual food  and are 
not content with God alone,  but desire rather to intermingle 
desire  and  affection  for  other  things.  This  can  likewise  be 
seen in this  same  book  of Holy Scripture,5 wherein it is  said 
that, not content with that simplest offood, they desired and 
craved  fleshly  food.'  And  that  Our  Lord  was  grievously 
offended  that they should  desire  to  intermingle  a  food  that 
1  So  Ale.  The  other  authorities  have  merely:  • which  may  pertain 
to it: and e.p.  adds to this:  'through self-love:  Even when softened by 
Diego  de  Jesus  this  phrase of the Saint did  not escape denunciation,  and 
it was the first of the' propositions' condemned in his writings  (cf.  p. lxiv, 
above).  It was defended by P. Basilio Ponce de Le6n in his Reply (p.lxv), 
and  more  extensively  by  P.  Nicolas  de  Jesus  Maria  (Elucidatio,  Pt.  II, 
Chap.  i).  In reality little defence  is  needed  other than  that contained in 
the  last chapters  of the  Ascent  of Mount  Carmel,  which  clearly  show  the 
harm  caused  by  supernatural  favours,  when  these  are  abused,  to  the 
m..lmory,  the understanding and the will.  Who,  after all,  can doubt that 
we  may abuse' things  supernatural' and  by such abuse hinder the soul's 
union  with God? 
I  S.  Luke xiv,  33.  8  A,  e.p.:  • to teach the world.' 
•  E.p.:  'that God's  Majesty.' 
6  E.p.  alters  this  to:  'in the  same  Scripture:  [It does  not,  in fact, 
occur in the sa1lle  book.]  •  Numbers xi,  4. 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  V 
was  so  base and so  coarse with one that was  so  noble  1  and 
so  simple;  which,  though  it  was  so,  had  within  itself the 
sweetness  and  substance
2 
of  all  foods.  Wherefore,  while 
they yet had the morsels  in their mouths,  as  David says  like-
wise:  Ira  Dei  descendit  super  eos.
3 
The  wrath  of God  came 
down  upon them,  sending fire  from  Heaven and consuming 
many  thousands  of them;  for  God  held  it  an  unworthy 
thing that they should have a  desire  for  other food  when He 
had given  them food  from  Heaven. 
4.  Oh,  did  spiritual  persons  but  know  how  much  good 
and  what  great  abundance  of spirit  they  lose  through  not 
seeking  to  raise  up  their  desires  above  childish  things,  and 
how  they  would  find  in this  simple  spiritual food  the sweet-
ness  of all  things,  if they  desired  not  to  taste  those  things  ! 
But  such  food  gives  them  no  pleasure,  for  the  reason  why 
the children of Israel  received  not the sweetness  of all  foods 
that  was  contained  in  the  manna  was  that  they  would  not 
reserve their desire for it alone.  So that they failed  to find in 
the  manna  all  the  sweetness  and  strength  that  they  could 
wish,  not  because  it  was  not  contained  in  the  manna,  but 
because  they  desired  some  other  thing.  Thus  he  that will 
love  some  other  thing  together
4 
with  God  of a  certainty 
makes  little  account  of God,  for  he  weighs  in  the  balance 
against God  that which,  as  we  have said,  is  far  distant from 
God. 
5.  It is  well  known  by experience  that, when the will  of a 
man  is  affectioned  to  one  thing,  he  prizes  it  more  than any 
other;  although  some  other thing  may  be  much  better,  he 
takes less  pleasure in it.  And if he wishes  to  take pleasure in 
both,  he  is  bound  to  do  injustice  to  the  more  important, 
since he makes an equality between them.
s 
Now,  inasmuch 
as  there is  naught  that equals God,  the  soul  that loves  some 
other thing  together  with  Him,  or clings  to  it,  wrongs  Him 
greatly.  And if this is  so,  what would  it be doing if it loved 
anything more than  God? 
6.  It is  this,  too, that was denoted by the command of God 
to  Moses
6 
that  he  should  ascend  the  Mount  to  speak  with 
1  [Lit.,  • so  high.']  2  E.p.  omits:  • and  substance.' 
3  Psalm lxxvii,  31  [A.V.  lxxviii,  31). 
a  E.p.  omits' together.' 
,  E.}>.  substitutes  for  the last clause:  .  because  of the  unjust  equality 
that  he  makes  between  them.' 
8  A,  B:  . This  likewise  is that  which  God  intended to  teach  when  He 
commanded  :;\loses,'  etc. 
32    S C E ~ T   OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
Him.:  He  commanded  him  not  only  to  ascend  it  alone, 
leaving  the  children  of Israel  below,  but not  even  to allow 
the beasts to feed over against the Mount.
1 
By this He signi-
fied  that the soul  that is  to ascend  this  mount of perfection, 
to  commune  with  God,  must  not  only  renounce  all  things 
and leave them below, 
2 
but must not even allow the desires, 
which  are  the· beasts,  to  pasture  over  against  this  mount-
that is, upon other things which are not purely God, in Whom 
every desire ceases:  that is,  in the state of perfection.  Thus 
he  that journeys  on  the  road  and  makes  the  ascent  to  God 
must  needs  be  habitually  careful  to  quell  and  mortify  the 
desires;  and  the  greater  the  speed  wherewith  a  soul  does 
this, the sooner will it reach the end of its journey.  But until 
these  be quelled,  it cannot reach  the end; however  much it 
practise the virtues,  since it is  unable to attain to perfection 
in  them;  for  this  perfection  consists.  in  voiding  and 
stripping  and  purifying  the  soul  of every  desire.  Of this 
we  have  another very3  striking figure  in  Genesis,  where  we 
read  that,  when  the  patriarch  Jacob  desired  to  ascend 
Mount Bethel, in order to build an altar there to God whereon 
he  should  offer  Him'  sacrifice,  he  first  commanded  all  his 
people  to  do  three  things:  one  was  that  they  should  cast 
away  from  them  all  strange  gods;  the  second,  that  they 
should purify themselves  ;  the third, that they should change 
their garments. 
5 
7.  By  these  three  things  it is  signified  that any  soul  that 
would  ascend  this  mount in order to  make  of itself an altar 
whereon  it may offer  to  God  the sacrifice  of pure love  and 
praise  and  pure  reverence,  must,  before  ascending  to  the 
summit  of the  mount,  have  done  these  three  things  afore-
mentioned  perfectly.  First,  it  must  have  cast  away  all 
strange  gods-namely,  all  strange  affections  and  attach-
ments;  secondly,  it  must  be  purified  from  the  remnants 
which  the  desires  aforementioned  have  left  in  the  soul,  by 
means  of the  dark  night  of sense  whereof we  are  speaking, 
habitually6  denying them and repenting itself;  and thirdly, 
in  order  to  reach  the  summit  of this  high  mount,  it  must 
have  changed  its  garments,  which,  through  its  observance 
1  E.p.:  • within sight of the Mount.'  A,  B:  • near the Mount.' 
a  E.p.  omits:  'and leave them below.' 
I  E.p. omits' very.' 
,  The  codices  have:  • whereon  he  offered  Him.'  The editions change 
tbis  to:  • whereon to offer  Him.'  5  Genesis  xxxv,  2. 
•  A,  B  have' in due order' for' habitually: 
BOOK  1.  CHAPTER  V 
33 
of the  first  two  things,  God  will  change  for  it,  from  old  to 
new,  by giving the soul a  new understanding of God in God, 
the old 1  human understanding being cast aside;  and a new 
love of God in God,  the will  being now detached from all its 
old desires and human pleasures, and the soul being brought 
into  a  new  state  of knowledge  and  profound  delight,
2 
all 
other old  images  and  forms  of knowledge  being  cast  away, 
and  all  that  belongs  to  the  old  man,  which  is  the  aptitude 
of the natural self,  being quelled,  and the  soul  being clothed 
with a  new supernatural aptitude according to all  its  facul-
ties.  So  that  its  operation,  which  before  was  human,  has 
become Divine,  which is  that that is  attained in  the state of 
union,  wherein  the soul  becomes  naught  else  than  an  altar 
whereon God is  adored in praise and love,  and God alone is 
upon  it.  For  this  cause  God  commanded  that  the  altar 
whereon  the Ark  of the Covenant was  to  be laid
3 
should  be 
hollow  within;4  so  that  the  soul  may  understand  how 
completely  empty of all  things  God  desires  it  to  be,  that  it 
may be an altar worthy of the presence of His  Majesty.  On 
this  altar it was  likewise  forbidden  that there should  be any 
strange  fire,  or  that  its  own  fire  should  ever  fail;  and  so 
essential was  this that, because Nadab and Abihu, who were 
the  sons  of the  High  Priest Aaron,  offered  strange fire  upon 
His altar, Our Lord was wroth and slew them there before the 
altar. 
5 
By  this  we  are  to  understand  that  the  love  of God 
must never fail  in the soul,  so  that the soul  may be a  worthy 
altar,  and also  that no  other love  must  be  mingled  with  it. 
8.  God  permits  not  that  any  other  thing  should  dwell 
together with Him.  Wherefore we may read in the First Book 
of the  Kings  that,  when  the  Philistines  put  the  Ark  of the 
Covenant into  the temple where  their idol was,  the idol  was 
cast  down  upon  the  ground  at the  dawn  of each  day,6  and 
broken to pieces;  and He only permits and wills  that there 
should  be  one  desire  where  He is,  which  is  to  keep  the  law 
of  God  perfectly,  and  to  bear  upon  oneself  the  Cross  of 
Christ.  And thus  naught else is  said in the Divine Scripture 
1  A  rcads:  'the new.' 
2  [More literally:  • and  abysmal delight. 'J  Ale. 'omits  these words  by 
a  copyist's ovcrsight.  A,  B,  C give  thcm;  D  has:  'and habitual delight.' 
The Saint certainly wrote abisal,  a  word  which had passed out of usc  when 
the editio  princeps  was made,  in  IGIG. 
3  E.p.:  • whereon sacrifices were to be offered.'  The reading is ncarer 
to Scripture than  that of  the codices.  4  Exodus  xxvii,  8. 
a  Leviticus  x,  1-2.  E.}}.  rcads:  'before the sa.me  alta.r.' 
8  A,  B:  'of each  mllrIling.' 
34  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
to  have  been  commanded  by  God  to  be  put  in  the  Ark, 
where  the  manna  was,  save  the  book  of the  Law,l and  the 
rod  of Moses,  which  signifies  the  Cross. 
2 
For the soul  that 
aspires  to  naught  else  than  the  keeping  of the  law  of the 
Lord perfectly and the bearing of the Cross of Christ will  be 
a  true  Ark,  containing  within  itself the  true  manna,  which 
is  God,3  when  that  soul  attains  to  a  perfect  possession  in 
itself  of  this  law  and  this  rod,  without  any  other  thing 
soever. 
CHAPTER  VI 
Wherein  are  treated  two  serious  evils  caused  in  the  soul  by  the 
desires,  the  one  evil being privative and the other positive." 
I.  In  order  that  what  we  have  said  may  be  the  more 
clearly and fully  understood, it will  be well here to set down 
and  state  how
5 
these  desires  are  the  cause  of two  serious 
evils  in the soul:  the one is  that they deprive it of the spirit 
of God,  and the other is  that the soul  wherein  they dwell  is 
wearied, tormented, darkened, defiled and weakened, accord-
ing to that which is said in Jeremiah, Chapter II :  Duo  mala 
fecit  Populus  meus:  dereliquerunt  fontem  aqUfB  vivfB,  et  foderunt 
sibi  cistemas,  dissipatas,  qUfB  continere  non  valent  aquas.  Which 
signifies:  They have forsaken  Me,  Who am the fountain  of 
living water, and they have hewed them out broken cisterns, 
that  can  hold  no  water. 
6 
Those  two  evils-namely,  the 
privative and the positive-may be caused by any disordered 
act of the desire.  And, first of all, speaking of the privative, 
it is  clear?  from  the  very  fact  that  the  soul  becomes  affec-
tioned  to  a  thing  which  comes  under the  head  of creature, 
that the more  the desire for  that thing fills  the soul,
8 
the less 
capacity has  the soul  for  God;  inasmuch  as  two  contraries, 
a.ccording to the philosophers, cannot coexist in one person ;9 
1  Deuteronomy xxxi,  26.  I  Numbers xvii,  10. 
a  E.p.  ends the chapter here. 
t  E.p.  adds:  'This is proved  by passages from  Scripture.' 
6  E.p.:  'it will be well  here  to state how.'  •  Jeremiah ii,  13. 
7  So  Alc.-A, B,  e.p.  read:  'These two evils  are caused  by one act of 
the desire.  For it is  clear,' etc. 
•  [Lit., '  the greater the bulk that that desire has in the soul.'] 
•  E.p.  modifies:  ' ... it has  for  God;  for,  as  we  said in Chapter iv, 
two contraries cannot coexist in one  person;  and  affection  for  God  and 
affection for creatures are contraries and so cannot coexist in  one  person.' 
A,  B  omit  • according to  the  philosophers'  and  • as  we  said in the fourth 
chapter.' 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  VI 
35 
and  further,  since,  as  we  said  in  the  fourth  chapter, 
affection  for  God  and  affection  for  creatures  are  con-
traries,  and  thus  there  cannot  be  contained  within  one 
will  affection  for  creatures  and  affection  for  God.!  For 
what  has  the  creature  to  do  with  the  Creator?  \Vhat  has 
sensual  to  do  with  spiritual?  Visibk  with  invisible? 
Temporal  with  eternal?  Food  that  is'  heavenly,  spiritual 
and  pure with  food  that is  of sense  alone  and  is  purely sen-
sual?  Christlike  detachment  with  attachment  to  aught 
soever' ? 
2.  Wherefore,.  as  in  natural  generation  no  form  can  be 
introduced  unless  the  preceding,  contrary  form  is  first 
expelled  from  the  subject,  which  form,  while  present,  is  an 
impediment to  the other by reason  of the contrariety which 
the two have between each other;  even so, for as long as the 
soul is subjected to the sensual spirit,2 the spirit which is  pure 
and  spiritual  cannot  enter  it.  Wherefore  our  Saviour  said 
through  S.  Matthew:  Non  est  bonum  sumere panem filiorum,  et 
mittere canibus. 3  That is:  It is not meet to take the children's 
bread  and  to  cast  it  to  dogs.  And  elsewhere,  too,  he  says 
through  the  same  Evangelist':  Nolite  sanctum  dare  canibus.
5 
Which signifies:  Give not that which is  holy unto the dogs. 
In  these  passages  Our Lord  compares  those who  deny  their 
creature  desires,  and  prepare  themselves  to  receive  the 
spirit  of God  in  purity,  to  the  children  of God;  and  those 
who  would  have  their  desire  feed  upon  the  creatures,  to 
dogs.  For it is  given  to  children  to  eat with  their  father  at 
table and from  his  dish,  which is  to feed  upon his  spirit,  and 
to dogs  are given  the crumbs which fall  from  the table. 
3.  From this  we are to learn that all  creatures are crumbs 
that  have fallen  from  the  table of God.  Wherefore  he  that 
feeds  ever  upon
8 
the  creatures  is  rightly  called  a  dog,  and 
therefore  the bread is  taken from  the children,  because they 
desire  not to  rise  from  feeding  upon  the  crumbs,  which  are 
the  creatures,  to  the  table  of the  uncreated  spirit  of their 
Father.  Therefore,  like  dogs,  they are ever hungering,  and 
justly  so,  because  the  crumbs  serve  to  whet  their  appetite 
rather than to satisfy  their hunger.  And thus David says  of 
them:  Famen  patientuT  ut  canes,  et  circuibunt  civitatem.  Si  vero 
1  Cf.  p.  34.  n.  9. 
a  S.  Matthew  xv,  26. 
2  E.p.:  • sensual and a.nimal  spirit.' 
,  So  Ale.  A,  B:  Et alibi.  E.p.:  • and elsewhere.' 
I  S.  Ma.tthew  vii,  6.  •  [Lit.,  ' he that goes feeding  upon.'] 
H 
36  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
non fueTint  saturati,  et  murmurabunt.
1 
Which  signifies:  They 
shall  suffer  hunger  like  dogs  and  shall  go  round  about  the 
city,  and,  when  they  see  not  themselves  satisfied,  they shall 
murmur.  For  this  is  the  property  of one  that  has  desires, 
that  he  is  ever  discontented  and  dissatisfied,  like  one  that 
suffers  hunger;  for  what  has  the  hunger  which  all  the 
creatures suffer to do with the fullness  which  is caused by the 
spirit  of  God?  Wherefore  this  fullness  that  is  uncreated
2 
cannot enter the soul, if there  be  not first  cast out that other 
created  hunger which  belongs  to  the desire of the soul; for, 
as  we  have said,
3 
two  contraries cannot dwell  in one person, 
the  which  contraries  in  this  case'  are  hunger  and  fullness. 
4.  From  what  has  been  said  it  will  be  seen  how  much 
greater is  the work ofGod
5 
in the cleansing and the purging 
of a  soul  from  these contrarieties than in the creating of that 
soul  from  nothing.  For  these  contrarieties,  these  contrary 
desires  and  affections,  are  more completely  opposed  to  God 
and  offer  Him  greater  resistance  than  does  nothingness; 6 
for  nothingness  resists  not  at all. 
7 
And let  this  suffice  with 
respect  to  the first  of the important evils  which  are inflicted 
upon the soul  by the desires-namely, resistance to  the spirit 
of God-since much has been said of this above. 
5.  Let us  now speak of the second effect which  they cause 
in  the  soul.  This  is  of  many  kinds,  because  the  desires 
weary  the soul  and torment and darken it,  and defile  it and 
weaken  it.  Of these  five  things  we  shall  speak  separately, 
in  their  turn. 
6.  With  regard  to  the  first,  it  is  clear  that  the  desires 
weary  and  fatigue  the  soul;  for  they  are  like  restless  and 
discontented  children,  who are ever demanding  this  or that 
from  their mother, and are never satisfied.  And  even as  one 
that digs because he covets a treasure is wearied and fatigued, 
even  so  is  the  soul  wearied  and  fatigued  in  order  to  attain 
that which its desires demand of it  ;  and although in the end 
it may attain it, it is  still  weary,  because it is  never satisfied; 
1  Psalm lviii,  15-16 [A.  V.,  liX,14-IS]. 
2  E.p.:  . this fullness  of  God.' 
a  E.p.:  '  ... cast  out from  it this  hunger  of  the  desire;  for,  as  has 
been  said,'  etc. 
•  E.p.  omits:  . in  this case.' 
6  [Lit.,  • how much more  God  does.']  E.p. adds:  • in a  certain way.' 
•  E.p.:  '  ... affections seem  to hinder  (estorbar)  God  more  than  does 
nothingness. ' 
7  E.p.:  • for nothingness resists  not  His  Majesty  at  all,  and  creature 
desire does  resist  Him.' 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  VI 
37 
for,  after all,  the cisterns which it is  digging are broken,  and 
cannot hold water to satisfy thirst.  And thus, as Isaiah says: 
Lassus  adhuc  sit it,  et  anima  ejus  vacua  est. 
1 
Which  signifies: 
His desire is  empty.  And the soul that has desires is wearied 
and fatigued;  for  it is  like  a  man that is  sick of a  fever,  who 
finds  himself no better until the fever  leaves him,  and whose 
thirst  increases  with  every  moment.  For,  as  is  said  in  the 
Book  of Job:  Cum  satiatus fuerit,  arctabitur,  tEstuabit,  et  omnis 
dolor  irruet  super  eum.
2 
Which  signifies:  \Vhen  he  has 
satisfied  his  desire,  he  will  be  the  more  oppressed  and 
straitened;  the heat of desire hath increased in his soul  and 
thus  all  grief will  fall  upon  him.  The  soul  is  wearied  and 
fatigued  by  its  desires,  because  it  is  wounded  and  moved 
and  disturbed  by them as  is  water by the winds;  in just the 
same  way  they  disturb  it,  allowing  it  not  to  rest  in  any 
place or in any thing soever.  And of such a soul says Isaiah: 
Cor  impii  quasi  mare ftrvens.
3 
The  heart  of the  wicked  man 
is  like  the sea  when it rages.  And  he  is  a  wicked  man  that 
subjects  not his  desires.  The soul  that would  fain  satisfy its 
desires  grows  wearied  and fatigued;  for  it is  like  one  that, 
being an hungered, opens his mouth that he may sate himself 
with  wind,  when,  instead  of being satisfied,  his  craving  be-
comes  greater,  for  the  wind  is  no  food  for  him.  To  this 
purpose said Jeremiah : 4  In  desiderio  animtE  SUtE  attraxit ventum 
amoris  sui. Ii  As  though  he  were  to  say:  In the  desire  of his 
will  he  snuffed  up  the  wind  of his  affection.  And  later  he 
tries  to describe the aridity wherein such a  soul remains, and 
warns it, saying:  Prohibe pedem tuum  a nuditate,  et guttur tuum  a 
siti.6  Which  signifies:  Withhold  thy  foot  (that  is,  thy 
thought)  from  detachment  and  thy  throat  from  thirst 
(that  is  to  say,  thy  will  from  the  indulgence  of the  desire 
which  causes  greater  drought)  ;7  and,  even  as  the  lover  is 
wearied  and  fatigued  upon  the  day  of his  hopes,  when  his 
attempt  has  proved  to  be  vain,  so  the  soul  is  wearied  and 
fatigued  by all  its  desires  and  by  indulgence  in  them,  since 
they all  cause it greater emptiness and hunger;  for,  as  they 
commonly say,  desire is like the fire,  which increases as wood 
1  Isaiah  xxix,  8.  The editions  supply  the  translation  of  the  first  part 
of the ~   t i n   text,  which the Saint and the codices  omitted:  'After being 
wearied  and fatigued,  he still thirsteth,' etc. 
Z  Job xx,  22.  •  Isaiah lvii,  20. 
•  E.p.:  • And  thus  Jeremiah says of such a  soul.' 
6  Jeremiah ii, 24.  •  Jeremiah  ii,  25. 
•  7  E.p.  reads' dryness' for' drought' and  omits  several  lines,  continu-
Ing:  'Desire is like the fire,'  etc. 
38  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
is  thrown  upon  it,  and  which,  when  it  has  consumed  the 
wood,  must  needs  burn away. 
7.  And desire is  in yet  worse  condition here;  for  the fire 
goes  down  when  the  wood  is  consumed,  but desire,  though 
it increases  when  fuel  is  added  to  it,  decreases  not  corres-
pondingly when the fuel is consumed;  on the contrary, instead 
of going  down, as  does  the fire  when its fuel  is  consumed,  it 
fails  from  weariness,  for  its  hunger is  increased  and its  food 
diminished.  And  of this  Isaiah  speaks,  saying:  Declinabit 
ad dexteram,  et esuriet:  et comedet ad sinistram, et non saturabitur.
1 
This signifies:  He shall turn to the right hand, and shall be 
hungry;  and he shall eat on the left hand, and shall  not be 
filled.  For  they  that  mortify  not  their  desires,  when  they 
, turn',  justly  see  the  fullness  of the  sweetness  of spirit  of 
those  who  are  at the  right  hand  of God,  which  fullness  is 
not granted to themselves;  and justly, too, when they eat on 
the  left  hand,
2 
by  which  is  meant  the  satisfaction  of their 
desire  with some  creature comfort,  they are not filled.  For, 
leaving  that  which  alone  can  satisfy,  they  feed  on  that 
which causes them greater hunger.  It is clear, then, that the 
desires  weary  and fatigue  the soul. 
CHAPTER  VII 
Wherein  is  showrl  huiii  the  desires  torment  the  soul.  This  is proved 
likewise by comparisons and quotations. 
3 
I.  The second kind of positive evil which the desires cause 
the  soul  is  in  their  tormenting  and afflicting  of it,  after  the 
manner of one who is  in torment through being bound with 
cords from  which he has  no  relief until he be freed.  And of 
these David says:  Funes peccatorum  circumplexi  Junt  me.
4 
The 
cords  of  my  sins,  which  are  my  desires,  have  constrained 
1  Isaiah ix,  20. 
I  Thus  J ~     [with' run' for' eat '].  A, B, e.p. read:  ' .... when they turn 
from  the  way  of  God  (which  is  the  right  hand)  are  justly  hungered,  for 
they merit not the fullness of the sweetness of spirit.  And justly, too, when 
they eat on the left hand,' etc.  [While agreeing with P.  Silverio that Alc. 
gives the better reading, I prefer' eat' to • run' :  it is nearer the Scriptural 
passage  and  the  two  Spanish  words,  comen  and  corren,  could  easily  be 
confused in MS.] 
a  Thus Ale.  and e.p.  A,  Bread:  • This is proved by comparisons and 
quotations from  the Sacred  Scripture.' 
•  Psalm cxviii,  61  [A. V.,  cxix,  61). 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  VII 
39 
me  round  about.  And  in  the  same  way  wherein  one 
that  lies  naked  upon  thorns  and  briars  is  tormented  and 
afflicted,  even  so  is  the  soul  tormented  and  afflicted 
when  it  rests  upon  its  desires.  For  they  take  hold  upon  it 
and  wound  it  and  distress  it  and  cause  it  pain,  even  as  do 
thorns.  Of  these  David  says  likewise:  Circumdederunt  me 
sicut  apes:  et  exarserunt  sicut  ignis  in  spinis.
1 
Which signifies: 
They  compassed  me  about  like  bees,2  wounding  me  with 
their  stings,  and  they  were  enkindled  against  me,  like  fire 
among  thorns;  for  in  the  desires,  which  are  the  thorns, 
the fire  of anguish  and torment increases.  And  even  as  the 
husbandman,  coveting  the  harvest  for  which  he  hopes, 
afflicts  and  torments  the  ox  in  the  plough,  even  so  does 
concupiscence  afflict  the  soul  in  its  desire  to  attain  that  for 
which it longs.  This can be clearly seen in that desire which 
Delilah  had  to  know  whence  Samson  derived  his  strength 
that  was  so  great,  for  the  Scripture says  that it fatigued  and 
tormented  her so  much  that it  caused  her  to  swoon,  almost 
to  the  point of death,  and she  said:  Deficit  anima  ejus,  et  ad 
mortem  usque  lassata  est. 
3 
2.  The  more  intense  is  the  desire,  the  greater  is  the 
torment  which  it  causes  the  soul.  So  that  the  torment  in-
creases  with  the  desire;  and  the  greater  are  the  desires 
which  possess  the soul,  the  greater  are  its  torments;  for  in 
such  a  soul  is  fulfilled,  even  in  this  life,  that  which is  said 
in  the  Apocalypse  concerning  Babylon,4  in  these  words: 
Q,uantum glorificallit se,  et  in  deliciis jui!, tan tum  date  illi !ormentum, 
et  luctum.
s 
That is  :  As  much as  she has desired to exalt and 
fulfil  her desires,  so  much  give  her of torment  and  anguish. 
And  even  as  one  that  falls  into  the  hands  of his  enemies  is 
tormented  and  afflicted,  even  so  is  the  soul  tormented  and 
afflicted  that  is  led  away  by  its  desires.  Of this  there  is  a 
figure  in the Book of the Judges,  wherein it may be read that 
that strong  man,  Samson,  who  at one  time  was  strong
6 
and 
free  and  a judge of Israel,  fell  into the power of his  enemies, 
and  they  took  his  strength  from  him,  and  put  out  his  eyes, 
and  bound  him  in  a  mill,  to  grind  corn,7  wherein  they 
tormented  and afflicted  him  greatly;8  and  thus  it happens 
I  Psalm cxvii.  12  [A. V .•  cxviii,  12]. 
"  A.  13:  'like stinging  bees.'  3  Judges  xvi.  IG. 
(  E.p.  omits:  . concerning  Babylon.'  6  l{evclation  xviii.  7. 
G  E.p.:  '  ... figure  in  that  strung  man,  SJ.mson.  who  at  one  time 
was  so  strong: ctc. 
7  [Lit.,  .  bound  him  to grind  in a  mill.']  8  Judges  xvi,  21. 
40  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
to  the  soul  in  which  these  its  enemies,  the  desires,  live  and 
rule;  for  the  first  thing  that  they  do  is  to  weaken  the 
soul  and  blind  it,  as  we  shall  say  below;  and  then  they 
amict  and  torment  it,  binding  it  to  the  mill  of  con-
cupiscence;  and  the  bonds  with  which  it is  bound  are  its 
own  desires. 
3.  Wherefore  God,  having compassion  on  these  that with 
such  great labour,  and at such  cost  to themselves,  go  about 
endeavouring  to  satisfy  the  hunger and  thirst  of their desire 
in  the  creatures,  says  to  them  through  Isaiah:  01llnes 
sit imtes ,  venite  ad  aquas;  et  qui  non  hahelis  argentum,  properate, 
emite,  et  comedite:  venite,  emite  ahsque  argento,  vinum,  et  lac. 
Quare  appenditis  argentum  non  in  panihus,  et  lahorem  vestrum  non 
in  saturitate?1  As  though  He  were  to  say:  All  ye  that have 
thirst of desire,  come  to  the  waters,  and all  ye  that have  no 
silver  of your own  will  and  desires,  make  haste;  buy from 
Me and eat;  come and  buy from  Me  wine  and  milk  (that 
is,  spiritual sweetness  and  peace),  without the silver of your 
own  will,  and  without  giving  Me  any  labour  in  exchange 
for it, as  ye give for  your desires. 
2 
Wherefore do ye give  the 
silver  of your  wilP  for  that  which  is  not  bread-that is,  of 
the  Divine  Spirit-and set  the  labour of your  desires  upon 
that  which  cannot  satisfy  you?  Come,  hearkening  to  Me, 
and ye  shall  eat the good  that ye  desire  and your soul  shall 
delight  itself in fatness. 
4.  This  attaining  to  fatness  is  a  going  forth  from  all 
pleasures  of the  creatures;  for  the  creatures  torment  but 
the  Spirit  of God ·refreshes.  And  thus  He calls  us  through 
s.  Matthew, saying:  Venite  ad me omnes,  qui lahoratis,  et onerati 
estis,  et  ego  rejiciam  vos,  et invenietis requiem  animahus  vestris.
4 
As 
though  He  were  to  say:  All  ye  that  go  about  tormented, 
afflicted  and  burdened  with  the  burden  of your  cares  and 
desires,  go  forth  from  them,  come  to  Me,  and  I  will  refresh 
you  and  ye  shall  find  for  your  souls  the  rest  which  your 
desires  take  from  you,  wherefore  they  are  a  heavy  burden, 
for David says of them:  Sicut onus grave gravatfl sunt super  me.:; 
1  Isaiah  Iv.  l-.!. 
2  A.  H repl'at:  .  wine  and  milk-that is,  peace and sweetness.' 
3  E.p.:  . of your own will.' 
•  S.  Matthew  xi.  28-9.  6  Psalm xxxvii,  5  [A.V.,  xxxviii.  4]. 
BOOK  J.  CHAPTER  VIII 
CHAPTER  VIn 
Wherein  is shown  how  the  desires  darken  and blind the  soul. 
1 
I.  The third evil  that the desires  cause in the soul  is  that 
they  blind  and  darken  it.  Even  as  vapours  darken  the 
air  and  allow  not  the  bright  sun  to  shine;  or  as  a  mirror 
that  is  clouded  over  cannot  receive  within  itself  a  clear 
image;  or  as  water  defiled  by  mud  reflects  not  the  visage 
of one  that looks  therein;  even  so  the  soul  that  is  clouded 
by  the desires  is  darkened in  the  understanc ing  and  allows 
neither
2 
the  sun  of natural  reason  nor  that  of the  super-
natural  Wisdom  of God  to  shine  upon  it  and  illumine  it 
clearly.  And  thus  David,  speaking  to  this  purpose,  says: 
Comprehe1lderunt  me  iniquitates  metE,  et  non  potui,  ut  viderem.
3 
Which signifies:  Mine iniquities· have taken hold upon me, 
and I  could have no  power to see. 
2.  And  at  this  time,  when  the  soul  is  darkened  in  the 
understanding, it is stultified also in the will, and the memory 
becomes  dull  and  disordered  in  its  due  operation.  For,  as 
these  faculties  in  their  operations  depend  upon  t   ~   under-
standing,  it  is  clear  that,  when  the  understanding  is  em-
barrassed,  they  will  become  disordered  and troubled.  And 
thus David says:  Anima mea  turhata  est  valde.1i  That is:  My 
soul  is  sorely  troubled.  Which  is  as  much  as  to  say,  'dis-
ordered in its  faculties.'  For,  as  we  say,  the understanding 
has  no  more  capacity  for  receiving  enlightenment from  the 
wisdom of God than has the air, when it is dark, for receiving 
enlightenment from the sun;  neither has the will any power 
to embrace God within itselfin pure love,  even as  the mirror 
that is  clouded  with  vapour  has  no  power  to  reflect  clearly 
within itself any visage, 
6 
and even less  power has the memory 
which is clouded by the darkness of desire to take clearly upon 
itself the form of the image of God, just as  the muddied water 
cannot  show  forth  clearly  the  visage  of one  that  looks  at 
himself therein. 7 
1  A,H,e.p. add:  'This is proved by quotations from the Sacred Scripture.' 
Z  [Lit.,  ' gives  no  occasion  either  for,'  etc.]  Only  Ale.  rea.ds  thus.  All 
the other authorities have:  'gives no light.' 
a  Psalm xxxix,  13  [A. V.,  xl,  12J. 
•  So e.p.  The  other a.uthorities  have:  'My wickednesses.' 
6  Psalm  vi,  4  [A. V.,  vi,  3J. 
G  [Lit.,  • the  present  visage.']  A,  H,  c.p.  have' object' for' visage.' 
7  •  Therein' is in c.p.  only. 
42  ASCENT  OF  'MOUNT  CARMEL 
3.  Desire  blinds  and  darkens  the  soul;  for  desire,  as 
such,  is  blind,  since ofitsclf it:  has  no understanding in  itself, 
the  reason  being  to it  always,  as  it  were,  a  child  leading  a 
blind  man.
l 
And  hence  it comes  to  pass  that,  whensoever 
the soul  is  guided  by its  desire,  it becomes  blind;  for  this  is 
as if one that sees  were guided by one that sees  not,  which is, 
as  it  were,  for  both  to  be  blind.  And  that  which  follows 
from  this is  that 
2 
which Our Lord says through  S.  Matthew: 
Si  CIECUS  CIECO  ducatum  pTd!stet,  ambo  in  foveam  cadunt.
3 
If the 
blind lead the blind,  both shall  fall  into the ditch.  Of little 
use  are  its  eyes  to  a  moth,  since  desire  fur  the  beauty of the 
light dazzles  it  and  leads it into the flame.
4 
And even so we 
may say that one who feeds  upon  desire  is  like  a  fish  that is 
dazzled, upon which the light acts rather as darkness, prevent-
ing it from seeing the harm which the fishermen are preparing 
for  it.  This  is  very  well  explained  by  David himself,  where 
he says of such persons  :  Supercecidit ignis,  et non  viderunt solem. 
5 
Which  signifies:  There  came  upon  them  the  fire,  which 
burns with its heat and dazzles with its light. 6  And it is  this 
that desire does  to the soul,  enkindling its concupiscence and 
dazzling its understanding so  that it cannot see its light.  For 
the cause of its being thus dazzled is  that, when another light 
of a  different  kind  is  set  before  the  eye,  the  visual  faculty  is 
attracted  byi that which  is  interposed so  that it sees  not  the 
other;  and, as the desire is  set so  near to the soul  that it is  in 
the  soul  itself:  the  soul  meets  this  first  light  and  is  attracted 
byl!  it;  and thus it is  unable to see  the light of clear under-
standing,  neither  will  see  it  until  the  dazzling  power  of 
desire is  taken away from it. 
4.  For this  reason  one  must greatly lament the ignorance 
of certain  men,  who  burden  themselves  with  extraordinary 
penances  and  with  many  other  voluntary  practices,  and 
think  that  this  practice  or that will  suffice  to  bring  tHem  to 
1  E.p.  has:  '  ... is  blind,  since  of itself it is unreasonable;  and it  is 
reason  that alwa.ys  guides a.nd  directs the soul rightly in its operations.' 
    E.p.:  . is  exactly  that.' 
3  S.  Matthew  xv,  14. 
4  [Hogue ret.  l\lore exactly:  . fire,'  .  bonfire:  • blaze.'] 
&  Psalm  lvii,  9  [d.  A.V.,  lviii,  8). 
B  So  Ale.  The uther  l\\SS.  have:  • The light ft'll  upon  them and struck 
their eyes and dazzled  them.'  E.p.  reads:  . The fire  came upon them and 
thcy saw  not  the sun.' 
7  Ale.  has:  . is  blinded  by,'  probably  a  copyist's  error  [cit:gase  for 
dbasd· 
K  Ilcn.'  A amI  IJ  have (ilgase,  whereas  Ale.  and  e.p.  read  dbase. 
BOOK  1.  CHAPTER  VIn 
43 
the  union  of Divine  Wisdom;  but  such  is  not  the  case 
if  they  endeavour  not
l 
diligently  to  mortify  their  desires. 
I f  they  were  careful  to  bestow  half of that  labour  on  this, 
they  would  profit  more  in  a  month  than  they  profit  by  all 
the other practices in many years.  For, just as it is  necessary 
to  till  the  earth  if it is  to  bear  fruit,  and  unless  it  be  tilled 
it  bears  naught  but  weeds,  just  so  mortification  of  the 
desires  is  necessary  if  the  soul  is  to  profit.  Without  this 
mortification,  I  make  bold  to  say,  the  soul  no  more 
achieves  progress  on  the  road  to  perfection  and  to  the 
knowledge  of  God  and  of  itself,  however  many  efforts  it 
may  make,  than  the  seed  grows  when  it  is  cast  upon
2 
untilled  ground.  Wherefore  the  darkness  and  rudeness 
of  the  soul  will  not  be  taken  from  it  until  the  desires  be 
quenched.  For  these  desires  are  like  cataracts,  or  like 
motes  in  the  eye,  which  obstruct  the  sight  until  they  be 
cast away. 
5.  And  thus  David, .realizing  the  blindness  of these souls, 
and  the  completeness  of  their  exclusion  from  die  light  of 
truth, and the greatness of God's wrath against them, speaks 
with  them,  saying:  Priusquam  intelligerent  spinte  vestrte 
rhamnum:  sicut  viventes,  sic  in  ira  absorbet  eos.
3 
And  this  is  as 
though  He  had  said:  Before  your  thorns  (that  is,  your 
desires)  hardened  and  grew,  changing  from  tender  thorns 
into  a  thick  hedge  and  shutting  out  the  sight  of God  even 
as  oft-times  the  living find  their  thread  of life  broken in the 
midst of its  course,  even so  will  God swallow  them up in His 
wrath.
4 
For  the  desires  that  are  living  in  the  soul,  so  that 
it  cannot  understand  Him,  will  be  absorbed  by  God  by 
means  of chastisement  and  correction,  either  in  this  life  or 
in  the  next,  and  this  will  come  to  pass  through  purgation. 
And  He  says  that  He  will  absorb  them  in  wrath,  because 
that  which  is  suffered  in  the  mortification  of the  desires  is 
1  E.p.  has:  • who  burden  themselves  with  unrestrained  (lit .•  des-
ordenadas,  disordered.  unruly] penances and with many other unrestrained 
practices-I  mean  voluntary  ones-and  place  their  confldence  in  these, 
and  think  tha.t  these  alone.  without  any  mortification  of  their  desires  in 
other  respects.  will  be  sufticient  to  lead  them  to  the  union  of  Divine 
\\iisdom;  but this is not the  case if  they endeavour not,' etc. 
a  E.p.:  • bdng scattered over: 
3  Psalm lvii.  10  [,\.V .•  lviii.  9]. 
,  [Po  Silverio  following)  Ale.  reads:  • Before  your  thorns  (that  is. 
your  desires)  understood.  even  as  the  living.  after  this  ma.nner  He will 
absorb  them  in  His  wrath:  All  the  other  )155.,  however.  and  also  e.p., 
rcad  as  in  the  text. 
44  ASCRNT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
punishment  for  the  ruin  which  they  have  wrought  in  the 
souL I 
6.  Oh that men  could  know  how  great is  the  blessing  of 
Divine  light  whereof  they  are  deprived  by  this  blindness 
which  proceeds  from  their  affections  and  desires,  and  into' 
what great hurts and evils  these  make them to fall  day after 
day,  for  so long as  they mortify them not!  For a  man must 
not  rely  upon  a  clear  understanding,  or upon  gifts  that  he 
has  received  from  God,  and  think  that  he  may  indulge  his 
affection  or  desire,  and  will  not  be  blinded  and  darkened, 
and fall  gradually into a  worse estate.  For who  would have 
said that a  man so  perfect in wisdom and the gifts of God as 
was  Solomon  would  have  been  reduced  to  such  blindness 
and foolishness  of the will  as  to make altars to so  many idols 
and  to  adore  them  himself,  when  he  was  01d?2  And  no 
more  was  needed  to  bring  him  to  this  than  the  affection 
which he had for  his wives and his neglect to deny his desires 
and the delights of his heart.  For he himself says concerning 
himself,  in  Ecclesiastes,  that  he  denied  not  his  heart  that 
which  it demanded  of him.
3 
And this  man was· capable of 
being  so  completely  led  away  by  his  desires  that,  although 
it is  true that at the beginning he was cautious,  nevertheless, 
because  he  denied  them  not,  they  gradually  blinded  and 
darkened  his  understanding,  so  that  in  the  end  they  suc-
ceeded in quenching  that great  light  of wisdom  which  God 
had given him,  and therefore in his old age he forsook  God. 
·7.  And if unmortified desires could do so much in this man 
who  knew  so  well  the  distance  that  lies  between  good  and 
evil,  what  will  they  not  be  capable  of accomplishing  by 
working  upon  our ignorance?  For we,  as  God
t 
said  to  the 
Prophet Jonah concerning the Ninevites, cannot discern  be-
tween 
5 
our right hand and our left. 
6 
At every step we  con-
sider  evil  to  be  good,  and  good,  evil,  and  this  arises  from 
1  E.p.  reads:  .  For  God  in  His  wrath  will  swallow  up  those  whose 
desires  live  in  the soul  and  shut  out  the  knowledge  of  God,  either in  the 
next life  in  the  affliction  and  purgation  of  purgatory,  or in  this life  with 
atfiictions and trials  which  He sends  to detach them from  their desires.  or 
through  the  mortiication  of  their  own  desires.  This  God  does  that  He 
may remove thereby the false light of desire which is between Himself and 
us,  and  which  was  dazzling  us  and  hindering  us  from  knowing  Him;  so 
that,  the  sight of  the  understanding  being  enlightened,  the ruin  wrought 
by the desires  may be              I  3  Kings  [A.V.,  1          xi,  4. 
3  Ecclesiaste:;  ii,  10..  '  E.p.:  'as the  Lord: 
6  [Lit.,  'we  .  .  •  know  not  what  there is  between.'] 
G  Jonah  iv,  II. 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  IX 
45 
our  own  nature.  What,  then,  will  come  to  pass  if  the 
hindrance  of  desire
1 
is  added  to  our  natural  darkness? 
Naught  but  that  which  Isaiah  describes  thus:  Palpavimus, 
sicut  cfEci  parietem,  et  quasi  absque  oculis  attrectavimus:  impegimus 
meridie,  quasi  in  tenebris.
2 
The prophet is  speaking with  those 
who love to follow  these their desires.  It is  as if he had said  : 
We  have groped for  the  wall  as  though  we  were  blind,  and 
we  have  been  groping  as  though  we  had  no  eyes,  and  our 
blindness has attained to such a  point that we have stumbled 
at  midday  as  though  it  were  in  the  darkness. 
3 
For he  that 
is  blinded  by  desire  has  this  property,  that,  when  he  is  set 
in  the  midst  of truth and  of that  which  is  good  for  him,  he 
can no more see it than if he were in darkness. 
CHAPTER  IX 
Wherein  is  described  how  the  desires  defile  the  soul.  This  is 
proved  by  comparisons  and  quotations from  Holy  Scripture. 
r.  The  fourth  evil  which  the  desires  cause  in  the  soul  is 
that  they  stain  and  defile  it,  as  is  taught  in  Ecclesiastes,  in 
these  words:  Qui  tetigerit  picem,  inquinabitur  ab  ea.
4 
This 
signifies:  He  that  touches  pitch  shall  be  defiled  therewith. 
And  a  man  touches  pitch  when  he  allows  the  desire  of his 
will  to be satisfied  by any creature.  Herein it is  to  be noted 
that  the  Wise  Man  compares  the  creatures  to  pitch;  for 
there is  more  difference  between  excellence  of soulS  and  the 
best  of the  creatures
6 
than there  is  between  pure diamond
7
, 
or  fine  gold,  and  pitch.  And just as  gold  or diamond,  if it 
were heated and placed upon pitch,  would  become foul  and 
be  stained  by  it,  inasmuch  as  the  heat  would  have  cajoled 
and  allured  the  pitch,  even  so  the  soul  that  is  hot  with 
desire  for  any creature draws  forth
S 
foulness  from it through 
the heat of its desire and is  stained by it.  And there is· more 
J  [Li.t.,  • if desire.']  Z  Isaiah lix,  10. 
a  E.p. has slight verbal variations here, the chief being' as in darkness' 
for' as though  we  had  no  eyes,'  and' in  obscurity'  for' in the darkness.' 
,  Ecclesiasticus xiii,  I. 
    E.p.:  . between  the excellence  which  the soul  may have.' 
e  [More  literally:  . and  all  the  best  that  is  of  the  creatur!:s.'  'nest' 
is  neuter and  refers  to qualities,  appurtenances,  etc.] 
7  [Lit.,  • bright  diamond.'] 
a  E.p.:  . even  so  the soul.  in the heat of its desire  which it has for  any 
creature, derives,'  etc. 
46  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
difference  between  the  soul  and  other  corporeal  creatures 
than  between  a  liquid  that is  highly  clarified  and  mud  that 
is  most  foul.  Wherefore,  even  as  such  a  liquid  would  be 
defiled if it were mingled with mud, so is  the soul defiled that 
clings  to creatures,  since  by doing  this it becomes  like  to the 
said  creatures.  And  in  the  same  way  that  traces  of soot 
would  defile  a  face  that  is  very  lovely  and  perfect,  even  in 
this way do disordered  desires  befoul  and defile the soul  that 
has  them,  the which soul is  in itself a  most lovely and perfect 
image of God. 
2.  Wherefore Jeremiah, lamenting the  ravages  of foulness 
which  these  disordered  affections  cause  in  the  soul,  speaks 
first of its beauty, and then of its foulness,  saying:  Candidiores 
sunt  Na;:.artei  ejus  nive,  nitidiores  lacte,  rubicundiores  ebore  antiquo, 
sapphiro  puichriores.  Denigrata  est  super  carbones facies  eorum,  et 
non  sunt  cogniti  in piateis.
1 
Which signifies:  Its  hair-that is 
to  say,  that  of  the  soul-is  more  excellent  in  whiteness
2 
than  the  snow,  clearer
3 
than  milk,  and  ruddier  than  old 
ivory,  and lovelier  than  the  sapphire stone.  Their face  has 
now  become  blacker  than  coal  and  they  are  not  known  in 
the  streets. 
4 
By  the  hair  we  here  understand  the  affections 
and  thoughts  of  the  soul,  which,  ordered  as  God  orders 
them-that is,  in  God  HimselfS-are  whiter  than snow, and 
clearer
6 
than  milk,  and  ruddier  than  ivory, 7  and  lovelier 
than the sapphire.  By  these four  things is  understood every 
kind  of beauty and excellence  of corporeal  creatures,  higher 
than  which,  says  the  writer,  are  the soul  and its  operations, 
which  are  the  Nazarites  or  the  hair  aforementioned;  the 
which  Nazarites,  being  disordered II  and  arranged  in  a  way 
that God  ordered  not-that is,  being set  upon  the creatures 
-have their face  (says Jeremiah)  made and turned  blacker 
than  coal. 
3.  All  this  harm,  and  more,  is  done  to  the  beauty of the 
soul  by  its  unruly  desires  for  the  things  of this  world;9  SO 
1  Lamentations iv,  7-8. 
2  A:  . is  whiter  than whiteness,  than the snow.'  B:  • is lovelier than 
whiteness,  than the snow.' 
3  [Lit.,  mas 'I'esplandecie)ltes,  '  more  brilliant,'  , more  luminous.'] 
,  [Lit.,  plazas  (derived  from  the  Latin  plateas),  which  now,  however, 
has the  meaning  of  '  squares,'  .  (market)  places. '] 
6  Ale.  omits,  perhaps  by  an oversight:  'that  .  .  .  Himself.' 
8  Cf.  n.  3.,  above.  7  E.p.:  . than old  ivory.' 
•  [The words translated' disordered,'  , unruly,' here and elsewhere,  and 
occasiollllily  . unrestrained,'  arc  the  sallle  ill  the original:                    
8  E.p.  omits:  . for  the  things  uf  this  world.' 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  IX 
47 
much  so  that,  if we  set  out  to  speak  of the  foul  and  vile 
appearance  that  the  desires  can  give  the  soul,  we  should 
find  nothing,  however  full  of cobwebs  and  worms  it  might 
be,  not  even  the  corruption  of a  dead  body,  nor aught  else 
that  is  impure  and  vile,  nor  aught  that  can  exist  and  be 
imagined  in  this  life,  to  which  we  could  compare  it.  For, 
although  it is  true  that  the  disordered  soul,  in  its  natural 
being,l  is  as  perfect  as  when  God  created  it,  yet,  in  its 
reasonable being, it is  vile,  abominable, 
2 
foul,  black and full 
of all the evils that are here being described, and many more. 
For,  as  we  shall  afterwards  say,  a  single  unruly  desire, 
although  there  be  in  it  no  matter  of mortal  sin,  suffices  to 
bring  a  soul  into  such  bondage,  foulness  and  vileness  that 
it can in no wise come to accord with God in union
3 
until the 
desire be purified.  What will  be the vileness of the soul  that 
is  completely  unrestrained  with  respect  to  its  own  passions 
and given up to its  desires,  and how far withdrawn will it be 
from  God and from  His  purity? 
4.  I t  is  impossible  to  explain  in  words,  or  to  cause  to  be 
understood  by  the  understanding,  what  a  variety  of  im-
purity is  caused  in  the soul  by  variety  of desire.  For,  if it 
could be expressed and understood,  it would  be a  wondrous 
thing,  and one also which  would fill  us  with  pity,  to see  how 
each desire,  in accordance with  its  quality and degree,  be it 
greater  or  smaller,  leaves  in  the  soul  its  mark  and  deposit' 
of impurity and vileness,  and how  one single  disorder of the 
reason can be the source of innumerable different impurities, 
some  greater,  some  less,  each  one  after  its  kind. S  For  even 
as  the soul  of the righteous  man  has  in one single  perfection, 
which  is  the  uprightness  of  the  soul,  innumerable  gifts  of 
great richness,  and many virtues of great loveliness,  each one 
full  of grace  after  its  kind  according  to  the  multitude  and 
difference  in the affections  of love  which  it has  had in  God, 
even  so  the  disordered  soul,  according  to  the  variety  of the 
desires  which it has for  the creatures, has in itself a  miserable 
variety  of  impurities  and  meannesses,  wherewith  it  is 
endowed  by  the said  desires. 
I  E.p.:  'natural substance.'      E.p.  omits' abominable.' 
3  E.p.:  '  ... of  mortal  sin,  befouls  and  stains  the  soul  and  renders 
it  unlit  to  come  to  accord  with  God  in  perfect  union.'  A,  13;  . in  any 
union.'  [The  Spanish  of the  text reads  literally:  . in a  union.'] 
.  'E.p.:  '  ... how  each  desire,  in  agreement  with  its  quality  and 
Intention,  leaves its  mark and  depo:;it:  etc. 
•  E.p.  omits:  . and  how  ... its  kind.' 
48  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
5.  This variety of desire
l 
is  well  described  in the  book of 
Ezekiel,  where it is  written that God showed this prophet, in 
the  interior  of  the  Temple,  painted  around  its  walls,  all 
likenesses  of creeping  things  which  crawl  on  the  ground, 
and all  the abominati()ns  of unclean beasts. 
2 
And then God 
said to Ezekiel:  Son  of man,  hast thou  not indeed seen  the 
abominations  that  these  do,  each  one  in  the  secrecy  of his 
chamber?3  And  God  commanded  the  Prophet  to  go  in 
farther  and  he  would  see  greater  abominations;  and  he 
says  that  he  there  saw  women  seated,  weeping  for  Adonis, 
the god of love. 4  And God commanded him to go in farther 
still, and he would see yet greater abominations, and he says 
that he saw there five-and-twenty old men whose backs  were 
turned  toward  the  Temple. 
5 
6.  The  diversity  of creeping  things  and  unclean  beasts 
that  were  painted  in  the  first  chamber  of the  Temple  are 
the  thoughts  and  conceptions  which  the  understanding 
fashions  from  the  lowly  things  of earth,  and  from  all  the 
creatures, which are painted, just as they are, in the temple of 
the soul,  when the soul
8 
embarrasses  its  understanding  with 
them,  which  is  the soul's  first  habitation.  The women  that 
were  farther  within,  in  the  second  habitation,  weeping  for 
the god Adonis,  are the desires  that are in the second faculty 
of the  soul,  which  is  the  will;  the  which  are,  as  it  were, 
weeping,  inasmuch  as  they  covet  that  to  which  the  will  is 
affectioned,  which  are  the  creeping  things  painted  in  the 
understanding.  And  the men that were  in the  third habita-
tion 
7 
are  the  images  and  representations  of the  creatures, 
which  the  third  part8  of the  soul,-namcly  memory-keeps 
and reflects  upon
9 
within itself.  Of these it is  said that their 
backs  are turned toward the Temple because when  the soul, 
according  to these  three  faculties,  completely  and  perfectly 
embraces  anything  that  is  of the  earth,  it  can  be  said  to 
have its  back turned toward the Temple of God, which is  the 
right reason  of the  soul,  which  admits  within  itself nothing 
that is  of creatures.
lO 
1  [Lit.,  '  of desires.']  A,  B, e.p.  have:  'of impurities.' 
Z  Ezekiel  viii,  10.  a  [Ezekiel  viii,  12.] 
•  Ezekiel viii,  14.  I  Ezekiel viii,  16. 
B  E.p.:  'which,  being  so  contrary  to  things  eternal,  defile  the  temple 
of  the soul,  and  the soul,'  etc. 
7  So  Ale.,  e.p.  A,  B  and  some  editions have:  'third chamber.' 
8  E.p.:  'third faculty.' 
•  [Lit.,  '  revolves '-' turns over in its mind' in our common idiom.] 
lu  .t:.p.:  'admits within  itself  no  created  thing  that is  opposed  to God.' 
BOOK I.  CHAPTER  X 
49 
7.  And  let  this  now  suffice  for  the  understanding  of this 
foul  disorder  of the  soul  with  respect  to  its  desires.  For 
if we had to treat in detail of the lesser foulness!  which these 
imperfections and their variety  make and cause in the soul, 
and that which is  caused by venial sins,  which is still greater 
than  that  of the imperfections,  and their great variety,  and 
likewise  that  which  is  caused  by  the  desires  for  mortal  sin, 
which  is  complete foulness  of the soul, and its  great variety, 
according  to  the  variety  and  multitude  of all  these  three 
things,  we should never end, nor would the understanding of 
angels suffice to understand it.
2 
That which I  say,  and that 
which  is  to  the  point  for  my  purpose,  is  that  any  desire, 
although it be for  but  the  smallest  imperfection,  stains  and 
defiles  the soul. 
3 
CHAPTER  X 
Wherein  is  described  how  the  desires  weaken  the  soul  in  virtue  and 
make  it lukewarm. ' 
I.  The fifth  way  in  which  the  desires  harm  the  soul  is 
by making it lukewarm and weak,  so  that it has  no strength 
to follow  after  virtue  arid  to  persevere  therein.  For as  the 
strength  of the  desire,  when  it  is  divided,  is  less  than  if it 
were  set  wholly  on  one  thing  alone,  and  as,  the  more  are 
the  objects  whereon  it is  set,  the less  of it  there  is  for  each 
one  of  them,  for  this  cause  philosophers  say  that virtue  in 
union  is  stronger  than  if it  be  dispersed.  Wherefore  it is 
clear that, if the desire  of the will  be dispersed among other 
things than virtue, it must be weaker as  regards virtue.  And 
thus the soul whose will is divided among trifles  is  like water, 
which,  having  an  outlet  below  wherein  to  empty  itself, 
never  rises;  and such  a  soul  has  no profit.  For this  cause 
the  patriarch  Jacob  compared  his  son  Reuben  to  water 
poured out,  because in a  certain sin he had given rein to his 
desires.  And  he  said:  Thou  art  poured  out  like  water; 
grow  thou  not. 
6 
As  though  he  had  said:  Since  thou  art 
poured out like  water  as  to  the desires,  thou shalt  not grow 
in virtue.  And thus,  as  hot water,  when uncovered,  readily 
1  E.p.:  'of the impediment to this union.' 
I  E.p.  shortens:  • and its great diversity,  we  should  never end.' 
a  E.p.  omits:  'stains  ... soul,'  leaving the sentence incomplete. 
,  E.p.  adds:  'This is proved  by comparisons and quotations from  the 
Sacred  Scripture.'  5  Genesis xlix, 4. 
50  ASCENT  OF                   
loses heat, and as aromatic spices, when they are unwrapped, 1 
gradually lose  the  fragrance  and  strength  of their  perfume, 
even  so  the  soul  that  is  not  recollected  in  one  single  desire 
for  God  loses  heat  and  vigour  in  its  virtue.  This  was  well 
understood  by David,  when  he said,  speaking  with  God:  I 
will  keep  my strength for  Thee.
2 
That is, concentrating the 
strength  of my desires
3 
upon  Thee alone. 
2.  And  the desires  weaken  the virtue of the soul,  because 
they  are  to  it  like  the  shoots'  that  grow  about  a  tree,  and 
take  away  its .virtue  so  that  it  cannot  bring  forth  so  much 
fruit.  And  of such  souls  as  these  says  the  Lord:  V  lB  prlBg-
nantibus,  et  nutrientihus  in  illis diehus. S  That is:  Woe  to them 
that in those days are with child and to them that give suck. 
This  being  with  child  and  giving  suck  is  understood  with 
respect  to  the  desires;  which,  if they  be  not  pruned,  will 
ever  be  taking  more  virtue  from  the  soul,  and  will  grow  to 
the  harm of the soul,  like  the shoots  upon  the  tree.  Where-
fore  Our  Lord  counsels  us,  saying:  Have  your  loins  girt 
about
6
-the loins  signifying  here  the  desires.  And  indeed, 
they  are  also  like  leeches,  which  are  ever  sllcking  the  blood 
from  the  veins,  for  thus  the  Preacher  terms  them  when  he 
says:  The leeches  are  the  daughters-that is,  the  desires-
saying ever:  Daca,  daca.
7 
3.  From this  it is  clear  that  the  desires  bring  no  good  to 
the soul  but rather take from  it that which  it has;  and if it 
mortify them  not,  they  will  not cease  till  they have wrought 
in  it  that  which  the  children  of the  viper  are  said  to  work 
in  their  mother;  who,  as  they  are  growing  within  her 
womb,  consume  her  and  kill  her  while  they  themselves 
remain  alive  at  her  cost.  Just  so  the  desires  that  are  not 
mortified  grow  to  such  a  point  that  they  kill  the  soul  with 
respect to God because it has not first  killed them.  And they 
alone live  in  it.  Wherefore  the  Preacher  says:  Auftr  a  me 
Domine  ventris  concupiscentias.
1I 
4.  And,  even  though  they  reach  not  this  point,  it is  very 
piteous  to  consider  how  the  desires  that  live  in  this  poor 
soul  treat it, how unhappy it is  with regard to itself,  how dry 
1  A,  B:  '  ... spices,  not being covered.' 
Z  Psalm  lviii,  10  [.-\'.V.,  lix,  9].  a  E.p.:  'my affections.' 
4  A,  B,  e.p.:  'like the  twigs  and  shoots.' 
6  S.  i\latthew xxiv,  19.  e  S.  Luke xii,  35. 
7  Proverbs  xxx,  15.  All  the  codices  have  this  reading.  E.p.  reads: 
, saying ever:  ..  Give  me,  give  me."  , 
e  Ecclesiasticus  xxiii,  6.  [In  the  original  the  last  two  sentences  are 
transposed.] 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  XI 
with  respect  to  its  neighbours,  and  how  weary  and  slothful 
with respect to the things of God.  For there is no evil humour 
that  makes  it  as  difficult  and  wearisome  for  a  sick  man  to 
walk,  or gives  him  such  distaste  for  eating,  as  the  difficulty 
and  distaste  which  desire  for  creatures  gives  to  a  soul  for 
following  virtue.  And  thus  the reason why many souls  have 
no  diligence  and  eagerness  to  gain 
1 
virtue  is,  as  a  rule, 
that  they  have  desires  and  affections  which  are  not  pure 
and are not fixed  upon  God.
2 
CHAPTER  XI 
Wherein  it  is           necessary  that  the  soul  that  would  attain  to 
Divine union shouid he free from desires,  howsoever small. 
3 
I.  I expect that for a long time the reader has been wishing 
to  ask  whether it be necessary,  in order to attain to  this high 
estate of perfection,  to undergo first  of all total mortification 
in all the desires, great and small, or ifit will suffice to mortify 
some  of them and to leave others,  those  at least which  seem 
of little  moment.  For  it  appears  to  be  a  severe  and  most 
difficult thing for  the soul  to be able to  attain to such purity 
and  detachment  that  it  has  no  will  and  affection  for  any-
thing. 
2.  To this  I  reply:  first,  that it is  true that all the desires 
are  not  equally  hurtful,  nor  do  they  all  equally  embarrass 
the  soul'  (we  are  speaking  of  those  that  are  voluntary), 
for  the  natural  desires  hinder  the  soul  little,  or  not  at 
all,  from  attaining to union,  when they are not consented  to 
nor  pass  beyond  the  first  movements  (that  is, Ii  all  those 
wherein  the  rational  will  has  had  no  part,  whether  at  first 
or afterward)  ;  and  to  take away  these-that is,  to  mortify 
them wholly in this life-is impossible.  And these hinder not 
the  soul  in  such  a  way  as  to  prevent  attainment  to Divine 
union, even though they be not, as I say, wholly mortified; for 
the natural man may well have them, and yet the soul may be 
1  A,  B:  'to work  virtue.'  E.p.:  • to  work            
2  [Lit.,  '  not pure on  (;od.']  E.p.:  'not pure on God our Lord: 
3  Ale.  differs  slightly here, chiefly  by using a  stronger word for' small.' 
We might read:  '  how  very small soever.' 
4  Ale.  omits several lines here, but apparently only through the copyist's 
negligence. 
5  [The original has no such explanatory phrase.]  E.p.,  however, reads: 
, And  I  mean  by  ..  lIatural ..  and" first  movements"  all  those .... etc: 
r 
52  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
quite  free  from  them  according  to  the  rational  spirit.  For 
it will  sometimes  come  to  pass  that  the  soul  will  be  in  the 
fulP  union  of the  prayer  of quiet  in  the  will,  while  these 
desires  are actually dwelling in  the sensual  part of the soul,
2 
and  the  higher  part,  whiCh  is  in  prayer,  will  have  nothing 
to  do  with  them.  Yet  the  other voluntary  desires,  whether 
they be of mortal sin,  which are the gravest,  or of venial  sin, 
which are less grave, or whether they be onlyofi.mperlections, 
which  are  the least  grave  of all,  must  be driven  away  every 
one, and the soul must be free from them all, howsoever small 
they  be,  if it  is  to  come  to  this  complete  union;  amI  the 
reason  is  that  the  state  of this  Divine  union  consists  in  the 
soul's  total  transf()rmation,  according  to  the  w i l ~     in  the  will 
of God,  so  that there  may  be  naught in the soul  that is  con-
trary  to  the  will  of God,  but  that,:\  in  all  and  through  all, 
its  movement  may  be  that of the  will  of God  alone. 
3.  It is  for  this  reason  that  we  say  of this  state  that  it  is 
the  making  of two  wills  into  one-namely,  into  the  will  of 
God,  which w i l l ~   of God is  likewise  the will  of the soul.  For 
if this soul desired any imperfection that God wills  not,  there 
would  not  be  made  one  will  of God,  since  the  soul  would 
have  a  will  for  that  which  God  had  not.  It is  clear,  then, 
that  fur  the  soul  to  come  to  unite  itself perfectly  with  God 
through  love and  wi1l,  it must first  be free  from  all  desire  of 
the  will,  howsoever  small.  That is,  that  it  must  not  inten-
tionally and knowingly consent with the will to imperfections, 
and  it  must  have  power  and  liberty  to  be  able  not  so  to 
consent  intentionally.  I  say  knowingly,  because,  uninten-
tionally  and  unknowingly,  or  without  having
S 
the  power 
to do otherwise, it may well fall into imperfections and venial 
sins,  and  into  the  natural  desires  whereof we  have  spoken; 
for  of such  sins  as  these  which  are  not  voluntary  and  sur-
reptitious
6 
it  is  written  that  the  just  man  shall  fall  seven 
times  in the day and shall  rise  up again. 
7 
Hut of the volun-
tary  desires,  which  are  intentional  venial  sins,  though  they 
be for  very  small  things,  as  I  have said,  anyone that is  not 
1  [That is,  enjoys all  the union that the praye,r of quiet gives.]  B, e.p. 
have:  . in high union.' 
2  Thus A,  B.  The other authorities  [and  P.  Silverio]  read:  • of  man.' 
3  E.p.:  '[and] so  that.' 
,  E.p.:  . the making into one will  of  God-that is,  of  my will  and the 
will of God,  so  that the will,'  etc. 
6  E.p.:  'without wholly  having.' 
8  These last two words occur in Alc.  alone.  7  Proverbs xxiv, 16. 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  XI 
53 
conquered  suffices  to  impede  union.
1 
I  mean,  if this  habit 
be  not  mortified;  for  sometimes  certain  acts  of different 
desires  have not as  much  power when the habits  are  morti-
fied.
2 
Still,  the  soul  will  attain  to  the  stage  of not  having 
even  these,  for  they  likewise  proceed  from  a  habit  of im-
perfection.  But  .some  habits  of  voluntary  imperfections, 
which are never completely conquered, prevent not only the 
attainment of Divine  union,  but also  progress  in  perfection. 
4.  These  habitual  imperfections  are,  for  example,  a  com-
mon  custom  of much  speaking,  or  some  attachment  which 
we never wish entirely to conquer-such as  that to a  person, 
a  garment,  a  book,  a  cell,  a  particular  kind  of food,  tittle-
tattle,  fancies  for  tasting,  knowing or hearing certain things, 
and  suchlike.  Anyone  of these  imperfections,  if the  soul 
has become attached and habituated to it, is of as great harm 
to  its  growth and progress  in virtue as  though it were  to  fall 
daily  into  many other imperfections  and  casual  venial  sins
3 
which proceed not from a common indulgence in any common 
4 
and harmful  attachment,  and  will  not  hinder it so  much  as 
when  it  has  attachment  to  anything.  For while  it has  this 
there is  no possibility that it will  make progress in perfection, 
even  though the imperfection
a 
be extremely small.  For it is 
the  same  thing  if a  bird  be  held  by  a  slender  cord  or  by 
a  stout  one;  since,  even  if it  be  slender,  the  bird  will  be 
as well held as though it were stout, for so long as it breaks itnot 
and flies  not away.  It is  true that the slender one is the easier 
to  break;  still,  easy  though it  be,  the  bird will  not flyaway 
if it  be  not  broken.  And  thus  the  soul  that has  attachment 
to  anything,  however  much  virtue it possess,  will  not attain 
to the liberty of Divine union.  For the desire and the attach-
ment  of the  soul  have  that  power  which  the  sucking-fish
ll 
is  said  to  have  when  it clings  to  a  ship;  for,  though  but  a 
very small fish,  if it succeed  in  clinging  to  the ship, it makes 
it impossible  for  it  to  reach  the  port,  or to  sail  onward.  It 
is  sad  to  see  certain  souls  in  this  plight;  like  rich  vessels, 
1  [The original omits' union.']  Only Ale. reads:  'which arc intentional 
~   c n i a l   sins.'  E.p.  reads:  'But of  desires  which  are  voluntary  and  quite 
lIltcational, though they be for  very small things, as has been said, anyone 
that is not conquered  suffices  to impede.' 
~   Ale.  only  has:  'when  ... mortified.'  E.p.  substitutes:  'since 
they have not become a definite habit.'  A. 13 read similarly, but omit' not.' 
3  E.p.:  'many other and even greater imperfections.' 
,  E. p.  omits this second  • common.' 
$  E.}).:  'that the soul will  reach perfection,  though the thing.'  etc. 
•  [Or' remora.' J 
54  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
they  are  laden  with  wealth  and  good  works  and  spiritual 
exercises,  and  with  the  virtues  and  the  favours  that  God 
grants  them;  and  yet,  because  they  have  not  the  courage 
to break with some whim or attachment or affection  (which 
are all the same), they never make progress or reach the port 
of perfection,l  though  they would  need  to  do  no  more  than 
make  one  good  flight  and  thus  to  snap  that cord  of desire 
right  off,  or  to  rid  themselves  of that  sucking-fish  of desire 
which clings  to them.
2 
5.  It  is  greatly  to  be  lamented  that,  when  God  has 
granted them strength  to  break the other and stouter cords
3 
of affections  for  sins  and vanities,  they should fail  to attain' 
to  such  blessing  because  they  have  not  shaken  off  some 
childish  thing  which  God  has  bidden  them  conquer5  for 
love  of Him,  and which  is  nothing  more  than a  thread  or :1 
hair. 
6 
And,  what  is  worsr,  not  only  do  they  make  no 
progress,  but  because  of  this  attachment  they  fall  back,
7 
lose  that
8 
which  they  have  gained,  and  retrace  that  part of 
the  road  along  which  they have  travelled
9 
at the  cost  of so 
much time and labour;  for  we  know  that,  on this  road,  not 
to go forward  is  to  turn back,  and not to  be gaining is  to  be 
losing.  This  Our Lord desired  to  teach  us  when  He said: 
He that is not with Me is against Me;  and he that gathereth 
not with  Me scattereth.
10 
He that takes  not the  trouble  to 
repair  the  vessel,  however  slight  be  the crack  in  it,  is  likely 
to spill all  the liquid  that is  within it.  The Preacher taught 
us this clearly when he said:  He that contemneth small things 
shall  fall  little  by  little.l1  For,  as  he  himself says,  the  fire 
is  increased  by a  single spark.
12 
And  thus  one imperfection 
1  E.p.:  • neither can attain  to the port of perfect union.' 
2  E.p.  omits:  • which clings  to  them.' 
3  [This  is  a  stronger word  than  that used  above,  which,  if the context 
would  permit,  might  better  be  translated  • string '-its  equivalent  in 
modern speech.  Below,  this earlier  word  is  translated' thread.'] 
,  E.p.:  'fail to progress and  to attain.' 
a  A,  B,  e.p.:  • God  left them  to conquer.' 
•  E.p.  omits:  • or a  hair.'  [The  word  rendered' thread,'  as explained 
in n.  3,  above,  can  also  be  taken in the stronger sense of  ' cord. '] 
7  E.p.  adds:  • in the matter of  perfection.' 
•  E.p.:  • losing something of  that.' 
•  E.p.  omits:  . and retrace  ... travelled.' 
10  S.  Matthew xii, 30.  E.p. reads:  • For we know that, on this spiritual 
road, not to go forward victoriously is to turn back;  and not to be gaining 
is to be losing.  This Our Lord desired to teach us when  He said:  He that 
gathereth not with Me,  scattereth.' 
11  Ecclesiasticus  xix,  I.  E. p.  adds:  • in great things.' 
11  Ecclesiasticus  xi,  34  [A.V.,  xi,  32]. 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  XI 
55 
is  sufficient  to  lead  to  another;  and  these  lead  to  yet 
more;  wherefore  you  will  hardly  ever  see  a  soul  that  is 
negligent  in  conquering  one  desire,  and  that has  not  many 
more arising from  the same weakness  and imperfection  that 
this  desire  causes.  In this  way they are continually falling; 
we  have seen  many persons  to whom God has been granting 
the favour  of leading them  a  long  way,  into  a  state of great 
detachment and liberty,  yet who,  merely  through beginning 
to indulge some small attachment, under the pretext of being 
good,  or in  the  guise  of conversation  and  friendship,  often 
lose  their  spirituality  and  desire  for  God  and  holy  solitude, 
fall  from  the  joy  and  whole-hearted  devotion  which  they 
had in their spiritual exercises,  and cease not until they have 
lost  everything;  and  this  because  they  broke  not  with  that 
beginning of sensual  desire and pleasure and kept not them-
selves in solitude for  God. 
6.  Upon  this  road  we  must  ever  journey  in  order  to 
attain our goal;  which  means  that we  must ever  be  morti-
fying  our  desires  and  not  indulging  them;  and  if they  are 
not all  completely  mortified  we  shall  not completely attain. 
For even  as  a  log  of wood  may fail  to  be transformed  in the 
fire  because a  single  degree  of heat is  wanting to it,  even  so 
the  soul  will  not  be  transformed  in  God  if it  have  but  one 
imperfection,  although  it  be  something  less  than  voluntary 
desire  ; 1  for,  as  we  shall  say  hereafter concerning the night 
of faith,  the  soul  has  only  one  will,  and  that  will,  if it  be 
embarrassed  by  aught  and  set  upon  aught,  is  not  free, 
2 
solitary and  pure,  as  is  necessary for  Divine  transformation. 
7.  Of what  has  been  said  we  have  a  figure  in  the  Book 
of Judges,  where  it  is  related  that  the  angel  came  to  the 
children  of Israel  and  said  to  them  that,  because  they  had 
not  destroyed  that froward  people,  but  had  leagued  them-
selves with some of them, they would therefore be left among 
them as their enemies, that they might be to them an occasion 
of stumbling and perdition. 
3 
And exactly so  does  God deal 
with  certain  souls:  though  He  has  taken  them  out  of the 
world,' and slain  the giants  of their sins,  and  destroyed  the 
multitude  of their  enemies,  which  are  the  occasions  of sin 
that they  had  in  the  world,  solely  that they  may  enter  this 
Promised  Land  of Divine  union  with  greater  liberty,  yet 
1  E.p.  omits:  • although  ... desire.' 
I  A.  B.  e.p.:  'is not completely free.'  I  Judges ii. 3. 
,  A,  B:  'of the perils of the world.'  E.p.:  'of the Egypt of the world.' 
56  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
they  harbour friendship  and  make  alliance  with  the  insig-
nificant  peoples1-that  is,  with  imperfections-and  mortify 
them  not  completely;  therefore  Our  Lord  is  angry,  and 
allows  them 
2 
to  fall  into  their  desires  and  go  from  bad  to 
worse. 
8.  In  the  Book  of Joshua,  again,  we  have  a  figure  of 
what  has  just  been  said-where  we  read  that  God  com-
manded  Joshua,  at  the  time  that  he  had  to  enter  into 
possession  of the  Promised  Land,  to  destroy  all  that  were 
in the city of  Jericho, in  such wise as to leave therein nothing 
alive, man or woman, young or old, and to slay all the beasts, 
and  to  take  naught,  neither  to  covet  aught,  of the  spoils. 
3 
This  He  said  that we  may  understand  how,  if a  man  is  to 
enter  this  Divine  union,  all  that  lives  in  his  soul  must  die, 
both  little  and  much,  small  and  great,  and  that  the  soul 
must be without desire for all this, and detached from it, even 
as  though it existed  not for  the soul,  neither the soul  for  it. 
This  S.  Paul  teaches  us  clearly  in  his  epistle  ad  Corinthios, 
saying:  This I  say to you,  brethren,  that the time is  short; 
it  remains,  and  it behoves  you,  that  they  that  have  wives 
should  be as  though they had none;  and they that weep  for 
the things of this  world,  as  though they wept not;  and they 
that  rejoice,  as  though  they  rejoiced  not;'  and  they  that 
buy,  as  though  they  possessed  not;  and  they  that  use  this 
world,  as  though they used it not. 5  This the Apostle says  to 
us  in  order  to  teach  us  how  great  must  be  the  detachment 
of our soul from  all things if it is  to journey to  God. 
CHAPTER  XII 
Which  treats  of the  answer  to  another  question, G  explaining  what 
the  desires  are  that  suffice  to  cause  the  evils  aforementioned  in 
the  soul. 
I.  We  might  write  at greater length  upon  this  matter of 
the night of sense,  saying all  that there is  to say  concerning 
1  [The original  phrase  (gente  menuda)  means' little folk.'  It is  used  of 
children  and  sometimes  also  of insects  and  other small  creatures.  There 
is  a  marked  antithesis  between  the' giants,'  or sins,  and  the' little  folk,' 
or imperfections.] 
2  E.p.:  'therefore,  since  they  live 
Majesty is wroth and allows  them,' etc. 
,  E.p.  omits this clause. 
G  E.p.:  'Answers another question.' 
negligently  and  slothfully;  His 
.  8  Joshua vi,  21. 
5  I  Corinthians vii, 29-31. 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  XII 
57 
the harm which is  caused by the desires,  not only in the ways 
aforementioned,  but  in  many  others.  But  for  our  purpose 
that  which  has  been  said  suffices;  for  we  believe  we  have 
made it clear in what  way  the  mortification  of these  desires 
is  called  night,  and  how  it behoves  us  to  enter  this  night  in 
order  to  journey  to  God.  The  only  thing  that  remains, 
before  we  treat of the  manner of entrance  therein,  in  order 
to  end  this  part,  is  a  question  concerning  what  has  been 
said  which  might  occur  to  the reader. 
2.  It may  first  be asked  if any desire  suffices  to  work  and 
produce  in  the  soul  the  two  evils  aforementioned-namely, 
the  privative,  which  consists  in  depriving  the  soul  of  the 
grace  of  God,  and  the  positive,  which  consists  in  causing 
within  it  the  five  serious  evils  whereof. we  have  spoken.
1 
Secondly,  it may be asked if any desire,  however small  it be 
and  of whatever  kind,  suffices  to  cause  all  these  together, 
2 
or  if some  desires  cause  some  and  others  cause  others.  If, 
for example, some cause torment;  others, weariness  ;  others, 
darkness,  etc. 
3.  Answering  this,  I  say,  first  of all,  that  with  respect  to 
the privative evil-which consists in the soul's being deprived 
of God,  this  is  wrought  wholly,
3 
and  can  only  be  wrought, 
by  the voluntary  desires,  which  are of the  matter of mortal 
sin;  for  they  deprive  the  soul  of grace  in  this  life,  and  of 
glory,  which  is  the  possession  of God,  in  the  next.  In  the 
second  place,  I  say  that  both  those  desires  which  are  of 
the  matter  of mortal  sin,  and  the  voluntary  desires,  which 
are of the matter of venial sin, and those that are of the matter 
of imperfection, are each sufficient to  produce in the soul all 
these  positive evils  together;  the which evils,  although in a 
certain  way  they  are  privative,  we  here  call  positive,  since 
they  correspond  to  a  turning  towards  the  creature,  even  as 
the privative evils  correspond  to a  turning away from  God." 
But  there  is  this  difference,  that  the  desires  of mortal  sin 
cause  total  blindness,  torment,  impurity,  weakness,  etc. 
But  those  others,  which  are  of the  matter  of venial  sin  or 
imperfection, Ii  produce  not  these  evils  in  a  complete  and 
supreme  degree,  since  they  deprive  not  the  soul  of grace, 
1  E.p.  abbreviates:  '  ... ca.use  in the soul  the two evils,  positive and 
privative,  already described.' 
2  So  Ale.  A,  e.p.  have:  'all these five  evils together.'  B:  'all these 
evils  together.'  3  E.p.  omits' wholly.' 
,  E.p.  omits:  'the which  ... from  God.' 
6  E. p.:  'or known imperfection.' 
58  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
whereon depends the possession of them ;1  since the death of 
the  soul  is  their  life;  but  they  cause  them  in  the  soul 
remissly,  proportionately  to  the  remission  of grace  which 
these  desires  cause  in  the  soul. 2  So  that  that  desire  which 
most  weakens  grace  will  cause  the  most  abundant  torment, 
blindness  and  defilement. 3 
4.  But it is  to be noted that, although each desire produces 
all  these  evils,  which  we  here  term  positive,  there  are  some 
which,  principally  and  directly,  produce some  of them,  and 
others which produce others, and the remainder arc produced 
consequently  upon  these.  For,  although  it is  true  that  one 
sensual  desire  produces  alI  these  evils,  yet  its  principal  and 
proper  effect  is  the  defilement  of the  soul  and  body.  And 
although  one  avaricious  desire  likewise  produces  them  all, 
its  principal  and  direct  result  is  to  cause  misery.  And  al-
though similarly  one vainglorious  desire  produces  them  all, 
its  principal  and  direct  result  is  to  cause  darkness  and 
blindness. 
4 
And  although  one  gluttonous  desire  produces 
them  all,  its  principal  result  is  to  cause  lukewarmness  in 
virtue.  And  even  so  with  the  rest. 
5.  And  the  reason  why  any  act  of voluntary  desire  pro-
duces  in  the  soul  all  these  effects  together  lies  in  the  direct 
contrariety  which  exists  between  them  and  all  the  acts  of 
virtue  which  produce  the  contrary  effects  in  the  soul.  For, 
even  as  an  act  of  virtue  produces  and  begets  in  the  soul 
sweetness,  peace, consolation,  light,  cleanliness and fortitude 
all  together,  even  so  an  unruly  desire  causes  torment, 
fatigue,  weariness,  blindness  and  weakness.  AlI  the  virtues 
increase  by  the  practice  of  anyone  of them,  and  all  the 
vices  increase  by  the  practice of anyone  of them  likewise, 
and the remnants
5 
of each increase in the soul.  And although 
all  these  evils  are not visible at the moment when the desire 
is  indulged,  since  the  resulting  pleasure  gives  no  occasion 
for  them,  yet  their  evil  remnants  are  clearly  perceived, 
whether  before  or  afterwards.  This  is  very  well  illustrated 
by that book which  the angel  commanded S. John to  cat,  in 
1  E.p.:  '  ... of  grace,  with  the  which  privation  goes  together  the 
possession  of  them.' 
2  E.p.:  .  But  they  cause  something  of  these  evils,  although  remissly, 
proportionately  to  the  lukewarmness  and  remission  which  they  cause  in 
the soul.' 
3  E.p.:  • will  cause  more  abundantly  torment,  blindness  and  nOn-
purity.'  4  Ale.  unintentionally omits  this sentence. 
    E.p.:  • the  effects.'  [The  wonl  translated  • remnants'  also  means 
• a.fter-taste.'] 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  XIII 
59 
the Apocalypse,  the which  book was  sweetness  to his  mouth, 
and in his  belly bitterness.
1 
For the desire,  when it is  sated, 
is  sweet  and  appears  to  be  good,  but  its  bitter  effect  is  felt 
afterwards;  the  truth  of  this  can  be  clearly  proved  by 
anyone  who  allows  himself to  be  led  away  by it.  Yet  I  am 
not ignorant that there are some men so  blind and insensible 
as  not to  feel  this,  for, .as  they do  not walk  in  God,  they are 
unable to perceive  that which  hinders them from  approach-
ing Him. 
6.  I am not writing here of the other natural desires which 
are  not  voluntary,  and  of thoughts  that  go  not  beyond  the 
first  movements,  and  other  temptations  to  which  the  soul  is 
not  consenting;  for  these  produce  in  the  soul  none  of the 
evils  aforementioned.  For,  although  a  person  who  suffers 
them  may  believe  that  the  passion  and  disturbance  which 
they then  cause  him are defiling  and  blinding him,  it is  not 
so;  rather they are  bringing  him  the  opposite advantages. 
2 
For,  in  so  far  as  he  resists  them,  he gains  fortitude,  purity, 
light and consolation,  and many blessings,  even as Our Lord 
said to S.  Paul:  That virtue was  made perfect in weakness. 
3 
But  the voluntary desires  work  all  the  evils  aforementioned, 
and  more.  Wherefore  the  principal  anxiety  of  spiritual 
masters  is  to  mortify  their  disciples  immediately  of  any 
desire  soever,  causing  them  to  remain  without  the  objects 
of their desires, in order to free  them from such great misery. 
CHAPTER  XIII 
Wherein  is  described  the  way  and  manner  which  the  soul  must 
observe in order to  enter  this night of sense. 4 
I.  I t now remains for me to give certain counsels whereby 
the soul may know how to enter this night of sense and may be 
able  to  enter  therein.  To  this  end  it  must  be  known  that 
the  soul  habitually  enters  this  night  of sense  in  two  ways: 
the  one is  active;  the  other passive.  The active  way  con-
sists  in  what  the  soul  can  do  of itself,  and in  what it does, 
5 
1  Revelation  x,  9.  This sentence is  omitted  by e.p. 
2  E.p.  inserts  the  important  modifying  adverb' occasionally.' 
8  2  Corinthians xii,  9.  [' Virtue'  had  often, in  the author's day,  much 
of  the meaning of the modern  word  '  strength. '] 
,  The  title  in  e.p.  is:  'Of  the  way  and  manner which  the  soul  must 
observe in order to enter this night of sense  through faith.' 
    The earlier editions add:  'aided by grace: 
60  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
in  order to  enter therein,  whereof we  shall  now  treat in  the 
counsels  which follow.  The passive  way is  that wherein  the 
soul  does  nothing, 
1 
and  God  works  in  the  soul,  and  it 
remains,  as  it  were,  patient. 
2 
Of this  we  shall  treat in  the 
fourth  book,
3 
where  we  have  to  treat  of beginners.  And 
because  we  shall  there,  with  the  Divine  favour,  give  many 
.counsels  to  beginners,  according  to  the  many imperfections 
which they are liable to have on this  road,  I  shall not spend 
time in giving many here.  And this,  too,  because it belongs 
not to  this  place  to  give  them,  as  at present we  are  treating 
only  of the  reasons  for  which  this journey is  called  a  night, 
and of what kind  it is,  and how many parts it has.  But,  as 
it  seems  that  it  would  be  incomplete,  and  less  profitable 
than  it should  be,  if we  gave  no  help  or  counsel  here  for 
walking  in  this  night  of the desires,  I  have  thought  well  to 
set  down  briefly  here  the  way  which  is  to  be  followed  : 
and  I  shall  do  the same  at the  end  of each  of the  next  two 
parts,  or causes,  of this  night,  whereof,  with the  help  of the 
Lord,  I  have to treat. 
2.  These counsels for  the conquering of the desires,  which 
now follow,  albeit brief and few,  I  believe to  be as  profitable 
and  efficacious  as  they  are  concise;  so  that  one  who  sin-
cerely  desires  to  practise  them  will  need  no  others,  but will 
find  them all included in these. 
3.  First, let him have an habitual desire
4 
to imitate Christ 
in  everything that he does,  conforming  himself to  His  life; 
upon which life  he must meditate so  that he may know how 
to  imitate  it,  and  to  behave  in  all  things  as  Christ  would 
behave. 
4.  Secondly, in order that he may be able to  do this  well, 
every  pleasure  that  presents  itself to  the  senses,  if it  be  not 
purely for  the honour and glory of God,  must be renounced 
and completely rejected for  the love of Jesus  Christ,  Who in 
this  life  had no other pleasure,  neither desired  such,  than to 
do  the  will  of His  Father,  which  He  called  His  meat  and 
food. 
5 
I  take this  example.  If there present itself to  a  man 
the pleasure of listening to things that tend not to  the service 
1  The earlier editions add:  'as of itself or by its own effort.' 
2  The earlier  editions  have:  'but God  works  it. in  the soul  with more 
special  aids,  and  the  soul  is,  as it were,  patient, consenting thereto freely.' 
3  The earlier editions have:  'in the Dark Night':  it is,  of course,  that 
treatise that is  referred  to. 
t  E.p.  has' care and affection'  for' desire.'  [The word  used  for  desire 
is  apetito,  which  has  been  used  in  the  past  chapters  for  desires  of  sense 
(d. p.  17,  n.  5,  above).)      [So  John iv,  34.) 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  XIII  61 
and honour of God,  let  him not desire  that pleasure,  neither 
let  him  desire  to  hear  them;  and  if  there  present  itself 
the  pleasure  of looking  at  things  that  help  him  not  God-
ward,l let him not desire the pleasure or look at these things  ; 
and if in conversation or in aught else soever it present itself, 
let  him  do  the  same.  And  similarly  with  respect  to  all  the 
senses,  in  so  far  as  he  can fairly  avoid  the  pleasure in  ques-
tion;  if he  cannot,  it  suffices  that  although  these  things 
may  be  present  to  his  senses,  he  desire  not  to  have  this 
pleasure.  And  in  this  wise  he  will  be  able  to  mortify  and 
void  his  senscs  of such  pleasure,  and  leave  them,  as  it were, 
in  darkness.  And  having  this  care  he  will  soon  profit 
greatly. 
5.  For  the  mortifying  and  calming  of  the  four  natural 
passions,  which  are  joy,  hope,  fear  and  grief,  from  the 
concord and  pacification of which  come  these  blessings,  and 
others  likewise,  the  counsels  which follow  are of the greatest 
help,  and  of grc3.t  mcrit,  and  the source  of great  virtues. 
6.  Strive  always  to  choose,  not  that  which  is  easiest,  but 
that which is  most  difficult; 
Not that which  is  most  delectable,  but that which is  most 
unpleasing ; 
Not that which gives  most pleasure,  but rather that which 
gives  least ;   
Not that which is  restful,  but that which is  wearisome; 
Not  that  which  gives  consolation,  but  rather  that  which 
makes  disconsolate  ; 
Not that which is  greatest,  but that which is  least; 
Not that which is loftiest, and most precious, but that which 
is  lowest  and  most despised  ; 
Not  that  which  is
3 
a  desire  for  anything,  but  that 
which  is  a  desire for  nothing  ; 
Strive not to go about seeking the best of temporal things, 
but the worst. 
Strive  thus  to  desire  to  enter  into  complete  detachment 
and emptiness  and  poverty,  with  respect  to  that which  is  in 
the world,  for  Christ's sake. 
7.  And it is  meet that the soul embrace these acts with all 
its  heart  and  strive  to  subject  its  will  thereto.  For,  if it 
perform  them  with  its  heart,  it  will  very  quickly  come  to 
1  E.p.:  • that lead  him  not Godward: 
2  n. e.p.:  • that which gives none.'  E.p.  omits' rather.' 
3  [Lit.,  • Not that  which is  to desire anything,  etc.'] 
ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
find  in  them  great  delight  and  consolation,  and  to  act  with 
order and  discretion. 
8.  These  things  that  have  been  said,  if they  be faithfully 
put  into  practice,  are  quite  sufficient  for  entrance  into  the 
night  of  sense;  but,  for  greater  completeness,  we  shall 
describe another kind of exercise  which teaches us  to  mortify 
the  concupiscence  of  the  flesh  and  the  concupiscence  of 
the eyes,  and  the pride of life,  which,  says  S.  John, 1  are  the 
things  that  reign  in  the  world,  from  which  all  the  other 
desires  proceed. 
2 
g.  First,  let  the soul  strive  to  work in its  own  despite,  and 
desire  all  to  do  SO.3  Secondly,  let  it  strive  to  speak  in 
its  own  despite  and  desire  all  to  do  SO.4  Third,  let it strive 
to  think humbly of itself,  in its  own despite,  and desire all  to 
do SO.5 
10.  In  concluding  these  counsels  and  rules,  it  is  well  to 
set down  here  those  lines  which  are written in  the Ascent  of 
the  Mount,6  which  is  the  figure  that is  at the  beginning  of 
this  book;  the  which  lines  are  instructions  for  mounting it, 
and thus  reaching  the summit of union.  For,  although it  is 
true  that  that  which  is  there  spoken  of is  spiritual  and  in-
terior,  there is  reference likewise  to  the spirit of imperfection 
according  to  sensual  and exterior  things,  as  may  be  seen  by 
the two roads which  are on either side  of the path of perfec-
tion.  It is  in  this  way  and  according  to  this  sense  that  we 
shall understand them here;  that is  to say,  according to that 
which  is  sensual.  Afterwards,  in  the  second  part  of  this 
night,  they  will  be  understood  according  to  that  which  is 
spiritual. 7 
I I.  The lines  are  these: 
In order to arrive at  having
8 
pleasure  in  everything, 
Desire  to have  pleasure  in  nothing. 
1  [I  S.  John ii,  lU.] 
2  E.p.  abbreviates:  'which teaches  us  to  mortify  truly  the  desire  for 
honour,  whence originate  many  other [desires].' 
a  A,  B,  e.p.:  'others  to  do  so.'  A,  B  add:  'and  this  is  aga.inst  the 
concupiscence of the flesh.' 
,  A,  B  add:  'and this is  against the concupiscence of the  eyes.' 
    A,  D  add:  'likewise against it;  and  this  is  against the  pride of  life.' 
I  A,  B,  C,  D,  e.p.  have' figure'  for' ascent.'  The  reference  is  to  the 
diagram  which  is  reproduced  as  the  frontispiece  to  this  volume.  Cf.  also 
p.  xxxiv,  above. 
7  The  Saint  docs  not,  however,  allude  to  these  lines  again.  The  order 
followed  below is  that of  Ale .•  which  differs  somewhat from  that  followed 
in  the  diagram.  I  E.p.:  'to have.' 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  XIV 
In order to arrive at possessing everything, 
Desire to possess  nothing.
1 
In order to arrive at being everything, 
Desire to be  nothing. 
In order to arrive at knowing everything, 
Desire to know  nothing. 
In order to arrive at that wherein thou  hast  no  pleasure, 
Thou must go by a  way wherein thou  hast no pleasure. 
In order to arrive at that which thou knowest  not, 
Thou must  go  by a  way that thou knowest  not. 
In order to arrive at that which thou  possessest  not, 
Thou must go by a  way that thou possessest  not. 
In order to arrive at that which thou  art not, 
Thou must go through that which thou  art  not. 
THE  WAY  NOT  TO  IMPEDE  THE  ALL 
12.  When thou thinkest  upon anything, 
Thou  ceasest  to cast thyself upon the All. 
For,  in order to pass from  the all to the All, 
Thou hast to deny thyself2  wholly3  in all. 
And,  when thou comest  to possess  it wholly, 
Thou must  possess  it without desiring  anything. 
For,  if thou  wilt  have  anything in all, 
Thou hast  not thy treasure  purely in God. 
13.  In  this  detachment  the  spiritual  soul  finds  its  quiet 
and  repose;  for,  since  it covets  nothing,  nothing wearies  it 
when it is  lifted  up,  and nothing oppresses it when it is  cast 
down,  for  it is  in  the  centre of its  humility;  since,  when  it 
covets  anything,  at that very  moment it  becomes  wearied. f, 
CHAPTER  XIV 
Wherein  is  expounded the  second  line  of the  stanza. 
5 
Kindled in love  with yearnings. 
I.  Now  that  we  have  expounded  the  first  line  of  this 
stanza,  which  treats  of the  night  of sense,  explaining  what 
1  [This line, like 11.  G,  8 of the paragraph, reads more literally:  'Desire 
not  to  possess  (be,  know)  anything  in  anything.'  It is  more  emphatic 
than I.  2.]  Z Thus Ale.,  A,  B. C,  D.  E.p.  repeats:  'cast thyself.' 
a  [There is a repetition here which could only be indicated by translating 
'all-Iy.'  So,  too,  in the next couplet.] 
,  A,  B  add:  . and  tormented.' 
    E.p.:  • of  the  above-mentioned  stanza.' 
64  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
this  night  of sense  is,  and  why it is  called  night;  and  now 
that we have likewise described the order and manner which 
are  to  be  followed  for  a  soul  to  enter  therein  actively,  the 
next thing to be treated in due sequence is  its properties and 
effects,  which  are  wonderful,  and  are  aescribed  in  the  next 
lines  of the stanza aforementioned, upon which I  will briefly 
touch for the sake of expounding the said lines, 
1 
as I  promised 
in  the  Prologue;2  and  I  will  then  pass  on  at  once  to  the 
second  book,  treating of the other part of this  night,  which 
is  the spiritual. 
2.  The soul,  then,  says  that,  , kindled  in love  with yearn-
ings,' it passed through this dark night of sense and came out 
thence to the union of the Beloved.  For, in order to conquer 
all  the  desires  and  to  deny  itself the  pleasures  which  it has 
in everything, and for  which its  love  and affection  are  wont 
to  enkindle  the  will  that  it  may  enjoy  them,  it  would  be 
necessary to experience another and a greater enkindling by 
another and a  better love,  which is that of its Spouse;  to the 
end  that,  having  its  pleasure  set  upon  Him  and  deriving 
from Him its strength, it should have courage and constancy 
to  deny  itself  all  other  things  with  ease..  And  not  only 
would it be needful,  in order to  conquer  the strength of the 
desires  of sense,  to  have  love  for  its  Spouse  but  also  to  be 
enkindled by love and to have yearnings.  For it comes to pass, 
and  so  it is,  that  with  such  yearnings  of desire  the  sensual 
nature is  moved  and  attracted  to  sensual  things,  so  that,  if 
the  spiritual  part  is  not  enkindled  with  other  and  greater 
yearnings  for  that  which  is  spiritual,  it  will  be  unable  to 
throw  off the yoke  of nature
3 
or to  enter this  night of sense, 
neither  will  it have  courage  to  remain  in darkness  as  to  all 
things,  depriving itself of desire for  them all. 
3.  And the nature and different varieties of these yearnings 
of love  which  souls  have  in  the  early  stages  of this  road  to 
union;  and the diligent means and contrivances which they 
employ  in  order  to  leave  their  house,  which  is  self-will, 
during  the  night  of the  mortification  of their  senses;  and 
how  easy,  and  even  sweet  and  delectable,"  these  yearnings 
for  the Spouse  make all  the  trials  and  perils  of this  night  to 
1  E.p.  omits:  • for  ... lines.' 
Z  This  confirms  our  point  (p.  19.  n.  4.  above)  that the Saint considers 
the  Argument  as  part  of  the  .Prologue.  A  and  B  omit  the  rest  of  this 
paragraph. 
a  [Lit .• • to  conquer  the  natural  yoke.']  E.p.  has:  • the  sensual  and 
material  yoke.'  '  E.p.  omits:  • and  delecta.ble.' 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  XV 
appear to  them,  this is  not the place to say,  neither can it be 
said;  for  it  is  better  to  know  it  and  meditate  upon  it than 
to \write  of it.  And  so  we  shall  pass  on  to  expound  the 
remaining lines  in the next chapter. 
CHAPTER  XV 
Wherein  are  expounded  the  remaining  lines  of the  aforeTlle7ltioned 
stanza.
l 
.  .  .  oh,  happy chance  !  --
I  went  forth  without  being  observed,  My  house  being  now  at 
rest. 
I.  These  lines  take  as  a  metaphor  the  miserable ,state  of 
captivity,  a  man's  deliverance  from  which,  ,,-hen  none  of 
the  gaolers
2 
hinder  his  release,  is  considered  a  'happy 
chance.'  For  the  soul,  on  account  0[3  original  sin,  is  truly 
as  it  were  a  captive  in  this  mortal  body,  subject  to  the 
passions  and desires  of nature,  from  bondage and subjection 
to  which  it  considers  its  having  gone  forth  without  being 
obsen'ed  as  a  '  happy  chance' -having gone  forth,  that is, 
without  being impeded or apprehended  by  any of them. 
2.  For to this end  the  soul  profited  by going  forth  upon  a 
, dark  night' -that is,  in  the  privation  of all  pleasures  and 
mortification  of  all  desires,  after  the  manner  whereof  we 
have spoken.  And by its' house  being now at rest' is  meant 
the sensual  part,  which  is  the house  of all  the  desires,  and is 
now at rest  because  they  have  all  been  overcome and lulled 
to  sleep.  For  until  the  desires  arc  lulled  to  sleep  through 
the  mortification  of the  sensual  nature,  and  until at last  the 
sensual  nature itself is  at rest  from  them,  so  that they  make 
not war upon the spirit, the soul goes  not forth to true liberty 
and  to  the  ii-uition  of union  with  its  Uelond. 
END  0.10'  THE  FIRST  BOOK' 
1  A has no chapter-heading', considering this chapter as  the  termination 
of  the last. 
   A,  13  have' gaolers';  Ale.,  C,  V,  'prisoners.'  The first  reading is 
th. more apt,  though we          not :-;ay  that the seclInd  is                 
3  [Lit.,  .  after.'j  4  So  cnd  both  the codices and  c.p. 
BOOK  THE  SECOND 
OF  THE  'ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL' 1 
Wherein  is  treated  the  proximate  means  of ascending  to  union  with 
God,  which is faith J'  and wherein is therefore described the second 
part  of this  night,  which,  as  we  said,  belongs  to  the  spirit,  and 
is  contained in  the  second s t a n ~ a     which  is  as follows.:a 
STANZA  THE  SECOND 
CHAPTER  J3 
In  darkness  and  secure,  By  the  secret  ladder,  disguised-oh, 
happy chance !-
In darkness and in concealment,  My  house being now at rest. 
1.  In this second stanza the soul sings of the happy chance 
which  it experienced  in  stripping  the  spirit  of all  spiritual 
imperfections and desires for the possession of spiritual things. 
This  was  a  much  greater  happiness  to  it,  by  reason  of the 
greater  difficulty  that  there  is  in  putting  to  rest  this  house 
of the spiritual  part,  and  of being  able  to  enter this  interior 
darkness,  which  is  spiritual  detachment  from  all  things, 
whether  sensual  or  spiritual,  and  a  leaning  on  pure  faith
4 
alone
s 
and  an  ascent  thereby  to  God.  The  soul  here  calls 
this a  '  ladder,' and' secret,'  because all  the rungs  and parts 
ofit
6 
are secret and hidden from all sense and understanding. 
And  thus  the soul has  remained in darkness as  to  alllight
7 
of 
sense  and  understanding,  going  forth  beyond  all  limits  of 
1  So  both  codices and  e.p. 
2  E.p.  abbreviates:  'Treats  of  the  proximate  means  of  attaining  to 
union  with  God,  which  is  faith,  and  of  the  second  night  of  the  spirit,  con-
tained  in  the  second  stanza.'  It should  be  observed  that  the  Saint  calls 
this  Second  Book'  the  second  (spirituai)  night'  (e.g.,  on p.  78  below,  and 
elsewhere) . 
3  The  chapter-headings  vary  considerably  in  the  codices  and editions. 
B.  treats this chapter as an exposition and numbers from  the next onward. 
4  E.p.:  'on living  faith.' 
•  In  parenthesis  e.p.  adds:  'and  of  this  I  am  ordinarily  speaking 
because  I  treat  with  persons  who  journey  to  perfection.' 
e  [Ut.,  '  all  the steps and  articles that it has.'] 
1  E.p.:  'all natural  light.' 
66 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  I 
nature  and  reason  in  order to  ascend  by this  Divine  ladder 
of faith,  which  attains!  and  penetrates  even  to  the  heights
2 
of God.  The  soul  says  that  it  was  travelling  'disguised,' 
because  it  wears  its  garments  and  vesture
3 
and  natural 
condition  changed  into  the  Divine,  as  it  ascends  by 
faith.  And  this  disguise  was  the  cause  of  its  not  being 
recognized  or  impeded,  either  by  time  or  by Jreason  or  by 
theA  devil;  for  none  of  these  things  can  harm  one  that 
journeys  in  faith.  And  not  only  so,  but  the  soul  travels  in 
such  wise  concealed  and  hidden  and  is  so  far  from  all  the 
deceits  of the  devil  that  in  truth it journeys  (as  it  also  says 
here)  'in  darkness  and  in  concealment' -that  is  to  say, 
hidden  from  the  devil,  to  whom  the  light  of faith  is  more 
than darkness. 
2.  And  thus  the  soul  that  journeys  through  this  night, 
we  may  say,  journeys  in  concealment  and  in  hiding  from 
the devil,  as  will  be more clearly seen  hereafter.  Wherefore 
the  soul  says  that  it  went  forth' in  darkness  and  secure'  ; 
for  one  that  has  such  happiness  as  to  be  able  to  journey 
through the darkness  of faith,  taking faith for  his  guide,  like 
to  one  that is  blind,
4o 
and  going forth  from  all  phantasms  of 
nature  and  reasonings  of the  spirit,  journeys  very  securely, 
as  we  have  said.  And  so  the  soul  says  furthermore  that  it 
went forth  through this spiritual night,  its' house being now 
at  rest' -that  is  to  say,  its  spiritual  and  rational  part. 
When,  therefore,  the soul  attains  to  union  with  God,  it has 
both its natural faculties at rest,  and likewise its impulses and 
yearnings  of the  senses, S  as  to  the  spiritual  part.  For  this 
cause the soul says  not here that it went forth with yearnings, 
as  in  the         night  of sense.  For,  in  order  to  journey  in 
the night of sense,  and  to strip itself of that which is  of sense, 
it  needed  yearnings  of sense-love  so  that  it  might  go  forth 
perfectly;  but,  in  order to  put to rest  the house  of its spirit, 
it needs  no  more  than  denial
6 
of all  faculties  and  pleasures 
1  [Lit.,  '  climbs':  the verb  (escala)  is identical  with the noun' ladder' 
(l'scala).]  2  [Lit., '  to the depths.'] 
3  Only  Ale.  has:  'vesture.' 
4  [The literal  translation is  shorter,  viz.  '  taking  faith  for  a  blind  man's 
guide.']  6  Ale.  omits:  'of the           
8  [Lit.,  m·gation.]  This is  the  reading  of "\le.  • Affirmation'  is  found 
in  A,  B,  C,  lJ,  ('.p.  Though  the  two  words  are  antithetica.l,  they  express 
the  same  underlying  concept.  [The  aftirmation,  or                    of  all 
the  powers and  desires of  the  spirit upon  pure faith,  so  that they  may  be 
ruled  by pure faith  alone, is equivalent to the denial,  or negation,  of those 
powers and desires in so far as  they are not ruled  by pure faith.] 
K 
68  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
and  desires  of the  spirit  in  pure  faith.  This  attained,  the 
soul  is  united  with  the Beloved  in  a  union  of simplicity and 
purity and love and similitude. 
3.  And  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  first  stanza, 
speaking  of the  sensual  part,  says  that  the  soul  went  forth 
upon' a  dark  night,'  while  here,  speaking  of the  spiritual 
part,  it says  that it went forth' in darkness.'  For the dark-
ness of the spiritual part is  by far the greater, even as darkness 
is  a  greater obscurity than that of night.  For,  however dark 
a  night  may  be,  something  can  always  be seen,  but in true 
darkness nothing can be seen;  and thus in the night of sense 
there  still  remains  some  light,  for  the  understanding  and 
reason remain, and are not blinded.  But this spiritual night, 
which  is  faith,  deprives  the  soul  of everything,  both  as  to 
understanding  and  as  to  sense.  And for  this  cause  the  soul 
in  this  night  says  that  it  was  travelling  'in  darkness  and 
secure,'  which  it  said  not  in  the  other.  For,  however  little 
the  soul  may  work  with  its  own  ability,  it  journeys  more 
securely,  because it journeys more in faith.  And this  will  be 
expounded gradually, at length, in this second book, wherein 
it  will  be  necessary  for  the  devout  reader  to  proceed  atten-
tively,l  because  there  will  be  said  herein  things  of  great 
importance  to  the  person  that  is  truly  spiritual. 2  And, 
although they are somewhat obscure, some of them will pave 
the  way  to  others,  so  that  I  believe  they  will  all  be  quite 
clearly  understood. 
CHAPTER  II 
Which  begins  to  treat  of the  second  part  or  cause  of this  night, 
which  is faith.  Proves  by  two  arguments  how  it  is  darker  than 
the first  and  than  the  third. 
I.  There now follows  the  treatment of the second  part of 
this  night,  which  is  faith;  this  is  the  wondrous  means
3 
which,  as 'We  said,  leads  to  the goal,  which  is  God,  Who,  as 
we said,  is  also  to the soul,  naturally,  the third cause or part 
of this  night.  For faith,  which  is  the  means,  is  compared 
with  midnight.  And thus  we  may  say  that it is  darker  for 
the soul either than the first part or, in a way, than the third; 
1  So  e.p.  The  clause' wherein  ... attentively'  is  omitted  in  A.  B. 
C.  D.  Ale.  reads:  'wherein  I  request  the  benevolent  attention  of  the 
devout  reader:  a  A.  B  end  the chapter here. 
3  E.p.  has' manner'  for' means.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  II 
69 
for  the first  part,  which  is  that of sense,  is  compared  to  the 
beginning of night, or the time when sensible objects  are no 
longer visible,  and thus it is  not so far removed from light as 
is  midnight.  The third part,  which is  the period preceding 
the dawn, is  quite close to the light of day, and it, too, there-
fore,  is  not so  dark as  midnight;  for  it is  now  close  to  the 
enlightenment  and  illumination  of the light!  of day,  which 
is  compared  with  God.  For,  although  it  is  true,  if  we 
speak after a  natural manner, that God is as  dark a  night to 
the soul  as  is  faith,  still,  when these  three parts of the night 
are  over,  which  are naturally night to  the soul,  God  begins 
to illumine the soul  by supernatural  means  with  the rays  of 
His  Divine  light;2  which  is  the  beginning  of the  perfect 
union  that follows,  when  the third  night is  past,  and it can 
thus  be said to  be less  dark. 
3 
2.  It is  likewise  darker than the first  part, for  this belongs 
to  the  lower  part  of man,  which  is  the  sensual  part,  and, 
consequently,  the  more  exterior;  and  this  second  part, 
which  is  of faith,  belongs  to  the higher  part of man,  which 
is  the rational  part,  and,  in consequence,  more interior and 
more  obscure,  since  it  deprives  it of the  light  of reason,  or, 
to  speak  more  clearly,  blinds  it;'  and  thus  it  is  aptly 
compared  to  midnight,  which  is  the depth of night and  the 
darkest part thereof. 
1  So Ale.  A,  B, e.p.:  'of the brightness.' 
2  E.p.  adds  these  words,  which  occur in  none  of the codices:  'and in 
a  loftier,  higher and  more experimental manner.' 
3  A,  B:  'to be  dark.' 
4  This was another of the propositions which  were  cited by those who 
denounced  the  writings  of  S.  John  of  the  Cross  to the  Holy  Office.  It is 
interpretable, nevertheless, in a  sense that is perfectly true and completely 
in conformity with Catholic doctrine.  The Saint does  not, in these words, 
affirm  that  faith  destroys  nature  or  quenches  the  light  of  human  reason 
(S.  Thomas,  Summa,  Pt.  I,  q.  I,  a.  8,  et  alibi);  what  he  endeavours  to 
show is that the coming of knowledge through faith excludes a  simultaneous 
coming of  natural  knowledge  through reason.  It is only in this way that, 
in  the  act of faith,  the soul  is deprived  of the light of reason,  and  left,  as 
it were, in blindness, so that it may be raised to another nobler and sublimer 
kind of knowledge,  which,  far  from  destroying reason,  gives it dignity and 
perfection.  Philosophy  teaches  that the  proper and  connatural  object  of 
the  understanding,  in  this  life,  is  things  visible,  m   t ~ r i   l   and  corporeal. 
By  his  nature,  man  inclines  to  knowledge  of  this  kind,  but  cannot  lay 
claim to such knowledge as regards the things which belong to faith.  For, 
as S.  Paul says in a  famous verse:  Fides est sperandarum substantia rerum, 
argumentum  non  apparientium  (Hebrews  xi,  I).  This  line  of  thought  is 
not confined to S.  John of the Cross, but is followed  by all  the mystics and 
is  completely  in  agreement  with  theological  doctrine.  Cf.  Respuesta 
[Reply]  of  P.  Basilio  Ponce  de  Leon  and  Dilucidatio,  Pt.  II,  Chap.  ii, and 
also  the following  chapter in  this  present book. 
70  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
3.  We have now to prove how this second part, which is faith, 
is  night  to  the  spirit,  even  as  the  first  part is  night to sense. 
And  we  shall  then describe also  the things  that are contrary 
to  it,  and  how  the  soul  must  prepare itself actively  to enter 
therein.  For, concerning the passive part, which is that which 
God  works  in it,  when  He brings it into that night,  we shall 
speak in its  place,  which  I  intend shall  be the  third  book.
1 
CHAPTER  III 
How faith  is dark  night  to  the  soul.  This  is proved with arguments 
and quotations and figures from  Scripture. 
2 
I.  Faith, say  the theologians,  is  a  habit of the soul, certain 
and obscure.  And the reason for its being an obscure habit is 
that  it  makes  us  believe  truths  revealed  by  God  Himself, 
which  transcend  all  natural  light,  and  exceed  all  human 
understanding,  beyond  all  proportion. 
3 
Hence  it  follows 
that,  for  the  soul,  this  excessive  light  of faith  which  is  given 
to  it is  thick  darkness,  for  it overwhelms  that which  is  great 
and  does  away  with  that  which  is  little,  even  as  the  light  of 
the  sun  overwhelms  all  other  lights  whatsoever,  so  that 
when it shines and disables  our powers of vision  they  appear 
not  to  be  lights  at  all.  So  that  it  blinds  it and  deprives  it 
of the sight  that has  been given to it,  inasmuch  as  its  light is 
great  beyond  all  proportion  and  surpasses  the  powers  of 
vision.  Even  so  the light of faith,  by its  excessive  greatness, 
oppresses  and  disables  that  of the  understanding;'  for  'the 
latter,  of its  own  power,  extends  only  to  natural  knowledge, 
although  it  has  a  faculty5  for  the  supernatural,  when  Our 
1  Here end  Ale.  and  e.p.  A,  13  add:  'as we  have already  spoken  and 
promised  to  speak  of  the  passive  [part]  of  the  first  [night]  in  the  second 
[book].'  2  A,  B  omit this sentence. 
3  E.p.  omits:  'beyond all  proportion.' 
,  E.p.:  'by  its  excessive  greatness  and  by  the  way  whereip  God 
communicates it,  transcends  that of our understanding.' 
,  E.p.:  'an obediential  faculty'  [potentia  obediential]:  this  phrase  is 
borrowed  from  the  Schoolmen.  Among  the  various  divisions  of  the 
faculty are two, natural and obediential.  The first is that which is directed 
towards an act within the power of nature;  the second is directed towards 
an  act  which  exceeds  these  powers,  by  God,  Who  is  outside  the  laws  of 
nature and can therefore work outside the natural domain.  This obedien-
tial  faculty  (called  also  'receptive'  or  '  passive ')  frequently  figures  in 
mystical  theology, since it is this that disposes the faculties of  the soul  for 
the supernatural reception of the gifts of grace, all of which exceed  natur.ll 
capacity. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  III 
Lord  may  be  pleased  to  bring  it  to  a  supernatural 
action. 
2.  Wherefore  a  man  can  know  nothing  by  himself,  save 
after a  natural manner, 
1 
which is  only  that which he attains 
by  means  of the  senses.  For  this  cause  he  must  have  the 
phantasms  and  the  figures
2 
of objects  present  in  themselves 
and  in  their  resemblances;3  otherwise'  it  cannot  be,  for, 
as  philosophers say:  Ab  obJeto  et potentia paritur notitia.  That 
is:  From  the  object  that  is  present  and  from  the  faculty, 
knowledge  is  born  in  the  soul.  Wherefore,  if one  should 
speak  to  a  man  of things  which  he  has  never  been  able  to 
understand,  and whose likeness  he has never seen,  he would 
have no more illumination from them whatever than if naught 
had  been  said  of them  to  him.  I  take an example.  If one 
should say to a man that on a certain island there is an animal 
which he has never seen, and give him no idea of the appear-
ance of that animal, that he may compare it with others that 
he has seen,  he will have no more knowledge or imagination 
of it than he had before,  however much is  being said  to him 
about  it.  And  this  will  be  better  understood  by  another 
and a clearer example.  If they should describe to a man that 
was  born  blind,  and  has  never  seen  any  colour,  what  is 
meant  by  a  white  colour  or  by  a  yellow,  he  would  under-
stand it but indifferently,  however much they might describe 
it to him;  for,  as  he has never seen such colours or anything 
like  them  by  which  he  may judge  them,  only  their  names 
would  remain  with  him;  for  these  he  would  be  able  to 
comprehend  through  his  hearing,  but  not  their  forms  or 
figures,  since  he has  never seen  them. 
3.  Even so' is  faith  with respect  to  the soul  ;  it tells  us  of 
things  which  we  have  never  seen  or  understood,  either  in 
themselves,  or  in  aught  that  resembles  them,  since  they 
resemble naught at all. 5  And thus we have no light of natural 
1  E.p.:  • a  natural  manner  which  has  its  beginning  in  the  senses.' 
Here the Saint expounds  a  principle of schola.stic  philosophy summarized 
in  the  axiom:  Nihil  est  in intellectu  quin  prius  1Lon  fuerit  in  sensu.  This 
principle,  like  many  other  great  philosophical  questions,  has  continually 
been  debated.  S.  John  of  the Cross  will  be  found  as a  rule  to  follow  the 
philosophy most favoured  by the Church  and is always rigidly orthodox. 
Z  E.p.:  • the phantasms  and  senses.' 
I  E.p.  uses  semejanzas,  the abstra.ct noun;  the codices have semejantes 
[a  word  which  can  be  either  abstract  or concrete,  in  the  latter case  with 
the  sense of '  fellow·creatures  'J. 
,  E.p.  adds in parenthesis:  • though  not equivalent in  every  way.' 
6  E.p.:  • or in aught that  resembles  them,  which  might  bring  us  to a 
knowledge  of them without revelation.' 
72  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
knowledge  concerning  them,  since  that  which  we  are  told 
of them has no relation to any sense of ours;  we  know it by 
the  ear alone,  believing  that which  we  are  taug-ht,  bringing 
our natural light into subjection and treating it as if it were 
not.
l 
For,  as  S.  Paul  says,  Fides  ex  auditu.
2 
As  though  he 
were  to  say:  Faith  is  not  knowledge  which  enters  by  any 
of the  senses,  but  is  only  the  consent  given  by  the  soul  to 
that which  enters
3 
through  the  hearing. 
4.  And faith greatly surpasses even that which is suggested 
by the examples  given  above.  For not only  does  it give  no 
knowledge and science,' but,  as  we  have said,  it deprives  us-
of all  other  knowledge  and  science,  and  blinds  us  to  them, 
so  that  they  cannot judge it well. 
5 
For  other sciences  can 
be  acquired  by  the  light  of  the  understanding;  but  the 
science  that is  of faith  is  acquired  without  the illumination 
of the  understanding,  which  is  rejected  for  faith;  and  in 
its  own light it is  lost,  if that light be  not darkened.  Where-
fore  Isaiah said:  Si non  eredideritis,  non  intelligetis.
6 
That. is  : 
If ye  believe  not,  ye shall  not understand.  It is  clear,  then, 
that faith is  dark night for  the soul,  and it is  in this way that 
it gives  it  light;  and  the  more  it  is  darkened,  the  greater 
light  comes  to  it.  For it is  by  blinding  that it gives  light, 
according  to  this  saying  of Isaiah:  For  if ye  believe  not, 
ye  shall  not  (he  says)  have  light. 
7 
And  thus  faith  was 
foreshadowed  by  that  cloud  which  divided  the  children  of 
Israel  and  the  Egyptians  when  the  former  were  about  to 
enter the  Red  Sea,  whereof Scripture says  that:  Erat  nubes 
tenebrosa,  et  illuminans  noetem.
8 
This is  to say  that that cloud 
was  full  of darkness and gave light by night. 
5.  A  wondrous  thing  it  is  that,  though  it  was  dark,  it 
should  give  light  by  night.  This  was  in  order  that  faith, 
which  is  a  black  and  dark  cloud  to  the  soul  (and  likewise 
is night, since in the presence of faith the soul is deprived of its 
1  [Lit.,  • submitting and blinding our natural light.'] 
I  Romans x,  I7.  a  E.p.:  • but is superior light which  enters.' 
,  E.p.:  . no evidence or science.' 
•  E.p.:  • but,  as  we  have  said,  it surpasses  and  transcends any other-
knowledge  and  science,  so  that  we  may  only  judge  of  it  in  perfect 
contemplation.' 
•  Isaiah  vii,  9.  So  Ale.  The  passage  seems  to  be  taken  from  the 
Septuagint. 
7  [Lit.,  'If ye  believe  not,  that  is,  ye  shall  not  have  light.']  E.p. 
evidently  found  this not  clear,  for  it expands  the sentence  thus:  For if 
ye believe not-that is, if ye blind not yourselves-ye shall not understand 
-that is,  ye  shall  not  have  light  and  knowledge  both  lofty  and  super-
natural.'  I  Exodus xiv,  20. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  IV 
73 
natural  light  and  is  blinded),  should  with  its  darkness  give 
light and illumination  to  the darkness  of the soul,  for  thus it 
was  fitting  that the  disciple  should  be  like  the  master.  For 
man,  who is  in  darkness,  could  not  fittingly  be  enlightened 
save  by  other  darkness,  even  as  David  teaches  us,  saying: 
Dies  diei  eructat  verbum  et  nox  nocti  indicat  scientiam.
1 
Which 
signifies:  Day unto  day  uttereth  and aboundeth  in speech, 
and night unto night showeth  knowledge.  Which, speaking 
more  clearly,  signifies:  The  day,  which  is  God  in  bliss, 
where it is  day to the blessed angels  and souls which are now 
day,  communicates  and  reveals
2 
the  Word,  which  is  His 
Son,  that they may know Him and rejoice in Him.  And the 
night,  which  is  faith  in  the  Church  Militant,  where  it is  still 
night,  shows  knowledge  to  the  Church,  and consequently  to 
every soul, which knowledge is  night to it, since it is  deprived 
of3  clear  beatific  wisdom;  and,  in  the  presence  of  faith, 
it is  blind as  to this  natural light. 
6.  So  that  which  is  to  be  inferred  from  this  is  that 
faith,  because it is  dark  night,  gives  light  to  the soul,  which 
is in darkness, that there may come to be fulfilled' that which 
David likewise  says  to  this  purpose,  in these  words:  Et nox 
illuminatio  mea  in  deliciis  meis.
5 
Which  signifies:  The  night 
will  be  my  illumination  in  my  delights.  Which  is  as  much 
as  to  say:  In  the  delights  of my  pure  contemplation  and 
union  with  God,  the  night  of  faith  shall  be  my  guide. 
Wherein  he  gives  it clearly  to  be  understood 
6 
that  the  soul 
must  be in darkness in order to have light for  this  road. 
7 
CHAPTER  IV 
Treats  in  general  of how  the  soul  likewise  must  be  in  darkness,  in  so 
far  as  this  rests  with  itself,  to  the  end  that  it may  be  effectively 
guided  by faith  to  the  highest  contemplation. 
I.  It is  now,  I  think,  becoming  clear  how  faith  is  dark 
night  to  the  soul,  and  how  the  soul  likewise  must  be  dark, 
1  P'salm  xviii,  3  [A.V.,  xix,  2]. 
3  Thus  e.p.  modifies  the  reading  of  the  codices:  • and  pronounces  the 
Word.'  a  E.p.:  • since  it does  not yet enjoy.' 
,  E.p.:  • that there may come and may be fulfilled.' 
a  Psalm cxxxviii,  II  [A. V.,  cxxxix,  II]. 
•  E.p.  abbreviates:  • Giving  it to be understood.' 
t  E.p.:  • in ord.er  to have light and to be able tQ  walk on this road..' 
74  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
or in darkness  as  to its own light,l so that it may allow itself 
to  be  guided  by  faith  to  this  high  goal  of union.  But,  in 
order that the soul may be able to do this, it will now be well 
to  continue  describing,  in  somewhat  greater  detail,  this 
darkness which the soul must have, in order that it may enter 
into  this  abyss  of faith.  And  thus  in  this  chapter  I  shall 
speak of it in a  general way;  and hereafter,  with the Divine 
favour,  I  shall  continue  to describe  more  minutely  the  way 
in  which  the  soul  is  to  conduct  itself  that  it  may  neither 
stray therein nor impede this  guide. 
2.  I  say,  then,  that  the  soul,  in  order  to  be  effectively 
guided  to  this  state  by faith,  must  not  only  be  in  darkness 
with  respect  to  that  part  that  concerns  the  creatures  and 
temporal  things,  which  is  the  sensual  and  the  lower  part 
(whereof we have already treated),  but that likewise it must 
be  blinded  and  darkened  according  to  the  part  which  has 
respect to God and to spiritual things,  which is  the  rational 
and  higher  part,2  whereof  we  are  now  treating.  For,  in 
order that one may attain supernatural transformation,  it is 
clear  that he  must  be  set  in  darkness  and  carried  far  away 
from  all  that  is  contained  in  his  nature,
3 
which  is  sensual 
and rational.  For the word supernatural means that ·which 
soars  above  the  natural;  so  that  the  natural  self remains 
beneath.  For,  although  this  transformation  and  union  is 
something  that cannot  be comprehended  by  human  ability 
and  sense,  it  must  completely  and  voluntarily  void  itself 
of all  that  can  enter  into  it,' whether  from  above  or  from 
below,-I  mean  according  to  the  affection  and will-so far 
as  this  rests  with  itself.  For  who  shall  prevent  God  from 
doing  that which  He will  in the soul  that is  resigned,  anni-
hilated  and  detached?  But  the  soul  must  be  voided  of all 
such things as can enterS its capacity, so that,
6 
however many 
supernatural  things  it  may  have,  it  will  ever  remain  as  it 
were  detached  from  them  and  in  darkness.  It  must  be 
like  to  a  blind  man,  leaning  upon  dark  faith,  taking  it for 
guide and light, and leaning upon none of the things that he 
understands,  experiences,  feels  and imagines.  For all  these 
1  A.  e.p.:  • its own natural light.' 
I  Ale.  alone reads:  • the reason and the higher part.' 
I  E.p.:  • all  that belongs to his nature.' 
•  So  Ale.  The  other authorities  have:  • that can  be  contained in it.' 
[The difference  is slight:  cae, for  cabe,.] 
,  The variant of  the preceding note is repeated here. 
•  E.p.  abbreviates;  • But  the  soul  must  be  voided  of  all  things,  so 
that.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  IV 
75 
are  darkness,  which  will  cause  him  to  stray;  and  faith  is 
above all that he understands and experiences and feels  and 
imagines.  And  if he  be  not  blinded  as  to  this,  and  remain 
not in total darkness,l he attains not to that which is  greater 
-namely, that which is  taught by faith. 
3.  A  blind man, if he  be not quite blind,  refuses  to  be led 
by  a  guide;  and,  since  he  sees  a  little,  he  thinks  it  better 
to go  in whatever happens to be the direction which  he can 
distinguish,  because  he  sees  none  better;  and  thus  he  can 
lead  astray  a  guide  who  sees  more  than  he,  for  after  all 
it  is  for  him  to  say  where  he  shall  go  rather  than  for  the 
guide. 
2 
In the same way  a  soul  may lean upon  any know-
ledge  of its  own,  or any feeling  or  experience  of God,  yet, 
however  great this  may  be,  it is  very  little  and far  different 
from  what God  is;  and,  in going  along' this  road,  a  soul  is 
easily led astray or forced  to  halt,  because it will  not remain 
in faith like  one that is  blind,  and faith is  its  true guide. 
4.  It is  this  that  was  meant  by  S.  Paul  when  he  said: 
Accedentem  ad  Deum  oportet  credere  quod  est. 
3 
Which  signifies  : 
He that would journey towards  union with  God  must needs 
believe  in  His  being.  As  though  he  had  said:  He  that 
would  attain  to  being joined  in  one  union  with  God  must 
not walk by understanding,  neither lean upon experience or 
feeling  or  imagination,  but  he  must  believe  in  His  Being,' 
which is  not perceptible to the understanding,  neither to  the 
desire  nor to  the imagination nor to any other sense,  neither 
can  it  be  known S  in  this  life  at  all.  Yea,  in  this  life,  the 
highest  thing  that  can  be  felt  and  experienced  concerning 
God  is  infini tely  remote  from  God  and  from  the  pure 
possession  of Him.  Isaiah and S.  Paul say:  Nec  oculus  vidit, 
nec auris audivit,  nec in cor hominis ascendit, qute prteparavit Deus iis, 
qui  diligunt  ilium. 
6 
Which  signifies:  That which  God  hath 
prepared for  them that love  Him neither eye hath seen,  nor 
ear heard,  neither hath it entered into the heart or thought 
of man.  So,  however greatly the soul aspires  to be perfectly 
united  through  grace  in this  life  with  that  to  which  it  will 
be  united through glory in the next  (which,  as  S.  Paul here 
1  A,  B, e.p.  add:  • with respect to it.' 
I  E.p.:  '  ... lead  astray his guide.  because  he  acts  as if he saw and 
it is for  him to say where he shall go  rather than for  the guide.' 
I  Hebrews  xi,  6. 
•  E.p.:  • but he must believe in the perfection  of  the  Divine  Being.' 
6  E.p.:  • known as it is.' 
•  Isaiah lxiv,  .. ;  I  Corinthians ii, 9 •. 
76  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARIMEL 
says,  eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  hath  it 
entered  into the  heart  of man  in  the  flesh!)  it is  clear that, 
in order perfectly to attain to union in this life through grace 
and  through  love,  a  soul  must  be  in  darkness  with  respect 
to all  that can enter through  the eye,  and to all that can be 
received  through  the  ear,  and  can  be  imagined  with  the 
fancy,  and  understood  with  the  heart,  which  here  signifies 
the soul.  .  And thus  a  soul is  greatly impeded from  reaching 
this  high  estate  of union  with  God  when  it  clings  to  any 
understanding  or  feeling  or  imagination  or  appearance  or 
will  or manner of its  own,  or to any other act or to anything 
of its  own,  and  cannot  detach  and  strip  itself of all  these. 
For,  as  we  say,  the  goal  which  it  seeks  is  beyond  all  this, 
yea,  beyond  even  the  highest  thing  that can  be  known  or 
experienced;  and  thus  a  soul  must  pass  beyond  everything 
to  unknowing. 
5.  Wherefore,  upon this road,  to enter upon the road is  to 
leave the road;  or, to express it better, it is  to pass on to the 
goal  and  to leave  one's  own  waY,2  and  to  enter  upon that 
which
3 
has no way,  which is  God.  For the soul  that attains 
to  this  state  has  no  longer  any  ways  or  methods,  still  less 
is  it  attached  to  such  things  or  can  be  attached  to  them. 
I  mean  ways  of  understanding,  or  of  experience,  or  of 
feeling;  although it has  within itself all  ways,  after the way 
of one  that possesses nothing, yet possesses all things.  For, if 
it have  courage  to  pass  beyond its  natural  limitations,  both 
interiorly  and  exteriorly,  it  enters  within  the  limits  of the\ 
supernatural,' which  has  no  way,  yet  in  substanceS  has  all 
ways.  Hence for  the soul to arrive at these  limits is  for  it to 
leave  these  limi ts,  in  each  case  going  forth  out  of itself a 
great  way, from  this lowly state to that which  is  high above 
all others. 
6.  Wherefore,  passing  beyond all  that can be known and 
understood,  both  spiritually  and  naturally,8  the  soul  will 
desire with all desire to come to that which in this life cannot 
be  known,  neither  can  enter  into  its  heart.  And,  leaving 
behind all that it experiences and feels,  both temporally and 
1  A,  B:  • heart of the flesh.' 
•  [The  word  translated' way'  is  modo,  which,  in  the  language  of 
scholastic  philosophy,  would  rather be translated' mode.'] 
3  A,  B:  • to enter upon the goal  which  .  .  : 
•  E.p.:  • it enters, without any limit, into the supernatural.' 
•  E.p.  has' eminently' for' in substance: 
•  .E.p.:  • and temporally.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  IV 
77 
spiritually,l  and  all  that it is  able  to  experience  and feel  in 
this  life,  it will  desire  with  all  desire  to come  to that which 
surpasses  all  feeling  and  experience.  And,  in  order  to  be 
frce  and void  to that end,  it must in no  wise  lay  hold  upon 
that which  it receives,  either spiritually or sensually,  within 
itself
2 
(as  we  shall  explain  presently,  when  we  treat  this 
in  detail),  considering it. all to  be of much less  account.  For 
the  more  emphasis  the soul  lays  upon  what it understands, 
experiences  and  imagines,  and  the  more  it  esteems  this, 
whether it be spiritual or no, the more it loses  of the supreme 
good,  and  the  more  it  is  hindered  from  attaining  thereto. 
And  the less  it thinks  of what it may  have,  however  much 
this  be,  in  comparison  with  the  highest  good,  the  more  it 
dwells  upon  that  good  and  esteems  it,  and,  consequently, 
the  more nearly it approaches it.  And in this  wise  the soul 
approaches a great way towards union, in darkness, by means 
of faith,  which  is  likewise  dark,  and in  this  wise  faith  won-
drously  illumines  it.  It is  certain  that,  if the  soul  should 
desire  to  see,  it  would  be  in  darkness  much  more  quickly, 
3 
with  respect  to  God,  than would  one  who  opens  his  eyes  to 
look  upon the great brightness of the sun.  • 
7.  Wherefore,  by  being  blind  in  its  faculties  upon  this 
road,  the soul  will  see  the light,  even  as  the Saviour says  in 
the  Gospel,  in this  wise:  In judicium  veni in  hunc  mundum:  ut 
qui  non  vitient,  videant,  et qui  vident,  cltci fiant. "  That is:  I  am 
come into this world for judgement;  that they which see not 
may see, and that they which see  may become  blind.  This, 
as  it  will  be  supposed,  is  to  be  understood  of this  spiritual 
road,  where  the  soul  that  is  in  darkness,5  and  is  blinded 
as to all its natural and proper lights, will see supernaturally; 
and  the  soul  that  would  depend  upon  any  light  of its  own 
w   ~ l   become  the  blinder  and  will  halt  upon  the  road  to 
umon. 
8.  And,  that we may proceed with less  confusion,  I  think 
it will  be necessary  to describe,  in the following  chapter, the 
nature of this  that we  call union of the soul  with God;  for, 
when  this  is  understood,  that  which  we  shall  say  hereafter 
1  Thus  Ale.  A,  B  have' spiritually'  only;  e.p.:  • both  spiritually 
and sensually.' 
I  [Lit.,  • either spiritually or sensually, in its soul:] 
a  A,  B:  'it would  be in mueh greater darkness: 
,  S.  John ix,  39. 
•  E.p.  omits  the  quotation  and  its  exposition,  abbreviating  thus: 
• the soul will see the light, so that the soul that is in darkness  .  .  .' 
ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
will  become much clearer.  And so  I  think the treatment of 
this  union  comes  well  at  this  point,  as  in  its  proper  place. 
For,  although  the  thread  of that  which  we  are  expounding 
is  interrupted  thereby,  this  is  not  done  without  a  reason, 
since it serves  to illustrate in this  place the very thing that is 
being  described.
1 
The chapter which  follows,  then,  will  be 
a  parenthetical  one,  placed,  as  it  were,  between  the  two 
terms  of  an  enthymeme,2  since  we  shall  afterwards  have 
to  treat  in  detail  of  the  three  faculties  of  the  soul,  with 
respect  to  the  three  theological  virtues,  in  relation  to  this 
second  night. 
CHAPTER  V 
Wherein  is  described  what  is  meant  by  union  of the  soul  with  God, 
and a comparison is given. 3 
I.  From  what  has  been  said  above  it  becomes  clear  to 
some  extent  what we  mean  by union of the soul  with  God; 
what  we  now  say  about  it,  therefore,  will  be  the  better 
understood.  It  is  not  my  intention  here  to  treat  of the 
1  A,  B  end  the chapter here.  2  E.p.  omits this phrase. 
3  As  the  Saint  has  explained  above,  this  is  a  parenthetical  chapter 
necessary  to  an  understanding  of  the  following  chapters  on  the  active 
purification  of  the  three  faculties  of  the  soul;  for,  in  order  to  make  an 
intelligent use  of  the  means  to an  end,  it is important to know what  that 
end is.  S.  Jehn of the Cross begins by setting aside the numerous divisions 
under  which  the  mystics  speak  of  union  with  God  and  deals  only  with 
that which  most  usually  concerns  the  soul,  namely  union  which  is  active, 
and  acquired  by  our  own  efforts,  together  with  the  habitual  aid  of  grace. 
This is the kind  of union  which  is  most suitably described  in  this treatise, 
which deals with  the intense activity of the soul with regard  to the purga-
tion  of  the  senses  and  faculties  as  a  necessary means  for  the  loving  trans-
formation  of the soul in God-the end and goal of all  the Saint's writings. 
In order  to forestall  any  grossly  erroneous  pantheistic interpretations,  we 
point  out,  with  the  author  of  the  MCduia  Mistica  (Trat.  V,  Chap.  i, 
No.2),  that by union  the  Saint  understands' a  linking and  conjoining  of 
two  things  which,  though  united,  are  still  different,  each,  as  S.  Thomas 
teaches  (Pt.  III,  q.  2,  a.  I),  keeping  its  own  nature,  for  otherwise  there 
would  not  be  union  hut identity.  linion  of  the  soul  with  God,  therefore, 
will  be  a  linking and conjoining  of the soul with God  and  of God  with the 
soul, for  the one cannot be united  with the other if the other be not united 
with  the  one,  so  that the  soul  is  still  the  soul  and  God  is  still  God.  But 
just  as,  when  two  things  are  united,  the  one  which  has  the  most  power, 
virtue  and  activity  communicates  its  properties  to  the  other,  just  so, 
since  God  has  greater  strength,  virtue  and  activity  than  the  soul,  He 
communicates  His  properties  to  it  and  makes  it,  as  it  were,  deific,  and 
leaves it, as it were, divinized, to a  greater or a  lesser degree, corresponding 
to the  greater  or  the  lesser  degree  of  union  between  the  two.'  This  con-
ception,  which  is  a  basic one in Christian mysticism,  is  that of S.  John of 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  V 
79 
divisions  of this  union,  nor  of its  parts,l  for  I  should  never 
end  if I  were  to  begin  now  to explain what is  the nature of 
union  of  the  understanding,  and  what  is  that  of  union 
according  to  the  will,  and  likewise  according  to  the 
memory;  and  likewise  what  is  transitory  and  what 
permanent  in  the  union  of  the  said  faculties;  and  then 
what  is  meant  by  total  union,  transitory  and  permanent, 
with  regard  to  the  said  faculties  all  together.  All  this  we 
shall  treat  gradually  in  our  discourse-speaking  first  of 
one and  then  of another.  But here  this  is  not to  the point 
in order to  describe  what we  have to say  concerning them ; 
it will  be explained 2  much  more fittingly  in  its  place,  when 
we  shall  again  be  treating  the  same  matter,  and shall  have 
a  striking  illustration, together with the present explanation, 
so  that  everything  will  then  be  considered  and  explained 
and we  shall judge of it better. 
2.  Here  I  treat  only  of this  permanent  and  total  union 
according to the substance  of the  soul  and its faculties  with 
respect  to  the  obscure  habit  of union:  for  with  respect  to 
the  act,  we  shall  explain  later,  with  the  Divine  favour, 
how  there  is  no  permanent  union  in  the  faculties,  in  this 
life,  but a  transitory union only. 
3.  In  order,  then,  to  understand  what  is  meant  by  this 
union  whereof we  are  treating,  it must  be  known  that  God 
dwells  and  is  present  substantially  in  every  soul,  even  in 
that  of the  greatest  sinner  in  the  world.  And  this  kind  of 
the Cross.  Had  all  his  commentators understood  that fact,  some  of  them 
would  have  been  saved  from  making  ridiculous  comparisons  of  him  with 
Gnostics,  Illuminists or even the Eastern seekers after Nirvana.  Actually, 
this Sa.int and  Doctor of the Church applies the tenets of Catholic theology 
to  the  union  of  the  soul  with  God,  presenting  them  in  a  condensed  and 
vigorous  form  and  keeping also  to strict psychological  truth,  as in  general 
do  the  other  Spanish  mystics.  This is  one  of his greatest merits.  In  this 
chapter  he  is  speaking,  not  of  essential  union,  which  has  nothing  to  do 
with  his  subject,  but  (presupposing  the union  worked  through  sanctifying 
grace  received  in  the  substance  of  the  soul,  which  is  the  source  of  the 
infused  virtues,  such as faith,  hope  and  charity,  and  the gifts  of the  Holy 
Spirit)  of  active  actual  union,  after  which  we  can  and  should  strive,  so 
that we  may will  what God wills and abhor what He abhors.  Though not 
the  only  kind  of  union,  it is  this  which  chiefly  concerns  the  soul;  and, 
when  once  this  is  attained,  God  readily  grants  all  other  mystical  gifts. 
Cf.  S.  Teresa's Mansions  (Fifth  Mansions, Chap.  iii). 
I  Only Ale.,  A,  B  have:  • nor of its  parts.' 
2  E.p.  abbreviates:  'And  it  is  not  now  our  intention  to  explain  in 
detail  what  is  the  union  of  the  understanding,  what  is  that  of  the  will, 
and  what  likewise  is  that  of  the  memory;  and  what  is  transitory  and 
What  permanent in  t   ~   said  faculties,  for  this  we  shall treat hereafter  and 
it will  be  explained  .  .  .' 
80  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
union
l 
is  ever  wrought  between  God and all  the  creatures, 
for  in  it  He  is  preserving  their  being;  so  that  if union  of 
this  kind  were  to  fail  them,  they  would  at  once  become 
annihilated and would cease to be.  And so,  when  we  speak 
of union ofthe soul with God, we speak not of this substantial 
union which is continually being wrought,2 but of the union 
and transformation of the soul with God,3 which is not being 
wrought continually, but only when there exists  that likeness 
that  comes  from  love;  we  shall  therefore  term  this  the 
union  of likeness,  even  as  that  other  union  is  called  sub-
stantial  or  essential.  The  former  is  natural;  the  latter 
supernatural.  And  the  latter  comes  to  pass  when  the  two 
wills-namely  that  of the  soul  and  that  of God-are con-
formed  together in one, and there is naught in the one that is 
repugnant to the other.  And thus, when  the soul  rids  itself 
totally  of that  which  is  repugnant  to  the  Divine  will  and 
conforms  not with  it, it is  transformed  in God  through love. 
4.  This  is  to  be  understood  of that  which  is  repugnant, 
not only in action,  but likewise  in habit, so  that not only do 
the  voluntary  acts  of" imperfection  cease,  but  the  habits 
of those  imperfections,  whatever  they  be,  are  annihilated.' 
And  since  no  creature  whatsoever,  or any of its  actions  or 
abilities,  can  conform  or  can attain  to  that  which  is  God, 
therefore  must  the  soul  be  stripped  of all  things  created, 
and  of its  own  actions  and  abilities-namely,  of its  under-
standing,  liking and feeling-so  that,  when all  that is  unlike 
God  and  unconformed  to  Him  is  cast  out,  the  soul  may 
receive the likeness of God;  and nothing will then remain in 
it that is not the will  of God  and it will  thus be  transformed 
in  God.  Wherefore,  although  it  is  true  that,  as  we  have 
said,  God  is  ever  in  the  soul,  giving  it,  and  through 
His  presence  preserving  within  it  its  natural  being,  yet 
He does  not  always  communicate  supernatural  being  to  it. 
For  this  is  communicated  only  by  love  and  grace,  which 
not all souls possess;  and all those that possess it have it not 
in  the  same  degree;  for  some  have  attained more degrees 
of love  and  others  fewer.  Wherefore  God  communicates 
Himself most  to  that  soul  that  has  progressed  farthest  in 
love;  namely,  that  has  its  will  in  closest  conformity  with 
1  E.p.  adds:  • or  presence  (which  we  may  call  that  of  the  order  of 
nature).' 
I  E.p.:  • we  speak not of this presence of God  which  ever exists in all 
the creatures.'  I  E.p.  adds:  'through love.' 
•  E.p.  abbreviates:  'but also  the habits.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  V  81 
the  will  of God.  And  the  soul  that  has  attained  complete 
conformity  and  likeness  of will  is  totally  united  and  trans-
formed  in  God  supernaturally.  Wherefore,  as  has  already 
been  explained,  the  more  completely  a  soul  is  wrapped  up 
in
l 
the creatures and in its  own abilities,  by habit and affec-
tion,  the  less  preparation  it  has  for  such  union;  for  it 
gives  not God a  complete opportunity to  transform it super-
naturally.  The soul,  then,  needs  only  to  strip  itself of these 
natural  dissimilarities  and  contrarieties,  so  that  God,  Who 
is  communicating  Himself naturally  to  it,  according  to  the 
course  of  nature,  may  communicate  Himself  to  it  super-
naturally,  by means of grace. 
2 
5.  And it is  this  that S. John desired  to  explain,  when  he 
said:  Q,ui  non  ex  sanguinibus,  neque  ex  voluntate  earn is,  neque  ex 
voluntate  viri,  sed  ex  Deo  nati  sunt.
3 
As  though  he  had  said  : 
He gave power to be sons of God-that is,  to be transformed 
in  God-only to  those  who are  born,  not of blood-that is, 
not  of  natural  constitution  and  temperament-neither  of 
the  will  of  the  flesh-that  is,  of  the  free  will  of  natural 
capacity  and  ability-still less  of the  will  of man-wherein 
is  included  every  way  and  manner of judging and compre-
hending  with  the  understanding.  He  gave  power  to  none 
of these  to  become  sons  of God,  but  only  to  those  that are 
born of God-that is,  to those who being  born again  through 
grace,  and  dying  first  of all  to  everything  that is  of the  old 
man,  are  raised  above  themselves  to  the  supernatural,  and 
receive from God this rebirth and adoption, which transcends 
all  that can be imagined.  For,  as  S. John himself says  else-
where:  Nisi qui.r renatusfuerit ex aqua,  et Spiritu Sancto, non potest 
videre  regnum  Dei."  This signifies:  He that is  not born again 
in the Holy Spirit will not be able to see this kingdom of God, 
which is  the state of perfection;  and to be born again in the 
Holy SpiritS in this life
6 
is  to have a  soul  most like  to God in 
purity,  having in itself no admixture of imperfection, so  that 
pure transformation can be wrought in it through participa-
tion  of union,  albeit  not  essentially. 
1  [Lit .• • is  clothed  with.'] 
•  2  E.p.  reads:  • The  soul,  then,  needs  to  strip  itself  of  these  natural 
                   and  contrarieties,  so  that  God,  Who  is  naturally present in 
It by means  of essence.  may  communicate Himself  supernaturally to it by 
means  of  grace.  in the transformation  of  union.' 
3  S.  John i,  13.  4  S.  John iii,  5. 
   E.p.  omits  the  whole  of  the  first  pa.rt  of  this  paragraph.  beginning 
thus:  'For the  estate  of  perfection and  re-birth  in  the  Holy  Sllirit  .. .' 
r.  l\,  n:  'in this life  perfectly.' 
82  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
6.  In order that both these things may be the better under-
stood, let us make a comparison.  A ray of sunlight is striking 
a  window.  If the  window  is  in  any  way  stained  or  misty, 
the  sun's  ray  will  be  unable  to illumine it and  transform it 
into its  own light, totally,  as  it would  if it were clean  of all 
these  things,  and  pure;  but  it  will  illumine  it  to  a  lesser 
degree,  in proportion  as  it is  less  free  from  those  mists  and 
stains;  and will  do so  to a  greater degree,  according as it is 
cleaner from  them, 
1 
and this will not be because of the sun's 
ray,  but because  of itself;  so  much so  that,  if it  be  wholly 
pure  and  clean,  the  ray  of sunlight  will  transform  it  and 
illumine it in such wise that it will itself seem to be a  ray and 
will  give  the same light as  the ray.  Although in reality the 
window  has  a  nature  distinct  from  that  of  the  ray  itself, 
however much it may resemble it, yet we  may say that that 
window is  a  ray of the sun or is  light by participation.  And 
the soul  is  like  this  window,  whereupon is  ever  beating  (or, 
to  express  it  better,  wherein  is  ever  dwelling)  this  Divine 
light  of the  Being  of God  according  to  nature,  which  we 
have  described. 
7.  In thus allowing God to work in it, the soul  (having rid 
itself of every  mist  and stain of the creatures,  which  consists 
in  having  its  will  perfectly  united  with  that  of God,  for  to 
love is  to labour to detach and strip itselffor God's sake of all 
that  is  not  God)  is  at  once  illumined  and  transformed  in 
God,  and  God  communicates  to  it  His  supernatural Being, 
in such  wise  that it appears  to  be  God  Himself,  and  has  all 
that God  Himself has.  And  this  union comes  to  pass  when 
God  grants  the  soul  this  supernatural  favour,2  that  all  the 
things of God and the soul are one in participant transforma-
tion;  and the soul seems  to  be God  rather than a  soul,  and 
is  indeed  God  by  participation;  although it is  true  that its 
natural  being,  though  thus  transformed,  is  as  distinct  from 
the  Being  of God  as  it  was  before,  even  as  the  window  has 
likewise  a  nature distinct from  that of the  ray,  though  it is 
illumined by it. 
8.  This  makes  it clearer  that  the  preparation  of the  soul 
for  this  union,  as  we  said,  is  not  that  it should  understand 
or experience or feel  or imagine anything, concerning either 
God or aught else,  but that it should have purity and love-
that is,  perfect resignation and detachment  from  everything 
1  E.p.  omits:  • and will  ... from  them.' 
I  A, B, C,  e.p.  have:  • this sovereign favour.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  V 
for God's sake alone; 1  and, as there can be no perfect trans-
formation if there be not perfect purity, and as  the enlighten-
ment,  illumination  and  union  of the  soul  with  God  will  be 
according to the proportion of its  purity, in greater or in less 
degree;  yet  the  soul  will  not  be  perfect,  as  I  say,  if it  be 
not wholly  and  perfectly2  bright and clean. 
g.  This  will  likewise  be  understood  by  the  following· 
comparison.  A picture is  most perfect,  with  many and most 
sublime  beauties  and  delicate  and  subtle  brilliance,  and 
some  of its  beauties  are so  fine  and  subtle  that  they  cannot 
be  completely  realized  because  of their  delicacy  and  excel-
lence.  Less  beauty and delicacy will  be seen  in  this  picture 
by one whose  vision is  less  clear and refined  ;  and he whose 
vision  is  somewhat  more  refined  will  be  able  to  see  in  it 
greater  beauties  and  perfections;  and,  if  another  person 
has  a  vision  still  more  refined,  he will  see  still  greater  per-
fection  ; 3  and  finally,  he  who  has  the  clearest  and  purest 
faculties  will  see
4 
the  greatest  beauties  and  perfections 
of all;  for there is  so  much to see in  the image that, however 
far  one  may  attain,  there  will  ever  remain higher degrees  of 
attainment. 
10.  After the same manner we may describe the condition 
of  the  soul  with  respect  to  God  in  this  enlightenment  or 
transformation.  For, although it is  true that a  soul,  accord-
ing  to  its  greater  or smaller  capacity,  may  have  attained  to 
union,  yet  not all  do so  in  the same  degree,  for  this  depends 
upon what the Lord desires  to grant to each one.  It is  in this 
way  that souls  see  God in  Heaven;  some more,  some  less  ;5 
but  all  see  Him,  and  all  are  content,
6 
for  their  capacity  is 
satisfied. 
I  I.  Wherefore,  although  in  this  life  here  below  we  find 
certain  souls  enjoying  equal  peace  and  tranquillity  in  the 
state of perfection, and each one of them satisfied, yet some of 
them  may  be  many degrees  higher  than  others.  All,  how-
ever,  will  be  equally  satisfied,  because  the  capacity  of each 
:? 
1  E.p.  modiflCs:  'that  the  preparation  for  this  union  is  purity  and 
love-that  is,  perfect  resignation  and  total  detachment,  for  God's  sake 
alone.' 
2  [Lit.,  '  wholly  perfect and  .. .'] 
3  E.}>.:  'and he whose  vision is more refined  will be able to see greater 
beauties;  and, if another person has a  vision  still more refined,  he will  be 
able  to see still greater perfection.' 
4  E.p.:  'will be able to see.' 
6  E.p.:  'some more  perfectly,  some less  so.' 
e  E.p.:  'content and  satisfied.' 
L 
84  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
one  is  satisfied.
1 
But  the  soul  that  attains  not  to  such  a 
measure  of  purity  as  is  in  conformity  with  its  capacity2 
never  attains  true  peace  and  satisfaction,  since  it  has  not 
attained to the possession  of that detachment and emptiness 
in its  faculties  which is  required for  simple  union. 
3 
CHAPTER  VI 
Wherein  is  described  how  it  is  the  three  theological  virtues  that 
perfect  the  three  faculties  of the  soul,  and  how  the  said  virtues 
produce  emptiness  and  darkness  within  them. 
4 
I.  Having  now  to  endeavour  to  show  how  the  three 
faculties  of  the  soul-understanding,  memory  and  will-
are  brought  into  this  spiritual  night,  which  is  the  means  to 
Divine  union,  it  is  necessary  first  of all  to  explain  in  this 
chapter  how  the  three  theological  virtues-faith,  hope  and 
charity-which have  respect  to  the  three faculties  aforesaid 
as to their proper supernatural objects, and
s 
by means where-
of  the  soul  is  united  with  God  according  to  its  faculties, 
produce  the  same  emptiness  and  darkness,  each  one  with 
regard to its faculty.  Faith, in the understanding;  hope, in 
the  memory;  and  charity,  in  the  will.  And afterwards  we 
shall  go  on  to  describe  how  the  understanding  is  perfected 
in the darkness  of faith;  and  the  memory in the  emptiness 
of hope;  and  likewise  how  the  will  must  be  buried  in 
8 
the 
withdrawal  and  detachment  of the  affection  that  the  soul 
may journey to God.  This done,  it will  be clearly seen how 
necessary  it  is  for  the  soul,  if it  is  to  walk  securely  on  this 
spiritual  road,  to  travel  through  this  dark  night,  leaning 
upon  these  three  virtues,  which  empty  it  of all  things  and 
make  it  dark  with  respect  to  them.  For,  as  we  have  said, 
the  soul  is  not  united  with  God  in  this  life  through  under-
standing,  nor through  enjoyment,  nor through the imagina-
tion,  nor  through  any sense  whatsoever;  but only  through 
1  E.p.:  . equally  satisfied,  each  one  according  to  his  preparation  and 
the  knowledge  that he has of God.' 
:  E.p.:  . to such  a  measure of purity as seems  to be  demanded by the 
enlightenment and vocation [that have  been granted it]  from  God.' 
•  A.  B:  'simple union with God.' 
,  E.p.  adds:  'To  this  purpose  are  quoted  two  passages,  one  from 
S.  Luke  and  the other from  Isaiah.' 
fi  E.p.  omits:  . which  have  ... objects,  and '. 
S  So  Ale.,  B  ['  enterrar '].  A,  e.p.  have  [' entrar:  which  changes  the 
reading to]  , must  enter into.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  VI 
faith,  according  to  the  understanding;  and  through  hope, 
according  to  the  memory;  and  through  love,  according  to 
the  will.
1 
2.  These three virtues, as we have said, all cause emptiness 
in  the  faculties:  faith,  in  the  understanding,  causes  an 
emptiness  and  darkness  with  respect  to  understanding; 
hope,  in  the  memory,  causes  emptiness  of all  possessions; 
and  charity  causes  emptiness  in  the  will  and  detachment 
from  all  affection  and from  rejoicing in all  that is  not  God. 
For we see  that faith  tells  us  what cannot be understood with 
the  understanding. 
2 
Wherefore  S.  Paul  spoke  of  it  ad 
Hebrt20s  after  this  manner:  Fides  est  sperandarum  substantia 
rerum,  argumentum  non  apparentium.
3 
This  we  interpret  as 
meaning  that  faith  is  the  substance  of  things  hoped  for; 
and, although the understanding may be consenting thereto, 
firmly  and  certainly,  they  are  not  things  that  are  revealed 
to  the  understanding;  for,  if they were  revealed  to it,  there 
would  be  no  faith.  So  faith,  although it brings  certainty  to 
the  understanding,  brings  it not clearness,  but  obscurity. 
3.  Then,  as  to hope,  there is  no  doubt  but that it renders 
the  memory  empty  and  dark  with  respect  both  to  things 
below  and  to  things  above.  For  hope  has  always  to  do 
,vith  that  which  is  not  possessed;  for,  if it  were  possessed, 
there  would  be  no  more  hope.  Wherefore  S.  Paul  says 
ad  Romanos:  Spes,  QUt2  videtur,  non  est  spes:  nam quod videt  quis, 
quid sperat?4  That is  to say:  Hope that is  seen is  not hope; 
for  what a  man seeth-that is,  what a  man possesseth-how 
doth  he  hope  for  it?5  This  virtue,  then,  makes  emptiness 
also, for  it has  to do with that which is  not possessed  and not 
with  that which is  possessed. 
4.  Similarly,  charity  causes  emptiness  in  the  will  with 
respect  to  all  things,  since  it  obliges  us  to  love  God  above 
them all  ;  which cannot be unless we  withdraw our affection 
from  them all in order to set it wholly upon God.  Wherefore 
ehrist
6 
says,  through  S.  Luke:  Qui  non  renuntiat  omnibus 
1  E.p.:  • and  through  hope,  which  may  be  attributed  to  the  memory 
(although  it is in the  will)  with  respect  to  the emptiness and  forgetfulness 
of every other temporal and fleeting thing which it causes, the soul keeping 
Itself entirely for  the supreme good  for  which it hopes;  and  through love, 
according  to the  will.' 
2  E.p.  adds:  • according  to  its natural  light and  reason.' 
8  Hebrews  xi,  I.  '  Romans  viii,  24. 
6  A,  B:  'for  if  a  man  possessetb  what  he  seeth,  how  doth  he  hope 
for  it ? ' 
6  A,  n:    C h r i ~ t   Our  Lord: as in  several other places  below. 
86  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
qUte  possidet,  non  potest  meus  esse  discipulus.
1 
Which signifies: 
He  that  renounceth  not  all  that  he  possesseth  with  the  will 
cannot  be  My disciple.  And  thus  all  these  three virtues  set 
the soul in obscurity and emptiness with respect to all  things. 
5.  And  here  we  must  consider  that  parable  which  our 
Redeemer  taught in  the eleventh chapter of S.  Luke, where-
in  He said  that a  friend  had  to go  out at midnight in  order 
to  ask  his  friend  for  three  loaves; 2  the  which  loaves  signify 
these  three  virtues.  And  he  said  that  he  asked  for  them  at 
midnight in  order  to  signify  that the soul  that is  in darkness 
as  to  all  things  must  acquire  these  three  virtues
3 
according 
to  its  faculties  and  must  perfect  itself in  them  in  this  night. 
I n  the sixth chapter of Isaiah we  read that the two seraphim 
whom  this  Prophet  saw  on  either  side  of God  had  each  six 
wings;  with  twain  they  covered  their  feet,  which  signified 
the  blinding and quenching of the affections of the will  with 
respect  to  all  things  for  the  sake  of God;  and  with  twain 
they  covered  their  face,  which  signified  the  darkness  of the 
understanding  in  the  presence  of  God;  and  with  the 
other  twain  they  did  fly. 
4 
This  is  to  signify  the  flight  of 
hope  to  the  things  that  are  net  possessed,  when  it is  raised 
above  all  that  it  can  possess,  below  or  above,  apart  from 
God. 
6.  To these  three  virtues,  then,  we  have  to  lead  the  three 
faculties  of the  soul,  informing  each  faculty  by  each  one  of 
them, and stripping it and setting it in darkness
5 
as  concern-
ing  all  things  save  only  these  three  virtues.  And  this  is  the 
spiritual  night  which  just  now  we  called  active;  for  the 
soul does  that which it is  able to do in order to enter therein. 
And even as,  in the night of sense,  we  described a  method of 
voiding  the  faculties  of sense  of their  sensible  objects,  with 
regard  to  the  desire,  so  that  the  soul  might  go  forth  from 
the  beginning  of its  course  to  the  middle,  which  is  faith; 
even  so,  in  this  spiritual  night,  with  the  favour  of  God, 
we  shall  describe  a  method  whereby  the  spiritual  faculties 
are  voided  and  purified  of all  that  is  not  God,  and  are  set 
in  the darkness of these three virtues, which, as  we have said, 
J  S.  Luke  xiv,  33. 
2  S.  Luke xi,  5.  E.p.  omits:  'his friend.' 
3  E.p.:  'must prepare itself  for  the perfection  of  these  three  virtues.' 
•  Isaiah  vi,  2. 
6  E.p.:  'informing the  understanding  by faith,  stripping  the  memory 
of every  possession  and  informing  the will  by  charity, stripping  them and 
setting  them in  darkness  .  .  .' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  VII 
are  the  means  and  preparation  for  the  union  of the  soul 
with  God. 
7.  In this  method  is  found  all  security  against  the  crafts 
of  the  devil  and  against  the  efficacyl  of self-love  and  its 
ramifications,  which  is  wont  most  subtly  to  deceive  and 
hinder  spiritual  persons  on  their  road,  when  they  know 
not  how  to  become  detached  and  to  govern  themselves 
according to these three virtues;  and thus they are never able 
to  reach  the substance  and purity of spiritual  good,  nor  do 
they journey by so straight and short a  road as  they might. 
8.  And it must be noted that I  am now speaking particu-
larly  to  those  who  have  begun  to  enter  the  state  of con-
templation,  because  as  far  as  this  concerns  beginners  it 
must be described  somewhat more amply,2 as  we  shall  note 
in  the  second  book,  God  willing,  when  we  treat  of  the 
properties  of these  beginners. 
CHAPTER  VII 
Wherein  is described  how  strait  is  the  way  that  leads to  eternal
3
life 
and  how  completely  detached  and  disencumbered  must  be  those 
that  will walk  in  it.  We  begin  to  speak  of the  detachment  of 
the  understanding. 
I.  We have now to describe the detachment and purity of 
the  three  faculties  of the  soul  and  for  this  are  necessary  a 
far  greater  knowledge  and  spirituality  than  mine,  in  order 
to  make  clear  to  spiritual  persons  how  strait  is  this  road 
which,  said  Our Saviour,  leads  to life;  so  that they may be 
persuaded  hereof  and  not  marvel  at  the  emptiness  and 
detachment to which,  in this  night,  we have to abandon the 
faculties  of the soul. 
2.  To  this  end  must  be  carefully  noted  the  words  which 
Our  Saviour  used,  in  the  seventh  chapter  of S.  Matthew, 
concerning  this  road,
4 
as  follows:  Quam  angusta  porta,  et 
arcta  via  est,  qUiZ  ducit  ad  vitam,  et pauci  sunt,  qui  inveniunt  eam.
5 
This  signifies:  How  strait  is  the gate  and  how  narrow  the 
1  E.p.  reads' craft' for' efflcacy.' 
2  So  Ale.  A,  13  end  the  chapter  here.  E.p.  omits  the  reference  to 
the' second  hook'  as  being  inexact,  and  adds  simply:  • [more  amply] 
When  we  treat of the properties of these beginners.' 
3  E.p.  omits' eternal.' 
t  E.p.  adds:  • which  [words]  we  sha.ll  now  apply  to  this  dark  night 
and lofty  roa.d  of perfection.'  '  S.  Matthew  vii,  14. 
88  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
way  that  leadeth  unto  life,  and  few  there  be  that find  it ! 
In  this  passage  we  must  carefully  note  the  emphasis  and 
insistence  which  are  contained  in  that word  Q1lam.  For it 
is  as  if He had said:  In truth the way is  very strait, more so 
than you think.  And likewise  it is  to be noted  that He says 
first  that  the  gate  is  strait,  to  make  it  clear  that,  in  order 
for  the  soul  to  enter  this  gate,  which  is  Christ,  and  which 
comes  at  the  beginning  of the  road,  the  will  must  first  be 
straitened  and detached  in all  things  sensual  and  temporal, 
and  God' must  be  loved  above  them  all;  which  belongs  to 
the night of sense,  as  we  have said. 
3.  He  next  says  that  the  road  is  narrow-that is  to  say, 
the  road  of perfection-in  order  to  make  it  clear  that,  to 
travel  upon  the  road of perfection,  the soul  has  not only  to 
enter  by  the  strait  gate,1  emptying itself of things  of sense, 
but  that  it  has  also  to  constrain 
2 
itself,  freeing  and  disen-
cumbering  itself completely  in  that  which  pertains  to  the 
spirit.  And  thus  we  can  apply  what  He  says  of the  strait 
gate  to  the  sensual  part of man;  and  what  He says  of the 
narrow  road  we  can  understand  of  the  spiritual  or  the 
rational  part;  and,  when  He says' Few  there  be  that find 
it,'  the reason  of this  must be noted,  which  is  that there are 
few  who  can  enter,  and  desire  to  enter,  into  this  complete 
detachment and emptiness of spirit.  For this path ascending 
the high mountain of perfection leads upward, and is narrow, 
and  therefore  requires  such  travellers  as  have  no  burden 
weighing  upon  them  with  respect  to  lower  things,  neither 
aught  that embarrasses  them with  respect  to  higher  things: 
and  as  this  is  a  matter  wherein  we  must  seek  after  and 
attain  to  God  alone,  God  alone  must  be  the  object  of our 
search  and  attainment. 
4.  Hence  it  is  clearly  seen  that  the  soul  must  not  only 
be disencumbered from  that which belongs  to the creatures, 
but likewise,  as  it travels,  must be annihilated and detached 
from  all  that  belongs  to  its  spirit.  Wherefore  Our  Lord, 
instructing us and leading us into this road, gave, in the eighth 
chapter  of  S.  Mark,  that  wonderful  teaching  of  which  I 
think it may almost be said  that, the more  necessary it is  for 
spiritual  persons,  the less  it is  practised  by  them. 
3 
As  this 
teaching  is  so  important  and  so  much  to  our  purpose,  I 
1  A alone reads:  'by the road of perfection, that is, by the strait gate.' 
I  [Lit.,  '  to straiten':  the Spanish verb is derived  from  the adjective.] 
:I  From this point to the Latin text is omitted by A and B. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  VII 
89 
shall  reproduce  it here in full,  and  expound  it according  to 
its  real and spiritual sense.  He says,  then, thus:  Si quis  vult 
me  sequi,  deneget  semetipsum:  et  tollat crucem  suam,  et sequatur  me. 
Q,ui  enim  voluerit  animam  suam  salvam  jacere,  perdet  eam:  qui 
autem  perdiderit  animam  suam  propter  me  .  .  . salvam jaciet  eam.l 
This  signifies:  If any  man  will  follow  My  road,  let  him 
deny  himself and  take  up  his  cross  and follow  Me.  For he 
that will  save  his  soul  shall  lose  it;  but he  that loses  it for 
My sake,  shall gain it. 
5.  Oh,  that  one  might  show  us  how  to  understand, 
practise  and  experience  what  this  counsel  is  which 2  our 
Saviour here  gives  us  concerning  the  denial  of ourselves,  so 
that spiritual persons  might see  in how different  a  way  they 
should 
3 
conduct themselves  upon this  road from  that which 
many of them think proper!  For they believe that any kind 
of retirement  and  reformation  of life  suffices;  and  others 
are  content  with  practising  the  virtues  and  continuing  in 
prayer  and  pursuing  mortification;  but  they  attain  not 
to  detachment  and  poverty  or  denial  or  spiritual  purity 
(which  are all one),  which  the Lord  here commends  to  us  ; 
for  they prefer feeding  and clothing their natural selves  with 
spiritual  feelings  and  consolations,'  to  stripping  themselves 
of all  things,  and  denying  themselves  all  things,  for  God's 
sake.  For  they  think  that  it  suffices  to  deny  themselves 
worldly  things  without  annihilating  and  purifying  them-
selves  of spiritual  attachment.  Wherefore  it comes  to  pass 
that, when there presents itself to them any of this  solid  and 
perfect
6 
spirituality,  consisting  in  the  annihilation  of  all 
sweetness  in God,  in aridity,  distaste  and trial,  which  is  the 
true  spiritual  cross,  and  the  detachment  of  the  spiritual 
poverty of Christ,  they flee  from  it as  from  death,  and  seek 
only sweetness  and delectable communion with  God.  This 
is  not  self-denial  and  detachment  of  spirit,  but  spiritual 
gluttony.  Herein  they  become  spiritually  enemies  of the 
cross of Christ;  for  true spirituality seeks  for  God's sake that 
which  is  distasteful  rather  than  that  which  is  delectable; 
and  inclines  itself rather  to  suffering  than  to  consolation  ; 
and  desires  to  go  without all  blessings  for  God's  sake  rather 
than to possess them;  and to endure aridities and affiictiom 
rather  than  to  enjoy  sweet  communications,  knowing  that 
1  S.  Mark  viii.  34-5. 
2  E.p.:  • what is  contained in  this so  lofty instruction  which  ••  .-
S  A.  B. e.p.  have' it behoves 1hem to • for' they should.' 
,  E.p.:  . with  consola.tions.'  I  E.p.  omits:  . and  perfect 
go  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
this  is  to  follow  Christ  and  to  deny  oneself,  and  that  the 
other  is  perchance  to  seek  oneself  in  God,  which  is  clean 
contrary  to  love.
l 
For  to  seek  oneself in  God  is  to  seek  the 
favours  and  refreshments  of God;  but  to  seek  God  in  one-
self is  not only to desire  to  be without both of these for  God's 
sake,  but  to  incline  oneself  to  choose,  for  Christ's  sake, 
all  that  is  most  distasteful,  whether  as  to  God  or  as  to  the 
world;  and this  is  love of God. 
6.  Oh  that  someone  could  tell  us  how  far  Our  Lord 
desires  this  self-denial  to  be  carried!  It  must  certainly  be 
like  to  death  and  annihilation,  temporal,  natural  and 
spiritual,  in  all things that the  will  esteems,  wherein  consists 
all  self-denial. 2  And it is  this that Our Lord meant when He 
said:  He that will  save his  life,  the same shall  lose  it.  That 
is  to say:  He that will  possess  anything or seek anything for 
himself,  the same shall  lose  it;  and  he that loses  his  soul  for 
My sake,  the  same  shall  gain  it.  That is  to  say:  He  that 
for  Christ's  sake  renounces  all  that  his  will  can  desire  and 
enjoy,  and  chooses  that  which  is  most  like  to  the  Cross 
(which  the  Lord  Himself,  through  S.  John,  describes  as 
hating  his  soul), 3  the  same  sh"lll  gain  it.  And  this  His 
Majesty  taught  to  those  two  disciples  who  went and  begged 
Him for  a  place  on  His  right  hand  and 011  His  left;  when, 
giving  them  no  reply  to  their  request  f()f  such  glory,  He 
offered them the cup which  He had to driIlk,  as  a  thing more 
precious and more secure upon this earth than is  fruition. 4 
7.  This  cup  is  the  death  of  the  natural  s e   f ~   which  is 
attained  through  the soul's  detachment and annihilation,  in 
order  that  the  soul  may  travel  by  this  narrow  path,  with 
respect  to  all  that can  belong  to  it according  to  sense,  as  we 
have  said;  and  according  to  the  spirit,5  as  we  shall  now 
say;  that  is,  in its  understanding  and  in  its  enjoyment  and 
in its feeling.  And,  as  a  result,  not only is  the soul  detached 
as  to all this,  but, having  this spiritual help, it is  not hindered 
upon  the  narrow  road,  since  there remains  to it  naught  else 
than  self-denial  (as  the  Saviour  explains),  and  the  Cross, 
which is the staff whereby one may reach Him, 6  and whereby 
1  A,  13  omit this  last cla.use. 
2  So  Ale.,  A,  B,  C,  D.  E.p.  has:  'all gain.'  Tile gain,  however  [says 
P.  Silverio],  is  rather  a.  result  of  the  complete  self-denial  of  whieh  the 
Saint  i ~   here  speaking. 
3  S.  John xii,  25.  C  S.  Matthew xx,  22. 
5  Thus e.p.  Ak.,  A,  II  [and  P.  Silverio)  read' soul' for' spirit,' 
~   E.p.:  'the statl  whereon  to  lean.'  . 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  VII  gl 
the road is greatly lightened and made easy.  Wherefore Our 
Lord  said  through  S.  Matthew:  My  yoke  is  easy  and  My 
burden is  light;l  which  burden is  the  cross.  For if a  man 
resolve  to  submit  himself to  carrying  this  cross-that  is  to 
say,  if he resolve  to desire in truth to meet trials and to  bear 
them  in  all  things  for  God's  sake,  he  will  find  in  them  all 
great  relief and  sweetness  wherewith  he  may  travel  upon 
this  road,  detached  from  all  things  and  desiring  nothing. 
Yet,  if he  desire  to  possess  anything-whether it come from 
God  or from  any other source,-with any feeling  of attach-
ment,  he  is  not  detacqed  and  has  not  denied  himself in  all 
things;  and  thus  he  will  be  unable  to  walk  along  this 
narrow path or to climb  upward by it.
2 
8.  I  would,  then,  that  I  could  convince spiritual  persons 
that  this  road  to  God  consists  not in a  multiplicity of medi-
tations  nor in ways  or methods of such,  nor in  consolations, 
although  these  things  may in their own  way  be  necessary  to 
beginners;  but that it consists  only in the  one thing  that is 
needful,  which is  the ability to  deny oneself truly,  according 
to  that which  is  without and to  that which  is  within,  giving 
oneself up  to  suffering  for  Christ's  sake,  and  to  total  anni-
hilation.  For  the  soul  that  thus  denies  itself  will  achieve 
this  suffering  and  annihilation,  and  more  also,  and  will 
likewise  find  more  than  suffering  and  annihilation  therein. 
And if a  soul  be found  wanting in this  exercise,  which  is  the 
sum  and  root  of  the  virtues,  all  its  other  methods  are  so 
much  wandering  about in  a  maze,  and  profiting  not at all, 
although  its  meditations  and  communications  may  be  as 
lofty  as  those  of the  angels. 
3 
For  progress  comes  not  save 
through  the imitation of Christ,  Who is  the  Way,  the Truth 
and the Life,  and no man comes  to  the Father but by Him, 
even  as  He  Himself says  through  S.  John.
4 
And  elsewhere 
He says:  I  am the door; by Me if any man enter in he shall 
be  saved. 
5 
Wherefore,  as  it  seems  to  me,  any  spirituality 
that  would  fain  walk  in  sweetness  and  with  ease,  and  flees 
from  the imitation of Christ,  is  worthless. 
g.  And,  as  I  have  said  that  Christ  is  the  Way,  and  that 
this  Way is  death to our natural selves, in things both of sense 
and of spirit, I  will now explain how we are to  die, following 
the  example  of Christ,  for  He is  our example  and light. 
I  S.  Matthew  xi,  30.  B  E.p.  omits' upward.' 
3  E.p.  has' very  lofty'  and  omits' as  those  of  the  angels,'  which  is 
found,  however,  in all  the codices. 
,  S.  John xiv,  6,  6  S.  John x, 9. 
92  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
10.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  certain  that  He  died  as  to 
sense,  spiritually,  in  His  life;  and  also,  naturally,  at  His 
death.  For,  as  He  said,  He  had  not  in  His  life  where  to 
lay  His head,  and, in  His  death,  this was  even truer. 
I  I.  In the second  place,  it is  certain that,  at  the  moment 
of His  death,  He was  likewise  annihilated 
1 
in  His  soul,  and 
was  deprived of any relief and consolation,  since  His  Father 
left  Him in 2  the most intense aridity,  according  to  the lower 
part of His  nature. 
3 
Wherefore He had perforce to cry out, 
saying:  My  God!  My  God!  Why  hast  Thou  forsaken 
Me?4  This  was  the  greatest  desolation,  with  respect  to 
sense, that He had suffered in His life. Ii  And thus He wrought 
herein 6  the greatest work that He had ever wrought, whether 
in miracles or in mighty works,  during the whole of His  life, 
either  upon  earth  or  in  Heaven,7  which  was  the  reCOll-
ciliation  and  union  of mankind,  through  grace,  with  God. 
And  this  was,  as  I  say,  at  the  moment  and  the  time  when 
this  Lord  was  most  completely  annihilated  in  everything. 
That  is  to  say,  with  respect  to  human  reputation;  since, 
when  they  saw  Him  die, II  they  mocked  Him  rather  than 
esteemed  Him;  and  also  with  respect  to  nature,  since  His 
nature was  annihilated  when  He died;  and  with  respect  to 
the  spiritual
9 
consolation  and  protection  of  the  Father, 
since  at  that  time  He  forsook  Him,  that  He  might  pay  the 
whole  of man's  debt  and  unite  him  with  God,  being  thus 
annihilated and reduced as it were
10 
to  nothing.  Wherefore 
David  says  concerning  Him:  Ad  nihilum  redactus  sum,  et 
nescivi.ll  This  he  said  that  the  truly  spiritual  man  may 
understand the mystery of the gate and of the  way  of Christ, 
in  order  to  be  united  with  God,  and  may  know  that,  the 
more completely he  is  annihilated for  God's sake,  according 
to  these  two  parts,  the  sensual  and  the  spiritual,  the  more 
completely is  he united  to  God  and  the  greater  is  the  work 
which he accomplishes.  And when he  comes  to  be reduced 
to  nothing,  which  will  be  the greatest extreme  of humility, 
spirituaP2 union will  be wrought  between the soul  and  God, 
1  E.p.:  'He    ~   likewise  forsaken  and,    ~   it were,  annihila.ted.' 
3  E.p.:  'left Him  without consolation  and in.' 
3  l£.p.  omits:  'according to  ... His nature.' 
,  S.  :'Ilatthew xxvii,  46.  b  E.p.  omits this sentencc. 
6  E.p.  has' then' for' herein.' 
1  E.p.  omits:  'eithcr upon  earth  or in  Heaven.' 
B  E.p.  adds:  'on a  tree.'  I  E.p.  omits' spiritual.' 
10  Kp.:  'and as  though  reduced,  as it were.' 
11  Psalm lxxii, 22  [A.V.,lxxiii, 22].  12  E.p.  omits' spiritual.' 
BOOK· II.  CHAPTER  VIII 
93 
which in this life  is  the greatest and the highest  state attain-
able.  This  consists  not,  then,  in  refreshment  and  in  con-
solations  and  spiritual  feelings,  but in  a  living  death  of the 
Cross,  both  as  to  sense  and  as  to  spirit-that  is,  both  in-
wardlyand  outwardly. 
12.  I  will  not  pursue  this  subject  farther,  although 
I  have  no  desire  to  finish  speaking  of  it,  for  I  see  that 
Christl  is  .known  very  little  by  those  who  consider  them-
selves His friends:  we  see  them seeking  their  own  pleasures 
and  consolations  in  Him  because  of  their  great  love  for 
themselves,  but  not  loving  His  bitter  trials  and  His  death 
because  of their  great  love  for  Him.  I  am  speaking  now 
of those who consider themselves His friends;  for such as live 
far  away,  withdrawn  from  Him,  great  men  of  letters  and 
of influence,  and all  others who live yonder,  with the world, 
and  are  eager  about  their  ambitions  and  their  prelacies, 
may  be  said  not  to  know  Christ;  and  their  end,  however 
good,  will  be  very  bitter.  Of such  I  make  no  mentio.n  in 
these  lines;  but mention  will  be  made of them  on  the day 
of judgement, for  to  them it was  necessary to speak first  this 
word  of God, 2  as  to  those  whom  God  set  up  as  guides,  by 
reason  of their learning and their high position. 
13.  But  let  us  now  address  the  understanding  of  the 
spiritual  man,  and  particularly  that of the  man whom  God 
has  granted  the favour  of leading him into  the  state of con-
templation  (for,  as  I  have said,  I  am now  speaking  to  these 
in  particular},
3 
and  let  us  say  how  such  a  man  must  direct 
himself toward  God  in  faith,  and  purify  himself from  con-
trary  things,  constraining  himself'  that he may  enter  upon 
this  narrow  path  of obscure  contemplation. 
CBAPTER  VIII 
Which  describes  in  a general  way  how  no  creature  and no  knowledge 
that  can  be  comprehended  by  the  understanding  can  serve  as  a 
proximate means of Divine  union  with  God. 
I.  Before  we  treat  of  the  proper  and  fitting  means  of 
union  with  God,  which  is  faith,  it behoves  us  to  prove  how 
1  E.p.:  • that Jesus Christ.' 
t  [The  reference seems to be  to Acts  xiii,  46.J 
a  A.  B  omit the parenthesis. 
•  E.p.  has' girding' for' constraining,' 
94  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
no thing,  created or imagined,  can  serve  the  understanding 
as  a  proper means of union with God;  and how all  that the 
understanding  can attain serves  it  rather as  an  impediment 
than as  such a  means,  if it should desire  to ding to  it.  And 
now,  in  this  chapter,  we  shall  prove  this  in  a  general  way, 
and afterwards  we  shall  begin  to  speak in  detail,  treating in 
turn  of all  kinds  of knowledge  that  the  understanding  may 
receive  from  any sense,  whether  inward  or outward,  and  of 
the  inconveniences  and  evils  that  may  result  from  all  these 
kinds  of inward  and  outward  knowledge,
l 
so  that  it  pro-
gresses  not  in dependence  upon  the  proper  means,  which  is 
faith. 
2.  It must  be  understood,  then,  that,  according  to  a  rule 
of philosophy,  all  means  must  be  proportioned  to  the  end  ; 
that  is  to  say  that  they  must  have  some  connection  and 
resemblance  with  the  end,  such  as  is  enough  and  sufficient 
that the desired  end may be attained through them.  I  take 
an  example.  A  man  desires  to  reach  a  city;  he  has  of 
necessity  to  travel  by  the  road,  which  is  the  means  that 
brings  him  to  the  same  city  and  connects 2  him  with  it. 
Another example. 
3 
Fire is  to  be  combined and  united  with 
wood;  it  is  necessary  that  heat,  which  is  the  means,  shall 
first  prepare  the  wood,  by  conveying  to  it  so  many  degrees 
of warmth that it will have great resemblance and  proportion 
to  fire.  Now  if one  would  prepare  the  wood  by  any  other 
than the proper means-namely, with heat-as for  example, 
with  air  or  water  or  earth,  it  would  be  impossible  for  the 
wood  to  be  united  with  the fire,  just as  it would  be  equally 
so  to  reach  the  city  without going  by  the road  that leads  to 
it. 4  Wherefore,  in  order  that  the  understanding  may  be 
united  with  Godin  this  life,  so  far  as  is  possible,:; it must  of 
necessity  employ  that  means  that  unites  it  with  Him  and 
that  bears  the greatest  resemblance  to  Him. 
3.  Hereit must be pointed out that,amongall the creatures, 
the  highest  or  the  lowest,  there  is  none  that  comes  near  to 
God  or bears any resemblance  to  His  Being.  For,  although 
it is  true that all creatures have,  as  theologians say, a  certain 
relation  to  God,  and  bear a  Divine impress  (some  more and 
others  less,  according  to  what  is  more  or  less  dominant 
in  their  nature),  yet  there  is  no  essential  resemblance  or 
1  E.p.:  'kinds of knowledge.'  :I  [Lit.,  '  unites.') 
    E.p. adds . likewise.'  '  E.p. omits:  'just as ... leads to it.' 
5  c.p.  adds:  'in it '  [Le.,  in  this life). 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  VIII 
95 
connection between them and God,-on the contrary, the dis-
tance  between  their  being  and  His  Divine  Being  is  infinite. 
Wherefore it is  impossible for  the understanding to  attain  to 
God 1  by  means  of the  creatures,  whether  these  be  celestial 
or  earthly;  inasmuch  as  there  is  no  proportion  of resem-
blance  between  them.  Wherefore,  when  David  speaks  of 
the  heavenly  creatures,  he  says:  There  is  none  among  the 
gods  like  unto  Thee,  0  Lord  ; 2  meaning  by  t   ~   gods  the 
angels
3 
and  holy souls.  And  elsewhere:  0  God,  Thy  way 
is  in the sanctuary.  What God is  there so great as our God ?" 
As  though he were to say:  The way of approach to Thee,  0 
God,  is  a  holy  way-that is,  the  purity  of faith.  For what 
God can there be so  great?  That is  to say:  What angel will 
there be so  exalted in his  being,  and what saint so  exalted  in 
glory as to be  a  proportionate and  sufficient road by which  a 
man  may  come  to  Thee?  And  the  same  David,  speaking 
likewise  of earthly and heavenly things  both  together,  says: 
The Lord is  high  and looketh on lowly things,  and  the  high 
things He knoweth afar off.5  As  though he  had said:  Lofty 
in  His  own  Being,  He sees  that the  being  of the  things  here 
below
6 
is  very  low  in  comparison  with  His  lofty  Being; 7 
and  the  lofty  things,  which  are  the  celestial  creatures,  He 
sees  and  knows  to  be  very  far  from  His  Being.  All  the 
creatures,  then,  cannot  serve  as  a  proportionate  means  to 
the  understanding whereby it may reach  God.
8 
4.  Just  so  all  that  the  imagination  can  imagine  and  the 
understanding can receive and  understand in this life  is  not, 
nor  can  it  be,  a  proximate  means  of union  with  God.  For 
if we speak of natural things, since understanding can under-
stand naught save that which is  contained within, and comes 
under  the  category  of,  forms  and  imaginings  of things  that 
are received  through  the bodily senses,  the which  things,  we 
have  said,  cannot  serve  as  means,  it  can  make  no  use  of 
natural  intelligence.  And  if we  speak  of the  supernatural 
(in so  far  as  is  possible in this life  of our ordinary faculties
9
), 
the  understanding  in  its  bodily  prison  has  no  preparation 
or  capacity  for  receiving  the  clear  knowledge  of God;  for 
1  E.p.  adds' perfectly.' 
2  Psalm lxxxv, 8  [A.V.,  lxxxvi,  8).  3  E.p.:  'the holy angels. ' 
,  Psalm lxxvi,  14  [A.V.,  lxxvii,  13J  [lit.,  ' in the holy  'J. 
5  Psalm cxxxvii,  6  [A.V.,  cxxxviii, 6J. 
6  E.p.:  'of the things of the earth:  7  B  omits  this sentence. 
8  E.p.:  '  ... means  for  perfectly reaching  God.' 
8  These  last four  words are found  only in  Ale. 
96  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
such knowledge belongs not to this state, and we must either 
die or remain without receiving it.  Wherefore  Moses,  when 
he entreated  God for  this  clear knowledge,  was  told  that he 
could  not  see  Him,  in these  words
l
:  No  man shall  see  Me 
and remain alive.
2 
Wherefore S. John says:  No man hath 
seen  God  at  any  time,3  neither  aught  that  is  like  to  Him. 
And S.  Paul says,  with  Isaiah:  Eye hath not seen  Him,  nor 
hath  ear heard  Him.' neither  hath  it entered  into  the  heart 
of man. 4  And it is for this reason that Moses, in the bush, as 
is  said  in the Acts  of the Apostles,5 ventured not to  consider 
while God was  present;  for  he knew that his understanding 
could  make  no  such  consideration  as  was  fitting  concerning 
God,  corresponding  to  the  sense  which  he  had  of  God's 
presence. 
6 
And  of  Elijah,  our  father, '1  it  is  said  that  he 
covered  his  face  in  the  Mount  in  the  presence  of  God,8 
which  signifies  the  blinding  of his  understanding,  which  he 
wrought  there,  daring  not  to  lay  so  base  a  hand  upon  that 
which was  so  high;  seeing clearly that whatsoever he might 
consider,  or  understand  with  any  precision,  would  be  very 
far from  God and most unlike Him. 
5.  Wherefore no supernatural apprehension or knowledge 
in  this  mortal  life  can  serve  as  a  proximate  means  to  the 
high union oflove with God.  For all that can be understood 
by the understanding,  that can please the will,  and that can 
be  invented  by  the  imagination  is  most  unlike  to  God  and 
bears  no  proportion  to  Him,  as  we  have  said.  All  this 
Isaiah  admirably  explained  in  that  most  noteworthy 
passage,
9 
where  he says:  To what thing have ye  been able 
to liken  God?  Or what image  will  ye  make  that is  like  to 
Him?  Will the workman in iron perchance be able to make 
a  graven  image?  Or  will  he  that  works  gold  be  able  to 
imitate  Him
10 
with  gold,  or  the  silversmith  with  plates  of 
silver?l1  By  the  workman  in  iron  is  signified  the  under-
standing,  the office of which is  to form intelligences and strip 
1  E.p.  abbreviates:  •...  receiving  it.  Wherefore  God  said  to 
Moses:  No man  '.  .  .'  Z  Exodus  xxxiii,  20. 
3  S.  John i,  18.  E.p.  omits' neither  ... Him,'  which  is  found  in all 
the codices. 
,  I  Corinthians ii, 9;  Isaiah lxiv,  4.  •  Acts vii,  32. 
•  E.p.:  '  ... concerning  God,  though  this  sprang from  the profound 
sense which he had of God['s presence).' 
7  Only Alc.,  C read:  • our father.' 
•  3  Kings  [A.V.,  I  Kings)  xix,  13. 
•  Alc.  alone has:  • in that most noteworthy passage.' 
10  E.p.:  • to figure  Him' [or' to form  Him 'J.  A,  B:  • to make  Him.' 
11  Isaiah xl,  18-19. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  VIII 
97 
them of the iron of species  and images.  By  the workman in 
gold is understood the will,  which is  able to receive the figure 
and  the form  of pleasure,  caused  by  the  gold  of love. 
1 
By 
the  silversmith,  who  is  spoken  of as  being  unable  to  form 
2 
Him  with  plates  of silver,  is  understood  the  memory,  with 
the imagination, whereof it may be said with great propriety 
that its knowledge and the imaginings that it can invent
3 
and 
make  are  like  plates  of silver.  And  thus  it is  as  though  he 
had  said:  Neither  the  understanding  with  its  intelligence 
will  be  able  to  understand  aught  that  is  like  Him,  nor  can 
the  will  taste  pleasure  and  sweetness  that  bears  any  resem-
blance to  that which  is  God,  neither can the  memory set  in 
the imagination ideas  and images  that represent  Him.  It is 
clear,  then,  that none  of these  kinds  of knowledge  can lead 
the  understanding  direct  to  God;  and  that,  in  order  to 
reach Him, a  soul must rather proceed by not understanding 
than by desiring  to understand;  and  by blinding itself and 
setting  itself in  darkness  rather  than  by  opening  its  eyes  in 
order the more nearly to approach the ray Divine. 
6.  And thus  it is  that contemplation,  whereby the under-
standing has the loftiest knowledge of God, 
4 
is called mystical 
theology,  which  signifies  secret  wisdom  of God;  for  it  is 
secret  to  the  very  understanding  that  receives  it.  For  this 
reason  S.  Dionysius  calls  it  a  ray  of darkness.  Of this  the 
prophet Baruch says:  There is  none  that knoweth  its  way, 
nor any  that  can  think  of its  paths. 
5 
It is  clear,  then,  that 
the understanding must be blind  to  all  the paths  to  which it 
may attain,  in  order  to  be united  with  God.  Aristotle  says 
that,  even  as  are  the  eyes  of the bat with regard  to  the sun, 
which  is  total  darkness  to  it,  even  so  is  our  understanding 
to that which is  greater light in  God,  which is  total darkness 
to  us.  And  he  says  further  that,  the  more  profound  and 
clear  are  the  things  of God  in  themselves,  the  more  com.-
pletely  unknown  and obscure  are  they  to  us.  This  likewise 
the  Apostle affirms,  saying:  The deepest  things  of God  are 
the least known unto men. 
7.  But  we  should  never  end  if we  continued  at  this  rate 
to quote authorities and arguments to ,prove and              
1  A,  B, e.p.:  '  ... gold  of  the love wherewith it loves.' 
2  [All authorities read' fonn • (or' figure  ')  here.  Cf. p. 96. n.  10, above.] 
S  [This  is  the  word  (fingir,  • feign '),  translated  above  as  • imitate.' 
Cf.  p.  96,  n.  10.J 
•  So  Ale.  All  other  authorities  read:  •... the  understanding  is 
enlightened  by God.'  6  Baruch iii.  23. 
.  I 
98  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
that among all  created  things,  and  things  that belong to the 
understanding, there is  no ladder whereby the understanding 
can attain  to this  high  Lord.  Rather it is  necessary  to know 
that,  if  the  understanding  should  seek  to  profit  by  all  of 
these  things,  or  by  any  of them,  as  a  proximate  means  to 
such  union,  they  would  be  not  only  a  hindrance,  but  even 
an  occasion  of numerous  errors  and  delusions  in  the  ascent 
of this  mount. 
CHAPTER  IX 
How  faith  is  the  proximate  and proportionate  means  to  the  under-
standing  whereby  the  soul  may  attain  to  the  Divine  union  of 
love.  This  is  proved  by  passages  and  figures  from  Divine 
Scripture. 
1 
I.  From  what  has  been  said  it      to  be  inferred  that,  in 
order for  the  understanding  to  be  prepared  for  this  Divine 
union,  it must be  pure and void  of all  that pertains  to  sense, 
and  detached 2  and  freed  from  all  that  can  clearly  be 
perceived  by  the  understanding,  profoundly  hushed  and 
put  to  silence,  and  leaning  upon  faith,  which  alone  is  the 
proximate  and  proportionate  means  whereby  the  soul  is 
united with God;  for such is  the likeness  between  itself and 
God  that
3 
there  is  no  other  difference,  save  that  which 
exists  bet\...,een  seeing  God  and  believing  in  Him.  For,  as 
God  is  infinite,  so  faith  sets  Him  before  us  as  infinite;  and 
as  He is  Three and  One,  it sets  Him  before  us  as  Three  and 
      and  as  Goel  is  darkness  to  our  understanding,  e\'en 
so  does  faith              blind  and  dazzle  our  under:;tanding.
4 
And  thus,  by  this  means  alone,  Goel  manifests  Himself  to 
the  soul  in  Divine  light,  which  passes  all  understanding. 
And  therefore,  the  greater is  the  faith  of the  soul,  the  more 
completely  is  it  united  \rith  God.  I t  is  this  that  S.  Paul 
meant  in  the  passage  \vhich  we  quoted  above,  ,,,here  he 
says:  He that will  be  united  with  Goel  must  believe.
5 
That 
is,  he  must  walk  by  faith  in  his journey  to  Him,  the  under-
standing being blind and in darkness, \\-alking in faith alone ;6 
1  This  Ja.st  selltence      foum!  ollly  in  Ale.  anu  in  cp. 
2  E.p.  umit,;:  .  auu  detached.' 
3.  E.p.  omits:  'such  is  ... God  that,'  which  is  found  in  all  the 
Codices. 
4  This  clause  (' and  as  God  ..  ,  .  our  understanding  ')  is  omitted  from 
C.p,  6  Hebrews xi,  6. 
6  E.p,  omits:  'It is  thi,  that S.  Paul  ... in  faith  alone.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  IX 
99 
for  beneath  this  darkness  the  understanding  is  united  with 
God,  and  beneath  it  God  is  hidden,  even  as  David  said  in 
these  words:  Darkness  was  under  His  feet.  And  He  rose 
upon  the  cherubim,  and  flew  upon  the  wings  of the  wind. 
And  He  made  darkness  His  hiding-place  and  the  water 
dark.
1 
2.  By  his  saying  that  He  set  darkness  beneath  His  feet, 
and  that He  took  the  darkness for  a  hiding-place,  and  that 
His  tabernacle  round  about  Him  was  in  the  dark  water,  is 
denoted  the  obscurity  of the  faith  wherein  He is  concealed. 
And by his  saying that He rose  upon the cherubim and  flew 
upon  the  wings  of  the  winds,  is  understood  His  soaring 
above  all  understanding.  For  the  cherubim  denote  those 
who  understand  or  contemplate.  And  the  wings  of  the 
winds  signify  the  subtle  and  lofty  ideas  and  conceptions  of 
the  spirits,  above  all  of which  is  His  Being,  and  to  which 
none  can attain by his  own  power. 
3.  This  we  learn  from  an  illustration  in  the  Scriptures. 
When  Solomon  had  completed  the  building  of the  Temple, 
God  came  down  in  darkness  and  filled  the  Temple so  that 
the  children  of Israel  could  not  see;  whereupon  Solomon 
spoke  and  said:  The  Lord  hath  promised  that  He  will 
dwell  in  the  thick  darkness. 
2 
Likewise  He  appeared  in 
darkness to Moses in the Mount, wherein God was concealed. 
And  whensoever  God  communicated  Himself  intimately, 
He appeared in darkness,  as  may be seen  in Job, where  the 
Scripture  says  that  God  spoke  with  him  from  the  air  in 
darkness. 
3 
All  these  mentions  of  darkness  signify  the 
obscurity  of  the  faith  wherein  the  Divinity  is  concealed, 
when  It communicates  Itself  to  the  soul;  which  will  be 
ended  when,  as  S.  Paul  says,  that  which  is  in  part shall  be 
ended,4  which  is  this  darkness  of faith,  and  that  which  is 
perfect  shall  come,  which  is  the  Divine  light.  Of this  we 
have a  good  illustration in the army of Gideon,  whereof it is 
said  that  all  the  soldiers  had  lamps  in  their  hands,  which 
they saw  not,  because  they had  them concealed in  the  dark 
pitchers;  and,  when  these  pitchers  were  broken,  the  light 
was  seen.
5 
Just  so  does  faith,  which  is  foreshadowed  by 
1  Psalm  xvii,  10  [A.V.,  xviii.  g-ll].  E.p.  modiflCs  thus:  'And  He 
made darkness His hiding-place;  round about Him He set  His tabernacle, 
which is dark  water,  among  the clouds of  the air.' 
2  3  Kings  [A.V.,  I  Kings]  viii,  12. 
3  Job xxxviii,  I;  xl,  I. 
,  I  Corinthians xiii,  10.  '  Judges  vii,  10. 
M 
100  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
these  pitchers,  contain  within  itself Divine  light;1  which, 
when  it  is  ended  and  broken,  at  the  ending  and  breaking 
of  this  mortal  life,  will  allow  the  glory  and  light  of  the 
Divinity,  which  was  contained in it,2  to  appear. 
4.  It is  clear,  then,  that,  if the soul  in this  life is  to  attain 
to  union  with  God,  and  commune  directly  with  Him,  it 
must  unite  itself with  the  darkness  whereof Solomon  spake, 
wherein  God had promised to dwell,  and must draw near to 
the darkness of the air wherein God was pleased to reveal His 
secrets  to Job,  and  must  take  in its  hands,  in  darkness,  the 
jars·of Gideon,  that it may have in its  hands  (that is,  in  the 
works of its  will)  the light, which is  the union of love,  though 
it be  in  the  darkness  of faith,  so  that,  when  the  pitchers  of 
this  life  are  broken,  which  alone  have  kept  from  it  the 
light of faith,  it may see  God
3 
face  to face  in glory. 
5.  It  now  remains  to  describe  in  detail  all  the  types  of 
knowledge  and  the  apprehensions  which  the  understanding 
can  receive;  the  hindrance  and  the  harm  which  it  can 
receive  upon  this  road  of  faith;  and  the  way  wherein  the 
soul  must  conduct  itself so  that, whether they proceed from 
the  senses  or  from  the  spirit,  they  may  cause  it,  not  harm, 
but profit. 
CHAPTER  X 
Wherein  distinction  is  made  between  all  apprehensions  and  types  of 
knowledge  which  can  be  comprehended  by  the  understanding. 
I.  In  order  to  treat  in  detail  of the  profit  and  the  harm 
which  may  come  to  the soul,  with respect  to  this  means  to 
Divine  union  which  we  have  described-namely,  faith-
through the notions and apprehensions of the understanding, 
it is necessary here to make a distinction between all the appre-
hensions,  whether  natural  or  supernatural,  that  the  soul 
may  receive,  so  that  then,  with  regard  to  each  of them  in 
order,  we  may  direct  the understanding  with  greater  clear-
ness  into the night and obscurity of faith.  This will  be done 
with all  possible  brevity. 
2.  It must  be  known,  then,  that  the  understanding  can 
receive  knowledge  and  intelligence  by  two  channels:  the 
1  A,  e.p.  add:  . that is,  the truth of  tha.t  which  God  is  in  Himself.' 
2  E.p.  omits:  • which  was contained in it.' 
a  E.p.  omits' which  ... of  faith'  and  inserts' God,'  which  word  is 
Dot  found  in  the Codices. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XI  101 
one  natural  and  the  other  supernatural.  By  the  natural 
channel is  meant all that the understanding can understand, 
whether by means of the bodily senses  or by its own power. 
1 
The  supernatural  channel  is  all  that  is  given  to  the  under-
standing  over  and above  its  natural ability and capacity. 
3.  Of these  kinds  of supernatural  knowledge,  some  are 
corporeal and  some  are  spiritual.  The  corporeal  are  two 
in  number:  some  are  received  by  means  of  the  outward 
bodily  senses;  others,  by  means  of  the  inward  bodily 
senses,  wherein  is  comprehended  all  that  the  imagination 
can comprehend,
2 
form  and conceive. 
4.  The  spiritual  supernatural  knowledge  is  likewise  of 
two  kinds:  that which  is  distinct  and special in its  nature, 
and  that which  is  confused,  general  and  dark.  Of the  dis-
tinct and special kind there are four manners of apprehension 
which  are  communicated  to  the  spirit  without  the  aid  of 
any bodily sense:  these are visions, revelations, locutions and 
spiritual  feelings.  The  obscure  and  general  type  of know-
ledge  is  of one  kind  alone,  which  is  contemplation  that  is 
given in faith.  To this  we  have to lead the soul  by bringing 
it  t h ~ r e t   3   through  all  these  other  means,  beginning  with 
the first  and detaching it from  them. 
CHAPTER  XI 
Of the  hindrance  and harm  that  may  be  caused  by  apprehensions  of 
the  understanding  which  proceed  from  what  is  supernaturally 
represented  to  the  outward  bodily  senses;  and  how  the  soul 
is  to  conduct  itself therein. 
I.  The first  kinds  of knowledge  whereof we  have  spoken 
in the preceding chapter are those that belong to the under-
standing  and  come  through  natural  channels.  Of  these, 
since  we  have  treated  them already in the first  book,  where 
we led the soul into the night of sense,  we shall here say not a 
word,  for  in  that  place  we  gave  suitable  instruction  to  the 
soul  concerning  them.  What  we  have  to  treat,  therefore, 
in the present chapter, will be solely those kinds of knowledge 
1  [Lit .•  '  by itselc")  E.p.  adds:  • after these  [senses).'  A,  Bread:  • or 
by the channel of itself.' 
%  E.p.:  • can  apprehend,'  which  no  doubt  more  exactly  expresses  the 
Saint's  meaning. 
3  Ale.  breaks off  the chapter here. 
102  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
and  those apprehensions  which  belong to  the understanding 
and  come  supernaturally,  by  way  of  the  outward  bodily 
senses-namely,  by  seeing,  hearing,  smelling,  tasting  and 
touching.  With  respect  to  all  these  there  may  come,  and 
there are wont to come,l  to  spiritual persons  representations 
and  objects  of a  supernatural  kind.
2 
With  respect  to  sight, 
they are apt to picture figures  and forms  of persons belonging 
to  the  life  to  come-the forms  of certain  saints,  and  repre-
sentations  of angels,  good  and  evil,  and  certain  lights  and 
brightnesses  of an  extraordinary  kind.  And  with  the  ears 
they hear certain extraordinary words,  sometimes spoken by 
these  figures
3 
that  they  see,  sometimes  without  seeing  the 
person  who  speaks  them.  As  to  the  sense  of smell,  they 
sometimes  perceive  the  sweetest  perfumes  with  the  senses, 
without  knowing  whence  they  proceed.  Likewise,  as  to 
taste,  it comes  to pass  that they arc conscious of the sweetest 
savours,  and,  as  to  touch,  they  experience  great  delight'-
sometimes  to such  a  degree  that it is  as  though all  the  bones 
and the marrow rejoice and singS and are bathed in delight ;6 
this  is  like  that  which  we  call  spiritual  unction,  which  in 
pure  souls
7 
proceeds  from  the  spirit and flows  into  the  very 
members.  And  this  sensible  sweetness  is  quite  an  ordinary 
thing with 8  spiritual persons,  for  it comes  to them from  their 
sensible  affection  and  devotion,9  to  a  greater  or  a  lesser 
degree,  to each one after his  own  manner. 
2.  And  it  must  be  known  that,  although  all  these  things 
may happen to the bodily senses in the way of God, we must 
never  rely  upon  them  or  admit  them,  but  we  must  always 
fly  from  them,  without  trying  to  ascertain  whether  they 
be  good  or  evil;  for,  the  more  completely  exterior  and 
corporeal  they are, the  less  certainly are they of God.
10 
For 
it is more proper and habituaPl to God to communicate Him-
self to  the  spirit,  wherein  there  is  more  security  and  profit 
for  the soul,  than  to  sense,  wherein  there is  ordinarily much 
danger  and  deception;  for  bodily  sense judges  and  makes 
1  A,  B, e.p.  have' happen' for' come'  both here  and in the  preceding 
clause.  . 
I  E.p.:  'and objects represented  and set before them in  a  supernatural 
way.'  3  E.p.:  'these persons.' 
,  E.p.: 'and, as to touch,  of its own kind  of enjoyment and sweetness.' 
•  [Lit.,  ' and  blossom.']  6  E.p.:  • are bathed therein.' 
7  E.p.:  'in simple souls:'  8  E.p.:  'is wont  to  happen  to.' 
•  [Lit.,  ' from  the affection  and devotion of the sensible spirit.') 
10  E.p.:  'the less certainty is there of their being of God.' 
11  E.p. omits:  'and habitual.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XI 
its  estimate  of spiritual  things  by  thinking  that  they  are  as 
it feels  them  to  be,  whereas  they  are  as  different  as  is  the 
body  from  the  soul  and  sensualityl  from  reason.  For  the 
bodily sense  is  as  ignorant of spiritual  things  as  is  a  beast  of 
rational  things,  and  even  more so. 
3.  So  he that esteems  such  things  errs  greatly  and  places 
himself in great peril  of deception;  and  at best will  have  in 
himself  a  complete
2 
impediment  to  the  attainment  of 
spirituality.  For, as  we have said,  between  spiritual  things 
and  all  these  bodily  things there exists  no kind  of proportion 
whatever.  And  thus  it may  always  be  supposed  that  such 
things  as  these  are  more  likely  to  be  of the  devil  than  of 
God;  for  the  devil  has  more  influence  in  that  which  is 
exterior  and  corporeal,  and  can deceive  a  soul  more  easily 
thereby than  by  that which  is  more interior and spiritual. 
4.  And  the  more  exterior  are  these  corporeal  forms  and 
objects in  themselves,  the less  do  they  profit the interior and 
spiritual  nature,  because  of the  great distance  and  the little 
proportion existing  between  the  corporeal  and the spiritual. 
For,  although  they  communicate  a  certain  degree  of 
spirituality,  as  is  always  the  case  with  things  that  come 
from God, there  is  much  less  than there would  bc if the same 
things  were more interior  and spiritual.  And thus they  very 
easily  become  the  means  whereby  error  and  presumption 
and  vanity  grow  in the soul;  since,  as  they are  so  palpable 
and  material,  they  sdr  the  senses  greatly,  and  it appears  to 
the judgement of the soul  that they are of greater importance 
because  they are more readily  felt.  Thus  the soul goes  after 
them, abandoning faith and
3 
thinking  that the light  which it 
receives  from  them  is  the  guide  and  means  to  its  desired 
goal,  which  is  union  with  God.  But  the  more  attention  it 
pays  to  such  things,  the farther  it  strays from  the  true  way 
and  means,  which  are faith. 
5.  And,  besides all this,  when the soul sees that such extra-
ordinary things  happen  to  it,  it  is  often  visited,  insidiously 
and secretly,  by a  certain complacent  idea-namely, that it 
is  of some importance in  the eyes of God;  which  is contrary 
to  humility.  The  devil,  too,  knows  how  to  insinuate  into 
the  soul  a  secret  satisfaction  with  itself,  which  at  times 
becomes  very manifest;  wherefore  he  frequently  represents 
1  [Po  Silverio  remarks  here  that]  we  must  understand  [as  frequently 
elsewhere]  • sensibility' and  not sensuality in  the grosser sense. 
I  E.p.:  . a  great:  3  E.p.  omits:  • abandoning faith  and.' 
104  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
these  objects  to  the senses,  setting  before  the eyes the figures 
of saints  and  most  beauteous  lights;  and  before  the  ears 
words  well  dissembled;  and  representing  also  sweetest 
perfumes, delicious tastes
l 
and things delectable to the touch; 
to the end that, by producing desires for such things, he  may 
lead the soul into much evil.  These representations and feelings, 
therefore,  must  always  be  rejected;  for,  even  though  some 
of them be of God,  He is  not offended by their rejection,  nor 
is  the effect and fruit which He desires to produce in the soul 
by  means  of them  any  the  less  surely  received  because  the 
soul  rej ects  them and desires  them not. 
6.  The  reason  for  this  is  that  corporeal  vision,  or feeling 
in respect to any of the other senses,  or any other communi-
cation  of the  most  interior  kind,  if it be  of God,  produces 
its effect
2 
upon the spirit at the very moment when it appears 
or  is  felt,  without  giving  the  soul  time  or  opportunity  to 
deliberate whether it will  accept  or  reject  it.  For,  even  as 
God  gives  these  things  supernaturally,  without  effort
3 
on 
the  part of the soul,  and independently of its capacity,  even 
so  likewise,  without  respect  to  its  effort  or  capacity,  God 
produces  in  it the  effect  that  He  desires  by  means  of such 
things;  for  this  is  a  thing  that  is  wrought  and  brought  to 
pass  in  the  spirit  passively;'  and  thus  its  acceptance  or 
non-acceptance  consists  not  in  the  acceptance  or  the  rejec-
tion  of it  by  the  will.  It is  as  though fire  were  applied  to  a 
person's  naked  body:  it  would  matter  little  whether  or 
no  he  wished  to  be  burned;  the  fire  would  of  necessity 
accomplish   ~ s   work.  Just so  is  it with visions  and represen-
tations  that  are  good:  even  though  the  soul  desire  it not,5 
they  work  their  effect  upon  it,  and  in  the  soul  chiefly  and 
especially,  rather  than  in  the  body.  And  likewise  those 
that  come  from  the  devil  (without  the  consent  of the  soul) 
cause  it  trouble  or  aridity  or  vanity  or  presumption  in  the 
spirit.  Yet these are not so effective to work evil as are those 
of God  to  work good;  for  those  of the devil  can  only set in 
action  the  first  movements  of  the  will,6  and  move  it  no 
1  [Lit.,' and sweetnesses in the mouth.']  2  E.p.:  • its first effect: 
3  E.p.:  .  For,  even  as  God  begins these things supernaturally. without 
active effort  .  .  .' 
,  The  1630  edition  adds:  .  without its free  consent.' 
6  E.p.  omits:  • even  .  .  .  not.' 
8  E.p.:  • for  those  of  the devil  stop at the first  movements and cannot 
move  the  will.'  This,  no  doubt,  was  the  Saint's  meaning,  for  the  Church 
teaches  that the devil  cannot influence  the will  directly,  though  indirectly 
(principally  through  the senses and  the imagination)  he  may do  so. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XI 
10
5 
farther,  unless  the  soul  be  consenting  thereto;  and  such 
trouble  continues  not  long  unless  the soul's  lack  of courage 
and  prudence  be  the  occasion  of its  continuance.  But  the 
visions  that are of God  penetrate the soul  and move the will 
to  love,  and  produce  their  effect,l  which  the  soul  cannot 
resist even though it would,  any more than the window can 
resist  the  sun's  rays  when  they strike it. 
7.  The soul, then, must never presume to desire to receive 
them, even though, as  I  say,  they be of God;  for if it desire 
to  receive  them,  there follow  six  inconveniences. 
The  first  is  that  faith II  grows  gradually  less;  for  things 
that  are  experienced  by  the  senses  derogate  from  faith; 
since  faith,  as  we  have said,  transcends  every  sense.  And 
thus  the  soul  withdraws  itself  from  the  means  of  union 
with  God  when  it  closes  not  its  eyes  to  all  these  things  of 
sense. 
Secondly,  they  are  a  hindrance  to  the  spirit,  if  they  be 
not denied, for  the soul rests in them and its spirit soars  not 
to the invisible.  This  was  one of the reasons  why  the Lord 
said to His  disciples  that it was needful for  Him to go away 
that the Holy Spirit might come;  so,  too, He forbade  Mary 
Magdalene  to  touch  His  feet,  after  His  resurrection,  that 
she  might  be  grounded  in  faith. 
Thirdly,  the  soul  becomes  attached  to  these  things  and 
advances  not  to  true  resignation  and  detachment  of spirit. 
Fourthly, it begins to lose the effect of them and the inward 
spirituality which  they cause it, because  it sets  its  eyes  upon 
their  sensual  aspect,  which  is  the  least  important.  And 
thus  it  receives  not  so  fully  the  spirituality  which  they 
cause,3  which  is  impressed  and  preserved  more  securely 
when  all  things  of sense  are  rejected,  since  these  are  very 
different  from  pure  spirit. 
Fifthly,  the soul  begins to lose  the favours of God, because 
it accepts them as  though they belonged to it and profits not 
by  them as  it should.  And  to  accept them in this  way and 
not to profit  by them is  to seek  after them;  but  God  gives 
1  E.p.:  '  ... effect  of  excitement  and  overpowering  delight,  which 
makes  ready and  prepares  [the soul]  to give its free  and loving consent to 
good.'  It omits  the  rest  of  the  paragraph  as  in  the  text and  continues: 
, But  although  these  outward  visions  and  feelings  be  of  God,  if  the  soul 
make  much  account  of  them  and  endeavour  to  desire  to  accept  them, 
there follow  SIX  inconveniences.  The first  .. .' 
Z  E.p.:  'that the perfection  of  guidance  through faith.' 
•  a  A  here  repeats  the  phrase, above:  'because  it  sets  .  .  .  least 
Important.' 
106  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
them  not  that  the soul  may seek  after  them;1  nor should 
the soul take upon itself to believe that they are of God. Z 
Sixthly,  a  readiness  to  accept them opens  the door to  the 
devil  that  he  may  deceive  the  soul  by  other  things  like  to 
them,  which  he  very  well  knows  how  to  dissimulate  and 
disguise,  so  that  they  may  appear to  be  good;  for,  as  the 
Apostle  says,  he  can  transform  himself  into  an  angel  of 
light. 
3 
Of  this  we  shall  treat  hereafter,  by  the  Divine 
favour,  in  our  third  book,  in  the  chapter  upon  spiritual 
gluttony.' 
8.  It  is  always5  well,  then,  that  the  soul  should  reject 
these  things  with  closed  eyes  whencesoever  they  come. 
For,  unless  it  does  so,  it  will  prepare  the  way  for  those 
things  that  come  from  the  devil,  and  will  give  him  such 
influence  that,  not  only  will  his  visions  come  in  place  of 
God's,  but  his  visions  will  begin  to  increase,  and  those ·of 
God to cease, in such manner that the devil will have all the 
power  and  God  will  have  none.  So  it  has  happened
6 
to 
many  uncautious  and  ignorant  souls,  who  rely  on  these 
things  to  such  an extent  that  many of them  have  found  it 
hard  to  return  to  God  in  purity of faith;  and  many have 
been  unable  to  return,7  so  securely  has  the  devil  rooted 
himself in  them;  for  which  reason  it  is  well  to  reject  and 
deny  them  all. 8  For,  by  the  rejection  of evil  visions,  the 
errors of the devil  are avoided, and  by  the  rejection  of good 
visions  no  hindrance  is  offered  to  faith  and  the  spirit 
receives the fruit of them.  And just as,  when the soul allows 
them  entrance,  God  begins  to  withhold  them  because  the 
soul  is  becoming  attached  to  them  and  is  not  profiting  by 
them  as  it  should,  while  the  devil  insinuates  and  increases 
his  own  visions,  where  he  finds  occasion  and  cause  for 
them;9  just so, when the soul is  resigned, or even opposed,lO 
1  E.p.  endea.vours  to  bring  out  the  sense  more  clearly  here:  'is  to 
seek after them and to rest in them, a.nd  God  gives  them not for this: 
a  S.  John  of  the  Cross  means  that  the  soul  should  not  rely  upon  its 
own  judgement  in  such  matters  but  upon  some  discreet  and  learned 
director.  3  2  Corinthians  xi,  q. 
,  Only  Ale.  and  e.p.  have  this  sentence.  The' third  book'  must  be 
the Dark  Night  (I,  vi).  6  Ale.  alone has' always: 
•  E.p.  abbreviates:  'that his  visions  will  come  in  place  of  the others, 
as has happened  .  .  .' 
7  E.p.:  'have not returned.'  This is  more exact,  since  the backslider 
has always the power to return, if he so  wills. 
•  E.p.:  'and fear  them all.' 
•  A,  B,  e.p.:  'because  the  soul  gives  occasion  for  them  and  makes 
room for  them.'  10  E.p.:  'resigned,  and has no attachment: 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XI 
10
7 
to  them,  the  devil  begins  to desist,  since  he  sees  that  he  is 
working  it  no  harm;  and  contrariwise  God  begins  to  in-
crease and magnifyl  His favours  in a soul  that is  so  humble 
and  detached,  making  it  ruler  over2  many  things,  even  as 
He made  the servant who was  faithful  in small  things. 
g.  In  these  favours,  if the  soul  be faithful  and  humble, S 
the  Lord will  not cease until  He has  raised  it from  one step 
to  another,  even  to  Divine  union  and  transformation. 
For Our Lord.continues to prove the soul and to raise it ever 
higher,  so  that  He  first  gives  it  things  that  are  very  un-
pretentious  and exterior and in  the  order of sense,' in con-
formity  with  the smallness of its  capacity;  to  the  end  that, 
when it behaves as  it should,  and receives  these first  morsels 
with  moderation  for  its  strength  and  sustenance,  He  may 
grant it further and  better food.  If,  then, the soul conquer 
the· devil  upon the first  step,  it will  pass  to the second;  and 
if upon the second likewise,  it will  pass  to the third;  and so 
onward,  through all  seven  mansions,5  which  are  the seven 
steps  of love,  until  the  Spouse shall  bring  it to  the cellar of 
wine of His  perfect charity. 
10.  Happy  the  soul  that  can  fight  against  that  beast of 
the  Apocalypse,6  which  has  seven  heads,  set  over  against 
these  seven  steps  of love,  and  which  makes  war  therewith 
against  each  one,  and  strives  therewith  against  the  soul  in 
each  of these  mansions,  wherein  the soul  is  being  exercised 
and is  mounting step  by step in  the love  of God.  And  un-
doubtedly  if it strive  faithfully  against  each  of these  heads, 
and  gain  the  victory,  it will  deserve  to  pass  from  one  step 
to another, and from one mansion to another, even unto the 
last,  leaving the beast vanquished  after  destroying  its  seven 
heads,  wherewith  it  made  so  furious  a  war  upon  it.  So 
furious  is  this  war  that  S.  John  says  in  that  place
7 
that  it 
was given unto the beast to make war against the saints and 
to be able to overcome them upon each one of these steps of 
love,  arraying  against  each  one  many  weapons  and  muni-
tions of war.  And it is  therefore greatly to be lamented that 
many who engage in this spiritual battle against the beast do 
1  E.p.  omits:  • and  magnify.' 
I  (Lie.,  • making it over.']  E.p.  has:  • setting it and  placing it over.' 
•  [Lie.,  • and  retired.'] 
,  E.p.:  • so  that He rather visits it first  according to sense.' 
5  [The  phrase  is  suggestive  of  S.  Teresa.  but  the  Spanish  word  is  not 
moradas,  but mansiones.] 
•  [Revelation xiii,  I.]  7  (Ibid.,  7.] 
108  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
not  even  destroy  its  first  head  by  denying  themselves  the 
sensual  things  of  the  world.  And,  though  some  destroy 
and  cut  off this  head,  they  destroy  not  the  second  head, 
which is  that of the visions of sense whereof we are speaking. 
But  what  is  most  to  be  lamented  is  that  some,  having 
destroyed  not  only  the  first  and  the  second  but  even  the 
third,  which  is  that of the  interior senses,l  pass  out  of the 
state  of  meditation,  and  travel  stil1  farther  onward,  and 
are  overcome  by  this  spiritual
2 
beast  at  the  moment  of 
their  entering  into  purity  of spirit,  for  he  rises  up  against 
them once more, and even his first  head comes  to life again, 
and the last state of those souls is  worse  than the first,  since, 
when  they fall  back,  the beast brings  with  him seven  other 
spirits  worse  than himself. 3 
I  I.  The  spiritual  person,  then,  has  to  deny  himself  all 
the  apprehensions,  and  the  temporal delights,
4o 
that belong 
to  the  outward  senses,  if he  will  destroy  the  first  and  the 
second  head  of this  beast,  and  enter  into the first  chamber 
of love,  and  the  second,  which  is  of living  faith,6  desiring 
neither  to  lay  hold  upon,  nor  to  be  embarrassed  by,  that 
which  is  given  to  the  senses,  since  it is  this  that  derogates 
most from faith. 
6 
12.  It is  clear,  then,  that these sensual apprehensions and 
visions  cannot  be  a  means  to  union,  since  they  bear  no 
proportion  to  God;  and  this  was  one  of the  reasons  why 
Christ  desired  that  the  Magdalene  and  S.  Thomas
7 
should 
not  touch  Him.  And  so  the  devil  rejoices  greatly  when  a 
soul  desires  to  receive  revelations,  and  when  he  sees  it 
inclined  to  them,  for  he  has  then  a  great  occasion  and 
opportunity  to  insinuate  errors  and  to  detract  from  the 
faith in so far as  he  can;  for,  as  I  have said,  he  renders  the 
soul  that  desires  them  very  gross,  and  at  times  even  leads 
it into many  temptations and unseemly  ways. 
13.
8 
I  have  written  at  some  length  of  these  outward 
apprehensions  in  order  to  give  and  throw  rather  more 
light on the others, whereof we have to treat shortly.  There 
1  So  e.p.  The  other  authorities  [and  P.  Silverio]  read:  • the  interior 
sensual senses.'  I  Only Ale.  has' spiritual.' 
•  [So  Luke xi.  26.]  ,  E.p.:  • and the  bodily delights.' 
•  E.p.:  • into the first  and  the second  chamber of  love in living  faith.' 
•  E.p.:  '  ... this that is the greatest hindrance to this spiritual night 
of  faith.' 
7  E.p.:  • that Mary Magdalene and the apostle  S.  Thomas.' 
8  This paragraph is not in A  or  B.  It is given as found in Ale.;  C.  D. 
e.p.  give it with slight variants. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XII  log 
is so  much to say on this part of my subject that I could go on 
and never end.  I  believe, however,  that I  am summarizing 
it sufficiently by merely  saying  that the soul  must  take  care 
never  to  receive  these  apprehensions,  save  occasionally 
on  another  person's  advice,  which  should  very  rarely  be 
given,  and  even  then  it  must  have  no  desire  for  them.  I 
think  that  on  this  part  of my  subject  what  I  have  said  is 
sufficient.l 
CHAPTER  XII 
Which  treats  of natural  imaginary  apprehensions.  Descrihes  their 
nature  and proves  that  they  cannot  he  a proportionate  means  of 
attainment  to  union  with  God.  Shows  the  harm  which  results 
from  inahility  to  detach  oneself from  them. II 
I.  Before  we  treat  of  the  imaginary  visions  which  are 
wont  to occur supernaturally  to  the interior  sense,  which  is 
the imagination and  the fancy,  it is  fitting  here,  so  that we 
may  proceed  in  order,  to  treat  of the  natural  apprehen-
sions  of this  same  interior  bodily  sense,  in  order  that  we 
may  proceed  from  the  lesser  to  the  greater,  and  from  the 
more  exterior to  the more  interior,  until  we  reach  the  most 
interior
3 
recollection  wherein the soul is  united  with  God  ;4 
this  same  order  we  have  followed  up  to  this  point.  For 
we  treated first  of all  the  detachment of the  exterior senses
5 
from  the  natural  apprehensions  of  objects,
6 
and,  in  con-
sequence,  from  the  natural  power  of the  desires-this  was 
contained in the first  book,  wherein we spoke of the night of 
sense.  We  then  began  to  detach  these  same  senses  from? 
supernatural exterior apprehensions  (which, as we  have just 
shown  in  the  last  chapter,  affect  the  exterior  senses),  in 
order to lead the soul  into  the night of the spirit. 
2.  In this second  book,  the first  thing that  has  now to  be 
treated is  the interior bodily sense-namely, the imagination 
1  E.p.  has:  '  ... never  to  receive  them,  save in  some  rare  case  and 
after  close  examination  by  a  learned,  spiritua.l  and  experienced  person, 
and  even  then  [the soul  must receive  them]  without any desire to do so.' 
This is clearly an editorial attempt to clarify [and improve upon] the Saint's 
directions.  I  E.p.  adds:  • in time: 
a  [Or  • the  intimate';  but  the  superlative  idea  is  clearly  present.] 
Alc.  has:  • the last '-probably a  copyist's error [' ultimo' for' intimo 'J. 
•  A,  B  omit the rest of this paragraph and the whole of the next. 
I  E.p.:  • the detachment of the soul: 
•  E.p.:  • of exterior objects: 
7  E.p.:  '  ... began  the detachment in particular from  .. : 
110  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
and  the  fancy;  this  we  must  likewise  void  of  all  the 
imaginary  apprehensions  and  forms  that  may  belong  to  it 
by nature, and  we  must  prove  how impossible it is  that the 
soul should attain to union with God until its operation cease 
in  them,  since  they  cannot  be  the  proper  and  proximate 
means  of this  union. 
3.  It is  to  be  known,  then,  that .the  senses  whereof  we 
are  here  particularly  speaking  are  two  interior  bodily 
senses  which  are  called  imagination  and  fancy,  which  sub-
serve  each other in  due  order.  For  the  one  sense  reasons, 
as  it were,  by imagining,  and  the other forms  the  imagina-
tion, or that which is'imagined,  by making use of the fancy.l 
For our  purpose  the  discussion  of the  one  is  equivalent  to 
that of the other,  and, for  this  reason,  when  we  name  them 
not both,  we  are  to  be understood  as  speaking  of either,  as 
we  have  here  explained. 
2 
All  the  things,  then,  that  these 
senses  can  receive  and  fashion  are  known  as  imaginations 
and  fancies,  which "are  forms  that  are  represented  to  these 
senses  by  bodily  figures  and  images.  This  can  happen  in 
two  ways.  The one  way  is  supernatural, wherein  represen-
tation  can  be  made,  and  is  made,  to these  senses  passively, 
without  any  effort  of their  own;  these  we  call  imaginary 
visions,  wrought after a  supernatural  manner,  and  of these 
we shall speak hereafter.  The other way is  natural, wherein, 
through the  ability of the  soul,  these  things  can  be actively 
produced in it through its operation,
3 
beneath forms,  figures 
and  images.  And  thus  to  these  two faculties  belongs  medi-
tation,  which  is  a  discursive  action  wrought  by  means  of 
images, forms and figures that are produced and imagined by 
the said senses, as when we imagine Christ crucified, or bound 
to  the  column,  or at another  of the  stations;  or  when  we 
imagine God seated upon a throne with great majesty; or when 
we  consider  and  imagine glory to be like  a  most  beauteous 
light,  etc.;  or  when  we  imagine  all  kinds  of other  things, 
whether Divine or human,  that can belong to  the  imagina-
tion.  All  these imaginings4  must  be cast out from  the soul, 
which will remain in darkness as far as this sense is concerned, 
1  [Lit.,  'by fancying.']  E.p.:  'For in  the  one  there  is  something  of 
reasoning,  though  it  is  imperfect  and  is  [wrought]  imperfectly,  and  the 
other forms  the image,  which is  the imagination.' 
a  E.p.  adds:  'that what  we  say  of  the  one  is  understood  likewise  of 
the other and that we are speaking of both indifferently.' 
I  E.p.:  • The  other  way  is  natural,  when  through  its  operation  these 
things can be actively produced.' 
,  A,  B:  • All  these apprehensions.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XII  III 
that it may attain  to  Divine  union;  for  they  can  bear  no 
proportion to proximate means of union with God, any  more 
than can the bodily imaginings,  which serve as  object to the 
five  exterior senses. 
4.  The  reason  of  this  is  that  the  imagination  cannot 
fashion  or imagine anything whatsoever beyond  that which 
it has  experienced  through its  exterior senses-namely,  that 
which  it has  seen  with  the  eyes,  or heard  with  the ears,  etc. 
At most it can only compose likenesses of those things  that it 
has seen or heard or felt,  which  are  of no  more  consequence 
than
l 
those  which  have  been  received  by  the  senses  afore-
mentioned, nor are they even of as  much consequence.  For, 
although  one  imagines  palaces  of pearls  and  mountains  of 
gold,  through having seen gold and pearls, all this is  in truth 
less
2 
than  the  essence  of a  little  gold  or  of a  single  pearl, 
although  in  the  imagination  it  be  greater  in  quantity  and 
beauty. 
3 
And  since  no  created  things,  as  has  already  been 
said,  can bear any proportion to the Being of God, it follows 
that  nothing  that is  imagined  in  their  likeness  can serve  as 
proximate  means  to  union  with  Him,  but,  as  we  say,  quite 
the contrary. 
4 
5.  Wherefore  those  that  imagine  God  beneath  any  of 
these figures,  or as  a  great fire  or brightness, or in any other 
such  form,  and  think  that anything like  this  will  be like  to 
Him,  are  very  far  from  approaching  Him.  For,  although 
these  considerations  and  forms  and  manners  of meditation 
are necessary to beginners, in order that they  may gradually 
feed  and enkindle their souls  with love  by means of sense,  as 
we shall say hereafter,  and although  they  thus serve  them as 
remote  means  to  union  with  God,  through  which  a  soul 
has  commonly to  pass in order to  reach  the goal  and abode 
of  spiritual  repose,  yet  they  must  merely  pass  through 
them,  and  not  remain  ever  in  them,  for  in  such  a  manner 
they  would  never reach  their goal,  which does not resemble 
these  remote  means,  neither  has  aught  to  do  with  them. 
The stairs  of a  staircase have naught to do with  the  top of it 
and the room to which it leads, yet are means to the reaching 
of both  ;  and if the climber left not behind  the stairs below 
him  until  there  were  no  more  to  climb,  but  desired  to 
1  E.p.:  • which  are of  no greater excellence  than  .. .' 
2  E.p.  has' no  more'  for' less.' 
3  E.p.:  . although  in  the imagination it may have  the order and  trace 
of  beauty.'  &  E.p.  omits:  • but  .•. contrary.' 
112  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
remain  upon  anyone  of them,  he  would  never  reach  the 
top of them nor would he mount to the pleasant
l 
and peace-
ful  room  which  is  the  goal.  And just so  the  soul  that  is  to 
attain  in  this  life  to  the  union  of that  supreme  repose  and 
blessing,  by  means  of all  these  stairs  of meditations,  forms 
and  ideas,  must  pass  through  them  and  have  done  with 
them,2 since they have no resemblance  and  bear  no propor-
tion to the goal  to  which  they lead,  which  is  God.  Where-
fore  S.  Paul says  in  the  Acts  of the  Apostles:  Non  debemus 
estimare,  auro,  vel  argento,  aut  lapidi  sculpture  artis,  et  cogitationis 
hominis,  divinum esse similem. 3  Which signifies:  We ought not 
to think of the Godhead by likening Him to gold  or to  silver, 
neither  to  stone  that  is  formed  by  art,  nor  to  aught  that  a. 
man can form  with  his imagination. 
6.  Great,  therefore,  is  the error of many' spiritual persons 
who  have  practised  approaching  God  by  means  of images 
and  forms  and  meditations,  as  befits  beginners.  God 
would  now  lead  them  on  t0
5 
further  spiritual  blessings, 
which  are  interior  and  invisible,  by  taking  from  them  the 
pleasure  and  sweetness  of discursive  meditation;  but  they 
cannot,  or dare  not,  or  know  not  how  to  detach  themselves 
from  those  palpable  methods  to  which  they  have  grown 
accustomed.  They  continually  labour  to  retain  them, 
desiring  to  proceed,  as  before,  by  the  way  of consideration 
and meditation upon forms,  for  they think that it must be so 
with them always.  They labour greatly to this end and find 
little  sweetness  or  none;  rather  the  aridity  and  weariness 
and  disquiet  of their  souls  are  increased  and  grow,  in  pro-
portion  as  they  labour  for  that  earlier  sweetness.  They 
cannot find  this in that earlier manner, for  the soul no longer 
enjoys  that food  of sense,  as  we  have said;  it needs  not this 
but another food,  which  is  more delicate,  more interior and 
partaking less of the nature of sense  ;  it consists not in labour-
ing with the imagination,  but in setting the soul at rest,  and 
allowing it to remain in its  quiet and repose, which is  more 
spiritual.  For, the farther  the soul progresses in spirituality, 
the  more  it  ceases  from  the  operat.ion  of  the  faculties  in 
particular  acts,  for  it  becomes  more  and  more  occupied  in 
one  act  that  is  general  and  pure;  and  thus  the  faculties 
1  [Lit.,  , the level '-i.e., by contrast with the steep  stairs.] 
t  E.p.  omits:  • and have done with them.' 
•  Acts xvii,  29.  '  E.p.:  '  of certain.' 
I  [The  verb,  ~ e c o g e ~     of which the derived  noun is translated' recollec-
tion,'  has  more  accurately the meaning of  • gather,'  . take inwards.'] 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XII 
that were journeying to a  p l   c ~   whither the soul  has arrived 
cease  to work,  even as  the feet stop and cease to  move when 
their journey is over.  For if all were motion, one would never 
arrive,  and  if all  were  means,  where  or  when  would  come 
the fruition of the end and goal? 
7.  I t  is  piteous,  then,  to  see  many  a  one  who, 
1 
though 
his  soul  would  fain  tarry  in  this  peace  and  rest  of interior 
quiet,  where  it is  filled  with  the  peace  and  refreshment  of 
God,  takes  from  it its  tranquillity,  and leads  it away  to  the 
most  exterior  things,  and  would  make  it return  and  retrace 
the  ground  it  has  already  traversed,  to  no  purpose,2  and 
abandon the end and goal wherein it is  already reposing for 
the means which led it to that repose,
3 
which are meditations. 
This  comes  not to pass  without great reluctance and repug-
nance of the soul,  which would fain  be in that peace that it 
understands  not,· as  in  its  proper  place;  even  as  one  who 
has arrived, with great labour, and is now resting, suffers pain 
if they  make  him  return  to  his  labour.  And,  as  such  souls 
know not the mystery of this new experience,  the idea comes 
to  them  that  they  are  being  idle  and  doing  nothing;  and 
thus  they  allow  not  themselves  to  be  quiet,  but  endeavour 
to  meditate and reason.  Hence they are filled
5 
with aridity' 
and affliction,  because they seek to find  sweetness  where it is 
no longer  to  be found;  we  may  even  say  of them  that  the 
more  they  strive  the  less  they  profit,
6 
for,  the  more  they 
persist after this  manner,  the worse is  the state wherein they 
find  themselves,  because  their  soul  is  drawn  farther  away 
from  spiritual  peace;  and  this  is  to  leave  the  greater  for 
the  less,  and  to retrace  the  road  already  traversed,  and  to 
seek  to do that which has  been done. 
7 
8.  To such  as  these  the  advice  must  be  given  to  learn  to 
abide  attentively  and  wait  lovingly  upon  God  in  that state 
of quiet,  and  to pay no  heed either to imagination or to its 
working;  for  here,  as  we  say,  the faculties  are  at rest,  and 
are  working,  not  actively,  but  passively,  by  receiving  that 
1  [Lit.,  , to see  that there  are  many  who.']  E.p.  omits  '  many  who: 
making the subject of the sentence an  unspecified' they.' 
I  E.p.  omits:  'to DO  purpose.' 
a  [Po  Silverio  prints' a  ~ l   '-' to  Him';  but be  now  agrees  with  me 
that' a  tH  '-' to it,' i.e., the repose just mentioned-is the correct reading.] 
,  E.p.  omits:  'that it understands not.' 
I  A,  H:  'Hence comes it that they are filled'  [using  a  stronger word 
for' filled'  with the sense of ' stuffed,'  , swollen '].  . 
•  E.p.:  'the more they freeze,  the more they bind' [a popular saying]. 
7  Ale.  omits:  'and to  .  .  .  been done,' probably only by an oversight. 
114  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
which  God  works  in  them;  and,  if they  work  at times,  it is 
not  with  violence
l 
or with  carefully  elaborated  meditation, 
but  with  sweetness  of love,  moved  less  by  the  ability  of the 
soul  itself than  by  God,  as  will  be  explained  hereafter.  But 
let this  now suffice to show how fitting  and necessary it is  for 
those  who  aim  at  making  further  progress  to  be  able  to 
detach  themselves  from' all  these  methods  and  manners and 
works  of the  imagination  at  the  time  and  season  when  the 
profit  of the  state  which  they  have  reached  demands  and 
requires  it. 
g.  And,  that it  may  be understood  how this  is  to  be,  and 
at what season, we shall give in the chapter following
2 
certain 
signs  which  the  spiritual  person  will  see  in  himself  and 
whereby  he  may  know  at  what  time  and  season  he  may 
freely  avail  himself of the  goal  mentioned  above,  and  may 
cease from journeying by means of meditation and  the  work 
of the imagination. 
CHAPTER  XIII 
Wherein  are  set  down  the  signs  which  the  spiritual person  will find 
in  himself and whereby  he  may  know  at  what season  it behoves 
him  to  leave  meditation  and  reasoning  and pass  to  the  state  of 
contemplation. 
3 
I.  In  order  that  there  may  be  no  confusion  in  this  in-
struction  it  will  be  meet  in  this  chapter  to  explain  at  what 
time  and  season  it  behoves  the  spiritual  person  to  lay  aside 
the  task  of discursive  meditation  as  carried  on  through  the 
imaginations  and  forms  and  figures  above  men60ned,  in 
order  that  he  may  lay  them  aside  neither  sooner  nor  later 
than when the Spirit"  bids  him;  for,  although it is  meet for 
him  to  lay  them  aside  at  the  proper  time  in  order  that  he 
may journey to  God  and  not  be hindered  by  them,  it is  no 
less  needful  for  him  not  to  lay  aside  the  said  imaginative 
meditation  before  the  proper  time  lest  he  should  turn 
1  E.p.:  '  .... and  work  not,  save  in  that  simple  and  sweet  loving 
attentiveness;  and  if  at times  they  work  more  [than  this]  it is  not  with 
violence  .  .  .'  The  reading in  the  text  is  that of  Ale. 
e  Only  Ale.  and  e.p.  have:  • in  the chapter foIlowing: 
a  E.p.:  • Sets  down the signs  which  the spiritual person may recognize 
in  himself,  in  order  that  he  may  begin  to strip  the  understanding  of  the 
imaginary forms  and  reasonings of  meditation.' 
,  [The  MSS.  and  editions,  including  P.  Silverio,  have  • spirit:  but 
P.  Silverio  agrees  with  me that the correct reading is  . Spirit.') 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XIII 
115 
backward.  For, although the apprehensions of these faculties 
serve not as proximate means of union to the proficient,  they 
serve  nevertheless  as  remote  means  to  beginners  in  order  to 
dispose  and habituate
l 
the spirit  to spirituality  by means  of 
sense,  and  in  order  to  void  the  sense,  in  the  meantime,  of 
all  the  other low  forms  and images,  temporal,  worldly  and 
natural.  We  shall  therefore  here  give  certain  signs  and 
examples  which  the  spiritual  person  will  find  in  himself, 
whereby he may know if it is  meet for  him to lay them aside 
or not at this season. 
2 
2.  The first  sign  is  his  realization  that  he  can  no  longer 
meditate  or  reason
3 
with  his  imagination,  neither  can 
take  pleasure  therein  as  he  was  wont  to  do  aforetime;  he 
rather  finds  aridity  in  that  which  aforetime  was  wont  to 
attract  his  senses  and  to  bring  him  sweetness.  But,  for  as 
long  as  he  finds  sweetness  in  meditation,"  and  ·is  able  to 
reason,  he should not abandon this,  save when  his  soul is  led 
into  the  peace  and  quietness:;  which  is  described  under  the 
third head. 
I  A,  B:  'and habilitate.' 
2  A,  B  add  here:  'The signs  which  the  spiritual  person  will  observe 
in  himself  for  laying  aside  discursive  meditation  are  three.'  Alc.,  C,  D 
add  none of  these  words.  E.p.  adds only:  'which [signs]  are three.' 
a  A,  e.p.:  'or work.' 
•  Alc.  [and  P.  Silverio]:  'as he  extracts sweetness from  meditation.' 
6  E.p.  omits:  'and  quietness.'  The  Saint's  description  of  this  first 
sign  at  which  a  soul  should  pass  from  meditation  to  contemplation  was 
denounced  as disagreeing  with  Catholic  doctrine,  particularly  the phrase: 
, that  he  can  no  longer  meditate  or  reason  with  his  imagination,  neither 
can  take pleasure therein as he was wont to do aforetime.'  This language, 
however,  is  common  to mystics and theologians,  not excluding S.  Thomas 
(2
a 
2a!,  q.  180,  a.  6)  and  Suarez  (De  Oratiolle,  Bk.  II,  Chap.  x),  as  is 
proved,  with  eloquence  and  erudition,  by  P.  Basilio  Ponce  de  Leon  and 
the  Elucidatio,  in  their  refutations  of  the  Saint's  critics.  All  agree  that, 
in the act of contemplation of  which  S.  John of the Cross here speaks,  the 
understanding  must  be  stripped  of  forms  and  species  of  the  imagination 
and  that  the  reasonings  and  reflections  of  meditation  must  be  set  aside. 
This  is  to  be  understood,  both  of  the  contemplation  that  transcends  all 
human .methods,  and  also  of  that  which  is  practised  according  to  these 
human methods with the ordinary aid of grace.  But there is this important 
difference,  that those  who  enjoy  the first  kind  of  contemplation  set aside 
a.ll  intellectual reasoning as well as processes of the fancy and  the imagina-
        whereas, for  the second kind,  reasoning prior to the act of contempla-
tIOn  is  normally  necessary,  though  it  ceases  at  the  act  of  contemplation, 
and  there  is  then  substituted  for  it simple  and  loving intuition  of  eternal 
truth.  It should  be  clearly  understood  that  this  is  not  of  habitual 
OCcurrence  in  the  contemplative  soul,  but  occurs  only  during  the  act  of 
                 which  is  commonly  of  short  duration.  S.  Teresa  makes 
      clear in Chap.  xxvii of her Life, and treats this same doctrinal question 
10  many  other  parts  of  her  works---e.g.,  Life,  Chaps.  x,  xii;  Way  of 
Perfection,  Chap.  xxvi;  Mansions,  IV,  Chap. iii, etc. 
116  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
3.  The second  sign  is  a  realization  that he  has  no  desire 
to  fix  his  meditation  or  his  sense  upon  other  particular 
objects,  exterior or interior.  I  do not mean that the imagi-
nation neither comes  nor goes  (for it is  wont  to  move freely 
even at times  of great recollection),  but that the soul  has  no 
pleasure in fixing  it of set purpose upon other objects. 
4.  The third and surest sign is  that the soul takes pleasure 
in  being  alone,  and  waits  with  loving  attentiveness  upon 
God,  without  making  any particular meditation,  in  inward 
peace and quietness and rest,  and without acts and exercises 
of the faculties-memory,  understanding and will-at least, 
without  discursive  acts,  that  is,  without  passing  from  one 
thing  to  another;  the  soul  is  alone,  with  an  attentiveness 
and a  knowledge,  general and loving,  as  we  said,  but  with-
out  any  particular  understanding,  and  adverting  not  to 
what it is  contemplating.
l 
5.  These three signs,  at least,  the spiritual person must see 
in himself,  all  together,  before  he can venture  with  security 
to  abandon the state of meditation  and sense, I)  and to enter 
that of contemplation and spirit. 
6.  And  it  suffices  not  for  a  man  to  have  the  first  alone 
without  the  second,  for  it  might  be  that  the  reason  for  his 
being  unable  to  imagine  and  meditate  upon  the  things  of 
God,  as  he did aforetime,  was  his  being distracted and care-
less;3  for  the  which  cause  he  must  observe  in  himself the 
second  likewise,  which  is  the  loss  of inclination  or desire  to 
think  upon  other  things;  for,  when  the  inability  to  fix  the 
imagination and sense upon the things of God proceeds from 
distraction  or lukewarmness, the soul then has the desire and 
inclination  to  fix  it  upon  other  and  different  things,  which 
lead it thence altogether.  Neither does it suffice that he should 
observe  in  himself the  first  and  second  signs,  if he  observe 
not likewise, together with these, the third;  for,  although he 
observe  his  inability to  reason  and think upon the things  of 
God,  and likewise  his  distaste  for  thinking  upon  other  and 
different things,  this might proceed from melancholy or from 
some  other kind of humour in the brain or the heart,  which 
1  Only Ale.,  B, C,  D  have:  ' and adverting  ... it is contemplating.' 
I  E.p. omits:  . and sense.'  Since sense plays so great a part in medita-
tion,  S.  John of the Cross  places it in contradistinction to contemplation, 
which,  the more  nearly  it attains perfection,  becomes  the more lofty and 
Ipiritual  and  the  more  completely  freed  from  the  bonds  of  nature.  Cf. 
Elucidatio,  Pt.  II, Chap.  iii,  p.  180. 
a  A,  B,  C:  'and not recollected.' 
BOOK  II.·  CHAPTER  XIV 
habitually  produces  a  certain  absorption  and  suspension  of 
the senses,  causing the soul to think not at all, nor to desire or 
be inclined  to  think,  but  rather  to  remain  in  that  pleasant 
condition of wonder.  Against this must be set the third sign, 
which  is  loving attentiveness  and  knowledge,  in  peace,  etc., 
as  we  have said. 
7.  It is  true,  however,  that,  when  this  condition  first 
begins,  this  loving  knowledge  is  hardly  realized,  and  that 
for  two  reasons.  First,  this  loving  knowledge  is  apt  at  the 
beginning to  be very subtle and delicate,  and almost imper-
ceptible  to  the  senses.  Secondly,  when  the  soul  has  been 
accustomed  to  that  other  exercise  of meditation,  which  is 
wholly1  perceptible, it cannot realize,  or is  hardly conscious 
of,  this  other  new  and  imperceptible  condition,  which  is 
purely  spiritual;  especially  when,  not  understanding  it, 
the  soul  allows  not  itself to  rest  in  it,  but  strives  after  the 
former,  which  is  more  readily  realized;  so  that,  abundant 
though  the  loving  interior  peace  may  be,  the  soul  has  no 
opportunity of experiencing and enjoying  it.  But  the  more 
accustomed the soul grows  to this,
2 
by allowing itself to rest, 
the  more  it will  grow  therein  and become  conscious  of that 
loving  general  knowledge  of God,  in  which  it  has  greater 
enjoyment than in aught else,  since  this  knowledge  causes  it 
peace,  rest,  pleasure and delight  without labour. 
8.  And,  to  the  end  that  what  has  been  said  may  be  the 
clearer,  we  shall  give,  in  this  chapter  following,  the  causes 
and reasons why the three signs aforementioned appear to be 
necessary for  the soul that is journeying to pure spirit. 
3 
CHAPTER  XIV 
Wherein  is proved  the fitness  of these  signs,  and  the  reason  is  given 
why  that  which  has  been  said  about  them  is  necessary  to 
progress. 
I.  With  respect  to  the first  sign  whereof we  are  speaking 
-that is  to  say,  that  the  spiritual  person  who  would  enter 
upon  the  spiritual  road"  (which  is  that  of contemplation) 
must leave the way of imagination and of meditation through 
I  E.p.:  • which is  more.' 
I  A,  e.p.:  • becomes  prepared  for  this.' 
.  I  [Lit.,  '  appear  to  be  necessary  in  order  to  journey  to spirit.']  E.p.: 
• In order to guide  the spirit.'  •  E.p.:  'spiritual life.' 
JIB  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
sense, when he takes no more pleasure therein and is unable to 
reason-there  are  two  reasons  why  this  should  be  done, 
which may almost be comprised in one.  The first  is,  that in 
one  way  the  soul  has  received  all  the  spiritual  good  which 
it would be able to derive from the things of God by the way 
of meditation  and  reasoning,  the sign  whereof is  that it can 
no  longer  meditate  or  reason  as  before,
l 
and  finds  no  new 
sweetness  or pleasure  therein  as  it found  before,  because  up 
to  that  time  it had not  progressed 
2 
as  far  as  the spirituality 
which was in store for it;  for,  as  a  rule,  whensoever the soul 
receives  some  spiritual  blessing,  it  receives  it  with  pleasure, 
at  least  in  spirit,  in  that  means  whereby  it  receives  it  and 
profits  by  it;  otherwise  it  is  astonishing  if it  profits  by  it, 
or finds  in the cause of it that help and that sweetness  which 
it finds  when  it receives  it.
3 
For  this  is  in  agreement  with 
the saying of philosophers,  Quod sapit,  nutrit.  That is:  That 
which  is  palatable  nourishes  and  fattens.  Wherefore  holy 
Job  said:  Numquid  poterit  comedi  insulsum,  quod  non  est  sale 
conditum?'  Can that which is  unsavoury perchance be eaten 
when  it  is  not seasoned  with  salt?  It is  for  this  cause  that 
the soul is  unable to meditate or reason as  before:  the little 
pleasure  which  the  spirit  finds  therein  and the  little  profit 
which it gains. 
2.  The second reason is  that the soul at this season has now 
both  the substance and  the habit of the spirit of meditation. 
For it must be known that the  end  of reasoning and  medita-
tion on the things of God is  to gain some knowledge and love 
of God, and each time that the soul gains  this through medi-
tation,6 it is an act;  and just as many acts,  of whatever kind, 
end by forming a habit in the soul, just so,  many of these acts 
ofloving knowledge which the soul has been making one after 
another from  time  to  time come  through  repetition  to  be so 
continuous  in  it  that they  become  habitual.  This  end  God 
is  wont also  to effect in many souls  without  the interventioll 
of these  acts
6 
(or  at  least  without  many  such  acts  having 
preceded  it),  by  setting  them  at  once  in  contemplation. 
7 
And  thus  that which  aforetime  the  soul  was  gaining gradu-
ally  through  its  labour  of meditation  upon  particular facts 
1  E.p.:  • as it was  wont to do before.' 
I  E.p.:  '  ... pleasure  therein  as  before.  because  before  this  it  had 
not progressed  .. .'  3  E.p. omits:  • or finds  ... receives it: 
,  Job vi.  6.  6  E.p.  omits:  • through  meditation: 
•  E.p.:  • This  God  is  wont  to do likewise  without  the intervention of 
these acts of meditation.'  7  A  adds:  • and love.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XIV 
119 
has  now  through  practice,  as  we  have  been saying,  become 
converted and changed into a  habit and substance of loving 
knowledge,  of a  general  kind,  and  not distinct  or particular 
as  before.  Wherefore,  when it gives  itself to  prayer,  the soul 
is  now like one to whom  water has  been  brought,  so  that he 
drinks  peacefully without labour,  and is  no longer forced  to 
draw  the  water  through  the  aqueducts  of past  meditations 
and  forms  and  figures.
1 
So  that,  as  soon  as  the  soul  comes 
before  God,  it makes  an act of knowledge,  confused,  loving, 
passive  and  tranquil,  wherein  it drinks  of wisdom  and  love 
and delight. 
3.  And it is for this cause that the soul feels  great weariness 
and  distaste,  when)  although  it is  in  this  condition  of tran-
quillity, men try to make it meditate and labour in particular 
acts of knowledge.  For it is  like a child,  which, while receiv-
ing  the  milk  that  has  been  collected  and  brought  together 
for it in the breast, is  taken from  the breast and forced  to  try 
to gain and collect food  with  the diligence of its own squeez-
ing  and  handling.  Or it  is  like  one  who  has  removed  the 
rind from a fruit,  and is  tasting the substance of the fruit,  but 
is  now forced to cease doing this and to try to begin removing 
the  said
2 
rind,  which  has  been  removed  already.  He finds 
no rind to remove, and yet he is unable to enjoy the substance 
of the  fruit  which  he  already had in  his  hand;  herein he is 
like  to  one  who  leaves  a  prize  which  he  holds  for  another 
which he holds  not.  . 
4.  And many act thus who begin to enter this state;  they 
think that the whole business consists in a continual reasoning 
and  learning  to  understand  particular  things  by  means  of 
images  and  forms,  which  are  to  the  spirit  as  rind.  When 
they  find  not  these  in  that  substantial  and  loving  quiet 
wherein  their soul  desires  to  remain,  and  wherein  it  under-
stands  nothing clearly,  they think  that  they are going astray 
and wasting time,  and they begin once more to  seek the rind 
of their imaginings  and reasonings,
3 
but find  it not,  because 
it has  already  been  removed.  And  thus  they  cannot  enjoy 
the  substance  or  succeed  in  their  meditation,  and  they 
become troubled  by the thought that they are  turning back-
ward  and  are  losing  themselves.  They  are  indeed  losing 
themselves,'  though  not  in  the  way  they  think,  for  they 
1  [Cf.  the simile of  the Waters in S.  Teresa,  Life,  Chap.  xi.) 
I  E.p.:  • the same.'  a  A:  'the rind 01  reasoning.' 
•  E.p.:  'And they are indeed doing so,' 
120  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
are becoming lost to their own senses and to their first mamier 
of perception;1  and this  means  the gain  of that spirituality 
which is  being given  them.  The less  they understand, how-
ever,  the farther  they  penetrate  into  the  night  of the  spirit, 
whereof  we  are  treating  in  this  book,  through  the  which 
night  they  must  pass  in  order  to  be  united  with  God,  in  a 
union  that  transcends  all  knowledge. 
5.  With respect to the second sign,  there is little to say, for 
It  is  clear  that  at  this  season  the  soul  cannot  possibly  take 
pleasure  in  other  and  different  objects  of the  imagination, 
which  are  of the  world,  since,  as  we  have  said,  and for  the 
reasons already mentioned,  it has no pleasure in those which 
are most like to it-namely, those of God.  Only, as has been 
noted above, the imaginative faculty in this state of recollec-
tion  is  in  the  habit of coming  and  going  and varying  of its 
own  accord;  but  neither  according  to  the  pleasure  nor  at 
the  will  of the  soul,  which  is  troubled  thereby,  because  its 
peace and joy are disturbed. 
6.  Nor do  I  think  it necessary  to  say  anything here  con-
cerning  the  fitness  and  necessity  of the  third  sign  whereby 
the  soul  may  know  if it is  to  leave  the  meditation  afore-
mentioned,  which is  a  knowledge of God or an attentiveness 
to  Him,  both general  and loving.  For something  has  been 
said  of this  in  treating of the first  sign, and we  shall treat of 
it again hereafter,  when  we  speak in its  proper place of this 
confused  and general knowledge,  which  will  come  after our 
discussion  of all  the  particular apprehensions  of the  under-
standing.  But we  will  speak
2 
of one reason alone by which 
it may clearly  be seen  how,  when  the  contemplative  has  to 
tum  aside  from  the  way  of meditation  and  reasoning,  he 
needs  this  general and loving  attentiveness  or knowledge  of 
God.  The reason is that, if the soul at that time had not this 
knowledge  of God  or  this  realization  of His  presence,  the 
result would be that it would do nothing and have nothing; 
for,  having turned aside from  meditation  (by  meaJlS  whereof 
the  soul  has  been  reasoning  with  its  faculties  of sense),  and 
being  still  without  contemplation,  which  is  the  general 
knowledge  whereof we  are  speaking,3  wherein  the soul has 
exerted  its  spiritual  faculties'--namely,.  memory,  under-
1  A.  B. e.p.  add:  'and understanding: 
I  E.p.:  '  ... now speak.'  I  B:  'whereof we were speaking.' 
,  B:  '. .  .  the  soul  has  present  spiritual  faculties.'  [The  difference 
in  the  Spanish  between  this  reading  and  that  of  the  text is  very  slight 
and might be due to a  careless copyist.] 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XIV  121 
standing  and  will-these  being  united  in  this  knowledge 
which  is  already  wrought  and  received  in  them,  the  souP 
would  of necessity  be  without  any  exercise  in  the  things  of 
God,  since  the soul  can neither work nor receive
2 
that which 
has  been  worked  in  it,  save  only  by  way of these  two  kinds 
of faculty,
3 
that of sense  and  that of spirit.  For, as  we have 
said,  by  means  of  the  faculties  of sense  it  can  reason  and 
search  out  and  gain  knowledge  of things  and  by  means  of 
the spiritual  faculties  it can have fruition  of the knowledge· 
which  it  has  already  received  in  these  faculties  afore-
mentioned,  though  the  faculties  themselves  take  no  part 
herein. 
5 
7.  And  thus  the  difference  between  the  operation  of 
these  two  faculties  in the soul  is  like  the  difference  between 
working and enjoying the fruit of work which has been done; 
or  like  that  between  the  labour  of journeying  and  the  rest 
and quiet which  comes  from  arrival at the goal;  or,  again, 
like that between preparing a  meal and partaking and tasting 
of it, when it has been both prepared and masticated, without 
having any of the labour of cooking it  or it is like the differ-
ence  between  receiving  something  and  profiting  by  that 
which  has  been  received. 
6 
Now  if  the  soul  be  occupied 
neither with respect to the operation 
7 
of the faculties of sense, 
which  is  meditation and reasoning,  nor with  respect  to  that 
which has already been received and effected in the spiritual 
faculties, which is
8 
the contemplation and knowledge whereof 
we  have  spoken,  it  will  have  no  occupation,  but  will  be 
wholly  idle, and there would be no way in  which  it could be 
said to be  employed.  This  knowledge,  then,  is  needful  for 
the abandonment of the  way of meditation  and reasoning. 
8.  But here it must be made clear that this  general know-
ledge  whereof  we  are  speaking  is  at  times  so  subtle  and 
delicate,  particularly  when  it is  most  pure  and  simple  and 
perfect,  most  spiritual  and  most  interior,  that,  although  the 
1  E.p.  omits:  'the soul';  [as a  result,  the clause  may be interpreted 
impersonally,  but the general sense is the same]. 
I  E.p.:  'nor continue in:  I  A,  B:  'of these two faculties.' 
4  E.p.:  'the object of the knowledge: 
6  E.p.  adds:  'with labour,  seareh  or reasoning: 
•  So Ale.,  but the other codices and e.p.  place this last clause after' has 
been done' above. 
7  E.p.  omits' and  masticated'  and  the  following  clauses,  continuing 
thus:  '  ... [been  prepared].  And  if it be oot  occupied  io  any kind  of 
exercise,  whether it have respect to the operation  .. .' 
•  E.p. o m ~ t s     'in the spiritual faculties,  whicb is.' 
122  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
soul be occupied therein, it can neither realize it nor perceive 
it.  This  is  most  frequently  the  case  when  we  can  say  that 
it is  in itself most clear,  perfect and simple;  and this  comes 
to  pass  when  it penetrates a  soul  that is  unusually  pure  and 
far  removed  from  other  particular  kinds  of knowledge  and 
intelligence,  which  the  understanding  or  the  senses  might 
fasten upon.  Such a  soul, since it no longer has those  things 
wherein the understanding and the senses have the habit and 
custom  of occupying  themselves,  IS  not  conscious  of them, 
inasmuch as  it has  not its accustomed powers of sense.  And 
it is  for  this  reason  that,  when  this  knowledge  is  purest  and 
simplest  and  most  perfect,  the  understanding  is  least  con-
scious  of it and  thinks  of it as  most obscure.  And  similarly, 
in contrary wise,  when  it
l 
is  in  itself least  pure  and  simple 
in  the  understanding,  it  seems  to  the  understanding  to  be 
clearest and of the greatest importance, since it is  clothed in, 
mingled  with  or involved  in certain intelligible forms  which 
the  understanding or  the  senses
2 
may seize  upon. 
g.  This  will  be  clearly  understood  by  the  following  com-
parison.  Ifwe consider a ray of sunlight which enters through 
a  window,  we see  that,  the more the said ray is  charged with 
atoms  and  particles  of  matter,  the  more  palpable,  visible 
and bright it appears to  the eye of sense;3  yet it is  clear that 
the  ray  is  in  itself least  pure,  clear,  simple  and  perfect  at 
that time, since it is full of so many particles and atoms.  And 
we  see  likewise  that,  when  it is  purest  and  freest  from  those 
particles  and  atoms,  the  least  palpable  and  the  darkest
1 
does  it appear  to  the  material  eye;  and  the  purer it is,  the 
darker  and  less  apprehensible  it  appears  to  it.  And  if the 
ray  were completely pure and free  from  all  these  atoms and 
particles,  even  from  the  minutest  specks  of dust,  it  would 
appear completely dark and invisible
5 
to the eye, since every-
thing that could be seen would be lacking to it-namely, the 
objects of sight.  For the  eye  would find  no objects  whereon 
to  rest,  since  light  is  no  proper
6 
object  of vision,  but  the 
means whereby that which is  visible is  seen;  so  that, if there 
be  no  visible  objects  wherein  the  sun's  ray  or any light  can 
1  E.p.:  . when  this knowledge.'  I  E.p.  omits:  . or  the senses.' 
3  [Lit.,  • to  the sight of sense.']  E.p.  has:  • to the sense  of  sight.' 
,  E.p.:  . and  the  least  pure.' 
•  All  the  1\ISS.  have' incomprehensible.'  E.p.  reads' imperceptible' 
and  [says  P.  Silverio] 'rightly so. 
•  A.  B:  . no  visible.'  E.p.:  . since  simple  and  pure  light  is  not  a,s 
properly an object of sight as a  means whereby: etc.  . 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XIV 
12
3 
be  reflected,  nothing  will  be  seen.  Wherefore,  if the  ray  of 
light  entered  by  one  window  and  went  out  by  another, 
without  meeting  anything  that  has  material form,  it  would 
not
l 
be  seen  at  all;  yet,  notwithstanding,  that  ray  of light 
would  be  purer and  clearer in itself than  when  it was  more 
clearly  seen  and  perceived  through  being  full  of  visible 
objects. 
10.  The same thing happens in the realm of spiritual light 
with  respect  to  the  sight  of the  soul,  which  is  the  under-
standing,  and  which  this  general
2 
and  supernatural  know-
ledge and light whereof we are speaking strikes so  purely and 
simply.  So  completely is  it detached  and  removed  from  all 
intelligible  forms,  which  are  objects
3 
of the  understanding, 
that  it  is  neither  perceived  nor observed.  Rather,  at  times 
(that  is,  when  it  is  purest),  it  becomes  darkness,  because  it 
withdraws  the  understanding  from  its  accustomed  lights, 
from  forms  and from  fancies,  and then  the  darkness  is  more 
clearly  perceived  and realized.  But,  when  this  Divine  light 
strikes  the soul  with  less  force,  it  neither. perceives  darkness 
nor  observes  light,  nor  apprehends  aught  that  it  knows,' 
from  whatever  source;  hence  at  times  the  soul  remains  as 
it were in a  great forgetfulness,  so  that it knows  not where it 
has been
s 
or what it has  done,  nor is it aware of the  passage 
of time.  Wherefore  it  may  happen,  and  does  happen,  that 
many  hours  are  spent  in  this  forgetfulness,  and,  when  the 
soul  returns  to itself,  it believes  that less  than a  moment has 
passed,  or no  time at all.
6 
. 
1 I.  The  cause  of  this  forgetfulness  is  the  purity  and 
simplicity  of this  knowledge  which  occupies  the  souF  and 
simplifies,  purifies  and  cleanses  it  from  all  apprehensions 
and  forms  of the  senses  and  of the  memory,  through  which 
it acted when it was  conscious  of time, 8  and thus leaves  it in 
forgetfulness  and  without  consciousness  of  time.
9 
This 
prayer, therefore, seems to the soul extremely brief, although, 
as  we  say,IO  it  may last  for  a  long  period;  for  the  soul  has 
1  E.p.:  • it seems  that it would  not.' 
2  E.p.  omits:  • generaJ  and.' 
3  E.p.:  . which  are  proportionate objects.' 
,  E.p.  begins  this  sentence  thus:  .  At  other  times,  too,  this  Divine 
light  strikes  the  soul  with  such  force  that  it  neither  perceives  darkness, 
nor observes light,  neither does it seem to apprehend aught that it knows.' 
&  A,  B:  . has entered.'  •  E.p.  omits:  . or no  time at aU.' 
7  E.p.  adds:  • being itself clear and  pure.'  8  [Lit.,  • acted in time.'] 
,  [Lit.,  • without time.']  E.p.:  • without  noticing  differences  of  time.: 
10  E.p.:  • as  I  have said.'  . 
124  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
been united 
1 
in pure intelligence, which belongs not to time ; 
and  this  is  the  brief  prayer  which  is  said  to  pierce  the 
heavens,  because  it is  brief and  because  it belongs  not  to 
time.!  And it pierces the heavens,  because the soul is  united 
in  heavenly intelligence;  and when  the  soul  awakens,  this 
knowledge leaves  in  it the effects  which it created in it with-
out its being conscious of them, which effects are the lifting up 
of the spirit to the heavenly intelligence,  and its  withdrawal 
and  abstraction  from  all  things  and  forms  and  figures  and 
memories  thereof.  It is  this  that David  describes  as  having 
happened  to  him  when  he  returned  to  himself out  of this 
same forgetfulness,  saying:  Vigilavi,  et factus  sum  sicut passer 
solitarius  in  tecto. 
3 
Which  signifies:  I  have  watched  and  I 
have become like the lonely bird" on the house-top.  He uses 
the  word' lonely,'  meaning  that  he  was  withdrawn  and 
abstracted  from  all  things.  And by the house-top he means 
the elevation of the spirit on high;  and thus the soul remains 
as  though  ignorant  of all  things,  for  it  knows  God  only, 
without knowing how.  Wherefore  the Bride declares in the 
Songs  that among the effects  which  that sleep and forgetful-
ness of hers produced was this unknowing.  She says that she 
came  down  to  the  garden,  saying:  Nescivi.1i  That  is:  I 
knew  not  whence.  Although,  as  we  have  said,  the  soul  in 
this  state  of knowledge  believes  itself to  be  doirig  nothing, 
and to  be entirely  unoccupied, because it is  working neither 
1  E.p.  omits' united: 
J  E.p. modifies these lines thus:  '  ... it has been in pure intelligence, 
which  is  the brief prayer that is said to pierce the heavens.  Because it is 
brief and  because the soul is not conscious or observant of time:  P.    o s ~  
de Jesus Marfa comments thus upon this passage:  'In contemplation the 
soul  withdraws  itself  from  the seashore,  and  entirely  loses  sight  of  land, 
in  order to  whelm  itself  in  that  vast  sea  and  impenetrable  abyss  of  the 
Divine  Essence;  hiding  itself  in  the  region  of  time,  it enters  within  the 
most  extensive  limits  of  eternity.  For  the  pure  and  simple  intelligence 
wQereinto  the  soul  is  brought in  this  contemplation,  as  was  pointed  out 
by the ancient  Dionysius (Myst.  Theol.,  Chap. ii), and by our own Father, 
is not subject to time.  For, as S.  Thomas says  (Pt.  I, q.  11.8,  a.  3,  et  alibi), 
the  soul  is  a  spiritual  substance,  which  is  above  time  and  superior  to 
the movements  of  the heavens,  to  which  it is  only subject because of the 
body.  And  therefore  it  seems  that,  when  the  soul  withdraws  from  the 
body,  and  from  all  created  things,  and  by  means  of  pure  intelligence 
whelms  itself in  eternal  things,  it recovers  its natura1  dominion  and rises 
above  time,  if not  according to  substance,  at least  according  to its most 
perfect  being;  for  the noblest and most perfect  being of  the soul  resides 
rather in its acts than in its faculties.  Wherefore S.  Gregory said (Morals, 
Bk.  VIII):  .. The  Saints  enter  eternity  even  in  this  life,  beholding  the 
eternity of God:' ,  •  Psalm ci,  8  [A.V.,  cH,  7]. 
I  [The Spanish p4jaro,  • bird,'  is derived  from  passer,  • sparrow.'] 
•  Canticles vi,  12. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XIV 
12
5 
with  the senses  nor with  the faculties,  it should  realize  that 
it is  not wasting  time.
l 
For,  although  the  harmony  of the 
faculties  of the soul  may cease,  its  intelligence is  as  we  have 
said.  For this cause the Bride,  who  was  wise,  answered  this 
question herself in the Songs,  saying:  Ego  dormio  et cor  meum 
vigilat.
2 
As  though she were  to say:  Although I  sleep  with 
respect  to  my  natural  self,  ceasing  to  labour,  my  heart 
waketh,  being  supernaturally  lifted  up  in  supernatural 
knowledge. 
3 
12.  But it must  be  realized  that  this  knowledge  is  not  to 
be supposed  to  cause  this  forgetfulness  of necessity,  in order 
for  the  soul  to  be  in  the  state  that we  are  here  describing j 
for  this  happens  only  when'  God  suspends  in  the  soul  the 
exercise of all its faculties,  both natural and spiritual,  which 
happens very seldom,6 for this knowledge does not always fill 
the soul  entirely.  It is  sufficient for  the purpose,  in the case 
which  we  are  treating,  that  the  understanding  should  be 
withdrawn from all particular knowledge, whether temporal 
or spiritual,  and that the will should not desire  to  think with 
respect  to  either,  as  we  have said,  for  this  is  a  sign  that  the 
soul  is  occupied. 
8 
And  it  must  be  taken  as  an  indication 
1  E.p.  adds:  • nor is useless.'  I  Canticles v,  2. 
•  The  words  which  conclude  this  paragraph  in  the  edition  of  1630 
(' The sign  by  which we  may know if the  soul  is  occupied  in  this  secret 
intelligence is if it is seen to have no pleasure in thinking of aught, whether 
high or low') are not found either in the Codices or in e.p.  When S.  John 
of  the  Cross  uses  the  words' cessation,'  • idleness'  [oeio.,  Lat.  otium], 
• quiet,'  • annihilation,'  • sleep'  (of  the  faculties),  etc.,  he  docs  not  hold, 
with  the  Illuminists,  that the  understapding  and  will  in the  act of  con-
templation are completely passive. and that the contemplative is therefore 
impeccable, although he commit the grossest sins.  The faculties,  according 
to S.  John of the Cross.  are active even in the highest contemplation;  the 
understanding  is  attentive  to  God  and  the will  is  loving  Him.  They  are 
not working, it is true, in the way which is usual and natural with them-
that  is,  by  reason  and  imagination-but  supernaturally,  through  the 
unction  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  they  receive  passively,  without  any 
effort  of  their  own.  It is  in  this  sense  that such  words  as  those  quoted 
above are both expressively and appropriately used  by the Saint, for what 
is  done  without  labour  and  effort  may  better  be  described  by images  of 
passivity than by those of activity.  Further, the soul is unaware that its 
faculties  are  working  in  this  sublime  contemplation,  though  they  un-
doubtedly do  work. 
S.  John of the Cross,  philosopher as well as mystic, would  not deny the 
vital and intrinsic activity of the understanding and the will in contempla-
tion.  His  reasoning  is  supported  by  P.  Jose  de  Jesus  Marla  (Apologia 
Mistiea  ,u  la  Contemplaci6n  Divina,  Chap.  ix)  [quoted  at  length  by 
P.  Silverio, Olwas,  etc.,  Vol.  II, p.  130,  note]. 
•  E.p.:  • when in a  particular way.' 
I  E.p.  abbreviates:  '  ... suspends  the  soul,  and  this  happens  very 
seldom.'  •  E.p. omits:  • for this  ... occupied.' 
126  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
that this is SOl  when this knowledge is applied and communi-
cated  to  the  understanding only,  which  sometimes  happens 
when  the soul  is  unable  to  observe  it.  For,  when it is  com-
municated to the will also,  which happens almost invariably, 
the soul does not cease to understand in the very least degree, 
if it will  reflect hereon,  that it is  employed and  occupied  in 
this  knowledge,  inasmuch as  it is  conscious of a  sweetness  of 
love therein, without particular knowledge or understanding 
of that which it loves.  It is for this reason that this knowledge 
is  described as general and loving;  for, just as  it is  so  in the 
understanding,  being communicated to it obscurely,  even so 
is  it in  the  will,  sweetness  and love  being  communicated  to 
it confusedly,  so  that it cannot have a  distinct  knowledge  of 
the object of its love. 
13.  Let this suffice  now to explain how meet it is  that the 
soul  should  be  occupied  in  this  knowledge,  so  that  it  may 
turn aside from the way of spiritual 
2 
meditation, and be sure 
that, although it seem to be doing nothing, it is well occupied, 
ifit discern within itself these signs.  It will  also be realized, 
from  the comparison  which  we  have  made,  that if this  light 
presents itself to the understanding in a  more comprehensible 
and  palpable  manner,  as  the sun's  ray  presents  itself to  the 
eye  when  it is  full  of particles,  the  soul  must  not  therefore 
consider  it  purer,  brighter  and  more  sublime.  It is  clear 
that,  as  Aristotle  and  the  theologians  say,3  the  higher  and 
more sublime is the Divine light, the darker is it to our under-
standing. 
14.  Of this  Divine  knowledge  there  is  much  to  say,  con-
cerning  both  itself and  the  effects  which  it  produces  upon 
contemplatives.  All  this  we  reserve  for  its  proper  place,' 
for,  although  we  have  spoken  of it here,  there  would  be  no 
reason for having done so  at such length, save our desire not
6 
to leave this doctrine rather more confused than it is already, 
for  I  confess  it  is  certainly  very  much  so.  Not  only  is  it  a 
matter which  is  seldom  treated  in  this  way,  either  verbally 
or  in  writing,  being  in  itself so  extraordinary  and  obscure, 
but  my  rude  style  and  lack  of knowledge  make  it  more  so. 
Further,  since  I  have  misgivings  as  to  my  ability  to  explain 
it,  I  believe  I  often  write at too great length and go  beyond 
1  E.p.:  • it must be  taken to show that the soul is in this forgetfulness.' 
I  E.p.  omits' spiritual.'  I  A,  B  omit:  'as ... say.' 
,  In spite  of this  promise,  the  Saint does  not  return  to  this subject  at 
such length as his language here would  suggest. 
I  Ale.,  B  omit' not,' which,  however,  is  required  by the context. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XV 
12
7 
the  limits  which  are  necessary  for  that:  part  of the  doctrine 
which I  am treating.
l 
Herein I  confess  that I  sometimes err 
purposely;  for  that  which  is  not  explicable  by  one  kind  of 
reason  will  perhaps  be  better  understood  by  another,  or  by 
others yet;  and I  believe, too,  that in this way I am shedding 
more  light  upon  that  which  is  to  be  said  hereafter. 
15.  Wherefore it seems well  to  me also,  before completing 
this  part of my  treatise,  to set down  a  rcply2  to one  question 
which  may  arise  with  respect  to  the  continuance  of  this 
knowledge,  and  this  shall  be  briefly  treated
3 
in  the  chapter 
following. 
CHAPTER  XV 
Wherein  is  explained  how  it is  sometimes  well for  progressives  who 
are  beginning  to  enter  upon  this  general  knowledge  of con-
templation  to  profit  by  natural·  meditation  and the  work  of the 
natural faculties. 
I.  With  regard  to  what  has  been  said,  there  might  be 
raised  one  question-if  progressives  (that  is,  those  whom 
God is  beginning  to  bring into  this  supernatural knowledge 
of contemplation whereof we have spoken)  must never again, 
because of this  that they are. beginning to experience,  return 
to  the  way  of meditation  and  argument and  natural  forms. 
To this  the answer is that it is  not to be understood  that such 
as  are  beginning  to  experience  this  loving  knowledge  must 
never again,  as a  general rule,  try to  return to  meditation  ; $ 
for,  when  they  are  first  gaining  in  proficiency,  the  habit  of 
contemplation  is  not  yet  so  perfect  that  whensoever  ~ h   y  
wish  they  can give  themselves  to  the act thereof,  nor,  in  the 
same way,  have  they reached a  point so  far  beyond  medita-
tion  that they cannot occasionally meditate and reason  in a 
natural  way,
6 
as  they  were  wont,  using  the  figures  and  the 
steps  that  they  were  wont  to  use,7  and  finding  something 
new in them.  Rather, in these early stages, when,  by means 
of the indications already given,  they are able to see  that the 
1  A.  B  omit the rest of this  paragraph  . 
.  2  E.p.:  . not to fail  to reply.' 
a  E.p.:  . and this  I  will do.'  4  E.p.  omits' natural.' 
I  E.p.:  'this loving and  simple  knowledge  must never meditate again 
or strive to do so.' 
6  Ale.  alone has:  . in a  natural  way.' 
7  E.p.  omits:  'using  ... to  use.' 
I28  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
soul is  not occupied in that repose and knowledge,  they will 
need to make use of meditation until  they come by its means 
to  acquire  the habit which  we  have  described and which in 
some ways is perfect.  This will come about when, as soon as 
they  seek  to  meditate,  they  experience  this  knowledge  and 
peace, and find  themselves unable to meditate and no longer 
desirous  of doing so,  as  we  have said.  For until  they reach 
this stage, which is  that of the proficient in this exercise,  they 
use  sometimes the one and sometimes  the other,  at different 
seasons. 
1 
2.  The soul,  then,  will  frequently find  itself in this loving 
or peaceful  state  of waiting  upon  God!  without in any way 
exercising its faculties-that is,  with respect to particular acts 
-and without  working  actively  at all,  but only receiving. 
3 
In order  to  reach  this  state,  1t  will  frequently  need  to  make 
use  of meditation,  quietly  and  in  moderation;  but,  when 
once the soul is brought into this other state,' it acts not at all 
with  its  faculties,6  as  we  have  already  said.  It  would  be 
truer to say that understanding and sweetness work in it and 
are wrought  within it,  than that the  soul  itself works  at all, 
save  only  by waiting upon  God and  by loving  Him without 
desiring  to  feel  or  to  see  anything. 
6 
Then  God  communi-
cates Himself to it passively,  even as to one who has his  eyes 
open, so  that light is communicated to him passively, without 
his  doing  more  than  keep  them  open. 
7 
And  this  reception 
of light  which  is  infused  supernaturally  is  passive  under-
standing.  We say that the soul works not· at all, not because 
it  understands  not,  but  because  it  understands  things  not 
discovered  by its own industry and receives  only that which 
is  given  to it,  as  comes  to  pass  in the illuminations  and  en-
lightenments  or inspirations of God.
8 
3.  Although  in  this  condition  the  will  freely  receives  this 
general  and  confused  knowledge  of God,  it  is  needful,  in 
1  E.p. omits:  • at different seasons.' 
a  [Lit.,  • in this  loving  or  peaceful  presence,'  the  original  of  the  latter 
word  having also the sense of ' attendance.'] 
I  The  words:  • that  is  .•.. only  receiving'  occur  only in  Ale.  E.p 
substitutes:  'as has been  explained.' 
,  E.p.:  'when once  this [other state] is attained.' 
I  E,p.:  'the soul  neither reflects nor labours with its faculties.' 
•  E.p.  adds:  'save only to let itself be carried away by God.' 
7  E.p.  abbreviates:  '  ..• his  eyes  open,  light  is  communicated.' 
•  This passage (' And this reception  •  .  .  inspira.tions of God ') together 
with  the  :first  clause  of  the  next  paragraph  (' Although  .  .  .  knowledge 
of God  ')  is only found in Ale. 
BOOJ(  II.  CHAPTER  XV 
12
9 
order that it may  receive  this  Divine  light  more  simply and 
abundantly,  only  that  it  should  take  care  not  to  interpose 
other lights which are more palpable, whether forms or ideas 
or  figures  having  to  do  with  any  kind  of meditation;  for 
none of these  things is  similar to  that pure and serene light. 
Wherefore if at this  time  the will  desires  to  understand  and 
           particular  things,  however  spiritual  they  be,  this 
would  obstruct  the  pure  and  simple  general  lightl  of  the 
spirit,  by  setting  those  clouds  in  the  way;  even  as  a  man 
might set something before his  eyes which impeded his  vision 
and  kept  from  him  both  the  light  and the sight of things  in 
front  of him. 
4.  Hence  it clearly  follows  that,  when  the  soul  has  com-
pletely purified  and voided itself of all forms  and images  that 
can  be apprehended,  it will  remain in  this  pure and simple 
light,  being  transformed  therein  into  a  state  of perfection. 
For, though this light never fails  in the soul,2 it is  not infused 
jnto it because of the creature forms  and veils  wherewith  the 
soul  is  veiled  and  embarrassed;  but  if these  impediments 
and  these  veils  were  wholly  removed  (as  will  be  said  here-
after),  the soul  would  then  find  itself in a  condition  of pure 
detachment  and  poverty  of spirit,  and,  being  simple  and 
pure,  would  be  transformed  into  simple  and  pure  Wisdom, 
which is  the Son of God.  For the enamoured soul finds  that 
that which is  natural has failed it, and it is  then imbued  with 
that  which  is  Divine,  both  natur-ally  and  supernaturally, 
30  that there  may  be  no vacuum in its nature. 
3 
5.  When  the  spiritual  person  cannot  meditate,  let  him 
learn to be still in God, fixing his loving attention upon Him, 
in  the  calm  of his  understanding,  although  he  may  think 
himself to  he  doing  nothing.  For  thus,  little  by  little  and 
very quickly,  Divine calm and peace will  be infused  into his 
soul,  together  with  a  wondrous  and  sublime  knowledge  of 
God,  enfolded in Divine love.  And let him not meddle with 
forms,  meditations  and  imaginings,  or  with  any  kind  of 
reflection,  lest  the  soul  be  disturbed,  and  broQght  out  of 
its  contentment  and  peace,  which  can  only  result  in  its 
experiencing distaste  and  repugnance.  And  if,  as  we  have 
1  E.p.:  • this  would  obstruct the subtle anti simple light.' 
I  E.p. reads:  • For though  this  light is always  made  ready to be com-
m unicated  to the soul.' 
S  C,  D:  'for no  vacuum occurs in nature.'  E.p.:  • it is imbued  with 
that  which  is  Divine,  supernaturally,  for  God  leaves  no  vacuum  without 
filling it.' 
130  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
said,  such a  person  has scruples  that he is  doing nothing,  let 
him note that he is doing no small thing by pacifying the soul 
and  bringing it into calm and peace, unaccompanied by any 
act or desire,  for  it is  this  that Our Lord asks  of us,  through 
David,  saying:  Vacate,  et  videte  quoniam  ego  sum  Deus.
1 
As 
though  he  had said:  Learn  to  be  empty of all  things  (that 
is  to  say,  inwardly and outwardly2)  and you  will  see
3 
that I 
am God .. 
CHAPTER  XVI 
Which  treats  of the  imaginary  apprehensions  that  are  supernaturally 
represented  in  the  fancy.  Describes  how  they  cannot  serve  the 
soul as  a proximate  means  to  union  with  God. 
I.  Now that we have treated of the apprehensions which the 
soul can receive within itself by  natural means, and whereon 
the fancy  and the imagination can work  by means of reflec-
tion,
4 
it  will  be  suitable  to  treat  here  of the  supernatural 
apprehensions,  which  are  called  imaginary  visions,  which 
likewise  belong  to  these  senses,  since  they  come  within  the 
category  of images,  forms  and  figures,  exactlyli  as  do  the 
natural  apprehensions. 
2.  It must  be  understood  that beneath  this  term' imagi-
nary vision'  we  purpose  to  include  all  things  which  can  be 
represented  to  the  imagination  supernaturally  by  means  of 
any image,  form,  figure  and species. 
6 
For all the apprehen-
sions  arid  species  which,  through  all  the  five  bodily  senses, 
are represented to the soul, and dwell within it, after a natural 
manner,  may likewise  occur in the soul after a  supernatural 
manner,  and  be  represented  to  it  without  any assistance  of 
the  outward  senses.  For  this  sense  of fancy,  together  with 
memory,  is,  as  it  were,  an  archive  and  storehouse  of  the 
understanding,  wherein  are  received  all  forms  and  images 
that can be understood;  and thus  the soul has  them within 
itself as  it were  in a  mirror,  having received  them by  means 
of the five  s e n s ~ s     or,  as  we say,  supernaturally;  and thus  it 
1  Psalm xlv,  II  [A.V.,  xlvi,  10]. 
I  E.p.  omits:  • and outwardly.'  3  E.p.  adds:  • with delight.' 
,  E.p.:  . and  whereon  it  can  work  by  means  of  the  fancy  and  the 
imagination.'  6  E.p.  omits' exactly.' 
•  E.p.  here  adds  a  passage  which  is  found  in  none  of  the  Codices: 
, and  this  with  species  that  are  very  perfect  and  that  [have  power  to] 
make  representations  and  cause  influences  more  vivid  and  more  perfect 
than (any brought about]  through  the connatural order of  the senses.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XVI 
presents  them  to  the  understanding,  whereupon  the  under-
standing considers them and judges them.  And not only so, 
but the soul can also prepare and imagine others like to those 
with  which  it is  acquainted.
l 
3.  It must  be  understood,  then,  that,  even  as  the  five 
outward  senses  represent
2 
the  images  and  species  of  their 
objects to these inward senses,  even  so, supernaturally, as  we 
say, without using the outward senses, both God and the devil 
can  represent
3 
the  same  images  and  species,  of much  more 
beautiful'  and  perfect  kinds.  Wherefore,  beneath  these 
images,  God  often  represents  many  things  to  the  soul,  and 
teaches  it  much  wisdom;  this  is  continually  seen  in  the 
Scriptures,  as  where  Isaiah  saw  God  in  His  glory5  beneath 
the smoke  which covered the Temple, and beneath the sera-
phim  who  covered  their  faces  and  their  feet  with  their 
wings;6  and as Jeremiah saw the wand that was  watching,? 
and  Daniel a  multitude of visions, 8  etc.  And the devil,  too, 
strives  to  deceive  the soul  with  his  visions,  which in appear-
ance  are  good,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  Book  of the  Kings, 
when  he  deceived  all  the  prophets  of Ahab,  presenting  to 
their imaginations  the horns wherewith he said  the king was 
to  destroy  the Assyrians,  which  was  a  lie. 
9 
Even  such  were 
the  visions  of  Pilate's  wife,  warning  him  not  to  condemn 
Christ ;10  and  there are many other  places  where it is  seen 
how, in  this  mirror of the fancy and the imagination,l1 these 
imaginary  visions  come  more  frequently  to  proficients  than 
do  outward and  bodily visions.  These,  as  we  say,  differ not 
in their nature  (i.e.,  as  images and species)  from  those which 
enter by the outward senses;  but,  with respect to the effect 
which  they  produce,  and  in  the  degree  of their  perfection, 
there is  a  great difference;  for  imaginary visions  are subtler 
and produce a  deeper impression upon the soul,  inasmuch as 
they  are  supernatural,  and  are  also  more  interior  than  the 
exterior  supernatural  visions.  Nevertheless,  it  is  true  that 
some  of these  exterior  bodily  visions  may  produce a  deeper 
1  E.p. abbreviates:  '  ... and images which it has to make intelligible. 
and  thus  the understanding  beholds  and  judges them.' 
I  E. p.:  'propose and represent.' 
3  E.p.  has  (for' both  ... represent '):  'may be  represented.' 
•  E.p.:  'more vivid.' 
5  E.p.:  'as when God  showed  His glory.' 
G  Isaiah  vi,  4.  7  Jeremiah i,  II.  8  Daniel vii,  10. 
I  3  Kings xxii,  II  [A.V.,  I  Kings  xxii.  II]. 
10  [5.  Matthew xxvii,  19.] 
11  E.p.  has only:  'and [in]  many other places.' 
o 
132  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
impression;  the  communication,  after  all,  is  as  God  wills. 
We  are speaking,  however,  merely  of that which  belongs to 
their nature,  as  being more spiritual. 
4.  It is  to  these  senses  of imagination  and  fancy  that  the 
devil habitually betakes himself with his  wiles-now natural, 
now  supernatural;1  for  they  are  the  door  and  entrance  to 
the soul, and here, as we have said,
2 
the understanding comes 
to  take  up  or  set  down  its  goods,  as  it  were  in  a  harbour 
or  in  a  storehouse  where  it  keeps  its  provisions.  And  for 
this  reason  it is  hither  that  both  God  and  the  devil  always 
come  with  their jewels  of supernatural  forms  and  images, 
3 
to offer  them to the understanding;  although God does  not 
make use of this  means alone to instruct the soul,  but dwells 
within it in substance,  and is  able to do this  by Himself and 
by other            
5.  There is  no  need  for  me  to stop  here  in· order  to  give 
instruction  concerning  the signs  by which  it may  be  known 
which  visions  are  of God  and  which  not,  and  which  are  of 
one kind and which of another;  for  this is  not my intention, 
which  is  only  to  instruct  the  understanding  herein,  that  it 
may  not  be  hindered  or impeded  as  to  union  with  Divine 
Wisdom  by  the  good  visions,  neither  may  be  deceived  by 
those  which  are false. 
6.  I  say,  then,  that  with  regard  to  all  these  imaginary 
visions and apprehensions and to all other forms  and species 
whatsoever,  which present themselves beneath some particu-
lar  kind  of knowledge  or  image  or form,  whether  they  be 
false  and come from  the devil or are recognized  as  true and 
coming  from  God,  the  understanding  must  not  be  em-
barrassed  by them or feed  upon them,  neither must the soul 
desire  to  receive  them  or  to  have  them,'  lest  it  should  no 
longer be detached, free,  pure and simple, without any mode 
or manner, as is  required for  union. I; 
7.  The reason of this is  that all these forms  which we  have 
already mentioned are always represented,  in the apprehen-
sion of the soul,  as we have said,  beneath certain modes  and 
1  E.p.  omits:  • now  natural,  now  supernatural.'  The  Saint  employs 
this  last  word,  in  this  passage,  with  the  sense  of  'preternatural.'  Only 
God  can surpass the bounds of nature,  but the devil can act in such a  way 
that he appears to be doing so,  counterfeiting miracles,  and so forth. 
I  E.p.  omits:  • as we  have said.' 
•  E.p.:  • come hither with images and forms.' 
•  E.p.:  • or to set its foot  upon them.' 
I  E.p.:  • for  DiviDe union.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XVI 
133 
manners  which  are  limited;  and that the Wisdom  of God, 
wherein  the  understanding is  to  be  united,  has  no  mode  or 
manner, neither is it contained within any particular or distinct 
kind  of intelligence  or limit,  because  it  is  wholly  pure  and 
simple.  And  as,  in  order  that  these  two  extremes  may  be 
united-namely,  the  soul  and  Divine  Wisdom-it  will  be 
necessary for them to attain to agreement, by the mediation of 
a certain  mutual resemblance,l hence it follows  that the soul 
must  be  pure and simple,  neither bounded by,  nor attached 
to,  any particular kind  of intelligence,  nor modified  by any 
limitation  of form,  species  and  image.  As  God  comes  not 
within
2 
any image  or form,  neither is  contained  within  any 
particular kind  of intelligence,  so  the soul,  in order to  reach 
God,
3 
must likewise  come within no  distinct form  or kind  of 
intelligence.  . 
8.  And  that there  is  no form  or likeness  in  God  is  clearly 
declared by the Holy Spirit in Deuteronomy, where He says; 
Vocem  verborum  eJus  audistis,  et  formam  penitus  non  vidistis.' 
Which signifies:  Ye  heard the voice of His words,  and ye saw 
in God no form whatsoever.  But he says that there was dark-
ness  there,  and  clouds  and  thick  darkness,  which  are  the 
confused  and  dark  knowledge  whereof  we  have  spoken, 
wherein the soul is  united with God.  And afterwards he says 
further:  Non  vidistis  aliquam  similitudinem in  die,  qua  locutus est 
vobis  Dominus  in  Horeb  de  medio  ignis.  That  is:  Ye  saw  no 
likeness. in  God  upon  the  day  when  He  spoke  to  you  on 
Mount Horeb,  out of the midst of the fire. Ii 
9.  And  that  the  soul  cannot  reach  the  height  of God,8 
even as far as is possible in this life,  by means of any form and 
figure,  is  declared likewise  by the same Holy Spirit in Num-
bers,  where  God  reproves  Aaron  and  Miriam,  the  brother 
and  sister  of  Moses,  because  they  murmured  against  him, 
and,  desiring  to  convey  to  them  the  loftiness  of the  state  of 
union and friendship  with Him wherein He had placed him, 
said:  Si quis  inter  vos fuerit  Propheta  Domini,  in  visione  apparebo 
ei,  vel  per  somnium  loquar  ad  illum.  At  non  lalis  servus  meus 
Moyses,  qui  in  omni  domo  mea  fidelissimus  est:  ore  enim  ad  os 
loquor  ei,  et palam,  et  non per tETligmata,  et figuras  Dominum  videt.
7 
1  E.p.:  • by a  certain manner of resemblance.' 
a  E.p.:  • As  God  is  not contained within.' 
I  [Lit.,  • to come within  God.']  E.p.:  • to be united  with  God.' 
,  Deuteronomy iv,  12.  6  Deuteronomy iv,  15. 
I  E.p.:  • cannot reach  the  summit of union with  God.' 
7  Numbers  xii,  6-8. 
134  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
Which signifies:  If there be any prophet of the Lord among 
you,  I  will  appear  to  him  in  some  vision  or form,  or I  will 
speak  with  him  in  his  dreams;    u ~   there  is  none  like  My 
servant Moses,  who is  the most faithful in all  My house,  and 
I  speak with  him mouth  to  mouth,  and he sees  not God  by 
comparisons, similitudes and figures.  Herein He says clearly 
that,  in  this  lofty  state  of union  whereof we  are  speaking, 
God  is  not  communicated  to  the  soul  by  means  of  any 
disguise  of imaginary  vision  or  similitude  or  form,  neither 
can  He  be  so  communicated;  but  mouth  to  mouth-
that  is,  in  the  naked  and  pure  essence  of  God,  which  is 
the mouth of God  in love,  with the  naked and  pure essence 
of  the  soul,
l 
which  is  the  mouth  of  the  soul  in  love  of 
God. 
10.  Wherefore,  in order to come to  this  essential  union of 
love  in  God,2  the  soul  must  have  a  care  not  to  lean  upon· 
imaginary  visions,  nor  upon  forms  or  figures  or  particular 
objects  of the  understanding;  for  these  cannot serve it as  a 
proportionate and proximate means to such an end;  rather 
they  would  disturb  it,  and  for  this  reason  the  soul  must 
renounce  them  and  strive  not  to  have  them.  For if in any 
circumstance they  were  to  be received  and 'prized,  it would 
be for  the sake  of the  profit  which  true visions  bring  to  the 
soul  and  the  good  effect  which  they  produce  upon it.  But 
it is  not necessary,  for  this  reason,  to receive  them;·  rather, 
it is well always to reject them for the sours profit.  For these 
imaginary visions, like the outward bodily visions whereof we 
have  spoken,  do  the  soul  good  by  communicating  to  it in-
telligence or love or sweetness.  But for  this effec.t  to be pro-
duced  by  them in  the  soul  it is  not necessary  that it should 
desire  to receive  them;  for,  as  has also been said above,  at 
this  very  time6- when  they  are  present  to  the  imagination, 
they  produce in  the  soul  and  infuse  into it intelligence  and 
love,  or  sweetness,  or  whatever  effect  God  wills  them  to 
produce.  And  not  only  do  they  produce  this  joint  effect, 
but  principally,  although  not simultaneously,  they  produce 
I  The editions of 1630 and latel" dates  d   here:  'by means of the will.' 
But these words are found  neither ic e.p.  nor in the Codices. 
I  E.p.:  • to this so perfect union of  God.' 
•  [The  progressive  form  is  used  in  the  Spanish:  'not to  go  (or' be ') 
leaning upon.') 
•  A,  B:  'but it is necessary,  for this reason,  not to admit them.'  The 
second  part of  this sentence  shows  that the reading  of  the text,  which is 
that of both Ale.  and e.p., is the correct one. 
I  E.p.  omits:  'at this very time.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XVI 
135 
their  effect  in  the soul  passively,l  without  its  being  able  to 
hinder  this  effect,  even  if it  so  desired,2 just  as  it  was  also 
powerless  to acquire it,  although it had been able previously 
to  prepare itself.
3 
For,  even as  the window is  powerless'  to 
impede  the  ray  of sunlight  which  strikes  it,  but,  when  it  is 
prepared  by being cleansed,  receives its  light passively with-
out any diligence or labour on its own part, even so  the soul, 
although  against  its  will, Ii  cannot fail  to  receive  in  itself the 
influences  and  communications  of  those  figures,  however 
much  it  may  desire  to  resist  them.
8 
For  the  will  that  is 
negatively inclined cannot, if coupled with loving and humble 
resignation,  resist  supernatural  infusions;  it can  resist  only 
the impurity and imperfections of the soul,7 even as the stains 
upon a  window impede the brightness of the sunlight. 
8 
I  I.  From  this  it is  clearly  seen  that,  however  much  the 
soul  may  be  detached,  in  its  will  and  affection,  from  the 
apprehensions  of  the  stains  of  those  forms,  images  and 
figures  wherein  are  clothed 
9 
the  spiritual  communications 
which  we  have described,  not only is  it not deprived of these 
communications and blessings which they cause within it, but 
it  is  much  better  prepared  to  receive  them  with  greater 
abundance,  clearness,  liberty  of spirit  and  simplicity,  when 
all  these  apprehensions  are  set  on  one  side,  which  are,  as  it 
were,  curtains  and  veils  covering  the  spiritual  thing
lO 
that 
is  behind  them.  And  thus,  if the  soul  desire  to  feed  upon 
them,  they  occupy  spirit  and  sense  in  such  a  way  that  the 
spirit  cannot  communicate  itself  simply  and  freely;  for, 
while  they  are still  occupied  with  the  outer  rind,  it is  clear 
that  the understanding is  not free  to  receive the substance.
ll 
Wherefore,  if the  soul  at  that  time  desires  to  receive  these 
1  E.p.:  'And thus the  soul  receives  their quickening  effect  passively.' 
2  E.p.  omits:  'even though  it so  desired.' 
I  E.p.  substitutes  for  this  last  clause:  'notwithstanding  its  having 
laboured  previously  to  prepare  itself.' 
,  E.p.:  'To some extent it resembles a  window,  which is powerless  .. .' 
•  E.p.  omits:  'although against its will.' 
•  E.p.  omits:  • however  ... resist  them.' 
,  E.p.:  • For  the  will  cannot  resist  supernatural  infusions,  although 
without  doubt  the  impurity  and  imperfections  of  the  soul  are  an 
obstruction.'  8  [Lit.,  ' impede the  brightness.'] 
•  E.p.:  • from  the  stains  of  the  apprehensions.  images  and  figures 
wherein  are  clothed.'  A:  • from  the  apprehensions  and  the  stains 
of  them  and  the  affections  wherein  are  clothed.'  B:  • from  the 
apprehensions  of  the  stains  of  those  forms  and  figures  wherein  are 
clothed.'  10  E.p.:  • the  more spiritual  thing.' 
11  This is  the  reading  of  e.p.  A,  B  [followed  by  P.  Silverio]  read:  • to 
receive  those  forms.'  Ale.  reads  merely:  'to receive.' 
136  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
forms  and  to  set  store  by  them,  it  would  be  embarrassing 
itself,  and  contenting itself with  the  least  important  part of 
them-namely, all that it can apprehend and know of them, 
which  is  the  form  and  image  and  particular  object  of the 
understanding  in  question.  The  most  important  part  of 
them,  which is  the spiritual part that is  infused into the soul, 
it can neither apprehend nor understand, nor even know what 
it is,  nor be able to express  it, since it is  pure spirit.  What it 
knows  of them, as  we  say, is  only the least part of what is  in 
them, according to its manner of understanding-namely, the 
forms which  come  through sense.  For this  reason  I  say that 
what it cannot understand or imagine is communicated to it by 
these visions, passively, without any effort of its own to under-
stand and without its even knowing how to make such an effort. 
12.  Wherefore  the  eyes  of  the  soul  must  ever  be  with-
drawn  from  all  these  apprehensions  which  it" can  see  and 
understand  distinctly,  which  are  communicated  through 
sense,  and do  not produce the sure foundation  of faith,  and 
must  be  set upon  that which  it sees  not,  and  which  belongs 
not  to  sense,  but  to  spirit,  which  can  be  expressed  by  no 
figure of sense  ;  and it is  this which leads. the soul to union in 
faith,  which is  the true medium, as  has been said.  And thus 
these  visions  will  profit  the  soul  substantially,  in  respect  of 
faith,  when  it  is  able  completely  to  renounce  the  sensible 
and intelligible  partl of them,  and  to  make  good  use  of the 
purpose  for  which  God  gives  them  to  the  soul,  by  casting 
them  aside;  for,  as  we  said  of  corporeal  visions,  God 
gives  them not so  that the soul  may desire to have  them and 
to set  its  affection upon them. 
13.  But  there  arises  here  this  question:  If it is  true  that 
God  gives  supernatural  visions  to  the  soul,  but  not so  that 
it  may  desire  to  have  them  or  be  attached  to  them  or set 
store  by them,  why  does  He give  them at all,  since  by  their 
means the soul may fall  into many errors and perils, or at the 
least  may  find  in  them  such  hindrances  to  further  pro-
gress  as  are  here  described;  especially  since  God  can  come 
to the soul, and communicate to it, spiritually and substanti-
ally,  that  which  He  communicates  to  it  through  sense,  by 
means  of the  sensible  forms  and visions  aforementioned? 
14.  We  shall  answer  this  question  in the following  chap-
ter:
2 
it involves an important instruction,  most necessary, as 
1  E.p.:  • the  particular intelligible part.' 
a  Tho words' in the following  chapter'  occur in  Ale.  and e.p.  only. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XVI 
137 
I  see  it,  both  to  spiritual  persons  and  to  those  who  teach 
them.  For herein is taught the way and purpose of God with 
respect  to these  visions,  which  many know  not,  so  that they 
cannot rule themselves  or guide themselves to union,  neither 
can  they  guide  others  to  union,  through  these  visions.  For 
they think that, just because they know them to be true and 
to  come  from  God,  it  is  well  to  receive  them  and  to  trust 
them,l  not  realizing  that  the  soul  will  become  attached  to 
them,  cling  to  them and  be hindered  by  them,  as  it will  by 
things  of the  world,  if it know not how  to  renounce  these  as 
well as  those.  And thus they think it well to receive one kind 
of vision  and  to reject  another,  causing  themselves,  and  the 
souls  under  their  care,  great labour and  peril  in  discerning 
between  the  truth  and  the  falsehood  of these  visions.  But 
God commands them not to undertake this  labour, nor does 
He desire that sincere and simple souls should be led into this 
conflict  and  danger;  for  they  have safe  and sound instruc-
tion,  which is· that of the faith,  wherein they can go forward. 
15.  This,  however,  cannot  be unless  they  close  their  eyes 
to  all  that  is  of particular  and  clear  perception  and  sense. 
For,  although  S.  Peter  was  quite  certain  of that  vision  of 
glory  which  he  saw  in  Christ  at  the  Transfiguration,  yet, 
after having  described  it in his  second  canonical  Epistle,  he 
desired not that it should be taken for an important and sure 
testimony,  but rather  directed  his  hearers  to  faith,  saying: 
Et  habemus  firmiorem  propheticum  sermonem:  cui  benefacitis 
attendentes,  quasi  lucerne  lucenti  in  caliginoso  loco,  donee  dies 
elucescat.
2 
Which  signifies:  And  we  have  a  surer testimony 
than this vision of Tabor-namely, the sayings  and words  of 
the  prophets  who  bear  testimony  to  Christ,  whereunto  ye 
must indeed cling,  as  to a  candle which gives  light in a  dark 
place.  If we  will  think upon this  comparison,  we  shall find 
therein  the  instruction  which  we  are giving.  For,  in telling 
us  to  look  to  the  faith  whereof the  prophets  spake,  as  to  a 
candle that shincth in a  dark place,  he is  bidding us  remain 
in the darkness, with our eyes closed to all these other lights; 
and  telling  us  that in  this  darkness,  faith  alone,  which  like-
wise is  dark,  will  be the light to which  we shall cling;  for  if 
we  desire  to  cling  to  these  other  bright  lights-namely,  to 
distinct  objects  of the  understanding-we  cease  to  cling  to 
that  dark light,  which  is  faith,  and  we  no  longer  have  that 
1  E.p.:  • it is  well  to lean on them and cleave to them.' 
I  2  Peter i. 19. 
138  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
light in the dark place whereof S.  Peter speaks.  This place, 
which  here signifies  the understanding,  which is  the candle-
stick wherein this candle of faith is set, must be dark until the 
day when  the  clear  vision  of God  dawns  upon  it in  the  life 
to come,  or,  in this life,  until  the day of transformation  and 
union with  God to  which  the soul  is journeying. 
1 
CHAPTER  XVII 
Wherein  is  described  the  purpose  and  manner  of God  in  His  com-
munication of  spiritual blessings to the soul by means of  the senses. 
Herein  is answered the question  which has been  referred to. 
I.  There  is  much  to  be  said  concerning  the  purpose  of 
God,  and  concerning  the  manner  wherein  He  gives  these 
visions  in  order  to  raise  up  the  soul  from  its  lowly  estate  to 
His  Divine  union.  All spiritual books  deal  with  this  and in 
this  treatise  of ours  the method  which  we  are pursuing is  to 
explain it ;2  therefore I shall only say in this chapter as  much 
as  is necessary to answer our question,  which was as follows  : 
Since in these supernatural visions there is so much hindrance 
and  peril  to  progress,  as  we  have said,  why  does  God,  'Who 
is  most  wise  and  desires  to  remove  stumbling-blocks  and 
snares  from  the soul,  offer and communicate them to it? 
2.  In order to answer this,  it is  well  first  of all  to set down 
three  fundamental  points. 
3 
The  first  is  from  S.  Paul  ad 
Romanos,  where  he says:  QUIt  autem  sunt,  a Deo  ordinatt.e sunt, 
4 
Which  signifies:  The  works  that  are  done  are  ordained  of 
God.  The  second  is  from  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  Book  of 
Wisdom,  where  He says:  Disponit  omnia  suauiter.5  And  this 
is  as  though  He had said:  The wisdom  of God,  although it 
extends  from  one  end  to  another-that is  to  say,  from  one 
extreme  to  another-orders  all  things  with  sweetness.  The 
third  is  from  the  theologians,  who  say  that  Omnia  movet 
secundum  modum  earum.  That is,  God moves all things accord-
ing to  their nature. 
3.  It is  clear,  then,  from  these  fundamental  points,  that 
for  God to move the soul and to raise it up from  the extreme 
1  Ale.  ends  the chapter  with  the  words:  • transformation and  union.' 
E.p.  has' with  Him' for' with God.' 
Z  E.p.  omits:  • and in this treatise  ... to explain it.' 
3  E.p.:  • to  take  for  granted  three principles.' 
,  Romans xiii,  I  6  Wisdom  viii,  I. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XVII 
139 
depth  of its  lowliness  to  the extreme  height  of His  loftiness, 
in  Divine  union  with  Him,  He  must  do  it  with  order  and 
sweetness  and  according  to  the  nature  of  the  soul  itself. 
Then, since the order
l 
whereby the soul acquires knowledge 
is  through  forms  and  images  of  created  things,  and  the 
natural way wherein it acquires  this knowledge and wisdom 
is  through  the senses,  it follows  that, for  God  to  raise  up the 
soul to supreme knowledge,  and to do so  with sweetness,  He 
must  begin to  work  from  the lowest  and extreme end of the 
senses  of the soul,  in order  that  He  may gradually lead  it,2 
according  to  its  own  nature,  to  the  other  extreme  of  His 
spiritual  wisdom,  which  belongs  not  to  sense.  Wherefore 
He  first  leads  it  onward  by  instructing  it  through  forms, 
images  and  ways  of sense,  according  to  its  own  method  of 
understanding,  now  naturally,  now  supernaturally,  and  by 
means of argument, to this supreme spirit of God. 
4.  I t  is  for  this  reason  that God gives  the soul  visions  and 
forms,  images  and the other  kinds  of sensible  and spiritua1
3 
intelligible  knowledge;  not  that  God  would  not  give  it 
spiritual  wisdom!l  immediately,  and  all  at  o n c ~     if the  two 
extremes-which are human  and  Divine,  sense  and spirit-
could in the ordinary way concur and unite in one single act, 
without  the  preceding  intervention  of many  other  prepara-
tory  acts  which  concur  among  themselves  in  order  and 
sweetness,  and are a  basis and a  preparation one for another, 
like  natural  agents;  so  that the  first  acts  serve  the  second, 
the second the third, and so onward, in exactly the same way.:; 
And thus God brings man to perfection according to the way 
of man's own nature,  working from  what is  lowest  and  most 
exterior up to  what is  most interior and highest.  First,  then, 
He perfects  his  bodily  senses,  impelling  him  to  make  use  of 
good  things  which  are natural,  perfect  and exterior,  such  as 
hearing sermons  and  masses,  looking  on  holy  things,  morti-
fying  the  palate at meals  and  chastening  the sense  of touch 
by penance and holy rigour.  And,  when  these senses  are to 
some  extent  prepared,  He  is  wont  to  perfect  them  still 
further,  by  bestowing  on  them  certain supernatural favours 
and gifts,  in  order  to  confirm  them  the  more  completely  in 
1  B:  'since  the  method  and  order.'  [' Method'  is  the  modo  trans-
lated  above  as  '  n:l.ture.'] 
2  E.p.:  'may gradually  raise it.' 
3  E.p.  omits' spiritual.'  C  E.p.:  'spiritual substance.' 
I>  E.p. modifies:  ' ... preparation one for another;  even as with natural 
agents the first  serve the second,  the second  the third, a.nd  so  onward.' 
140  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
that which is  good,  offering them certain supernatural com  .. 
munications,  such  as  visions  of saints  and  holy  things,  in 
corporeal  shape,  the  Sweetest  perfumes,  locutions,  and 
exceeding  great  delights  of  touch,  wherewith!  sense  is 
greatly  confirmed  in virtue  and  is  withdrawn from  a  desire 
for  evil  things.  And  besides  this  the  interior  bodily  senses, 
whereof we are here treating, such as  imagination and fancy, 
He  continues  at  the  same  time  to  perfect  and  habituate
2 
to that which is good, by means of  considerations, meditations, 
and  reflections  of a  sacred  kind,  in  all  of which  He  is  in  .. 
structing  the spirit.  And,  when  these  are  prepared  by this 
natural  exercise,  God  is  wont  to  enlighten  and  spiritualize 
them  still  more  by  means  of certain  supernatural  visions, 
which are those that we are here calling imaginary;  wherein, 
as  we  have said,  the spirit,  at the same  time,  profits  greatly, 
for  both  kinds  of vision  help  to  take  away  its  grossness  and 
gradually to reform it.  And after this manner God continues 
to  lead  the  soul  from  one  step  to  another  till  it reaches  the 
most interior of an;  not that it is  always3  necessary for  Him 
to  observe  this  order,  and  to  cause  the  soul  to  advance 
exactly in this way, from the first step to the last;  sometimes 
He  allows  the  soul  to  attain  one  stage  and  not  another,  or 
leads it from the more interior to the less, or effects two stages 
of progress  together.  This  happens  when  God  sees  it to  be 
meet for  the soul,  or when He desires  to grant it His favours 
in  this  way;'  nevertheless  His  ordinary  way  agrees  with 
what has  been said. 
5.  It  is  in  this  way,  then,  that  God  instructs
S 
the  soul 
and  makes  it more  spiritual,  communicating  spirituality  to 
it first of all through outward and palpable things, adapted to 
sense,  on  account  of the  soul's  feebleness  and incapacity,  so 
that,  by  means  of the  outer  husk  of those  things  of sense 
which in themselves are good,  the spirit may make
8 
particu  .. 
lar  acts  and  receive  so  many  morsels  of spiritual  communi-
cation  that it may form a  habit in things spiritual,  and may 
acquire  actual  and  substantial  spirituality,7  in  complete 
1  E.p.:  locutions,  together  with  pure  and  singular  sweetness,  where-
with  .  .  :  I  A,  B:  • and habilitate.' 
3  E.p.  omits' always: 
,  E.p.:  '. .  .  :tnd  not  another,  when  He  sees  that  it  so  befits  the 
soul and desires to grant it favours in this  way: 
•  [The ver.b  is progressive  (' is instructing ').]  A,  B  add:  • ordinarily: 
•  [This verb also is  progressive:  • may go  (on)  making.'] 
7  E.p.:  • may  acquire  the  most  substantial  of  the  spirit'  [i.e.,  the 
most substantial spirituality]. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XVII 
abstraction from every sense.  To this, as we have said, the soul 
cannot attain except very gradually, and in its own way--that 
is,  by  means  of sense-to which  it has  ever  been  attached.
1 
And  thus,  in  proportion  as  the  spirit attains  more  nearly  to 
converse  with  God,  it  becomes  more  completely  detached 
and  emptied  of the ways  of sense,  which are  those  of imagi-
nary  meditation  and  reflection.  Wherefore,  when  the  soul 
attains  perfectly  to  spiritual  converse  with  God,  it  must  of 
necessity have been  voided  of all  that relates  to God and yet 
comes  under the head of sense.  Even so,  the more closely a 
thing  is  attracted  to  one  extreme,  the  farther  it  becomes 
removed  and  withdrawn 
2 
from  the  other;  and,  when  it 
rests  perfectly  in  the  one,  it  will  also  have  withdrawn  itself 
perfectly  from  the  other.  Wherefore  there  is  a  commonly 
quoted  spiritual  adage  which  says:  Gustato  spiritu,  desipit 
omnis caro.  Which signifies:  After the taste and sweetness  of 
the  spirit  have  been  received,  everything  carnal  is  insipid. a 
That is:  No profit or enjoyment is  afforded  by all the  ways 
of the flesh 4.  wherein is  included  all  communication of sense 
with the spiritual.  And this is clear:  for, ifit is spirit, it has no 
more  to  do with  sense;  and, if sense  can comprehend it,  it 
is  no  longer  pure  spirit.  For, the more that natural  appre· 
hension  and  sense can know of it, the less  it has of spirit and 
of the  supernatural,  as  has  been  explained  above. 
6.  The  spirit6  that  is  now  perfect,  therefore,  pays  no 
heed  to  sense,  nor  does  it  receive  anything  through  sense, 
nor makes any important use  of it,  neither needs to do so,  in 
its  relations  with  God,  as  it did  aforetime  when  it had  not 
grown  in  spirit.  It is  this  that  is  signified  by  that  passage 
from  S.  Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians· which  says:  Cum 
essem parvulus, loquebar ut paTvuius, sapiebam ut parvulus, cogitaham 
ut  parvulus.  Q,uando  autem  factus  sum  vir,  evacuavi,  que  erant 
parvuli.
8 
This  signifies:  When  I  was  a  child,  I  spake  as  a 
c;:hild,  I  knew  as  a  child,  I  thought  as  a  child;  but,  when 
I  became  a  man,  I  put  away?  childish  things.  We  have 
already explained how the things of sense,  and the knowledge 
that spirit can derives from them, are the business  of a  child. 
1  A,  B  add:  'and has come near.' 
2  E.p.:  'and  rejected.'  [All  the  verbs  in  these  last  two  clauses  are 
in the progressive form.]  3  E.p.:  'is tasteless.' 
•  E.p.:  'all the  tastes or roads of sense.' 
i  E.p.:  'the spiritual  man.'  8  I  Corinthians xiii,  II. 
7  [Lit.,  '  1 emptieu.']  A,  n, c.p.:  'I voided.' 
•  E.p.:  'that can  be  derived.' 
142  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
Thus, if the soul  should  desire  to  cling to them for  ever,  and 
not to throw them aside, it would never cease to be a child;  it 
would speak ever of God as a child, and would know of God as 
a child, and would think of God as  a child  ;1  for,  clinging to 
the  outer  husk  of sense,  which  is  the  child,  it  would  never 
attain to the substance of the spirit, which is  the perfect man. 
And  thus  the  soul  must  not  desire  to  receive  the  said 
revelations in order to continue in growth, even though God 
offer  them  to  it,  just as  the  child  must  leave  the  breast  in 
order  to  accustom  its  palate  to  strong  meat,  which  is  more 
substantial.  . 
7.  You  will  say,  then,  that when  the soul  is  immature,  it 
must  take  these  things,  and  that,  when  it is  grown,  it  must 
abandon  them;  even  as  an infant  must  take  the  breast,  in 
order  to  nourish  itself,  until  it is  older  and  can  leave  it.  I 
answer that, with respect to meditation and natural reflection 
by means of which the soul begins to seek God, it is  true that 
it must not leave  the  breast of sense  in order to  continue its 
nourishment  until  the  time  and  season  to  leave  it  have 
arrived,  and  this  comes  when  God  brings  the  soul  into  a 
more  spiritual  communion,  which  is  contemplation,  con-
cerning  which  we  gave  instruction  in  the  eleventh  chapter 
of this book.
2 
But, when it is a question of imaginary visions, 
or  other  supernatural  apprehensions,  which  can  enter  the 
senses  without  the co-operation of man's free  will,  I  say that 
at  no  time  and  season  must  it  receive  them,
3 
whether  the 
soul  be  in  the  state  of perfection,  or  whether in a  state  less 
perfect-not  even  though  they  come  from  God.  And  this 
for  two  reasons.  The  first  is  that,  as  we  have  said,  He 
produces His effect in the soul," without its being a hindrance 
to  it,  although  it can  and  may  hinder  vision,  which  comes 
to pass frequently  ;6  and consequently that effect
8 
which was 
to be produced in the soul is communicated to it much more 
substantially,  although  not  after  that  manner.  For,  as  we 
said likewise,  the  soul  cannot hinder the  blessings  that God 
desires  to communicate to it, neither is  it in the soul to do so, 
1  A,  B:  • it  would  never  cease  to  be a  child;  it would  ever speak  of, 
know and think of  God  as a  child.' 
a  In reality.  this instruction is given in Chap.  xiii.  . 
a  E.p.:  'must it seek them,  or remain for  long in them.' 
•  50 Alc.  The other M55.  and c.p.  read:  '  ... that. as we have said, 
they  produce  their efiect passively  in  the soul.' 
•  E.p.  has:  'although  it  do  something  to  hinder  the  manner  of  the 
vision,'  and  omits:  'which comes to pass frequently.' 
•  E.p.;  'that second  effect.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XVII 
143 
save through some imperfection and attachment;  and there 
is  neither imperfection  nor  attachment in  renouncing  these 
things  with humility and  misgiving.
l 
The. second  reason is 
that  the  soul  may  free  itself from  the  peril  and  labour  in-
herent  in  discerning  between  evil  visiQIls  and  good,  and  in 
deciding  whether  an  angel  be  of light  or  of darkness.  In 
this  labour there  is  no  advantage;  it only  wastes  the soul's 
time, and  hinders  it, and  becomes  to  it an occasion of many 
imperfections  and  of failure  to  make  progress.  The  soul 
concerns  not  itself,  in  such  a  case,  with  what is  important, 
nor disencumbers itself of trifles in the shape of apprehensions 
and  perceptions  of s.Jme  particular  kind,  according  as  has 
been said in the discussion of corporeal visions;  and of these 
more will  be said hereafter. 
8.  And  let  it  be  believed  that,  if Our  Lord  were  not  to 
lead  the  soul  after  the  soul's  own  manner,  as  we  say  here, 
He  would  never  communicate  to  it  the  abundance  of His 
spirit by these aqueducts,  which  are so  narrow-these forms 
and  figures  and  particular  perceptions-by  means  whereof 
He gives  the soul  enlightenment by crumbs.  For this  cause 
David says:  Mittit crystallum suam sicut buccellas.
2 
Which is as 
much  as  to  say:  He  sent  His  wisdom  to  the  souls  as  in 
morsels. 
3 
It is  greatly to  be lamented that,  though the soul 
has infinite capacity, , it should be given its food by morsels of 
sense,  by reason of the small  degree of its  spirituality and  its 
incapacitation  by  sense.  S.  Paul  was  also  grieved  by  this 
lack of preparation and this incapability of men for receiving 
the  Spirit,  when  he  wrote  to  the  Corinthians,  saying:  I, 
brethren,  when  I  came to you,  could  not speak to you  as  to 
spiritual persons,  but as  to  carnal;  for  ye could  not receive 
it, neither can  ye  now.  Tamquam  parvulis  in  Christo  lac potum 
vohis  dedi,  non  escam. Ii  That  is:  I  have  given  you  milk  to 
drink,  as  to infants in Christ, and not solid  food  to eat.
6 
9.  It now  remains,  then,  to  be  pointed  out  that  the  soul 
must not allow its eyes to rest upon that outer husk-namely, 
1  E.p.  omits  the  passage:  'For,  as  we  said  likewise  ... and  attach-
ment,' and substitutes f01"  '  and there  .  .  .  misgiving':  'For, in renounc-
ing these things with humility and misgiving,  there is neither imperfection 
nor attachment.'  The Codices  end  the sentence at the word' misgiving,' 
but  e.p.  continues:  'but  rather  disinterestedness  and  emptiness,  which 
is the best preparation for  union with God.' 
I  Psalm cxlvii,  17.  a  C,  D:  'as morsels.' 
. '  E.p.:  'has  as  it  were  infinite  capacity.'  All  the  MSS.  have  the 
reading of the text.  I  I  Corinthians iii,  1-2. 
•  E.p. omits:  'in Christ' and' to eat.' 
144  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
figures  and objects  set  before it supernaturally.  These may 
be  presented  to  the  exterior  senses,  as  are  locutions  and 
words  audible  to  the ear;  or,  to  the  eyes,  visions  of saints, 
and  of beauteous  radiance;  or  perfume.s  to  the  sense  of 
smell;  or  tastes  and  sweetnesses  to  the  palate;  or  other 
delights  to  the  touch,  which  are  w o   ~   to  proceed  from  the 
spirit,  a  thing  that  very  commonly  happens  to  spiritual 
persons. 
1 
Or  the  soul  may  have  to  avert  its  eyes  from 
visions  of interior  sense,  such  as  imaginary2  visions,  all  of 
which  it must  renounce  entirely.  It must  set  its  eyes  only 
upon  the spirituality which they produce, striving to preserve 
it in its good works and to practise that which is  for the dueS 
service  of God,  paying no heed  to  those  representations  nor 
desiring any pleasure of sense.  And in this way the soul takes 
from  these  things  only  that which  God  intends  and  wills-
namely,  the  spirit  of devotion-for  He  gives  them  for  no 
no  other important purpose;  and  it casts  aside  that  which 
He  would  not  give  if these  gifts  could  be  received  in  the 
spirit without it,' as  we have said-namely, the exercise and 
apprehension of sense. 
CHAPTER  XVIII 
Which  treats  of the  harm  that  certain  spiritual  masters  may  do  to 
souls  when  the)'  direct them  not  by a good method with respect  to 
the  visions  aforementioned.  Describes  also  how  these  visions 
may  cause  deception  even  though  they  be  of God. 
I.  In  this  matter  of visions  we  cannot  be  as  brief as  we 
should  desire,  since  there  is  so  much  to  say  about  them. 
Although in substance we have said what is  relevant in order 
to  explain  to  the  spiritual person  how  he  is  to  behave with 
regard to the visions aforementioned, and to the master who 
directs him, the way in which he is  to deal with his disciple, 
6 
yet  it  will  not  be  superfluous  to  go  into  somewhat  greater 
detail  about this  doctrine,  and  to  give  more  enlightenment 
as  to the harm which can ensue, either to spiritual souls or to 
the  masters  who  direct  them,  if  they  are  over-credulous 
about them,  although they be of God. 
1  E.p.  omits:  'a thing  ... persons! 
t  E.p.:  'interior imaginary.' 
a  So  Ale.,  C,  D.  A,  B,  e.p.  read' naked' [i.e.,  'pure 'J  for' due.' 
,  The remainder of the sentence is omitted in Alc. 
I  A,  B, e.p.  add:  f  concerning them: 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XVIII 
145 
2.  The reason which has now moved me to write at length 
about this is  the lack of discretion,  as  I  understand it,  which 
I  have  observed  in  certain  spiritual  masters.  Trusting  to 
these  supernatural  apprehensions,  and  believing  that  they 
are  good  and  come  from  God,  both  masters  and  disciples 
have  fallen  into  great  error  and  found  themselves  in  dire 
straits,  wherein is  fulfilled  the saying of Our Lord:  Si  clEeus 
Cfleo  ducatum prlEstet,  ambo  in foveam  cadunt.
1 
Which signifies  : 
If a  blind  man lead  another  blind  man,  they fall  both  into 
the ditch.  And He says  not' they shall fall,'  but' they fall.' 
For they  may fall  withQut  falling  into  error,  since  the  very 
venturing of the one to guide the other is a  going astray, and 
thus,  they fall  in this respect alone,2 at the very least.  And, 
first  of all,  there are some whose way and method with souls 
that  experience  these  visions  cause  them  to  stray,  or em-
barrass them with respect to their visions,  or guide them not 
along the road of humility,  but  encourage them to  fix  their 
eyes  upon  them  in  some  way  (for  which  reason  they 
remain  without  the  true  spirit  of faith) 3  and  edify  them 
not in faith,  but lead  them to speak highly of those  things.' 
By  doing  this  they  make  them  realize  that  they  themselves 
set some value  upon them,  or
5 
make great account of them, 
and,  consequently,  their disciples  do  the same.  Thus  their 
souls  have  been  set  upon  these  apprehensions,  instead  of 
being  edified  in  faith,  so  that  they  may  be  empty  and 
detached  and  freed  from  those  things  and  can  soar  to  the 
heights of dark faith.  And all this arises from  the terms and 
language which  the soul  observes its  master  to  employ with 
respect to this;  somehow it very easily conceives  a  satisfac-
tion and an esteem for it, which is not in its own control, and 
which averts the eyes  of the soul from the abyss  of faith. 
3.  And the reason why this is so easy must be that the soul 
is  so  greatly  occupied  therewith  that,  as  these  are things  of 
sense,  to  which it is  inclined  by nature,  and as  it is  likewise 
disposed  to  enjoy  the  apprehension  of those  distinct  and 
sensible  things,  it has  only to see  in its  confessor,  or in some 
other  person,  a  certain  esteem  and  appreciation  for  them, 
and  not  merely  will  it at once    o n   e i v ~   the same  itself,  but 
1  S.  Matthew xv,  14.  I  E.p.  omits' alone.' 
I  E.p.:  • for  which  reason  they  journey  not  by  way  of  the  pure  and 
perfect spirit  of  faith.' 
,  E.p.:  • and edify them not, neither fortify  them in it [i.e.,  in  faith], 
making  these  things  of great  account.' 
I  E.p. omits:  'sot some  value  upon  them,  or.' 
146  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
also,  without  its  realizing  the  fact,  its  desire  will  become 
allured  by them,  so  that it will  feed  upon  them and will  be 
ever more inclined toward them and will set a  certain value! 
upon  them.  And  hence  arise  many  imperfections,  at  the 
very least;  for  the soul is  no longer as  humble as  before,  but 
thinks  that all  this  is  of some  importance and  productive of 
good,  and  that it is  itself esteemed  by  God,  and  that  He is 
pleased  and  somewhat  satisfied  with  it,  which  is  contrary 
to  humility.  And  thereupon  the  devil  begins  secretly  to 
increase  this,  without  the  soul's  realizing  it,  and  begins  to 
suggest ideas to it about others, as to whether they have these 
things  or have  them  not,  or are  this  or are  that;  which  is 
contrary to  holy simplicity and spiritual solitude. 
4.  There is  much  more  to  be said  about  these  evils,  and 
of how  such  souls,  unless  they  withdraw  themselves,  grow 
not in faith,  and also of how there are other evils of the same 
kind  which,  although  they  be  not  so  palpable  and  recog-
nizable
2 
as  these,  are subtler and more hateful to the Divine 
eyes,  and  which  result  from  not living  in  complete  detach-
ment.  Let  us,  however,  leave  this  subject  now,3  until  we 
come  to  treat  of the  vice  of spiritual  gluttony'  and  of the 
other six  vices,  whereof,  with  the help of God, 6  many things 
will  be  said,  concerning  these  subtle  and  delicate  stains 
which  adhere  to  the spirit when its  director cannot guide it 
in detachment. 
5.  Let  us  now  say  something  of  this  manner  wherein 
certain confessors deaJ  with souls, and instruct them ill.  And 
of a  truth I  could  wish  that  I  were able to describe it,  for  I 
realize that it is  a  difficult thing to  explain how the spirit of 
the  disciple  grows  in  conformity  with  that  of his  spiritual 
father,  in  a  hidden  and  secret  way;  and  this  matter  is  so 
tedious  that it wearies  me,6  for  it seems  impossible  to  speak 
of the one thing without describing the other also, as they are 
spiritual  things,  and  the  one  corresponds  with  the  other. 
6.  But  it  is  sufficient  to  say  here  that 
7 
I  believe,  if the 
1  So all the MSS.  E.p. alters to • much value'  [bringing out the general 
sense  of the passage by the change]. 
I  E.p.  omits:  • and recognizable.' 
•  E.p.  omits' complete'  and  reads:  • We  shall  leave'  for' Let  us 
leave.' 
•  A,  B  omit the remainder of tge paragraph. 
•  E.p.  has:  . God  willing.' 
•  E.p.  omits:  'and this  ... wearies  me.' 
7  E.p.  omits  this  phrase.  A,  B  have:  'And,  treating  of  that  which 
I  promised.' 
BOOK  iI.  CHAPTER  XVIII 
147 
spiritual father has an inclination toward revelations of such 
a kind that they mean something to him,l or satisfy or delight 
his  soul,  it is  impossible  but that he  will impress  that delight 
and  that  aim
2 
upon  the  spirit  of his  disciple,  even  without 
realizing  it,  unless  the  disciple  be  more  advanced  than he ; 
and,  even in this  case,  he may well  do him grievous  harm if 
he  continue  therein.  For,  from  that  inclination  of  the 
spiritual  father  toward  such  visions,  and  his  pleasure  in 
them, there arises a certain kind of esteem for  them, of which, 
unless  he  watch it carefully,  he  cannot fail  to  communicate 
some  indication  or impression  to other  persons;  and if any 
other such  person  is  like-minded  and  has  a  similar inclina-
tion,  it is  impossible,  as  I  understand,  but tha.t  there  will  be 
communicated from the one to the other a great appreciation 
of these  things  and esteem for  them. 
7.  But let us  not now go into such detail.  Let us  speak of 
the confessor who, whether or no he be inclined toward these 
things,  has  not  the  prudence  that  he  ought  to  have  in  dis-
encumbering the soul and detaching the desire of his  disciple 
from  them,  but  begins  to  speak  to  him  about these  visions 
and devotes  the greater  part of his  spiritual  conversation  to 
them,  as  we  have  said,  giving  him  signs  by  which  he  may 
distinguish good  visions from  evil.  Now,  although it is  well 
to know this,  there is  no reason to cause the soul  this labour, 
anxiety  and  peril. 
3 
By  paying  no  heed 
4 
to  visions,  and 
refusing  to  receive  them,  all  this  is  prevented,  and  the  soul 
acts  as  it should.  Nor  is  this  all,  for  such  confessors,  when 
they see  that their penitents  are receiving visions  from  God, 
beg  them  to  entreat  God  to  reveal  them  to  themselves  also, 
or to say such and such things to them, with respect to them-
selves  or to others,  and the foolish  souls 
5 
do so,  thinking that 
it  is  lawful  to  desire  knowledge  by  this  means.  For  they 
suppose  that,  because  God is  pleased  to  reveal  or say  some-
thing by supernatural means, in His own way or for  His own 
purpose,  it is  lawful  for  them  to  desire  Him  to  reveal  it  to 
them,  and even to entreat Him to  do so. 
1  E.p.:  'that they have some weight with him: 
2  E.p.:  'that same pleasure and esteem.' 
3  E.p.  adds:  'save  in  a  case  of  stringent  necessity,  as  has  been 
said.' 
,  E.p.:  'By paying little heed.' 
.  6.  All  the  MSS.  have  this  reading,  but  the  editor  of  e.p.  evidently 
  i s l ~ k e     this  exact and  expressive phrase,  for  he  substituted' good  souls' 
for  it. 
p 
14.8  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
8.  And,  if it  comes  to  pass  that  God  reveals  it  at  their 
request, they become more confident,  thinking that, because 
God  answers  them,  it  is  His  will  and  pleasure  to  do  so ; 
whereas,  in  truth,  it is  neither  God's  will  nor  His  pleasure. 
And  they frequently  act or believe  according  to  that which 
He has  revealed  to  them,  or according  to  the  way  wherein 
He  has  answered  them;  for,  as  they  are  attached  to  that 
manner of communion  with  God,  their  will  acquiesces  in it 
and it pleases them greatly.  They take a  natural pleasure in 
their own  way  of thinking  and  naturally  abide  by  it;  and 
they  frequently  go  astray.!  Then  they  see  that  something 
happens  not  as  they  had  expected;  and  they  marvel,  and 
then begin to doubtifthe thingwereofGod,2since it happens 
not,  and  they  see  it  not,  after  their  oW!1  manner.  At  the 
beginning they thought two things:  first,  that the vision was 
of God,  since  at  the  beginning  it  agreed  so  well  with  their 
disposition,  and  their  natural  inclination  to  that  kind  of 
thing may well  have  been the cause of this agreement, as  we 
have said;  and secondly  that,  being of God,  it would  turn 
out as  they  thought or expected. 
g.  And  herein  lies  a  great  delusion,  for  revelations  or 
locutions  which  are of God  do  not  always  turn  out  as  men 
expect  or  as  they  imagine  inwardly.  And  thus  they  must 
never be believed or trusted blindly, even though men know 
them  to  be  revelations  or answers  or sayings  of God.  For, 
although  they  may  in  themselves  be  certain  and  true,  they 
are  not  always  S03  in  their  causes,  and  according  to  our 
manner of understanding, 4  as  we  shall  prove in the chapter 
following.  And  afterwards  we  shall  further  say  and  prove 
that, although God sometimes gives a supernatural answer to 
that which  is  asked  of Him,  it is  not  His  pleasure  to  do so, 
and sometimes,  although  He answers,  He is  angered. 
1  E.p.  abbreviates:  '  ... they  become  more  confident  about  other 
occasions  and  think  that  this  manner  of  communion  with  God  is  His 
pleasure,  whereas,  in  truth,  it is  neither  His  plea.sure  nor  His  will.  And, 
as  they  are  attached  to  that  manner  of communion  with  God,  it  pleases 
them  greatly  and  their  will  acquiesces  naturally  in  it.  For, as it  pleases 
them  na.turally,  they are  naturally inclined  to  their  way of thinking,  and 
they frequently  go astray in  what they say.' 
2  [Lit.,  • if  it were  of  God.']  E.p.:  • if  they  were  of  God  or  no.'  A: 
• if it were  of  God  or were  not God  [sic].'  B:  • if it were of God  or were 
not of  God.' 
I  E.  p. adds:  • of necessity.'  '  A,  B  end  the chapter here. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XIX 
149 
CHAPTER  XIX 
Wherein  is expounded and proved how,  although  visions and locutions 
which  come  from  God  are  true, 
1 
we  may  be  deceived  about 
them.  This  is proved  by quotations from  Divine  Scripture. 1 
I.  For  two  reasons  we  have  said  that,  although  visions 
and locutions which come from  God are true,  and in them-
selves are always certain, they are not always so  with respect 
to  ourselves.  One reason  is  the  defective  way in which  we 
understand them;  and the other, the variety of their causes. 
3 
In the first  place,  it is  clear that they are not always as  they 
seem,  nor do they turn out as  they appear to our manner of 
thinking.  The reason for  this  is  that,  since  God is  vast  and 
boundless,  He  is  wont,  in  His  prophecies,  locutions  and 
revelations,  to employ ways, concepts  and methods of seeing 
things which differ greatly from such purpose and method as 
can  normally be understood by ourselves;  and these are the 
truer and the more certain the less  they seem so  to us.  This 
we constantly see in the Scriptures.  To many of the ancients 
many prophecies  and locutions  of God  came  not  to  pass  as 
they  expected,  because  they  understood  them  after  their 
own  manner,  in  quite  a  different  way,  very  literally.  This 
will  be clearly seen in these  passages. 
2.  In  Genesis,  God  said  to  Abraham,  when  He  had 
brought him to the land of the Canaanites:  Tibi dabo  terram 
hanc.·  Which signifies,  I  will give thee this land.  And when 
He had said it to him many times, and Abraham was by now 
very old,  and He had never given it to him,  though He had 
said it to him, Abraham answered God once again and said  : 
Domine,  unde  scire  possum,  quod  posesurus  sum  eam?  That  is  : 
Lord,  whereby or by  what sign  am  I  to know  that  I  am to 
possess  it?  Then  God  revealed  to  him  that  he  was  not  to 
possess  it in person,  but that his  sons  would  do so  after four 
1  A,  B,  e.p.  add:  'in themselves.' 
2  This sentence is omitted in  A,  B. 
•  3  E.p.  amplifies  thus:  '  ... always  certain,  they  are  not  always  so 
In  our understanding.  One reason is the defective way in which we under-
stand  them;  and  the other is the causes  and  foundations  of them,  which 
are  minatory,  and.  as it were,  conditional,  depending  on  the  amendment 
of  this  or  the  accomplishment  of  that,  although  the  locution  itself  seem 
to  be  of  an  absolute  character.  These  two  things  we  shall  prove  with  a 
few  quotations  from  Scripture'  [Iii.,  ' from  Divine  authorities 'J. 
,  Genesis xv,  7. 
150  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
hundred years;  and Abraham then understood the promise, 
which was in itself most true;  for,  in giving it to his sons for 
love of him, God was giving it to himself.  And thus Abraham 
was deceived  by the way in which he himself understood the 
prophecy.  I f he had then acted according to his own under-
standing of it, those that saw him die without its having been 
given to him might have erred greatly;  for  they were not to 
see  the  time  of its fulfilment.  And,  as  they  had  heard  him 
say  that  God  would  give  it  to  him,l  they  would  have  been 
confounded and would have  believed it to have been false. 
3.  Likewise  to  his  grandson Jacob,  when Joseph  his  son 
brought him to Egypt because of the famine in Canaan, and 
when  he  was  on  the  road,  God  appeared  and said:  Jacob, 
Jacob,  noli  timere,  descende  in  Aegiptum,  quia  in  gentem  magnam 
faciam  te  ibi.  Ego  descendam  tecum  illuc . ..• Et inde adducam Ie 
reverlentem.
2 
Which  signifies:  Jacob, fear  not;  go  down to 
Egypt, and I  will  go  down there with thee;  and, when thou 
goest forth thence again, I will bring thee out and guide thee. 
This,  as  it  would  seem  according  to  our  own  manner  of 
understanding,  was  not  fulfilled,  for,  as  we  know,  the good 
old  man Jacob  died  in  Egypt  and  never  went  out  thence 
alive.  The word  of God  was  to  be fulfilled  in his  children, 
whom He brought out thence after many years,  being  Him-
self their guide  upon  the way.  It is  clear that anyone  who 
had known of this promise made by God to Jacob would have 
considered  it  certain  that Jacob,  even  as  he  had  gone  to 
Egypt alive, in his own person,3 by the command and favour 
of God,  would  of a  certainty  come out thence,  alive  and in 
his  own  person,' in  the  same form  and  manner as  he  went 
there,  since  God  had  promised  him  a  favourable  return ; 
and such a  one  would  have been deceived,  and would have 
marvelled  greatly,  when  he  saw  him  die  in  Egypt,  and  the 
promise,  in  the sense  in  which  he understood  it,  unfulfilled. 
And  thus,  while  the  words  of God  are  in  themselves  most 
true, it is possible to be greatly mistaken with regard to them. 
4.  In the Judges,  again,  we  read that,  when all the tribes 
of Israel had come together to make war against the tribe of 
Benjamin,  in  order  to  punish  a  certain  evil  to  which  that 
tribe  had  been  consenting,  they  were  so  certain  of victory 
because God had appointed them a captain for the war, that, 
1  E.p.:  'that God  had promised  it to him.' 
•  Genesis  xlvi,  3-4.  •  E.p.  omits:  'in his own person: 
,  E.p. omits:  'and in his own person.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XIX 
when twenty-two thousand of their men were conquered and 
slain,  they  marvelled  very  greatly;  and,  going  into  the 
presence  of God,  they  wept  all  that  day,  knowing  not  the 
cause of the fall,  since  they had understood 
1 
that the victory 
was  to  be  theirs.  And,  when  they  enquired  of God if they 
should give battle again or no, He answered that they should 
go and fight against them.  This time they considered victory 
to  be  theirs,  and  went  out  with  great  boldness,
2 
and  were 
conquered likewise the second time, with the loss of eighteen 
thousand  of their  men.  Hereupon  they were  in great  con-
fusion,  and  knew  not  what  to  do,  seeing  that  God  had 
commanded  them  to  fight  and  yet  each  time  they  were 
vanquished,  though  they  were  superior3  to  their enemies in 
number and strength, for the men of Benjamin were no  more 
than twenty-five thousand and seven hundred and they were 
four hundred thousand.  And in this way they were mistaken 
in  their  manner  of understanding  the  words  of God.  His 
words were not deceptive, for He had not told them that they 
should  conquer,  but  that  they  should  fight;  for  by  these 
defeats  God  wished  to  chastise  a  certain  neglect  and  pre-
sumption  of theirs,  and  thus  to  humble  them.  But  when 
ill  the end  He answered  that they would  conquer it was  so, 
although  they  conquered  only  after  the  greatest  stratagem 
and toil.' 
5.  In this  way,  and in many other  ways,  souls  are often-
times deceived with respect to locutions and revelations  that 
come from  God,  because  they  interpret  them  according  to 
their apparent sensei and literally;  whereas,  as  has aJready 
been  explained,  the  principal  intention  of  God  in  giving 
these  things  is  to  express  and convey  the  spirit  that is  con-
tained  in them,  which  is  difficult  to  understand.  And  the 
spirit is  much more pregnant in meaning than the letter, and 
is  very extraordinary,  and  goes  far  beyond  its  limits.  And 
thus,  he that clings  to  the  letter,  or  to  a  locution  or to  the 
form  or figure  of a  vision,  which  can  be apprehended,  will 
needs  go  far  astray,  and  will  forthwith  fall  into  great  con-
fusion  and  error,  because  he  has  guided  himself  by  sense 
according to these visions, and not allc,wed the spirit to work 
in  detachment from  sense.  Lit/era  enim  occidit,  spiritus  autem 
1  E.p.:  • understood  and considered.' 
I  So  Ale.  A,  B:  • witb great courage.'  E.p.:  • with great daring.' 
a  A,  B,  e.p.:  'were so greatly superior.'  '  Judges xx,  I:Z  ft. 
•  (Lit.,  • according to the rind:  Cf.  p.  II9, above.] 
152  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
vivificat,l as S. Paul says.  That is:  The letter killeth and the 
spirit giveth life. 
2 
Wherefore in this matter of sense the letter 
must be set aside,  and the soul  must remain in darkness,  in. 
faith,  which  is  the spirit,  and this cannot be comprehended 
by sense. 
6.  For which cause, many ofthe children ofIsrael, because 
they  understood  the sayings  and prophecies  of the prophets 
very literally,  and  these  were  not fulfilled  as  they expected, 
came to make little account of them and believed them not; 
so  much  so,  that  there  grew  up  a  common  saying  among 
them-almost  a  proverb,  indeed-which  turned  prophets 
into  ridicule. 
8 
Of  this  Isaiah  complains,  speaking  and 
exclaiming  in  the  manner following:  Q,uem  docebit  Dominus 
scientiam?  et  quem  intelligere faciet  auditum?  ablactatos  a  lacte, 
avulsos ab  uberibus.  Q,uia  manda remanda,  manda remanda,  expecta 
reexpecta,  expecta  reexpecta,  modicum  ibi,  modicum  ibi.  In  loquela 
enim  lab ii,  et  lingua  altera  loquetuT  ad  populum  istum.'  This 
signifies:  To  whom  shall  God  teach  knowledge?  And 
whom shall He make to understand His word and prophecy? 
Only them that are already weaned from the milk and drawn 
from  the  breasts.  For all  say  (that  is,  concerning  the  pro-
phecies
6
):  Promise  and  promise  again;  wait  and  wait 
again;  wait and wait again;8  there a  little,  there a  little; 
for  in  the  words  of His  lips  and  in  another  tongue  will  He 
speak  to  this  people.  Here  Isaiah  shows  quite  clearly  that 
these people  were  turning prophecies into ridicule,  and that 
it was in mockery that they repeated this proverb:  'Wait and 
then  wait  again.'  They  meant  that  the  prophecies  were 
never fulfilled  for  them,  for  they were wedded  to the letter, 
which is  the milk of infants
l 
and to their own sense,  which is 
the breasts, 7 both of which contradict the greatness of spiritual 
knowledge.  Wherefore  he  says:  To whom  shall  He  teach 
the wisdom of His prophecies?  And whom shall He make to 
understand His doctrine, save them that are already weaned 
from  the milk of the letter and from  the breasts of their own 
sense?  For this  reason  these  people  understand  it not,  save 
1  2  Corinthians iii. 6. 
I  A.  B:  'The letter surely killeth,  but the spirit giveth life.' 
S  Ale.  alone  has this last clause. 
t  Isaiah xxviii.  9-IJ. 
•  Only  Ale.,  e.p.  have the parenthesis. 
•  [For' wait:  we  may  also  read' hope:  Spanish  having  one  word 
(esperar)  whieh  expresses  both these ideas and which is  here used.] 
7  A.  B  OUlit:  • which is the breasts.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XIX 
153 
according  to  this  milk
1 
of the  husk  and  letter,  and  these 
breasts  of their  own  s ~ n s e     since  they  say:  Promise  and 
promise  again;2  wait  and  wait  again,  etc.  For  it  is  the 
doctrine  of the  mouth  of God,  and not  their own  doctrine, 
and  it is  in  another  tongue  than  their  own,  that  God  shall 
speak to  them. 
7.  And thus,  in  discussing  prophecy,  we  have not to con-
sider our own sense and language, knowing that the language 
of God  is  very  different  from  ours,  and  that  it  is  spiritual 
language, and very far removed from our understanding and 
exceedingly  difficult.  So  true  is  this  that  even  Jeremiah, 
though a  prophet of God,  when he sees  that the significance 
of the words  of God is  so  different from  the sense  commonly 
attributed to  them by men,  is  himself deceived by them and 
defends  the  people,  saying:  Beu,  heu,  heu,  Domine  Deus, 
ergone deeepisti populum istum et Jerusalem,  diems ~   Pax erit vobis; 
et ecce pervenit gladius usque ad animam?3  Which signifies:  Ah, 
ah, ah, Lord God, hast Thou perchance deceived this people 
and Jerusalem, saying' Peace will come upon you,' and seest 
Thou  here  that  the  sword  rec:.cheth  unto  their  soul?  For 
the peace that God promised them was that which was to be 
made between God and man by means of the Messiah Whom 
He was to send them, whereas they understood it of temporai 
peace;  and  therefore,  when  they suffered  wars  and  trials, 
they  thought  that  God  was  deceiving  them,  because  there 
befell. them  the contrary of that which they expected.  And 
thus  they  said,  as  Jeremiah  says  likewise:  Exspectavimus 
pacem,  et non erat bonum.
4 
That is:  We have looked for peace 
and  there is  no  boon of peace.  And  thus  it was  impossible 
for  them not to be deceived, since they judged the prophecy 
merely  by  its  literal  sense. 
5 
For who  would  fail  to  fall  into 
confusion and to go astray if he confined  himself to  a  literal 
interpretation of that prophecy which David spake concern-
ing Christ, in the seventy-first Psalm, and 
6 
of all  that he says 
therein,  where  he says:  Et dOTllinabitur  a maTi  usque  ad  mare; 
et a jiumine usque  ad terminos orbis terrarum.
7 
That is:  He shall 
have dominion from one sea even to the other, and from  the 
river unto the ends of the earth.  And likewise in that which 
I  E.p.:  'but follow  this  mUk.'  [This  involves only the slight variant 
of siguen  for  segun.]  I  This phrase is repeated in Ale.  only. 
a  Jeremiah iv,  10.  '  Jeremiah viii,  15. 
I  The  1630  edition has:  'literal and grammatical sense.' 
•  E.p.:  . and in particular.' 
7  Psalm lxxi,  8  [A.V.,  lx,.ii,  8]. 
154  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
he  says  in  the  same  place:  Liherahit  pauperem  a  potente,  et 
pauperem,  cui  non  erat  adJutor.
1 
\Vhich  signifies:  He  shall 
deliver the poor man from the power of the mighty,  and the 
poor  man  that had  no  helper.  But  later  it  became  known 
that  Christ  was  born 
2 
in  a  low  estate  and  lived  in  poverty 
and died in misery;  not only had He no dominion over the 
earth,  in a  temporal sense,  while  He lived,  but He was  sub-
ject  to  lowly  people,  until  He  died  under  the  power  of 
Pontius  Pilate.  And  not  only  did  He  not  deliver  His  dis-
ciples,  who  were  poor,  from  the  hands  of the  mighty,  in  a 
temporal  sense,  but  He  allowed  them  to  be  slain  and  per-
secuted for  His  name's sake. 
8.  The fact is  that these prophecies had to be understood, 
concerning  Christ,  spiritually,  in  which  sense  they  were 
entirely true.  For Christ was  not only Lord of earth alone, a 
but  likewise  of Heaven,  since  He  was  God;  and  the  poor 
who were to follow  Him He was not only to redeem and free 
from  the power of the devil,4 that mighty one against whom 
they had no helper,5 but He was also to make  them heirs  of 
the  Kingdom  of Heaven.  And  thus  God  was  speaking,  in 
the  most  important  sense,  of Christ,  and  of the  reward  of 
His  followers,  which  was  an  eternal  kingdom  and  eternal 
liberty;  and  they  understood  this,  after  their own  manner, 
in  a  secondary  sense,  of which  God  takes  small  account, 
namely  that  of temporal  dominion  and  temporal  liberty, 
which  in  God's  eyes  is  neither  kingdom  nor  liberty  at  all. 
Wherefore,  being  blinded  by  the  insufficiency  of the  letter, 
and not understanding its  spirit and truth,  they took the life 
of their God and Lord,  even as  S.  Paul said in these  words: 
QjLi  enim  habitabant  Jerusalem,  et  principes  ejus,  hunc  ignorantes 
et  voces  prophetarum,  qUIE  per  omne  Sabbatum  leguntur,  judicantes 
impleverunt.
6 
Which signifies:  They that dwell in Jerusalem, 
and her rulers,  not knowing Who He was,  nor understanding 
the  sayings  of the  prophets,  which  are  read  every  Sabbath 
day,  have fulfilled  them by judging Him. 
9.  And  to  such  a  point  did  they  carry  this  inability  to 
understand the sayings of God as  it behoved them, that even 
1  Psalm lxxi.  12  [A.V .•  lxxii,  12]. 
2  [Lit.,  • Seeing  Him later to be  born.'] 
3  A,  B,  e.p.:  • Lord of  all  the  earth.' 
•  E.p.;  . from  the  hands  and  the  power of  the  devil.'  A,  B:  • from 
the hands of the devil.' 
•  E.p.  omits:  . against  ... helper.'  A.  B  have  'powerful'  for 
• JIlighty.'  I  Acts xiii.  27. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XIX 
155 
His  own  disciples,  who  had  gone  about  with  Him,  were 
deceived, as  were those two who, after His death, were going 
to  the  village  of  Emmaus,  sad  and  disconsolate,  saying: 
Nos  autem  sperabamus  quod  ipse  esset  redempturus  Israel.
l 
That 
is:  We trusted that He should have redeemed Israel.  They, 
too,  understood  that this  dominion and redemption  were to 
be temporal;  but Christ our Redeemer, appearing to them, 
reproved them as  foolish  and heavy and gross
2 
of heart as  to 
their belief in the things that the prophets had spoken.
a 
And 
even when He was  going to Heaven, some of them were still 
in that state of grossness,  and asked Him, saying:  Domine,  si 
in  tempore  hoc  restitues  Regnum  Israel. II  That is:  Lord,  tell  us 
if Thou wilt restore at this  time the kingdom of Israel.  The 
Holy Spirit causes many things to be said which bear another 
sense  than that  which  men  understand;  as  can  be seen  in 
that  which  He  caused  to  be  said  by  Caiaphas  concerning 
Christ:  that it was  meet that one man should die lest all the 
people should perish. 
5 
This he said not of his  own accord ; 
and he said  it and understood it in one sense,  and the  Holy 
Spirit in another. I 
10.  From this it is  clear that, although sayings and revela-
tions  may  be  of God,  we  cannot always  have  confidence in 
them;  for  we  can very  easily  be greatly deceived  by  them 
because of our manner of understanding them.  For they are 
a1l
7 
an abyss  and  a  depth  of the  spirit,  and  to  try  to  limit 
them  to  what  we  can  understand  concerning  them,  and  to 
what our sense  can apprehend, is  nothing  but to attempt to 
grasp  the air,  and to grasp some  particle in it that the hand 
touches:  the air disappears  and nothing remains. 
I  I.  The  spiritual  teacher  must  therefore  strive  that  the 
spirituality  of his  disciple  be  not  cramped  by  attempts  to 
interpret all supernatural apprehensions,  which are no more 
than  spiritual  particles,  lest  he  come  to  retain  naught  but 
these,  and  have  no  spirituality  at  all.  But  let  the  teacher 
wean his  disciple from  all visions  and locutions,  and impress 
upon.him the necessity of dwelling in the liberty and darkness 
of faith, wherein are received spiritual liberty and abundance, 
8 
and  consequently  the  wisdom  and  understanding  necessary 
to  interpret  the  sayings  of God.  For  it is  impossible  for  a 
1  S.  Luke  xxiv,  21. 
2  So  Ale.  The other MSS.,  and e.p.,  ha.ve:  • foolish  and hard.' 
8  S.  Luke xxiv,  25.  •  Aets i,  6.  6  S.  John xi, 50. 
B  E.p.  adds:  • and a  very different one.' 
7  E.p. omits' aU.'  8  A,  B, e.p.:  • abundance of spirit: 
156  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
man, if he be not spiritual, to judge of the things  of God or 
understand them in a  reasonable way, and he is not spiritual 
when he judges them according to sense  ;  and thus, although 
they  come  to  him  beneath  the  disguise  of sense,  he  under-
stands them not.  This S. Paul well expresses in these words  : 
Animalis autem homo non percipit ea quIZ sunt spiritus Dei:  stultitia 
enim  est  illi,  et  non  potest  intelligere:  quia  de  spiritualihus  exami-
natur.  Spiritualis autem judicat o m n ~ a   l   Which signifies:  The 
animal  man perceives not the things which are of the Spirit 
of God,  for  unto  him  they  are  foolishness  and  he  cannot 
understand them because  they are spiritual;  but he that is 
spiritual  judgeth  all  things.  By  the  animal  man  is  here 
meant one that uses  sense  alone;  by the spiritual man, one 
that  is  not  bound  or  guided  by  sense.  Wherefore  it  is 
temerity to presume to have intercourse with God by way of 
a  supernatural  apprehension  effected  by  sense,  or  to  allow 
anyone  else  to  do  so. 
12.  And  that  this  may  be  the  better  understood  let  us 
here  set  down  a  few  examples.  Let us  suppose  that a  holy 
man  is  greatly  afflicted  because  his. enemies  persecute  him, 
and that God answers him,  saying:  I  will deliver thee from 
all  thine  enemies.  This  prophecy  may  be  very  true,  yet, 
notwithstanding, his enemies may succeed in prevailing, and 
he  may die at their hands.  And so  if a  man should  under-
stand  this  after a  temporal  manner  he  would  be  deceived; 
for  God might be speaking ofthe true and principal deliver-
ance  and  victory,  which  is  salvation,  whereby  the  soul  is 
delivered, freed and made victorious 
2 
over all its enemies, and 
much  more  truly  so  and  in a  higher  sense  than  if  it  were 
delivered  from  them  here  below.  And  thus,  this  prophecy 
would  be  much more true and comprehensive than the man 
could understand ifhe interpreted it only with respect to this 
life;  for God, in His words, always speaks of,  and has regard 
to, the sense which is  most important and profitable, whereas 
man,  according  to  his  own  way  and  purpose,  may  under-
stand  the  less  important  sense,  and  thus  may  be  deceived. 
This we see in that prophecy which David makes concerning 
Christ  in the  second  Psalm,  saying:  Reges  eos  in  virga jerrea, 
et  tamquam  vas figuli  confringes  eos.
3 
That is:  Thou shalt rule 
all the people with a  rod of iron and thou shalt dash them in 
1  I  Corinthians ii,  q. 
Z  [Lit.,  ' free  and  victorious.']  So  Ale.,  e.p.  A,  B  ha.ve:  • whence  the 
soul  remains  free  and  with  victory.'  I  Psalm ii,  9. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XIX 
157 
pieces  like  a  vessel  of clay.  Herein God  speaks  of the prin-
cipal and  perfect dominion,  which is  eternal;  and it was  in 
this  sense  that it was  fulfilled,  and  not in the less  important 
se'lse,  which  was  temporal,  and  which  was  not  fulfilled  in 
Christ  during  any  part  of His  temporal  life.  Let  us  take 
another  example. 
13.  A soul has great desires to be a martyr.  It may happen 
that  God  answers  him,  saying:  Thou  shalt  be  a  martyr. 
This  will  give  him  inwardly  great  comfort  and  confidence 
that  he  is  to  be  martyred;  yet  notwithstanding  it  may 
come  to  pass  that  he  dies  not  the  death  of a  martyr,  and 
nevertheless  the  promise  may  be  true.  Why,  then,  is  it not 
fulfilled  literally?  Because it will  be fulfilled,  and is  capable 
of  being  fulfilled, 
1 
according  to  the  most  important  and 
essential sense of that saying-namely, in that God will  have 
given that soul  the love and the reward which  belong essen-
tially  to  a  martyr;2  and  thus  in truth  He gives  to  the soul 
that which  it formally  desired  and that which  He promised 
it.  For the formal desire
3 
of the soul was, not that particular 
manner of death,  but  to  do  God  a  martyr's service,  and  to 
show its love for  Him as  a  martyr does.  For that manner of 
death is of no worth in itself without this love, the which love 
and the showing forth  thereof and  the  reward  belonging  to 
the martyr may be given to it more perfectly by other means. 
So  t4at,  though it may not die like a  martyr, the soul is  well 
satisfied  that  it  has  been  given  that  which  it  desired.  For 
such  desires  (when  they  are  born  of living  love  and  other 
such things), although they be not fulfilled in the way where-
in they are described and understood, are fulfilled  in another 
and  a  better  way,  and  in  a  way  which  honours  God  more 
greatly than  that which they might have asked.  Wherefore 
David says:  Desiderium pauperum exaudivit Dominus.'  That is  : 
The  Lord  has  granted  the  poor  their  desire.  And  in  the 
Proverbs Divine Wisdom says:  Desiderium suumjustis dahitllr. 5 
The righteous shall be given their desire.  Hence,  then, since 
we  see  that  many  holy  men  have  desired  many  things  in 
particular for  God's sake, and that in this life their desire has 
not been granted them,  it is  a  matter of faith  that, tI  as  their 
1  E.p.  omits:  'and is  ... fulfilled.' 
2  E.p.  adds:  'and by  His making him  a  martyr of  love,  and  granting 
him  a  prolonged  martyrdom  in  sufierings,  the  continuance  whereof  is 
more  painful  than  death.' 
3  E.p.:  'For the  chief dcsire.'  4  Psalm  ix,  17  [A.V.,  x,  17). 
Ii  Proverbs  x,  24.  G  E.p.:  'it is  certain that  .. .' 
IS8  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
desire  was  righteous  and true,  it has  been fulfilled  for  them 
perfectly  in  the  next  life.  Since  this  is  truth,  it  would 
also  be truth for God to promise it to them in this life, saying 
to them  :  Your desire shall be fulfilled;  and for it not to be 
fulfilled  in the way which  they expected. 
14.  In this  and other ways,  the words  and visions  of God 
may be  true and sure and yet we  may be deceived  by them, 
through  being unable  to interpret  them  in  a  very  high  and 
important  sense,  which  is  the  purpose  and  sense  wherein 
God intends  them.  And thus it is  safest  and surest to cause 
souls  to  flee  prudently  from  these  supernatural  things, 
accustoming  them,  as  we  have  said,  tol  purity  of spirit  in 
dark faith,  which  is  the  means  of union. 
CHAPTER  XX 
Wherein  is proved  by  passages from  Scripture  how  the  sayings  and 
words  of God,  though  always  true,  do  not  always  Test  upon 
stable causes. 
I.  We  have  now to  prove  the second  reason  why  visions 
and  words  which  come  from  God,  although  in  themselves 
they are always  true,  are not always  stable in their relation 
to  ourselves.  This is  because  of their causes,  whereon:a  they 
are founded;  for  God often makes statements founded  upon 
creatures  and  the  effects  of them,  which  are  variable  and 
may fail,  for  which reason the statements which are founded 
upon them may also be variable and may fail;  for,  when one 
thing depends on another, if one fails,  the other fails  likewise. 
It is  as  though 
3 
God  should  say:  In a  year's  time  I  shall 
send  upon  this  kingdom  such  or  such  a  plague;  and  the 
cause  and  foundation  for  this  warning  is  a  certain  offence 
which  has  been  committed  against  God  in  that  kingdom. 
If the offence should cease or change,  the punishment might 
cease  ;'  yet  the  warning  was  true  because  it  was  founded 
upon  the fault  committed  at the  time,  and,  if this  had con-
tinued, it would have been carried out. Ii 
1  A,  B:  'bringing them,  as  we  have said.  into  .. .' 
a  E.p.:  • of the  causes  whereon  .. : 
3  E.p.  abbreviates:  . This  is  because  of  the  causes  and  motives 
whereon  they  are  founded;  and  it  is  to  be  understood  that they  will  be 
so  for  as  long  as  the  cause  endures  which  determines  God  (let  us  say)  to 
chasten.  It is  as  though  .. .'  '  E.p.:  . cease or change: 
6  E.p.  adds:  'And  these  warnings  or  revelations  are  minatory  or 
conditional .. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XX 
159 
2.  This,  we see,  happened in  the city  of Nineveh,  where 
God said:  Adhuc quadraginta dies,  et Ninive suhvertetur.l  Which 
signifies  :  Yet  forty  days  and  Nineveh t  shall  be  destroyed. 
This  was  not  fulfilled,  because  the  cause  of this  warning 
ceased-namely the sins of the city, for which it did penance 
-but, if it had not done this,  the wal'ning would have been 
carried into effect.  We read likewise in the Third Book of the 
Kings  that,  when  King  Ahab  had  committed  a  very great 
sin,  God  sent  to  forete1l
3 
a  great  punishment-our  father 
Elijah  being  the  messenger'-which  should  come  upon  his 
person,  upon his  house and upori  his  kingdom. II  And,  be-
cause Ahab rent his  garments with grief and clothed himself 
in haircloth and fasted, and slept in sackcloth and went about 
in  a  humble  and  contrite  manner,  God  sent  again,  by  the 
same  prophet,  to  declare  to  him  these  words:  Quia  igitur 
humiliatus  est  mei  causa,  non  inducam  malum  in  diehus  ejus,  sed in 
diehus  filii  sui. 
8 
Which  signifies:  Inasmuch  as  Ahab  has 
humbled  himself for  love  of  Me,  I  will  not  send  the  evil 
whereof I  spake in his days,  but in the days of his  son.  Here 
we  see  that,  because Ahab changed his spirit and his former 
affection,  God likewise  changed his  sentence. 'I 
3.  From  this  we  may  deduce,  for  our  purpose,  that, 
although God may have revealed or affirmed something to a 
soul,  whether good or evil, and-whether relating to that soul 
itself or to  others,  this  may,  to  a  greater  or a  lesser  extent, 
have  been  changed  or  altered  or  withdrawn  entirely, 
according  to the change or variation in the affection  of this 
soul,  or the cause whereon God passed  His judgement, 8  and 
thus  it would  not  have  been  fulfilled  in  the  way  expected, 
and oftentimes none would have known why, save only God. 
For  God  is  wont  to  declare  and  teach  and  promise  many 
things,  not  that they  may be  understood  or possessed  at the 
time,  but that they may be understood at a  later time, when 
it is  evident that a soul ought to have light concerning them, 
or when  their  effect  is  attained.  This,  we  see,  He did  with 
1  Jona.h iii,  4-
2  E.p.:  •... where  God  sent  the  prophet  Jonah  to  proclaim  this 
threat from  Him in  Nineveh:  yet forty days and th'e  city of  Nineveh .. .' 
a  [Lit.,  • to promise.']  A,  H:  • God sent to threaten him with.'  E.p.: 
• God  sent him the  warning of.' 
•  A,  B  omit:  . our father  ... messenger.' 
6  3  Kings  [A.V.,  1  Kings]  xxi,  21.  •  3  Kings xxi,  27-9. 
7  Kp.:  '  ... because  Ahab  changed,  the  warning  sentence  of  God 
ceased  likewise.' 
•  E.p.:  . the cause to which God had regard.' 
160  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
His  disciples,  to  whom  He spake  many  parables,  and gave 
many judgements, the wisdom whereof! they understood not 
until  the time when  they had to preach it,  which  was  when 
the  Holy Spirit came upon them,  of Whom Christ had said 
to  them  that  He  would  declare  to  them  all  the  things .that 
He  had  spoken  to  them  in  His  life.  And,  when  S.  John 
speaks  of that entry of Christ into Jerusalem,  he says:  HlEc 
non  cognoverunt  discipuli  eJus  primum:  sed  quando  glorificatus  est 
Jesus,  tunc  recordati  Junt  quia  hlEc  erant  scripta  de  eo.
2 
And  thus 
there may pass in detail through the soul many things of God 
which  neither the soul  nor its director understands until  the 
p ~ o p   r   time. 
4.  Likewise,  in the First Book of the  Kings,  we  read  that, 
when  God  was  wroth  against  Eli,  a  priest  of Israel,  for  his 
sins in not chastising his sons, he sent to him by Samuel to say, 
among other words,  these which follow:  Loquens loculus  sum, 
ul domus  tua,  et  domus palris tui,  ministraret in  conspectu  meo,  usque 
in  sempiternum.  Verontamen  ahsit  hoc  a  me.  And  this  is  as 
though  He  had  said:
3 
In very  truth  I  said  aforetime  that 
thy house  and the house  of thy father should serve  Me con-
tinually  in  the  priesthood in  My  presence  for  ever,  but this 
purpose  is  far from  Me;  I  will  not do this  thing.  For, in-
asmuch as  this office of the priesthood was founded for giving 
honour and glory to God, and to this end God had promised to 
give  it to the father  of Eli  for  ever if he failed  not,
4 
when  Eli 
failed in zeal for the honour of God (for, as God Himselfcom-
plained  when  He sent  to  him,  he  honoured  his  sons  more 
than God,  overlooking  their sins  so  as  not to offend  them),6 
the promise also failed  which would have held good for  ever 
if the good service and zeal  of Eli had  lasted for  ever.  And 
thus,  there  is  no  reason  to  think  that,  because  sayings  and 
revelations 
6 
come from  God,  they  must  invariably  come  to 
pass  in  their apparent sense,  especially  when 
7 
they are con-
nected with human causes  which may vary,  change or alter. 
5.  And when they are dependent upon these causes 8  God 
Himself knows,  though  He  does  not  always  declare  it,  but 
1  Thus Ale.,  e.p.  A,  B  have:  'the meaning whereof: 
a  S.  John xii,  16.  I  I  Kings  [A.V.,  1  Samuel]  ii, 30. 
,  So  Ale.,  which,  however,  omits:  • if  he  failed  not.'  A,  D  have: 
• and  to  this  end  He  had  promised  the  priesthood  to  his  father,'  etc., 
B  adding:  • [his  father]  for  ever,  if  for  ever  good  service  and  zeal  con-
tinued  in them.'  I  A,  B  omit the parenthesis. 
•  E. p. adds:  'true in themselves.' 
7  E.p.  adds:  • by the command of God  Himself.' 
8  E.p.:  • And  when this is so.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XX 
161 
pronounces  the  saying,  or  makes  the  revelation,  and some-
times says nothing of the condition, as He did to the Ninevites 
when He told  them definitely that they would be destroyed 
after forty days. 
1 
At other times He lays down the condition, 
as  He did to  Rehoboam,  saying  to  him:  If thou  wilt  keep 
My  commandments,  as  did  My  servant  David,  I  will  be 
with thee even as  I  was with him,  and will      up thy house 
as I did to My servant David.!  But, whether He declares it or 
no,  the  soul  must  not  have  confidence  in  its  own  under-
standing;  for  it  is  impossible  to  understand  the  hidden 
truths of God which are in His sayings,  and the multitude of 
their  meanings.  He is  above  the  heavens,  and speaks  after 
the way ofetemity ;8  we blind souls are upon the earth and 
understand only  the ways  of flesh and time. "  It was for this 
reason, I believe, that the Wise Man said:  God is in Heaven, 
and thou art upon earth;  wherefore be not thou lengthy or 
hasty in speaking. 15 
6.  You will perhaps ask me:  Why, if we are not to under-
stand these things, or to interfere with them, does God com-
municate  them to  us?  I  have  already said  that everything 
will  be understood in its own time by the command of Him 
that declared it, and he whom God wills shall understand it, 
and it will  be seen that it was fitting;  for  God does  naught 
save with due cause and in truth.  Let it be realized,  there-
fore,  that there is no complete understanding of the meaning' 
of the sayings and things of God, and that this meaning can-
not  be decided  by what it seems  to be,  without great error, 
and,  in  the  end,  grievous  confusion.  This  was  very  well 
known to the prophets, into whose hands was given the word 
of God, and who found it a sore trial to prophesy concerning 
the  people;  for,  as  we  have said,  many of the  people saw 
t.hat things came not to pass literally, as  they were told them, 
for  which  cause  they  laughed  at the  prophets  and  mocked 
them  greatly;  so  much so  that Jeremiah  went  as  far  as  to 
say:  They mock me all the day long, they scorn and despise 
me every  one,  for  I  have long  been crying against evil  and 
promising them destruction;  and the word of the Lord has 
been  made  a  reproach  and  a  derision  to  me  continually. 
And  I  said,  I  must  not make remembrance of Him,  neither 
1  Jonah iii, 4.  I  3  Kings  [A.V.,  1  Kings]  xi,  38. 
•  [Lil., • on the road  of  eternity. '] 
•  E.p.:  '  ..• earth, so  that we cannot attain to His secrets.' 
,  Ecclesiastes v,  J  [A.V.,  v,  2].  •  E.p.  :  'of the full              
162  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
speak  any  more  in  His  name.
1 
Herein,  although  the  holy 
prophet  was  speaking  with  resignation  and  in  the  form  of 
a  weak  man  who  cannot endure the ways  and workings2  of 
God,  he  clearly  indicates  the  difference  between  the  way 
wherein  the  Divine  sayings  are  fulfilled  and  the  ordinary 
meaning  which  they  appear  to  have;  for  the  Divine 
prophets
3 
were  treated  as  mockers,  and  suffered  so  much 
from  their  prophecy  that Jeremiah  himself said  elsewhere: 
Formido  et laqueus facta  est nobis  vaticinatio  et  contritio.'  Which 
signifies:  Prophecy  has  become  to  us  fear  and  snares  and 
contradiction of spirit.  . 
7;  And the reason  why Jonah fled  when  God sent him t() 
preach the destruction  of Nineveh was  this,  namely,  that he 
knew  the  different  meanings  of the  sayings  of  God  with 
respect to  the understanding of men and with respect to  the 
causes of the sayings. Ii  And thus,  lest they should mock him 
when  they saw  that his  prophecy was  not fulfilled,  he  went 
  ~   y   and  fled  in  order  not  to  prophesy;  and  thus  he 
rerriained  waiting all  the forty  days  outside the city,  to see if 
his  prophel:Y  was  fulfilled;  and,  when  it  was  not fulfilled, 
he  was  greatly  afflicted,  so  much  so  that  he said  to God.: 
..  Qhsecro,  Domine,  numquid  non  hoc  est  verbum  meum,  cum  adhuc 
essem in terra mea?  propter hoc prtEoccupavi,  ut fugtrem in  Tharsis.
8 
That is:  I  pray Thee,  0  Lord,  was  not this  perchance.my 
saying when  I  was  in my country? . Therefore was  I  vexed, 
and  fled  away  to  Tarshish.  Arid  the saint  was  wroth  and 
besought God  to  take  away his life.'  . 
8.  Why,  then,  must  we  marvel  that  God  should  speak 
and reveal certain things  to souls  which  come not to pass  in 
the  sense  wherein  they  understand  them?  For,  if  God 
affirms or represents such or such a thing to the soul, whether 
good  or evil;  witl1  respect  to  itself or to another,  and if that 
thing  be  founded  upon  a  certain  affection  or  service  or 
offence of that soul,  or of another,  with respect to God,  and 
if the soul persevere therein, it will be fulfilled  ;  yet even then 
its fulfilment?  is  not  certain, since  it  is  not certain  that  the 
soul  will  persevere.  Wherefore,  we  must  have  confidence, 
8 
not in understanding,  but in faith. 
1  Jeremiah xx, 7-9.  •  E.p.:  'ways and secrets.' 
•  A,  B:  • the sacred  prophets.'  '  Lamentations iii,  47. 
i  E.p.:  '  ... namely,  that he understood not the truth of the sayings 
of God  and knew not wholly  their meaning.'  •  Jonah iv,  2. 
,  E.p. adds:  'as it seems' [i.e., in the sense which it seems to bear]. 
•  A,  B. e.p.  add:  'or security.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XXI 
CHAPTER  XXI 
Wherein  is  explained  how  at  times,  although  God  answers  the 
prayers  that  are  addressed  to  Him,  He  is  not  pleased  that  we 
should  use  such  methods.  It is also  proved how,  although  He 
condescend to  us  and answer us,  He  is oftentimes  wroth. 
I.  Certain  spiritual  men,  as  we  have  said,  are  confident 
that it is  a  good thing to display curiosity, as they sometimes 
do,  in  striving  to  know  certain  things  by  supernatural 
methods,  thinking  that,
l 
because  God  occasionally  answers 
their importunity, this is a good method and pleasing to God. 
Yet  the  truth  is  that,  although  He  may  answer  them,  the 
method is  not good,  neither is  it pleasing to God,  but rather 
it is  displeasing to Him;  and not only so,  but oftentimes He 
is  greatly  offended  and  wroth. 
2 
The reason  for  this  is  that 
it is  lawful
3 
for  no  creature  to  pass  beyond  the  limits  that 
God  has  ordained  for  His  governance  after  the  order  of 
nature.'  In  His  governance  of  man  He  has  laid  down 
rational  and  natural  limits  ; 5  wherefore  to  desire  to  pass 
beyond  them  is  not  lawful,6  and  to  desire  to  seek  out  and 
attain  to  anything  by  supernatural  means  is  to  go  beyond 
these  natural  limits. 
7 
It is  therefore  an  unlawful  thing, 
8 
and it is therefore not pleasing to God,9 for He is  offended by 
all  that  is  unlawful.  Well  knew  King  Ahab  this,  since, 
although  Isaiah  told  him  from  God  to  ask  for  a  sign,  he 
would  not do it, saying:  Non petam,  et  non  tentabo  Dominum.
10 
That is:  I will not ask such a thing, neither will I  tempt God. 
For  it is  tempting  God  to  seek  to  commune  with  Him  by 
extraordinary  ways,  such  as  those  that are supernatural. 
2.  But  why,  you  will  say,  if God  be  displeased,  does  He 
sometimes answer?  I reply that it is sometimes the devil who 
answers.  And, when it is  ~ o     Who answers,11  I reply that it 
1  E.p.:  • Certain  spiritual  men,  as  we  have  said,  are  confident-not 
reflecting much upon the curiosity which they sometimes display in striving 
to know certain things by supernatural means-and think that  .. .' 
I  E.p.:  . oftentimes He sorrows greatly for  it and is  [greatly]  wroth.' 
I  E.p.:  • it is fitting.' 
..  E.p.  omits:  • after the order of nature.' 
I  E.p.  omits:  • and natural.' 
•  E.p.:  . is not fitting.'  7  E.p.:  • these limits.' 
•  E.p.:  • it is not a  holy  or a  fitting  thing.' 
•  E.p. omits the remainder of this paragraph.  10  Isaiah vii, 12. 
11  Ale.  omits:  • I  reply  that  .  .  .  God  Who  answers,'  probably  by 
an  oversight. 
g 
164  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
is  because  of the weakness  of the soul  that desires  to  travel 
along that road,  lest it should  be disconsolate  and go  back. 
ward,  or  lest  it  should  think  that  God  is  wroth  with 
it and should  be  overmuch  afflicted;1  or for  other reasons 
known  to  God,  founded  upon  the  weakness  of that  soul, 
whereby God sees that it is  well that He should answer it and 
deigns  to do so  by this  method.  In the same way,  too,  does 
He treat many weak and tender souls, granting them favours 
and sweetness in sensible converse with Himself,  as has  been 
said above;  this is  not because He desires  or is  pleased  that 
they  should  commune  with  Him  after  this  manner  or  by 
these  methods;  it is  that He gives  to  each  one,  as  we  have 
said,  according  to  his  manner.  For  God  is  like  a  spring, 
whence everyone draws  water according to  the vessel  which 
he carries.  Sometimes a  soul  is  allowed  to draw it by  these 
extraordinary channels;  but it follows  not from  this  that it 
is lawful to draw water
ll 
by them, but only that God Himself 
can permit this,  when,  how and to whom  He  wills,  and for 
what  reason  He  wills,  without  any other  party having  any 
right  in  the  matter.  And  thus,  as  we  say,  He  sometimes 
deigns  to  satisfy  the  desire  and  the  prayer  of certain  souls, 
whom, since they are good and sincere, He wills not to fail to 
succour,  lest  He should  sadden them,  but  He  wills  not  this 
because  He is  pleased with  their methods.  This will  be the 
better understood  by the following  comparison. 
3.  The  father  of a  family  has  on  his  table  many  and 
different kinds of food,  some of which are better than others. 
A child is asking him for a  certain dish,  not the best,  but the 
first  that  meets  its  eye,  and  it asks  for  this  dish  because  it 
would rather eat of it than any other;  and as the father sees 
that, even ifhe gives it the better food,  it will not take it,  but 
will  have  that which  it asks  for,  since  that alone  pleases  it, 
he gives  it that,  regretfully,  lest it should  take no food  at all 
and  be  miserable.  In just  this  way,  we  observe,  did  God 
treat the children of Israel when they asked Him for a  king  : 
He gave them one,  but unwillingly,  because it was  not good 
for them.  And thus He said to Samuel:  Audi vocem populi in 
omnibus fJUte  locuntur libi:  non enim  te  abjecerunt,  sed me.
8 
Which 
signifies:  Hearken unto  the voice  of this  people  and grant 
them  the  king  whom  they  ask  of thee,  for  they  have  not 
1  E.p.:  • overmuch tempted.' 
I  E.p.:  • that it is fitting to seek to draw  water.' 
•  I  Kings [A.V.,  I  Sa.muel]  viii,  7. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XXI 
16
5 
rejected  thee  but  Me,  that  I  should  not  reign  over  them. 
In this same way God condescends to certain souls, and grants 
them that which is not best for them, because they will not or 
cannot  walk  by  any  other  road.  And  thus  certain  ~ o u   s  
attain  to  tenderness  and  sweetness  of spirit  or sense;  and 
God grants  them this1because  they are unable to partake of 
the stronger and more solid food  of the trials of the CrC?ss  of 
His  Son,  which  He would  prefer  them  to  take,  rather than 
aught else. 
4.  I  consider,  however,  that the desire  to know things  by 
supernatural  means is  much worse  than the desire  for  other 
spiritual favours  pertaining  to  the senses;  for  I  cannot see 
how the soul that desires them can fail to commit, at the least, 
venial  sin,  however  good  may  be its  aims,  and however far 
advanced it may be on  the road to perfection;  and he that 
bids  the  soul  desire  them,  and  consents  to  it,  sins  likewise. 
For there is  no necessity for  any of these  things,  since  there 
is  a  natural  reason  and  an  evangelical  doctrine  and  law 
which  are quite sufficient for  the souPs  guidance,  and there 
is  no  difficulty or necessity  that cannot be solved and reme-
died by these  means,  which are very pleasing to  God and of 
great  profit  to  souls;  and  such great use  must  we  make  of 
evangelical  doctrine  and  reason  that,  if certain  things  be 
told  us  supernaturally,  whether we  so  desire  or no,  we  must 
only  receive  that  which  is  in  clear  conformity  with  reason 
and evangelical law.  And  then  we  must  receive  it,  not  be-
cause it is  revelation, but because it is reason, setting aside all 
interest in revelation;  and even  then it is well to look at that 
reason  and examine it very much  more closely2 than if there 
had been  no  revelation  concerning it ;  inasmuch as the devil 
utters many things that are true,  and that will  come to  pass, 
and that are in conformity with reason,  in order that he may 
deceive. 
5.  Wherefore,  in  all  our  anxieties, trials  and  difficulties, 
there remains  to  us  no  better and surer  means  than prayer 
and hope that God will  provide for  us,  by such m.eans  as  He 
wills. 
3 
This  is  the  advice  given  to  us  in  the  Scriptures, 
where  we  read  that,  when  King Jehoshophat  was  greatly 
1  E.p.:  • And  if certain  souls  .•. or  sense,  God  grants  them  this,' 
etc. 
•  E.p.  abbreviates:  • And  then  we  must  receive  that which is in con-
formity  with reason  and  evangelical law ;  and  even  then it is  well  to look 
at it and examine it very  much  more closely  .. .' 
a  A;  'than hope  through the means that Ho wills.' 
166  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
afflicted  and  surrounded  by  enemies,  the  saintly  king  gave 
himself to prayer, saying  to God:  Cum  ignoremus  quid jacere 
debeamus,  hoc  solum  habemus  residui,  ut oculos  nostros  dirigamus  ad 
te.
1 
And this is as though he had said:  When the means fail 
and  reason  is  unable  to  succour  us  in  our  necessities,  it 
remains  for  us  only  to  lift  up  our  eyes  to  Thee,  that  Thou 
mayest succour us  as is  most pleasing to T ~ e e    
6.  And,  although  this  has  also  been demonstrated,  it will 
be  well  to  prove,  from  certain  passages  of Scripture,  that, 
though  God  may  answer  such  requests,  He is  none  the less 
sometimes wroth.  In the First Book of the Kings it is said that, 
when King Saul begged 
2 
that the prophet Samuel,  who was 
already dead, might speak to him, the said prophet appeared 
to him,  and that God  was  wroth with all  this,  since  Samuel 
then  reproved  Saul  for  having  done  such  a  thing,  saying: 
Quare  inquietasti  me,  ut  suscitare,?3  That is:  Why hast  thou 
disquieted  me,  in causing me  to arise?  We  also  know  that, 
in  spite of having answered  the children  of Israel and given 
them the food  that they besought of Him, God was neverthe-
less  greatly  incensed  against  them;  for  He  sent  fire  from 
Heaven  upon  them  as  a  punishment,  as  we  read  in  the 
Pentateuch,'  and  as  David  relates  in  these  words:  Adhuc 
esctB  eOTum  erant  in  ore  ipsorum,  et  ira  Dei  descendit  super  eos.:; 
Which  signifies:  Even  as  they  had  the  morsels  in  their 
mouths,  the wrath of God came down upon them.  And like-
wise we read in Numbers  that God  was  greatly wroth
6 
with 
Balaam  the  prophet,  because  he  went  to  the  Midianites 
when Balak their king sent for him, although God had bidden 
him go,  because he desired  to go and had begged it of God  ; 
and  while  he  was  yet  in  the  way  there appeared  to  him an 
angel with a sword, who desired to slay him, and said to him: 
Perversa est via tua,  mihique contraTia. 7  Thy way is perverse and 
contrary to  Me;  for  which cause he desired to slay him. 
7.  After  this  manner  and  many  others  God  deigns  to 
satisfy  the  desires  of souls  though  He  be  wroth  with  them. 
Concerning this we have many testimonies in Scripture, and, 
apart  from  these,  many  examples  ; 8  but  examples  are  not 
1  2  Chronicles  xx.  12.  I  E.p.  has  . desired' for'  begged.' 
I  I  Kings [A.V .•  I  Samuel]  xxviii.  15. 
I  E.p.  is more  precise:  . in the Book of  Numbers.' 
I  Psalm lxxvii.  30-1  [A.V .•  lxxviii.  30-1]. 
•  E.p.:  • that God  was none the less wroth.' 
7  Numbers  xxii.  32. 
•  So A.  B.  E.p. has:  • Concerning this there are many more testimonies 
in Divine Scripture.  and  many examples: 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XXI 
necessary  in a  thing  that is  So  clear.  I  only say  that it is  a 
most  perilous thing,  more so  than I  can express,  to  desire  to 
commune  with  God  by  such  means,  and  that  one  who  is 
affectioned  to  such  methods  will  not  fail  to  err greatly and 
will  often  find  himself in  confusion.  And  anyone  who  has 
had  experience  of this  will  understand  me  from  his  own 
experience.  For over and above  the  difficulty  that there  is 
in  being  sure  that  one  is  not  going  astrayl  in  respect  of 
locutions  and visions  which are of God,  there are ordinarily 
many of these locutions  and visions  which  are of the  devil ; 
for  in  his  converse  with  the  soul  the  devil  habitually  wears 
the same guise as God assumes in His dealings with it, setting 
before it things  that are very  like  to  those  which  God  com-
municates  to it,  insinuating  himself,  like  the  wolf in  sheep's 
clothing, among the flock,  with a success  so  nearly complete 
that he can hardly be recognized.  For, since  he says  many 
things  that  are  true,  and  in  conformity  with  reason,  and 
things that come to pass as  he describes  them, I!  it is very easy 
for  the  soul  to  be  deceived,  and  to  think  that,  since  these 
things  come  to  pass  as  he  says,  and  the  future  is  correctly 
foretold,  this  can  be  the  work of none  save  God;  for  such 
souls  know  not  that it is  a  very  easy  thing  for  one  that has 
clear natural light to  be acquainted,  as  to their causes,  with 
things,  or with  many of them, which  haye  been or shall  be.
3 
And since the devil has a very clear light of this kind, he can 
very  easily"  deduce  effect  from  cause,  although  it  may not 
always turn out as  he says,  because  all  causes
5 
depend  upon 
the will  of God.  Let us  take an example. 
B.  The devil  knows  that the constitution of the earth and 
the atmosphere, and the laws ruling the sun,  are disposed in 
such  manner  and  in  such  degree  that,  when  a  certain 
moment has  arrived,  it will  necessarily foHow,  according  to 
the  laws  of nature  laid  down  for  these  elements,  that  they 
will  infectS  people  with  pestilence,  and  he  knows  in  what 
places  this  will  be  more  severe  and  in  what  places  less  so. 
Here  you  have  a  kriowledge  of pestilence  as  to  its  causes. 
What a wonderful thing it is  when the devil reveals  this to a 
soul,  saying:  'In a  year  or  in six  months  from  now  there 
1  So e.p.  The Codices  have:  • in going  not astray.' 
I  [Lit.,  . that come out true.']  E.p.:  . tha.t come out exact.' 
a  E.p.  adds:  • and  thus  [such  a]  one  will  predict  ma.ny  things  of  the 
future.' 
•  E.p.  omits:  • very easily.'  '  E.p.;  • all  things.' 
•  E.p. abbreviates:  • according to their laws,  that they will infect.' 
168  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
will  be pestilence,'  and it happens  as  he says!  And yet this 
is  a  prophecy of the devil.  In the same way he may have a 
knowledge of earthquakes, and, seeing that the bowels of the 
earth are filling with air, he will say:  'At such a time there 
will be an earthquake. '  Yet this is only natural knowledge, 1 
for  the possession  of which it suffices  for  the spirit to be free 
from  the  passions  of the  soul,  even  as  Bretius  says  in  these 
words:  Si  vis  claro  lumine  cernere  verum,  gaudia  pelle,  timorem, 
spemque  jugato,  nec  dolor  adsit.1I  That  is:  If thou  desire  to 
know  truths  with  the  clearness  of nature,  cast  from  thee 
rejoicing  and fear  and hope and sorrow. 
g.  And  likewise  supernatural  events  and
3 
happenings 
may  be  known,  in  their  causes,  in  matters  concerning 
Divine  Providence,  which  deals  most justly and surely  as  is 
required  by the good or evil causes  of the sons of men.'  For 
one  may  know  by  natural  means Ii  that  such  or  such  a 
person,  or  such  or  such  a  city,  or  some  other  thing,  is  in 
such or such necessity, or has reached such or such a point, so 
that God, according to His providence and justice, must deal 
with such a  person or thing in the way required by its cause, 
and  in  the  way  that  is  fitting  for  it,  whether  by  dealing 
punishment or reward,  or whatsoever it be.  And  then  one 
can say:  At such  a  time  God  will  give you  this,  or will  do 
this,  or that will  come to pass,  of a  surety.'  It was  this  that 
holy Judith said  to  Holofernes,7  when,  in order to  persuade 
him  that  the  children  of Israel  would  without  fail  be  des-
troyed, she first related to him many of their sins and the evil 
deeds  that  they  did.  And  then  she  said:  Et,  quoniam  hlEc 
faciunt,  cerium est q7lOd in perditionem dabuntur.  Which signifies  : 
Since  they  do  these  things,  it  is  certain  that  they  will  be 
destroyed.  This  is  to  know  the  punishment  in  the  cause, 
8 
1  E.p.  omits the remainder of the paragraph. 
I  The  exact  reading  in  Boetius  is:  • Tu  quoque  si  vis  lumine  claro 
cemere  veJ:Um-Tramltc  recto  carpere  callem-Gaudia  pelle-Pelle 
timorem-Spemque fugato-Nee dolor adsit • (Migue. Vol.  LXXV, p.  122). 
•  A,  B  omit:  • events and.' 
,  E.p.:  • And likewise to some extent particular events and happenings 
may  be  deduced  from  Divine  Providence,  which  is  wont  to  deal  most 
justiy according  to the good  and evil  [doings]  of the sons of men.' 
•  So  Ale.  E.p.  omits:  ' by natural  means.'  A.  B:  • one  may know 
clearly.' 
•  E.p. omits:  • of a  su:ety.'  '  Judith xi,  12. 
•  E.p.:  • It is  this  tha.t  Aehior  meant  when  he  said  to  Holofernes 
(Judith v,  IS):  Quotiescumque  praeter  Deum  suum alterum  coluerune.  dati 
sunt  in  praeaam,  et  in  gladium  et  in  opprobrium.  This  is  to  know  the 
punishment in  the cause.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XXI 
16
9 
which is as  much as  to say:  It is certain that such sins  must 
be the cause of such punishments, at the hand of God Who is 
most just.  And  as  the  Divine  Wisdom  says:  Per  qUIB  quis 
pecco,t,  per bIBc  et  torquetur.
1 
With respect to  that and for  that 
wherein a  man sins,  therein is  he punished. 
10.  The  devil  may  have  knowledge  of  this,  not  only 
naturally, but also by the experience which he has of having 
seen  God  do  similar  things,  and  he  can  foretell  it  and  be 
correct. I  Again,  holy Tobias was  aware of the punishment 
of the  city  of Nineveh  because  of its  cause,  and  he  thus' 
admonished his son,  saying:  Behold, son,  in the hour when 
I  and thy mother die, go thou forth from this land, for it will 
not remain. 
8 
Video  enim quia iniquitas ejus finem  dabit ei. '  I see 
clearly that its  own iniquity must be the cause of its punish-
ment,  which  will  be  that  it shall  be  ended  and  destroyed 
altogether.  This  might  have  been  known  by  the  devil  as 
well  as  by  Tobias,  not  only  because  of the  iniquity  of the 
city,  but by experience, since they had seen that for  the sins 
of the  world  God  destroyed  it in  the Flood,
6 
and  that  the 
Sodomites,  too,  perished  for  their sins  by fire;  but Tobias 
knew it also through the Divine Spirit. 
I  I.  And  the  devil  may  know  that  one  PeterS  cannot,  in 
the course  of nature,  live more  than so  many years,  and he 
may foretell  this;  and so  with regard to many other things 
and in many ways that it is impossible to recount fully-nor 
can  one  even  begin  to  recount  many  of them-since  they 
are  most  intricate  and  subtle,  he  insinuates  falsehoods  ;7 
from  which  a  soul  cannot free  itself save by fleeing  from  all 
revelations and visions and locutions that are supernatural. 8  . 
Wherefore  God  is  justly  angered  with  those  that  receive 
them, for  He sees  that it is  temerity  on their part to  expose 
themselves to such great peril and presumption and curiosity, 
and  things  that  spring  from  pride,  and  are  the  root  and 
foundation of vainglory, and of disdain for the things of God, 
and the beginning of.many evils' to which many have come. 
1  Wisdom xi, 17  [A.V.,  xi,  16].  •  E.p. adds:  • at times.' 
•  E.p. has • city' for' land.'  '  Tobit xiv,  12. 
•  So  Alc.  E.p.:  • had  destroyed  men  in  the  Flood.'  A,  B:  • since 
they had  seen  the sins  for  which  God  had  destroyed  the world  with  the 
Flood.' 
•  [i.e .•  any individual.] 
,  E.p.  omits:  • he insinuates falsehoods.' 
•  E.p. omits:  • that are supernatural.' 
•  So  Alc.  A,  B:  • and  the  cause  of  many  evils.'  E.p.:  • and  many 
evils.' 
170  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
Such  persons  have  succeeded  in  angering  God  so  greatly 
that He has of set purpose allowed  them to go astray and be 
deceived  and  to  blind  their  own  spirits  and  to  leave  the 
ordered paths oflife and give way to their vanities and fancies, 
according  to  the  word  of Isaiah,  where  he  says:  Dominus 
miscuit  in  medio  ejus  spiritum  vertiginis.
1 
Which  is  as  much  as 
to  say  =  The  Lord  hath  mingled  in  the  midst  thereof the 
spirit  of dissension  and  confusion.  Which  in  our  ordinary 
vernacular  signifies  the  spirit  of misunderstanding.  What 
Isaiah  is  here  very  plainly  saying  is  to  our  point,  for  he  is 
speaking  of those  who  were  endeavouring  by  supernatural 
means to know things that were to come to pass.  And there-
fore he says  that God mingled in their midst the spirit of mis-
understanding;  not that God  willed  them,  in fact,  to have 
the spirit of error, or gave it to them, but that they desired to 
meddle with  that to which  by nature they could  not attain. 
Angered  by  this,  God  allowed  them  to  act foolishly,  giving 
them no light as  to that wherewith He desired not that they 
should concern themselves.  And thus  the prophet says  that 
God  mingled  that spirit in them,  privatively. 
2 
And in this 
sense  God is  the cause  of such  an evil-that is  to  say,  He is 
the privative cause,  which  consists  in His  withdrawal of His 
light  and  favour,  to  such  a  point  that  they  must  needs  fall 
into error. 
3 
12.  And in this  way  God gives  leave to the devil  to blind 
and deceive  many,  when  their sins  and audacities  merit it ; 
and  this  the  devil  can  do  and  does  successfully,  and  they 
give  him credence  and  believe him  to  be  a  good  spirit;  to 
such  a  point  that,  although  they  may  be  quite  persuaded 
that  he  is  not  so,  they  cannot  undeceive  themselves,  since, 
by the permission  of God,  there has already been insinuated 
into  them  the  spirit  of perverse  understanding,  even  as  we 
read  was  the  case  with  the  prophets  of King  Ahab,  whom 
God permitted  to  be deceived  by a  lying spirit,  giving leave 
to  the  devil  to  do  this,  and  saying:  Decipies,  et              j 
egredere,  et fac  ita.
4 
Which signifies  :  Thou shalt prevail with 
thy falsehood  and shalt deceive  them;  go  forth  and  do so. 
And so  well  was  he able to work upon the prophets and the 
king,  in order  to deceive  them,  that they would  not believe 
1  Isaiah xix,  14.  B  E.p.  has' permissively'  for' privatively.' 
3  E.p.:  '  ... and favour, wherefore it follows that they must infallibly 
fall  into error.' 
,  3  Kings  [A.V.,  I  Kings]  xxii,  22. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XXI 
the  prophet· Micaiah,  who  prophesied  the  truth  to  them, 
saying  the  exact  contrary  of  that  which  the  others  had 
prophesied,  and  this  came  to  pass  because  God  permitted 
them  to  be  blinded,  since  their  affections  were  attached  to 
that  which  they  desired  to  happen  to  them,  and  God 
answered  them  according  to  their  desires  and  wishes; 
and  this  was  a  most  certain  preparation  and  means  for 
their  being  blinded  and  deceived,  which  God  allowed  of 
set  purpose. 
13.  Thus,  too,  did Ezekiel  prophesy in the name of God, 
and,  speaking  against  those  who  began  to  desire  to  have 
knowledge  direct  from  God,  from  motives  of  curiosity, 
according to the vanityl of their spirit, he says:  When such a 
man comes  to the prophet to enquire of Me through him,  I, 
the Lord,  will  answer him by Myself,  and I  will set  My face 
in anger against that man;  and, as to the prophet, when he 
has gone astray in that which was asked of him,  Ego  Dominus 
decepi  prophetam  illum.
2 
That is:  I, the Lord, have deceived 
that prophet.  This is to be taken to mean, by not succouring 
him with His favour so  that he might not be deceived;  and 
this  is  His  meaning  when  He says:  I  the  Lord  will  answer 
him  by  Myself in  anger
3
-that is,  God  will  withdraw  His 
grace and favour from that man.  Hence necessarily' follows 
deception by reason of his abandonment by God.  And then 
comes  the devil and makes answer according to the pleasure 
and desire of that man, who,  being pleased thereat, since the 
answers  and  communications  are  according  to  his  will, 
5 
allows  himself to  be deceived greatly. 
14.  It may appear that we  have  to  some  extent forsaken 
the  purpose  that  we  expressed  in  the  title  of this  chapter, 
which  was  to  prove  that,  although  God  answers,  He some-
times complains.  But, if it be carefully  considered,6 all  that 
has  been  said  goes  to  prove  our intention;  for  it  all  shows 
that  God  desires  not  that  we  should  wish  for  such  visions, 
since He gives cause for us  to be deceived by them in so many 
ways. 
1  Ale.  has:  • to the variety.'  2  Ezekiel xiv,  7-9. 
3  [Ezekiel  xiv,  7.]  4  E.p.:  • Hence infallibly.' 
6  E.p.:  • are in conformity with his  will.' 
8  The  passage  from  the  beginning  of  the  paragraph  to  this  point  is 
found  only in Ale.  and e.p.  The latter reads' is wroth' for  • complains.' 
172  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
CHAPTER  XXII 
Wherein  is  solved
1 
Q.  question,  namely,  why  it  is  not  lawful,  under 
tke  law  of grace,·  to  ask anything  of God  by  supernatural 
means,  as it was under the ancient law.  This solution is proved 
by  a passage from  S.  Paul. a 
I.  Questions  keep  coming  to  our  mind,  and  thus  we 
cannot progress  with  the  speed  that we  should  desire.  For 
as  we  raise  these  questions,  we  are  obliged  of necessity'  to 
meet them,  that the truth of our teaching may ever be clear 
and carry its full  force.  But there is  always5  this advantage 
in  these  questions,  that,  although  they  somewhat  impede 
our progress,  they  serve  nevertheless  to  make our intention 
the clearer and more explicit,8 as  will  be  the  case  with  the 
present question. 
2.  In  the  last  chapter,  we  said  that  it is  not  the  will  of 
God  that souls  should  desire  to receive  anything  distinctly, 
through  visions,  locutions,  etc.,  by  supernatural  means. 
Further, we saw in the same chapter, and deduced from  the 
testimonies  which  were  there  brought forward  from  Scrip-
ture,  that such 
7 
communion with  God  was  employed  in the 
Old Law and was  lawful;  and that not only was  it lawful, 
but  God  commanded  it.  And  when  they  used  not  this 
opportunity, God reproved them, 
8 
as is  to be seen in Isaiah, 
where  God  reproves  the  children  of  Israel  because  they 
desired  to  go  down'  to  Egypt  without  first  enquiring  of 
Him,  saying:  Et  os  meum  non  interrogastis.
10 
That  is:  Ye 
asked  not  first  at  My  own  mouth  what  was  fitting.  And 
likewise we read in Joshua that,  when the children of Israel 
themselves  are  deceived  by  the  Gibeonites,  the  Holy  Spirit 
reproves  them  for  this  fault,  saying:  Susceperunt  ergo  de 
eibariis  eorum,  et  os  Dcmini  TUm  interrogaverunt.
l1 
Which  sig-
nifies:  They  took  of their  victuals  and  they  enquired  not 
1  E.p.:  • is treated.'  I  E.p.:  • under the New  Law.' 
•  E.p.  adds:  • This is  somewhat  pleasant for  an  understanding of the 
mysteries of our holy 1aith.'  '  E.p.  omits:  'of necessity.' 
.•  Ale.  alone has • always.' 
•  (Li,.,  • they serve  nevertheless for  the greater doctrine  and  clearness 
of our intention.') 
7  E.p.  abbreviates:  'Further, we  know  that such  •• : 
•  E.p.  adds:  • for it.' 
•  A,  B.  e.p.:  • they thought of  going down.' 
10  Isaiah xxx,  2.  .  11  Joshua ix. 14. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XXII 
173 
at the  mouth  of God.  Furthermore  we  see  in  the  Divine 
Scripture  that  Moses  always  enquired  of God,  as  did  King 
David  and  all  the  kings  of Israel  with  regard  to  their wars 
and  necessities,  and  the  priests  and  prophets  of old,  and 
God answered and spake with them and was not wroth, and 
it  was  well  done;  and  if they  did  it  not  it  was  ill done; 
and this is  the truth.  Why,  then,  in the new law-the law 
of grace-may it not now  be as  it was  aforetime ? 
3.  To  this  it  must  be  replied  that  the  principal  reason 
why in the  law  of Scripture
1 
the  enquiries  that were  made 
of God were lawful, and why it was fitting that prophets and 
priests  should  seek  visions  and  revelations  of God,  was  be-
cause  at  that  time  faith  had  no  firm  foundation,  neither 
was the evangelical law established;  and thus it was needful 
that they should enquire of God and that He should speak, 
whether  by  words  or by visions  and revelations  or whether 
by figures and similitudes or by many other ways  of impress-
ing  His  meaning.  For all  that He answered and spake  and 
revealed  belonged  to  the  mysteries  of our faith  and  things 
touching  it  or leading  to  it.  And,  since  the  things  of faith 
are not of man,  but are of the mouth  of God  Himself,  God 
Himself reproved  them  because  they  enquired  not  at  His 
mouth in their affairs,  so  that He might answer,2 and might 
direct their affairs and happenings toward the faith,  of which 
at that time  they had  no  knowledge,  because  it was  not yet 
founded. 
3 
But now that the faith  is  founded  in Christ, and, 
in this era of grace, the evangelical law has been made mani-
fest,  there  is  no  reason  to  enquire  of Him in  that  manner, 
nor for  Him to speak or to answer as  He did then.  For,  in 
giving  us,  as  He did,  His  Son,  which is  His  Word-and He 
has  no  other-He spake to us  all  together,  once and for  all, 
in this single Word, and He has no occasion to speak further. 
4.  And this is  the sense of that passage with which S.  Paul 
begins,  when  he  tries  to  persuade  the  Hebrews  that  they 
should  abandon  those  first  manners  and  ways  of converse 
with  God  which  are  in  the  law  of Moses,  and  should  set 
their  eyes  on  Christ  alone,  saying:  Multifariam  multisque 
modis  olim  Deus  loquens  patrihus  in  Prophetis:  novissime  autem 
1  A,  B, e.p.:  'why in the Old  Law.' 
I  E.p.:  '  ... of  God  Himself,  and  by His very  mouth  were  spoken: 
therefore it was  needful  that, as  we  have said,  they should  enquire a.t  the 
mouth of  God  Himself;  wherefore  He answered  them,  when  they did it 
not, so that He might answer them  .  .  .' 
I  E.p.  omits:  • beca.use  it was not yet founded.' 
174  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
diebus  istis  locutus  est nobis  in  Filio.
1 
And this  is  as  though he 
had said:  That which  God spake of old  in the prophets to 
our fathers,  in sundry ways and divers manners, He has now, 
at last,  in  these  days,  spoken  to  us  once  and  for  all  in  the 
Son.  Herein  the  Apostle  declares  that  God  has  been,  as  it 
were,  dumb,  and has  no  more to say,2 since  that which  He 
spake aforetime, in part, to the prophets, He has now spoken 
altogether in Him, giving us  the All,  which is  His  Son. 
5.  Wherefore he that would now enquire of  God, or seek any 
vision  or revelation,  would  not only be acting foolishly,  but 
would be committing an offence against God,3 by not setting 
his  eyes  altogether  upon  Christ,  and  seeking  no  new  thing 
or  aught  beside.  And  God  might  answer  him  after  this 
manner,  saying:  If I  have spoken  all  things  to  thee in  My 
Word,  which  is  My  Son,  and  I  have  no  other  word,  what 
answer  can  I  now  make  to  thee,  or  what  can  I  reveal  to 
thee  which  is  greater  than  this?'  Set  thine  eyes  on  Him 
alone,  for  in  Him  I  have  spoken  and  revealed  to  thee  all 
things, and in Him thou shalt find  yet more than that which 
thou  askest  and  desirest.  For  thou  askest  locutions  and 
revelations,  which  are  the  part;  but if thou  set  thine  eyes 
upon  Him,  thou shalt find  the  whole;  for  He is  My com-
plete locution  and answer,  and  He is  all  My vision  and  all 
My  revelation;  so  that  I  have  spoken  to  thee,  answered 
thee,  declared  to  thee  and  revealed  to  thee,  in giving  Him 
to  thee  as  thy  brother,6  companion  and  master,  as  ransom 
and as  reward.  For since  that day when I  descended upon 
Him with  My Spirit on  Mount Tabor, saying:  Hie  est filius 
meus  dilectus,  in  quo  mihi  bene  complacui,  ipsum  audite
6 
(which  is 
to  say:  This  is  My  beloved  Son,  in  Whom  I  am  well 
pleased;  hear ye  Him),  I  have left off all  these  manners of 
teaching  and answering,  and  I  have entrusted  this  to  Him. 
Hear Him;  for I  have no  more faith to reveal,  neither have 
I  any  more  things  to  declare.  For if I  spake  aforetime,7  it 
1  Hebrews  i,  I. 
I  E.p.:  '  ... declares  that  God  has  spoken  so  much  already,  in  this 
[way],  that He has  no  more to desire.' 
a  E.p.:  '.  .  .  or revelation,  would  seem  to  be  committing an  offence 
against God.' 
,  E.p.  omits;  • and  I  have  ... greater than this.' 
6  E.p.:  • for He is the Truth, the Guide and the Life,  and I  have given 
Him to  thee as thy  brother,' etc.  I  S.  Matthew xvii,  5. 
7  E.p.:  '.  .  .  on  Mount  Tabor,  saying:  This  is  My  beloved  Son  in 
Whom I  am well  pleased;  hear ye  Him.  Thou must seek no new manners 
of teaching and answering.  For if I  spake aforetime  .  .  .' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XXII 
175 
was  to  promise  Christ;  and  if they  enquired  of Me,  their 
enquiries
1 
were  directed  to  petitions  for  Christ  and  expec-
tancy  concerning  Him,  in  Whom  they  should  find  every 
good  thing  (as  is  now  set  forth  in  all  the  teaching  of the 
Evangelists  and  the  Apostles);  but  now,  any  who  would 
enquire  of Me  after  t ~ a t   manner,  and  desire  Me  to  speak 
to  him  or reveal  aught  to  him,  would  in  a  sense  be  asking 
Me for  Christ again,  and asking  Me for  more faith,  and be 
lacking  in  faith,  which  has  already  been  given  in  Christ; 
and  therefore  he  would  be  committing  a  great  offence 
against  My  beloved  Son,  for  not  only  would  he  be  lacking 
in faith,  but  he  would  be  obliging  Him again first  of all  to 
become  incarnate  and  pass  through  life  and  death.  Thou 
shalt  find 
2 
naught  to  ask  of  Me,  or  to  desire  of  Me, 
3 
whether revelations  or visions;  consider  this  well,  for  thou 
shalt find  that all  has  been  done  for  thee  and  all  has  been 
given  to thee-yea, and  much  more also-in Him. 
6.  If thou  desirest  Me  to  answer  thee  with  any  word  of 
consolation,  consider  My  Son,  Who  is  subject  to  Me,  and 
bound by love of Me,  and afflicted,« and thou shalt see how 
fully  He  answers  thee.  If thou  desirest  Me  to  expound  to 
thee  secret  things,  or  happenings,  set  thine  eyes  on  Him 
alone,  and thou shalt find  the most secret mysteries,  and the 
wisdom  and  wondrous  things  of God,  which  are  hidden  in 
Him,  even  as  My  Apostle  says:  In  quo  sunt  omnes  thesauri 
sapientiae  et  scientiae  Dei  absconditi.
5 
That  is:  In this  Son of 
God are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge of 
God.  These treasures of  wisdom shall be very much loftier and 
more delectable and more profitable for  thee than the things 
that  thou  desiredst  to  know.  Herein  the  same  Apostle 
gloried,  saying:  That he had  not declared  to  them  that he 
knew anything, 
6 
save Jesus Christ and Him crucified. 
7 
And 
if thou shouldst still  desire other Divine or bodily revelations 
and  visions,  look  also  at  Him  made  man,  and  thou  shalt 
find  therein  more  than  thou  thinkest,  for  the  Apostle  says 
likewise:  In  ipso  habitat omnis plenitudo  Divinitatis corporaliter.
8 
1  Ale.:  'their hopes.' 
Z  E.p.  abbreviates:  '  ... would  in  some  degree  be  Dot  content  with 
Christ,  and  thus  he  would  be  committing  a  great  offence  against  My 
beloved  Son.  If thou  hast Him,  thou shalt find  .  .  .' 
a  E.p.:  'neither to desire.' 
~   E.p.:  '  ... consider  My Son,  obedient  to  Me  and  afflicted  for  love 
of  l \   ~ c   .  .  .'  5  Colossians ii,  3. 
6  E.p.:  '  ... saying:  That  he  knew  no  other thing  .. " 
7  I  Corinthians ii,  2.  •  Colossians ii,  9. 
176  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
Which  signifies:  In Christ  dwelleth  all  the  fullness  of the 
Godhead bodily. 
7.  It is  not fitting,  then,  to  enquire of God  in any super-
natural  manner,  nor  is  it  now  necessary  that  He  should 
answer;  since all the faith  has been given us  in Christ, and 
there is  therefore no more of it to be revealed,  nor will there 
ever  be.
1 
And  he  that  now  desires  to  receive  anything  in 
a  supernatural  manner,  as  we  have  said,S  is,  as  it  were, 
finding  fault  with  God  for  not  having  given  us  a  complete 
sufficiency in His Son.  For, although such a  person may be 
assuming the faith,  and believing it, nevertheless he is  show-
ing a  curiosity which  belongs  to faithlessness.  We  must not 
expect,  then,3  to  receive  instruction,  or  aught  else,  in  a 
supernatural manner,  For, at the moment    ~ n   Christ gave 
up the ghost upon the Cross,  saying,  Consummatum est, , which 
signifies,  'It is  finished,'  an end  was  made,  not  only  of all 
these  forms,  but also  of all  those  other ceremonies  and rites 
of the Old Law.  And so we must now be guided in all things 
by the law of Christ made man, and by that of His  Church, 
and of His ministers,  in a  human and a  visible manner,  and 
by  these  means  we  must  remedy  our  spiritual  weaknesses 
and ignorances, since in these means  we shall find  abundant 
medicine for  them all.  If we leave this  path,  we  are guilty 
not  only  of curiosity,  but  of great  audacity:  nothing  is  to 
be  believed  in a  supernatural  way,  save  only  that which  is 
the  teaching  of  Christ  made  man,  as  I  say,  and  of  His 
ministers, who are men.
6 
So much so that S.  Paul says these 
words:  Quod si Angelus de  coelo  evangeli;:.averit, praeterquam quod 
evangeli;:.avimus  vobis,  anathema  sit.·  That  is  to  say:  If any 
angel  from  Heaven  preach any other  gospel  unto  you  than 
that which  we  men 
7 
preach  unto  you,  let him  be  accursed 
and excommunicate. 
B.  Wherefore, since it is  true that we must ever be guided 
by that which  Christ taught us,  and that all  things  else  are 
1  E.p.:  • since,  having  spoken  in  Christ,  He  leaves  no  more  to  be 
desired.' 
I  E.p.  has:  • in  an  extraordinary  supernatural  manner,'  and  omits: 
, as we  have said.' 
•  E.p.  adds:  • with this curiosity.'  •  S.  John xix, 30. 
•  These two  sentences are based on A and  B.  Ale.  omits several lines. 
apparently by an oversight.  E.p.  has' by the doctrine of Christ' for' by 
the law of Christ made man';  omits' in a  human and a  visible manner' ; 
and  adds' and withdraw from'  to • If we leave.' 
•  Galatians i,  8. 
7  E.p.  omits' men,' and also  • who are men' above. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XXII 
177 
as  nothing,  and  are  not  to  be  believed  unless  they  are  in 
conformity  with  it,  he  acts  vainly  who  still  desires  to  com-
mune with  God after the manner of the Old Law.  Further-
more,  it was  not lawful at that time for  everyone to enquire 
of God,  neither did God answer all men,  but only the priests 
and prophets, from whose mouths it was  that the people had 
to  learn  law  and  doctrine;  and  thus,  if a  man  desired  to 
know  anything  of God,  he  enquired  of Him  through  the 
prophet  or  the  priest  and  not  of  God  Himself.  And,  if 
David  enquired  of  God  at  certain  times  upon  his  own 
account,  this  was  because  he was  a  prophet,  and  yet,  even 
then, he did it not without the priestly vestment, as it is clear 
was  the case in the First  Book of the  Kings,  where  he  said 
to Abimelech the priest:  Applica ad me Ephod1-which ephod 
was  one  of the  chief  of the  approved  priestly  vestments, 
wherewith he spake with God.  But at other times he spake 
with  God  through  the  prophet Nathan and other prophets. 
And  by the mouths of these prophets and of the priests men 
were  to  believe that that which was  said to them came from 
  ~ d   )  they  were  not  to  believe  it  because  of their  own 
opInIOns. 
g.  And  thus,  men  were  not authorized  or empowered  at 
that time  to  give  entire  credence to  what was  said  by  God, 
unless  it  were  approved  by  the  mouths  of  priests  and 
prophets.  For God  is  so  desirous  that the  government and 
direction  of every  man  should  be  undertaken  by  another 
man like  himself, II  and t.hat  every man should  be ruled  and 
governed by natural reason,
3 
that He earnestly desires us  not 
to  give entire credence to the things that  He communicates 
to  us  supernaturally, nor to consider them as  being securely 
and completely confirmed until they pass through this human 
aqueduct  of the  mouth  of man.  And  thus,  whenever  He 
says  or reveals  something  to  a  soul,  He gives  this  same soul 
to  whom  He  says  it  a  kind  of inclination  to  tell  it  to  the 
person  to  whom  it  is  fitting  that it  should  be  told.  Until 
this  has  been  done,  it gives  not entire satisfaction,  because 
the  man has  not  taken it' from  another  man like  himself. 
6 
I  [It  was  to  Abiathar  that  this  was  said.]  I  Kings  [A. V.,  I  Samuel] 
xxiii, 9. 
I  [Po  Silverio  reads:  • like  Himself:  but  the  context seems  to  require 
the interpretation here adopted.) 
•  E.p.  omits:  'and that  ... natural reason.' 
•  A,  B, e.p.:  'in order that the man may take it.' 
I  E.p. adds:  'whom God has set iD  His place.' 
178  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
We see  in  the  book  of the Judges  that the same  thing hap-
pened to the captCl:in  Gideon,  to whom  God had said  many 
times  that  he  should  conquer  the  Midianites,  yet  he  was 
fearful and full of doubts  (for God had allowed him to retain 
that weakness)  until he heard from  the  mouth of men what 
God had said to him.  And it came to pass  that,  when God 
saw  that  he  was  weak,  He  said  to  him:  Rise  up  and  go 
down to the host.  Et cum  audieris quid loquantur,  tunc  conforta-
buntur  manus  tuae,  et  securior  ad  hostium  castra  descendes.
1 
That 
is:  When  thou  hearest  what  men  are  saying  there,  then 
shalt thou receive strength in that which I  have said to thee, 
and  thou  shalt  go  down  with  greater  security  to  the  hosts 
of the enemy.  And so  it came to pass  that,  having heard a 
dream related by one of the  Midianites to another,  wherein 
the  Midianite  had  dreamed  that  Gideon  should  conquer 
them,  he  was  greatly  strengthened,  and  began  to  prepare 
for  the  battle  with  great  joy.  From  this  it  can  be  seen 
that  God  desired  not  that  he  should  feel  confident,  since 
He  gave  him  not  the  assurance  by  supernatural  means 
alone,  but  caused  him  first  to  be  strengthened  by  natural 
means. 
2 
10.  And even  more surprising is  the thing that happened 
in  this  connection  to  Moses,  when  God  had  commanded 
him,  and given him many instructions,  which He confirmed 
with the signs  of the wand changed into a serpent and of the 
leprous  hand,  enjoining him  to  go  and  set  free  the children 
oflsrael.  So weak was he and so uncertain 
3 
about this going 
forth  that,  although  God  was  angered,  he  had  not  the 
courage  to  summon  up  the  complete  faith  necessary  for 
going,4  until  God  encouraged  him  through  his  brother 
Aaron,  saying:  Aaronfrater tuus  Levites,  scio  quod eloquens  sit: 
ecce  ipse  egredietur  in  occursum  tuum,  vidensque  te,  laetabitur  corde. 
Loquere  ad  eum,  et  pone  verba  mea  in  ore  ejus:  et  ego  ero  in  ore 
tuo,  et  in  ore  iliius,  etc.
5 
Which  is  as  though  He  had  said: 
I  know that thy brother Aaron is an eloquent man:  behold, 
8 
he  will  come  forth  to  meet  thee,  and,  when  he  seeth  thee, 
he  will  he  glad in his  heart;  speak  thou  with  him and  teU 
him  all  My  words,  and  I  will  be  in  thy  mouth  and  in his 
1  Judges vii,  II. 
I  E.p.:  • should  feel  confident,  until  he  had  heard  the  same  thing 
by the mouth of others.' 
a  [Lit.,  • and so  dark.']  E.p.:  • and so  hesitating and  uncertain.' 
I  E.p.  has' strength'  for' faith: 
•  Exodus iv,  14-15.  •  Ale.  alone has' behold.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XXII 
179 
mouth, so  that each of you shall believe that which is  in the 
mouth of the other. 
1 
1 I.  Having heard  these  words,  Moses  at once took  cour-
age,  in the hope of finding consolation in the counsel which 
his  brother  was  to  give  him;  for  this  is  a  characteristic  of 
the humble  soul  which  dares  not  to  treat  wIth  God  alone, 
neither  can  be  completely satisfied  without  human  counsel 
and  guidance.  And  this  is  the  will  of God,  foI'  He  draws 
near to  those  who  come  together  to treat concerning truth, 
in order to expound and confirm it in them, upon a  founda-
tion  of natural reason,2 even  as  He said  that  He  would  do 
when  Moses and Aaron should come together-namely, that 
He  would  be in  the  mouth of the  one  and  in  the  mouth  of 
the  other.  Wherefore  He  said  likewise  in  the  Gospel  that 
Ubi  fueTint  duo  vel  tTes  congTegati  in  nomine  meo,  ihi sum  ego  in 
medio eOTum.
3 
That is:  Where two or three are met together, 
in order to consider that which is for  the greater honour and 
glory  of My  name,  there  will  I  be  in  the  midst  of them. 
That is  to say,  I  will  make clear and confirm in their hearts 
the truths of God.  And it is to be observed that He said not: 
Where  there  is  one  alone,  there  will  I  be;  but:  Where 
there  are  at . least  two.  In  this  way  He  showed  that  God 
desires  not that any man by himself alone should believe his 
experiences  to  be of God, '  or should act in conformity with 
them, fi  or trust them,  but rather should  believe  the Church 
and IS  her ministers, for  God will not make clear and confirm 
the  truth in  the  heart of one  who  is  alone,  and thus  such  a 
one  will  be  weak  and cold. 
12.  Hence conles that whereon the Preacher insists,  where 
he  says:  Vae  soli,  quia  cum  ceciderit,  non  hahet                se. 
Si  dormieTint  duo,  fovehuntuT  mutuo;  unus  quomodo  calefiet?  et  si 
quispiam  praevaluerit  contra  unum,  duo  resistent  ei.'  Which  sig-
nifies:  Woe to the man that is  alone, for  when he falleth  he 
hath  none  to  raise  him  up.  If two  sleep  together,  the  one 
shall  give  warmth  to  the  other  (that  is  to  say:  with  the 
warmth  of God  Who  is  between  them 8);  but  one  alone, 
1  E.p.  omits:  • so that  ... the other.' 
•  E.p.  omits:  'upon  ... reason.'  •  S.  Matthew xviii.  20. 
,  [Lit.,  • the things which  he has  to be of God.'] 
•  A,  e.p.:  • neither should  rely  upon them.' 
•  [Lit..  '.  .  .  with  them.  without  the  Church  or  .. .']  E.p.  has: 
, .  .  .  with  them,  without  the  counsel  and  government  of  the  Church 
or  .  .  .'  7  Ecclesiastes iv,  10-12. 
I  The parenthetical words are omitted in A and B. 
R 
180  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
how shall  he be  warm?  That is  to  say:  How shall  he  be 
other  than cold  as  to  the  things  of God?  And if any man 
can fight  and prevail against  one enemy  (that is,  the  devil, 
who  can fight  and prevail  against  those  that  are alone  and 
desire  to  have  God  with  them  in  their  acts),  two  men  to-
gether will  resist  him-that is,  the  disciple  and the  master
1 
who  come  together  to  know  and  d0
2 
the  truth.  And  until 
this  happens  such  a  man  is  habitually  weak  and  feeble  in 
the  truth,  however  often  he  may  have  heard  it from  God; 
so much so that, despite the many occasions on wh.ich S.  Paul 
preached the  Gospel,  which  he said  that he  had heard,  not 
of men,  but of God,  he could  not do otherwise than go and 
consult  with  S.  Peter and  the Apostles,  saying:  Ne  forte  in 
vacuum  currerem,  aut cucurrissem.
3 
Which signifies:  Perchance 
he should  run,  or had run, in vain,' having no assurance of 
himself,  until  man had given  him assurance.  This seems  a 
noteworthy  thing,  0  Paul,  that  He  that  revealed  to  thee 
this  Gospel  should  be  unable likewise  to  reveal  to  thee  the 
assurance  of the  fault  which  thou  mightest  have committed 
in preaching the truth concerning Him. 
6 
13.  Herein  it is  clearly  explained  that  a  man is  to  place 
no  confidence  in  the  things  that  God  reveals,  save  in  the 
way  that  we  are  describing;  for,  even  in  cases  where  a 
person  is  in  possession  of such  certainty,  as  S.  Paul  was 
certain of his  Gospel  (since he had already begun to  preach 
it), yet, although the revelation be of God, man may still err 
with respect to it,6 or in things relating to it.  For, although 
God  reveals  one  thing,  He  reveals  not  always  the  other; 
and  oftentimes  He  reveals  something  without  revealing  the 
way  in  which  it is  to  be  done.  For  ordinarily  He  neither 
works  nor  reveals  anything  that  can  be  accomplished  by 
human counsel and industry, although He may commune for 
a  long time very lovingly with the soul.  Of this S.  Paul was 
very  well  aware,  since,  as  we  say,  although  he  knew  that 
the  Gospel  was  revealed  to  him  by  God,  he  went  to  take 
counsel with S.  Peter.  And we see this clearly in the Exodus, 
where  God  had communed most familiarly  with  Moses,  yet 
had never given  him  that salutary counsel  which  was  given 
him  by  his  father-in-law  Jethro-that  is  to  say,  that  he 
1  (i.e.,  the penitent and the confessor or director.] 
•  E.p.:  • and work.'  I  Galatians ii,  2. 
•  E.p.  omits the rest of this paragraph. 
I  A,  B:  • the truth of the Lord.' 
•  E.p.:  • may still err in the execution of it.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XXII 
should  choose  other judges to assist  him,  so  that the people 
should not be waiting from morning till night.
1 
This counsel 
God  approved,  though  it was  not  He  that  had  given  it to 
him,  for  it was  a  thing that fell  within  the limits  of human 
judgement and reason.  With respect to  Divine visions  and 
revelations  and locutions,  God is  not wont  to  reveal  them,-
for  He  is  ever  desirous  that  men  should  make  such  use  of 
their  own  reason  as  is  possible,  and all  such  things  have  to 
be  governed  by reason, a save  those  that are of faith,  which 
transcend  all judgement and reason,  although  these are not 
contrary to faith.' 
14.  Wherefore let none think that, because it may be true 
that God  and the saints commune with him familiarly about 
many things,  they will  of necessity explain to him the faults 
that he commits with regard  to anything, if it is  possible for 
him to  recognize  these faults  by other means.  He can have 
no  assurance  about  this;  for,  as  we  read  came  to  pass  in 
the  Acts  of the  Apostles,  S.  Peter,  though  a  prince  of the 
Church, who was taught directly by God, went astray never-
theless  with  respect  to  a  certain  ceremony  that  was  in  use 
among the people,  and God was  silent.  So far  did he stray 
that  S.  Paul  reproved  him,  as  he  affirms,  saying:  Cum 
vidissem,  quod  non  recte  ad  veritatem  Evangelii  ambularent,  dixi 
coram  omnibus:  Si  tu  judaeus  cum  sis,  gentiliter  vivis,  quomodo 
Gentes  cogis               Which  signifies:  When I  saw  (says 
S.  Paul)  that  the  disciples  walked  not  uprightly  according 
to  the  truth  of the  Gospel,  I  said  to  Peter  before them all  : 
If thou,  being a Jew,  as  thou  art,  livest  after the  manner of 
the Gentiles, how feignest thou to force the Gentiles to follow 
the Jews?  And God reproved not S.  Peter Himself for  this 
fault,  for  that  simulation  was  a  thing  that  had  to  do  with 
reason,  and  it  was  possible  for  him  to  know  it  by  rational 
means.
S 
15.  Wherefore  on the  day of judgement God will  punish 
for their many faults and sins  many souls with whom He may 
quite habitually have held converse here below, and to whom 
1  Exodus xviii,  21-2. 
I  E.p.:  'for  it  was  a  thing  that  pertained  to  human  counsel  and 
judgement.  And  thus  God  is  not  wont  to  reveal  all  things  that  may 
pertain  to  human  counsel  and  reason  with  respect  to  the  visions  and 
locutions of God  .  .  .' 
•  E.p.  omits:  • and  all such  ... by reason.' 
,  A,  B,  e.p.:  'they are not contrary to reason and judgement.' 
•  Galatians ii, 14. 
•  E.p.:  • for  it was a  thing that he might know by ordinary means.' 
182  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
He may have given much light and virtue;  for,  as  to  those 
things  that  they  have  known  that  they  ought  to  do,  they 
have  been  neglectful,  and  have  relied  upon  that  converse 
that they have  had with  God  and  upon  the  virtue  that He 
has  given  them.!  And  thus,  as  Christ
2 
says  in  the  Gospel, 
they will marvel at that time, saying:  Domine,  Domine,  nonne 
in  nomine  tuo proplzetavimus,  et  in  nomine  tuo  daemonia  ejecimus,  et 
in  nomine  tuo  virtutes  multas fecimus?3  That is:  Lord,  Lord, 
were  the  prophecies  that Thou spakest  to  us  perchance  not 
prophesied  in  Thy name?  And  in  Thy name  cast  we  not 
out  devils?'  And  in  Thy  name  performed  we  not  many 
miracles  and  mighty  works?  And  the  Lord  says  that  He 
will  answer them in these  words:  Et tunc  confitehor  illis,  quia 
numquam novi vos:  discedite  a me omnes qui operamini iniquitatem. 5 
That is  to say:  Depart from  Me,  ye  workers of iniquity, for 
I  never knew you.  Of the number of these was  the prophet 
Balaam and others like to him, who, though God spake with 
them  and  gave  them  thanks,8  were  sinners.  But  the  Lord 
will  likewise  give  their  proportion  of reproof to  His  friends 
and chosen  ones,  with  whom He communed familiarly here 
below, as to the faults and sins of neglect that they may have 
committed;  whereof there  was  no  need  that  God  should 
Himself  warn  them,  since  He  had  already  warned  them 
through the natural reason and law that He had given to them. 
16.  In  concluding  this  part  of my  subject,  therefore,  I 
say,  and I  infer from  what has  been said,  that anything,  of 
whatsoever  kind,  received  by  the  soul  through  supernatural 
means,  clearly  and  plainly,  entirely  and  simply,7  must  at 
once  be  communicated  to  the  spiritual  director.  For 
although  there  may  seem  no  reason  to  speak  of it,  or  to 
spend time  upon it,  yet the soul  acts safely,  as  we  have said, 
if it casts it aside and pays  no  heed  to it,  neither desires  it.
8 
Especially is  this so when it is  a  question of visions or revela-
tions  or  other  supernatural  communications,  which  are 
either  quite  clear or very nearly so.  It is  very  necessary  to 
give  an  account  of them  all,  although  it  may  seem  to  the 
1  A,  B, e.p.  add:  'and on that account  being neglectful.' 
I  So Alc.  A,  B:  • as Christ our Lord.'  E.p.:  • as our Lord  Jesus.' 
•  S.  Matthew vii, 22. 
•  Alc.  omits  this  sentence.  E.p.  adds:  • Indeed  we  have  cast  out 
devils.'  I  S.  Matthew vii, 23. 
•  E.p.  omits:  • and gave them thanks.' 
,  E.p.  adds:  • with aU  truth.' 
•  E.p.  omits:  • neither desires it.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XXII 
soul  that there is  no reason for  so  doing.  And this for  three 
causes. 
1 
First, because, as  we have said, God communicates 
many  things,  the effect,  power,2  light  and  security whereof 
He confirms  not  wholly in the soul,  until,  as  we  have  said, 
the soul consults him whom God has given to it as a spiritual 
judge,  which  is  he  that  has  the  power  to  bind  or  to  loose, 
a.nd  to approve or to  blame,  as  we  have shown  by means  of 
the  passages  quoted  above; 3  and  we  can  show  it  daily  by 
experience,  for  we  see  humble  souls  to  whom  these  things 
come  to  pass,  and  who,  after  discussing  them  with  fit  per-
sons,  experience  a  new  satisfaction,  power,  light  and  assur-
ance;  so  much  so  that  to  some  it  seems  that  they  belong 
not  to  them,  neither  have  they  'possession  of them,  until 
they communicate them to the director,  and  that then they 
are given  to them anew. 
17.  The  second  cause  is  that  the  soul  habitually  needs 
instruction  upon  the  things  that come  to  pass  within  it,  in 
order to be directed  by that means  to spiritual poverty and 
detachment,  which is  the dark night.  For if this instruction 
is  being  withheld  from  it-even  when  the  soul  desires  not 
such  things-it will  gradually,  without realizing it,  become 
callous' as  it treads  the spiritual road,  and draw near again 
to  the road  of sense;  it is  partly with  respect  to  this  that 
these  distinct things happen. 
6 
18.  The third cause is that, for the sake of the humility and 
submission  and  mortification  of the  soul,  it is  well  to  relate 
everything  to  the  director,  although  he  make
8 
no  account 
of it all and consider it as of no importance.  There are some 
souls  who  greatly  dislike  speaking  of such  things,  because 
they  think  them  to  be  of no  importance.  And  they know 
not  how  the  person  to  whom  they  are  to  relate  them  will 
receive  them;  which  is  lack  of humility,  for  which  reason 
it  is  needful  to  submit  themselves  and  relate  these  things. 
And  there  are  others  who  are  very  timid  in  relating  them, 
because they see not why they should have these experiences, 
which seem to belong to saints, as  well  as other things which 
1  So  Alc.  B  has:  'three reasons';  A,  e.p.:  • three things.' 
•  A,  B:  • the effort,  effect  .  .  : 
•  A, B  omit:  • by means of the passages quoted  above: 
,  A,  e.p.  read  • rude'  for' callous.'  [The  change  is  a  slight  one: 
enrudeciendo  for endureciendo.] 
6  E.p. omits:  • it is partly  .•. happen.' 
•  [The Spanish phrase equally admits the reading:  • although the soul 
make.'] 
184  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
they  are  sorry  to  have  to  describe;  for  which  cause  they 
think there is  no reason to speak of them because they make 
no  account  of them;  but for  this  very  reason  it is  well  for 
them  to  mortify  themselves  and  relate  them,  until  in  time 
they  come  to  speak  of  them  humbly,  unaffectedly,  sub-
missively and readily,  and after this  they will  always find  it 
easy to do so. 
19.  But,  with  respect  to  what  has  been  said,  it  must  be 
pointed  out  that,  although  we  have  insisted  so  much 
1 
that 
such  things  should  be  set  aside,  and  that confessors  should 
not incite their penitents to discuss  them,  it is  not well  that 
spiritual fathers  should show displeasure in regard to them, 
or should seek to avoid them or despise  them,  or give  their 
penitents cause to show reserve and not to venture to speak 
of them,  for  it  would  be  the  means  of causing  them  many 
inconveniences  if the  door  were  closed  upon  their  relating 
them.  For, since this is a  means and mannerS whereby God 
guides  such  souls,  there is  no  reason for  thinking ill of it or 
for  being alarmed  or offended  by it;  but rather there  is  a 
reason for proceeding
8 
very quietly and kindly, for encourag-
ing these souls  and for giving them an opportunity to speak 
of these things;  if necessary, they must be exhorted to speak; 
and,  in view  of the  difficulty  that some  souls  experience in 
describing  these  things,  this  is  sometimes  quite  essential. 
Let confessors direct their penitents in faith, instructing them 
frankly to turn away their eyes from all such things, teaching 
them how to void  the desire and the spirit of them that they 
may  make  progress,  and  giving  them  to  understand  how 
much more precious in God's sight is  one work or act of the 
will  performed in  charity than  are all  the visions  and  com-
munications' that they may receive from Heaven, since these 
imply neither merit nor demerit. Ii  Let them point out, too, 
that many souls who have known nothing of such things have 
made incomparably greater progress  than  others  who  have 
received  many of them. 
1  B:  • so  rigorously.' 
•  E.p.:  • For, as we have said, this is a  means;  and, since it is a  means 
and manner  ...  ' 
I  None of "the  MSS.  have' proceeding,' which  e.p.  supplies. 
•  E.p.:  • than  are all  the visions and  revelations.'  A,  B:  • than  are 
all  the visions and revelations and communications.' 
•  E.p.  omits:  'since these  ... demerit.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XXIII  185 
CHAPTER  XXIII 
Which  hegins to  treat  of tM  apprehensions of tM understanding  that 
come  in  a purely spiritual way,  and describes  their nature. 
I.  Although  the  instruction  that  we  have  given  with 
respect  to  the  apprehensions  of the  understanding  which 
come  by  means  of sense  is  somewhat brief,  in comparison 
with  what might be said  about them,  I  have not desired  to 
write  of them  at greater  length;  I  believe,  indeed,  that  I 
have  ajready  been  too  lengthy  for  the  fulfilment  of  my 
present intention, which is to dic;encumber the understanding 
of them and direct the soul into the night of faith.  Where-
fore  we  shall  now  begin  to treat of those  other four  appre-
hensions of the understanding, which, as we said in the tenth 
chapter,1  are purely spiritual-namely,  visions,  revelations, 
locutions  and  spiritual  feelings.  These  we  call  purely 
spiritual, for they do not  (as  do those that are corporeal and 
imaginary)  communicate  themselves  to  the  understanding 
by way of the corporeal senses;  but,  without the interven-
tion of any inward or outward corporeal sense,  they present 
themselves  to  the  understanding,  clearly  and  distinctly,  by 
supernatural  means,  passively-that  is  to  say,  without  the 
commission  of any act or operation on the  part of the soul 
itself,  at the least actively.s 
2.  It must be known,  then,  that, speaking broadly and in 
general  terms,  all  these  four  apprehensions  may  be  called 
visions  of the soul;  for  we  can speak  of the  understanding 
of the soul as  of its signt.  And since all these apprehensions 
are intelligible  to  the understanding,  they are described,  in 
a  spiritual sense,  as  ' visible.'  And thus the kinds  of intelli-
gence  that are formed  in the  understanding  may  be  called 
intellectual visions.  Now,  since  all  the objects  of the  other 
senses,  which  are  all  that can  be  seen,  and  all  that can  be 
heard,  and  all  that  can  be  smelt  and  tasted  and  touched, 
are objects of the understanding in so far as  they fall  within 
the limits of truth or falsehood,  it follows  that, just as  to the 
eyes  of the. body  all  that  is  visible  in  a  bodily  way  causes 
bodily  vision,  even  so,  to  the  spiritual  eyes  of the  soul-
namely,  the  understanding-·all  that  is  intelligible  causes 
1  It is in Chapter x  (and not in viii, as is said in A.  Band e.p.)  that the 
author treats of these spiritual apprehensions. 
•  E.p.:  • actively and  as on its own account: 
186  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
spiritual vision;  for,  as  we have said,  for  the soul to under-
stand  is  for  it  to  see.  And  thus,  speaking  generally,  these 
four  apprehensions  may  be  called  visions.  This  cannot  be 
said,  however,  of the  other  senses,  for  no  one  of them  is 
capable,  as  such,  of receiving  the object of another one.  . 
3.  But,  since  these  apprehensions  present  themselves  to 
the soul  in the same  way as  they do  to  the  various senses,  it 
follows  that,  speaking  properly  and  specifically,  we  shall 
describe  that which  the understanding receives  by means  of 
sight  (because  it can see  things  spiritually,  even  as  the  eyes 
can see  bodily)  as  a  vision;  and  that  which  it receives  by 
apprehending  and  understanding  new  things  (as  it  were 
through  the  hearing,  when  it  hears  things  that  are  not 
heard 
1
)  we  describe  as  revelation;  and  that  which  it 
receives  by  means  of hearing  we  call  locution;  and  that 
which  it receives  through  the  other senses,  such  as  the  per-
ception  of sweet  spiritual  fragrance,  and  of spiritual  taste 
and  of spiritual  delight  which  the  soul  may  enjoy  super-
naturally,  we  call spiritual feelings.  From all these the soul 
derives  spiritual  vision  or understanding,  without  any  kind 
of apprehension concerning form,  image or figure  of natural 
fancy  or imagination 2;  these  things  are  communicated  to 
the soul directly  by supernatural  means  and a  supernatural 
process. 
4.  Of these,  likewise  (even  as  we  said  of the  other imag-
inary corporeal apprehensions), it is well that we should here 
disencumber the understanding,  leading and directing it by 
means of them into the spiritual night of faith,  to the Divine 
and substantial  union of God 3.;  lest,  by letting such  things 
encumber and stultify it, it should be hindered upon the road 
to solitude and detachment from all things, which is necessary 
to  that end.  For,  although  these  apprehensions  are nobler 
and more profitable and much more certain than those which 
are corporeal  and imaginary,  inasmuch  as  they are interior 
and  purely spiritual,  and  are  those  which  the devil  is  least 
able to counterfeit, since they are communicated to the soul 
more  purely  and  subtly  without  any effort  of its  own  or of 
the  imagination,  at  least  actively,'  yet  not  only  may  the 
understanding  be encumbered  by them upon this  road,  but 
1  E.p. omits the words in parenthesis. 
J  E.p.  adds:  • whence it may derive them.' 
I  The  1630 editioD  emends:  • of the love of God: 
• E.p. adds:  • aDd  OD  its OWD             
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XXIV 
it  is  possible  for  it  to  be  greatly  dec.eived  through  its  own 
imprudence. 
5.  And  although,  in  one  sense,  we  might  conclude  with 
these  four  kinds  of apprehension,  by  treating  them  all  to-
gether and giving advice which holds good of them all, as we 
have  given  concerning  all  the  others-namely,  that  they 
should  neither  be  desirerl  nor  aspired  to-yet,  since  we 
shall presently throw more light upon the way in which this 
is  to  be done,  and certain  things  will  be  said  in connection 
with  them,  it  will  be  well  to  treat  of each  one  of them  in 
particular, and thus we shall now speak of the first apprehen-
sions,  which  are intellectual  or spiritual  visions. 
CHAPTER  XXIV 
Which  treats  of  two  kinds  of  spiritual  vlszon  that  come 
supernaturally. 
I.  Speaking  now  strictly  of  those  visions  which  are 
spiritual,  and  are  received  without  the  intervention  of any 
bodily sense, I  say that there are two kinds of vision that may 
come  to  the  understanding;  the  one  kind  is  of corporeal 
substances;  the  other,  of  incorporeal  or  separated  sub-
stances.  The corporeal  visions  have  respect  to  all  material 
things  that are  in  Heaven  and  on  earth,  which  the  soul  is 
able to see,  even while it is  still in the body,  by the aid of a 
certain supernatural illumination, derived from God, where-
in it is  able to see all absent things in Heaven and on earth, 
1 
even as S. John saw,  as we read in the twenty-first chapter of 
the Apocalypse, where he describes and relates the excellence 
of the  celestial Jerusalem,  which  he saw  in  Heaven.  Even 
so,  again,  we read of S.  Benedict that in a  spiritual vision he 
saw  the  whole  world. 
3 
This  vision,  says  S.  Thomas  in  the 
first  of his  Quodlibets,  was  in the light  that is  derived  from 
above,  as  we  have said. 
2.  The other visions,  which are of incorporeal substances, 
cannot  be  seen  by  the  aid  of  this  derived  illumination, 
whereof we  are  here  speaking,  but  only  by  another  and  a 
higher illumination which is called die illumination of glory. 
And  thus  these  visions  of incorporeal  substances,  such  as 
1  The remainder of this paragraph is omitted by e.p. 
S  S.  Gregory:  Dial.,  Bk.  II,  Chap.  xxxv.  • Omnis  etiam  mundus 
velut sub uno solis radio collectus, ante oculos eius adductus est: 
188  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
angels  and  SOUIS,l  are  not  of this  life,  neither  can  they  be 
seen in the  mortal  body;  for,  if God  were  pleased  to  com-
municate  them  to  the  soul,  in  essence  as  they  are,  the soul 
would  at once go forth  from  the flesh  and  would  be loosed 
from  this  mortal  life.  For  this  reason  God  said  to  Moses, 
when he entreated Him to show him His Essence  :  Non vitftbit 
me  homo,  et  vivet.
2 
That is:  Man  shall  not  see  Me  and  be 
able  to  remain  alive.  Wherefore,  when  the  children  of 
Israel  thought that they were to see  God,  or had seen  Him, 
or  some  angel,  they  feared  death,  as  we  read  in  Exodus, 
where,  fearing  these  things,  they  said:  Non  loquatur  nobis 
Dominus,  ne  forte  moriamur.
3 
As  if they  had  said:  Let  not 
God  communicate  Himself to  us  openly,  lest  we  die.  And 
likewise  in  the Judges,  Manoah,  father  of Samson,  thought 
that he and his wife had seen in essence the angel who spake 
with them (and who had appeared  to them in  the form  ofa 
most beautiful man)  and he said to his wife:  Morte moriemur, 
quia  vidimus  Dominum.'  Which  signifies:  We  shall  die, 
because  we  have seen  the Lord.
6 
3.  And  thus  these  visions  belong  not  to  this  life,  save 
occasionally  and  fleetingly,  when,  making  an  exception  to 
the conditions of our natural life,  God so  allows it.  At such 
times  He totally  withdraws  the spirit from  this  life,  and  the 
1  The  Toledo  edition  reads:  'such  as  the  Divine  Being.  angels, 
Bouls.'  This  is  based  on  an  erroneous  reading  attributed  incorrectly  to 
Andres  de  la  Encarnacion,  who  does  not  say.  in  fact.  that  any  MS.  so 
varies  the  text.  but  that  it  might  be  so  varied  in  accordance  with  the 
context.  No MS.  has:  • the Divine  Being.' 
I  Exodus xxxiii, 20.  I  Exodus xx, 19.  I  Judges xiii, 22. 
•  E.p.  abbreviates  this  long  paragraph  thus:  'The  other  visions, 
which are of incorporeal substances, dema.nd another and a higher illumina-
tion;  and thus these visions of incorporeal substances, such as angels and 
souls,  are not very ordinary, nor proper to this life;  still less is  that of the 
Divine  Essence,  which  is  proper  to  the  Blessed  in  Heaven,  save  that  it 
may  be communicated  to a  soulll.eetingly  and  as in  passing.'  The next 
two  paragraphs  are  omitted  from  e.p.  P.  Jeronimo  de  San  Jose,  in  the 
edition  of  1630,  copies  from  e.p.  the  lines  given  in  this  note  above.  and 
then continues:  • [save  when]  God  so allows,  in spite of the condition  of 
our natural life,  withdrawing the  spirit from  it occasionally,  as  happened 
to  the apostle  Saint  Paul.  when  he says  that he  saw  unspeakable  secrets 
in  the  third  heaven.'  The  adjustments  made  by  P.  Salablanca  and 
amplified  by  P.  Jer6nimo in  the  rest  of  the  paragraph  [ef.  notes  below] 
follow the most usual scholastic doctrine.  Among the Discalced Carmelite 
writers who deal most fully and competently with this doctrine of spiritual 
visions  are  the  authors  of  the  Cursus  Theologim  Mysticm,  Vol.  IV. 
Disp.  xx,  xxi;  Felipe  de  la  Santisima  Trinidad:  Summa  Thcologim 
MysticfIJ,  Pt.  II,  Tract.  III,  Disc.  iv:  MCduia  Mistica,  Tract.  VI.  S. 
Thomas  (I p., q.  88,  a.  I)  says that we  cannot quidditative know separated 
su bstances. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XXIV  J8g 
natural  functions  of the  body  are  supplied  by  His  favour. 
This is  why,  at the time when  it is  thought that S.  Paul saw 
these (namely, the incorporeal substances in the third heaven) 
that saint says  :1  Sive  in  corpore,  nescio,  sive  extra  corpus,  nescio, 
Deus scit. a  That is,  he was enraptured, and of that which he 
saw he says that he knows  not if it was  in the body or out of 
the body, but that God knows.  Herein it is  clearly seen that 
the limits of natural means of communication 
8 
were passed, 
and that this was  the  work of God.  Likewise,  it is  believed 
that God showed His Essence to Moses, for we read that God 
said  to  him  that He would set  him in the cleft  of the  rock, 
and  would  protect  him,  by  covering  him  with  His  right 
hand,  and  protecting  him  so  that  he  should  not  die  when 
His  glory passed;  the which  glory  passed  indeed,  and  was 
shown  to  him  fleetingly,  and  the  natural  life  of Moses  was 
protected by the right hand of God.·  But these visions that 
were so substantial-like that ofS. Paul and Moses, and that 
of our father
6 
Elijah,  when he covered his face  at the gentle 
whisper of God-although they  are fleeting,  occur only very 
rarely-indeed,  hardly  ever-and  to  very  f e ~     for  God 
performs  such  a  thing  in  those  that  are  spiritually  most 
strongS in the Church and the law of God, as were the three 
men named above. 
4.  But,  although  these  visions  of  spiritual  substances 
cannot 
7 
be  unveiled  and  be  clearly  seen  in  this  life  by  the 
understanding,  they  can  nevertheless  be  perceived  in  the 
substance of the soul,  with  the sweetest  touches and unions, 
all  of which  belongs  to  spiritual  feelings,  whereof,  with  the 
Divine favour,  we shall treat presently;  for our pen is  being 
directed  and guided  to  these-namely,  to the  Divine  bond 
and  union  of the  soul  with  Divine  Substance.  We  shall 
speak ofthis when we treat ofthe dark and confused mystical 
understanding  which  remains  to  be  described,  wherein  we 
shall show how, by means of this dark and loving knowledge, 
God is  united  with  the  soul  in a  lofty  and Divine  degree; 
8 
for,  after  some  manner,  this  dark  and  loving  knowledge, 
1  Ale.  omits:  • namely  .  .  .  saint says.'  •  2  Corinthians xii,  2. 
•  A,  B:  • that the limits of life.'  '  Exodus xxxiii,  22. 
I  Only Ale.  and the edition of 1630 have:  • our father.' 
•  The editi.:>n  of 1630  omits' most.'  A,  B  [by changing one letter and 
writing fuentes  for fuertes]  read:  • that are spiritual fountains.' 
,  The edition of 1630 adds:  • according to the ordinary law.' 
•  This  description  the  Saint  probably  accomplished.  or  intended  to 
accomplish,  in  his  commentaries  on  the  last  five  stanzas  of  the  Dar" 
NiB"'.  which  have not come down to U5. 
190  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
which is  faith,  serves as a  means to Divine union in this life, 
even as,  in the next life,  the light of glory serves  as  an inter-
mediary to the clear vision of God. 
5.  Let  us,  then,  now  treat  of  the  visions  of  corporeal 
substances,  received spiritually in the soul,  which come after 
the maimer of bodily visions.  For, just as the eyes see bodily 
visions  by  means  of natural  light,  even  so  does  the  soul, 
through  the  understanding,  by  means  of  supernaturally 
derived light,  as  we  have said,  see  those same natural things 
inwardly, together with others, as  God wills;  the difference 
. between  the  two  kinds  of vision  is  only  in  the  mode  and 
manner  of them.  For spiritual  and  intellectual  visions  are 
much  clearer  and  subtler  than  those  which  pertain  to  the 
body.  For, when God is  pleased  to  grant this favour  to  the 
soul,  He communicates to it that supernatural light whereof 
we  speak,  wherein  the soul  sees  the  things  that  God  wills  it 
to see,  easily and most clearly, whether they be of Heaven or 
of earth, and the absence or presence of them is  no hindrance 
to the vision.  And it is  at times as  though a  door were most 
clearly opened before it, through which the soul sees  a light, 
after the manner of a lightning flash,  which, on a  dark night, 
reveals  things  suddenly,  and  causes  them  to  be clearly  and 
distinctly  seen,  and  then leaves  them  in darkness,  although 
the  forms  and  figures  of them  remain  in  the  fancy.  This 
comes to pass much more perfectly in the soul, 1  because those 
things  that the spirit has seen in that light remain impressed 
upon it in such  a  way  that whensoever it observes
2 
them it 
sees them in itself as it saw  them before ;3  even as in a mirror 
the forms  that are in it
4 
are seen  whensoever a  man looks  in 
it,  and in  such  a  way that those forms  of the things  that  he 
has  seen  are  never  wholly  removed  from  his  soul,  although 
in course of time they  become somewhat remote.'; 
6.  The  effect  which  these  visions  produce  in  the  soul  is 
that of quiet,  illumination, joy like  that  of glory,  sweetness, 
purity  and  love,  humility  and  inclination  or  elevation  of 
the  spirit  in  God;  sometimes  more  so,  at other times  less  ; 
with  sometimes  more  of one  thing,  at other  times  more  of 
another;  according  to  the spirit wherein  they are received 
and according as  God  wills. 
1  E.p.  omits the rest of  the paragraph. 
S  •  Whensoever, enlightened by God, it observes  .. .'  reads the edition 
of  1630.  I  A:  • it sees  them even as it saw them  before.' 
« Edition of  1630:  • that are represented in it.' 
I  Ibid.:  • more remote.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XXIV 
7.  The devil likewise can cause
1 
these visions,  by means of 
a  certain  natural  light,:I  whereby  he  brings  things  clearly 
before the mind,  through spiritual suggestion,  whether they 
be present or absent.  There is  that  passage in S.  Matthew, 
which  says  of the  devil  and  Christ:  Ostendit  omnia  regna 
mundi, et gloriam eorum.
3 
That is  to say:  He showed Him all 
the kingdoms of the world and the glory of them.  Concern-
ing this certain doctors say that he did it by spiritual sugges-
tion, '  for it was  not possible to  make Him see so  much with 
the  bodily  eyes  as  all  the  kingdoms  of the  world  and  the 
glory of them.  But there is  much difference  between  these 
visions that are caused by the devil and those that are of God. 
For  the  effects  produced  in  the  soul  by  the  devil's  visions 
are  not  like  those  produced  by  good  visions;  the  former 
cause  aridity  of spirit  as  to  communion  with  God  and  an 
inclination  to esteem  oneself highly,  and  to  receive  and  set 
store  by  the visions  aforesaid,  and in no wise  do  they cause 
the gentleness  of humility and love  of God.  Neither do the 
forms  of such  visions  remain  impressed  upon  the  soul  with 
that sweet clearness  of the others;  nor do they last,  but are 
quickly  effaced  from  the  soul,  save  when  the  soul  greatly 
esteems them, in which case its high esteem of itself causes it 
to  recall  them  naturally,  but  with  great  aridity  of spirit, 
and  without  producing  that  effect  of  love  and  humility 
which is  caused  by good  visions  when  the soul recalls  them. 
8.  These visions,  inasmuch  as  they are of creatures,  with 
whom  God  has  no  proportion5  or  essential  conformity, 
cannot  serve  the  understanding  as  a  proximate  means  to 
union 
6 
with  God.  And thus  the soul  must conduct itself in 
a  purely  negative  way  concerning  them,  as  in  the  other 
things  that we  have described,  in order that it may progress 
by  the  proximate  means-namely,  by  faith.  Wherefore 
the soul  must make  no store or treasure of the forms of such 
visions  as  remain  imprinted  upon  it,  neither  must  it  lean 
upon them;  for  to do this would be to be encumbered with 
those  forms,  images  and  persons  which  remain  inwardly 
within it,  and thus  the soul would  not progress  toward  God 
1  Edition of  1630:  . can cause or imitate: 
2  E.p.  a.dds:  .  making  use  of the fancy.' 
3  S.  Matthew iv,  8.  Thus the Codices.  E.p.  omits the Latin text. 
,  E.p.:  '  ... by  intelligible  spiritual  suggestion:  On  this  passage, 
cf. Cornelius a  Lapide (Commentaria in Matthceum,  Cap  IV)  and S.  Thomas 
(III p.,  q.  -p, ad 3). 
I  A,  B:  . no communication:  I  A,  B:  • to essential union: 
192  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
by denying itself all things.  For,  even if these forms  should 
be  permanently  set  before  the  soul,  they  will  not  greatly 
hinder this  progress,  if the soul  has  no  desire  to  set store  by 
them.  For, although it is true that the remembrance of them 
impels  the soul  to  a  certain love  of God and contemplation, 
yet  it is  impelled  and exalted much more by pure faith  and 
dark detachment from them all,  without its  knowing how or 
whence they come to it.  And thus it will  come to pass  that 
the soul will  go  forward,  enkindled with yearnings of purest 
love  for  God,  without  knowing  whence  they come  to  it,  or 
on  what  foundations  they  have  rested.  The  fact  is  that, 
while  faith  has  been  acquiring  an  ever  deeper  root  and 
foundation in the soul by means of that emptiness and dark-
ness  and detachment from all things, or spiritual poverty, all 
of which may be spoken of as  one and the same thing,  at the 
same time the charity of God has become rooted and founded 
in  the  soul  ever  more  truly.  Wherefore,  the  more  the  soul 
desires  obscurity  and  annihilation  with  respect  to  all  the 
outward or inward things  that it is  capable of receiving,  the 
more deeply founded is it in faith,  and, consequently, in love 
and  hope,  since  these  three  theological  virtues  go  together 
in one.
1 
9  But  at  certain  times  the  soul  neither  understands  this 
love nor feels  it;  for this love has not its basis in sense and in 
tender feelings,  but in the soul, in fortitude and in a courage 
and daring  that are  greater  than  they  were  before,  though 
sometimes  it  overflows  into  sense  and  produces  gentle  and 
tender feelings.  Wherefore,  in order  to  attain  to  that love, 
joy and delight which such visions produce and cause in the 
soul,  it  is  fitting  that  the  soul  should  have  fortitude  and 
mortification  and  love
i 
that  it  may  desire  to  remain  in 
emptiness  and  darkness  as  to  all  things,  and  to  build  its 
love and joy upon that which it neither sees nor feels,  neither 
can see  nor feel  in this life,  which is  God,  Who is incompre-
hensible and above all things.  It befits  us,  then,  to journey 
to  Him  by  denying  ourselves  everything.  For  otherwise, 
even if the soul be so  wise,  humble and strong  that the devil 
cannot deceive  it by visions  or cause it to fall  into some sin 
of presumption,  as  he  is  wont  to  do,  he  will  not  allow  it 
to  make  progress;  for  he  sets  obstacles  in  the  way  of 
spiritual detachment and poverty of spirit and emptiness  in 
I  E.p.  omits:  'since  ... in one.' 
•  E.p. omits:  'and love.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XXV 
[93 
faith,  which  is  the  essential  condition  for  union  of the  soul 
with  God. 
10.  And  as  the  same  teaching  that  we  gave  in  the  nine-
teenth  and  twentieth  chapters,  concerning  supernatural 
apprehensions  and  visions  of sense,  holds  good  for  these 
visions,  we  shall  not  spend  more  time  here  in  describing 
them. 
1 
CHAPTER  XXV 
Which  treats  of revelations,  descrihing  their  nature  and  making  a 
distinction  hetween  them. 
I.  According  to  the  order  which  we  are  here  following, 
we  have next  to  treat of the second  kind  of spiritual appre-
hension,  which  we  have described above as  revelations,  and 
which  properly  belongs I  to  the  spirit  of prophecy.  With 
respect  to  this,  it  must  first  be  known  that  revelation  is 
naught else  than the discovery  of some hidden  truth or the 
manifestation  of some  secret  or  mystery.  Thus  God  may 
cause the soul  to  understand something,  by making clear to 
the understanding the truth concerning it, or He may reveal 
to  the  soul  certain  things  which  He  is  doing  or  proposes 
to  do. 
2.  Accordingly,  we  may  say  that  there  are  two  kinds  of 
revelation.  The first  is  the  revealing  to  the  understanding 
of truths  which  are  properly  called  intellectual  knowledge 
or intelligence;  the  second  is  the  manifestation  of secrets, 
which  are  called  revelations  with  more  propriety  than  the 
others.  For  the  first  kind  cannot  strictly  be  called  revela-
tions,  since  they  consist  in  this,  that  God  causes  the soul  to 
understand  naked  truths,  not only with  respect  to temporal 
things,  but likewise with respect to spiritual things,  revealing 
them to the soul clearly and openly.  These I  have desired to 
treat  under  the  heading  of revelations:  first,  because  they 
have  much kinship  and similarity with  them:  secondly,  in 
order not  to  multiply  many  distinctive  terms. 
3.  According  to  this  method,  then,  we  shall  now  be  well 
able  to  divide  revelations  into  two  kinds  of apprehension. 
The one  kind  we  shall  call intellectual  knowledge,  and  the 
other,  the  manifestation  of secrets  and  hidden  mysteries  of 
I  A,  B, e.p.:  • in treating them more extensively.' 
•  E.p.:  • some of which properly belong.' 
194  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
God.  With  these  we  shall  conclude  in  two  chapters  as 
briefly  as  we  may,  and  in  this  chapter  following  we  shall 
treat of the first.1 
CHAPTER  XXVI 
Which  treats  of the  intuition  of naked  truths  in  the  understanding, 
explaining  how  they  are  of two  kinds  and  how  the  soul  is  to 
conduct  itself with  respect  to  them. 
I.  In  order  to  speak  properly  of this  intuition  of naked 
truths  which  is  conveyed  to  the  understanding, .the  writer 
would need  God to take his  hand and to  guide his  pen;  for 
know,  dear reader, that to describe what they are to the soul 
in themselves surpasses  all  words.  But,  since  I  speak not of 
them here of set purpose,  but only that through them I  may 
instruct the soul  and direct it to  Divine union,  I  shall suffer 
myself to speak of them  here in  a  brief and  modified  form, 
as  is  sufficient for  the fulfilment  of that intention. 
2.  This  kind  of vision  (or,  to  speak  more  properly,  of 
knowledge  of naked  truths)  is  very  different  from  that  of 
which we have just spoken in the twenty-fourth chapter.  For 
it is  not  like seeing  bodily things  with  the understanding;  it 
consists  rather in comprehending and seeing with the under-
standing the  truths  of God,  whether of things  that are,  that 
have been  or that will  be,  which  is  in close  conformity  with 
the spirit of prophecy,  as  perchance we shall show hereafter. 
3.  Here it is  to be observed  that this  kind of knowledge is 
distinguishable  according  to  two  divisions:  the  one  kind 
comes  to  the  soul  with  respect  to  the  Creator;  the  other 
with  respect  to  creatures,  as  we  have  said.  And,  although 
both  kinds  are  very  delectable  to  the  sou],  yet  the  delight 
caused in it by the kind that relates  to God is  comparable to 
nothing whatsoever, and there are no words or terms wherein 
it can be  described.  This kind of knowledge is  of God Him· 
self,  and  the delight is  in  God Himself,  whereof David says: 
There is  naught soever like  to  Him.  For this  kind  of know· 
ledge  comes  to  the soul  in direct  relation  to  God,  when  the 
soul,  after  a  most  lofty  manner,  has  a  perception  of some 
attribute of God-of His  omnipotence,  of His  might,  of His 
goodness and sweetness,  etc.  ;  and, whensoever it has such a 
1  So  Ale.  A,  B  omit:  'and in  ... the  first.'  E.p.  has:  'treating, 
in this first  chapter, intellectual  knowledge.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XXVI 
195 
perception,  that which  is  perceived cleaves  to the soul.  In-
asmuch  as  this  is  pure  contemplation,  the  soul  clearly  sees 
that there is  no way wherein it can say aught concerning it, 
save to speak,  in certain general  terms,  of the abundance of 
delight and blessing which it has felt,  and this is  expressed by 
souls  that  experience  it;  but not  to  the  end  that  what  the 
soul  has  experienced  and  perceived  may  be  wholly  appre-
hended. 
4.  And thus David,  speaking for  himself when  something 
of this  kind  had  happened  to  him,  used  only  common  and 
general  terms,  saying:  Judicia  Domini  vera,  justificata  in 
semetipsa.  Desiderabilia super aurum et  lapidem pretiosum multum ; 
et  dulciora  super  mel  et  favum.
1 
Which  signifies:  The judge-
ments  of God 2-that is,  the virtues  and attributes which  we 
perceive  in  God-are in  themselves  true, justified,  more  to 
be  desired  than  gold  and  ,'cry  much  more  than  precious 
stones,  and  sweeter  than  the  honeycomb  and  the  honey. 
And  concerning  Moses  we  read  that,  in  a  most  lofty  mani-
festation  of knowledge  that  God  gave  to  him from  Himself 
on  an  occasion  when  He  had  passed  before  him,  He  said 
only  that  which  can  be  expresscd  in  the  common  terms 
above mentioned.  And it was so  that, when the Lord passed 
before  him  in  that  manifestation  of  knowledge,  Moses 
quickly  prostrated  himself  upon  the  ground,3  saying: 
Dominator  Domine  Deus,  misericors  et  clemens,  paliens,  et  multlE 
miserationis,  ac  verax.  Qui  custodis  misericordiam  in  millia.
4 
Which  signifies:  Ruler,5 Lord,  God,  merciful  and clement, 
patient,  and  of great  compassion,  and  true,  that  keepest 
mercy promised unto thousands.  Here it is  seen  that  Moses 
could  not  express  that  which  he  had  learned  from  God  in 
one  single                 of  knowledge,  and  therefore  he 
expressed  and gave  utterance  to it in  all  these  words.  And 
although  at  times,  when  such  knowledge  is  given  to  a  soul, 
words  are used,  the soul  is  quite aware  that it  has  expressed 
no  part  of what  it  has  felt;  for  it  knows  that  there  is  no 
fit  name  by  which  it  is  able  to  name  it.  And  thus  S.  Paul, 
when he  was  granted that lofty knowledge of God,  made no 
attempt to describe it,  saying  only that it was  not lawful for 
man to speak of it. 
1  Psalm  xviii,  10-II  [A.V.,  xix,  9-10]. 
2  E.p.;  . That which we  judge and perceive concerning God.' 
8  A,  B  omit' quickly.' 
4           xxxiv,  6-7.  6  [Lit.,  • Emperor.'] 
S 
196  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
5.  These Divine  manifestations  of knowledge  which  have 
respect to God never  relate to particular matters, inasmuch 
as they concern the Chief Beginning, and therefore can have 
no particular reference,  unless it be a question of some truth 
concerning a  thing less  than God, which in some way is seen 
together  with  the  rest;  but  these  Divine  manifestations 
themselves-no,  in  no  way  whatsoever.l  And  these  lofty 
manifestations  of knowledge  can only come  to  the soul  that 
attains to union with God, for they are themselves that union; 
and  to  receive  them  is  equivalent to a  certain  contact  with 
the  Divinity2  which the soul  experiences, and thus  it is  God 
Himself Who is perceived and tasted therein.  And, although 
He  cannot  be  experienced  manifestly  and  clearly,  as  in 
glory,  this  touch  of knowledge and delight is  nevertheless  so 
sublime  and  profound  that  it  penetrates  the  substance
3 
of 
the soul, and the devil cannot meddle with it or produce any 
manifestation like  to it, for  there is  no such  thing,  neither is 
there  aught  that  compares  with  it,  neither can  he  infuse 
pleasure  or  delight  that  is  like  to  it;  for  such  kinds  of 
knowledge  savour  of  the  Divine  Essence  and  of  eternal 
life,  and the devil  cannot counterfeit a  thing so  lofty. 
6.  Nevertheless he rnight make some pretence of imitating 
it,  by  representing  to  the  soul  certain  great  things  and 
pregnant  matters  which  can  readily  be  perceived  by  the 
senses  and endeavouring to persuade the soul  that these  are 
God;  but not in such wise  that it enters into the substance' 
of the soul  and of a  sudden 
6 
renews  it and enkindles  it with 
love,  as  do the manifestations  of God.  For there are certain 
kinds  of knowledge, and certain of these touches wrought  by 
God in the substance of the soul,  which  enrich it after such 
wise  that not only does  one  of them suffice  to take from  the 
soul once  and for  all  the  whole  of the  imperfections  that it 
had itself been unable to  throw off during its whole life,  but 
it leaves  the soul full  of virtues  and blessings
8 
from  God. 
7.  And these touches are so delectable to the soul, and of a 
delight  so  intimate,  that  if it  received  only  one  of them  it 
1  E.p.:  • and  therefore  can  have  no  particular  reference.  unless  this 
knowledge  should  be  extended to some other truth concerning something 
less than God which is capable of being described in some way;  but these 
general manifestations-no.'  I  E.p. has' Divine Truth' for' Divinity.' 
•  E.p.:  • the inmost part.' 
,  E.p.:  • into the very interior part.'  A:  'into the wisdom.' 
•  So Alc.,  D.  A,  B, C,  P, e.p.  have:  • and sublimely:  [The clliference 
is  slight:  ,ubidamente for  subitamente.) 
•  A,  erroneously,  has:  • and  visions.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XXVI 
197 
would  consider itself well  rewarded for  all  the  trials  that it 
had  suffered  in this  life,  even  had  they  been innumerable; 
and it is so greatly encouraged and given such energy to suffer 
many things for God's sake that it suffers above all in seeing 
that it suffers  not  more. 
8.  The soul  cannot attain to these lofty  degrees  of know-
ledge by means of any comparison or imagination of its own, 
because!  they are loftier  than all  these;  and so  God  works 
them in  the soul  without  making  use  of its  own  capacities. 
Wherefore,  at certain  times,  when  the  soul  is  least  thinking 
of it and least desiring it,  God is  wont to give it these Divine 
touches,  by causing it certain recollections  of Himself.  And 
these are sometimes suddenly caused in the soul by its  mere 
recollection  of  certain  things-sometimes  of  very  small 
things.  And they are so readily perceived 
2 
that at times they 
cause not only the soul,  but also  the  body,  to  tremble.  But 
at other times  they come  to  pass  in the spirit when it is  very 
tranquil, without any kind of trembling,  but with a  sudden
3 
sense  of delight  and  spiritual  refreshment. 
g.  At other times,  again, they come when the soul repeats 
or  hears  some  word,  from  Scripture  or  possibly  from  some 
other  source;  but  they  are  not  always  equally  efficacious 
and  sensible,  for  oftentimes  they  are  extremely  faint;  yet, 
however  faint  they  may  be,  one  of these  recollections  and 
touches  of God  is  more  profitable  to  the  soul  than  many 
other  kinds  of  knowledge  or  many  meditations  upon  the 
creatures  and  the  works  of God.  And,  since  these  mani. 
festations  of knowledge  come  to  the  soul  suddenly,'  and 
independently  of its  own  free  will,  it  must  neither desire  to 
have them, nor desire  not to have  them 
5
;  but must  merely 
be  humble  and  resigned  concerning  them,  and  God  will 
perform  His  work  how  and  when He wllls. 
10.  And  I  say  not  that  the  soul  should  behave  in  the 
same  negative  manner  with  regard  to  these  apprehensions 
as  with  regard  to  the  rest,  for,  as  we  have  said,  they  are a 
part of the union,  towards  which we are directing  the soul  ; 
to  which end we  are teaching it to  detach and strip itself of 
all other apprehensions.  And the means by which God will 
1  E.p. adds:  • as we  have said.' 
I  E.p.:  • And they are so efficacious.' 
I  So  Ale.  The  other  authorities  read:  'with  a  sublime'  [subido  for 
subjto,  as above].  '  E.p.  adds:  'as we  have said.' 
6  E.p.:  • it  must  neither  strive  to  have  them  nor  strive  not  to  have 
them.' 
Ig8  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
do this  must  be  humility and suffering for  love  of God  with 
resignation
1 
as  regards all reward;  for these favours  are not 
granted  to  the soul  which  still  cherishes  attachments,  inas-
much as  they are granted through  a very special love of God 
toward the  soul which loves Him likewise with  great detach-
ment.  It is  to this  that t   ~   Son of God referred,  in S. John, 
when  He  said:  Q,ui  autem  diligit  me,  diligetuT  a  PatTe  meo,  et 
ego  diligam  eum,  et  manifestabo  ei  me  ipsum.
3 
Which  signifies  : 
He that loves Me shall be loved of My Father, and I will love 
him and  will  manifest  Myself to  him.  Herein are included 
the kinds of knowledge and touches to which we are referring, 
which  God  manifests  to  the soul  that truly loves  Him.
3 
I  I.  The  second  kind  of knowledge  or  vision  of interior 
truths' is  very  different  from  this  that  we  have  described, 
since it is  of things lower than God.  And herein is  included 
the perception of the truth of things  in themselves,  and that 
of the  events  and  happenings  which  come  to  pass  among 
men.  And  this  knowledge  is  of such a kind  that,  when  the 
soul  is  taught  these  truths,  they  sink  into it deeply,  without 
anyone  saying  aught  to  it  about  them,  to  such  an  extent 
that, although  they may tell  it something else,  the soul  can-
not give  its  inward assent  to  this,  even  though  it endeavour 
to give such assent by making a great effort;  for it is learning 
something  else  within  the  spirit  by  means  of the spirit  that 
teaches it that thing, 
5 
which is  equivalent to seeing it clearly. 
This  pertains 6  to  the  spirit  of prophecy  and  to  the  grace 
which  S.  Paul  calls  the 'gift  of the  discernment  of spirits. 
7 
Yet, although the soul holds something which it understands 
to  be quite certain and true,  as  we  have said,  and although 
it may  be unable  to  give  it that passive interior  consent,  it 
must  nQ.t  therefore  cease  to  believe  and  to  give  the consent 
of reason  to  that  which  its  spiritual  director  tells  it  and 
commands  it,8  even  though  this  may  be  quite  contrary  to 
its own feelings,  so  that it may be directed in faith  to Divine 
union,  to  which  a  soul  must  journey  by  believing  rather 
than  by  understanding. 
1  E.p.  adds;  'and disinterestedness.'  I  S.  John xiv,  21. 
3  A,  B:  'that draws near to  Him and truly loves  Him.' 
,  A,  13:  'or of interior  truths.' 
6  E.p.:  • something else in  that which  has been spiritually represented 
to it.' 
I  E.p.;  'This may pertain. •  7  I  Corinthians xii,  10. 
•  E.p.  abbreviates:  'a.s we  have said, it cannot but follow  that which 
its  spiritual director  commands.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XXVI 
199 
12.  Concerning both these things we have clear testimonies 
in  Scripture.  For  with  respect  to  the  spiritual  knowledge 
1 
of things  that  may  be  acquired,  the  Wise  Man  says  these 
words:  Ipse  dedit  mihi  horum,  quit  sunt,  scientiam  veram,  ut 
sciam  dispositionem  orhis  terrarum,  et  virtutes  elementorum,  initium 
et  consummationem  temporum,  l,icissitudinum  permutationes,  et  con-
summationes  temporum,  et  morum  mutationes,  divisiones  temporum, 
et  anni  cursus,  et  stella rum  dispositiones,  naturas  animalium  et  iras 
hestiarum,. vim  ventorum,  et  cogitationes  hominum,  dijJerentias  vir-
gultorum,  et  virtutes  radicum,  et  qultcumque  sunt  abscondita,  et 
improvisa  didici:  omnium  enim  artifex  docuit  me  sapientia. II 
Which  signifies:  God  hath  given  me  true  knowledge  of 
things,  namely:  That I  should  know  the disposition  of the 
round  world 
3 
and  the  virtues  of the  elements;  the  begin-
ning,  ending  and  middle  of the  seasons,  the  alterations  in 
the changes' and the consummations  of the seasons, and  the 
changes of customs,  the divisions  of the seasons, 
6 
the courses 
of the year and the dispositions  of the stars;  the  natures  of 
the  animals,  and  the  furies  of the  beasts,  the  strength  and 
virtue of the winds, and the thoughts of men;  the diversities 
in  plants  and  trees  and  the  virtues  of roots  and  all  things 
that are hidden,  and those  that are not foreseen 
6
:  all  these 
I  learned,  for  Wisdom,  which  is  the  worker  of all  things, 
taught  me.  And  although  this  knowledge  which  the  Wise 
Man here says  that God gave him concerning all things was 
infused 7  and general,  the passage quoted furnishes  sufficient 
evidence  for  all  particular  kinds  of knowledge  which  God 
infuses  into  souls,  by  supernatural  means,  when  He  wills. 
And this not that He may give them a general habit ofknow-
ledge as He gave to Solomon in the matters afore-mentioned  ; 
but  that He may reveal to them at times  certain  truths  with 
respect  to  any  of all  these  things  that  the  Wise  Man  here 
enumerates.  Although  it  is  true  that into  many souls  Our 
Lord  infuses  habits  which  relate  to  many  things,  yet  these 
are  never  of so  general  a  kind  as  they  were  in  the  case  of 
Solomon.  The  differences  between  them  are  like  to  those 
between the gifts  distributed  by God  which  are enumerated 
1  E.p.:  • to the particular spiritual knowledge.' 
2  Wisdom  vii.  17-21.  The reading of the  Latin text is  that of Ale. 
3  [Lit .• • of the roundness of the lands.'] 
4  E.p.:  . the changes in events.' 
5  A omits this phrase. and B. this and  the phrase preceding. 
•  E.p.  omits:  • and  ... foreseen.' 
7  A .abbreviates:  • which  is the worker of all things,  was infused.' 
200  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
by S.  Paul;  among these he sets  wisdom,  knowledge;)  faith, 
prophecy,  discernment or knowledge  of spirits,  understand· 
ing  of tongues,  interpretation  of spoken  words,  etc.
1 
All 
these  kinds  of knowledge  are  infused  habits, I  which  God 
gives  freely  to  whom  He  will,  whether  naturally  or  super-
naturally;  naturally,3  as  to  Balaam,  to  other  idolatrous 
prophets  and  to  many sybils,  to whom  He gave the spirit of 
prophecy;  and supernaturally,  as  to the holy prophets and 
apostles  and other saints. 41 
13.  But  over  and  above  these  habits  or  graces
fi 
freely 
bestowed,6  what  we  say  is  that  persons  who  are  perfect  or 
are  making  progress  in  perfection  are  wont  very  ordinarily 
to  receive  enlightenment  and  knowledge  of things  present 
or absent;  these  they  know  through  their  spirit,7  which  is 
already  enlightened  and  purged.  We  can  interpret  that 
passage from  the  Proverbs  in  this  sense,  namely:  Quomodo 
in  aquis  resplendent  vultus  prospicientium  sic  corda  hominum  mani-
festa  SU1tt  prude1;,tibus.
8 
Even  as  there  appear  in  the  waters 
the faces  of those  that look  therein,  so  the hearts  of men are 
manifest  to  the  prudent.  This  is  understood  of those  that 
have the  wisdom  of saints,  which  the  sacred  Scripture calls 
prudence.  And in this  way  these spirits  sometimes  learn of 
other  things  also,  although  not  whensoever  they  will;  for 
this  belongs  only  to  those  that have  the  habit,  and  even  to 
these  it  belongs  not  always  and  with  respect  to  all  thing's, 
for it depends  upon God's will  to help them. 
14.  But  it  must  be  known  that  those  whose  spirits  are 
purged  can  learn  'i?y  natural  means  with  great  readiness, 
9 
and  some  more  readily  than  others,  that  which  is  in  the 
inward  spirit  or  heart,  and  the  inclinations  and  talents  of 
men, and this by outward indications, albeit very slight ones, 
as  words,  movements  and  other  signs.  For;  even  as  the 
devil  can do this,  since  he is  spirit,  even  so  likewise  can the 
spiritual  man,  according  to  the  words  of the  Apostle;)  who 
says:  Spiritualis  autem  judicat  omnia.
10 
He  that  is  spiritual 
1  [Lit.,  '  exposition of words';  the reference is clearly to 1  Corinthians 
xii,8-10.] 
2  E.p.:  • infused  gifts:  I  Alc.  alone has' naturally: 
,  E.p.  abbrevlates:  • to  whom  He will,  as to  the holy  prophets  and 
apostles and  to other saints.' 
I  E.p.:  . But over and above these graces.' 
8  (The originM  has gratis datas.] 
7  E.p.:  'through the light  which they receive in  their spirit.' 
I  Proverbs xxvii,  19. 
•  E.)I.:  . can IcarD with greater readiness.'  10  1  CorinthiaDS ii,  I,S. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XXVI  201 
judgeth all things.  And  again  he  says:  Spiritus  enim  omnia 
scrutatur,  etiam profunda  Dei.
1 
The spirit searcheth all things, 
yea,  the deep  things  of God.  Wherefore,  although spiritual 
persons  cannot by nature know  thoughts,  or things  that are 
in the minds of others, II they may well interpret them through 
supernatural enlightenment or by si.gns.  And, although they 
may often  be deceived  in  their interpretation  of signs,  they 
are  more  generally  correct.  Yet  we  must  trust  neither  to 
the  one  means  nor  to  the  other,  for  the  devil  meddles 
herein  greatly,  and  with  much  subtlety,  as  we  shall  after-
wards  say,  and  thus  we  must  ever  renounce  such  kinds  of 
knowledge. 
15.  And  that  spiritual  persons  may  have  knowledge  of 
the  deeds  and  happenings  of men,  even  though  they  be 
elsewhere,  we have witness and example in the Fourth Book 
of the Kings, where Gehazi, the servant of our father Elisha, 
3 
desired  to hide from  him  the  money which he had received 
from  Naaman the  Syrian,  and  Elisha said:  Nonne  cor  meum 
in  prssenti  erat,  quando  reversus  est  homo  de  curru  suo  in  occursum 
lui l' Was  not  my heart perchance present,  when Naaman 
turned again from  his  chariot and went to meet thee?  This 
happens  spiritually;  the  spirit  sees  it  as  though  it  were 
happening in its presence.  And the same thing is  proved in 
the same  book,  where  we  read  likewise  of the  same  Elisha, 
that, knowing all  that the King of Syria did with his  princes 
in his  secret place,  he  told it to  the King of Israel,  and thus 
the counsels of the King of Syria were of no effect;  so  much 
so  that,  when the  King of Syria saw that all was  known,  he 
said  to  his  people
5
:  Wherefore  do  ye  not  tell  me  which  of 
you is  betraying me to the King of Israel ?  And then one of 
his  servants  said:  Nequaquam,  Domine  mi  Rex,  sed  Eliseus 
Prophela,  qui  est  in  Israel,  indicat  Regi  Israel  omnia  verba, 
quscumque  locutus  fueris  in  conclavi  tuo. e  I t  is  not  so,  my 
lord,  0  king,  but  Elisha,  the  prophet  that  is  in  Israel, 
telleth  the  king  of Israel all  the words  that thou speakest  in 
thy bedchamber. 
16.  Both kinds of this knowledge of things, as  well as  other 
kinds  of knowledge,  come  to  pass?  in the soul               so 
1  I  CorinthilUls ii,  10.  I  [Lit.,  ' in the interior.'] 
•  This phrase is  found  only in Ale.  and e.p. 
,  ..  Kings [A.V.,  2  Kings]  v,  26. 
6  A,  B:  • to his counsellors.' 
•  4  KingS' [A.V.,  2  Kings]  vi,  12. 
7  E.p.:  'Both kinds of this knowledge  of things also come to pass.' 
202  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
that for its own part it does  naught.  For it will come to pass 
that,  when  a  person  is  inattentive  to  a  matter and  it is  far 
from  his  mind, there will  come to him a vivid understanding 
of what he is  hearing or reading, and that much more clearly 
than it could be conveyed by the sound of the words;  and at 
times,  though  he  understand  not  the  words,  as  when  they 
are  in  Latin  and  he  knows  not  that tongue,  the  knowledge 
of their meaning comes to him, despite his not understanding 
them. 
17.  With  regard  to  the  deceptions  which  the  devil  can 
bring about,  and does  bring about,  concerning  this  kind  of 
knowledge  and  understanding,  there is  much  that might  be 
said, for the deceptions  which he effects in this  way are very 
great  and very  difficult  to  unmask.  Inasmuch  as,  through 
suggestion,l  he  can  represent  to  the  soul  many  kinds  of 
intellectual  knowledge  and  implant  them  so  firmly  that  it 
appears  impossible  that  they  should  not  be  true,  he  will 
certainly make the soul  to believe innumerable falsehoods  if 
it  be  not  humble  and  cautious.  For suggestion  has  some-
times great power over the soul, above all when it is  to some 
extent aided by the weakness of sense, causing the knowledge 
which it conveys  to sink into the soul  with such great power, 
persuasiveness and determination that the soul  needs  to give 
itself earnestly  to  prayer and  to exert  great  strength  if it is 
to cast it off.  For at times  the devil is  accustomed  to repre-
sent  to  the  soul  the sins  of others,  and  evil  consciences  and 
evil souls,2 falsely but very vividly, and all this he does to harm 
the soul,  trusting  that it may spread abroad  his  revelations, 
and that thus more sins may be committed, for which reason 
he  fills  the  soul  with  zeal  by making  it  believe  that  these 
revelations are graated it so that it may commend the persons 
concerned  to God.  Now,  though  it is  true  that God some-
times sets before holy souls the necessities of their neighbours, 
so  that  they  may  commend  them  to  God  or  relieve  them, 
even as  we  read that He revealed  to Jeremiah the weakness 
of the Prophet Baruch, that he might give  him counsel con-
cerning it,3 yet it is  more often the devil  who  does  this,  and 
speaks  falsely  about  it,  in  order  to  cause  infamy,  sin  and 
discouragement,  whereof  we  have  very  great  experience. 
And  at  other  times  he  implants  other  kinds  of knowledge 
1  E.p.  adds:  • making use of the bodily senses.' 
8  A,  B:  . and the evil souls of others,' 
a  Jeremiah xlv,  3. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XXVI  20
3 
with  great  assurance,  and  persuades  the  soul  to  believe 
them. 
18.  Such  knowledge  as  this,  whether  it be of God  or no, 
can  be  of very  little  assistance  to  the  progress  of the  soul 
1 
on its journey to  God,  if the soul  desire  it  and  be  attached 
to it;  on the contrary,  if it were not scrupulous in rejecting 
it,  not  only  would  it  be hindered  on its  road,  but  it  would 
even be greatly harmed and led far astray.  For all the perils 
and  inconveniences  which,  as  we  have  said,  may  be  in-
volved  in  the supernatural  apprehensions  whereof we  have 
treated  up  to  this  point,  may  occur  here,  and  m,ore  also. 
I  wIll  not,  therefore,  treat  more  fully  of this  matter  here, 
since  sufficient  instruction  has  already  been  given  in  past 
chapters;  but I  will
2 
only say that the soul  must always  be 
very scrupulous in rejecting these things, and seek to journey 
to  God  by  the  way  of unknowing;  and  must  ever  relate 
its experiences to its spiritual confessor,  and be ever attentive 
to  his  counsel.  Let  the  confessor  guide  the  soul  past  this, 
as  though  it  were  a  passing  matter,  for  it  is  of no  kind  of 
importance  for
3 
the  road  to  union;  for  when  these  things 
are gran ted to the soul passively they always leave  in  it such 
effect  as  God  wills  shall  remain,  without  necessity  for  the 
soul to exert any diligence in the matter. C  And thus it seems 
to me that there is  no reason to describe here either the effect 
which  is  produced  by true knowledge,  or that which  comes 
from false knowledge, for this would be wearisome and never-
ending.  For  the  effects  of this  knowledge  cannot  all  be 
described  in  a  brief instruction,  the knowledge  being great 
and  greatly  varied,  and  its  effects  being  so  likewise,  since 
good  knowledge  produces good effects,  and  evil  knowledge, 
evil  effects, Ii  etc.  In saying  that all  should  be  rejected,6  we 
have said sufficient for  the soul  not to go astray. 
7 
J  E.p.:  'can bring very little profit to the soul.' 
I  A,  B:  'therefore I  will  .  .  .' 
3  E.p.:  '.  .  .  p   s s i n ~   matter,  treating it as of no account for  .  .  .' 
,  E.p.  omits:  . without  ... in the matter.' 
5  A,  B,  e.p.  have:  '  ... good  effects  [leading]  to  good,  and  evil 
knowledge evil effects  [leading]  to evil.'  Ale.  ends the chapter here. 
•  E.p.  adds:  • and how  this is to be done.' 
7  E.p.  omits:  • for  the  soul  not  to go astray.'  We follow  A  and B  in 
our reading of this last sentence. 
204  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
CHAPTER  XXVII 
Which  treats  of the  second kind of revelation,  namely,  the  disclosure 
of hidden  secrets. I  Describes  the  way  in  which  these  may 
assist  the  soul  toward  union  with  God,  and  the  way  in  which 
they  may  be  a  hindrance;  and  how  the  devil  may  deceive  the 
soul greatly  in  this  matter. 
I.  We  were saying that the second  kind of              was 
the  manifestation  of  hidden  mysteries  and  secrets.  This 
may  come  to  pass  in  two  ways.  The  first  with  respect  to 
that which God is  in Himself,  wherein is  included the revela-
tion  of the  mystery  of the  most  holy  Trinity  and  Unity  of 
God.  The  second  is  with  respect  to  that  which  God  is  in 
His  works,  and herein  are included  the  other articles  of our 
Catholic  faith,2  and  the  propositions  deducible  from  them 
which  may  be  laid  dm  .... n  explicitly  as  truths.  In these  are 
included  and  comprised  a  great  number  of the  revelations 
of the prophets, of promises  and threatenings of God, and of 
other things which have happened and shall happen. 3  Under 
this second head we  may also include  many other particular 
things  which  God  habitually  reveals,  both  concerning  the 
universe in general as also in particular concerning kingdoms, 
provinces and states and families  and particular persons.  Of 
these we have examples in abundance in the Divine writings, 
both of the  one kind  and  of the  other,  especially  in  all  the 
Prophets, wherein are found revelations of all these kinds.  As 
this is a clear and plain fact, I will not here spend time in quot-
ing these examples, but will only say' that these revelations do 
not come to pass  by word alone,  but that God gives  them in 
many  ways  and  manners,  sometimes  by  word  alone,  some-
times  by  signs  and  figures  alone,  and  by  images  and simili-
tudes  alone,  sometimes  in more than one  way  at once,  as  is 
likewise  to  be seen  in the  Prophets,  particularly  throughout 
the  Apocalypse,  where  we  find  not  only  all  the  kinds  of 
revelation  which  we  have  described,  but likewise  the  ways 
and  manners to which we are here referring. 
I  A.  B. e.p.  add:  • and mysteries.' 
I  E.p.:  . of our holy Catholic faith.' 
•  The  MSS.  [and  P.  Silverio)  add:  • with  regard  to  this  business  of 
faith.'  E.p.  omits these words. 
,  A.  B:  '. .  .  I  do not speak  of  them;  I  only say  .  .  .' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XXVII  205 
2.  As  to  these  revelations  which  are  included  under  our 
second head,  God grants them still in our time to whom He 
will.  He is  wont, for example, to reveal to some persons how 
many days  they still  have  to  live,  or what trials  they  are  to 
to suffer, or what is to befall such and such a  person, o.r such 
and such a  kingdom, etc.  And even as regards the mysteries 
of our  faith,  He  will  reveal  and  expound  to  the  spirit  the 
truths concerning them, 
1 
although  this  is  not properly to  be 
termed revelation, for it has already been revealed once, but is 
more  correctly  a  manifestation  or  explanatiop  of what  has 
been  revealed  already. 
3.  In  this  kind  of  revelationS  the  devil  may  meddle 
considerably.  For,  as  revelations  of  this  nature  come 
ordinarily  through  words,  figures  and  similitudes,  etc.,  the 
devil  may  very  readily  counterfeit  others  like  them,  much 
more so than when the revelations are in spirit alone. 8  Where-
fore, if with regard to the first  and the second kind of revela-
tion  which  we  are  here  describing,  as  touching  our  faith, 
there be r e v e   l e ~   to  us  anything new,  or different,  we  must 
in  no  wise  give  our consent  to  it,  even  though  we  had  evi-
dence  that it was  spoken  by  an  angel  from  Heaven.'  For 
even so says  S.  Paul, in these words:  Lieet nos,  aut  Angelus  de 
((llo  evangeli.(.et  vobis  prteterquam  quod  evangeli.(.avimus  vobis, 
anathema  sit.
6 
Which signifies:  Even though an angel from 
Heaven  declare  or  preach  unto  you  aught  else  than  that 
which we  have preached  unto you,  let him be anathema. 
4.  Since,  then,  there are no  more  articles  to  be  revealed 
concerning the substance of our faith than those which  have 
already  been  revealed  to  the  Church,  not  only  mustS  any-
thing  which  may  be  revealed  anew  to  the  soul  concerning 
this  be rejected,  but it behoves  the soul
7 
to  be  cautious and 
take  no notice of various  other things  involved  therein,  and 
for the sake of the purity of the soul it behoves it to keep the 
faith,  even  though  the  truths  already  revealed  to  it  be 
revealed  again;  and  to  believe  them,  not  because  they 
are now revealed anew,  but because they have already been 
sufficiently  revealed  to  the  Church;  rather  it  must  close 
1  E.p.  adds:  • with particular light and impressiveness.' 
I  So  the  MSS.  E.p.  reads:  • With  regard,  then,  to  what  we  call 
revelations  (for  I  speak  not now of what has already  been revealed,  such 
as the mysteries of the faith)  .  .  .' 
•  E.p. omits:  • much more  ... spirit alone.' 
•  E.p. omits:  • even though ... from Heaven.'  •  Galatians i, 8. 
•  E.p.  begins the sentence thus:  • And thus,  not only must  .  .  .' 
,  E.p.  adds:  • apart from  this.' 
206  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
its  understanding  to  them,  holding
1 
simply  to  the  doctrine 
of the  Church and to its faith,  which,  as  S.  Paul says,  enters 
through hearing.
s 
And let not its credence and intellectual 
assent be given to these matters of the faith  which have been 
revealed anew, however fitting and true they may seem to it, 
ifit desire  not to be deceived.
3 
For, in order to deceive the 
soul  and  to  instil  falsehoods  into  it,  the  devil  first  feeds  it 
with  truths  and  things  that are  probable in order to  give  it 
assurance  and afterwards  to  deceive  it.
4 
He  resembles  one 
that  sews  leather  with  a  bristle,  first  piercing  the  leather 
with  the  sharp  bristle,  after  which  enters  the  soft  thread; 
the thread could not enter unless  the bristle guided  it. 
5.  And let this be considered carefully;  for,  even were it 
true that there was  no peril in such deception,  yet it greatly 
behoves  the  soul  not  to  desire  to  understand  clearly  things 
that  have  respect  to  the  faith,S  so  that it  may  preserve  the 
merit of faith,  in its  purity and entirety,  and likewise  that it 
may come,  in this  night of the understanding,  to the Divine 
light  of Divine  union.  And  it is  equally  necessary  to  con-
sider any new revelation with  one's eyes  closed,  and holding 
fast  the prophecies of old, for the Apostle S.  Peter, though he 
had seen the glory of the Son of God after some  manner' on 
Mount Tabor,  wrote,  in his  canonical  epistle,  these  words: 
Et  habemus  firmiorem  propheticum  sermonem;  cui  benefacitis 
attendentes,  etc. 
7 
Which  is  as  though  he had said:  Although 
the vision  that we have seen  of Christ on the  Mount is  true, 
the word of the prophecy that is  revealed to us  is  firmer and 
surer, and, ifye rest your soul upon it, ye  do well. 
6.  And if it is  true that, for  the  reasons  already described, 
it  behoves  the  soul  to  close  its  eyes  to  the  aforementioned 
revelations  which  come  to  it,  and  which  concern  the  pro-
positions  of the  faith,8  how  much  more  necessary  will  it be 
neither  to  receive  nor  to  give  credit  to  other  revelations 
relating  to  different  things,  wherein  the  devil  habitually 
1  E.p.  abbreviates:  • it behoves it to keep  the faith,  closing its under-
standing and holding  .. .'  a  Romans x.  17. 
a  E.p.  has' be  easily  given:  and  omits' of  the  faith'  and' however 
fitting and true they  may seem  to it: 
t  E.p.  omite;:  • and afterwards to deceive it.' 
6  E.p.  omits:  • that have respect to the faith.' 
•  E.p. omits these three words.  7  2  S.  Peter i.  19. 
•  So  Ale.  A.  B:  • to  close  its  eyes  to  the  things  that  happen  with 
respect  to  the propositions  or new  revelations  of the  faith.'  E.p.:  . not 
to  open  its  eyes  curiously  to  the  new  revelations  which  come  to  it  and 
which concern  the propositions of the faith.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XXVIII  207 
meddles so greatly that I  believe it impossible! for a  man not 
to  be  deceived  in  many  of them  unless  he  strive  to  reject 
them,  such  an  appearance  of truth  and  security  does  the 
devil  give  them?  For  he  brings  together  so  many  appear-
ances and probabilities,  in order that they may be believed, 
and plants them so firmly in the sense  and the imagination, 
that  it seems  to  the  person  affected  that  what  he  says  will 
certainly happen;  and in such a  way does  he cause the soul 
to grasp and hold them,  that,  if it have  not  humility,  it will 
hardly be persuaded to reject them and made to  believe  the 
contrary.  Wherefore,  the soul  that is  pure, cautious, simple 
and humble must resist  revelations  and other visions  with as 
much  effort  and  care  as  though  they  were  very  perilous 
temptations. 
2 
For there is  no need  to  desire  them;  on the 
contrary, there is  need not to desire them, if we are to reach 
the union of love.  For it is  this  that Solomon  meant  when 
he said:  What need has a  man to desire and seek  the things 
that are  above  his  natural  capacity?3  As  though  we  were 
to say:  He has' no necessity, in order to be perfect, to desire 
supernatural  things 5  by  supernatural  means,  which  are 
above  his  capacity. 
8 
7.  And  as  the  objections  that  can  be  made  to  this  have 
already  been  answered,  in  the  nineteenth  and  twentieth 
chapters  of this  book,  I  refer  the  re'\der  to  these,  and  say 
only  that  the  soul  must  keep  itself from  all  revelations
7 
in 
order to journey,  in  purity and  without  error,  in  the  night 
of faith,  to union. 
CHAPTER  XXVIII 
Which  treats  of interior  locutions  that  may  come  to  the  spirit super-
naturally.  Says of what kinds they are. 
I.  The discreet  reader has ever  need  to  bear in mind  the 
intent  and  end  which  I  have  in  this  book,  which  is  the 
1  E.p.:  • I  believe it almost impossible.' 
a  E.p.  omits:  'with as  .  .  .  temptations.' 
3  Ecclesiastes vii,  I  [Vulgate).  E.p.  omits' natural.' 
&  A, B: ' Man has.'  6  E.p.:' supernatural and extraordinary things.' 
I  A,  B  add:  'for perfection.' 
7  So  Ale.  A.  Bread:  'I refer  [the  reader]  to  them  in  that  which 
touches  this  matter  of  revelations;  for  it  is  sufficient  to  know  that  it 
behoves the soul to keep itself from them aU ... .'  E.p.:  '  ... referring 
[the  reader]  to them,  I  cease  as  touching  this matter of  revelations;  for 
it  is  sufficient  to  know  that  it  behoves  the  soul  to  keep  itself  prudently 
from  them all.  .  .  .' 
208  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
direction  of the soul,  through  all  its  apprehensions,  natural 
and supernatural, without deception or hindrance, in purity 
of faith,  to  Divine  union with  God.  If he  does  this,  he  will 
understand  that,  although  with  respect  to  apprehensions  of 
the soul  and  the  doctrine  that  I  am expounding  I  give  not 
such copious instruction neither do I particularize so much or 
make  so  many  divisions  as  the  understanding  perchance 
requires,  I  am not being over-brief in this  matter.  For with 
respect  to  all  this  I  believe  that sufficient cautions,  explana-
tions  and instructions are given for  the soul  to  be enabled to 
behave prudently in every contingency,  outward or inward, 
so as  to make progress.  And this is  the reason why I  have so 
briefly dismissed  the subject of prophetic apprehensions and 
the other subjects allied  to it;  for  there is  so  much  more to 
be said of each of them, according to the differences and the 
ways  and manners!  that are  wont  to  be  observed  in  each,· 
that I  believe  one  could  never  know  it all  perfectly.  I  am 
content  that,  as  I  believe,  the  substance  and  the  doctrine 
thereof have been given, and the soul has been warned of the 
caution  which  it  behoves  it  to  exercise  in  this  respect,  and 
also  concerning  all  other  things  of the same  kind  that  may 
come to pass  within it. 
2.  I  will  now  follow  the  same  course  with  regard  to  the 
third  kind  of apprehension,  which,  we  said,  was  that  of 
supernatural locutions, 3  which are apt to come  to the spirits 
of spiritual  persons' without  the  intervention  of any  bodily 
sense.  These,  although  they are of many kinds,  may,  I  be-
lieve,  all  be  reduced  to  three,  namely:  successive,  formal 
and substantial.  I  describe  as  successive  certain words  and 
arguments,  which  the  spirit  is  wont  to  form  and  fashion 
when  it is  inwardly recollected.  Formal  words  are certain 
clear  and  distinct  words Ii  which  the spirit  receives;  not  of 
itself,  but from a  third person, sometimes when it is recollec-
ted  and  sometimes  when  it  is  not.  Substantial  words  are 
others  which  also  come  to  the  spirit  formally,  sometimes 
when it is  recollected  and sometimes  when  it is  not;  these 
cause in the substance of the soul' that substance and virtue 
which they signify.  All  these we shall here proceed to treat 
in their order. 
I  E.p.  omits:  • and manners.'  I  E.p. omits:  'in each.' 
•  E. p.  bas • apprehensions • for • locutions.' 
,  E.p.  omits:  • the spirits of.'  A.  B  have' may' for' are wont to: 
,  [Lit.,  • certain distinct and formal  W01"dS.'] 
•  E.p.:  • in the inmost part of the soul.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XXIX  209 
CHAPTER  XXIX 
Which  treats  of the  first  kind  of words  that  the.  recollected  spirit 
sometimes  forms  within  itself.  Describes  the  cause  of these 
and the profit and the  harm  which  there  may be  in  them. 
I.  These successive  words  always  come  when  the spirit is 
recollected  and  absorbed  very  attentively  in  some  medita-
tion;  and, in its  reflections upon that same matter whereon 
it is thinking, it proceeds from one stage to another, forming
1 
words  and  arguments  which  are greatly  to  the  point,  with 
much facility and distinctness,  and by means of its reasoning 
discovers'  things  which  it  knew  not  with  respect  to  the 
matter of its reflections,  so  that it believes that it is  not doing 
this itself, but that another person is supplying the reasoning 
within  its  mind  or  answering  its  questions  or  teaching  it. 
And  in  truth  it  has  great  cause  to  think  this,  for  the  soul 
itself is  reasoning with itself and answering itself as though it 
were one person addressing            and in some ways  this 
is  really so;  for,  although it is  the spirit itself that works as 
an instrument,3 the Holy Spirit oftentimes aids it to produce 
and  form  those  true  reasonings,  words  and  conceptions. 
And thus it utters  them to  itself as though  to  a third  person. 
For,  as  at  that  time  the  understanding  is  recollected  and 
united  with the truth of that whereon it is  thinking,  and the 
Divine Spirit is  likewise  united  with  it in  that truth,  as  it is 
always  united in all  truth,' it follows  that,  when the under-
standing  communicates  in  this  way  with  the  Divine  Spirit. 
by  means  of  this  truth,  it  begins  to  form  within  itself, 
successively,  those  other  truths  which  are  connected  with 
that whereon it is  thinking,  the door being opened to it and 
illumination being given to it continually by the Holy Spirit 
Who  teaches  it.  For  this  is  one  of the  ways  wherein  the 
Holy Spirit teaches. 
2.  And  when  the  understanding  is  illumined  and  taught 
in this way by this  master, and comprehends these truths,  it 
begins  of its  own accord Ii  to form  the  words  which  relate  to 
the  truths  that  are  communicated  to  it  from  elsewhere. 
1  A,  B  have' founding' for' forming.' 
I  B  has' reflects  upon' for' discovers.' 
•  E.p.  omits:  . as an instrument.' 
,  E.p.  omits:  • in that  ... all  truth.' 
I  E.p.  omits:  • of its own accord.' 
210  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
So that we  may say that the voice  is  the voice  of Jacob and 
the hands  are the  hands  of Esau.
1 
And  one  that is  in this 
condition  will  be  unable  to believe  that  this  is  so,  but will 
think  that  the  sayings  and  the  words  come  from  a  third 
person.  For such  a  one  knows  not  the  facility  with  which 
the undex:standing can form  words  inwardly, as though  they 
come  from  a  third  person,  and  having  reference  to  con-
ceptions and truths  which  have in fact  been  communicated 
to it by a  third person. 
3.  And although it is  true that, in this communication and 
enlightenment  of the  understanding,  no  deception  is  pro-
duced  in the soul  itself,  yet  deception  may,  and frequently 
does  occur  in  the  formal  words  and  reasonings  which  the 
understanding  bases  upon  it.  For,  inasmuch  as  this  illu-
mination which it receives is at times very subtle and spiritual, 
so that the understanding cannot attain to a clear apprehen-
sion  of it,  and it is  the understanding that,  as  we say,  forms 
the reasonings of its  own accord,  it follows  that those which 
it forms are frequently false,  and on other  occasions  are only 
apparently true, or are imperfect.  For since at the outset the 
soul began to seize the truth, and then brought into play the 
skilfulness  or the clumsiness  of its  own lowly  understanding, 
it  is  natural  that  it  should  change  its  way  of thinking  iIi 
accordance  with  its  intellectual  capacity,  and continue  all 
the  time  in  the  same  way,  as  though  a  third  person  were 
speaking  .. 
4.  I  knew  a  person  who  had these  successive  locutions, 
and who among them formed  some that were very true and 
substantial  with  respect  to  the  most  holy  Sacrament  of the 
Eucharist;  but  others  were  sheer  heresy.2  And  I  am 
appalled  at  what  happens  in  these  days-namely,  when 
some soul  with the very smallest experience of meditation, if 
it be conscious of certain locutions of this  kind in some state 
of recollection,  at  once  christens  them  all  as  coming from 
God,  and  assumes  that this  is  the case,  saying:  'God said 
to me ... '  ;  'God answered me ...  '  ;  whereas it is  not so at 
all,  but, as we have said, it is  for  the most part they who are 
saying it to themselves. 
5.  And,  over  and  above  this,  the  desire  which  people 
have  for  locutions,  and  the  pleasure  which  comes  to  their 
spirits from  them,  lead  them  to  make answer  to  themselves 
1  Genesis xxvii.  22. 
I  B.p.:  'but others containecimuch error,' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XXIX  211 
and then to think that it is God Who is answering ~   m   and 
speaking to them.  They therefore commit great blunders if 
they  put  not  great  restraint  upon  themselves,  and  if their 
director  obliges  them  not  to  abstain  from  these  kinds  of 
reflection.  For they  are apt to  gain  from  them  mere  non-
sensical  talk and impurity of soul  rather than humility and 
mortification of spirit, if they think' This was indeed a great 
thing' and' God was speaking'  ;  whereas it will have been 
little  more  than  nothing,  or  nothing  at  all,  or  less  than 
nothing.  For, if humility and charity be not engendered by 
such experiences,  and mortification and holy simplicity and 
silence,  etc.,  what  can be  the  value  of them?  I  say,  then, 
that these things  may hinder the soul greatly in its  progress 
to Divine union  because,  if it pay heed to them, it is  led far 
astray from the abyss offaith, where the understanding must 
remain  in darkness,  and must journey in darknesll,  by love 
and in faith,  and not by much reasoning. 
6.  And  if you  ask  me  why  the  understanding  must  be 
deprived  of these  truths,  since  it is  illumined  through  them 
by the Spirit of God, and that thus they cannot be evil,  I say 
that  the  Holy  Spirit  illumines  the  understanding  which  is 
recollected,  and  illumines  it according to the manner of its 
recollection, 
1 
and  that  the  understanding  cannot  find  any 
other  and  greater  recollection  than  in  faith;  and  thus 
the  Holy  Spirit  will  illumine  it  in  naught  more  than 
in faith.  For the purer and the more  refined in faith II  is  the 
soul,  the more it has of the infused charity of God;  and the 
more  charity it has,  the  more  is  it illumined  and the  more 
gifts  of the Holy Spirit are communicated to it, for charity is 
the cause and the means whereby they are communicated to 
it. 
3 
And  although  it  is  true  that,  in  this  illumination  of 
truths,  the  Holy  Spirit communicates  a  certain light to  the 
soul)  this  is  nevertheless  as  different  in  quality  from  that 
1  This  profound  and  important  principle,  which  has  often  been 
developed  in  mystical  theology,  is  well  expounded  by  P.  Jose  de  Jesus 
Maria  in  a  treatise  called  Reply  to  a  question  [Respuesta  a  una  duda). 
Here,  among other things,  he  says;  'As S.  Thomas  proves  (De  VeJ'itate. 
q.  12,  a.  6),  Divine  illumination, like  every  other  spiritual  form,  is  com-
municated  to  the  soul  after  the  manner  of  the  receiver  of  it,  whether 
according  to  sense  or  according  to  spirit,  to  the  particular  or  to  the 
universal.  And  thus,  he that receives it must prepare himself for  it to be 
communicated  to  him  further,  whether  in  small  measure  (as  we  say)  or 
according to sense,  or in large measure or intellectually.' 
2  E.p.;  • in perfection  of living faith.' 
3  E.p.  omits' of the Holy Spirit' and' for charity  ... communicated 
to it: 
T 
212  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
which is  in faith,  wherein is no clear understanding, as  is  the 
most precious gold from  the basest metal;  and,  with regard 
to its quantity,l the one is as  much greater than the other as 
the  sea  is  greater  than  a  drop  of water.  For  in  the  one 
manner there is communicated to the soul wisdom concerning 
one or two or three truths, etc., but in the other  h   r ~   is com-
municated to it all the wisdom of God in general, which is the 
Son of God, Who communicates Himself to the soul in faith.' 
7.  And if you tell me that this is all good, and that the one 
impedes  not  the  other,  I  reply  that it impedes  it greatly  if 
the soul  sets  store  by it;  for  to do this  is  to  busy itself with 
things  which  are  quite  clear  and  of little  importance,  yet 
which  are  quite  sufficient  to  hinder  the  communication  of 
the  abyss  of faith,  wherein  God  supernaturally and secretly 
instructs  the soul,  and exalts  it in virtues  and gifts  in a  way 
that  it  knows  not.  And  the  profit  which  these  successive 
communications  will  bring  us  cannot come  by our  deliber-
ately  applying  the  understanding  to  them,  for  if we  do  this 
they will  rather lead  us  astray,  even  as  Wisdom  says  to  the 
soul  in the Songs:  Turn away thine eyes  from  me,  for  they 
cause  me to soar aloft.
3 
That is  to say:  They make me to 
soar far  away from  thee and to set myself higher.  We  must 
therefore not apply the understanding' to that which is  being 
supernaturally communicated to it, but simply and sincerely 
apply the will  to God with  love,5 for  it is  through love  that 
these blessings are communicated and through love they will 
be communicated in greater abundance than before.  For if 
the ability of the natural
6 
understanding or of other faculties 
be  brought  actively  to  bear  upon  these  things  which  are 
communicated  supernaturally  and  passively,  its  imperfect 
nature  will  not  reach  them,  and  thus  they  will  perforce  be 
modified according to the capacity of the understanding, and 
consequently will perforce be changed;  and thus the under-
standing will necessarily go astray? and begin to form reason-
ings  within  itself,  and  there  will  no  longer  be  anything 
supernatural or any semblance thereof, but all will be merely 
natural and  most  erroneous  and unworthy. 
1  E.p.:  'and, as to the abundance of its light.' 
2  E.p.:  'in  general,  by  a  simple  and  universal  knowledge  which  is 
given  to the soul in faith.'  3  [Canticles vi, S.] 
,  E.p.:  'the strength of the understanding.' 
,  A,  B:  'apply the will  to the love of God.' 
8  E.p.  omits' natural.' 
7  E.p.:  'will necessarily  be in peril of straying.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XXIX  213 
8.  But  there  are  certain  types  of understanding  so  quick 
and subtle that,  when  they  become  recollected  during some 
meditation,  they reason in conceptions, and begin naturally, 
and  with  great  facility,  to form  their conceptions  into  these 
words  and  arguments,  and  think  that  without  doubt  they 
come from God.  Yet they come only from the understanding, 
which,  with  its  natural  illumination,  being  to  some  extent 
freed from the operation of the senses,  is able to effect all this, 
and more, without any supernatural aid.  This happens very 
commonly,  and such  persons  are greatly  deceived,  thinking 
that they have  attained  to  a  high  degree  of prayer and are 
receiving  communications  from  God,  wherefore  they  either 
write this  down or cause! it to be written.  And it turns  out
l 
to  be  nothing,  and  to  have  the  substance  of  no  virtue, 
and it does  them no greater service than to encourage them 
in  vanity. 
g.  Let  these  learn  to  be  intent  upon  naught,  save  only 
upon  grounding the will in humble love,  working diligently, 
suffering  and  thus imitating the Son  of God in  His  life  and 
mortifications,3  for  this  is  the  road  whereby  a  man  will 
come  to  all  spiritual  good,  rather  than  by  much  inward 
reasoning. 
10.  In this type oflocution-namely, in successive interior 
words-the devil intervenes frequently,  especially in the case 
of such  as  have  some  inclination  or affection  for  them.  At 
the time when such persons  begin to be recollected,  the devil 
is  accustomed  to  offer  them ample material for  distractions, 
forming  conceptions  or words  by suggestion  in their under-
standing,  and then corrupting
C 
and deceiving it most  subtly 
with  things  that have great  appearance  of truth.  And  this 
is  one  of the  manners  wherein he communicates 
6 
with those 
who have made some implicit or expressed compact with him; 
as  with  certain  heretics,  especially  with  certain  heresiarchs, 
whose  understanding  he  fills  with  most  subtle,  false  and 
erroneous  conceptions  and  arguments. 
I  I.  From  what  has  been  said,  it  is  evident  that  these 
successive locutions  may proceed in the understanding from 
three causes,  namely:  from  the  Divine  Spirit,  Who  moves 
and illumines the understanding ;  from the natural illumina-
1  E.p.:  '.  .  .  from  God.  and they write down wha.t  happens to them 
or cause  .. .'  I  E.p.:  • And  it all  turns out  .. .' 
•  E.p.:  . in His life.  and mortifying themselves in all  things.' 
,  [Lit .• • and  then throwing it down.'] 
•  E.p.:  • It is in this way that he is  wont to communicate  .. .' 
214  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
tion  of the  same  understanding;  and  from  the  devil,  who 
may speak to the soul  by suggestion.  To describe!  now the 
signs  and indications  by which a  man may know when they 
proceed  from  one  cause  and  when  from  another would  be 
somewhat difficult, as also to give examples and indications. 
2 
It is  quite  possible,  however,  to  give  some  general  signs, 
which  are  these.  When  in  its  words  and  conceptions  the 
soul finds  itself loving God and at the same time is  conscious 
not  only  of love  but also  of humility  and  reverence,  it is  a 
sign that the Holy Spirit is working within it, for, whensoever 
He grants favours, He grants them with this accompaniment. 
When  the locutions  proceed from  the brilliance and illumi-
nation  of the  understanding  only,  it  is  the  understanding 
that accomplishes  everything,  without  that operation  of the 
virtues (although the will, in the knowledge and illumination 
of those truths, may love naturally)  ;  and, when the medita-
tion  is  over,  the  will  remains  dry,  albeit inclined  neither to 
vanity  nor  to  evil,  unless  the  devil  should  tempt  it  afresh 
about this  matter.  This,  however,  is  not the case  when the 
locutions  have  been  prompted  by  a  good  spirit;  for  then, 
as  a  rule,  the  will  is  afterwards  affectioned  to  God  and 
inclined to well-doing.  At certain times,  nevertheless, it will 
happen  that,  although  the  communication  has  been  the 
result  of  a  good  spirit,  the  will  remains  in  aridity,  since 
God  ordains  it so  for  certain  causes  which  are  of assistance 
to  the  soul.  At  other  times  the  soul  will  not  be  very  con-
scious  of the operations  or motions  of those  virtues,  yet  that 
which it has experienced will be good.  Wherefore I  say that 
the difference  between  these  locutions  is  sometimes  difficult 
to  recognize,  by  reason  of  the  varied  effects  which  they 
produce;  but these  which have now been described are the 
most  common,  although  sometimes  they  occur  in  greater 
abundance  and  sometimes  in  less.  But  those  that  come 
from  the  devil  are  sometimes  difficult  to  understand  and 
recognize, for,  although it is  true that as a rule they leave the 
will  in  aridity  with  respect  to  love  of God,  and  the  mind 
inclined  to  vanity,  self-esteem  or complacency,  nevertheless 
they  sometimes  inspire  the  soul  with  a  false  humility and  a 
fervent  affection  of the  will  rooted  in  self-love,  so  that  at 
times  a  person  must  be  extremely  spiritually-minded  to 
recognize it.  And this  the devil  does  in order the  better to 
1  E.p.:  'But to describe.' 
2  E.p.:  'examples and signs.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XXX 
215 
protect himself;  for  he knows  very  well  how sometimes 
1 
to 
produce tears  by  the feelings  which  he inspires  in a  soul,  in 
order  that  he  may  continue  to  implant  in  it  the  affections 
that he desires.  But he always strives to move its will so  that 
it may  esteem  those  interior  communications,  attach  great 
importance to  them, and,  as  a  result,  give  itself to them and 
be  occupied  in  that  which  is  not  virtue,  but  is  rather  the 
occasion of losing such virtue as  the soul  may have. 
12.  Let us remember, then, this necessary caution, both as 
to the one type oflocution and as to the other, so that we may 
not be deceived or encumbered with  them.  Let us  treasure 
none  of  them,  but  think  only  of  learning  to  direct  our 
will  determinedly  to  God,  fulfilling  His  law  and  His  holy 
counsels  perfectly,  which  is  the  wisdom  of the  Saints,  and 
contenting  ourselves  with  knowing  the mysteries  and truths 
~ i t     the  simplicity  and  truth  wherewith.  the  Church  sets 
them  before  us.  For  this  is  sufficient  to  enkindle  the  will 
greatly,  without  our  meddling  in  other  deep  and  curious· 
things  wherein  it is  a  wonder if there  is  no  peril.  For with 
respect  to  this  S.  Paul says:  It is  not fitting  to  know  more 
than it behoves us
3 
to know.·  And let this suffice with respect 
to  this  matter of successive words. 
CHAPTER  XXX 
Which  treats  of the  interior  words  that  come  to  the  spirit formally 
by  supernatural  means.  Warns  the  reader  of the  harm  which 
they  may  do  and  of the  caution  that  is  necessary  in  order  that 
the  soul  may not  be  deceived  by  them. 
I.  The  interior  words  belonging  to  the  second  type  are 
formal  words,  which  at certain  times  come  to  the  spirit  by 
supernatural  means,  without  the  intervention  of any  of the 
senses,  sometimes  when  the spirit is  recollected and at other 
times when it is not.  I call them formal because they are com-
municated to the spirit formally by a  third person, I)  the spirit 
itself playing  no  part  in  this.  And  they  are  therefore  very 
different from  those which we  have just described;  because 
1  E.p.  omits' sometimes.'  2  A,  B omit:  • and curious.' 
a  [The  verbs  used  in  the  Spanish for  • is  fitting'  and  • behoves'  are 
the same.]  ,  Romans xii,  3. 
•  A,  B:  • because  it  seems  to  the  spirit  that  a  third  person  com-
municates them formally.' 
216  ASCENT  OF  MOVNT  CARMEL 
not  only  have  they  this  difference,  that they  come  without 
any such intervention of the spirit itself as takes place in the 
other case;  but also,  as  I  say,  they sometimes  come  when 
the  spirit  is  not  recollected  and  even  when  it  is  far  from 
thinking  of the subject  of what is  being  said  to  it.  This  is 
not so  in the first  type  of locution,  which  always  has  some 
relation to the subject which the soul is  considering. 
2.  These  words  are  sometimes  very  clearly  formed  and 
sometimes  less  so;  for  they are frequently  like conceptions 
in which something is  said to the spirit, whether in the form 
of a  reply  to  it,  or  in  that  of another  manner  of address. 
Sometimes there is  only one word;  sometimes there are two 
or  more;  sometimes  the  words  succeed  one  another  like 
those already described, for they are wont to be. continuous, 
either instructing the soul  or  discussing  something  with  it ; 
and  all  this  comes  to  pass  without  any  part  being  played 
therein by the spirit, for it is just as  though one person were 
speaking  with  another.  In  this  way,  we  read,  it came  to 
pass  with Daniel, who says that the angel spoke within him.1 
This was a  formal  and successive  discourse  within his  spirit, 
which instructed him, even as the angel declared at the time, 
saying that he had come to instruct him. 
g.  When these  words  are no more than formal,  the effect 
which  they  produce  upon  the soul  is  not  great.  For ordi-
narily  they serve  only  to instruct or. illuminate  with  respect 
to one  thing;  and,  in order to  produce  this  effect,  it is  not 
necessary  that  they  should  produce  any  other  effect  more 
efficacious than the purpose to which they are leading.  And 
when they are of God they invariably work this in the soul  ; 
for they make it ready and quick to do that which it is  com-
manded or instructed to do;  yet at times they take not from 
it  the  repugnance  or  the  difficulty  which  it  feels,  but  are 
rather wont to increase these,  which God does for  the better 
instruction,  greater  humility  and  further  good  of the  soul. 
And  this  repugnance Illost  commonly occurs  when  the soul 
is commanded to do things of a high order, or things of a kind 
that may exalt it;  when things that make for lowliness  and 
humility  are commanded  the  soul,  it responds  with  greater 
ease and readiness.  And thus we read in Exodus that, when 
God  commanded  Moses  to  go  to  Pharaoh  and  deliver  the 
people, he showed such great repugnance that He had to com-
mand him three times to do it and to perform signs for him ; 
1  Daniel ix,  22. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XXX  217 
and all  this  was  of no avail  until  God gave him Aaron for  a 
companion  to  take  part of the  honour.l 
4.  On  the  other  hand,  when  the  words  and  communi-
cations are of the dpvil,  it comes to pass that the soul responds 
with  greater ease  and readiness  to  things  that are of greater 
weight,2  and  for  lowlier  things  it  conceives  repugnance. 
The fact is  that God so greatly abhors seeing souls inclined to 
high  position  that,  even  when  He  commands  and  obliges 
them  to  accept  such  position,  He  desires  them  not  to  be 
ready  and  anxious  to  command.  It is  this  readiness  which 
God  commonly  inspires  in  the  soul,  in  these  formal  words, 
that constitutes one great difference between them and these 
other  successive  words:  the  latter  move  not  the  spirit  so 
much,  neither  do  they  inspire  it  with  such  readiness,  sinse 
they  are less  formal,  and  since  the  understanding has  more 
to do  with  them.  Nevertheless  successive  words  may some-
times  produce  a  greater  effect  by  reason  of the  close  com-
munication  that  there  is  at  times  between  the  Divine spirit 
and  the  human.  I t  is  in  the  manner  of their  coming  that 
there is  a  great difference between the two kinds oflocution. 
With respect to formal words  the soul can have no doubt if it 
is  pronouncing  them itself,  for  it  sees  quite  clearly that it is 
not,  especially  when  it has  not  been  thinking  of the subject 
of that which has  been said to it;  and even when it has been 
so  thinking it feels  very clearly and distinctly that the words 
come from  elsewhere. 
5.  The soul  must  no  more  attach importance to  all  these 
formal  words  than  to  the  other,  or  successive,  words;  for, 
apart from  the fact that to do so would occupy the spirit with 
that which is  not a  legitimate and proximate means to union 
with God-namely, faith-it might also very easily cause it to 
be deceived  by the devil.  For sometimes it is  hardly possible 
to  know  what  words  are spoken  by  a  good  spirit,  and what 
by an evil  spirit.  As  these  produce no great effect,  they can 
hardly be distinguished by their effects;  for sometimes words 
which  come  from  the  devil  have  more  efficacy3  with  im-
perfect souls  than have these others, which come from a good 
spirit,  with  souls  that  are  spiritual.  The  soul,  then,  must 
take  no  account  of what  these  words  may  express,' neither 
attach  any importance  to  them,  whether  they  come from  a 
1  Exodus iii,  h'. 
2  [Lit.,  • greater worth.'j  A,  B:  • greater truth and  worth.' 
3  A,  c.p.:  • more sensible  efficacy.' 
218  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
good or from  an evil spirit.  But the words must be repeated 
to  an  experienced  confessor,  or  to  a  discreet  and  learned 
person,  that he may give  instruction and see  what it is  well 
to  do,  and  impart  his  advice;  and  the  soul  must  behave, 
with  regard  to  them,  in  a  resigned  and  passive
1 
manner. 
And, if such an expert person cannot be found,  it is  better to 
attach no importance to these words
2 
and to repeat them to 
nobody;  for it is easy to find  persons who will  ruin the soul 
rather than edify it.  Souls must not be given into the charge 
of any kind of director, since it is  a  thing of such  importance 
in so grave a  matter whether one goes  astray or acts  rightly. 
6.  And let it be clearly noted that a  soul should never act 
according  to  its  own  opinion  or  accept  anything  of what 
these locutions express,  without much reflection and without 
taking advice of another. 3  For strange and subtle deceptions 
may arise  in  this  matter;  so  much so  that  I  myself believe 
that  the soul  that  does  not  set  itself against  accepting  such 
things cannot fail  to be deceived  by many of them. C 
7.  And  since  we  have  treated  of  these  deceptions  and 
perils,  and  of the  caution  to  be  observed  with  regard  to 
them, in Chapters seventeen,  eighteen,  nineteen and twenty 
of this  book,  I  refer  the reader to  these  and say no more on 
this  matter here;  I  only repeat that my chief instruction is 
that the soul should attach no importance to these  things  in 
any way.!» 
CHAPTER  XXXI 
Which  treats  of the  substantial  words  that  come  interiorly  to  the 
spirit.  Describes the  difference  between  them andformal words, 
and  the profit  which  they  bring  and  the  resignation  and respect 
which  the  soul  must observe  with  regard to  them. 
6 
I.  The  third  kind  of interior  words,  we  said,  is  called 
substantial.  These  substantial  words,  although  they  are 
J  [Lit.,' negative.'] 
a  E.p.:  • it is  better  to  take  the  substantial  and  secure  part  of  what 
these words  bring,  and otherwise to attach no importance to them.' 
II  E.p.  omits:  • of another: 
4  A,  B, e.p.  add:  • either to a  small,  or to a  great extent.' 
6  So  Alc.  A,  B:  '. .  .  my  chief  instruction,  and  the  surest,  to  this 
end, is that the soul should attach no importance whatever to these things, 
however highly it may think of them, but should  be guided in all things by 
reason and by what the Church has already taught us and teaches us daily.' 
•  This chapter is notable for the hardly surpassable clarity and precision 
with which the Saint defines substantial locutions.  Some critics, however, 
ha.ve  ,found  fault  with  him  for  saying  that the  soul  should  Dot  fea.r  these 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XXXI 
21
9 
likewise formal,  since  they are impressed  upon the soul  with 
all  formality,  differ,  nevertheless,  in  that  substantial  words 
produce vivid and substantial effects  upon the soul,  whereas 
words which are merely form.al  do not.  So  that, although it 
is  true  that  every  substantial  word  is  formal,  every  formal 
word is  not therefore substantial,  but only, as we said above, 
such a word as impresses substantiallyl on the soul that which 
it signifies.  It is  as  if Our Lord  were  to  say formally to the 
soul:  'Be thou good' ;  it would then substantially be good. 
Or as  if He were  to  say  to  it:  'Love thou  Me';  it would 
then have and feel within itself the substance oflove for God.-
Or as ifit feared greatly and He said to it:  'Fear thou not ': 
it  would  at  once  be  conscious  of great  fortitude  and  tran-
quillity.  For the sayings of God, and His words,  as  the Wise 
Man says,  are full  of power; 3  and thus  that which  He says 
to the soul  He produces substantially within it.  For it is  this 
that David signified  when he said:  See,  He will give  to His 
voice a  voice  of virtue. '  And even so  with  Abraham,  when 
He said to him:  Walk in My presence and be thou perfect  :5 
he was then perfect and walked ever in the fear of God.  And 
this  is  the  power  of His  word  in  the  Gospel,  wherewith  He 
healed  the  sick,  raised  the  dead,  etc.,  by  no  more  than  a 
word.  And after this manner He gives certain souls locutions 
which  are  substantial;  and  they  are  of such  moment and 
price that they are life and virtue and incomparable  blessing 
to the soul;  for one ofthese words  works
6 
a  greater blessing 
within  the  soul  than  all  that  the  soul  has  itself  done 
throughout its  life. 
2.  With respect to these words, the soul should do nothing. 
I t  should  neither  desire  them,  nor  refrain  from  desiring 
locutions,  but  accept  them  humbly  and  passively,  since  they  depend 
wholly on God.  The reply is  that,  when  God  favours  the soul with these 
locutions,  its  own  restless  effort  can  only  impede  His  work  in  it,  as  has 
already  been  said.  The soul  is truly co-operating  with  God  by preparing 
itself  with  resignation  and  humble  affection  to  receive  His favours:  it is 
in no sense,  as some critics have asserted,  completely inactive.  As  to the 
fear  of  being  deceived  by  these  locutions,  both  S.  Thomas  and  all  the 
principal  commentators  are  in  conformity  with  the  Saint's  teaching. 
S.  Teresa,  too,  took  the  same  attitude  as  S.  John  of  the  Cross.  Cf.  her 
Life,  Chap.  xxv, and  Mansions,  VI,  Chap.  iii. 
1  E.p.:  'impresses truly.' 
Z  E.p.  modifies  thus:  'Or if  He  were  to  say  formally  to  the  soul: 
Love  thou  Me:  it would  then  have and  feel  within  itself impulses of love 
for  God.'  The  edition  of  1630  has:  '  ... the  substance  of  love-that 
is,  true love  of  God,'  reading otherwise as in  the text. 
3  Ecclesiastes viii, 4.  •  Psalm lxvii,  34  [A.V.,  lxviii,  33]. 
    Genesis  xvii,  I.  •  E.p.:  'perhaps works.' 
220  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
them ;  it should neither reject them nor fear them.  I t should 
do nothing
l 
in the way of executing what these words express, 
for  these substantial words are never pronounced by God in 
order that the soul may translate them into action,  but that 
He may so translate them within the soul  ;  herein they differ 
from formal  and successive  words.  And  I  say  that the soul 
must  neither  desire  nor  refrain  from  desiring,  for  its  desire 
is  unnecessary in order that God  may translate  these  words 
into  effect,  nor  is  it  sufficient  for  the  soul  to  refrain  from 
desiring  in  order  for  the  said  effect  not  to  be  produced. 
Let the soul  rather be resigned  and  humble with  respect  to 
them.  It should  not  reject  them,2  since  the  effect  of these 
words remains substantially within it and is full oftlie blessing 
of God.  As  the soul receives this blessing passively, its action 
is  in  no  way  of any  importance.  Nor  should  it  fear  any 
deception;  for  neither the understanding nor the devil  can 
intervene herein, nor can they succeed 
8 
in passively producing 
this  substantial  effect  in  the  soul,  in  such  a  way  that  the 
effect  and  habit of the  locution  may  be  impressed  upon  it, 
unless  the  soul  should  have  given  itself  to  the  devil  by  a 
voluntary  compact,  and  he  should  have  dwelt  in  it  as  its 
master, and impressed upon it these effects,  not of good,  but 
of evil.'  Inasmuch as that soul would be already voluntarily 
united  to  him  in  perversity,  the  devil  might  easily  impress 
upon it the effects of his sayings  and words  with  evil  intent. 
5 
For we see by experience that in many things and even upon 
good souls  he works  great violence,  by means  of suggestion, 
making  his  suggestions  very  efficacious;  and  if they  were 
evil  he  might  work  in  them  the  consummation  of  these 
suggestions.
6 
But he cannot leave upon a soul effects similar 
1  Ale.  omits:  'desire nothing  .  .  .  should do nothing.' 
I  E.p. abbreviates this paragraph thus:  'With respect to these words, 
the  soul  should  itself  do  nothing  and  desire  nothing  at  the  time,  but 
conduct  itself  with  resignation  and  humility,  giving  its  free  consent  to 
God;  neither should  it reject anything,  nor fear anything.  It should  not 
labour  in  executing  what  these  words  express,  for  by  these  substantial 
words  God  works  in  the  soul;  wherein  they  differ  from  formal  and 
successive words.  It should  not reject them,' etc.  . 
a  E.p.:  '  nor can this evil one succeed  .. .'  . 
,  E.p.  has  (fol:  • unless  the  soul  ... of  evil '):  'although  in  souls 
that were  given  to  the  devil  by  a  voluntary  compact,  in  whom  he  dwelt 
as  their  master,  he  could  by  suggestion  impel  them ·to  [produce]  results 
of great malignity.' 
I  So  A,  B.  Alc.  omits  this  sentence.  E.p.  has:  'For,  as  such  souls 
would  already  be voluntarily  united  to him  in  perversity,  the devil  could 
easily impel them  thereto.' 
•  E.p.:  'be might impel them  more violently still.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAP'rER  XXXII  221 
to  those  of locutions  which  are good;  for  there is  no  com-
parison between the locutions of the devil and those of Gad. 
The former  are all  as  though  they  were  not,  in comparison 
with  the  latter,  neither  do  they  produce  any  effec.t.  at  all 
compared  with  the effect  of these.  For this  cause  God says 
through  Jeremiah:  What  has  the  chaff  to  do  with  the 
wheat?  Are  not  My  words  perchance  as  fire,  and  as  a 
hammer that breaketh the rock in pieces?l  And  thus  these 
substantial words are of great service to the union of the soul 
with  God;  and the  more interior and the more substantial 
they are,  the greater is  the profit that they bring.  Happy is 
the soul to whom God speaks.  Speak, Lord, for Thy servant 
heareth.
2 
CHAPTER  XXXII 
Which  treats  of the  apprehensions  received  by  the  understanding 
from  interior  feelings  which  come  superno.turally  to  the  soul. 
Describes  their  cause,  and  the  manner  wherein  the  soul  must 
conduct itself so  that they may not obstruct its road to  un£on  with 
God. 
I.  It is  now  time  to  treat  of the  fourth  and  last  kind  of 
               apprehension  which  we  said  might come  to  the 
               through  the  spiritual  feelings  which  are 
frequently  produced  supernaturally in the  souls  of spiritual 
persons and which we count amongst the distinct apprehen-
sions  of the understanding. 
2.  These  diistinct  spiritual  feelings  may  be  of two  kinds. 
The first  kind is  in the affection of the will.  The second, in 
the substance  of the soul. 3  Each  of these  may  be  of many 
kinds.  Those  of the  will,  when  they  are  of God,  are  most 
sublime;  but those  that are of the substance of the soul are 
very high and of great good and profit.'  As  to these,  neither 
the soul  nor he that treats  with  it can  know  or understand 
the cause whence they proceed, or what are the acts whereby 
God grants it these favours;  for  they depend not upon any 
good  works performed  by the soul, nor upon     meditations, 
1  Jeremiah xxiii,  28--9.  A,  B, e.p.  read' stones' for' rocks.' 
•  I  Kings  [A.V.,  I  Samuel] iii,  10. 
•  E.p.:  • The  second,  feelings  that,  though  they  are  also  in  the  will, 
yet,  because  they  are  most  intense,  sublime,  profound  and  secret,  seem 
not to touch the will,  but to be wrought in the substance of the soul.' 
,  E.p.:  • but the second are very high and of great good and profit.' 
222  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
although both these things are a  good preparation for them : 
God  grants  these  favours  to  whom  He  wills  and  for  what 
reason He wills. 
1 
For it may come to pass that a  person will 
have performed  many good  works  yet  that He will  not give 
him  these  touches  of His  favour;  and  another  will  have 
done far  fewer  good  works,  yet  He will  give  him  them  to a 
most  sublime  degree  and  in  great  abundance.  And  thus 
it is  not  needful  that  the  soul  should  be actually  employed 
and occupied in spiritual things  (although it is  much  better 
that it should be so employed ifit is  to have these favours)  for 
God to give it these touches in which the soul experiences the 
said  feelings;  for  in the  majority  of cases  the  soul  is  quite 
heedless of them.  Of these touches, some are distinct and are 
quickly gone;  others are less  distinct  and last longer. 
3.  These  feelings,  inasmuch  as  they  are  feelings  only,! 
belong not to the understanding but to the will;  and thus  I 
refrain, of set  purpose, from  treating  of them here, nor shall 
I  do  so  until we  treat of the night and purgation of the will 
in  its  affections:  this  will  be  in  the  third  book,  which 
follows  this. 
3 
But since frequently,  and even  in the majority 
of cases, apprehensions and knowledge and intelligence over-
flow  from  them  into  the  understanding,  it  will  be  well  to 
make  mention  of them  here,  for  that reason  only.  It must 
be known,  then,  that from  these feelings,  both from  those of 
the  will  and  from  those  which  are  in  the  substance  of the 
soul;  whether'  they  are  caused  suddenly  by  the  touches  of 
God,  or  are  durable  and  successive,  an  apprehension  of 
knowledge or intelligence overflows frequently,  as  I  say,  into 
the  understanding;  and  this  is  normally  a  most  sublime 
perception of God,  most delectable  to the understanding,  to 
which  no  name  can  be given,  any  more  than  to  the feeling 
whence it overflows.  And these manifestations of knowledge 
are  sometimes  of  one  kind  and  sometimes  of  another ; 
sometimes  they are clearer and more  lofty,  according  to the 
nature of the touches which come from God and which cause 
1  A,  B:  'and how  He wills.'  Note  that the  Saint does not deprecate 
good  works,  as  did  the  Illuminists  (alumbrados),  who  bade  the  soul  set 
them aside for  contemplation,  even though they were works of obligation. 
On  the  contrary,  he  asserts  that  good  works  have  a  definite,  though  a 
preparatory part, to play in the life of the contemplative. 
I  E.p.:  '  ... they  are  feelings  only  of  the  kind  whereof  we  here 
speak  .. .' 
a  Ale.  alone  has:  'which  follows  this.'  The  Saint  does  not,  in  fact, 
return  to this matter, either in the third book or elsewhere. 
,  E.p.:  'that from all these feelings,  whether  .. .' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XXXII  223 
the  feelings  whence  they  proceed,  and  according  also  to 
their property.! 
4.  It is  unnecessary  here to spend a  great store of words I 
in cautioning and directing the understanding, through these 
manifestations  of knowledge,  in  faith,  to  union  with  God. 
For  albeit  the  feelings  which  we  have  described  are  pro-
duced  passively in the soul,  without  any             assistance 
to that end on its own part, even so likewise is the knowledge 
of them  received  passively  in  the  understanding,      a  way 
called  by  the  philosophers' passible,'  wherein  the  under-
standing plays no part.  Wherefore, in order not to go astray 
on their account nor to impede the profit which comes from 
them,  the  understanding  must  do  nothing  in  connection 
with  these  feelings,  but  conduct  itself  passively,
3 
and  not 
interfere  by applying  to them its  natural capacity.  For, as 
we have said in dealing with successive locutions,  the under-
standing,  with  .its  activity,  would  very  easily  disturb  and 
ruin the effect of these delicate manifestations of knowledge, 
which are a  delectable supernatural intelligence that human 
nature  cannot  reach  or  apprehend  by  its  own  efforts,  but 
only by an attitude of receptivity.4  And thus  the soul  must 
not strive  to  attain them  or desire  to receive  them, Ii lest  the 
understanding  should  itself  form  other  manifestations,  or 
the  devil  should  make  his  entry  with  still  more  that  are 
different from them and false.  This he may very well do by 
means 8  of the feelings  aforementioned,  or of those  which he 
can himself infuse into the soul that gives itself to these kinds 
of  knowledge. 
7 
Let  the  soul  be  resigned,  humble  and 
passive  herein,  for,  since it receives  this  knowledge  passively 
from God, He will communicate it whensoever He is pleased, 
if He sees  the soul  to  be humble and detached.  And in this 
way  the  soul  will  do  nothing  to  coun.teract  the  help  which 
these kinds of knowledge give it in its progress toward Divine 
union,  which help is great;  for these touches are all touches 
of union,  which  are wrought  passively in the soul. 8 
1  E.p.:  . to their capacity.'  2  E.p.:  • to spend many words.' 
I  E.p.  adds here:  . inclining the will  to free  consent and gratitude.' 
,  [Lit.,  • or apprehend  by doing,  but by receiving.'] 
i  E.p.  omits:  • or desire to receive them: 
•  The  edition  of  1630  has:  '. .  .  do  in  the  soul,  when  it gives  itself 
to these kinds of knowledge,  by means  .  .  .' 
i  E.p. substitutes for' or of those  .  .  .  kinds of knowledge' the words: 
• making use of the bodily senses.' 
•  Some  editions  here  add  a  long  paragraph,  which,  however,  is  the 
work  of  P.  Jeronimo  de  S.  Jose,  who  was  responsible  for  the  edition  of 
224  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
5.  What  has  been  said  concerning  this  is  sufficient,  for 
no  matter what may happen to the soul  with  respect to the 
understanding,  cautions  and  instructions  have  been  given 
it in  the sections  already  mentioned.  And  although  a  case 
may  appear  to  be  different  and  to  be  in  no  way  included 
herein,  there is  none that cannot be reduced to one of these, 
from which may be deduced the instruction necessary for it.
1 
J630.  It appears  neither in  the MSS.  nor in the edition of  1618.  It runs 
as follows: 
All the instruction which has been given in this book on total abstrac-
tion aqd passive contemplation, wherein,  oblivious to all created things 
[and detached from images and figures,  we  allow ourselves to be guided 
by God,  remaining in simple regard of supreme truth, is applicable not 
only  to that act of  most  perfect  contemplation,  the  lofty  and  wholly 
supernatural  repose  of  which  is  still  prevented  by  the  daughters  of 
Jerusalem  (namely,  good  reflections  and  meditations),  if at that time 
the  soul  desires  them,  but also  to tile  whole  of  the  time  during which 
Our  Lord  communicates  the simple,  general  and  loving  attentiveness 
aforementioned,  or in which  the soul,  aided  by grace,  remains  in  that 
state.  For at that time the soul must always strive to keep its under-
standing  in  repose,  without  the  intrusion  of  other  forms,  figures  or 
particular  kinds  of  knowledge,  save  to  a  very slight  extent and  quite 
superficially;  and it must have a  loving sweetness  which will enkindle 
it ever  more.  But,  except  at this  time,  in  all  its  exercises,  acts  and 
works,  the soul must make use of good meditations and remembrances, 
so  as  to  experience  the  greater  devotion  and  profit,  most  of  all  with 
respect to the life, passion and death of Our Lord  Jesus Christ, 60 that 
its actions, practices and life may be made like to His. 
1  Thus  Alc.  A,  B,  e.p.  read:  'This  suffices  to  conclude  with  the 
supernatural  apprehensions  of  the  understanding,  so  far  as  concerns  the 
guidance of the understanding,  by their means,  in faith,  to  Divine union. 
And  I  think that what has  been  said  with  regard  to this suffices,  for,  no 
matter  what  happens  to  the  soul  with  respect  to  the  understanding, 
instructions  and  cautions  concerning  it  will  be  found  in  the  sections 
already  mentioned.  And,  if something  should  happen,  apparently  so 
different  that none  of them  deals  with it (although  I  think  there will  be 
nothing  relating  to the understanding which cannot be  referred  to one of 
the four kinds of distinct               instructions and cautions concerning 
it can  be  deduced  from  what has been  said of others  similar to  it.  And 
with this  we  will  pass  to  the third  book,  where,  with the Divine favour, 
we shall treat of the interior spiritual purgation of the will with regard  to 
its interior affections which we here call active night.' 
C,  D  have:  'From what  has  been  said  may  be  deduced  instructions 
and cautions for guidance in whatever may happen to the soul with regard 
to the understanding,  even if it seem  so  different  that it includes  none  of 
the four  distinct kinds,  although I  think there will  be nothing relating to 
the  understanding  which  cannot  be  referred  to  one  of them.  And  so  we 
will  pass  to  the  third  book: 
The edition of J630 follows A, Band e.p., and adds further:  'I therefore 
beg  the  discreet  reader  to  read  these  things in a  benevolent  and  simple 
'spirit;  for,  when  this spirit is  not present,  however  sublime  and  perfect 
be the instruction,  it will  not yield  the profit  that it contains,  nor will  it 
earn  the  esteem  that  it  merits.  How  much  truer  is  this  in  the  present 
case,  since my style is in so  many ways deficient I ' 
BOOK  THE  THIRD 
Which  treats  of the  purgation  of the  active  night vf the  memory  and 
will.  Gives  instruction  how  the  soul  is  to  behave  with  respect 
to  the  apprehensions  of these  two  faculties,  that  it  may  come 
to  union  with  God,  according  to  the  two  faculties  afore-
mentioned,  in perfect hope  and charity. 
1 
CHAPTER  I 
I.  The first faculty of the soul, which is the understanding, 
has  now  been               through  all  its  apprehensions,  in 
the  first  theological  virtue,  which  is  faith,  to  the  end  that, 
according  to  this  faculty,  the  soul  may  be united  with  God 
by means of the purity of faith.  It now remains  to do like-
wise with respect to the other two faculties  of the soul,  which 
are memory and will, and to purify them likewise with respect 
to  their  apprehensions,  to  the  end  that,  according  to  these 
two faculties  also,  the soul  may come  to  union with  God in 
perfect hope and charity.  This will briefly be effected in this 
third  book.  VYe  have  now  concluded  our treatment  of the 
understanding,  which  is  the  receptacle  of all  other  objects 
according to its  mode of operation; 2  and in treating of this 
we  have gone a  great part of the whole way.  It is  therefore 
unnecessary  for  us  to  write  at equal  length  with  respect  to 
these  faculties;3  for  it  is  not  possible  that,  if the  spiritual 
man  instructs  his  understanding  in  faith  according  to  the 
doctrine which has been given him, he should not, in so doing, 
instruct the other two faculties  in the other two virtues like-
wise;  for  the  operations  of each  faculty  depend  upon  the 
others. 
2.  But since,  in order to follow  our manner of procedure, 
and  in  order,  too,  that  we  may  be  the  better  understood, 
we  must  necessarily  speak  of the  proper  and  determinate 
1  So  Ale.,  A,  B.  Thls  first  chapter,  in e.p.,  is  called  the' Argument' 
of  the  book,  and  the  numbering  of  the  chapters  differs  correspondingly 
from  that of the MSS.  Cf.  the Exposition of Book II (p.  66,  above). 
2  E.p.:  '  ... of  all the other objects that pass  to these faculties.' 
a  E.p.  omits the rest of this paragraph. 
225 
226  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
matter,  we  shall  here  be obliged  to set  down  the  apprehen-
sions  proper to each faculty,l and first,  those of the memory, 
making here such distinction between them as suffices for oQ.r 
purpose.  This we  shall be able to deduce from  the distinc-
tion  between  their  objects,  which  are ..  three:  natural. a 
imaginary  and  spiritual;  according  to  which  there  are 
likewise  three  kinds  of knowledge  which  come  from  the 
memory,  namely:  natural  and  supernatural,3  imaginary 
and  spiritual. 
3.  All  these,  by  the  Divine favour,  we  shall  treat here  in 
due  course,  beginning  with  natural  knowledge,  which  per-
tains  to the  most  exterior  objects.  And  we  shall  then  treat 
of the  affections  of the  wil1,  wherewith  we  shall  conclude 
this  third book of the spiritual active night. 
CHAPTER  II 
Which  treats  of the  natural  apprehensions  of  the  memory  and 
describes  how  the  soul  must  be  voided  of them  in  order  to  be 
able  to  attain  to  union  with  God according  to  this faculty. 
I.  It is  necessary  that,  in each of these  books,  the  reader 
should  bear in  mind the  purpose  of which  we  are speaking. 
For otherwise  there  may  arise  within him  many such  ques-
tions  with  respect  to  what  he  is  reading  as  might  now  be 
arising  with  respect  to  what  we  have  said  of the  under-
standing,  and shall say  now of the  memory,  and  afterwards 
shall  say  of the  will.  For,  seeing  how  we  annihilate  the 
faculties  with  respect  to  their  operations,  it  may  perhaps 
seem  to  him  that  we  are  destroying  the  road  of spiritual 
practice  rather  than  constructing  it;  this  would  be  true  if 
we  were  seeking here  only  to  instruct  beginners,  whom  it is 
necessary  to  prepare  through  these  apprehensible  and  dis-
cursive  apprehensions. 
2.  But,  since we  are  here  giving  instruction  to  those  who 
would  progress  farther  in contemplation, even to union with 
God,  to  which  end  all  these  means  and  exercises  of sense 
1  E.p.:  'we shall here have to treat of the acts of each faculty.' 
I  'Natural  and  supernatural,'  says  the  edition  of  1630,  basing  its 
reading upon the similar one two lines below. 
•  It will be seen from  what follows  that in practice the Saint preserves 
the  strictly  tripartite  division  given  in  the  text  above,  supernatural 
knowledge  being found  in each of the sections. 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  II 
227 
concerning  the  faculties  must  recede  into  the  background, 
and be put to silence,  to  the end that God  may of His  own 
accord  work  Divine  union  in  the  soul,  it  is  necessary  to 
proceed  by  this  method  of disencumbering  and  emptying 
the soul, and causing the natural jurisdiction and operations 
of the faculties  to be denied  them, so that they may become 
capable  of  infusion  and  illumination  from  supernatural 
sources;  for  their  capacity  cannot  attain  to  so  lofty  an 
experience,  but will rather hinder it, if it be not disregarded. 
3.  And  thus,  if it  be  true,  as  it  is,  that  the  soul  must 
proceed  in  its  growing  knowledge  of God  by learning that 
which  He is  not  rather  than  that which  He is,  in  order  to 
come  to  Him,  it must  proceed  by renouncing and  refusing 
to  accept  everything  in  its  apprehensions  that  can  be 
renounced,  whether  this  be  natural or  supernatural,  to the 
very uttermost.  We shall proceed with this end in view with 
regard  to  the  memory,  drawing  it  out  from  its  natural 
methods and limitations, and causing it to rise above itself-
that is,  above all clear knowledge and apprehensible posses-
sion-to the supreme hope of God,  Who is incomprehensible. 
4.  Beginning,  then,  with  natural  knowledge,  I  say  that 
natural  knowledge  in  the  memory  consists  of all  kinds  of 
knowledge that the memory can form concerning the objects 
of the  five  bodily  senses-namely:  hearing,  sight,  smell, 
taste and touch-and all those kinds of knowledge which the 
soul  can  form  and  make  after  this  fashion.  Of all  these 
forms and manners of knowledge the soul must strip and void 
itself,  and it must strive  to lose  the imaginary apprehension 
of them, so  that there may be left in it no kind of impression 
of knowledge,  nor trace of aught soever,  but rather the soul 
must  remain  barren  and  bare,l as  if these  forms  had  never 
passed through it, and in total oblivion and suspension.  And 
this cannot happen unless the memory be annihilated as to all 
its forms, ifit is to be·united with God.  For it cannot happen 
save  by total separation· from  all forms  which are not God; 
for  God comes beneath no definite form or kind of knowledge 
whatsoever,  as  we  have  said  in treating  of the  night  of the 
understanding.  And  since,  as  Christ  says,2  no  man  can 
serve two masters,3 and the memory cannot be united' both 
1  E.p.:  ' ... impression  of  knowledge,  but  [the  soul]  must  remain 
as completely detached as it can.' 
I  E.p.:  • as our Redeemer teaches.' 
•  (S.  Matthew vi,  24.]  •  E.p.:  • united in perfection: 
U 
228  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
to God and to definite forms  and  kinds  of knowledge·;  and, 
as  God has  no  form  or image that can be comptehende.d  by 
the memory, it follows  that, when the memory is  united with 
God  (as  is  seen,  too,  every  day  by  experience),  it  remains 
without form  and without figure,  its  imagination being lost 
and itself being absorbed  in a  supreme good, and in a  great 
oblivion,  remembering  nothing.  For  that  Divine  union 
voids  its fancy  and clears it
l 
of all forms  and kinds  of know-
ledge and ·raises it to the supernatural. 
5.  Now  there  sometimes  comes  to  pass  here  a  notable 
thing;  for  occasionally,  when  God  causes  these  touches  of 
union in the memory, the brain (where memory has its seat), 
is  so  perceptibly  upset  that  it seems  as  if it  becomes  quite 
inert,  and  its judgement  and  sense  are  lost.  This  is  some-
times  more  perceptible  and  sometimes  less  so,  according  to 
the strength of this touch! and then,  by reason of this union, 
the  memory is  voided  and  purged,  as  I  say,  of all  kinds  of 
knowledge.  It remains  in  oblivion-at  times  in  complete 
oblivion 2-S0  that  it  has  to  put forth  a  great  effort  and  to 
labour greatly in order to remember anything. 
6.  And sometimes this oblivion of the memory and suspen-
sion  of the  imagination  reach  such  a  point,  because  of the 
union  of the  memory  with  God,  that  a  long  time  passes 
without the soul's  perceiving it,  or knowing what has  taken 
place during that period.  And, as the imaginative faculty  is 
then in suspension, it feels  naught that is  done to it,  not even 
things  that cause pain;  for  without imagination there is  no 
feeling,  not  even  coming  through  thought,  since  this  exists 
not.
3 
And, to  the end that God may cause  these  touches of 
union,  the soul  must  needs  withdraw  its  memory  from  all 
apprehensible  kinds  o     knowledge.  And  it  is  to  be  noted 
that  these  suspensions  come  not  to  pass  in  those  that  are 
already  perfect,  since  they have  attained  to  perfect  union, 
and these suspensions belong to the beginnings of union. 
7.  Someone will  remark that all this seems  very well,  but 
that it leads to the destruction of the natural use and course 
of the  faculties,  and  reduces  man  to  the state of a  beast-a 
1  E.p.:  'and seems  to clear it.' 
I  So  Ale.  and  P.  A:  'It remains  in  oblivion,  and,  at  times,  [is) 
oblivious  to  itself.'  B:  • It  remains  transported,  and,  at  times,  [is) 
oblivious  to itself.'  E.p.  omits  the  whole  of  the  paragraph  down  to  this 
point,  continuing  the  preceding  paragraph,  thus:  '.  .  .  raises  it  to  the 
supernatural. leaving it in  such oblivion  that it has to put forth  ..  ' 
a  Ale. ends the sentence at • feeling.' 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  II 
229 
state of oblivion and even               he becomes incapable 
of reasoning  or  of remembering  his  natural  functions  and 
necessities.  I t  will  be argued that God destroys not nature, 
but  rather  perfects  it;  and  that  from  this  teaching  there 
follows  necessarily its  destruction,  when that which  pertains 
to  morality  and  reason  is  not  practised  and  is  forgotten, 
neither  is  that  which  is  natural  practised;  for  (it  will  be 
said)  none  of these  things  can  be  remembered,  when  the 
soul  is  deprived of! forms  and kinds  of knowledge which are 
the means  of remembrance. 
8.  To this I reply that, the more nearly the memory attains 
to  union with God,  the more do definite kinds of knowledge 
become  perfected  within  it,  until  it  loses  them  entirely-
namely,  when  in  perfection it ·attains  to  the state  of union. 
And  thus,  at the  beginning,  when  this  is  first  taking  place, 
the  soul  cannot  but fall  into  great  oblivion  with  respect  to 
all  things,  since  forms  and  kinds  of knowledge  are  being 
erased  from  it;  and therefore it isguiIty of many omissions 
in  its  outward  behaviour  and  usage-forgetting  to  eat  or 
drink,  and  being  uncertain  if it  has  done  this  or  no,  if it 
has  seen  this  or  no,  if it  has  said  this  or  no-through  the 
absorption of the memory in God.
2 
But when once it attains 
to  the  habit  of union,  which  is  a  supreme  blessing,  it  no 
longer  has  these  periods  of oblivion,  after  this  manner,  in 
that  which  pertains  to  natural  and  moral  reason;  actions 
which  are  seemly  and  necessary  it  performs  rather  with  a 
much greater degree of perfection, although it performs them 
no longer by means of forms  and manners of knowledge per-
taining to the memory.  For, when it lias the habit of union, 
which is a supernatural state, memory and the other faculties 
fail  it completely in their natural functions,  and pass beyond 
their natural limitations,  even to God,  Who is  supernatural. 
And thus, when the memory is transformed in GoCl,  it cannot 
receive  impressions  of  forms  or  manners  of  knowledge. 
Wherefore  the  functions  of the  memory  and  of the  other 
faculties  in this  state are all  Divine;  for,  when at last  God 
possesses  the faculties  and  has  become  the  entire  master  of 
them,  through  their  transformation  into  Himself,  it  is  He 
Himself Who moves and commands them divinely, according 
1  E.p.:  'when the soul  pays no heed  to.' 
Z  E.p.  abbreviates:  '  ... union  with  God,  the  less  it heeds  definite 
kinds of  knowledge, and  this increases in proportion as it draws  nearer to 
the state of union through the absorption of the memory in God.' 
230  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
to His Divine Spirit and will ; 1  and the result of this  is  that 
the operations of the soul are not distinct,  but all that it does 
is  of God,  and  its  operations  are  Divine,  so  that,  even  as 
S.  Paul says,  he that is joined unto  God  becomes  one spirit 
with Him.
2 
g.  Hence it comes  to  pass  that the operations  of the soul 
in union are of the Divine Spirit and are Divine.  And hence 
it comes that the actions of such souls are only those that are 
seemly and reasonable,  and not those that are ill-beseeming. 
For the Spirit of God teaches them that which they ought to 
know,  and  causes  them  to  be ignorant of that which  it be-
hoves  them not to  know,  and  to remember that which  they 
have to remember, with or without forms,  and to forget that 
which they should forget;  and it makes them love that which 
they have to love, and not to  love that which  is  not in  God. 
And thus,3  all the first  motions  of the faculties  of such  souls 
are Divine and it is  not  to  be wondered at that the motions 
and operations of these faculties should be Divine, since they 
are transformed  in the  Divine  Being.' 
10.
6 
Of these  operations  I  will  give  a  few  examples:  let 
this  be  one.  A  person  asks  another  who  is  in  this  state  to 
commend  him  to  God.  This  person  will  not  remember  to 
do  so  by  means  of any  form  or  manner  of knowledge  that 
remains  in his  memory concerning that other person;  and 
if it  is  right  that he should  recommend  him to  God  (which 
will  be if God desires to receive a prayer for that person),  He 
will move his will and give him a desire to pray for him;  and 
if God desires  not such prayer,  that other person will  not be 
able nor will  desire to pray, 
6 
though he make great efforts  to 
do so;  and at times God will cause him to pray for others of 
whom he has no knowledge nor has ever heard.  And this is 
because,  as  I  have  said,  God  alone  moves  the  faculties  of 
1  E. p. omits the rest of this pa.ragraph and the first sentence of the next. 
2  I  Corinthians vi,  17. 
I  E.p.  substitutes  for  this  sentence:  'For He [i.e.,  the Spirit of God] 
specially governs and moves them so that they may perform those actions 
which are seemly,  according to the will  and ordinance of God.'  . 
,  P.  Jose  de  Jesus  Maria,  in  his  Vida  y  excelencias  de  la  Santisima 
Virgen  Maria  (I,  xl), quotes this and part of the last paragraph from what 
he claims to be an original  MS.  of S.  John of the Cross,  but his text varies 
considerably from that of any MS.  now  known.  [Po  Silverio, however (d. 
p.  224,  above),  considers  that  this  and  other  similar  citations  are  quite 
untrustworthy. ] 
6  E.p.  omits paragraphs  10,  II,  12,  all of which,  however,  are restored 
in the edition of  1630. 
•  Edition of  1630:  • will not pray nor will desire to pray.' 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  II 
these souls to do those works which are meet, according to the 
will and ordinance of God,  and they cannot be moved to do 
others;  and  thus  the  works  and  prayers  of these  souls  are 
always  effectual.  Such  were  those  of  the  most  glorious 
Virgin Our Lady,  who,  being rai3ed  to  this high estate from 
the beginning, had never the form of any creature! imprinted 
in her soul,  neither was  moved  by such,  but was  invariably 
guided  by the  Holy Spirit. 
I  I.  Another example.  At a  certain time a  person in this 
state  has  to  attend  to  some  necessary  business.  He  will 
remember it by  no  kind  of form,  but,  without his  knowing 
how, it will come to his soul, 
2 
at the time and in the manner 
that it ought to  come,  and that without fail. 
12.  And not only in these things does  the Holy Spirit give 
such  persons light,  but in many others,  relating  bpth  to  the 
present and to the future, and, in many cases,  even when they 
are  far  distant;  and  although  at  times  this  comes  to  pass 
through  intellectual  forms,  it  frequently  happens  without 
the  intervention  of any forms  that  can  be  apprehended,  so 
that these persons know not how they know. 
3 
But this comes 
to  them  from  the  Divine  Wisdom;  for,  since  these  souls 
exercise  themselves  in  knowing  and  apprehending  nothing 
with the faculties, 4.  they come in general,  as  we  have said in 
the Mount, I; to know everything, according to that which the 
Wise  Man says:  The worker  of all things,  who  is  Wisdom, 
taught me all things. II 
13.  You  will  say,  perhaps,  that the soul  will  be unable to 
void and deprive its memory of all forms  and fancies  to such 
an extent as  to be able to attain to so lofty a state;  for there 
are  two  things  so  difficult  that  their  accomplishment  sur-
passes  human  ability  and  strength,  namely,  to  throw  off 
with  one's  natural  powers  that  which  is  natural,  which  is 
hard  enough,7  and  to  attain  and  be  united  to  the  super-
I  Edition  of  1630:  'of any creature  that would  turn her  aside  from 
God.' 
2  Edition  of  1630  adds  here:  'by  the  stirring  up  of  his  memory 
described above.' 
a  Edition of  1630  abbreviates:  '. .  •  even  when  they  are  distant,  so 
that these persons know not how  they know.' 
,  Edition of  1630:  'a.J.d apprehending with the faculties  nothing that 
can impede them.' 
6  The reference is to the drawing of the Mount of Perfection. Cf. p. xxxiv, 
above. 
•  Wisdom vii,  2  I. 
7  [Lit.,  • which cannot be • (que  no  puede  ser).  but this is  a  well-known 
Spanish hyperbole describing what is extremely difficult.] 
232  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
natural,  which is  much more difficult-indeed, to speak the 
truth,  is  impossible  with  natural  ability  alone.  The truth, 
I  repeat, is that God must place the soul in this supernatural 
state;  but the soul,  as far as  in it lies,  must  be  continually 
preparing  itself;  and  this  it  can  do  by  natural  means, 
especiallyl  with  the  help  that  God  is  continually    ~ v i n     it. 
And  thus,  as  the  soul,  for  its  own  part,  enters  into  this 
renunciation  and  self-emptying  of forms,  so  God  begins  to 
give it the possession of union;  and this God works passively 
in the soul,  as  we  shall say,  Deo  dante,  when we  treat of the 
passive  night  of the  soul.  And  thus,  when  it  shall  please 
God, and according to the manner of the soul's preparation, 
He will grant it the habit of perfect and Divine union. 
2 
14.  And  the Divine effects  which  God  causes  in the soul 
when  He  has  granted  it this  habit,  both  as  to  the  under-
standing  and  as  to  the  memory  and  will,  we  shall  not 
describe  in  this  account  of the  soul's  active  purgation  and 
night,  for  by this  alone  the  soul  does  not  completely attain 
Divine  union.  We  shall  speak  of these  effects,  however,  in 
treating of the passive  night,  by  means  of which  is  brought 
about  the  union  of the  soul  with  God.
3 
And  thus  I  shall 
1  E.p. omits' especially.'  I  E.p. omits:  • and  Divine.' 
•  E.p.  omits  all  the  rest  of this  paragraph,  substituting the  following 
passage,  which  it  introduces  in  order  [says  P.  Silverio]  to  describe  the 
scope of the Saint's teaching, and which is copied in the edition of  1630 : 
In [treating of]  this purgation of the memory,  I  speak here only of the 
necessary  means  whereby  the  memory  may  place  itself  actively  in  this 
night and purgation, as far as lies in its power.  And these means are that 
the spiritual man must habitually exercise caution, after this manner.  Of 
all  the things that he sees,  hears,  smells,  tastes or touches he  must  make 
no  particular  store  in  the  memory,  or  pay  heed  to  them,  or· dwell  upon 
them,  but  must  allow  them  to  pass  and  must  remain  in  holy  oblivion 
without refiecting upon them, save when necessary for some good reflection 
or  meditation.  And  this  care  to  forget  and  set  aside  knowledge  and 
images  is  never  applicable  to  Christ  and  His  Humanity.  For,  although 
occasionally,  at  the  height  of  contemplation  and  simple  regard  of  the 
Divinity, the soul may not remember this most sacred Humanity, because 
God,  with His own hand,  has raised  the soul  to this, as it were,  confused 
and  most supernatural knowledge,  yet it is in no  wise  seemly to study to 
forget  it,  since  looking  and  meditating  lovingly  upon  it will  aid  the soul 
to [attain] all that is good, and hereby it will  most readily rise to the most 
lofty state of union.  And it is clear that, although other bodily and visible 
things  are  a  hindrance  and  ought  to  be  forgotten,  we  must  not  include 
among  these  Him  Who  became  man  for  our  salvation,  and  Who  is  the 
truth,  the  door,  the  way  and  the  guide  to  all  good  things.  This  being 
assumed,  let  the  soul  strive  after  complete  abstraction  and  oblivion,  so 
that, in so far as is possible,  there may remain in its memory no knowledge 
or image of created things,  as though they existed  not in the world;  and 
let it leave  the memory free  and disencumbered  for  God,  and,  as it were, 
lost in holy oblivion. 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  II 
233 
speak here only of the necessary means whereby the memory 
may place itself actively in this night and purgation, as far as 
lies  in its  power.  And these means are that the spiritual man 
must habitually exercise caution, after this  manner.  All the 
things that he hears, sees, smells, tastes or touches, he must be 
careful not to store up or collect in his  memory,  but he must 
allow  himself to forget  them immediately,  and this  he  must 
accomplish,  if need  be,  with  the  same  efficacy  as  that  with 
which others contrive to remember them, so that there remains 
no knowledge or image of them whatsoever in his memory.  It 
must be with him as  if they existed not in the world, and his 
memory must be left free and disencumbered of them, and be 
tied to no consideration,  whether from above or from  below, 
as  if he  had  no  faculty  of memory;  he  must  freely  allow 
everything to fall  into oblivion  as  though  all  things  were  a 
hindrance to him;  and in fact  everything that is  natural, if 
one  attempt to  make  use  of it in supernatural  matters,  is  a 
hindrance rather than a help. 
15.  And  if  those  questions  and  objections  which  arose 
above  with  respect  to  the; understanding  should  also  arise 
here  (the  objections,  that  is  to  say,  that  the  soul  is  doing 
nothing, is  wasting its time and is  depriving itself of spiritual 
blessings  which it might well  receive  through  the  memory), 
the answer to this has already t-"en given,l and will  be given 
again  farther  on,  in  oUI  treatment  of  the  passive  night; 
wherefore there is  no need for us  to linger here.  It is  needful 
only to observe that, although at certain times  the benefit of 
this suspension of forms  and kinds  of knowledge  may not be 
realized,  the  spiritual  man  must  not  for  that  reason  grow 
weary, for  God will  not fail  to succour him in His own time. 
To attain so  great a  blessing  it behoves  the soul  to  endure 
much and  to suffer  with patience and hope. 
16.  And,  although  it  is  true  that  a  soul  will  hardly  be 
found  that is  moved  by  God  in all  things  and at all  times, 
and  has  such  continual  union  with  God  that,  without  the 
mediation of any form,  its faculties
2 
are ever moved divinely, 
there are yet souls who in their operations are very habitually 
moved by God, and these are not they that move themselves 
of their own strength,  for,  as  S.  Paul says,  the sons  of God, 
who  are transformed  and united in God,  are moved  by the 
1  E.p.:  '  ... through  the  memory)  much has already been  said  here 
in reply to them. and there,  too,  they have been completely answered: 
•  E.p.  omits:  • without the mediation of any form.' 
234  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
Spirit of God, 1  that is,  are moved to Divine actions in their 
faculties.  And  it is  no  marvel  that  their  operations should 
be Divine, .!iince  the  union  of the soul  is  Divine. 
CHAPTER  III 
Wherein  are  descrihed three kinds of  evil which come  to  tke soul wizen 
it  enters  not  into  darkness  with  respect  to  knowledge  and 
reflections  in  the  memory.  Herein  is  descrihed  the first. 
I.  To three  kinds  of evil  and inconvenience  the spiritual 
man is  subject when he persists in desiring to make use of all 
natural knowledge and reflections of the memory in order to 
journey toward God, or for  any other purpose:  two of these 
are positive and one is privative.  The first comes from things 
of the world;  the second,  from  the devil;  the third,  which 
is privative, is the impediment and hindrance to Divine union 
caused  and  effected  in the  soul. 
2.  The  first  evil,  which  comes  from  the  world,2  consists 
in the subjection of the soul, through knowledge
3 
and reflec-
tion, to many kinds of  harm, such as falsehoods, imperfections, 
desires,  opinions,  loss  of  time,  and  many  other  things 
which  breed  many kinds  of impurity in the soul.  And it is 
clear that the soul  must of necessity  fall  into many perils  of 
falsehood,  when  it gives  way  to  knowledge  and  reasoning; 
for oftentimes that which is  true must appear false,  and that 
which  is  certain, doubtful;  and  contrariwise;  for  there is 
scarcely a  single truth of which we can have complete know-
ledge.  From all  these  things  the soul  is  free  if the  memory 
enters into darkness  with respect  to every  kind  of reflection 
and knowledge. 
3.  Imperfections  meet  the  soul  at every  step  if it sets  its 
memory upon that which it has heard,  seen,  touched, smelt 
and  tasted;  for  there  must  then  perforce  cling  to  it  some 
affection, whether this  be of pain,  of fear,  of hatred, of vain 
hope, vain  enjoyment,  vainglory,  etc.  ;  for  all  these  are,  at 
the least,  imperfections,  and at times  are  downright
4 
venial 
sins;  and they leave much impurity most subtly in the soul, 
even though the reflections and the knowledge have relation 
1  Romans viii,  14.  I  E.p.:  •  r o ~   the things of the world.' 
•  A,  B:  • through much knowledge.' 
,  [Lit., • good.']  E.p.  reads' known' for  • downright.' 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  III 
235 
to  God.
1 
And  it  is  also  clear  that  they  engender  desires 
within the soul,  for these arise naturally from the knowledge 
and  reflections  aforementioned,  and  if one  wishes  only  to 
have this  knowledge  and  these  reflections,  even  that  is  a 
desire.  And it is  clearly seen that many occasions of  judging 
'others will come likewise;  for,  in using its memory,  the soul 
cannot  fail  to  come  upon  that which  is  good  and  bad  in 
others, and, in such a  case, that which is evil oftentimes seems 
good,  and  that which is  good,  evil.  I  believe  there is  none 
who can completely free  himself from  all these  kinds  of evil, 
save  by  blinding  his  memory  and  leading  it  into  darkness 
with regard to all these things. 
4.  And if you  tell  me that a  man is  well  able  to  conquer 
all  these  things  when  they  come  to  him, I  reply  that,  if he 
sets store by knowledge, this is simply and  t t   r l y   impossible; 
for  countless  imperfections  and  follies  insinuate  themselves 
into such knowledge, some of which are so subtle and minute 
that, without the soul's realization thereof,  they cling to it of 
their own accord, even as pitch clings to the man that touches 
it;  so that it is  better to conquer once for all by denying the 
memory completely.  You will say likewise that by so  doing 
the soul deprives itself of many good thoughts and meditation s 
upon  God,  which  are  of  great  profit  to  it  and  whereby 
God grants it favours.  I  reply that to this end purity of soul 
is  of the greatest  profit,2  and  this  consists  in  clinging  to  no 
creature affection,  or temporal affection,  or effective  adver-
tence;  concerning  which  I  believe  that  they  cannot  but 
cling  to  the  soul  because  of  the  imperfection  which  the 
faculties  have  in  their  own  operations.  Wherefore  it  is 
better to  learn to silence the faculties and to cause them to be 
still,  so  that God may speak.  For,  as  we have said,  in order 
to  attain  to  this  state  the  natural  operations  must  be  lost 
from  sight,  and this  happens,  as  the prophet says,  when  the 
soul comes  into solitude,  according to these its  faculties,  and 
God speaks  to its  heart. 
3 
5.  And if you  again  reply,  saying  that the soul  will  have 
1  So  Ale .•  A.  B.  E.p.  reads:  I  ••• venial  sins:  all  of  these  [being] 
things which disturb perfect purity and most simple union with God.' 
a  E.p.  inserts,  after' grants it favours':  • I  reply  that  that  which  is 
purely God and assists this simple, pure. universal and confused knowledge 
is  not  to  be  rejected,  but  that  which  detains  [the  memory]  in  images, 
forms,  figures  or  similitudes  of  created  things.'  It continues:  • And, 
speaking  of  this  purgation,  in order  that  God  may  accomplish  it,  purity 
of  soul  is  of  the  greatest  profit.  _ .  .'  The insertion  is  also  found  in  the 
edition of 1630.  I  Hosea ii. 14. 
\ 
236  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
no  blessing  unless  it  meditates  upon  God  and  allows  its 
memory  to  reflect  upon  Him,  and  that  many  distractions 
and negligences  will  continually enter it,  I  say that it is  im-
possible,  if the  memory  is  recollected  with  regard  both  to 
things  of the next life and to things here below,  that evils or 
distractions  should  enter  it,  nor  other  follies  or  vices  (the 
which things always enter when the memory wanders), since 
there is  no exit  or entrance for  them.  This  would  come  to 
pass if,  when we had shut the door upon considerations and 
reflections  concerning  things  above,  we  opened  it  to  things 
below;  but in this state we shut the door to all things whence 
distraction  may  come,l  causing  the  memory  to  be still  and 
dumb, and the ear of the spirit to be attentive, iIi silence,  to 
God alone, saying with the prophet:  Speak,  Lord, for Thy 
servant heareth.
2 
It was  thus  that the Spouse in the Songs 
said  that his Bride should be,  in these words:  My sister is  a 
garden  enclosed  and  a  fountain  sealed
3
-that  is  to  say, 
enclosed  and sealed  against all  things  that may enter. 
6.  Let the soul,  then, remain' enclosed,' without anxieties 
and troubles,  and He that entered in bodily form  to His  dis-
ciples  when  the  doors  were  shut,  and  gave  them  peace,' 
though they neither knew  nor thought that this was possible 
nor knew how it was  possible, 
5 
will  enter spiritually into the 
soul, without its  knowing  how He does so, when the doors of 
its faculties-memory, understanding and will-are enclosed 
against all apprehensions.  And He will fill  them with peace, 
coming down upon the soul, as the prophet says, like a river of 
peace,6 and taking from it all  the misgivings and suspicions, 
disturbances and darknesses which caused it to fear that it was 
lost or was on the way to perdition.  Let it not lose its anxiety 
to  pray, and let  it wait in detachment  and emptiness, for  its 
blessing will not tarry. 
CHAPTER  IV? 
Which  treats of the second kind of evil that may come to  the soul from 
the  devil by way of the natural apprehensions of the  memory. 
I.  The second  positive evil  that may come  to the soul  by 
means  of the  knowledge  of the  memory  proceeds  from  the 
1  [Lit.,  • whence  that  may  come:]  E.p.:  • We  shut  the  door  to  all 
things which are a  hindrance to union, and whence distraction may come: 
I  I  Kings [A.V.,  I  Samuel] iii, 10.  a  Canticles iv,  12.  . 
,  [So  John xx, 19.]  6  E.p. omits:  • nor knew how it was possible: 
•  Isaiah xlviii,  18.  7  P. omits this chapter. 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  IV 
237 
devil, who by this means obtains great influence over the soul. 
For he  can  continually  bring it new forms,  knowledge  and 
reflections,  by  means  whereof  he  can  taint  the  soul  with 
pride,  avarice, wrath, envy, etc.,  and cause  it  unjust hatred, 
or vain love, and deceive it in many ways.  And beside this, 
he is  wont to leave impressions,l and to implant them in the 
fancy,  in such wise that those that are false  appear true, and 
those  that  are  true,  false.  And  finally  all  the  greatest 
deceptions which are caused  by the devil,  and the evils  that 
he brings to the soul,  enter by way of knowledge and reflec-
tions of the memory.  Thus if the memory enter into darkness 
with  respect  to  them  all,  and  be annihilated in its  oblivion 
to  them,  it  shuts  the  door  altogether  upon  this  evil  which 
proceeds from the devil,  and frees  itself from all these  things, 
which  is  a  great blessing.  For the devil  has  no  power over 
the soul  unless  it be  through  the  operations  of its  faculties, 
principally by means of knowledge, 2 since upon these depend 
almost all the other operations of the other faculties.  Where-
fore,  if the memory be annihilated with respect to  them,  the 
devil can do naught;  for he finds no foothold, and without a 
foothold  he is  powerless. 
3 
2.  I  would  that  spiritual  persons  might  clearly  see  how 
many kinds  of harm are wrought by evil spirits in their souls 
by  means  of  the  memory,  when  they  devote  themselves 
frequently to making use of it, and how many kinds of sadness 
and affliction  and vain and  evil' joys  they  have,  both  with 
respect  to  their  thoughts  about  God,  and  also  with  respect 
to  the  things  of the  world;  and  how  many impurities  are 
left  rooted  in  their spirits; 5  and likewise  how  greatly  they 
are distracted from the highest recollection, which consists in 
fixing the whole soul,  according to all its faculties- upon the 
one incomprehensible Good,  and in withdrawing it from  all 
things  that can  be apprehended, since  these  are not incom-
prehensible Good.  This is  a  great good  (although less  good 
results  from  this  emptiness  than from  the soul's  fixing  itself 
upon  God),  simply  because  it  is  the  cause  which  frees  the 
soul from  many griefs  and afflictions  and sorrows,  over and 
above  the imperfections and sins from  which it is  delivered. 
1  [Lit., '  to leave things.']  A.  B, e.p.:  • to fix  things.' 
2  E.p.:  'by means of  forms  and species.' 
a  [Lit., • he finds  nothing to seize, and with nothing he can do nothing.'] 
&  E.p.  omits:  'and evil.' 
Ii  "\ Ie.  omits:  • and how many  .  .  .  spirits: 
238  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
CHAPTER  V 
Of the  third  evil  which  comes  to  the  soul  by  way  of the  distinet 
natural knowledge  of the  memory. 
I.  The  third  evil  which  comes  to  the  soul  through  the 
natural apprehensions of the memory is  privative;  for  these 
apprehensions  can  hinder  moral  good  and  deprive  us  of 
spiritual good.  And, in order that first of all we may explain 
how  these  apprehensions  hinder  moral  good  in  the  soul,  it 
must be known that moral good consists in the restraining of 
the· passions  and  the  curbing  of  disorderly  desires,  from 
which restraint there come to the soul tranquillity, peace and 
rest,  and  moral virtues,  all  of which  things  are  moral good. 
This restraining and curbing of the passions  cannot be truly 
accomplished  by the soul that forgets  not and withdraws not 
itself  from  things  pertaining  to  itself,  whence  arise  the 
affections;  and  no  disturbances  ever  arise  in  the soul  save 
through  the  apprehensions  of the  memory.  For,  when  all 
things  are  forgotten,  there  is  naught  that  can  disturb  one's 
peace or that moves  the  desires;  for,  as they say, that which 
the eye sees  not the heart desires  not. 
2.  And  this  we  learn  by  experience  at  every  moment; 
for we observe that, whenever the soul begins to think of any 
matter, it is  moved and disturbed, either much or little, with 
respect to that thing, according to the nature of its apprehen-
sion.  If it  be  a  troublesome  and grievous  matter,  the  soul 
finds sadness! in it;  if pleasant, desire and joy, 
2 
and so forth. 
Wherefore  the result of the changing of that apprehension is 
necessarily  disturbance;  and  thus  the  soul  is  now  joyful, 
now sad  ;  now it hates, now loves  ;  and it cannot continue in 
one and the same attitude  (which is  an effect of moral tran-
quillity), save when it strives to forget  all  things.  It is  clear, 
then,  that knowledge greatly hinders  the good  of the  moral 
virtues  in the soul. 
3.  Again,  what  has  been  said  clearly  proves  that  an  en-
cumbered memory also hinders spiritual good ;3  for  the soul 
that is  disturbed, and has no foundation of moral good,  is  to 
that extent incapable of spiritual good, which impresses itself 
only upon souls that are restrained and given to peace.  And 
1  E.p.:  'sadness or hate.' 
I  E.p.:  'if pleasant, joy and desire.' 
•  The edition of  1630  reads:  'spiritual or mystical good.' 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  VI 
239 
besides this, if the soul pays attention and heed to the appre-
hensions of the memory-seeing that it can attend to but one 
thing  at a  time-if it  busies  itself with  things  that  can  be 
apprehended, such as  the knowledge of the memory, it is not 
possible  for  it to  be free  to attend to  the incomprp.hensible, 
which is God.  For, in order to approach God, the soul must 
proceed by not comprehending rather than by comprehend-
ing;  it must exchange the mutable and comprehensible for 
the  immutable  and  incomprehensible. 
CHAPTER  VI 
Of the  benefits  which  come  to  the  soul  from  forgetfulness  and 
emptiness  of all  thoughts  and knowledge  which  it may  have  in 
a natural way  with  respect  to  the  memory. 
I.  From  the  evils  which,  as  we  have  said,  come  to  the 
soul  through  the  apprehensions  of  the  memory,  we  can 
likewise  infer  the  benefits  which  are  contrary  to  them  and 
come to the soul as  a result of its forgetting them and empty-
ing  itself  of them.  For,  as  natural  philosophers  say,  the 
same  doctrine  which  serves  for  one thing serves  likewise  for 
its  contrary.  In the  first  place,  the  soul  enjoys  tranquillity 
and peace of mind, since it is freed from the disturbance and 
the  change  which  arise  from  thoughts  and  notions  of the 
memory, and consequently it enjoys purity of conscience and 
soul,  which  is  more  important.  And  herein  the  soul  has 
ample  preparation for  Divine  and  human  wisdom,  and for 
the  virtues.  . 
2.  In the second place,  it is  freed  from  many suggestions, 
temptations  and  motions  of the devil,  which  he infuses  into 
the soul  by  means of thoughts and notions,  causing it to fall 
into many impurities and sins, 
1 
as David says in these words: 
They thought and spake wickedness.
2 
And thus, when these 
thoughts have been completely removed, the devil has naught 
wherewith  to  assault  the soul  by natural  m ~ a n s     3 
3.  In  the  third  place,  the  soul  has  within  itself,  through 
this recollection of itself and this forgetfulness.as to all things, 
a  preparedness  to  be  moved  by  the  Holy  Spirit and  taught 
1  A,  B,  e.p.:  • to  fall,  at the  least,  into  many  impurities,  and,  as  we 
have said, into sins.' 
a  Psalm lxxii, 8  [A.V.,  lxxiii, 8].  E.p.:  'and found  wickedness.' 
~   E.p.  omits:  • by Datural means.' 
240  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
by  Him,  for,  as  the  Wise  Man  says,  He  removes  Himself 
from thoughts which are without understanding.
l 
Even if a 
man  received  no  other  benefit  from  this  forgetfulness  and 
emptiness  of the  memory  than  being  freed  thereby  from 
troubles  and  disturbances,  it  would  be  a  great  gain  and 
blessing  for  him.  For the  troubles  and  disturbances  which 
are  bred  in  the  soul  by  adversity2  are  of no  use  or  profit
8 
for  bringing  prosperity;'  indeed,  as  a  rule,  they  make 
things worse and also harm the soul itself.  Wherefore David 
said:  Of a  truth every man is  disquieted vainly. I;  For it is 
clear  that  to  disquiet  oneself is  always  vain  since  it  brings 
profit to none.  And thus, even if everything came to an end 
and were destroyed, and if all things went wrong and turned 
to  adversity,  it  would  be  vain  to  disturb  oneself;  for  this 
hurts  a  man rather than relieves  him.  And  to  bear every-
thing with equable and peaceful tranquillity not only brings 
the soul  the  profit of many  blessings,  but likewise  causes  it, 
even in the midst of its adversities, to form a truer judgement 
about them and to find  them a  fitting  remedy. 
4.  For  this  reason  Solomon,  being  well  acquainted  both 
with the evil and with the benefit of which we are speaking, 
said:  I  knew that there was  naught better for  man than to 
rejoice  and  to  do  good  in his  life. 
6 
By  this  he  meant  that, 
in  everything  that  happens  to  us,  howsoever  adverse  it  be, 
we  should  rejoice  rather  than  be  troubled,  so  that  we  may 
not lose  a  blessing  which  is  greater  than  any  kind  of pros-
perity-namely, tranquillity and peace of mind in all things, 
which,  whether they  bring adversity  or prosperity,  we  must 
bear in  the same  manner.  This  a  man would  never  lose  if 
he  were  not  only  to  forget  all  kinds  of knowledge  and  put 
aside  all  thoughts,  but  would  even  withdraw  himself from 
hearing,  sight  and  commerce  with  others,  in  so  far  as  was 
possible for  him.  Our nature is so frail  and so  easily moved 
that,  however  well  it  be  disciplined,  it  will  hardly  fail  to 
stumble upon  the remembrance  of things which will  disturb 
and change a mind that was in peace and tranquillity  when 
it  remembered  them  not.  For  this  caUSe  said Jeremiah: 
With  memory  I  will  remember,  and  my soul  will  fail  me 
for pain. 
7 
1  Wisdom i,  5.  I  [Lit.,  • by adverse things and happenings.'] 
8  E.p. omits:  'or profit.' 
,  [Lit.,  'for  the  prosperity 
E.p. omits:  • things and.' 
•  Ecclesiastes iii, 12. 
of  the  same  things  and  happenings.'] 
6  Psalm xxxviii, 7  [A.V.,  xxxix,  6]. 
7  Lamentations iii, 20. 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  VII 
CHAPTER  VII 
Which  treats  oj the  second  kind  oj apprehension  oj the  memory-
the  imaginary-and oj supernatural  knowledge. 
I.  Although  in  writing  of natural  apprehensions  of the 
first kind we also gave instruction concerning the imaginary, 
which are likewise natural, it was  well  to  make this  division 
because  of the  love  which  the  memory  preserves  for  other 
forms  and  kinds  of knowledge,  which  are  of supernatural 
things,  such  as  visions,  revelations,  locutions  and  feelings 
which come in a supernatural way.  When these things have 
passed  through  the soul,  there is  wont  to  remain impressed 
upon it some  image,  fmm,  figure  or notion,  whether in  the 
soul  or in  the  memory  or fancy,  at times  very  vividly  and 
effectively.  Concerning these images it is also needful to give 
advice,  lest  the  memory  be  encumbered  with  them  and 
they  be  a  hindrance  to  its  union  with  God  in  perfect  and 
pure hope. 
2.  And I  say that the soul, in order to attain that blessing, 
must never reflect upon the clear and distinct objects which 
may  have  passed  through  its  mind  by supernatural  means, 
so  as  to  preserve  within it the forms  and figures  and  know-
ledge  of those  things.  For we  must  ever  bear in  mind  this 
principle:  the greater heed  the soul  gives  to  any clear and 
distinct ·apprehensions,  whether natural or supernatural,  the 
less  capacity  and  preparation  it has  for  entering  into  the 
abyss  of faith,  wherein  are absorbed all  things  else.  For,  as 
has been said, no supernatural forms or knowledge which call 
be apprehended  by the  memory are God,
l 
and,  in order t" 
reach  God,  the soul  must void  itself of all  that is  not  God. 
The  memory  must  also  strip  itself of all  these  forms  and 
notions,  that it may unite itself with  God in hope.
2 
For all 
possession is contrary to hope, which, as S.  Paul says,  belongs 
to  that  which  is  not  possessed. 
3 
Wherefore,  the  more  the 
memory  dispossesses  itself,  the greater is  its  hope;  and  the 
more it has of hope, the more it har.  of union with  God  ;  for, 
with  respect  to  God,  the  more  the  soul  hopes,  the  more  it 
attains.  And  it  hopes  most  when  it  is  most  completely 
1  E.p.  adds:  • nor do  they  bear any proportion to  Him nor can  serve 
as proximate mea.ns  to union with  Him.· 
a  E.p.:  •... unite  itself  with  God  in  a  manner  of  mystical  and 
perfect hope.'  I  Hebrews xi,  I. 
242  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
dispossessed;  and, when it shall  be perfectly dispossessed, it 
will  remain  with  the  perfect  possession  of God,l  in  Divine 
union.  But there are many who will not deprive themselves 
of the  sweetness  and  delight  which  memory  finds  in  those 
forms  and  notions,  wherefore  they  attain  not  to  supreme 
possession  and  perfect  sweetness.  For  he  that  renounces 
not  all  that he  possesses  cannot  be  the  disciple  of Christ. a 
CHAPTER  VIII 
Of the  evils  which  may  be  caused  to  the  soul  by  the  knowledge  of 
supernatural  things,  if it  reflect  upon  them.  Says  how  many 
these  evils  are. 
3 
I.  The spiritual  man  incurs the risk  of five  kinds  of evil 
if he  gives  heed  to,  and  reflects  upon,  these  forms  and 
notions  which  are impressed  upon him  by the  things  which 
pass  through  his  mind in a  supernatural way. 
2.  The first is  that he is  frequently deceived,  and mistakes 
one thing for  another.  The second  is  that he is  like  to fall, 
and  is  exposed  to  the  danger  of falling,  into  some form  of 
presumption  or  vanity.  The  third  is  that  the  devil  has 
many occasions of deceiving him by means of the apprehen-
sions aforementioned.  The fourth is  that he is  hindered as  to 
uniQn in hope with God.  The fifth is  that, for the most part, 
he has  a  low judgement of God. 
3.  As  to the first  evil,  it is  clear that,  if the  spiritual  man 
gives heed to these forms and notions, and reflects upon them, 
he  must  frequently  be  deceived  in his  judgement of them ; 
for,  as  no  man  can  have  a  complete  understanding  of the 
things  that  pass  through  his  imagination  naturally,  nor  a 
perfect  and  certain  judgement  about  them,  he  will  be 
much less  able still to  have this  with  respect  to  supernatural 
things,  which  are  above  our  capacity  to  understand,  and 
occur but rarely.  Wherefore  he will  often think that what 
comes  but from  his fancy  pertains  to  God;  and  often,  too, 
that  what is  of God  is  of the  devil,  and what  is  of the devil 
is  of God.  And very often  there  will  remain with him deep 
impressions  of forms  and  notions  concerning  the  good  and 
evil of others,  or of himself, together with other figures which 
1  E.p.  adds:  • in so  far as may be in this life.' 
I  S.  Luke xiv,  33. 
I  A,  B, e.p.  add:  • and treats here of the first: 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  IX 
243 
have  been  presented  to  him:  these  he  will  consider  to  be 
most  certain  and  true,  when  they  will  not  be so,  but very 
great  falsehoods.  And  others  will  be  true,  and  he  will 
judge them to  be false,  although  this  error  I  consider safer, 
as  it is  apt to arise from  humility. 
4.  And,  even  if he  be  not  deceived  as  to  their  truth,  he 
may well  be deceived as  to their quantity or quality,l think-
ing that little things are great, and great things, little.  And 
with  respect to their quality,  he may consider what is  in his 
imagination  to  be  this  or  that,  when  it is  something  quite 
different;  he may put, as  Isaiah says, darkness for light, and 
light for darkness, and bitter for sweet,  and sweet for bitter. a 
And finally,  even though he be correct as to one thing, it will 
be  a  marvel  if he  goes  not astray with  respect  to the  next; 
for,  although  he  may  not  desire  to  apply  his  judgement  to 
the judging  of them,  yet,  if he  apply  it in  paying  heed  to 
them,  this will be sufficient for some evil to cling to him as  a 
result of it, 3  at least passively;  if not evil of this kind, then of 
one  of the four  other kinds  of which  we shall shortly speak. 
5.  It behoves the spiritual man,  therefore, lest he fall  into 
this  evil  of being deceived in his judgement, not to desire to 
apply his judgement in order to know the nature of his own 
condition or feelings,  or the nature of such and such a vision, 
notion  or feeling;  neither should  he desire  to know it or to 
give heed' to it.  This he should only desire in order to speak 
of it to his  spiritual father,  who  will  then teach him how to 
void  his  memory  of these  apprehensions. I;  For,  whatever 
may be their  intrinsic  nature,  they cannot  help  him to love 
God  as  much  as  the  smallest  act  of living  faith  and  hope 
performed in the emptiness  and renunciation  of all  things. 
8 
CHAPTER  IX 
OJ the  second  kind  oj evil,  which  is  the  peril  of falling  into  self-
esteem  and vain presumption. 
I.  The supernatural apprehensions of  the memory already 
described  are  also  a  great  occasion  to  spiritual  persons  of 
1  E.p.:  'quality and value:  I  Isaiah v.  20. 
a  The  1630  edition adds:  'and for him to suffer from it.' 
,  E.p.:  'give much heed: 
•  E.p.  adds:  • or  [to  do]  what  in  his  particular  case  may  be  most 
             with this same detachment.' 
•  E.p.:  • in the emptiness of all  this: 
x 
244  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
falling into some kind  of presumption or vanity, if they give 
heed  to  them and  set store  by them.  For,  even as  he  who 
knows  nothing  of them  is  quite  free  from  falling  into  this 
vice,  since  he  sees  in  himself no  occasion  of presumption, 
even so,  in contrary wise,  he that has experience of them has 
close at hand an occasion for thinking himself to be something, 
since he possesses  these supernatural communications.  For, 
although it is  true that he  may attribute them to God,  hold 
himself!  to  be unworthy of them,  and give  God the thanks, 
yet  nevertheless  he  is  wont  to  keep  in  his  spirit  a  certain 
secret  satisfaction,  arid  a  self-esteem  and  a  sense  of their 
value,  from  which,  without  his  knowledge,  there  will  come 
to him great spiritual pride. 
2.  This  may  be  observed  very  clearly  by  spiritual  men 
who  will  consider  the  dislike  and .aversion  caused  them  by 
any who do not praise their spirituality, or esteem the experi-
ences  which  they  enjoy;  and  in  the  mortification  which 
they suffer when they think or are told  that others have just 
those  same  exp.eriences,  or  greater  ones.  All  this  arises 
from  secret self-esteem  and  pride,  and  they  cannot  manage 
to understand that they are steeped in pride up to their very 
eyes.  For  they  think  that  a  certain  degree  of recognition 
of their own wretchedness  suffices,  and,  although they have 
this,  they are full  of secret self-esteem and satisfaction, taking 
more  delight  in  their  own  spirituality  and  spiritual  gifts
2 
than in those of others.  They are like the Pharisee who gave 
thanks  to  God  that  he  was  not  as  other  men,  and  that he 
practised such and such virtues, whereat he was satisfied with 
himself and  presumed  thereon. 
3 
Such  men,  although  they 
speak  not  like  the  Pharisee  in  so  many  words,  habitually 
resemble  him in spirit.  And some  of them  even  become  so 
proud  that  they  are  worse  than  the  devil.  For,  observing 
in  themselves,  as  they  imagine,  certain  apprehensions  and 
feelings  concerning  God which  are  devout  and  sweet,  they 
become  self-satisfied  to  such  an  extent  that  they  believe 
themselw:s  to  be  very  near  God;  and  those  that  are  not 
like  themselves  they  consider  very  low  and  despise  them 
after the manner of the Pharisee. ' 
3.  In  order  to  flee  from  this  pestilent  evil,  abhorrent  in 
the eyes  of God,  they must consider  two  things.  First,  that 
1  E.p.:  'feel himself.' 
•  S.  Luke xviii,  11-12. 
•  E.p.:  'spirituality and gifts.' 
,  A,  B:  'and despise them as the Pharisee despised the publican.' 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  X 
245 
virtue  consists  not in apprehensions  and feelings  concerning 
God, howsoever sublime they be, nor in anything of this kind 
that a  man  can  feel  within  himself;  but,  on  the  contrary, 
in  that  which  has  nothing  to  do  with  feeling---:namely,  a 
great  humility  and  contempt  of oneself and  of all  that per-
tains to  oneself,. firmly. rooted in the soul  and  keenly  felt  by 
it;  and likewise  in  being  glad  that  others  feel  in  this  very 
way  concerning  oneself  and  in  not  wishing  to  be  of any 
account in the esteem! of others. 
4.  Secondly,  it  must  be noted  that  all  visions,  revela-
tions  and  feelings  coming  from  Heaven,  and  any  thoughts 
that  may proceed from these,  are ofless worth than the least 
act  of humility;  for  such  an  act has  the  effects  of charity. 
The  humble  soul  esteems  not  its  own  things  nor strives  to 
attain them;  nor thinks  evil,  save  of itself;  nor thinks  any 
good thing of itself,  but only of others.  It is  well,  therefore, 
that  these  supernatural  apprehensions  should  not  attract 
men's  eyes,  but  that  they  should  strive  to  forget  them  in 
order that  they may  be free. 
CHAPTER  X 
Of the  third  evil  that  may  come  to  the  soul from  the  devil,  through 
the  imaginary apprehensions of the  memory. 
I.  From  all  that  has  been  said  above  it  may  be  clearly 
understood and inferred how great is  the evil that may come 
to  the  soul  from  the  devil  by  way  of  these  supernatural 
apprehensions.  For  not  only  can  he  represent  to  the 
memory and the fancy  many false  forms  and notions,  which 
seem  true  and  good,  impressing  them  on  spirit  and  sense 
with  great  effectiveness  and  certifying  them  to  be  true  'by 
means  of suggestion  (so  that  it  appears  to  the  soul  that  it 
cannot be otherwise,  but that everything is even as he repre-
sents it;  for,  as  he transfigures himself into an angel oflight, 
he appears  as  light to  the soul)  ;  but he may also  tempt the 
soul  in many ways  with  respect  to  true knowledge,  which  is 
of God,  moving its  desires
2 
and affections,  whether spiritual 
or sensual, in unruly fashion with respect to these;  for,  ifthe 
soul  takes  pleasure in such apprehensions,  it is  very easy for 
the devil to cause its desires and affections to grow
3 
within it, 
1  [Lit"  • in  the heart.']  I  A,  B:  • its will  and  desires.' 
a  A,  B  and  many  of  the  editions  (not,  however,  e.p.)  have  creer 
('  believe ')  for  crecer  ('  grow').  so  that  we  should  have  to  read:  • to 
cause it to believe its desires and affections.' 
246  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  C   R ~ { E L  
and  to  make  it  fall  into  spiritual  gluttony  and  other 
evils. 
2.  And, in order the better to do this, he is wont to suggest 
and  give  pleasure,  sweetness  and  delight  to  the senses  with 
respect to these saine things of God, so that the soul is corrup-
ted  and  bewildered 
1 
by  that sweetness,  and is  thus  blinded 
with  that pleasure and sets  its  eyes  on pleasure rather than 
on love  (or,  at least,  very  much  more  than upon love),  and 
gives more heed to the apprehensions than to the detachment 
and emptiness which are found in faith and hope and love of 
God.  And  from  this  he  may  go  on  gradually  to  deceive 
the  soul  and  cause  it  to  believe  his  falsehoods  with  great 
facility.  For  to  the  soul  that  is  blind  falsehood  no  longer 
appears  to  be  falsehood,  nor  does  evil  appear  to  be  evil, 
etc.;  for  darkness  appears to  be light,  and light,  darkness; 
and  hence  that  soul  comes  to  commit  a  thousand  foolish 
errors,2 whether with  respect to natural things,  or to  moral 
things,  or to spiritual  things;  so  that that which  was  wine 
to it becomes vinegar.  All  this  happens  to the soul  because 
it  began  not,  first  of all,  by  denying  itself the  pleasure  of 
those supernatural things.  At first this is a small matter, and 
not very harmful,  and the soul  has  therefore no  misgivings, 
and  allows  it to  continue,  and  it  grows,3  like  the  grain  of 
mustard seed, into a tall tree.  For a small error at the begin-
ning,  as  they say,  becomes  a  great error in the end. 
3.  Wherefore,  in order  to flee  from  this  great evil,  which 
comes' from  the devil,  the soul  must not desire  to have any 
pleasure  in  such  things,  because  such  pleasure  will  most 
surely lead it to become blind and to fall.  For of their own 
nature,  and  without  the  help  of the  devil, Ii  pleasure  and 
delight  and  sweetness  blind 
8 
the  soul.  And  this  was  the 
meaning  of David  when  he  said:  Peradventure  darkness 
shall blind me in my delights  and I  shall have the night for 
my light.? 
1  [The  two  verbs,  in  the  original,  have  very  definite  and  concrete 
meanings,  • sweetened with honey' and . dazzled by a  lamp' respectively.] 
•  E.p. adds here:  • so that that which was wine to it becomes vinegar,' 
omitting this same phrase where it occurs below. 
•  E.p.:  'to continue and grow: 
•  E.p.:  • which may come: 
6  E.p. omits:  'and without the help of the devil.' 
•  E.p.:  • dull and  blind.' 
7  Psalm cxxxviii,  II  [A.V.,  cxxxix.  II]. 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XI 
247 
CHAPTER  XI 
Of the  fourth  evil  that  comes  to  the  soul  from  the  distinct  super. 
natural  apprehensions  of the  memory,  which  is  the  hindrance 
that it interposes  to  union. 
I.  Concerning  this  fourth  evil  there  is  not  much  to  be 
said, since it has already continually been expounded in this 
third  book,  wherein  we  have proved  how,  in order that the 
soul may come to union with God in hope, it must renounce 
every possession  of the memory;  for,  in order that its  hope 
in God may be perfect,  it must have naught in the memory 
that is  not God.  And, as we  have likewise said,  no form or 
figure  or image  or other kind  of knowledge  that may come 
to the memory can be God, neither can be like Him, whether 
it  be  of  e   v ~ n   or of earth,l  natural  or supernatural,  even 
as  David  teaches,  when  he  says:  Lord,  among  the  gods 
there is  none like  unto Thee. 
2 
2.  Wherefore, if the memory desires to pay any heed to any 
of these things, it hinders the soul  from  reaching God;  first, 
because  it  encumbers  it,  and  next  because,  the  more  the 
soul  has of possession,  the less  it has  of hope. 
3 
Wherefore it 
is  needful  for  the soul to be stripped of the distinct forms and 
notions  of supernatural  things,  and  to  become  oblivious  to 
them,  so  that there  may  be  no  hindrance  to  its  union  with 
God according to  the memory in perfect hope. 
CHAPTER  XII 
Of the fifth evil that  may  come  to  the  soul in supernatural imaginary 
forms and apprehensions,  which  is a low and unseemly judgement 
of God. 
I.  No  less  serious  is  the  fifth  evil  that  comes  to  the  soul 
from  its  desire to retain in the memory and imagina.tion the 
said  forms  and  images  of  things  that  are  supernaturally 
communicated to it,  above all if it desires  to take them as  a 
means to Divine union.  For it is  a  very easy  thing to judge 
of the  Being  and  greatness  of God less  worthily  and  nobly 
1  E.p. omits:  '  whether it be of heaven or of earth.' 
I  Psalm lxxxv,  8  [A.V.,  lxxxvi,  8]. 
I  E.p.:  '  of perfection of hope.' 
248  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
than befits  His incomprehensible nature;  for,  although our 
reason  and judgement may form  no express conception that 
God is like anyone of these things, yet the very consideration 
of these  apprehensions,  if in  fact  the  soul  considers  them, 
makes  and causes  it not  to  esteem  God,l or not to feel  con-
cerning  Him,  as  highly  as  faith  teaches,  since  faith  tells  us 
that  He  is  incomparable,  incomprehensible,  and  so  forth. 
For,  besides  the fact  that the soul  takes from  God all  that it 
gives  to the creature,  it is  natural  that,  by means  of its  con-
sideration  of  these  apprehensible  things,  there  should  be 
formed  within  it a  certain  comparison  between  such  things 
and God, which prevents it from judging and esteeming God 
as  highly as  it ought.  For the creatures,  whether terrestrial 
or celestial,  and all distinct images and kinds  of knowledge, 2 
both  natural  and  supernatural,  that  can  be  apprehended 
by the faculties  of the soul;  however lofty they be in this life, 
have  no  comparison  or  proportion  with  the  Being  of God, 
since  God  falls  within  no  genus  and  no  species,  as  they  do, 
according  as  the  theologians  tell  us.
3 
And  the  soul  in  this 
life is  not capable of receiving in a  clear and distinct manner 
aught save  that which falls  into a  genus  and a  species.  For 
this  cause  S.  John says  that  no  man  hath  seen  God  at  any 
time.
4 
And Isaiah says that it has not entered into the heart 
of man  what  God  is  like. Ii  And  God said  to  Moses  that he 
could  not see  Him in  this  state of life. 
6 
Wherefore, he that 
encumbers  his  memory  and  the  other  faculties  of the  soul 
with  that which  they  can comprehend  cannot esteem  God, 
neither feel  concerning Him, as  he ought. 
2.  Let us  make a  comparison on a  lower scale.  It is  clear 
that  the  more  a  man  fixes  his  eyes 
7 
upon  the  servants  of a 
king,  and  the  more  notice  he  takes  of them,  the  less  notice 
does  he take of the king himself,  and the les!"  does  he esteem 
him;  for,  although  this  comparison  be  not  formally  and 
distinctly  present iIi  the  understanding,  it is  inherent in the 
act, since,  the more attention  the man gives  to the servants, 
the  more  he takes from  their  lord;  and  he  cannot  have  a 
very  high  opinion  of the king  if the servants appear to him 
to be of any importance while they are in the presence of the 
I  E.p.  abbreviates:  • the  very  consideration  of  these  apprehensions 
makes the soul not to esteem  God  .  .  .' 
a  E.p.:  • and all  the forms  and images.' 
8  E.p.  ends this sentence at • no species.'  '  S.  John i,  18. 
,  Isaiah lxiv, 4.  •  Exodus xxxiii, 20. 
7  E.p.:  • fixes  the eyes of his esteem.' 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XIII 
249 
king,  their lord.  Even  so  does  the soul  treat its  God  when 
it  pays  heed  to  the  creatures
l 
aforementioned.  This  com-
parison, however, is  on a  very low scale, for,  as we have said, 
God is  of another being than His creatures in that He is at an 
infinite  distance  from  them  all.  For  this  reason  they  must 
all  be  banished from  sight,  and  the  soul  must  withdraw its 
gaze from them in all their forms,  that it may set its gaze on 
God through faith and hope. 
2 
3.  Wherefore  those  who  not  only  pay heed  to  the  imagi-
nary apprehensions  aforementioned,  but suppose  God to be 
like  to some  of them,  and think that by means of them they 
will  be able to attain to union with God,  have already gone 
far  astray and will  ever continue to lose  the light
3 
of faith in 
the understanding, through which this  faculty is  united with 
God;  neither  will  they  grow  in  the  loftiness  of  hope,  by 
means  whereof the  memory  is  united  with  God  in  hope,' 
which must be brought about through disunion from all that 
is  of the imagination. 
CHAPTER  XIII 
Of the  benefits  which  the  soul  receives  through  banishing from  itself 
the  apprehensions  of the  imagination.  This  chapter  answers  a 
certain  objection  and  describes  a difference  which  exists  between 
apprehensions  that  are  imaginary,  natural and supernatural. 6 
I.  The benefits that come from voiding the imagination of 
imaginary  forms  can  be  clearly  observed  in  the  five  evils 
aforementioned  which they inflict upon the soul,  if it desires 
to  retain  them,  even  as  we  also  said  of the  natural  forms. 
But,  apart from  these,  there are other  benefits  for  the spirit 
-namely,  those  of great rest and  quiet.  For, setting aside 
that natural rest  which  the soul  obtains  when it is  free  from 
images  and forms,  it likewise  becomes  free  from  anxiety  as 
to  whether  they  are  good  or  evil,  and  as  to  how  it  must 
behave with respect to the one and to the other.  Nor has it 
to waste the labour and time of its spiritual masters, requiring 
them  to  ascertain  if these  things  are  good  or  evil,  and  if 
they are of this kind or of another;  for  the soul has no need 
1  A,  B, e.p.:  'to the  things.'  I  E.p.:  'and perfect hope.' 
a  E.p.:  'and profit  not greatly  by the light.' 
,  E.p.  omits:  • in hope: 
6  So  Ale.,  e.p.  The  other  authorities  have  the  first  sentence  of  the 
title only. 
250  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
to  desire to  know all this  if it gives  no heed to  them.
1 
The 
time  and  energies  which  it  would  have  wasted  in  dealing 
with  these  images  and  forms
2 
can  be  better  employed  in 
another and a  more  profitable exercise,  which is  that of the 
will with.respect to God, and in having a care to seek detach-
ment  and  poverty  of  spirit  and  sense,  which  consists  in 
desiring earnestly to  be without any support and consolation 
that can be apprehended, whether interior or exterior.  This 
is  well  practised when we desire and strive to strip ourselves 
of these  forms,  since  from  this  there  will  proceed  no  less  a 
benefit  than that  of approach  to  God  (Who  has  no  image, 
neither form nor figure)  and this will be the greater according 
as  the  soul  withdraws  itself  the  more  completely  from  all 
forms,  images  and  figures  of the imagination. 
8 
2.  But perchance you  will  say:  'Why do many spiritual 
persons  counsel  the soul  to strive  to  profit  by the communi-
cations and feelings  which come from  God,  and to desire to 
receive  them from  Him,  that it may have something to give 
Him;  since,  if He  gives  us  nothing,  we  shall  give  Him 
nothing likewise?  And wherefore does S.  Paul say:  Quench 
not the Spirit?'  And  the Spouse to the Bride:  Set me as a 
seal
6 
upon  thy heart and as  a  seal  upon  thine  arm?6  This 
celtainly denotes some  kind of apprehension.  And, accord-
ing to the instruction given above, not only must all this not 
be  striven  after,  but,  although  God  sends  it,  it  must  be 
rejected and cast aside.  But surely it is clear that, since God 
gives  it,  He  gives  it  to  a  good  purpose,  and  it will  have  a 
good  effect.  We  must  not  throwaway  pearls.  And  it is 
even a  kind of pride to be unwilling to receive  the things  of 
God, as if we could do without them and were self-sufficient.' 
3.  In order to  meet this  objection it is  necessary to recall 
what we  said  in the fifteenth  and sixteenth  chapters 7  of the 
sec.:>nd book, where to a great extent this question is answered. 
:For  we  said  there  that  the  good  that  overflows  in  the soul 
fro:n  supernatural  apprehensions,  when  they  come  from  a 
good  source,  is  produced  passively  in  the  soul.at  that  very 
instant
8 
when  they are  represented  to  the  senses,  without 
1  E.p.  adds:  'but [needs]  only  to  reject  them  in  the  sense  already 
mentioned.' 
I  E.p.  abbreviates:  'which  would  have been wasted  upon this.' 
I  E.p.  omits:  'of the imagination.'  •  I  Thessalonians v,  19. 
I  D,  P:  'as a  sign.'  '  Canticles viii, 6. 
7  More correctly.  in Chaps.  xvi and xvii. 
I  E.p.  omits:  • at that very instant.' 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XIII 
the working of any operation of the faculties.  Wherefore it 
is  unnecessary  for  the  will  to  perform  the  act  of receiving 
them;  for,  as  we  have  also  said,  if at  that  time  the  soul 
should  try to labour with its  faculties, I  the effect  of its  own 
base  and  natural  operation  would  be  to  hinder  the  super-
natural graces 2  which  God is  even then working in it rather 
than that,  through these apprehensions,  God should cause it 
to  derive  any benefit from  its active exertion.  Nay,  rather, 
as  the spirituality  coming  from  those  imaginary  apprehen-
sions is  given passively to the soul, even so must the soul con-
duct itself passively with respect to them, setting no store by 
its inward or outward actions.
3 
To do this is  to preserve the 
feelings  that come from God, for in this way they are not lost 
through the soul's  base  manner of working.  Neither is  this 
to quench  the spirit;  for  the spirit would  be  quenched  by 
the soul if it desired  to  behave in another manner than that 
whereby  God is  leading it.  And  this  it  would  do if,  when 
God  had  given  it spiritual  graces'  passively,  as  He does  in 
these  apprehensions,  it  should  then  desire  to  exert  itseIf 
actively with respect to them,  by labouring
5 
with its  under-
standing' or by seeking to find something in them.  And this 
is  clear because, if the soul desires to labour at that time with 
its  own  exertions,  its  work  cannot  be  more  than  natural, 
7 
for  of itself it is  capable of no  more;  for  supernaturally8 it 
neither  moves  itself nor can move  itself,  but it is  God  that 
moves  the soul  and  brings it to this  state. 
9 
And  thus,  if the 
soul at that time desires  to labour with its own exertions  (as 
far  as  lies  in  its  power),  its  active  working  will  hinder  the 
passive  work
lO 
that  God  is  communicating  to  it,  which  is 
that of the Spirit. I  I  It will  be setting itself to its  own  work, 
which is  of another and  a lowlier  kind  than that which God 
1  A,  B:  'labour  with  the  favour  of  its  faculties:  E.p.:  'labour 
according to the ability of its faculties: 
I  [Lit.,  • the supernatural:] 
3  E.p.  adds:  . in the sense  mentioned above.' 
•  [Lit.,  • h·ad  given  it spirit'  (or' spirituality').] 
6  E.p.  inserts:  'of itself: 
G  E.p.  ends  the  paragraph  here,  but  the  1630  edition  adds' beyond 
what God  gives it '  and continues,  with the variants noted  below. 
7  The 1630 edition adds:  'or, at most. if it be supernatural, it must be 
very much inferior to that which God  would  work in it,  for  of itself: 
B  The  1630  edition  has:  'for in  this  most  sublime  and  supernatural 
way: 
•  The  1630 edition adds:  'when it gives its consent: 
10  The 1630 edition has:  'it will, with its working, hinder the work.' 
11  [Or' that of spirituality:  Cf.  D.  4.  above.] 
252  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
communicates to it;  for the work of God is passive and super-
natural, and that of the soul is active and natural; 
1 
and in 
this  way the soul would therefore be quenching the Spirit. 
4.  That this  activity of the soul  is  an inferior  one  is  also 
clear  from  the fact  that the  faculties  of the  soul  cannot,  of 
their  own  power,s  reflect  and  act,  save  upon  some  form, 
figure  and  image,  and  this  is  the  rind  and  accident  of the 
substance and spirit which exists below this rind and accident. 
This  substance and spirit unite not  with  the faculties  of the 
soul  in  true  understanding  and love,  save  when  at last  the 
operation  of the  faculties  ceases.  For  the  aim  and  end  of 
this operation is only that the substance which can be under-
stood and loved and which lies beneath these forms may come 
to  be  received  in  the  soul.  The  difference,  therefore,  be-
tween  passive  and  active operation,  and  the  superiority  of 
the former,  corresponds to the difference that exists  between 
that which is  being done and that which is  done already,  or 
between that which a  man tries to attain and effect and that 
which is  already effected.  Hence it may likewise be inferred 
that,  if the  soul  desires  to  employ  its  faculties  actively  on 
these supernatural apprehensions,  wherein God,  as  we  have 
said, bestows the spirit of them passively, it would do nothing 
less than abandon what it had already done, in order to do it 
again,  neither would it enjoy what it had done,  nor could it 
produce any other result, by these actions ofits own, save that 
offrustrating what has been done already.  For, as we say, the 
faculties  cannot of their own power attain to the spirituality 
which  God bestows  upon the soul  without any operation of 
their own.  And  thus  the soul  would  be directly quenching 
the spirituality3  which  God infuses  through these imaginary 
apprehensions  aforementioned  if it  were  to set  any store  by 
them;  wherefore  it  must  set  them  aside,  and  take  up  a 
passive and negative attitude with regard to them.
4 
For at 
that time God is  moving  the soul  to things which are above 
its  own  power and knowledge.  For this  cause the prophet 
said:  I  will stand upon my watch and set my step upon my 
tower, and I  will watch to see that which will be said to me.
5 
This is  as though he were to say:  I  will stand on guard over 
1  The  1630  edition omits:  'for the work  ... active and D'l.tural.' 
2  E.p.:  • cannot. according to their natural and ordinary method: 
3  [Or' the Spirit:  Cf.  p.  251,  nn.  4,  II, above.] 
•  E.p. omits' and negative' and adds' as we  say: 
•  Habakuk  ii,  I.  [The  original  has  • munition'  for  'tower'  and 
'contemplate' for' watch to see:] 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XUI 
253 
my faculties and I  will take no step forward as to my actions, 
and thus  I  shall  be able to contemplate  that which  will  be 
said to me-that is,  I  shall understand and enjoy that which 
will  be communicated  to me supernaturally. 
5.  And  that,  too,  which  is  alleged  of the  Spouse  is  here 
understood  of the  love  that  He  entreats  of!  the  Bride,  the 
office  of which  love  between  two  lovers  is  to  make  one  like 
to the otherll in the principal part of them.  Wherefore He tells 
her to set Him as a seal upon her heart, 3  where all the arrows 
strike  that leave  the quiver  of love,  which  arrows  are  the 
actions and motives oflove.  So they will all strike Him Who 
is  there as a  mark' for  them;  and thus all will  be for  Him, 
so  that  the  soul  will  become  like  Him  through  the  actions 
and motions of love,  until it be transformed  in Him.  Like-
wise he bids her set Him as a sealS upon her arm, because the 
arm performs 
6 
the exercise oflove, for by the arm the Beloved 
is  sustained and comforted. 
6.  Therefore  all  that  the soul  has  to  endeavour  to  do  in 
all  the apprehensions which come to it from above,  whether 
imaginary  or  of any  other  kind-it  matters  not  if they  be 
visions,  locutions,  feelings  or  revelations-is  to  make  no 
account of the letter or the rind  (that is,  of what is  signified 
or represented  or given  to  be  understood),  but to  pay heed 
only  to  the  possession  of the love  of God  which  they  cause 
interiorly within the soul.  And in this case the soul will make 
account, not offeelings of sweetness or delight, nor of figures, 
but of the feelings  oflove which they cause it.  And with this 
sole  end  in  view  it  may  at  times  recall  that  image  and 
apprehension  which  caused it to love,  in  order to  place  the 
spirit  in  the  way  of love.  For,  though  the  effect  of that 
apprehension be not so  great afterwards,  when it is  recalled, 
as it was on the first occasion when it was communicated, yet, 
when  it is  recalled,  love  is  renewed,  and  the  mind  is  lifted 
up  to  God,  especially  when  the  recollection  is  of certain 
figures,  images  or feelings  which  are  supernatural,  and are 
wont to be sealed and imprinted upon the soul in such a way 
that they continue for a long time-some of them, indeed, are 
never  taken from  the  soul.  And  those  that are thus  sealed 
upon the soul produce in it Divine effects  of love,  sweetness, 
1  A,  B:  'that He has to.' 
I  E.p.  omits the rest of this sentence. 
•  Canticles viii,  6.  A,  B:  'as a  sign.' 
4  A,  e.p.:  • as a  sign.'  Ii  E.p.:  'as a  sign.' 
•  [Lit.,  '  because in the arm is.'] 
254  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
light  and  so  forth,  on  almost  every  occasion  when  the soul 
returns  to  them,  sometimes  more  so  and  sometimes  less  ; 
for  it is  to  this  end that they were impressed  upon it.  And 
thus  this  is  a  great  favour  for  the  soul  on  which  God 
bestows  it,  for  it  is  as  though  it  had within  itself a  mine  of 
blessings. 
7.  The  figures  which  produce  effects  such  as  these  are 
deeply  implanted  in  the  soul, 
1 
for  they  are  not  like  other 
images  and forms  that are retained in the fancy.  And thus 
the soul  has no need  to have recourse to this faculty when it 
desires to recall them, for it sees that it has them within itself, 
and  that  they  are  as  an  image  seen  in  the  mirror.  When 
it  comes  to  pass  that  any  soul  has  such  figures  formally 
within itself,  it will then do well  to recall  them  to  the  effect 
oflove to which I  have referred, for they will be no hindrance 
to the union oflove in faith, since the soul will not desire to be 
absorbed in the figure,  but only to profit by the love;  it will 
immediately set aside the figure,  which will thus  rather be a 
help  to it. 
8.  Only with great difficulty can it be known when these 
images  are  imprinted  upon  the  soul,  and  when  they  touch 
but the fancy. 
2 
For those  which  tou:h the fancy  are as  apt 
to occur very frequently as are the others;  for certain persons 
are accustomed habitually to have imaginary visions in their 
imagination and fancy,  which are presented  to them in one 
form  with  great frequency;  sometimes  because  the  appre-
hensive  power  of the  organ  concerned  is  very  great,  and, 
however little they reflect  upon it,  that habitual figure  is  at 
once  presented  and  outlined  in  their  fancy;  sometimes 
because it is the work of the devil;  sometimes, again, because 
it is  the work  of God;  but the visions  are not formally  im-
pressed  upon  the soul.  They  may  be  known,  however,  by 
their effects.  For those  that are natural,  or that come from 
the  devil,  produce  no  good  effect  upon  the  soul,  however 
frequently  they  be  recalled,  nor  work  its  spiritual  renewal, 
but  the  contemplation  of  them  simply  produces  aridity. 
Those  that  are  good,  however,  produce  some  good  effect 
when they are recalled, like that 
3 
which was  produced in the 
soul  upon  the first  occasion.  But the formal  images  which 
1  E.p.  adds:  'according to its intellectual  memory.' 
I  E.p.:  ' ... when  these  images  touch  the spiritual  part of  the soul 
directly and when they belong to the fancy.' 
I  So e.p.  The MSS.  [and  P.  Silverio)  read:  • in that.' 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XIV  255 
are imprinted upon the soul almost invariably produce some 
effect  in it,  whensoever they are remembered. 
9.  He that has  experienced  these  will  readily  distinguish 
the one kind from the other, for the great difference! between 
them is  very clear to anyone that has experience of them.  I 
will  merely  say  that  those  which  are formally  and  durably 
imprinted  upon the soul  are of very rare occurrence.  But, 
whether they be of this kind or of that, it is  good for the soul 
to  desire  to  understand  nothing,  save  God  alone,  through 
faith,  in hope.  And  if anyone  makes  the objection  that to 
reject  these  things,  if they are  good,  appears  to  be  pride,  I 
reply that it is  not so,  but that it is  prudent humility to profit 
by them in the best way, as has been said, and to be guided by 
that which is  safest. 
CHAPTER  XIV 
Which  treats  of spiritual knowledge  in  so far  as  it may  concern  the 
memory. 
I.  We  classed  spiritual knowledge  as  the third division  of 
the  apprehensions  of the  memory,  not  because  they  belong 
to  the bodily sense of the fancy,  as  do the rest,  for  they have 
no  bodily form  and  image,2  but  because  they  are  likewise 
apprehensible by spiritual memory and reminiscence.  Now, 
after  the soul  has  had  experience  of one  of these  apprehen-
sions,  it can recall  it whensoever it will;  and this  is  not by 
the  effigy3  and image  that  the  apprehension  has  left  in  the 
bodily sense, for,  since this is  of bodily form,  as we say, it has 
no  capacity  for  spiritual  forms;  but  because  it  recalls  it, 
intellectually  and  spiritually,  by  means  of that form  which 
it has left impressed upon the soul, which is likewise a formal 
or spiritual form  or notion or image,  whereby it is  recalled, 
or  by means  of the effect  that it has  wrought.  It is  for  this 
reason  that I  place  these  apprehensions  among those  of the 
memory,  although  they  belong 'not  to  the apprehensions  of 
the fancy. 
2.  What this knowledge is,  and how the soul is  to conduct 
itself with respect to it in order to attain to union with God, 
are  sufficiently  described  in  the  twenty-fourth  chapter'  of 
1  E.p.:  • the aforementioned  difference.' 
I  E.p.  omits:  • for  they have no bodily form and image.' 
3  E.p.:  • not by the figure.' 
,  Really the chapter is the twenty-sixth. 
256  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT· CARMEL 
the second book,  where we treated this knowledge as appre-
hensiop.s  of the  understanding.  Let this  be referred  to,  for 
we there described how it was of  two kinds : either uncreated 
1 
or of the  creatures.  I  speak  now only  of things  relating to 
my present purpose-namely, how the memory must behave 
with respect to them in order to attain to· union.  And I  say, 
as  I  have just  said  of formal  knowledge  in  the  preceding 
chapter (for this, being of created things, is of the same kind), 
that these apprehensions may be recalled when they produce 
good effects,  not that they may be dwelt upon,  but that they 
may quicken the soul's love and knowledge of God.  But, if 
the  recollection  of them  produces  not good  effects,  let  the 
memory  never  give  them  even  passing    t t e n t i o n ~   With 
regard  to  uncreated  knowledge,2  I  say  that the soul  should 
try  to  recall  it as  often as  possible,  for  it will  produce great 
effects.  As  we  said  above,  it produces  touches  and impres-
sions of union with God, which is  the aim towards which  we 
are  directing  the  soul.  And  by  no  form,  image  or  figure 
which  can  be  impressed  upon  the  soul  dc,es  the  memory 
recall these  (for these touches and impressions of union with 
the  Creator
3 
have  no  form),  but only  by  the  effects  which 
they have produced upon it oflight, love, joy and renewal of 
the spirit,  and so  forth,  some of which are wrought anew in 
the  soul  whensoever  they are  remembered. 
CHAPTER  XV 
Which  sets  down  the  general  method  wherehy  the  spiritual  person 
must govern  himself with  respect  to  this  sense. 
I.  In order to conclude  this  discussion  on the memory,  it 
will  be  well  at  this  point  to  give  the  spiritual  reader  an 
account of' the method which he must observe, and which is 
of universal application, in order that he may be united with 
God according  to  this  sense. i  For, although what has  been 
said  makes  the  subject  quite  clear,  it  will  nevertheless  be 
more easily  apprehended  if we  summarize it here.  To this 
end it  must  be remembered  that,  since our aim is  the union 
1  E.p.:  • either of unereated  perfections.' 
I  E.p.:  'With regard  to the knowledge of things unereated.' 
a  A.  B:  'with God.' 
,  Only Ale.  and e.p.  have:  'an account of.' 
I  E.p.:  • this faculty.' 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XV 
257 
of the soul with God in hope, according to the memory,  and 
since  that which  is  hoped for  is  that which  is  not possessed, 
and since, the less we possess of other things, the greater scope 
and  the  greater  capacity  we  have  for  hoping,  and  conse-
quently  the  greater  hope,!  therefore,  the  more  things  we 
possess,  the less  scope and  capacity  there is  for  hoping,  and 
consequently  the less  hope
2 
have we.  Hence,  the  more the 
soul dispossesses  the memory offorms and things  which may 
be  recalled  by  it,  which  are  not  God,3  the  more  will  it  set 
its  memory  upon  God,  and  the  emptier  will  its  memory 
become, so  that it may hope for Him Who shall fill  it.  What 
must be done, then, that the soul may live in the perfect and 
pure  hope  of God is  that,  whensoever  these  distinct  images, 
forms  and  notions  come  to it,  it  must  not  rest  in them,  but 
must turn immediately to God, voiding the memory of them 
entirely,  with  loving  affection.  It .must  neither  think  of 
these  things  nor consider  them  beyond  the degree  which  is 
necessary for the understanding and performing of its obliga-
tions,  if they have any concern with these.  And this it must 
do  without  setting  any  affection  or inclination  upon  them, 
so that they may produce no effects' in the soul.  And thus a 
man must not fail  to think and recall that which he ought to 
know  and  do,  for,  provided  he  preserves  no  affection  or 
attachments,  this will do him no harm.  For this  matter the 
lines  of the  Mount,  which  are  in  the  thirteenth  chapter
6 
of 
the first  book,  will  be of profit. 
3.  But  here  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  this  doctrine 
of ours does  not agree,  nor do we  desire that it should agree, 
with  the  doctrine  of those  pestilent  men,  who,  inspired  by 
Satanic  pride  and  envy,  have  desired  to  remove  from  the 
eyes ofthe faithful the holy and necessary use, and the worthy 
6 
adoration, of images of God and of the saints.  This doctrine 
of ours  is  very different  from  that;  for  we  say  not  here,  as 
they  do,  that  images  should  not  exist,  and  should  not  be 
1  E.p.:  • the greater perfection  of hope.' 
Z  E.p.:  • the less perfection of hope.' 
3  E.p.:  • which are not  Divinity or God  made human, the memory  of 
Whom is  always  a  help  to  that end,  sioce  He is  the true Way and  Guide 
and  Author  of  all  good.'  With  this  addition,  ct.  that quoted  on  p.  232, 
n.  3,  above.  '  E.p.:  • no  efiects or perturbations.' 
6  So  e.p.  A,  B  have:  • in  the  first  chapter,'  referring  apparently  to 
the  drawing  described  above  (pp.  xxxiv-v).  Alc.,  C,  D  [followed  by  P. 
Silverio]  read:  'in the chapter.' 
•  [The  Spanish  word,  inciita,  is  stronger  than  this,  meaning  • dis-
tinguished,'  • illustrious. 'J 
258  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
adored;  we  simply  explain  the  difference  between  images 
and  God.  We  exhort  men  to  pass  beyond  that  which  is 
superficial
l 
that they may not be hindered from attaining to 
the living truth beneath it,  and to make no  more account of 
the former  than suffices  for  attainment to the spiritual.  For 
means  are good  and  necessary  to an end;  and images  are 
means  which  serve  to  remind  us  of God  and  of the  saints. 
But when we  consider and attend to the means  more than is 
necessary for  treating them as  such,  they disturb and hinder 
us  as  much,  in their own way,  as  any different thing;2  the 
more so,  when we treat of supernatural visions and images, 
3 
to which  I  am specially referring,  and with respect to which 
arise  many deceptions  and  perils.  For,  with  respect  to  the 
remembrance  and  adoration  and  esteem  of images,  which 
the Catholic  Church sets  before US,4  there can be no decep-
tion or peril,  because naught is  esteemed  therein other than 
that  which  is  represented  ; 5  nor  does  the  remembrance  of 
them fail  to profit the soul, since they are not preserved in the 
memory save with love for  that which they  represent;  and 
provided  the  soul  pays  no  more  heed  to  them  than  is 
necessary  for  this  purpose,6  they  will  ever  assist  it to  union 
with  God,  allowing  the  soul  to  soar  upwards  (when  God 
grants it that favour)  from the superficial image
7 
to the living 
God, forgetting every creature and everything that belongs to 
creatures. 
8 
CHAPTER  XVI 
Which  hegins  to  treat  of the  dark  night  of the  will.  Makes  a 
division  hetween  the  affections  of the  will. 
9 
I.  We  should  have  accomplished  nothing  by  the  purga-
tion of the understanding in order to ground it in the virtue 
1  [Lit.,  • which is painted.') 
2  E.p.  adds:  • disturbs and hinders us.' 
3  E.p.:  • of images and visions that are interior and are formed  in the 
soul.' 
,  B:  '  sets  corporeally  before  us'  [Po  Silverio,  in  a  note,  prefers  this 
reading].  A,  Ale.:  • sets n   t u ~   l l y   before  us.'  E.p.:  • which our mother 
the Church  sets before us.' 
6  E.p.  omits:  ' because naught  ... represented.' 
•  E.p.:  • and,  provided  the soul uses them for  this purpose: 
7  [Lit.,  • the painted image.') 
•  A,  B  have here:  • End of  the third book,'  the chapters which  follow 
being placed in the fourth book. 
•  A,  B  omit this second  sentence. 
BOOK  Ill.  CHAPTER  XVI 
259 
of faith,  and  by  the  purgation  of the  memoryl  in  order to 
ground it in hope,  if we  purged  not  the will  also  according 
to the third virtue, which is charity, 
2 
whereby the works that 
are  done  in  faith  live  and  have  great  merit,  and  without  it 
are  of no  worth.  For,  as  S.  James says:  Without works  of 
charity, faith is  dead. 
3 
And, now that we have to treat of the 
active  detachment and night of this faculty,  in order to form 
it  and  make it perfect in this  virtue  of the charity of God,  I 
find  no  more  fitting  authority  than  that  which  is  written 
in  the  sixth  chapter  of  Deuteronomy,  where  Moses  says: 
Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart and with 
all  thy soul and with all  thy strength. "  Herein is  contained 
all that the spiritual man ought to do, and all that I have here 
to  teach  him,  so  that  he  may  truly  ~ t t   i n   to  God,  through 
union  of the  will,  by  means  of charity.  For herein  man is 
commanded  to  employ  all  the  faculties  and  desires  and 
operations  and  affections  of his  soul  in  God,  so  that all  the 
ability  and strength  of his  soul  may serve  for  no  more  than 
this,  according  to  that  which  David  says,  in  these  words: 
Fortitudinem  meam  ad te  custodiam. 
5 
2.  The strength of the soul consists in its faculties,  passions 
and desires, all of which are governed by the will.  Now when 
these  faculties,  passions  and desires  are directed  by the will 
toward God, and turned away from all that is  not God,  then 
the strength of the soul is  kept for  God,  and thus  the soul is 
able to love  God  with all its  strength.  And,  to the end that 
the  soul  may  do  this,  we  shall  here  treat  of the  purgation 
from the will of all its  unruly affections,  whence arise unruly 
operations,  affections  and  desires,8  and  whence  also  arises 
its failure  to  keep  all  its  strength  for  God.  These affections 
and  passions  are  four,  namely:  joy,  hope,  grief and  fear. 
These  passions,  when  they  are  controlled  by  reason  with 
respect to God,  so  that the soul rejoices only in that which is 
purely the honour and glory  of God,  and hopes  for  naught 
else,  neither grieves save for  things that concern this,  neither 
fears  aught save  God alone,  it is  clear that the strength and 
ability  of the soul  are  being  directed  toward  God  and  kept 
for  Him.  For, the more the soul  rejoices in any other thing 
1  E.p.  adds:  • in  the  sense  referred  to  in  the  sixth  chapter  of  the 
second  book.' 
I  E.p.:  • if we  purged  not the will  also with respect to charity.' 
•  S.  James ii.  20.  '  Deuteronomy vi,S. 
I  Psalm lviii.  10  [A.V .•  lix,  9]. 
•  E.p.  omits:  • whence arise  ... and desires.' 
y 
260.  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
than  Go.d,  the  less  co.mpletely  will  it  centre  its  rejo.icing  in 
Go.d;1  and  the  mo.re  it ho.pes  in aught  else,  the less  will  it 
ho.pe  in Go.d;  and so.  with  the o.ther  passio.ns. 
3.  And in o.rder to.  give fuller instructio.ns co.ncerning this, 
we shall treat, in turn and in detail, as is  o.ur custo.m,  o.f each 
o.fthese fo.ur  passions  and o.fthe desires  of the will.  Fo.r  the 
whole  business  o.f  attaining  to.  union  with  God  consists  in 
purging the will from its affections and desires;  so. that thus 
it may no.  longer be a  base,  human will,  but may beco.me  a 
Divine will,  being made o.ne
l 
with  the will  of God. 
4.  These  four  passions  have  the  greater  dominion, in  the 
soul  and assail  it the more vehemently,  when  the will  is  less 
strongly  attached  to.  God  and  more  dependent  o.n  the 
creatures.  For  then  it  rejoices  very  readily  at  things  that 
merit  no.t  rejoicing,  hopes  in  that  which  brings  no.  pro.fit, 
grieves o.ver that in which perchance it ought to.  rejoice,  and 
fears  where there is  no reason for fearing. 
5.  From  these  affections,  when  they  are  unbridled,  arise 
in the soul all  the vices  and imperfections which it possesses, 
and  likewise,  when  they  are o.rdered  and  composed,  all  its 
virtues.  And it must  be known  that,  if one o.f them should 
become  ordered  and  controlled  by  reaso.n,  the  rest  will  be-
come so  likewise;  for  these  four  passions  of the soul  are so 
closely and intimately united to.  one another that the actual 
direction of  one is the virtual direction of the o.thers ; and if  one 
be actually recollected the other three will virtually and pro-
portionately be recollected likewise.  For, if the will rejoice in 
anything, it will as a result hope for the same thing to. the extent 
of its  rejoicing,  and  herein  are  virtually included grief and 
fear  with  regard  to  the same  thing;  and,  in proportion as 
desire for these is  taken away, fear and grief co.ncerning them 
are likewise  gradually lost,  and hope for  them is  removed. I 
For the will, with these four passio.ns, is denoted by that figure 
which  was  seen  by  Ezekiel,  of four  beasts  with  one  body, 
which had four  faces;  and the wings of the one were jo.ined 
to.  those  of the o.ther,  and each o.ne  went straight before  his 
face,  and  when  they  went  forward  they  turned  not  back.' 
And thus in the same manner the wings  of each one of these 
affections  are joined to.  those  of each  of the  others,  so  that, 
1  [Lit.,  '  the less strongly its rejoicing  will  be employed in God.'] 
I  [The original is stronger:  • one same thing.'] 
•  E.p.  adds:  • after  the  manner  (though  it  is  not  this  that  is  there 
meant)  of those  four  beasts that were  seen by Ezekiel.' 
,  Ezekiel i,  5-9. 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XVII  261 
in  whichever  direction  one  of them  turns-that  is,  in  its 
operation-the others  of necessity  go  with  it virtually also; 
and,  when one of them descends,  as is  there said,  they l11ust 
all descend, and, when  one is  lifted  up,  they will  all be lifted 
up.  Where thy hope is,  thither will go thy joy and  ~   r   and 
grief;  and,  if thy  hope returns,  the others  will return,  and 
SO  of the rest. 
6.  Wherefore thou must take note
1 
that,  wheresoever one 
of these passions is, thither will go likewise the whole soul and 
the  will  and  the  other  faculties,  and  they  will  all  live  as 
captives to this passion,  and the other three passions!  will  be 
living in it also,  to afflict  the soul with  their captivity,3 and 
not to allow it to fly  upward to the liberty and rest of sweet 
contemplation  and union.  For this  cause  Boetius  told  thee 
that,  if thou shouldst  desire  to  understand  truth  with  clear 
light,  thou  must  cast  from  thee joys,  hope, fear  and  grief.' 
For,  as  long as  these  passions  reign,  they allow not the soul 
to  remain in the tranquillity and peace  which are necessary 
for  the wisdom which,  by natural or supernatural means,  it 
is  capable of receiving. 
CHAPTER  XVII 
Which  begins  to  treat  of the  first  affection  of the  will.  De5CTibes 
the  nature  of  joy and makes a distinction  between  the  things  in 
which  the  will can  rejoice. 
I.  The first of the passions of the soul and affections of the 
will  is joy,  which,  in so  far as  concerns  that
S 
which  we pro-
pose  to say about it,  is  naught else than a  satisfaction of the 
will  together  with  esteem  for  something  which  it  considers 
desirable;  for  the  will  never  rejoices  save  when  an  object 
gives  it appreciation and satisfaction.  This has reference  to 
active joy,  which  arises  when the soul  clearly and distinctly 
understands  the  reason  for  its  rejoicing,  and  when  it  is  in 
its  own  power  to  rejoice  or  not.  There  is  another  and  a 
passive  joy,  a  condition  in  which  the  will  may  find  itself 
rejoicing  without  understanding  clearly  and  distinctly  the 
reason for its rejoicing,  and which also occurs at times when 
1  A,  B,  e.p.  add:  '0 spiritual man.' 
2  A:  'and the other three faculties,  or rather passions.' 
•  E.p.  omits:  • with their captivity.' 
,  Cf.  p.  168,  above.  I  E.p.:  'which,  with regard to that.' 
262  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
it does  understand this;  but it is  not in the soul's power
l 
to 
rejoice  or  not.  Of this  condition  we  shall  speak  hereafter. 
For the  present  we  shall  speak of joy when it is  active  and 
voluntary and arises from  things that are distinct and clear. 
2.  J  oy may arise from six kinds of good things or blessings, tI 
namely:  temporal,  natural,  sensual,  moral,  supernatural 
and  spiritual.  Of these  we  shall  speak in their  order,  con-
trolling  the  will  with  regard  to  them so  that it may  not  be 
encumbered by them and fail  to place the strength of its joy 
in God.  To this end it is well to presuppose one fundamental 
truth,  which  will  be  as  a  staff whereon  we  should  ever lean 
as  we  progress;  and  it will  be  well  to  have  understood  it, 
because  it  is  the  light  whereby  we  should  be  guided  and 
whereby  we  may  understand  this  doctrine,  and  direct  our 
rejoicing in all these blessings to God.  This truth is  that the 
will  must  never  rejoice  save  only  in  that  which  is  to  the 
honour and glory of God;  and that the greatest honour we 
can show to Him is  that of serving  Him  according  to  evan-
gelical  perfection;  and  anything  that  has  naught  to  do 
with this is  of no value and profit to man. 
CHAPTER  XVIII 
Which  ·treats  of joy  with  respect  to  temporal  blessings.  Describes 
how joy in  them  must be  directed to  God. 
I.  The first  kind  of blessing  of which  we  have  spoken  is 
temporal.  And  by  temporal  blessings  we  here  understand 
riches,  rank,  office  and  other things  that  men  desire;  and 
children,  relatives,  marriages,  etc.  :  all  of which  are things 
wherein  the  will  may  rejoice.  But  it  is  clear  how  vain  a 
thing it is  for  men to rejoice in riches,  titles,  rank, office and 
other  such  things  which  they  are  wont  to  desire;  for,  if a 
man were the bett'er servant of God for  being rich, he ought 
to rejoice in riches;  but in fact  they are rather a  cause
3 
for 
his  giving  offence  to  God,  even  as  the  Wise  Man  teaches, 
saying:  'Son, if thou  be  rich,  thou  shalt  not  be free  from 
sin."  Although  it  is  true  that  temporal  blessings  do  not 
1  E.p.  adds:  • at that time.' 
I  [Lit.,  '  things or blessings.'  The word  here translated' blessings" is 
bienes,  often rendered' goods.'  I  use' blessings'  or • good  things' in the 
following  chapters, according as best suits the context.] 
I  E.p.:  'but rather they may be a cause.'  6  Ecclesiasticus xi, 10. 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XVIII  263 
necessarily  of themselves  cause  sin,  yet,  through  the  frailty 
of its  affections,  the heart of man habitually clings  to  them 
and fails  God  (which  is  a  sin,  for  to fail  God is  sin
l
)  ;  it is 
for  this  cause that the  Wise  Man says:  'Thou shalt not be 
free  from sin.'  For this  reason  the LordI spoke  of riches, in 
the Gospel,  as  thorns, 
3 
in order to show that he who touches 
them ·with the will shall be wounded by some sin.  And that 
exclamation which He makes in the Gospel,5 saying:  How 
hardly  shall  they  that  have  riches  enter  the  Kingdom  of 
the  heavens-that is  to  say,  they  that  have joy in  riches-
clearly shows  that man  must  not rejoice  in  riches,. since  he 
exposes himself thereby to such great peril. G  And David, in 
order to withdraw us  from this  peril, said likewise:  Ifriches 
abound,  set  not  your  heart on them.
7 
And I  will  not here 
quote further  testimony  on so  clear a  matter. 
2.  For in this case I  should never cease quoting Scripture, 
nor  should  I  ceases  describing  the  evils  which  Solomon 
imputes  to  riches  in Ecclesiastes.  Solomon was  a  man who 
had  possessed  great  riches,  and,  knowing  wcll  what  they 
were,  said:  All  things  that are under the sun  are vanity of 
vanities,  vexation  of spirit and vain solicitude  of the  mind. It 
And  he that loves  riches,  he  said,  shall  reap  no  fruit  from 
them.
lo 
And he adds that riches are kept to the hurt of their 
owner,ll  as  we  see  in  the  Gospel,  where  it  was  said  from 
Heaven to the man that rejoiced because he had kept12  many 
fruits  for many  years:  Fool,  this  night shall  thy soul  be  re-
quired of thee to give account thereof, and whose shall be that 
which thou hast gathered?13  And finally,  David tcaches  us 
the same, saying:  Let us have no  envy when our neighbour 
becomes  rich,  for  it  will  profit  him  nothing  in  the  life  to 
come;16  meaning thereby that we  might rather have pity on 
him. 
I  E.p.  omits:  'for to fail  God is sin.' 
I  E.p.:  'For this reason  Jesus Christ our Lord.' 
•  S.  Matthew xiii,  22;  S.  Luke viii,  14. 
,  [Lit.,  ' handles them.'] 
I  So  Ale.  A,  B:  'which  He  makes  in  Saint  Luke,  and  which  is  so 
much to be feared.'  E.p.:  'which He makes in Saint Matthew and which 
is so  much to be feared.' 
•  S.  Matthew xix,  23;  S.  Luke xvii,i,  24. 
7  Psalm lxi,  II  [A.V.,  lxii,  10]. 
I  E.p. omits:  'quoting Scripture,  Dor  should  I  cease.'  .  . 
•  Ecclesiastes i,  14.  10  Ecclesiastes v,  9. 
11  Ecclesiastes v,  II.  . 
11  Ale.,  erroneously,  has:  'he had gained.'  11  S.  Luke xii,  20. 
11  Psalm xlviii,  17-18 [A.V.,  xlix,  16-17]. 
264  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
3.  It follows,  then,  that  a  man  must  neither  rejoice  in 
riches  when  he  has  them,  nor when  his  brother has  them, 
1 
unless  they help them to serve  God.  For if ever it is  allow. 
able to rejoice in them,2 this will be when they are spent and 
employed in the service  of God,  for  otherwise no  profit  will 
be derived from them.  And the same is  to be understood of 
other blessings  (titles,  offices,  etc.)  :  in all of which it is  vain 
to  rejoice  if a  man  feel  not  that  God  is  the  better  served 
because  of them  and  the  way  to  eternal  life  is  Ipade  more 
secure.  And as it cannot be clearly known if this is so  (if God 
is  better served,  etc.),  it would  be a  vain  thing to  rejoice in 
these things deliberately, since such ajoy3 cannot be reason· 
able.  For, as the Lord says:  If  a  man gain all the world, he 
may yet  lose  his  soul.'  There  is  naught,  then,  wherein  to 
rejoice save in the fact  that God is  better served. 
·4.  Neither is  there cause for  rejoicing in children,  be they 
many,  or rich,  or endowed  with  natural  graces  and talents 
and  blessings  of fortune,  but  only  in  that  they  serve  God. 
For Absalom,  the son of David, found neither his beauty nor 
his  riches  nor  his  lineage  of any service  to  him  because  he 
served not God. Ii  Hence it was a  vain thing to have rejoiced 
in  such  a  son.  For  this  reason  it  is  also  vain  for  men  to 
desire to have children, as do some who trouble and disturb 
everyone  with  their desire for  them,  since  they  know  not if 
such children will be good and serve God.  Nor do they know 
if their satisfaction in them will  be turned into pain;  nor if 
the  comfort  and  consolation  which  they  should  have  from 
them  will  change  to  disquiet  and  trial;  and  the  honour 
which  they should  bring them,  into  dishonour;  nor if they 
will  cause  them to give  greater  offence  to  God,  as  happens 
to many.  Of these  Christ says  that they encompass sea and 
land to enrich them and to  make  them doubly the children 
of perdition  which  they are  themselves. 
8 
5.  Wherefore,  though  all  things  smile  upon  a  man  and 
all  that  he  does  turns  out  prosperously, 'he ought  to  have 
misgivings  rather than  to  rejoice;  for  these things  increase 
1  E.p.:  '  ... rejoice  because  he  has  riches,  nor  because  his  brother 
has them.' 
I  A,  Ale.  [and P.  Silverio]  add:  'as one will rejoice in riches.' 
a  E.p.:  'such a  joy in them.' 
,  S.  Matthew xvi, 26.  E.p. has:  'If a  man gain all the world, it profits 
him little, if he suffers  detriment in his soul.' 
6  2  Kings  [A.V.,  2  Samuel]  xiv,  25. 
•  S.  Matthew xxiii,  15. 
,  E.p.  adds:  'and, as they say,  [good  things]  fall into his mouth.' 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XVIII  265 
the occasion and peril of his forgetting God.!  For this cause 
Solomon says, in Ecclesiastes, that he was cautious:  Laughter 
I  counted  error  and  to  rejoicing  I  said,  'Why  art  thou 
vainly deceived? ' 2  Which is as though he had said:  When 
things  smiled  upon  me  I  counted  it  error  and  deception 
to  rejoice  in them;  for  without  doubt it is  great error and 
folly  on  the  part  of Go  man  if he  rejoice  when  things  are 
bright and pleasant for him, knowing not of a  certainty that 
there will come to him thence some eternal good.  The heart 
of the fool,  says  the  Wise  Man,  is  where  there  is  gladness, 
but  that  of the  wise  man  is  where  there  is  sorrow. 
3 
For 
gladness' blinds the heart and allows it not to consider things 
and  ponder them;  but sadness  makes  a  man open his  eyes 
and look  at the  profit  and  the  harm  of them.  And  hence 
it is  that,  as  he himself says,  anger  is  better  than laughter. 
5 
Wherefore it is  better to go to the house of mourning than to 
the house  of a  feast;  for  in the former is  figured  the end  of 
all men,
8 
as  the Wise  Man says  likewise. 
6.  It would  therefore  be  vanity for  a  woman  or her hus-
band to rejoice in their marriage when they know not clearly 
that  they  are  serving  God  better  thereby.  They  ought 
rather  to  feel  confounded,  since  matrimony  is  a  cause,  as 
S.  Paul says,  whereby each one sets  his  heart upon the other 
and  keeps  it not  wholly  with  God.  Wherefore  he  says:  If 
thou shouldst find  thyself free  from  a  wife,  desire not to seek 
a  wife;  while  he  that  has  one  already  should  walk  with 
such  freedom  of heart  as  though  he  had  her  not.
7 
This, 
together  with  what  we  have  said  concerning  temporal 
blessings,  he  teaches  us  himself,  in  these  words:  This  is 
certain;  as  I  say  to  you,  brethren,  the  time  is  short;  it 
remaineth both that they that have wives  be as  though they 
had  none;  and  they  that  weep,  as  them  that  weep  not; 
and  they  that  rejoice,  as  them  that  rejoice  not;  and  they 
that buy,  as  them  that  possess  not;  .and  they  that use  this 
world,  as  them that use  it not. 
8 
All  this  he says  to show us 
that we must not set our rejoicingS upon any other thing than 
1  A,  B,  e.p.  add:  • and of offending Him, as we  have said.' 
11  Ecclesiastes ii, 2.  a  Ecclesiastes v.ii,  5. 
I  E.p.:  • For vain gladness.'  '  Ecclesiastes vii,  4. 
•  Ecclesiastes vii, 2.  7  I  Corinthians vii, 27.  •  I  Corinthians vii, 2!r"30' 
•  [The original reads:  • to show us that to set,' etc., leaving the sentence 
grammatically incomplete.  P.  Gerardo  omits' since the rest' and reads: 
. to show  us  that to set  ... service of  God  1s  vanity:  etc.]  Ale.  omits 
all  the  paragraph  down  to  this  point,  reading:  • And  thus  we  must  not 
set our rejoicing  .  .  .' 
266  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
that which tends to the service of God, since the rest is vanity 
and that which profits  not;  for joy that is  not according to 
God can bring no profit.
1 
CHAPTER  XIX 
OJ the  evils  that  may  beJall  the  soul  when  it  setr  its  rejoicing  upon 
temporal blessings. 
I.  If we  had to  describe  the  evils  which  environ  the soul 
when it sets  the affections of its will upon temporal blessings, 
neither ink nor paper would suffice us and our time would be 
too  short.  For  from  very  small  beginnings  a  man  may 
attain  to  great  evils  and  destroy  great  blessings;  even  as 
from a  spark of fire,  ifit be not quenched,  may be enkindled 
great fires  w   i ~     set  the  world  aflame.  All  these evils  have 
their  root  and  origin  in  one  important  evil  of a  privative 
kind that is  contained in this joy-namely, withdrawal from 
God.  For  even  as,  in  the  soul  that is  united  with  Him  by 
the affection  of its  will,  there are born all  blessings,  even so, 
when it withdraws  itself from  Him because  of this  creature 
affection, there beset it all evils and disasters proportionately 
to  the  joy  and  affection  wherewith  it  is  united  with  the 
creature;  for  this  is  inherent  inS  withdrawal  from  God. 
Wherefore  a  soul  may expect  the  evils  which  assail  it  to  be 
greater or less  according to the greater or lesser degree of its 
withdrawal from God.  These evils  may  be  extensive  or in-
tensive;  for the most part they are both together. 
2.  This privative evil, whence, we say, arise other privative 
and positive evils,  has four degrees,  each one worse than the 
other.  And,  when  the soul  compasses  the fourth  degree,  it 
will  have compassed  all  the  evils  and  depravities  that arise 
in  this  connection. 
3 
These  four  degrees  are  well  indicated 
by  Moses  in  Deuteronomy  in  these  words,  where  he  says: 
The Beloved grew fat and kicked.  He grew fat and became 
swollen and gross.'  He forsook God his  Maker and departed 
from  God his  Salvation. Ii 
3.  TIlls growing fat  of the soul,  which  was loved before it 
1  A,  B:  '.  .  .  to  God  cannot  please  the  soul.'  E.p.:  '  ... to  God 
cannot do  the soul good:  I  [Lit.,  ' for this is:] 
I  [Lit.,  ' that can be told in this case:] 
,  E.p.:  'The Beloved became fat and turned;  he became swollen and 
gross.'  6  Deuteronomy xxxii,  IS. 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XIX 
grew fat,l indicates absorption in this joy of creatures.  And 
hence  arises  the  first  degree  of this  evil,  namely  the  going 
backward;  which  is  a  certain  blunting  of the  mind  with 
regard  to God, an obscuring of the blessings  of God like  the 
obscuring  of the  air  by  mist,  so  that  it  cannot  be  clearly 
illumined  by  the  light  of the sun.  For,  precisely  when  the 
spiritual  person  sets  his  rejoicing  upon  anything,  and  gives 
rein  to  his  desire  for  foolish  things,  he  becomes  blind  as  to 
God,  and  the  simple  intelligence  of his judgement  becomes 
clouded,  even  as  the  Divine  Spirit  teaches  in  the  Book 
of Wisdom,  saying:  The use  and association  of vanity2  and 
scorn obscureth good things,  and inconstancy of desire  over-
turneth  and  perverteth  the  sense  and judgement  that  are 
without malice. 
3 
Here the Holy Spirit shows that, although 
there  be  no  malice'  conceived  in  the  understanding  of the 
soul,  concupiscence  and  rejoicing  in  the  creatures  suffice  of 
themselves  to  create  in the soul  the  first  degree  of this  evil, 
which  is  the blunting of the  mind and the darkening of the 
judgement, by which the truth is  understood and each thing 
honestly judged as  it is. 
4.  Holiness and good judgement suffice  not to save a  man 
from falling into this evil, if he gives  way to concupiscence or 
rejoicing in temporal things.  For this reason God warned us 
by  uttering  these  words  through  Moses:  Thou  shalt  take 
no  gifts,  which  blind  even  the  prudent. I)  And  this  was 
addressed  particularly to  those  who  were  to  be judges;  for 
these  have  need  to  keep  their  judgement  clear  and  alert, 
which  they will  be  unable to  do  if they covet  and rejoice  in 
gifts.  And  for  this  cause  likewise  God  commanded  Moses 
to  make judges of those  who  abhorred  avarice,  so  that their 
judgement should not be blunted with the lust of  the passions. 6 
And thus he says  not only that they should not desire it,  but 
that  they should  abhor it.  For,  if a  man is  to  be  perfectly 
defended  from  the  affection  of love,  he  must  preserve  an 
abhorrence of it, defending himself by means of the one thing 
against  its  contrary.  The  reason  why  the  prophet  Samuel, 
for  example,  was  always so  upright and enlightened a judge 
is  that  (as  he said  in the  Book  of  the  Kings)  he  had  never 
received a  gift from  any man. 
7 
1  E.p.:  'This becoming fat of the soul, which previously was loved .. .' 
Z  E.p.:  • The false  appearance of vanity  .. .'  8  Wisdom iv,  12. 
,  E.p.:  • no precedent malice.'  i  Exodus xxiii, 8. 
e  Exodus xviii,  21-2.  7  1  Kings  [A.V.,  I  Samuel]  xii,  3. 
268  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
5.  The second degree of this privative evil arises from the 
first,  which is  indicated in the  words  following  the  passage 
already quoted,  namely:  He grew fat  and became swollen 
and gross.
l 
And thus  this second degree is  dilatation of the 
will  through  the  acquisition  of greater  liberty  in  temporal 
things;  which  consists  in  no longer attaching so  much  im-
portance  to  them,  nor  troubling  oneself about  them,  nor 
esteeming  so  highly  the joy  and  pleasure  that  come  from 
created blessings.  And this will have arisen in the soul from 
its having in the first place given rein to rejoicing;  for, through 
giving  way  to it,  the soul  has  become  swollen  with  it,  as  is 
said in til at passage,  and that fatness  of rejoicing and desire 
has caused it to dilate and extend its will  more freely toward 
the  creatures.  And  from  this  result  great  evils.  For  this 
second  degree  causes  the  soul  to  withdraw  itself from  the 
things of God, and from holy practices, and to find no pleasure 
in  them,  because  it  takes  pleasure  in  other  things  and 
devotes  itself continually to  many imperfections  and follies
2 
and to joys and vain pleasures. 
6.  And  when  this  second  degree is  wholly  consummated, 
it  withdraws  a  man  from  the  practices  which  he  followed 
continually and  makes  his  whole  mind  and covetousness  to 
be  given  to secular  things.  And  those  who  are affected  by 
this second degree not only have their judgement and under-
standing  darkened  so  that they  cannot recognize  truth  and 
justice,  like  those  who  are  in  the  first  degree,  but they  are 
also  very  weak  and  lukewarm  and  careless 
3 
in  acquiring 
knowledge  of,  and  in  practising,  truth  and justice,  even  as 
Isaiah says  of them in these words:  They all love  gifts  and 
allow  themselves  to  be  carried  away  by  rewards,  and  they 
judge not  the  orphan,  neither  doth  the  cause  of the  widow 
come unto them that they may give heed to it.4  This comes 
not to pass  iIi  them without sin,  especially  when to  do these 
things is  incumbent upon them  because of their office.  For 
those who are affected by this degree are not free from malice 
as  are  those  of the  first  degree.  And  thus  they  withdraw 
themselves  more  and  more  from  justice  and  virtues,  since 
their  will  reaches  out  more  and  more
li 
in  affection  for 
creatures.  Wherefore,  the  characteristics  of those  who  are 
1  Deuteronomy xxxii,  IS.  E.p.  omits:  'grew fat and.' 
a  E.p.:  'and many follies.' 
I  E.p.  omits:  . and careless.'  '  Isaiah i,  23. 
•  A,  e.p.:  '  ... their  will  becomes  more  and  more  enkindled  ... ' 
[The  change is a  slight one:  emendiendo for  extendiendo.] 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XIX 
in  this  second  degree  are  great  lukewarmness  in  spiritual 
things  and failure  to  do  their duty  by them;  they practise 
them from  formality  or from  compulsion  or from  the habit 
which  they  have  formed  of practising  them,  rather  than 
because  they  love  them. 
7.  The  third  degree  of this  privative  evil  is  a  complete 
falling  away from  God,  neglect to fulfil  His  law in order not 
to lose worldly things and blessings  ; 1  and relapse into mortal 
sin through covetousness.  And this third degree is described 
in  the  words  following  the  passage  quoted  above,  which 
says:  He forsook  God  his  Maker. 
2 
In  this  degree  are in-
cluded  all  who  have  the  faculties  of the  soul  absorbed  in 
things  of the world and in riches  and commerce,3 in such a 
way that they care nothing for fulfilling the obligations of the 
law  of God.  And  they  are  very  forgetful  and  dull  with 
respect  to  that  which  touches  their  salvation,  and  have  a 
correspondingly  greater  ardour  and  ingenuity  with  respect 
to things of the world.  So much so  that in the Gospel Christ 
calls them children of this  world, and says of them that they 
are  more  prudent  and  acute  in  their  affairs  than  are  the 
children oflight in their own.'  And thus they are as  nothing 
in  God's  business,  whereas  in the  world's  business  they are 
everything.  And  these  are  the  truly  avaricious,  who  have 
extended  and  dispersed  their  desire  and  joy  on  things 
created,  and  this  with  such  affection  that  they  cannot  be 
satisfied;  on the contrary, their desire and their thirst grow 
all  the  more  because  they  are  farther  withdrawn:  from  the 
only source  that could satisfy them,  which is  God.  For it is 
of these that God Himself speaks through Jeremiah, saying: 
They  have  forsaken  Me,  Who  am  the  fountain  of living 
water,  and  they  have  hewed  them  out broken  cisterns  that 
can hold no water. (;  And this is  the reason why the covetous 
man  finds  naught  among  the  creatures  wherewith  he  can 
quench  his  thirst,  but  only  that  which  increases  it.  These 
persons  are they that fall  into countless kinds  of sin through 
love  of temporal  blessings  and  the  evils  which  afflict  them 
are  innumerable.  And  of this,  David  says:  Transierunt  in 
affectum cordis. 
8 
1  E.p.:  'not to lose the trifling things of the world.' 
2  Deuteronomy xxxii.  15.  •  E.p.:  • commerce with it.' 
•  S.  Luke xvi, 8.  I  Jeremiah ii.  13. 
I  Psalm  lxxii.  7  [A.V .•  lxxiii.  7].  Only  e.p.  has  this  quotation  in  its 
Spanish form.  Alc.  adds the word e ~ p o   .   d .  
270  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
8.  The fourth  degree  of this  privative  evil  is  indicated in 
the last words of our passage, which says:  And he departed 
from  God  his  Salvation.
1 
This  degree  is  reached  by  those 
of  the  third  degree  whereof  we  have  just  spoken.  For, 
through  not  giving  heed  to  setting  his  heart  upon  the  law 
of God because of temporal blessings, the soul of the covetous 
man departs far from  God according to his  memory,  under-
standing and will, forgetting Him as though He Were  not his 
God,  which comes to pass  because he has made for himself a 
god  of money  and  of temporal  blessings,s  as  S.  Paul  says 
when he describes avarice as slavery to idols. 3  For this fourth 
degree  leads  a  man  as  far  as  to  forget  God,  and to  set  his 
heart, which he should have set formally upon God, formally 
upon money,  as though he had no  god beside. 
9.  To this  fourth  degree  belong those  who hesitate not to 
subject  Divine  and  supernatural  things  to  temporal  things, 
as  to  their  God,  when  they  ought  to  do  the  contrary,  and 
subject  temporal  things  to  God,  if they considered  Him as 
their God, as would be in accordance with reason.'  To these 
belonged the iniquitous 5 Balaam, who sold the grace that God 
had  given  to  him.6  And  also  Simon  Magus,  who  thought 
to value the grace of God in terms of money,  and desired to 
buy  it.7  In  doing  this  he  showed  a  greater  esteem  for 
money;  and  he  thought  there  were  those  who  similarly 
esteemed  it,  and  would  give  grace  for  money.  In  many 
other  ways  there  are  many  nowadays  who  belong  to  this 
fourth  degree;  their  reason  is  darkened  to  spiritual  things 
by  covetousness;  they  serve  money  and  not  God,  and  are 
influenced by money and not by God, putting first the cost of 
a  thing and not its  Divine  worth  and reward,  and in  many 
ways making money their principal god and end, and setting 
it before  the  final  end,  which  is  God. 
10.  To  this  last  degree  belong  also  those  miserable  souls 
who  are  so  greatly  in  love  with  their  own  goods  that  they 
take them for  their god,  so  much so  that they scruple not to 
sacrifice their lives  for  them,  when  they see  that this  god  of 
theirs  is  receiving  some  temporal  harm.  They  abandon 
themselves to despair and commit suicide for miserable ends, 
showing by their own acts how wretched is the reward which 
1  Deuteronomy xxxii,  IS. 
I  A,  e.p.:  '  ... he has  made money and temporal blessings a  god  for 
himself.'  I  Colossians iii, S. 
,  E. p.  omits:  'if they considered  Him as  t.heir God.' 
•  E.p.:  'the impious.'  '  Numbers xxii,  7.  7  Acts viii,  18-19. 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XX 
they receive from  a  god like  their own.  For when they can 
no  longer  hope  for  aught  from  him  he  bestows  on  them 
despairl and death;  and those whom he pursues not to this 
last evil of death he condemns  to a  dying life
2 
in the griefs  of 
anxiety  and in many other miseries, allowing no gladness  to 
enter their heart, and no good thing upon earth to enlighten 
them.  They  continually  pay  the  tribute  of their  heart  to 
money  by  their  yearning  for  it  and  hoarding  of it  for  the 
final  calamity of their just perdition, as  the Wise  Man warns 
them, saying:  Riches are kept to  the hurt of their owner. 
3 
I  I.  And  to  this  fourth  degree  belong  those  of  whom 
S.  Paul says:  Tradidit illos in reprobum sensum. 4.  For joy, when 
it strives after possessions as its final goal, drags man down to 
these evils.  But those on whom it inflicts lesser evils are also 
to  be  sorely  pitied,  since,  as  we  have  said,  their  souls  are 
driven far backward upon the way6 of God.  Wherefore, as 
David  says:  Be  not  thou  afraid  when  one  is  made  rich  : 
that  is,  envy  him  not,  thinking  that  he  outstrips  thee,  for, 
when he dieth, he shall carry nothing away, neither shall his 
glory nor his joy descend with him. 
6 
CHAPTER  XX 
Of the  benifits  that  come  to  the  soul  from  its  withdrawal  of joy 
from  temporal things. 
I.  The spiritual  man,  then,  must  see  to  it carefully  that 
his  heart and his  rejoicing  begin  not to lay hold  upon tem-
poral  things;  he  must fear  lest  from  being  little  it should 
grow  to  be  great,  and  should  increase  from  one  degree  to 
another.  For  little  things  do  indeed  become  great;  and 
from  a  small  beginning  there  comes  in  the  end  a  great 
matter, 
7 
even as a spark suffices to set a mountain on fire and 
to  burn  up  the  whole·  world. 
8 
And  let  him  never  be  self-
confident because his attachment is  small,  and fail  to uproot 
it instantly because he thinks that he will do so later.  For if, 
1  The remainder of this chapter is omitted in Ale. 
I  So  e.p.  (lit.,  'to live  dying '].  A:  'to live  living';  B:  'to  die 
liVing.'  a  Ecclesiastes v,  II-12. 
,  Romans i,  28.  I  E.p.:  'upon the road: 
•  Psalm xlviii,  17-18  [A.V.,  xlix,  16-17]. 
7  Thus  the  Codices.  E.p.  alters  this  to  • a  great  evil:  [Po  Silverio 
supports the emendation.] 
6  E.p.  omits:  'and to burn up the whole  world:  (The word rendered 
• mountain'  may  also mean' wood:  Cf.  S.  James  iii,  5,  Vulgate.] 
272  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
when  it  is  so  small  and  in  its  beginnings,  he  has  not  the 
courage  to  make  an  end  of it,  how  does  he  suppose,  and 
presume,  that he  will  be able to do so  when it is  great and 
more deeply rooted.  The more so since Our Lord said in the 
Gospel:  He that is  unfaithful in little will be unfaithful also 
in much.
1 
For he that avoids  the small sin will  not fall  into 
the  great  sin;  but great  evil  is  inherent  in  the  small  sin, II 
since it has  already penetrated within the fence  and wall  of 
the  heart;  and  as  the  proverb  says:  Once  begun,  half 
done.  Wherefore  David  warns  us,  saying:  Though riches 
abound, let us  not apply our heart to them. 
3 
2.  Although a  man might not do this for the sake  of God 
and  of the  obligations  of Christian  perfection,  he  should 
nevertheless  do  it because  of the  temporal  advantages  that 
result from it, to say nothing ofthe spiritual advantages, and 
he should free  his  heart completely from  all  rej9icing in the 
things  mentioned  above.  And  thus,  not  only  will  he  free 
himself from  the  pestilent  evils  which  we  have described  in 
the last  chapter,  but,  besides  this,  he  will  withdraw his joy 
from  temporal blessings  and acquire the virtue ofliberality, 
which is  one of the principal attributes of God,' and can in 
no wise  coexist with covetousness.  Apart from 'this,  he will 
acquire  liberty  of soul,  clarity  of reason,  rest,  tranquillity 
and  peaceful  confidence  in  God  and  a  true  reverence  and 
worship  of God  which  comes  from  the  will. 5  He  will  find 
greater  joy  and  recreation  in  the  creatures  through  his 
detachment from  them,  for  he cannot rejoice  in them if he 
look  upon  them  with  attachment  to  them  as  to  his  own. 
Attachment  is  an  anxiety  that,  like  a  bond,  ties  the  spirit 
down  to  the  earth  and  allows  it no  enlargement  of heart. 
He will  also  acquire, in his  detachment from  things,  a  clear 
conception ofthem, so that he can well understand the truths 
relating to them, both naturally and supernaturally.  He will 
therefore enjoy them after a  very different fashion from  that 
of one  who  is  attached  to  them,  and  he  will  have  a  great 
advantage  and superiority  over  such  a  one.  For,  while  he 
1  S.  Luke xvi,  10. 
a  [The  word  • sin' is not in the original of  this sentence,  which  reads 
• the small  ... the great  .. :  etc.] 
a  Psalm lxi,  I  I  [A. V.,  lxii,  10].  E.p.;  'let us not attach our  heart to 
them: 
,  So  Alc.,  e.p.  A,  B:  'one of the principal  virtues of God,  or,  rather, 
attributes.' 
Ii  A, B:  'which comes from liberty:  [The word translated' reyerence ' 
normally implies respectful acquiescence.) 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XX 
273 
enjoys  them according to their truth,  the other enjoys  them 
according  to  their  deceptiveness;1  the  one  appreciates  the 
best side  of them and the other the worst;  the one  rejoices 
in their substance;  the other, whose sense is  bound to them, 
in their accident.  For sense cannot grasp or attain to more 
than  the  accident,  but the spirit,  purged  of the  clouds  and 
species of accident,  penetrates the truth and worth of things, 
for this is its object.  Whereforejoy, like a  cloud, darkens the 
judgement, since there can be no voluntary joy in creatures 
without  voluntary  attachment,  even  as  there  can  be  no joy 
which is  passion when there is  no habitual attachment in the 
heart; 2  and  the  renunciation  and  purgation  of such  joy 
leave  the judgement  clear,  even  as  the  mists  leave  the  air 
clear when they are scattered. 
3.  This  man,  then,  rejoices  in  all  things-since  his  joy 
is dependent upon none of them-as ifhe had them all  ;  and 
this  other,  through  looking  upon  them  with  a  particular 
sense of ownership,  loses  all  the pleasure of them in general. 
This former man, having none of them in his  heart, possesses 
them all, as S. Paul says, in great freedom. 3  This latter man, 
inasmuch  as  he  has something of them  through the attach-
ment  of his  will,  neither  has  nor  possesses  anything;  it  is 
rather  they  that  have  possessed 
4 
his  heart,  and  he  is,  as  it 
were,  a  sorrowing captive.  Wherefore, ifhe desire to have a 
certain degree  of joy in creatures,  he  must  of necessity have 
an equal degree of disquietude and griefin his heart, since it 
is  seized  and  possessed  by them.  But he that is  detached is 
untroubled by anxieties,  whether in prayer or apart from it; 
and thus, without losing time, he readily gains great spiritual 
treasure.  But  the  other  man  loses  everything,  running  to 
and fro  upon the  chain  by  which  his  heart is  attached  and 
bound;  and with all his diligence he can still hardly free him-
self for  a  short time from  this  bond of thought and rejoicing 
by  which  his  heart  is  bound.  The  spiritual  man,  then,  at 
the first  motion of his  heart towards creatures,  must restrain 
it,  remembering  the  truth  which  we  have  here  laid  down, 
that there is  naught wherein a  man must rejoice,  save in his 
service of God,  and in his  striving for  His  glory and honour 
in all things, directing all things solely to this  end and turning 
aside  from  vanity  in  them,  looking  in  them  neither  for  his 
own joy nor for  his  consolation. 
1  Ale.  omits the rest of this sentence and  the whole  of the next. 
2  E.p.  [for' when  ... heart ']  reads:  • without voluntary attachment: 
I  2  Corinthians vi,  10.  '  A.  B:  'they have seized: 
274  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
4.  There  is  another  very  great  and  important  benefit  in 
this  detachment  of the  rejoicing  from  creatures-namely, 
that it leaves  the heart free  for  God.  This is  the dispositive 
foundation  of all  the  favours  which  God  will  grant  to  the 
soul, and without this  disposition He grants them not.  And 
they  are such  that,  even  from  the  temporal  standpoint,  for 
one joy which the soul renounces for love of Him and for the 
perfection of the Gospel,  He will give him a  hundred in this 
life,  as  His  Majesty  promises  in  the  same  Gospel.
l 
But, 
even  were  there  not  so  high  a  rate  of interest,  the spiritual 
man should quench these creature joys in his soul because of 
the  displeasure  which  they  give  to  God.  For we  see  in the 
Gospel that, simply because that rich man rejoiced at having 
goods  for  many years,  God  was  so  greatly angered  that He 
told  him  that his  soul  would  be  brought  to  account on  that 
very  night. 
2 
Therefore,  we  must  believe
3 
that,  whensoever 
we  rejoice  vainly,  God  is  beholding  us  and preparing some 
punishment  and  bitter  draught  according  to  our  deserts, 
so that the pain which results from the joy may sometimes be 
a  hundred  times  greater' than the joy.  For,  although  it  is 
true,  as  S. John says  on this  matter, in the Apocalypse,  con-
cerning Babylon,  that as  much as she had rejoiced  and lived 
in delights, so much torment and sorrow
li 
should be given her, 
yet this is  not to  say  that  the  pain will  not  be  greater than 
the  joy,  which  indeed  it  will  be,  since  for  brief pleasures 
are  given  eternal  torments.  The  words  mean  that  there 
shall  be  nothing  without  its  particular  punishment,  for  He 
who will punish the idle word will not pardon vain rejoicing. 
CHAPTER  XXI 
Which  describes  how  it is  vanity  to  set  the  rejoicing  of the  will upon 
the  good  things  of nature,  and how  the  soul  must  direct  itself, 
by  means  of them,  to  God. 
I.  By natural blessings  we here understand beauty, grace, 
comeliness,  bodily  constitution  and  all  other  bodily  endow-
ments;  and likewise,  in  the  soul,  good  understanding,  dis-
cretion and other things that pertain to reason.  Many a man 
1  S.  Matthew xix,  29. 
a  E.p.:  'Therefore, we  may fear.' 
,  E.p.:  '  ... may often  be greater.' 
6  Revelation  xviii,  7. 
2  S.  Luke xii,  20. 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XXI 
275 
sets his rejoicing upon all these gifts, to the end that he himself, 
or  those  that  belong  to  him,  may possess  them,  and for  no 
other reason, and gives  no thanks to God Who bestows  them 
on him so that He may be the better known and loved by him 
because of them.  But it is vanity and deception to rejoice for 
this  cause alone,  as  Solomon says  in these  words:  Deceitful 
is  grace  and  vain  is  beauty;  the  woman  who  fears  God, 
she  shall  be praised. 
1 
Here he teaches  us  that a  man ought 
rather  to  be  fearful  because  of these  natural  gifts,  since  he 
may easily be distracted
2 
by them from the love of God, and, 
if he  be attracted  by  them,  he  may fall  into  vanity  and  be 
deceived.  For this reason bodily grace is said to be deceptive 
because  it  deceives  a  man  in  the  way3  and attracts  him  to 
that  which  beseems  him  not,  through  vain  joy  and  com-
placency, either in himself or in others that have such grace. 
And it is  said  that beauty is  vain because it causes a  man to 
fall  in many ways when he esteems it and rejoices in it, for he 
should only rejoice ifhe serves God or others through it.  But 
he ought rather to fear and harbour misgivings lest perchance 
his  natural graces and gifts should be a  cause of his offending 
God,  either  by  his  vain  presumption  or  by  the  extreme 
affection 4.  with  which  he  regards  them.  Wherefore  he that 
has  such  gifts  should  be  cautious  and  live  carefully,  lest, 
by  his  vain  ostentation,  he  give  cause  to  any  man  to 
withdraw  his  heart  in  the  smallest  degree  from  God. 
For  these  graces  and  gifts  of nature  are  so  full  of provo-
cation  and  occasion  of  evil,  both  to  him  that  possesses 
them and to him that looks  upon them,  that there is  hardly 
any  who  entirely  escapes  from  binding  and  entangling  his 
heart in them.  We  have heard that many spiritual persons, 
who  had certain of these gifts,  had such fear of this that they 
prayed God to disfigure them, lest they should be a cause and 
occasion  of any  vain  joy  or  affection  to  themselves  or  to 
others,  and  God granted  their prayer. 
.  2.  The spiritual man, then,  must purge his  will, and make 
It  to  be  blind  to  this  vain  rejoicing,  bearing  in  mind  that 
beauty and all other natural gifts are but earth, and that they 
come from the earth and will return thither;  and that grace 
and  beauty are smoke  and vapour  of this  same  earth;  and 
that they  must  be held  and esteemed  as  such  by a  man that 
desires not to fall  into vanity,  but will direct his heart to God 
1  Proverbs xxxi.  30 . 
B  A.  B:  • in  the  road: 
I  A.  B:  . be kept back: 
4  A.  B.  e.p.:  • the strange affection.' 
z 
276  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
in  these  matters,  with  rejoicing  and  gladness,  because  God 
is  in  Himself  all  these  beauties  and  graces  in  the  most 
eminent  degree,  and  is  infinitely  high  above  all  created 
things.  And,  as  David says,  they are all like a  garment and 
shall  grow  old  and  pass  away,  and  He  alone  remains  im. 
mutable for  ever.1  Wherefore,  if in all  these  matters a  man 
direct  not  his  rejoicing  to  God,  it  will  ever  be  false  and 
deceptive.  For of such a man is that saying of Solomon to be 
understood, where he addresses joy in the creatures, saying: 
To  joy  I  said:  'Wherefore  art  thou  vainly  deceived?'2 
That is,  when  the  heart allows  itself to  be attracted  by  the 
creatures. 
CHAPTER  XXII 
Of the  evils  which  come  to  the  soul  when  it  sets  the  rejoicing  of its 
will upon  the good things of nature. 
I.  Although  many  of these  evils  and  benefits  that  I  am 
describing in treating of these kinds of  joy are common to all, 
yet,  because  they  follow  directly  from  joy  and  detachment 
from  joy  (although  comprised  under  anyone  of these  six 
divisions  which I  am treating), therefore I  speak under each 
heading of some evils and benefits which are also found under 
another,  since  these,  as  I  say,  are  connected  with  that joy 
which  belongs  to  them  all.  But  my  principal  intent  is  to 
speak of the particular evils  and benefits  which  come to the 
soul,  with  respect  to  each thing,  through its  rejoicing  or not 
rejoicing in it.  These I  call particular evils,  because they are 
primarily and immediately caused  by one particular kind of 
rejoicing,  and  are  not,  save  in  a  secondary  and  mediate 
sense,  caused  by  another.  The  evil  of spiritual  lukewarm· 
ness,  for  example,  is  caused  directly  by  any and every  kind 
of  joy, and this evil is therefore common to all these six kinds; 
but fornication  is  a  particular evil,  which is  the direct  result 
only  of joy  in  the  good  things  of nature  of which  we  are 
speaking. 
2.  The spiritual and bodily evils,  then,  which directly and 
effectively  come to  the soul  when it sets  its  rejoicing  on  the 
good things of nature are reduced to six principal evils.  The 
first  is  vainglory,  presumption,  pride  and  disesteem  of our 
1  Psalm ci,  27  [A.V.,  cii,  26-7].  I  Ecclesiastes ii,  2. 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XXII 
neighbour;  for  a  man  cannot  cast
l 
eyes  of esteem  on  one 
thing  without taking them from the rest.  From this follows, 
at  the  least,  a  real  disesteem 
2 
for  everything  else;  for 
naturally,  by setting our esteem on one thing,  we  withdraw 
our  heart  from  all  things  else  and  set  it  upon  the  thing 
esteemed  ;  and from this  real  contempt it is  very easy to fall 
into  an  intentional  and  voluntary  contempt  for  all  these 
other  things,  in  particular  or  in  general,  not  only  in  the 
heart,  but also  in speech,  when we say that such  a  thing or
3 
such a  person is  not like such another.  The second evil is the 
moving of the senses  to complacency and sensual delight and 
luxury. 
4 
The third  evil  comes  from  falling  into  adulation 
and  vain  praise,  wherein  is  deception  and vanity,  as  Isaiah 
says in these words:  My people, he that praises thee deceives 
thee. 
5 
And  the  reason  is  that,  although  we  sometimes 
speak  the  truth when we  praise grace  and beauty, yet it will 
be  a  marvel  if there  is  not  some  evil  enwrapped  therein  or 
if the  person  praised  is  not  plunged  into  vain  complacency 
and  rejoicing,  or  his  imperfect intentions  and  affections  are 
not directed thereto.  The fourth evil is of a general kind:  it is 
a serious
6 
blunting of the reason  and the spiritual sense,  such 
as  is  effected  by  rejoicing  in  temporal good  things.  In one 
way indeed it is much worse.  For as  the good things of nature 
are  more  closely  connected  with  man  than  are  temporal 
good things,  the joy which they give leaves an impression and 
effect  and  trace  upon  the  senses  more  readily  and  more 
effectively,  and  deadens  them  more  completely.  And  thus 
reason and judgement are not free,  but are clouded with that 
affection  of joy which is  very  closely  connected  with  them; 
and from  this arises  the fifth  evil,  which is  distraction of the 
mind  by created  things.  And  hence  arise  and  follow  luke-
          and weakness  of spirit,  which is  the sixth evil,  and 
IS  likewise of a general kind;  this is  apt to reach such a  pitch 
that  a  man  may  find  the  things  of God  very  tedious  and 
troublesome,  until  at last  he  comes  to abhor  them.  In this 
rejoicing purity of spirit, at least, is  invariably lost first  of all. 
For if any spirituality is  discerned,  it will  be  of such a  gross 
and  sensual  kind  that  it  is  hardly  spiritual  or  interior  or 
recollected  at all,  since  it  will  consist  rather  in  pleasure  of 
I  E.p.;  • cannot excessively cast.' 
I  E.p.;  . a  real and.  as it were,  negative disesteem.' 
3                  'such a  thing or.'  '  E.p.  omits;  • and lUXUry: 
6  Isaiah lll,  12.  •  [Lit.,  • the great.'] 
278  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
sense  than in strength of spirit.  Since,  then, the spirituality 
of the soul is  of  so  low and weak a  character at that time as 
not to quench the habit of this rejoicing  (for this habit alone 
suffices  to destroy pure spirituality, even when the soul is  not 
consenting  to  the acts  of rejoicing),  the soul  must  be living, 
so to say, in the weakness of sense rather than in the  strength 
of the spirit.  Otherwise, 
1 
it will be seen in the perfection and 
fortitude which the soul will have when the occasion demands 
it.  Although I deny not that many virtues may exist together 
with  serious  imperfections,  no  pure  or  delectable  inward 
spirituality can exist while these joys are not quenched;  for 
the  flesh  reigns
2 
within,  warring  against  the  spirit,  and, 
although the spirit may be unconscious  of the evil, yet at the 
least it causes it hidden  distraction. 
3.  Returning now to speak of that second evil, which con· 
tains  innumerable  evils  within  itself,  it  is  impossible  to 
describe  with  the  pen  or to  express  in  words  the  lengths  to 
which it can go,  neither is  this  unknown  or hidden,3 nor the 
extent  of  the  misery  that  arises  from  the  setting  of  our 
rejoicing  on  natural  beauty and  graces.  For every  day  we 
hear of numerous  deaths,  the loss  by many of their honour, 
the  commission  of  many  insults,  the  dissipation  of  much 
wealth,  numerous cases  of emulation and strife,  of adultery, 
rape  and  fornication,4  and  of the  fall
5 
of many  holy  men, 
comparable  in  number  to  that  third  part  of  the  stars  of 
Heaven which  was  swept down by the tail of the serpent on 
earth. 
6 
All  these  disasters  come  from  that cause.  The fine 
gold  has  lost  its  brilliance  and  lustre  and  is  become  mire; 
and the notable and noble men of Sion, who were clothed in 
finest  gold,  are counted as  earthen pitchers,  that are broken 
and  have  become  potsherds. 
7 
How  far  does  the  poison 
of this  evil  not penetrate? 
4.  And  who  drinks  not,  either  much  or  little,  from  this 
golden chalice ofthe Babylonian woman of the Apocalypse?8 
She seated herself on that great beast,  that had seven  heads 
1  E.p.  omits' otherwise.' 
•  E.p.:  'the flesh  almost reigns here.' 
•  E.p.  omits:  'neither  .  .  .  hidden.' 
,  E.p.:  'of adultery and rape.' 
,  The Codices [followed  by P. Silverio] have' of the fall to the ground' 
which  e.p.  abbreviates [as in the text]. 
•  Revelation xii,  4.  '  Lamentations iv,  1-2. 
•  Revelation  xvii,  4.  Here  eleven  pages  are  missing  from  Alc.,  which 
P.  Andres  de  la  Encarnaci6n  supplies,  taking  them  from  the  old  MS. 
which in his time was preserved at Duruelo. 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XXII  279 
and  ten  crowns,  signifying  that  there  is  scarce  any  man, 
whether high or low, saint or sinner, who comes not to drink 
of her wine,  to some extent enslaving his  heart thereby, for, 
as  is  said of her in that place, all the kings  of the earth have 
become  drunken  with  the  wine  of her  prostitution.  And 
she  seizes  upon  all  estates  of men,  even  upon  the  highest 
and  noblest  estate-the  service  of  the  sanctuary  and  the 
Divine  priesthood-setting  her  abominable  cup,  as  Daniel 
says,  in the holy  place,l and leaving scarcely a  single strong 
man  without  making  him  to  drink,  either  little  or  much, 
from  the  wine  of this  chalice,  which  is  vain  rejoicing.  For 
this  reason it is  said  that all  the kings  of the earth have  be-
come  drunken  with  this  wine,  for  very  few  will  be  found, 
however  holy  they  may  have  been,  that  have  not  been  to 
some extent stupefied and bewildered  by this draught of the 
joy and  pleasure of natural graces and beauty. 
5.  This  phrase' they  have  become  drunken'  should  be 
noted.  For, however little a man may drink of the wine oftms 
rejoicing, it at once takes  hold  upon the heart,  and stupefies 
it and works the evil of darkening the reason, as does wine to 
those who have been corrupted  by it.  So that, if some anti-
dote be not at once taken against this poison, whereby it may 
be  quickly  expelled,  the  life  of  the  soul  is  endangered. 
Spiritual  weakness  will  increase,  bringing  it  down  to  such 
great evil that it will be like Samson, when his  eyes
2 
were  put 
out  and  the  hair  of his  first  strength  was  cut  off,  and  like 
Samson it will see itself grinding in the mills, a captive among 
its  enemies; 3  and  afterwards,  peradventure,  it  will  die  the 
second  death  among its  enemies,  even  as  did  he,4  since  the 
drinking of this  rejoicing will  produce spiritually in them all 
those  evils  that were  produced  in him  physically,  and  does 
in fact  produce  them in  many persons  to  this  day.  Let  his 
enemies  come  and  say  to  him afterwards,  to  his  great con-
fusion:  Art thou he that broke the knotted cords,5 that tote 
asunder the lions,  slew the thousand Philistines,  broke down 
the gates  and freed  himself from  all  his  enemies? 
6.  Let us  conclude,  then,  by giving the instruction neces-
sary  to counteract this  poison.  And let it be this:  As  soon 
1  Daniel ix,  27. 
I  The  Codices  have:  'when  the  eyes  of  his  sight  .. .'  This  reading 
[adopted  by  P.  Silverio]  is  shortened  by  e.p.,  as  being  pleonastic,  to 
• when his eyes  .. .'  •  Judges xvi. 
,  The 1630 edition reads:  • even  as he died  the first  [death].' 
I  E.p.:  . the three knotted cords.' 
280  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
as thy heart feels  moved by this vain joy in the good things of 
nature,  let it remember  how  vain  a  thing it is  to  rejoice  in 
aught  save  the  service  of God,  how  perilous  and  how  per-
nicious.  Let  it  consider  how  great  an  evil  it was  for  the 
angels  to  rejoice  and  take  pleasure  in  their  natural  endow-
ments  and  beauty,  since  it was  this  that plunged  them  into 
the  depths  of shame. 1  Let them think,  too, how  many evils 
come  to  men daily  through  this  same  vanity,  and  let  them 
therefore  resolve  in good  time  to  employ  the  remedy which 
the  poet counsels  to  those  who  begin  to grow affectioned  to 
such things.  'Make haste now,' he says,  '  to use the remedy 
at the beginning;  for when evil things have had time to grow 
in  the  heart,  remedy  and  medicine  come  late.'2  Look  not 
upon the wine,  as  the Wise  Man says,  when its  colour is  red 
and when it shines in the glass  ;  it enters pleasantly and bites 
like  a  viper and sheds abroad  poison like a  basilisk. 
3 
CHAPTER  XXIII 
Of the  benefits  which  the  soul  receives from  not  setting  its  reJoicing 
upon  the good things of nature. 
I.  Many are the benefits which  come to the soul  througJ:t 
the withdrawal of its  heart from  this  rejoicing;  for,  besides 
preparing itself for  the love  of God  and the other virtues,  it 
makes  a  direct  way  for  its  own  humility,  and  for  a  general 
charity  toward  its  neighbours.  For,  as  it is  not  led  by  the 
apparent'  good  things  of nature,  which  are  deceitful,  into 
affection for  anyone,  the soul  remains free  and able
6 
to love 
them all  rationally  and spiritually,  as  God  wills  them to  be 
loved.  Here it must be understood  that none deserves  to be 
loved, save for  the virtue that is  in him.  And, when we love 
in this way, it is very pleasing to the will of God, and this love 
also  brings  great liberty;  and if there  be 'attachment in it, 
there is  greater attachment to God.  For,  in  that case,  the 
more this love grows,  the more grows our love toward God ; 
and,  the  more  grows  our love  toward  God,  the greater  be-
1  [Lit.,  • since through this they fell  into the vile  abysses:] 
I  So  Ale.  The other authorities have only:  • medicine comes late.' 
I  Proverbs  xxiii.  31-2.  Only  Ale.  and  e.p.  have:  'and sheds  abroad 
poison [really' poisons ']  like a  basilisk:  A,  B  have  'its poison'  and use 
the word  basilisco,  where Ale.,  e.p.  have r4culo,  with the same meaning. 
,  E.p.  omits' apparent:  •  [Lit .• • free  and clear.'] 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XXIII  281 
comes our love for our neighbour.  For, when love is grounded 
in God,  the reason for  all love is  one and  the same  and the 
cause of all love is  one and the same also. 
2.  Another  excellent  benefit  results  to  the  soul  from  its 
renunciation of this kind of rejoicing, 1  which is  that it fulfils 
and  keeps2  the  counsel  of Our  Saviour  which  He  gives  us 
through S.  Matthew.  Let him that will follow  Me,  He says, 
deny himself.3  This the soul could in no wise do ifit were to 
set its rejoicing upon the good things' of nature;  for he that 
attaches any importance to himself neither denies himself nor 
follows  Christ. 
3.  There  is  another  great  benefit  in  the  renunciation  of 
this  kind  of rejoicing,  which  is  that it produces  great  tran-
quillity  in  the  soul,  empties  it  of  distractions  and  brings 
recollection  to  the  senses,  especially  to  the  eyes.  For  the 
soul  that desires not to rejoice in these things  desires  neither 
to look at them  nor to attach  the  other senses  to  them,  lest 
it should be attracted or entangled by them. 6  Neither will it 
spend  time  or  thought  upon  them,  being  like  the  prudent 
serpent, which stops its ears that it may not hear the charmers
8 
lest  they make some impression upon it.7  For,  by guarding 
its  doors,  which  are  the  senses,  the  soul  guards  itself safely 
and increases  its  tranquillity  and  purity. 
4.  There is  another benefit of no less  importance to those 
that have become proficient in the mortification of this kind 
of rejoicing,  which  is  that evil  things  and  the  knowledge  of 
them neither make an impression upon them nor stain them 
as they do  those to whom they still give any delight.  Where-
fore the renunciation and mortification of this rejoicing result 
in spiritual cleanness of soul and body;  that is,  of spirit and 
sense;  and  the soul  comes  to  have an angelical  conformity 
with God, and becomes, both in spirit and in body, a worthy 
temple  of the  Holy  Spirit.  This  cannot come  to  pass  if the 
heart rejoices  in natural graces  and  good  things. 
8 
For this 
reason  it is  not  necessary  to have  given  consent  to any evil 
thing,  or to have remembrance of such;9  for  that rejoicing 
1  'From  .  .  .  rejoicing'  are words found  in Ale.  only. 
a  E.p.  adds:  • with perfection.' 
a  S.  Matthew xvi,  24.  '  A,  B,  e.p.  read:  'the gifts.' 
6  E.p. omits:  • or entangled by them.' 
•  So  Ale.  A,  B:  • incantations.'  E.p.:  • charms.' 
1  Psalm lvii,  5  [A.V.,  lviii,  4-5]. 
I  E.p.:  • if the heart allows itself to be to any extent carried away by 
rejoicing in natural graces and good  things.' 
•  E.p. omits:  • or to have remembrance of such.' 
282  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
suffices  to  stain  the  soul  and  the  senses  with  impurity  by 
means of the knowledge of evil  ;1  for,  as the Wise Man says, 
the  Holy Spirit will  remove  Himself from  thoughts  that are 
without  understanding-that  is,  without  the  higher  reason 
that has respect to God.
2 
5.  Another benefit ofa general kind follows,  which is  that, 
besides  freeing  ourselves  from  the  evils  and  dangers  afore-
mentioned,  we  are  delivered  also  from  countless  vanities, 
and  from  many  other  evils,  both  spiritual  and  temporal  ; 
,and  especially  from  falling  into  the  small  esteem  in  which 
are held all  those that are seen  to glory or rejoice in the said 
natural gifts, whether in their own or in those of others.  And 
thus these souls  are held  and esteemed as  wise and prudent, 
as indeed are all  those  who  take  no account of these  things, 
but only of that which  pleases  God. 
6.  From  these  said  benefits  follows  the  last,  which  is  a 
generosity  of the soul, as  necessary  to the service of God as is 
liberty  of spirit, whereby  temptations are  easily  vanquished 
and trials faithfully  endured,  and whereby,  too,  the virtues· 
grow and become prosperous. 
CHAPTER  XXIV 
Which  treats  of the  third kind of good  thing  whereon  the  will  may 
set  tbe  affection  of Tfjoicing,  which  kind  pertains  to  sense. 
Indicates  what  these  good  things  are  and  of how  many  kinds, 
            the  will  has  to  be  directed  to  God  and purged of this 
re.Jotczng. 
I.  We  have  next  to  treat  of rejoicing  with  respect  to  the 
good  things  of sense,  which  is  the  third  kind  of good  thing 
wherein  we  said  that  the  will  may  rejoice.  And  it is  to  be 
noted  that  by the  good  things  of sense  we  here  understand 
everything  in  this  life  that  can  be  apprehended  by  the 
senses  of sight,  hearing,  smell,  taste  or  touch,  and  by  the 
interior  fashioning  of  imaginary  reflections,  all  of  which 
things  belong  to  the  bodily  senses,  interior and  exterior. 
2.  And,  in  order  to  darken  the  will  and  purge  it  of 
rejoicing with  respect  to  these  sensible  objects,  and direct it 
1  E.p.  concludes  this  paragraph  here,  but  the  1630  edition  continues, 
as in the Codices,  which we here follow. 
I  Wisdom i, S.  •  A,  B:  • the virtues of the soul.' 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XXIV  283 
to  God  by  means  of them,  it  is  necessary  to  assume  one 
truth,  which is  that, as  we  have frequently said,  the sense  of 
the lower part of man, which is  that whereof we are treating, 
is  not,  neither can be,  capable of knowing or understanding 
God as God is.  So that the eye cannot see Him, or aught that 
is  like  Him;  neither  can  the  ear  hear  His  voice,  or  any 
sound that resembles  it ; . neither can the sense of smell  per-
ceive a  perfume so  sweet as He;  neither can the taste detect 
a  savour so  sublime  and  delectable;  neither can the  touch 
feel a movement so delicate and full of delight, nor aught like 
to it ;  neither can His form or any figure that represents Him 
enter into the thought or imagination.  Even so says  Isaiah: 
Eye  hath  not  seen  Him,  nor  hath  ear  heard  Him,  neither 
hath it entered into the heart of man. 
1 
3.  And here it must be noted  that the senses  may receive 
pleasure  and  delight,  either  from  the  spirit,  by  means  of 
some communication that it receives from God interiorly, or 
from  outward  things  communicated  to  them.  And,  as  has 
been said, neither by way of the spirit nor by that of sense  can 
the sensual  part of the soul  know  God.  For, since  it has  no 
capacity for attaining to such a  point, it receives in the senses 
both that which  is  of the spirit and  that which  is  of sense, 2 
and receives  them in no other way.  Wherefore it would  be 
at the  least  but vanity  to  set  the  rejoicing  of the  will  upon 
pleasure caused by any of these apprehensions,  and it would 
be hindering the power of the will from occupying itself with 
God and from  centring its  rejoicing in Him alone.  This the 
soul  cannot perfectly accomplish,  save  by purging itself and 
remaining in darkness as to rejoicing of this kind, as also with 
respect  to other things. 
4.  I  said  advisedly  that  if the  rejoicing  of the  will  were 
set  upon  any of these things it would  be vanity.  But,  when 
it is  not set  upon  them,  and  when,  as  soon  as  the  will  finds 
pleasure in that which it hears, sees and does, it soars upward 
to  rejoice  in  God-to  which  end  its  pleasure  furnishes  a 
motive and  provides  strength-this is  very good.  In such a 
case  not  only  need  the  said  motions  not  be  shunned  when 
they cause this  devotion and prayer,  but the soul  may profit 
by  them,  and  indeed  should  so  profit,  to  the  end  that  it 
may accomplish  this  holy exercise.  For there are souls  who 
1  Isaiah lxiv.  4;  I  Corinthians ii. 9. 
a  E.p.:  . and that which is of the intellect.' 
284  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
are  greatly  moved  by  objects  of sense  to  seek  God.  But 
much  caution  must  be  observed  herein  and  the  resulting 
effects  must  be  considered;  for  oftentimes  many  spiritual 
persons  indulge  in  the  recreations  of sense  aforementioned 
under  the  pretext  of offering  prayer and  devotion  to  God; 
and  they  do  this  in a  way  which  must  be  called  recreation 
rather than prayer,  and which gives  more pleasure to them-
selves  than to  God.  And,  although! the intention that they 
have is  toward God, the effect which they prodU(;e
2 
is  that of 
recreation  of sense,  wherein  they find  weakness  and  imper-
fection,  rather than revival of the will  and surrender thereof 
to  God. 
5.  I  wish, therefore, to propose a  test here whereby it may 
be seen when these delights of the senses aforementioned are 
profitable and when they are not.  And it is that, whensoever 
a  person  hears  music  and  other  things,  and  sees  pleasant 
things,3  and  is  conscious  of sweet  perfumes,  or tastes  things 
that are delicious or feels  soft touches,  if his  thought and the 
affection of his will are at once centred upon God and if that 
thought of God gives him more pleasure than the movement 
of sense which causes it, and save for that he finds  no pleasure 
in  the  said  movement,  this  is  a  sign  that  he  is  receiving 
benefit therefrom, and that this thing of sense is  a  help to his 
spirit.  In this  way  such  things  may  be  used,  for  then such 
things  of sense subserve  the end for  which  God created and 
gave them,  which is  that He should  be the better loved and 
known  because  of them.  And  it  must  be  known,  further-
more,  that  one  upon  whom  these  things  of sense  cause  the 
pure spiritual effect which  I  describe has  no desire for  them, 
and makes  hardly  any account  of them,  though  they  cause 
him great pleasure when they are offered  to him,  because of 
the  pleasure  which,  as  I  have said,  they  cause  him  in  God. 
He is  not,  however,  solicitous  for  them,  and  when  they  are 
offered to him, as I say, his will passes from them at once and 
he abandons it to God and sets it upon Him. 
6.  The  reason  .why  he  cares  little  for  these  motives, 
although  they  help  him  on  his journey  to  God,  is  that  the 
spirit  which  is  so  ready  to  go  by  every  means  and  in  every 
way  to  God  is  so  completely  nourished  and  prepared  and 
satisfied by the spirit of God that it lacks nothing and desires 
nothing;  or,  if it  desires  anything  to  that  end,  the  desire 
1  E.p.:  • although it seems  that.'  I  E.p.:  • which  they cause.' 
I  A.  e.p.:  • hears music or other pleasant things.' 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XXV  285 
at once passes and is forgotten, and the soul makes no account 
ofit.  But one that feels  not this liberty of spirit in these things 
and pleasures of sense,  but whose will rests in these pleasures 
and feeds  upon them, is  greatly harmed by them and should 
withdraw  himself from  the  use  of them.  For,  although  his 
reason  may desire  to  employ them to journey toward  God, 
yet,  inasmuch  as  his  desire  finds  pleasure  in  them  which  is 
according  to  sense,  and  their  effect  is  ever  dependent upon 
the pleasure which they give,  he is  certain to find  hindrance 
rather  than  help  in  them,  and  harm  rather  than  profit. 
And,  when he sees that the desire! for such recreation reigns 
in him, he must mortify it;  for,  the stronger it becomes, the 
more  imperfection  he  will  have  and  the  greater  will  be  his 
weakness. 
7.  Whatsoever pleasure, then, presents itself to the spiritual 
person from sense,  and whether it come to him by chance or 
by  design,  he  must  make  use  of it  only as  a  means  to  God, 
lifting up to Him the rejoicing of his soul  so  that his  rejoicing 
may be useful  and profitable! and perfect;  realizing that all 
rejoicing which implies not renunciation 
3 
and annihilation of 
every other kind  of rejoicing,  although it be  with  respect  to 
something apparently very lofty,  is  vain and profits not,  but 
is  a  hindrance towards  the union of the will  in God. 
CHAPTER  XXV 
Which  treats  of the  evils  that  ajjlict  the  soul  when  it  desires  to  set 
the  rejoicing  of its  will  upon  the  good  things  of sense. 
I.  In  the  first  place,  if  the  soul  does  not  darken  and 
quench the joy which  may arise  within it from  the things of 
sense,  and direct its rejoicing to God, all the general kinds of 
evil  which  we  have  described  as  arising  from  every  other 
kind of rejoicing follow  from  this joy in the  things  of sense  : 
such evils are darkness in the reason, lukewarmness, spiritual 
weariness,  etc.  But,  to  come  to  particulars,  many  are  the 
evils,  spiritual,  bodily and sensual,  into which  the  soul  may 
fall  through  this  rejoicing. 
2.  First  of all,  from  joy  in  visible  things,  when  the  soul 
denies  not itself in order to reach God,  there may come to it, 
1  E.p.:  • that the spirit.'  I  Ale.  alone has:  I  and profitable.' 
•  [Lit.,  • that is  not in renunciation  .  .  .'] 
286  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
directly,  vanity of spirit and distraction of the mind,  unruly 
covetousness,  immodesty, outward and inward unseemliness, 
impurity of thought, and envy. 
3.  From joy in  hearing  useless  things  there  may  directly 
arise  distraction  of the  imagination,  gossiping,  envy,  rash 
judgements and vacillating thoughts;  and from  these  arise 
many other and pernicious evils. 
4.  From  joy  in  sweet  perfumes,  there  arise  loathing  of 
the poor,  which is  contrary to the teaching of Christ,  dislike 
of serving  others,  unruliness  of heart in humble things,  and 
spiritual insensibility, at least to  a  degree  proportionate with 
its  desire  for  this joy. 
5.  From joy in the savour of meat and  drink,  there arise 
directly such gluttony and drunkenness,  wrath,  discord  and 
want of charity with one's  neighbours and with  the poor,  as 
had  that  Epulon,l  who  fared  sumptuously  every  day,  with 
Lazarus. 
2 
Hence arise  bodily disorders,  infirmities and evil 
motions,  because  the  incentives  to  luxury  become  greater. 
Directly,  too,  there  arises  great  spiritual  torpor,  and  the 
desire for spiritual things is corrupted, so that the soul cannot 
taste  any  of them,  neither  endure  them  nor  treat  of them. 
From this joy is  likewise  born distraction of the other senses 
and of the heart, and discontent with respect to many things. 
6.  From joy in the  touch  of soft  things  arise  many  more 
evils  and  more  pernicious  ones,  which  more  quickly  cause 
sense  to  overflow  into  spirit,3  and  quench  all  spiritual 
strength  and  vigour.  Hence  arises  the  abominable  vice  of 
effeminacy,  or  the  incentives  thereto,  according  to  the 
proportion  of joy of this  kind  which  is  experienced.  Hence 
luxury  increases,  the  mind  becomes  effeminate  and  timid, 
and the senses  grow soft and delicate and are predisposed  to 
sin  and  evil.  Vain  gladness  and  joy  are  infused  into  the 
heart;  the  tongue  takes  to  itself licence  and  the eyes  roam 
unrestrainedly;  and  the  remaining  senses  are  blunted  and 
deadened,  according  to  the  measure'  of this  desire.  The 
judgement is  confounded,  being  nourished  by spiritual folly 
and insipidity;  moral cowardice and inconstancy increase; 
and,  by  the  darkness  of the  soul  and  the  weakness  of the 
heart,  fear  is  begotten  even  where  no  fear  is.  At  times, 
again,  this joy begets  a  spirit  of confusion,  and insensibility 
1  E.p.:  'as had that rich eater.'  I  S.  Luke xvi,  19. 
a  E.p.:  'which more quickly hurt the spirit.' 
I  [Lit.,  '  to the quantity.']  E.p.:  'to the degree.' 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XXVI  287 
with respect to conscience and spirit;  wherefore the reason 
is  greatly enfeebled, and is affected in such a  way that it can 
neither  take  nor give  good  counsel,  and  remains  incapable 
of moral  and spiritual  blessings  and becomes  as  useless  as  a 
broken vessel. 
7.  All  these  evils  are caused  by this  kind  of rejoicing-in 
some  more  intensely, 
1 
according  to  the  intensity  of their 
rejoicing, and also according to the complacency or weakness 
or variableness of the person who yields  to it.  For there are 
natures  that  will  receive  greater  detriment  from  a  small 
occasion  of sin than will  others from  a  great one. 
8.  Finally,  from  joy  of this  kind  in  touch,  a  person  may 
fall  into  as  many  evils  and  perils  as  those  which  we  have 
described  as  concerning  the  good  things  of nature;  and, 
since these have already been described, I  do not detail them 
here;  neither do  I  describe many other evils  wrought thus, 
such as  diminution of spiritual exercises  and bodily penance 
and  lukewarmness  and  lack  of devotion  in  the  use  of the 
sacraments of penance and of the Eucharist. 
CHAPTER  XXVI 
Of the  benefits  that come  to  the  soul from  self-denial  in  rejoicing  as 
to  things of sense,  which  benefits  are  spiritual  and temporal. 
I.  Marvellous  are the  benefits  that the soul  derives from 
self-denial in this  rejoicing:  some of these are spiritual and 
some  temporal. 
2.  The first  is  that the soul,  by restraining its rejoicing as 
to things of sense,  is  restored from  the distraction into which 
it  has  fallen  through  excessive  exercise  of the  senses,  and  is 
recollected  in God.  The spirituality and the virtues  that it 
has  acquired  are  preserved;  nay,  they  are  increased  and 
increase  continually.2 
3.  The  second  spiritual  benefit  which  comes  from  self-
denial  in  rejoicing  as  to  things  of sense  is  exceeding  great. 
We  may say with truth that that which was sensual becomes 
spiritual, and that which was bestial becomes rational;  and 
even  that  the  soul  is  journeying  from  a  human  life  to  a 
1  E.p.:  'in some more, in others less,  more or less intensely  .. .' 
I  [Lit.,  'and  gain  continually.']  So  Ale.  A,  B  add  'anew.'  E.p. 
omits:  . and increase continually.' 
288  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
portion  which  is  angelical;  and that, instead  of being  tem-
poral and human, it becomes celestial and divine.  For, even 
as a man who seeks the pleasure of things of sense and sets his 
rejoicing  upon  them  neither  merits  nor  deserves  any  other 
name than those which we have given him-that is,  sensual, 
bestial,  temporal, etc.-even so,  when he  exalts his  rejoicing 
above these things of sense, he merits all those other names-
to wit,  spiritual,  celestial,  etc. 
4.  And  it  is  clear  that  this  is  true;  for,  although  the 
exercise  of the  senses  and  the  power  of sensuality  are  con-
trary,  as  the  Apostle says,  to  the power and the exercises  of 
spirituality,l  it  follows  that,  when  the one  kind  of power is 
diminished and brought to an end,  the other contrary kinds, 
the  growth  of which  was  hindered  by  the  first  kinds,  are 
increased.  And thus,  when  the spirit is  perfected,  (which  is 
the  higher  part of the  soul  and  the  part  that  has  relations 
with  God  and  receives  His  communications),  it  merits  all 
these  attributes  aforementioned,  since  it  is  perfected  in  the 
heavenly  and  spiritual  gifts  and  blessings  of  God.  Both 
these things are proved by S.  Paul, who calls the sensual man 
(namely,  the  man  that directs  the  exercise  of his  will  solely 
to  sense)  the  animal  man,  who  perceives  not
2 
the  things  of 
God.  But  this  other  man,  who  lifts  up  hi.;  will  to  God,  he 
calls  the spiritual  mall,  saying  that this  man penetrates  and 
judges all  things,  even  the  deep  things  of God.
3 
Therefore 
the  soul  gains  herein  the  marvellous"  benefit  of  a  dis-
position  well  able  to  receive  the  blessings  and spiritual  gifts 
of God. 
5.  The third benefit is  that the pleasures and the rejoicing 
of the  will  in  temporal  matters  are very  greatly increased  ; 
for,  as  the Saviour says,  they shall receive an hundredfold in 
this life.
5 
So that, if thou deniest thyself one joy, the Lord will 
give  thee  an  hundredfold  in  this  life,  both  spiritually  and 
temporally ;  and likewise, for one joy that thou hast in these 
things of sense,  thou  shalt have  an hundredfold  of affliction 
and  misery.  For," through  the  eye  that  is  purged  from  the 
joys of sight,  there comes  to  the soul a  spiritual joy,  directed 
to God in all things that are seen, whether Divine or profane. 8 
Through the ear that is  purged from the joy of hearing, there 
1  Galatians v,  17.  a  A,  B:  • who is lle  that perceives not  .. .' 
3  I  Corinthians ii,  9,  10,  14. 
,  Here  P. Juan Evangelista's copy recommences (cf.  p. 278, n. 8, above). 
,  S.  Matthew xix,  29.  •  E.p.:  'or human.' 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XXVI  289 
comes to the soul-joy most spiritual an hundredfold, directed 
to God in all that it hears,  be it Divine or profane.
1 
Even so 
is  it with  the other senses  when they are purged.  For, even 
as  in the state of innocence all that our first  parents saw and 
said  and ate in Paradise furnished  them with greater sweet-
ness of contemplation, so that the sensual part of their nature 
might  be duly  subjectec!  to,  and  ordered  by,  reason;  even 
so the man whose sense is  purged from all things of sense and 
made subject to  the spirit,  receives,  in his  very first  motion, 
the  delight  of delectable  knowledge  and  contemplatioI)  of 
God. 
6.  Wherefore, to him that is pure, all things,  whether high 
or low,  are an occasion of greater good  and further  purity s 
even as the man that is impure is apt to derive evil from things 
both  high  and  low,  because  of his  impurity.  But  he  that 
conquers  not  the joy of desire  will  not  enjoy the serenity  of 
habitual rejoicing in  God through  His  creatures and works. 
In  the  man  that  lives  no  more  according  to  sense,  all  the 
operations  of the senses  and faculties  are directed  to Divine 
contemplation.  For,  as  it  is  true  in  good  philosophy  that 
each thing operates according to its being, and to the life that 
it lives,  so  it is  clear,  beyond  contradiction,  that,  if the soul 
lives  a  spiritual life,  the animal life 
2 
being mortified,  it must 
be journeying straight  to  God,  since  all  its  spiritual  actions 
and motions pertain to the life of the spirit.  Hence it follows 
that such  a  man,  being  pure  in  heart,  finds  in  all  things  a 
knowledge of God which is joyful and pleasant, chaste,; pure, 
spiritual,  glad  and  loving. 
7.  From  what  has  been  said  I  deduce  the  following 
doctrine-namely  that,  until  a  man  has  succeeded  in  so 
habituating  his  senses  to  the  purgation  of the  joys  of sense 
that  from  his  first  motion 
3 
he  is  gaining  the benefit  afore-
mentioned of directing all  his  powers to  God,  he must needs 
deny himself joy and  pleasure with  respect  to these  powers, 
so  that he may withdraw his  soul  from  the life of sense.  He 
must fear that, since he is not yet spiritual, he may perchance 
derive  from  the  practice  of these  things  a  pleasure  and  an 
energy  which  is  of sense  rather  than  of spirit;  that  the 
energy which is  of sense may predominate in all his actions; 
1  E.p.:  'or human.' 
2  E.p.:  '  ... that according  to the being which  everything has is the 
life  that  it  lives,  therefore,  in  a  soul  [lit.,  • in  him 'J  that  has  a  spiritua.l 
ueing,  the animal life  .. .' 
I  E.p.  omits:  'from his first  motion.' 
290  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
and that this  may lead to an increase of sensuality and may 
sustain and nurture it.  For, as Our Saviour says, that which 
is  born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit 
is  spirit.1  Let this  be closely  considered,  for  it is  the truth. 
And  let  not  him  that  has  not  yet  mortified  his  pleasure  in 
things  of sense  dare  to  make  great  use  of the  power  and 
operation  of sense  with  respect  to  them,  thinking  that  they 
will help him to become more spiritual;  for the powers of the 
soul  will  increase the more without the intervention of these 
things  of sense-that is,  if it  quench  the joy and  desire  for 
them rather than make any use  of it. 
a.  There is  no need  to speak of the blessings of glory that, 
in the life to come, result from the renunciation of these joys. 
For,  apart  from  the  fact  that  the  bodily  gifts  of the  life  of 
glory, such as agility and clarity, will be much more excellent 
than  in  those  souls  who  have  not  denied  themselves,  there 
will  be  an  increase  in  the  essential  glory  of the soul  corre-
sponding to its love of God, for  Whose sake it has renounced 
the things  of sense  aforementioned.  For every  momentary, 
fleeting joy that has  been  renounced,  as  S.  Paul says,  there 
shall  be  laid  up  an  exceeding  weight  of glory  eternally. a 
And  I  will  not  here  recount  the  other  benefits,  whether 
moral,  temporal  or spiritual,  which result from  this  night of 
rejoicing;  for  they  are  all  those  that  have  already  been 
described,  and  to  a  more  eminent  degree;  since  these joys 
that  are  renounced  are  more  closely  linked  to  the  natural 
man, and therefore he that  renounces them acquires thereby 
a  more  intimate  purity. 
CHAPTER  XXVII 
Which  begins  to  treat of the fourth  kind of  good-namely,  the  moral. 
Describes  wherein  this  consists,  and in  what  manner joy  of the 
will therein  is  lawful. 
I.  The fourth  kind  of good  wherein  the  will  may  rejoice 
is  moral.  By  this  we  here  understand  the  virtues,  and  the 
habits  of the  virtues,  in  so  far  as  these  are  moral,  and  the 
practice  of any  virtue,  and  the  practice  of works  of mercy, 
the  keeping  of the law of God,  and of that of the common-
1  s.  John  iii,  6.  I  :2  Corinthians iv,  17. 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XXVII  291 
weal,l  and  the  putting  into  practice  of all  good  intentions 
and inclinations. 
2.  These kinds of moral good, when they are possessed and 
practised,  deserve perhaps more than any of the other kinds 
aforementioned  that the will  should  rejoice  in them.  For a 
man  may rejoice in his own affairs for one of two reasons,  or 
for  both  reasons  together-namely, for  that which  they are 
in  themselves,  or for  the good  which  they  imply and  bring 
with  them as  a  means  and instrument.  We  shall  find  that 
the  possession  of the three kinds  of good already  mentioned 
merits no rejoicing of the will.  For, as has been said, they do 
no  good  to  man  of themselves,  nor  have  they  any good  in 
themselves, since they are so fleeting and frail;  rather, as we 
have  likewise  said,  they  cause  and  bring  him  trouble  and 
grief  and  affliction  of spirit.  Now,  although  they  might 
merit  that  man  should  rejoice  in  them  for  the  second 
reason-which is  that he may profit by them for journeying 
to  God-this is  so  uncertain that, as  we  commonly see,  they 
more  often  harm  man  than  bring  him  profit.  But  moral 
goods merit a certain degree ofrejoicing in him that possesses 
them, and this for the first reason-namely, for their intrinsic 
nature  and  worth.  For  they  bring  with  them  peace  and 
tranquillity,  and  a  right  and ordered  use  of the  reason  and 
actions  that are consistent  therewith,  so  that a  man cannot, 
humanly speaking,  have anything better in this  life. 
3:  Thus,  since  these  virtues  deserve  to  be  loved  and 
esteemed, humanly speaking, for their own sakes,  a man may 
well  rejoice in the possession of them, and may practise them 
for  that  which  they  are  in  themselves,  and  for  the  blessing 
which they bring to man in human and temporal form.  In 
this  way and for  this reason 
2 
philosophers and wise  men and 
princes  of old  esteemed  and  praised them,  and endeavoured 
to  possess  and  practise  them;  and,  although  they  were 
heathen,  and  regarded  them  only  in  a  temporal  manner, 
merely  considering  the  blessings  which  they  knew  would 
result  from  them-temporal,  corporal  and  natural-they 
not only obtained by means of them the temporal renown and 
benefits  which  they sought,  but,  apart from  this,  God,  Who 
1  [Lit.,  pol£tica,  which  I  take as  an  adjective  qualifying  ley  ('  law')  in 
the  sense  of  • law  of  the  commonweal.'  P.  Silverio  seems  to consider it 
to be a  noun, and glosses it as meaning' good  government in the common-
weal,  courtesy  and  other  social  virtues.']  A,  Bread  pldtica  [' conversa-
tion 'J,  thereby entirely altering the sense. 
I  E.p.  omit;;:  'and for  this reason.' 
2  A 
292  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
loves  all that is good  (even in barbarians and heathen)  and, 
as  the  Wise  Man  says,  hinders  naught  that  is  good,l  gave 
them longer life,  greater honour, dominion and peace (as  He 
did for  example to the Romans),  because they followed just 
laws;  for He subjected nearly the whole world to them, and. 
gave  rewards  of a  temporal  kind  for  their  good  customs  to 
those who  because of their unbelief were incapable of eternal 
reward.  For  God  loves  moral  good  so  much  that,  merely 
because Solomon asked  wisdom of Him that he might teach 
his  people,  govern  them justly  and  bring  them  up  in  good 
customs,  God  Himself was  greatly  pleased  with  him,  and 
told him that, because he had asked for  wisdom to that end, 
this should be given him, and there should also be given hini 
that which he had not asked,  namely,  riches  and honour, so 
that no  king,  either  in  the  past  or in  the future,  should  be 
like him.2 
4.  But,  although the Christian  should  rejoice  in  this first 
way  in  the  moral  good  that  he  possesses  and  in  the  good 
works  of a  temporal  kind  which  he does,  since they lead  to 
the temporal blessings which we have described, he must not 
allow  his joy to  stop  at this  first  stage  (as  we  have  said  the 
heathen  did,  because  their  spiritual  sight  extended  not  be-
yond the things of this mortal life) ;  but, since he has the light 
of faith,  wherein  he  hopes  for  eternal  life,  without  which 
nothing  that belongs  to  this  life  and the  next  will  be of any 
value  to  him,  he  must  rejoice  principally  and  solely  in  the 
possession  and  employment  of these  moral  goods  after the 
second  manner-namely, in  that  by  doing  these  works  for 
the love of God he will gain eternal life.  And thus he should 
set his eyes and his rejoicing solely on serving and honouring 
God  with  his  good  customs  and  virtues.  For without this 
intention the virtues are of no worth in the sight of God, as is 
seen  in  the  ten  virgins  of the Gospel,  who had all kept their 
virginity and done good  works;  and yet,  because the joy of 
five  ofthem was not of the second kind (that is,  because they 
had not directed their joy to God),  but was  rather after the 
first  and  vain  kind,  for  they  rejoiced 
3 
in  the  possession  of 
their good  works,  they were  cast  out from  Heaven  with  no 
acknowledgement  or  reward  from  the  Bridegroom.  And 
likewise many persons of old had many virtues' and practised 
1  Wisdom vii,  22. 
I  3  Kings  [A.V.,  1  Kings]  iii,  Il-13. 
•  A,  B, e.p.  add:  • and  boasted:  ,  E.p.:  . certain virtues: 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XXVIII  293 
good works, and many Christians have them
1 
nowadays and 
accomplish  great  acts,  which  will  profit  them  nothing  for 
eternal  life,  because  they have not sought in them the glory 
and  honour  which  belong  to  God  alone. 
2 
The  Christian, 
then,  must rejoice,  not in the performing of good  works and 
the following of good customs,  but in doing them for the love 
of God  alone,  without  respect  to  aught  else  soever.  For, 
inasmuch  as  good  works  that  are  done  to  serve  God  alone 
will  have  the  greater  reward  in  glory,  the  greater  will  be 
the confusion in the presence of God of those who have done 
them  for  other  reasons. 
5.  The  Christian,  then,  if he  will  direct  his  rejoicing  to 
God  with regard  to  moral good,  must realize  that the  value 
of his  good  works,  fasts,  alms,  penances,  etc.,  is  not  based 
upon the number or the quality of them, but upon the love of 
God  which  inspires  him  to  do  them  ;  and that they are the 
more  excellent  when  they  are  performed  with  a  purer  and 
sincerer  love  of God,  and  when  there is  less  in  them  of self-
interest, joy,  pleasure,  consolation and praise,  whether  with 
reference  to this  world  ot to the next.  Wherefore the heart 
must not be set upon pleasure,  consolation and delight,  and 
the other interests which good works and practices commonly 
bring  with  them,  but it must concentrate its  rejoicing  upon 
God.  It must  desire  to  serve  Him  in  its  good  works,  and 
purge itself from  this  other rejoicing,  remaining in  darkness 
with  respect to it and desiring that God alone shall have joy 
in its good works and shall take secret pleasure therein,  with-
out  any  other 'intention  and  delight  than  those  relating  to 
the honour and glory of God.  And thus,  with respect to this 
moral  good,  the  soul  will  concentrate all  the  strength  of its 
will  upon God. 
CHAPTER  XXVIII 
Of seven  evils  into  which  a man  may fall  if he  set  the  rejoicing  of 
his  will upon  moral good. 
I.  The principal evils  into which a  man may fall  through 
vain  rejoicing  in  his  good  works  and  habits  I  find  to  be 
seven  ;  and they are very hurtful because they are spiritual. 3 
J  E.p.:  'have and  practise them.' 
2  E.p.  adds:  'and His love above all  things.' 
a  A,  H,  e.p.  add:  'These I  shall here briefly describe.' 
294  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
2.  The first  evil  is  vanity,  pride,  vainglory and  presump-
tion;  for a  man cannot rejoice in his  works  without esteem-
ing  them.  And  hence  arise  boasting  and  like  things,  as  is 
said of the Pharisee in the Gospel, who prayed and congratu-
lated  himself before  God,l  boasting  that  he  fasted  and  did 
other good  works. 
3.  The second  evil  is  usually  linked  with  this:  it  is  our 
jUdging  others,  by  means  of comparisons,  as  wicked  and 
imperfect, when it seems to us  that their acts and good works 
are inferior to our own;  we  esteem them the less  highly  in 
our  hearts,  and  at times  in  our speech.  And  this  evil  was 
likewise  that  of the  Pharisee,  for  in  his  prayer  he  said:  I 
thank Thee that
2 
I  am not as other men are:  robbers, unjust 
and adulterers. a  So  that by one  single act he fell  into these 
two evils, esteeming himself and despising others, as do many 
nowadays,  saying:  I  am not like  such  a  man,  nor  do  I  do 
this  and  that,  as  does  such  or  such  a  man.  And  many  of 
these  are  even  worse  than the  Pharisee.  He,  it is  true,  not 
only  despised  others,  but  also  pointed  to  an  individual, 
saying:  Nor am I  like this  publican.  But they,  not satisfied 
with  either  of these  things,  go  so  far  as  to  be  angry  and 
envious  when  they  see  that others  are  praised,  or do  more, 
or are of greater use,  than themselves. 
4.  The third evil  is  that,  as  they look for  pleasure in their 
good  works,  they  usually  perform  them  only  when  they see 
that some  pleasure  and  praise  will  result  from  them.  And 
thus,  as  Christ says,  they do everything ut  videantur ab  homini-
bus,
4 
and work not for  the love  of5  God  alone. 
5.  The fourth  evil  follows  from  this.  It is  that  they  will 
have  no  reward  from  God,  since  they  have  desired  in  this 
life  to have joy or consolation  or honour or some other kind 
of interest as a result of their good works:  of such the Saviour 
says that herein they have received their reward. 6  And thus 
they have had 
7 
naught but the labour of their work and are 
confounded,  and  receive  no  reward.  There  is  so  much 
misery among the sons of men which has to do with this evil 
that I  myself believe that the greater number of good  works 
which  they perform in public are either vicious or will  he of 
no value to them, or are imperfectS in the sight of God, since 
1  S.  Luke xviii.  11-12.  2  E.p.  omits:  • I  thank Thee  that.' 
•  S.  Luke xviii.  II.  '  S.  Matthew xxiii.  5. 
6  A.  B.  e.p.  omit:  • the love of.' 
•  S.  Matthew vi.  2.  7  E.p.:  . And  thus they  will  have.' 
•  A. e.p.:  • or are imperfect and defective.' 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XXVIII  295 
they are  not  detached  from  these  human intentions  and in-
terests.  For what  other judgement  can  be  formed  of some 
of  the  actions  which  certain  men  perform,  and  of  the 
memorials  which  they  set  up,  when  they  will  not  perform 
these  actions  at  all  unless  they  are  surrounded  by  human 
respect  and  honour,  which  are  the  vanity  of life,  or  unless 
they can perpetuate in these  memorials  their name,  lineage 
or  authority,  until  they  set  up  their  emblems
1 
and  escut-
cheons  in  the  very  churches,  as  if they  wished  to set  them-
selves,  in the stead  of images,  in  places  where  all  bend  the 
knee?  In these  good  works  which  some  men  perform,  may 
it  not  be  said  that  they  are  worshipping
2 
themselves  more 
than  God?  This  is  certainly  true if they  perform  them for 
the reason described and otherwise would not perform them 
at all. 3  But  leaving  aside  these,  which  are the  worst  cases, 
how  many  are there  who  fall  into  these  evils  in  their good 
works in many ways?  Some wish  to be praised, others to be 
thanked,  others enumerate their good  works  and desire  that 
this  person  and  that  shall  know  of them,  and  indeed  the 
whole  world;  and sometimes  they  wish  an intermediary to 
present their alms,  or to carry out other charitable deeds,4 so 
that  more  may  be  known  of  them;  and  some  desire  all 
these  things.  This  is  the  sounding  of the trumpet,  which, 
says  the  Saviour  in  the  Gospel,  vain  men  do,  for  which 
reason they shall have  no reward for  their  works from God. Ii 
6.  These persons, then, in order to flee from this evil,  must 
hide their good  works  so  that God alone may see  them,  and 
must  not  desire  anyone  to  take  notice  of them.  And  they 
must  hide them,  not only from  others,  but even from  them-
selves.  That is  to  say  that they  must  find  no satisfaction in 
them,  nor esteem  them  as  if they  were  of some  worth,  nor 
derive pleasure from  them at all.  I t is  this  that is  spiritually 
indicated in those words of Our Lord:  Let not thy left hand 
know what thy  right hand doeth.
6 
Which  is  as  much as  to 
say:  Esteem not with thy carnal and temporal eye the work 
that thou  doest spiritually.  And in this  way  the strength of 
the  will  is  concentrated  upon  God,  and  a  good  deed  bears 
fruit in His  sight;  so  that not only  will  it not be lost,  but it 
1  A,  B:  'their names.' 
2  [Lit.,  '  are adoring.')  E.p.:  • are esteeming.' 
I  E.p.  omits this entire sentence. 
•  [Lit.,  • to present their alms or that which they do.'] 
i  S.  :\latthew vi,  2. 
•  S.  Matthew  vi,  3. 
296  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
will be of great merit. 
1 
And in this sense must be understood 
that  passage  from Job:  If I  have  kissed  my hand  with  my 
mouth, which is  a great sin and iniquity, and my heart hath 
rejoiced  in  secret. 
2 
Here  by  the  hand  is  understood  good 
works,  and by the  mouth is  understood  the will  which  finds 
satisfaction  in  them.  And  since  this  is,  as  we  say,  finding 
satisfaction in oneself,  he says:  If my heart hath rejoiced in 
secret;  which is  a great iniquity and a  denial  of God.  And 
this  is  as  though  he were  to  say that he had  no satisfaction, 
neither did  his  heart rejoice  in secret. 
3 
7.  The  fifth  of these  evils  is  that  such  persons  make  no 
progress  on  the  road  of  perfection.  For,  since  they  are. 
attached to  the  pleasure and consolation  which  they find  in 
their  good  works,  it  follows  that,  when  they  find  no  such 
pleasure  and  consolation  in  their  good  works  and  exercises, 
which  is  ordinarily  when  God  desires  to  lead  them  on,  by 
giving  them  the  dry  bread  of the  perfect  and  taking  from 
them the milk of babes,  in order to prove their strength and 
to purge their delicate appetites so  that they may be able to 
enjoy the food  of grown men, they commonly faint and cease 
to persevere, because their good works give them no pleasure. 
In this way may be spiritually understood these words ofthe 
Wise  Man:  Dying  flies  spoil  the  sweetness  of ointment. 
4 
For, when any mortification comes to these persons,  they die 
to  their  good  works  and  cease  to  practise  them;  and  thus 
they lose  their perseverance,  wherein are found  sweetness of 
spirit and interior consolation. 
8.  The sixth of these  evils  is  that such  persons  commonly 
c1eceive  themselves,  thinking that the things  and good works 
which give them pleasure must be better than those that give 
them  none.  They  praise  and  esteem  the  one  kind  and 
depreciate the other; 5  yet as  a  rule those  works  whereby a 
man is  most greatly mortified  (especially when he is  not pro-
ficient  in  perfection)  are  more  acceptable  and  precious  in 
the  sight  of God,  by  reason  of the self-denial  which  a  man 
1  So  Ale.  A,  B,  e.p.  read:  'where  not  only will  it  be  lost  [sic.  Read: 
• where  otherwise 'J,  but oftentimes,  through inward  vanity and  boasting, 
the soul will sin greatly  before  God.'  2  Job xxxi,  27-8. 
3  So  Alc.  A,  B  and  (with  slight  variations)  e.p.  add:  'For to  assign 
and  attribute  good  works  to  oneself  is  to  deny  them  to  God,  to  Whom 
belongs  every  good  work;  this  Lucifer  did,  rejoicing  in  himself  and 
denying  to  God  that  which  was  His,  and  exalting  himself  because  of  it, 
which was  the cause of his perdition.'  4. Ecclesiastes x,  1. 
6  So  Ale.  A,  B:  • and reprehend  and despise  the other.'  E.p.:  • and 
condemn  and despise  the other.' 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XXIX  297 
must observe in performing them, than are those wherein he 
finds  consolation and  which  may very easily  be an occasion 
of self-seeking.  And in this way Micah says of them  :  Malum 
manuum suarum dicllllt  honum.
l 
That is:  That which is  bad in 
their  works  they  call  good.  This  comes  to  them  because of 
the  pleasure  which  they- take in their good  works,  instead  of 
thinking  only  of giving  pleasure  to  God.  The  extent  to 
which this evil  predominates,  whether in spiritual  men or in 
ordinary persons,  would take too long to describe, for hardly 
anyone  can be found  who is  moved  to do such works simply 
for  God's  sake,  without the attraction  of some  advantage  of 
consolation  or  pleasure,  or  some  other  consideration. 
g.  The seventh  evil  is  that,  in  so  far  as  a  man  stifles  not 
vain rejoicing in moral works, he is  to that extent incapable of 
receiving  reasonable  counsel  and  instruction  with  regard  to 
good  works  that  he  should  perform.  For  he  is  fettered  by 
the habit of weakness  that he has acquired through perform-
ing good works with attachment to vain rejoicing;  so that he 
cannot consider  the  counsel  of others  as  best,  or,  c\-en  if he 
considers it to be so,  he cannot follow  it, through not having 
the  necessary  strength  of mind.  Such  persons  as  this  are 
greatly  weakened  in  charity  toward  God  and  their  neigh-
bour ;  for  self-love,  in  which  they  indulge  with  respect  to 
their good  works,  causes  their charity to grow cold. 
CHAPTER  XXIX 
OJ the  benefits  which  come  to  the  soul  through  the  withdrawal  of its 
rejoicing Jrom  moral good. 
I.  Very great are the benefits which come to the soul when 
it desires  not to set the vain rejoicing of its will on this kind of 
good.  For, in the first place, it is freed from falling into many 
temptations  and  deceits  of  the  devil,  which  are  involved 
in  rejoicing  in  these  good  works,  as  we  may  understand  by 
that  which  is  said  in Job,  namely:  He sleepeth  under  the 
shadow, in the covert of the reed
2 
and in moist places.
3 
This 
he applies to the devil,  who deceives the  soul  in  the  moisture 
of rejoicing  and in  the  vanity  of the  reed-that is,  in  vain 
1  :'.Iicah  vii,  3-
    This  is  the emendation  of  e.p.  The Codices  [followed  by P.  Silverio] 
haw:  • of the fcather,'  as  also  below.  3  Job xl,  J6 (A.V.,  xl,  21). 
2g8  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
works.  And it is no wonder ifthe soul is secretly deceived by 
the  devil  in  this  rejoicing;  for,  apart  altogether  from  his 
suggestions,  vain  rejoicing  is  itself  deception.  This  is 
especially true when there is any boasting of heart concerning 
these  good  works,  as  Jeremiah  well  says  in  these  words: 
Arrogantia  tua  decepit  te.
1 
For what greater deception is  there 
than  boasting?  And  from  this  the  soul  that  purges  itself 
from  this  rej oicing is  freed. 
2.  The second  benefit  is  that  the  soul  performs  its  good 
works  more  deliberately  and  more  perfectly,  which  is  im· 
possible if there be in  them  the passion  of joy and pleasure. 
For,  because of this  passion of joy,  the passions of wrath and 
concupiscence  are  so  strong  that  they  will  not  submit  to 
reason,2  but ordinarily cause a  man to be inconsistent in his 
actions  and  purposes,  so  that  he  abandons  some  and  takes 
up  others,  and  begins  a  thing  only  to  abandon  it without 
completing  any  part  of it.  For,  since  he  acts  under  the 
influence  of pleasure,  and  since  pleasure  is  variable,  being 
much  stronger  in  some  natures  than  in  others,  it  follows 
that,  when  this  pleasure  ceases,  both  the  action  and  its 
purpose  cease,  even  though  they  may  be  important.  To 
such persons  the joy which they have in their work is  the soul 
and the strength  thereof;  and,  when  the joy is  quenched,3 
the work  ceases  and  perishes,  and  they  persevere  therein  no 
longer.  It is  of such persuns that Christ says:  They receive 
the  word  with joy,  and  then  the  devil  taketh  it away  from 
them,  lest  they should  persevere. 
4 
And  this  is  because they 
have no strength and no roots save in thejoy aforementioned. 
To  take  and  to  withdraw  their  will,  therefore,  from  this 
rejoicing  is  the  cause  of  their  perseverance  and  success. Ii 
This benefit,  then, is  a  great one, even as  the contrary evil is 
great  likewise.  The  wise  man  sets  his  eyes  upon  the  sub-
stance  and  benefit  of his  work,  not  upon  the  pleasure  and 
delight which it gives  him;  and so he is  not beating the air, 
but derives  from  his  work a  stable joy,  without any meed of 
bitterness. 
6 
1  Jeremiah  xlix,  16.  E.p.  adds  the translation:  • Thy arrogance hath 
deceived  thee.' 
a  [Lit.,  '  will  not give  place to the weight of reason.'] 
a  A,  B:  'when the joy ceases.'  •  S.  Luke viii,  12. 
6  E.p.  :  •... is an excellent preparation for perseverance and success.' 
6  E.p.:  • without demanding any meed  of  pleasure.'  [The word  trans-
lated  •             '  in  the  text is  sinsabor,  the  contrary  of  saba"  which  is 
translated  above  • pleasure.'  The  chief  idea            sinsabor  is  that  of 
insipidity and boredom.] 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XXX  299 
3.  The third  benefit is  divine.  It is  that,  when  vain joy 
in  these  good  works  is  quenched,  the  soul  becomes  poor in 
spirit,  which  is  one of the blessings  spoken  of by  the  Son  of 
God when He says:  Blessed are the poor in spirit, for  theirs 
is  the Kingdom of Heaven.
l 
4.  The fourth  benefit is that he that denies himself this joy 
will  be  meek,  humble  and  prudent  in  his  actions.  For he 
will not act impetuously and rapidly, through being impelled 
3 
by the wrath and concupiscence which belong to joy; neither 
presumptuously,  through being affected  by the esteem of his 
own work  which  he cherishes  because  of the joy that he has 
in it;  neither incautiously,  through being blinded by joy. 8 
5.  The  fifth  benefit  is  that  he  becomes  pleasing  to  God 
and  man,  and  is  freed  from  spiritual  sloth,  gluttony  and 
avarice,  and from  spiritual envy and from  a  thousand  other 
vices. 
CHAPTER  XXX 
Which  hegins tt;  treat of the fifth kind of  good thing wherein  the  will 
may  rejoice,  which  is the  supernatural.  Describes  the  nature of 
these  supernatural  good  things,  and  how  they  are  distinguished 
from  the spiritual,  and how joy in  them  is  to  be  directed  to  God. 
I.  I t now behoves us to treat of the fifth  kind of good thing 
wherein the soul  may rejoice,  which is  the supernatural.  By 
this  term we  here  understand  all  the  gifts  and graces  given 
by  God  which  transcend  natural  virtue  and  capacity  and 
are called  gratis  datlE.  Such  as  these  are the gifts  of wisdom 
and knowledge which  God gave  to  Solomon,  and the graces 
whereof S.  Paul speaks'-namely, faith,  gifts  of healing,  the 
working  of miracles,  prophecy,  knowledge  and discernment 
of spirits,  interpretation  of words  and  likewise  the  gift  of 
tongues. 
2.  These  good  things,  it  is  true,  are  also  spiritual,  like 
those of the same kind of which we  have to speak presently; 
yet,  since  the  two  are  so  different,  I  have  thought  well  to 
make  a  distinction  between  them.  The  practice  of these 
has an intimate relation with the profit of man, and it is  with 
a  view to  this  profit and to  this  end that God gives  them, as 
1  S.  Matthew  v,  3.  I  E.p.:  • being carried  away: 
a  Ale.  omits:  'neither  ... by joy.'  'I Corinthians xii, 9-10. 
300  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
S.  Paul s'ays:  The spirit is  given to none save for the profit 
of the rest;1  and this is  understood ofthese graces.  But the 
use  and  practice  of spiritual  graces  has  to  do  with  the  soul 
and  God  alone,  and  with  God  and  the  soul,  in  the  com-
munion of understanding and will,  etc., as  we shall say here-
after.  And  thus  there  is  a  difference  in  their  object,  since 
spiritual  graces  have  to  do  only  with  the  Creator  and  the 
soul  ;2  whereas  supernatural  graces  have  to  do  with  the 
creature,  and  furthermore  they  differ
3 
in  substance,  and 
therefore  differ  in their operation,  and thus  of necessity  the 
instruction which  we  gfve  concerning them differs.also. 
3.  Speaking  now  of supernatural  graces  and  gifts  as  we 
here understand them,  I say that, in order to purge ourselves 
of vain joy in them, it is  well here to notice two benefits which 
are  comprised  in  this  kind  of gift-namely,  temporal  and 
spiritual.  The temporal  benefits  are  the healing of infirm-
ities, the receiving  of their sight  by  the  blind,  the  raising  of 
the dead,  the casting  out of devils,  prophesying  concerning 
the  future  so  that  men  may  take  heed  to  themselves,  and 
other things  of this  kind.  The spiritual  and eternal  benefit 
is  that  God  is  known  and served  through  these  good  works 
by  him  that  performs  them,  or  by  those  in  whom  and  in 
whose  presence  they are performed. 
4.  With  respect  to  the first  kind  of benefit-namely,  the 
temporal-supernatural works and miracles merit little or no 
rejoicing  on  the  part  of the  soul;  for,  without  the  second 
kind  of benefit,  they  are  of little  or no  importance  to  man, 
since  they are not in themselves a  means for uniting the soul 
with  God,  as  charity is.  And  these supernatural works and 
graces  may  be  practised  by those who are  not in  a  state  of 
grace  and  charity,  whether  they  truly  give  thanks  and 
attribute  their  gifts  to  God,4  as  did  the  wicked  prophet 
Balaam,  and  Solomon,  or  whether  they  perform  them 
falsely,  by  means  of the  devil,  as  did  Simon  Magus,  or  by 
other secrets  of nature.  These works  and marvels,  if any of 
them  were  to  be  of any  profit  to  him  that  worked  them, 
would  be true works given  by God.  And S.  Paul teaches us 
what these  are  worth Ii  without  the  second  benefit,  saying  : 
1  I  Corinthians xii,  7. 
2  E.p.:  'spiritual graces are between  God and the soul.' 
I  E.p.:  'but the other supernatural graces of which we  were speaking 
have relation to other creatures and are for their profit.  And furthermore 
they differ.' 
•  [Lit.,  • give thanks and gifts to God.')  6  A,  B  omit' worth.' 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XXXI  301 
Though I  speak with the tongues  of men and of angels,  and 
have not charity,  I  am become as  a  sounding bell  or metal. 
And though I  have prophecy and know all mysteries and all 
knowledge;  and  though  I  have  all  faith,  even as  much  as 
may remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing, 
etc. 
1 
Wherefore Christ will refuse the requests of many who 
have esteemed  their good  works  in this  way,  when they beg 
Him for glory because of them, saying2:  Lord,  have we  not 
prophesied in Thy name and worked many miracles?  Then 
Christ  will  say  to  them:  Depart  from  Me,  workers  of 
iniquity. 
3 
5.  A  man,  then,  should  rejoice,  not  when  he  has  such 
graces and practises them,  but when he reaps from them the 
second  spiritual  fruit,  namely  that  of serving  God  in  them 
with  true charity,  for  herein is  the fruit  of eternal life.  For 
this  cause  Our  Saviour  reproved  the  disciples  who  were 
rejoicing because they cast out devils,  saying:  Desire not to 
rejoice  in  this,  that  devils  are  subject  to  you,  but  rather 
because  your  names  are  written  in the  book  of life. '  This, 
according  to  good  theology,  is  as  much  as  to  say:  Rejoice 
if your  names  are  written  in  the  book  of life.  By  this  it is 
understood  that  a  man  should  not  rejoice  save  when  he is 
walking in the way  of life,  which  he may do  by performing 
good works in charity;  for where is the profit and what is the 
werth in the sight of God of aught that is  not love  of God? 
And this love is  not perfect if it be not strong and discreet in 
purging the will of  joy in all things,  and if it be not set upon 
doing the will  of God  alone.  And in this manner the will  is 
united  with  God  through  these  good  things  which  are 
supernatural. 
CHAPTER  XXXI 
Of tM  evils  which  come      the  soul  when  it sets  the  rejoicing  of the 
will upon  this kind of  good. 
I.  Three principal evils,  it seems  to me,  may come to the 
soul  when  it  sets  its  rejoicing
6 
upon  supernatural  good. 
These  are:  that  it  may  deceive  and  he  deceived;  that  it 
1  1  Corinthians xiii,  1-2. 
I  A,  B:  'and say to Him.'  The other authorities omit' saying.' 
I  S.  Matthew  vii,  22-3.  •  S.  Luke x,  20. 
a  E.p.:  . may come to man when he sets his rejoicing: 
302  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
may fall  away from  the  faith;  and  that it  may  indulge  in 
vainglory or some  other such  vanity. 
2.  As to the first of these,  it is a  very easy thing to deceive 
others,  and  to  deceive  oneself,  by  rejoicing  in  this  kind  of 
operation.  And the reason  is  that,  in order  to  know  which 
of these works  are false and which are true,  and how and at 
what time they should be practised, much counsel and much 
light  from  God  are  needful,  and  both  these  are  greatly 
impeded  by  joy  in  these  operations  and  esteem  for  them. 
And  this  for  two  reasons:  first,  because  joy  deadens  and 
darkens judgement;  second,  because,  when  a  man has joy 
in these  things,  not only  does  he  the  more  quickly  become 
eager  to  obtain them,  but he  is  also  the  more impelled
1 
to 
work  them  out of the  proper season.  And  supposing  even 
that  the  virtues  and  operations  which  are  practised  are 
genuine,  these  two  defects  suffice  for  us  to  be  frequently 
deceived in them, either through not understanding them as 
they should be understood, or through not profiting by them 
and  using  them at the times  and in the ways  that are most 
meet.  For,  although  it is  true  that,  when  God  gives  these 
gifts and graces, He gives light by which to see them, and the 
impulse  whereby  a  man  may  know  at  what  times  and  in 
what ways  to use them;  yet these souls,  through the attach-
ment and imperfection which they may have with  regard  to 
them,  may  greatly  err,  not  using  them  with  the  perfection 
that God desires  of them therein,  and in the way  and at the 
time that He wills.  We read that Balaam desired to do this, 
when,  against  the  will  of God,  he  determined  to  gol  and 
curse the children of Israel, for which reason  God  was  wroth 
and  purposed  to  slay  him.
3 
And  S.  James  and  S.  John' 
desired  to call  down fire  from  Heaven upon  the  Samaritans 
because they gave not lodging to Our Saviour, and for this He 
reproved them. 
6 
3.  Here  it  is  evident  that  these  persons
8 
were  led  to 
determine  to  perform these  works,  when  it was  not meet  to 
do so,  by a  certain imperfect passion,  which was  inherent in 
their joy in them and esteem for  them.  For,  when no such 
imperfection  exists,  the  soul  is  moved  and  determined  to 
perform  these  virtues  only  in  the  manner  wherein  God  so 
1  E.p.:  'the more inclined.'  I  E.p.:  'he dared  to go.' 
•  Numbers xxii. 22-3.  4  E.p.  adds:  'carried away by zeal.' 
•  S.  Luke ix,  5 4 ~ 5    
8  E.p.:  'that these imperfect persons of whom we are speaking.' 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XXXI  303 
impels it, and at His time,  and until then it is  not right that 
they should  be performed.  It was  for  this  reason  that God 
complained of  certain prophets, through Jeremiah, saying:  I 
have not sent the prophets,  and they ran;  I  have not spoken 
to  them,  and they  prophesied.
1 
And  later He says:  They 
deceived  My people by their lying and their miracles,  when 
I  had not commanded them, neither had I sent them.
2 
And 
in that place He says  of them likewise:  They see  the visions 
of their heart, and speak of them 
3
;  which would not happen 
if they had not this  abominable attachment  to these  works. 
4.  From  these  passages  it  is  to  be  understood  that  the 
evil of this rejoicing not only leads men to make wicked and 
perverse  use  of these  graces  given  by  God,  as  did  Balaam 
and those  of whom the prophet here says  that they  worked 
miracles whereby they deceived the people, but it even leads 
them to use these graces without having been given them by 
God,  like  those who  prophesied their own fancies  and  pub-
lished  the  visions  which  they  invented  or  which  the  devil 
represented  to  them.  For,  when  the  devil  sees  them affec-
tioned to these  things,  he opens  a  large field  to  them,  gives 
them  abundant  material  and  interferes  with  them in  many 
ways;  whereupon  they  spread  their  sails  and  become 
shamelessly  audacious,  devoting  themselves  freely  to  these 
prodigious  works. 
5.  Nor does the evil stop here.  To such a  point does their 
joy in these works  and their eagerness for  them extend that, 
if before they had a secret compact with the devil  (and many 
of them do in fact  perform  these  works  by such  secret com-
pacts), it now makes them bold enough to work with him by 
an explicit and  manifest  compact,  submitting themselves  to 
him,  by  agreement,  as  his  disciples  and  allies.  Hence  we 
have  wizards,  enchanters,  magicians,  fortune-tellers  and 
sorcerers.  And so  far  docs  the joy of these  persons  in their 
works  carry  them  that,  not  only  do  they  seek  to  purchase 
gifts  and graces  with  money,  as  did  Simon  Magus,  in  order 
to  serve  the  devil;  but  they  even  strive  to  obtain  sacred 
th!ngs, and (which cannot be said without trembling)  Divine 
thmgs, 'for even the very Body6  of our Lord Jesus Christ has 
been  seen  to  be  usurped  for  the  use  of their  wicked  deeds 
1  Jeremiah xxiii,  21.  2  Jeremiah xxiii, 32. 
3  Jeremiah xxiii,  26. 
I  The remainder of this sentence is  omitted  from  e.p. 
e  [Lit.,  • the awful  Body.'] 
304  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
and abominations.  May God here extend and show to them 
His  great  mercy! 
6.  Everyone  will  clearly  understand  how  pernicious  are 
such  persons  to  themselves  and  how  prejudicial  to  Christi-
anity.!  It may be noted  here that all  those  magicians  and 
fortune-tellers who lived among the children of Israel, whom 
Saul destroyed out of the land, because they desired to imitate 
the true prophets of God,  had fallen into such  abominations 
and  deceits. 
7.  He,  then,  that has  supernatural gifts  and graces  ought 
to withdraw himselffrom desiring to practise them, and from 
joy iri so  doing,  nor ought he to care to exercise  them; a  for 
God,  Who  gives  Himself to  such  persons,  by  supernatural 
means, for the profit of His  Church and of its  members,  will 
move  them likewise  supernaturally3  in such  a  manner and 
at such time as  He desires.  As  He commanded  His  faithful 
ones· to take no thought as to what they were to say, or as to 
how they were to say it, since this is the supernatural business 
of faith,  it will  likewise  be His  will  (as  these  operations  are 
no  less  a  supernatural  matter)  that  a  man should  wait and 
allow God  to work,  by moving  his  heart,  since in the virtue 
of this  working will  be wrought all virtue.  The disciples  (so 
we  read  in the Acts  of the  Apostles),  although  these  graces 
and  gifts  had  been  infused  within  them,  prayed  to  God, 
beseeching  Him  to  be pleased  to  stretch  forth  His  hand  in 
making  signs  and  performing  works  of  healing  through 
them,  that they might introduce the faith  of our Lord Jesus 
Christ into the hearts of men. Ii 
8.  From this  first  evil  may proceed the second,  which is  a 
falling away from the faith;  this   ~ n   come to pass after two 
manners.  The first  has respect to others;  for,  when a  man 
sets out, unseasonably and needlessly, to perform a marvel or 
a mighty work, apart from the fact that this is tempting God, 
which is  a  great sin,  it may be that he will  not succeed,  and 
will engender in the hearts of men discredit and contempt for 
the faith.  For, although at times  such persons  may succeed 
because for  other reasons  and purposes God so  wills  it,  as in 
the  case 'of Saul's  witch
8 
(if it  is  true  that  it  was  indeed 
Samuel who appeared on that occasion), they will not always 
1  A.  B.  e.p.:  • to the Christian commonweal.' 
I  A:  • to name them.'  E.p. omits:  • nor ought he to care to exercise 
them.'  a  E.p.  adds:  • to exercise them.' 
•  E.p.:  • His disciples.'  6  Acts iv.  29-30. 
•  1  Kings [A. V .•  I  Samuel].xxviii.  7.  11. 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XXXI  305 
so  succeed;  and,  when they do so,  they go astray none the 
less  and are blameworthy for  having used these graces when 
it was  not fitting  to do so.  The second manner in which  we 
may fall  away is  in ourselves 
1 
and has respect  to the merit  of 
faith;  for, if a  man make much account ofthese miracles, he 
ceases  to lean  upon  the substantial  practice  of faith,  which 
is  an  obscure  habit;  and  thus,  where  signs  and  witnesses 
abound,  there  is  less  merit  in  believing.  In  this. way  S. 
Gregory  says  that  faith  has  no  merit  when  human  reason 
supplies  experience. 
2 
And  thus  these  marvels  are  never 
worked  by  God  save  when  they  are  really  necessary  for 
belief. 3  Therefore,  to the end that His  disciples  should  not 
be  without merit,  though they had experience of His  resur-
rection,  He did  many  things  before  He showed  Himself to 
them,  so  that they should  believe  Him without seeing  Him. 
To Mary Magdalene, first of all,  He showed the empty tomb, 
and afterwards  bade the angels speak to her ;4  for,  as S .. Paul 
says,  faith  comes  by  hearing;1i  and,  having  heard,  she 
believed before she saw.  And, although she saw Him, it was 
as  an  ordinary man,
6 
that,  by the  warmth of His  presence, 
He might completely instruct her in the belief in which  she 
was wanting.  And He first sent to tell His disciples, with the 
women, and afterwards they went to see  the tomb.  And, as 
to those who went to Emmaus, He first of all enkindled their 
hearts in faith so  that they might see Him,  dissembling  with 
them  as  He  walked. 
7 
And  finally  He  reproved  them  all 
because they had not believed those  who  had announced to 
them  His  resurrection. 
8 
And  He  reproved  S.  Thomas 
because  he  desired  to  have  the  witness  of His  wounds,  by 
telling him that they who saw Him not and yet believed Him 
were  blessed. 
8 
g.  And thus it is  not the will  of God that miracles should 
be wrought, for,  as  men say,  when He works them,  He does 
so only because He cannot do otherwise. 10  And for this cause 
He  reproved  the  Pharisees  because  they  believed  not  save 
1  Ale.  has • in like manner' [asimismoJ  for' in ourselves' [en sf  mismoJ. 
2  •  Nee  fides  habet  meritum  cui  humana  ratio  przbet experimentum.' 
S.  Gregory,  Hom.  26  in  Evang.  (Migne,  Vol.  LXXVI,  p.  1137).  The 
translation  in  the  text  is  that  of  Ale.  A,  B,  e.p.  have:  '  •.. supplies 
experience of a  human a.nd  palpa.ble kind.' 
a  E.p. adds:  'and for other ends concerning His glory and His saints.' 
,  [5.  Luke xxiv,  6;  S.  John xx,  2.]  •  [Romans x,  17.) 
I  E.p.:  'as a  g   ~ d e n e r   '  [5.  John xx,  15].  1  S.  Luke xxiv,  15. 
I  [5.  Luke xxiv,  25-6.)  t  S.  John xx,  29. 
10  E.p.  omits:  • for,  as  ... do otherwise.' 
306  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
through  signs,  saying:  U nlessye see  marvels  and signs,  ye 
believe not. 
1 
Those, then, who love to rejoice in these super-
natural works, lose much in the matter of faith. 
10.  The  third  evil  is  that,  because  of their joy  in  these 
works,  men  commonly  fall  into  vainglory  or  some  other 
vanity.  For even their joy in these  wonders,  when it is  not, 
as we have said, purely in God and for God, is vanity;  which 
is  evident in the  reproof given  by Our Lord to the disciples 
because they had rejoiced that devils were subject to them ;2 
for  which joy,  if it had  not  been  vain,  He would  not have 
reproved  them. 
CHAPTER  XXXII 
Of two  benefits  which  are  derived from  the  renunciation  of rejoicing 
in  the  matter of the supernatural graces. 
I.  Besides  the  benefits  which  the  soul  gains  by  being 
delivered  from  the  three  evils  aforementioned  through  its 
renunciation  of this  joy,  it  acquires  two  excellent  benefits. 
The  first  is  that  it  magnifies  and  exalts  God:  the  second 
is  that  it exalts  itself.  For God  is  exalted  in  the  soul  after 
two  manners:  first,  by the withdrawal of the  heart and the 
joy of the  will  from  all  that is  not God, in order to set  them 
upon  Him alone.  This  David  signified  in  the  verse
3 
which 
we  quoted  when  we  began  to  speak  of  the  night  of this 
faculty;  namely:  Man  shall  attain  to  a  lofty  heart,  and 
God  shall  be  exalted. 
4 
For,  when  the heart is  raised  above 
all  things,  the soul is  exalted above them all. 
2.  And,  because in  this  way the soul  centres itself in God 
alone,  God is  exalted and magnified,  when He reveals to the 
soul  His  excellence  and  greatness;  for,  in this  elevation  of 
joy,  God  bears witness  of Himself,  Who He is.  This cannot 
be done save ifthe will be voided of  joy and consolation with 
respect to all things, even as David said also, in these words  : 
Be  still  and  see  that  I  am  God.
5 
And  again  he  says:  In 
a  desert  land,  dry  and  pathless,  have  I  appeared  before 
Thee,  to  see  Thy  power  and  Thy  glory. 
8 
And,  since  it is 
true that God is  exalted  by the fixing  of the soul's  rejoicing 
1  S.  John iv,  48. 
B  E.p.:  . in the place.' 
I  Psalm xlv,  II [A.V.,  xlvi,  10]. 
I  S.  Luke x,  20. 
,  Psalm lxiii,  7  [A.V.,  lxiv,  6-7]. 
•  Psalm lxii, 3  [A. V.,  lxiii, 1-2]. 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XXXIII  307 
upon  detachment from  all  things,  He is  much  more  highly 
exalted  when  the soul  withdraws  itself from  the  most  won-
drous of these things in order to fix its rejoicing on Him alone. 
For these,  being supernatural,  are of a  higher nature;  and 
thus for the soul to cast them aside, in order to set its rejoicing 
upon God alone,  is  to attribute greater glory and excellence 
to  God than to  them.  For,  the more and the greater things 
a  man  despises  for  the  sake  of another,  the  more  does  he 
esteem  and  exalt  that other. 
3.  Furthermore,  God  is  exalted  after  the  second  manner 
when  the  will  is  withdrawn  from  this  kind  of operation; 
for,  the more God is  believed and served without testimonies 
and signs,  the more He is  exalted by the soul,  for  it believes 
more  concerning  God  than  signs  and  miracles  can  demon-
strate. 
4.  The second  benefit wherein the soul  is  exalted  consists 
in this, that, withdrawingthe wiIi from all desire for apparent 
1 
signs and testimonies, it is  exalted in purest faith,  which God 
increases  and infuses  within  it  much  more intensely.  And, 
together with this, He increases in it the other two theological 
virtues,  which are charity and hope,  wherein the soul  enjoys 
the highest  Divine  knowledge  by means  of the obscure  and 
detached  habit of faith;  and it enjoys  great delight  of love 
by means of charity, whereby the will rejoices in naught else 
than in the living God;  and likewise it enjoys satisfaction in 
the  memory2  by  means  of hope.  All  this  is  a  wondrous 
benefit,  which  leads  essentially  and  directly  to  the  perfect 
union of the soul  with  God. 
CHAPTER  XXXIII 
Wh.ich  begins  to  treat of the  sixth kind of  good wherein  the  soul may 
rejoice.  Describes  its  nature  and makes  the first  division  under 
this head. 
3 
I.  Since  the  intention  of this  work  of ours  is  to  lead  the 
spirit  through  these  good  things  of the  spirit  even  to  the 
Divine union of the soul  with  God,  it will  now  behove both 
myself  and  the  reader  to  give  our  consideration  to  this 
matter with  particular  care.  For,  in speaking  of this  sixth 
1  [i.e.,  that are perceived by the faculties of the soul  in other ways than 
by pure faith.]  I  A,  D,  e.p.:  'in the will.' 
3  This last sentence is founcl  in A.  Band e.p.  only. 
2B 
g08  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
kind of good,  we have to treat of the good things of the spirit, 
which  are  those  that are of the greatest service  to  this  end. 
For  it  is  quite  certain,  and  quite  an ordinary occurrence, 
1 
that some  persons,  because of their lack of knowledge,  make 
use  of spiritual  things  with  respect  only  to sense,  and leave 
the  spirit  empty.  There  will  scarcely  be  anyone  whose 
spirit is  not to a  considerable degree corrupted by sweetness 
of sense;  since,  if the  water  be  drunk  up  before  it  reaches 
the spirit,  the latter becomes  dry and barren. 
2.  Coming to this  matter, then,  I  say  that by good things 
of the spirit I  understand all those that influence and aid the 
soul  in  Divine  things  and  in  its  intercourse  with  God,  and 
the  communications  of God  to  the  soul. 
g.  Beginning by making a division between these. supreme 
kinds  of good,  I  say that good  things  of the spirit are of two 
kinds:  the  one  kind  is.  delectable  and  the  other  painful. 
And each of these  kinds is  likewise  of two  manners;  for  the 
delectable  kind  consists  of clear  things  that  are  distinctly 
understood, and also of things that are not understood clearly 
or  distinctly.  The  painful  kind,  likewise,  may  be  of clear 
and distinct  things,  or of things dark and confused. 
4.  Between  all  these  we  may  likewise  make  distinctions 
with  respect  to the faculties  of the soul.  For some  kinds  of 
spiritual  good,  being  of knowledge,  pertain  to  the  under-
standing;  others, being of affection, pertain to the will;  and 
others,  inasmuch  as  they  are  imaginary,  pertain  to  the 
memory. 
5.  We shall leave  for later consideration those good things 
that  are  painful,  since
2 
they  pertain  to  the  passive  night, 
in  treating  of which  we  shall  have  to speak  of them;  and 
likewise  the  delectable  blessings  which  we  described  as 
being of things  confused  and not distinct,  of which  we  shall 
treat hereafter, since they pertain to that general, confused and 
loving  knowledge ·wherein  is  effected  the  union  of the  soul 
with  God,  and  which  we  passed  over  in  the  second  book,. 
deferring it so that we might treat of it later
3 
when we should 
make  a  division  between  the  apprehensions  of the  under-
standing.'  We shall s p   ~ k   here and now of those delectable 
blessings which are of things clear and distinct. 
1  [Li,.,  • thing.']  E.p.:  • For it is  quite a  certain thing  .. .' 
I  E.p.:  • inasmuch as.'  •  Cf.  p.  126,  n.  4,  above. 
,  Ale.  omits:  • when we should  ... understanding.'  E.p.  adds to this 
last phrase:  • and this we  shall duly do in the book of the Da,k Nig"''' 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XXXIV  309 
CHAPTER  XXXIV 
Of those good things of the  spirit which can  be  distinctly apprehended 
by the  understanding  and the  memory.  Describes  how  the  will 
is to. behave in  the  matter of rejoicing in  them. 
I.  We  might  spend  much  time  here  upon  the  multitude 
of the apprehensions  of the memory and the understanding, 
teaching how  the  will  is  to conduct itself with regard to  the 
joy that it may have  in them,  had  we  not treated  of this  at 
length in the second and the third book.  But, since we there 
spoke of the manner wherein it behove:,  these two faculties  to 
act  with  respect  to  them,  in  order  that  they  may  take  the 
road to Divine union, and since it behoves the will to conduct 
itself likewise  as  regards  rejoicing in them, it is  unnecessary 
to  go  over  this  here;  for  it suffices  to say  that wheresoever 
we there said that those faculties should void themselves of  this 
or that apprehension, it is  to be understood also that the will 
should  likewise  be voided  of joy in them.  And in the way 
wherein  it  is  said  that  memory  and  understanding  should 
conduct  themselves  with  regard  to  all  these  apprehensions, 
the  will  must  conduct  itself likewise;  for,  since  the under-
standing and the other faculties  cannot admit or reject any-
thing  unless  the  will  intervene  therein,  it  is  clear  that  the 
same  teaching that serves  for  the  one  will  serve  also for  the 
other. 
2.  It may  there  be  seen,  then,  what  is  requisite  in  this 
case,  for  the  soul  will  fall  into  all  the  evils  and  perils  to 
which  we  there  referred  if it  cannot  direct  the  rejoicing  of 
the  will  to God in all  those  apprehensions.
1 
CHAPTER  XXXV 
Of  the  delectable  spiritual  good  things  which  can  be  distinctly 
apprehended by  the  will.  Describes  the  kinds  of these. 
I.  We  can  reduce  all  the  kinds  of good  which  can  dis-
tinctly  cause  joy  to  the  will  to  four:  namely,  motive, 
provocative,  directive  and  perfective.  Of these  we  shall 
speak in turn, each in its order;  and first,  of the motive kind 
1  Ale.  abbreviates:  • It may  there  be  seen  what  is  requisite  herein. 
for  the soul will fall  into all those evils if it cannot direct itself to God: 
310  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
-namely,  images  and  portraits  of  saints,  oratories  and 
ceremonies. 
2.  As  touching images  and portraits,  there may be  much 
vanity  and  vain  rejoicing  in  these.  For,  though  they  are 
most  important  for  Divine  worship  and  most  necessary  to 
move the will to devotion, as is shown by the approval given 
to them  and the  use  made of them  by our Mother Church 
(for  which  reason  it is  always  well  that  we  should  employ 
them, in order to awaken our lukewarmness), there are many 
persons  who  rejoice  rather  in  the  painting  and  decoration 
of them  than in  what  they  represent. 
3.  The  use  of images  has  been  ordained  by  the  Church 
for  two  principal ends-namely, that we may reverence the 
Saints in them, and that the will may be moved and devotion 
to  the  Saints  awakened  by  them.  When  they  serve  this 
purpose they are beneficial and the use of them is necessary  ; 
and  therefore  we  must  choose  those  that are most  true and 
l!f.elike, and that most move the will to devotion, and our eyes 
must  ever  be  fixed  upon  this  motive  rather  than  upon  the 
value  and  cunning  of their  workmanship  and  decoration. 
For,  as  I  say,  there  are  some  who  pay  more  attention  to 
the cunning with  which an image is  made,  and to its  value, 
than to what it represents;  and that interior devotion which 
they  ought  to  direct  spiritually  to  the  saint  whom  they  see 
not,  forgetting  the  image  at  once,  since  it serves  only  as  a 
motive,l they squander upon the cunning and the decoration 
of its  outward  workmanship.  In  this  way  sense  is  pleased 
and delighted,  and the love and rejoicing of the will remain 
there.  This  is  a  complete  hindrance  to  true  spirituality, 
which  demands  annihilation  of  the  affections  as  to  all 
particular things. 
4.  This  will  become  quite  clear  from  the  detestable 
custom which certain persons observe with regard to images 
in  these  our  days.  Holding  not  in  abhorrence  the  vain 
trappings of the world, they adorn images with the garments 
which  from  time  to  time  vain  persons  invent  in  order  to 
satisfy  their  own  pleasures  and  vanities. a  They  clothe 
images  with  these  garments  which  are  reprehensible  even 
in  themselves,  a  kind  of  vanity  which  was,  and  is  still, 
abhorrent to the saints whom the images represent.  Herein, 
with their help, the devil succeeds in canonizing his  vanities, 
1  E.p.  omits the phrase:  • forgetting  ... as a  motive: 
I  A.  B. e.p.  have' frivolities'  for' vanities: 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XXXV  31 I 
by clothing the saints  with  them,  not without causing them 
great  displeasure.  And  in  this  way  the  honest  and  grave 
devotion  of the soul,  which rejects and spurns all vanity and 
every  trace  of it,  is  reduced  in  them  to  little  more  than a 
dressing  of dolls;  some  persons  use  images  merely  as  idols 
upon  which  they  have  set  their  rejoicing.
1 
And  thus  you 
will  see  certain  persons  who  are  never  tired  of adding  one 
image  to another,  and wish  them to  be of this  or that kind 
and workmanship, and to be placed in this or that manner, 
so as to be pleasing to sense;  and they make little account of 
the  devotion  of the  heart.  They are  as  much  attached  to 
them as  was  Micah to his idols, I  or as  was  Laban; 3  for the 
Qne ran out of his house crying aloud because they were being 
taken from him;  and the other, having made a long journey 
and  been  very  wroth  because  of them,  diSturbed  all  the 
household  stuff of Jacob,  in searching  for  them. 
5.  The  person  who  is  truly'  devout  sets  his  devotion 
principally  upon  that  which  is  invisible;  he  needs  few 
images and uses few,  and chooses those that harmonize with 
the Divine rather than with  the human,  clothing them,  and 
with  them  himself,  in  the  garments  of the  world  to  come, 
and  following  its  fashions  rather  than  those  of this  world. 
For not only does an image belonging to this world in no way 
influence  his  desire;  it does  not  even  lead him to  think  of 
this  world,  in  spite  of his  having  before  his  eyes  something 
worldly,  akin  to  the  world's  interests.  Nor  is  his  heart 
attached to the images  that he uses;  if they are taken from 
him,  he  grieves  very  little,  for  he  seeks  within  himself the 
living  image,  which  is  Christ  crucified,  for  Whose  sake  he 
rather  desires  that  all  should  be  taken  from  him  and  he 
should  have  nothing.  Even  when  the  motives  and,  means 
which  lead  him  closest  to  God 
6 
are  taken  from  him,  he 
remains  in  tranquillity.  For  the  soul  is  nearer  perfection 
when it is  tranquil andjoyous, though it be deprived of these 
motives,  than  if  it  has  possessi.on  of  them  together  with 
desire  and  attachment.  For,  although  it  is  good  to  be 
pleased  to  have  such  images  as  assist  the  soul  to  greater 
devotion  (for  which  reason  it is  those  which  move  it  most 
1  E.p.  abbreviates:  '  ... to little more than curiosity and vanity.' 
a  Judges xviii.  22-4.  a  Genesis xxxi. 34-7. 
,  Ale.  alone  has' truly.' 
6  E.p.:  . Even  when  the means  that seemed  to be  leading him closest 
to God  .• .' 
312  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
that must always  be chosen), yet it is something far removed 
from perfection to be so greatly attached to them as to possess 
them with attachment, so  that, if they are taken away from 
the soul, it becomes sad. 
6.  Let  the  soul  be  sure  that,  the  more  closely  it  is 
attached to  an image or a  motive,l  the less  will  its devotion 
and  prayer  mount  to  God.  For,  although  it  is  true  that, 
since  some  are  more  appropriate  than  others,  and  excite 
devotion  more  than others,  it is  well,  for  this  reason  alone, 
to be affectioned to some rather than to others, as I have just 
now  said, I  yet  there  must  be  none  of the  attachment  and 
affection  which  I  have  described.  Otherwise,  that  which 
has to sustain the spirit  in  its  flight  to  God,  in total forget-
fulness)  will  be  wholly  occupied  by  sense,  and  the  soul 
will  be  completely  immersed  in  a  delight  afforded  it  by 
what are but instruments.  These instruments I  have to use 
solely in  order  to  assist  me in devotion;  yet,  on account of 
my imperfection, they may well serve me as a  hindrance, no 
less  so than may affection and attachment to anything else. II 
7.'  But,  though perhaps in this matter of images you may 
think  that  there  is  something  to  be  said  on  the  other side, 
if you  have  not  clearly  understood  the  detachment  and 
poverty of spirit which is  r ~ q u i r e     by perfeCtion,  at least you 
cannot excuse the imperfection which is  commonly indulged 
with regard to rosaries  ;  for you will hardly find anyone who 
has  not some  weakness  with  regard  to  these,  desiring  them 
to be  of this  workmanship  rather  than  of that, Ii  or  of this 
colour or metal rather than of that, or decorated in someone 
style  or in some  other.  Yet  no  one  style  is  better than an-
other for  the hearing  of a  prayer  by  God,  for  this  depends 
upon the simple and true heart,8 which looks at no more than 
pleasing  God,  and,  apart from  the  question  of indulgences, 
cares  no more for  one rosary than for  another. 
8.  O'ur vain concupiscence is  of such a  nature and quality 
that it tries  to cling to  everything;  and it is  like the  worm 
which  destroys  healthy  wood,  and  works  upon  things  both 
good and evil.  For what else is your desire to have a rosary of 
I  E.p.:  • or a  motive of sense.' 
I  Alc.  omits:  • as I  have just now said.' 
•  E.p.  omits:  • no less  ... anything else.' 
•  [In  this  and  the  next  paragraph  the  Saint  is  more  than  usually 
personal  in  his  approach  to  the  reader.  The  word  '"  (you)  is  repeated 
many times.  and  placed  in  emphatic  positions, in a  way  which  cannot be 
exactly reproduced in English.] 
•  E.p.:  • than of the other.'  •  E.p.:  • and upright heart.' 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XXXVI  313 
cunning workmanship,  and your wish  that it shall  be of one 
kind  rather than of another,  but the fixing  of your rejoicing 
upon the instrument?  It is like desiring to choose one image 
rather  than  another,  and  considering,  not  if it  will  better 
awaken Divine love within you,  but only ifit is  more precious 
and  more  cunningly  made.  If you  employed  your  desire 
and  rejoicing  solely  in  the  love  of  God,  you  would  care 
nothing for  any of these  considerations.  It is  most vexatious 
to  see  certain  spiritual  persons  so  greatly  attached  to  the 
manner and workmanship of these instruments and motives, 
and  to  the  curiosity  and  vain  pleasure  which  they  find  in 
them;  for  you will never see them satisfied,  but they will  be 
continually leaving one thing for another, and forgetting and 
forsaking  spiritual  devotion for  these  visible things, to which 
they  have  affection  and  attachment,  frequently  of just  the 
same kind as that which a  man has to temporal things;  and 
from  this  they  receive  no  small  harm. 
1 
CHAPTER  XXXVI 
Which  continues to  treat of images,  and describes  the  ignorance  which 
certain  persons  have  with  respect  to  them. 
I.  There is  much that might be said of the stupidity which 
many persons  display  with  regard  to images;  their foolish-
ness  reaches  such  a  point  that  some  of them  place  more 
confidence  in  one  kind  of image  than in another,  believing 
that God will  hear them more  readily because  of these  than 
because  of those,  even  when  both  represent  the same  thing, 
as  when  there are two  of Christ or two  of Our Lady.  And 
this  happens  because  they  have  more  affection  for  the  one 
kind  of workmanship than for  the other;  which implies  the 
crudest  ideas  concerning  intercourse  with  God  and  the 
veneration  and  honour  that  are  owed  to  Him,  which  has 
solely  to  do  with  the  faith  and  the  purity  of heart  of him 
that prays. 
2 
For if God  sometimes  grants  more favours  by 
1  Ale.  abbreviates  the  last  sentence  thus:  'And  it  is  a  pity  to  see 
certain spiritual persons so  greatly attached to the manner and workman-
ship of these instruments, and having the [same]  affection  and attachment 
to  them  as  to other temporal  things.'  C,  D  also  abbreviate,  but resemble 
the other authorities rather than Ale. 
a  E.p.  reads:  '... in  one  kind  of  image  than  in  another,  being 
influenced  herein  solely  by  the  affection  which  they  have  for  one  figure 
rather  than  for  another.  This  implies  the  crudest  and  meanest  ideas 
concerning  intercourse  with  God  and  the  veneration  and  honour that are 
owed  to  Him, which has  principally  to do  with  the  faith  and  the purity 
of heart of him that prays.'  . 
314  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
means  of one  image  rather  than  by  another  of the  same 
kind,  it is  not  because  there  is  more  virtue  to  this  effect  in 
one than in another (however much difference there may be 
in  their  workmanship),  but  because  some  persons  better 
awaken their own devotion by one than by another.  !fthey 
had the same devotion for  the one as  for  the other  (or even 
without  the  use  of either),  they  would  receive  the  same 
favours  from  God.
1 
2.  Hence  the reason  for  which  God  works
l 
miracles  and 
grants favours  by means of one kind of image rather than by 
another is not that these should be esteemed more than those, 
but to the end that, by means of the wonder that they cause, 
there  may be awakened sleeping devotion and the affection 
of the faithful  for  prayer.  And  hence  it comes  that,  as  the 
contemplation of the image at that time  enkindles  devotion 
and makes us  to continue in prayer (both these being means 
whereby God hears and grants  that which is asked of Him), 
therefore, at that time and by means or that same image, God 
continues to work favours and miracles because of the prayer 
and affection which are then shown;  for it is certain that God 
does  it not  because  of the image,  which in itself is  no  more 
than a  painted thing,  but because of the devotion  and  faith 
which  the  person  has  toward the saint  whom  it  represents. 
And so,  if YOH  had the same devotion and faith in Our Lady 
before  one  image  representing  her  as  before  another,  since 
the  person  represented  is  the same  (and  even,  as  we  have 
said, if you had no such image at all),  you would receive the 
same  favours.  For  it  is  clear  from  experience  that,  when 
God  grants  certain favours  and  works  miracles,  He does  so 
as  a  rule  by  means  of certain  images  which  are  not  well 
carved  or cunningly formed  or  painted,  so  that the faithful 
may attribute nothing to the figure  or the painting. 
3 
3.  Furthermore,  Our  Lord  is  frequently  wont  to  grant 
these favours  by means of those images that are most remote 
and solitary.  One reason for  this is  that the effort necessary 
to journey to them causes  the affections  to be increased and 
makes the act of prayer more earnest.  Another reason is that 
we  may withdraw ourselves  from  noise  and from  people,  so 
1  E.p.:  '  ... of  the  same  kind,  it is  (although  there  may  be  much 
difference in their workmanship)  to the end that people may awaken their 
own  devotion  better  by  means  of  one  than  by means  of  another.'  This 
concludes the paragraph, the last sentence being omitted. 
I  [Lit.,  • awakens.'  Cf.  the use of the same metaphor below.] 
a  A,  B.  e.p.:  • to the painting or the workmanship.' 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XXXVI  315 
that we  may pray, even as did the Lord.  Wherefore he that 
makes  a  pilgrimage does  well  if he  makes  it at  a  time  when 
no  others  are  doing  so,  even  though  the  time  be  unusual. 
When  a  great  multitude  is  making  a  pilgrimage,  I  should 
never  advise  him to do so;  for,  as  a  rule,  people  return  on 
these  occasions  in  a  state  of greater  distraction  than  when 
they  went.  And  many  set '\out  and  make  these  pilgrimages 
for  recreation  rather  than  for  devotion.  When  there  is 
devotion and faith, then, any image will suffice;  but, if there 
is  none,  none  will  suffice.
l 
Our  Saviour  was  a  very  living 
image  in  the  world;  and yet  those  that had  no faith,  even 
though  they  went  about  with  Him  and  saw  His  wondrous 
works,  derived  no  benefit  from  them.  And  this  was  the 
reason why, as  the Evangelist says,  He did few  mighty works 
in  His  own  country. 
2 
4.  I  desire also to speak here of certain supernatural effects 
which  are sometimes  caused  by certain images  in particular 
persons.  The  effect  is  that  God  gives  to  certain  images  a 
particular  spiritual  influence  upon  them,  so  that  the  figure 
of the  image  and  the  devotion  caused  by  it remain  fixed  in 
the mind, and the person has  them ever present before him; 
and so,  when  he  suddenly  thinks  of the image,  the spiritual 
influence which works  upon him is  of the same kind as  when 
he saw it-sometimes it is  less  but sometimes it is  even greater 
-yet, from  another inage, although it be of the most perfect 
workmanship,  he will  not obtain the same spiritual effect. 
5.  Many persons,  too,  have devotion  to  one kind of work-
manship  rather than  to another,  and to some  they will  have 
no more  than a  natural inclination and affection, just as  we 
prefer  seeing  one  person's  face  to  another's.  And  they  will 
naturally become more attracted to  a  particular image,  and 
will  keep it more vividly in their imagination,3 even  though 
it  be  not  as  beautiful  as  others, just because  their  nature is 
attracted to  that kind of form  and figure  which it represents. 
And  some  persons  will  think  that  the  affection  which  they 
have  to  such  or such  an  image  is  devotion,  whereas  it  will 
perhaps  be  no  more  than  natural inclination  and affection. 
Again, it may happen that, when they look at an image, they 
1  E.p.:  • When  there  is  no  devotion  and  faith,  then,  no  image  will 
suffice.' 
a  S.  Luke iv,  24.  [Rather S.  Matthew xiii,  58;  S.  Mark vi,  5.] 
sA:  ' ... and  will  keep  it more vividly,  because it is a  natural thing 
and  (sic)  to have it ever in  the memory.' 
316  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
will see it move,  or make signs and gestures and indications, 
or speak.  This, and the variety of supernatural effects caused 
by images  of which  we  have here been speaking,  are,
l 
it is 
true,  quite  frequently  good  and  true  effects,  produced  by 
God  either to increase the devotion  or so  that the soul  may 
have some support on which to lean,  because it is  somewhat 
weak,  and so  that it may be not·  distracted.  Yet frequently, 
again,  they  are  produced  by  the  devil!  in  order  to  cause 
deception  and  harm.  We  shall  therefore  give  instruction 
concerning  this  in  the chapter following. 
CHAPTER  XXXVII 
Of how  the  rejoicing  of the  will  must  he  directed,  hy  way  of the 
images,  to  God,  so  that  the  soul  may  not  go  astray  because  of 
them  or  he  hindered by  them. 
I.  Just as images are of great benefit for remembering God 
and  the  saints,  and  for  moving  the  will  to  devotion  when 
they are used in the ordinary way,8 as  is  fitting,  so  they will 
lead  to  great error if,  when  supernatural  happenings  come 
to pass in connection with them,  the soul should not be able 
to conduct itself as  is  fitting for its journey to  God.  For one 
of the  means  by  which  the  devil  lays  hold  on  uncautious 
souls,  with  great  ease,  and             th,e  way  of spiritual 
truth for them, is  the' use  of extraordinary and supernatural· 
happenings,  of which he gives examples by means of images, 
both the material and corporeal images used by the Church, 
and also those which he is  wont to fix in the fancy in relation 
to such or such a saint, or an image of him, transforming him-
self into an angel oflight that he may deceive.  For in those 
very means which we possess for our relief and help the astute 
devil contrives to hide himself in  order to  catch us  when  we 
are least  prepared.  Wherefore it is  concerning good  things 
that  the  soul  that  is  good  must  ever  have  the  greatest  mis-
givings,  for  evil  things  bear  their  own  testimony  with 
them. 
1  A:  '  ... or  speak  in  this  manner  or  in  another.  But  concerning 
the supernatural effects,  etc,  ... they are.' 
a  E.p.:  'Yet at other times  they are not  true [effects]  and are  apt to 
be  produced by the devil.'  a  Ale.  omits:  'in the ordinary way.' 
•  E.p.:  • and  rare.'  Cf.  p.  132,  n.  I,  above. 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XXXVII  317 
2.  Hence, in order to avoid all the evils which may happen 
to  the  soul  in  this  connection,  which  are its  being hindered 
from  soaring  upward  to  God,  or its  using  images  in  an  un-
worthy and ignorant manner,  or its  being deceived  by them 
through  natural  or  supernatural  means,l  all  of which  are 
things  that  we  have  touched  upon  above;  and  in  order 
likewise  to  purify  the  rejoicing  of the  will  in  them  and  to 
direct  the soul  by  means  of them  to  God,  for  which  reason 
the  Church recommends  their use,  I  desire here to set down 
only one warning,  which will  suffice for everything,  and this 
is  that, since images serve us  as  a  motive for  invisible things, 
we  must  strive  to  set  the  motive  and  the  affection  and  the 
rejoicing  of  our  will  only  upon  that  which  in  fact  they 
represent.  Let the faithful  soul,  then,  be careful  that,  when 
he  sees  the  image,  he  desire  not  that  his  senses  should  be 
absorbed by it, whether the image be corporeal or imaginary, 
whether  beautifully  made  or  richly  adorned,  whether  the 
devotion that it causes be of sense or of spirit, whether it give 
supernatural  manifestations  or  no.  The  soul  must  on  no 
account  set  store  by these  accidents,  nor even  regard  them, 
but
2 
must raise  up its  mind from  the image to  that which it 
represents,  centring  the  sweetness  and  rejoicing  of its  will, 
together with the prayer and devotion of its spirit, upon God 
or  upon  the  saint  who  is  being  invoked;  for  that  which 
belongs  to  the living  reality  and  to  the spirit  should  not be 
usurped by sense and by the painted object.  If the soul pays 
heed  to  this,  it will  not  be deceived,  for  it  will  set  no store 
by anything that the image may say to it,  nor will it occupy 
its  sense  or its  spirit  in such  a  way  that  they  cannot travel 
freely  to God, nor will it place more confidence in one image 
than in another.  And an image which would cause the soul 
devotion  by  supernatural  means  will  now  do  so  more 
abundantly,  since  the  soul  will  now  go  with  its  affections 
directly  to  God.  For,  whensoever  God  grants  these  and 
other favours,  He does so  by inclining the affection of the joy 
of the will  to  that  which  is  invisible,  and  this  He wishes  us 
also  to do,  by  annihilating  the  power  and  sweetness  of the 
faculties  with  respect to  these  visible  things  of sense. 
1  E.p. omits:  . through natural or supernatural means.' 
1  E.p.  here  interpolates:  • having  paid  to  the  image  the  adoratioD 
which the Church  commands.' 
318  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
CHAPTER  XXXVIII 
Continues  to  describe  motive  good.  Speaks  of oratories  and places 
dedicated to prayer. 
I.  I  think  it  has  now  been  explained  how  the  spiritual 
person  may  find  as  great  imperfection  iIi  the  accidents  of 
images,  by  setting  his  pleasure  and  rejoicing
l 
upon  them, 
as  in  other  corporal  and  temporal  things,  and  perchance 
imperfection  more  perilous  still.  And  I  say  that  the  im-
perfection  may  perchance  be  more  perilous,  because,  when 
a  person  says.  that  the  objects  of this  rejoicing  are  holy,  he 
becomes  more  secure,  and  fears  not  to  become  naturally 
affectioned  and atta.ched  to them.  And thus such  a  person 
is  sometimes  greatly deceived,  thinking himself to  be full  of 
devotion because he perceives that he takes pleasure in these 
holy things,  when,  perchance, this is  due only to  his  natural 
desire and temperament,  which lead him to this just as  they 
lead  him to other things. 
2.  Hence  it arises  (for  we  are  now  beginning  to  treat  of 
oratories)  that  there  are  some  persons  who  never  tire  of 
adding images of one kind or another to their oratories, and 
take  pleasure  in  the  order  and  arrangement  in  which  they 
place them, so  that their oratories may be well  adorned and 
pleasing to behold.  Yet they love not God  more when their 
oratories  are  arranged  in  the  one  way  than  in  the  other-
indeed they love  Him less,  since  the pleasure  which  they set 
upon  their  painted  adornments  is  taken,  as  we  have  said, 
from the living reality.  It is true that all the adornment and 
embellishment  and  respect  that  can  be  lavished  upon 
images  amounts  to  a  very  small  thing,  and  that  therefore 
those who have images and treat them with little decency and 
respect  are worthy of severe  reproof,  as  are th.ose  who  have 
images so ill-carved that they take away devotion rather than 
produce  it,  for  which  reason  some  image-makers  who  are 
very  defective  and unskilled  in  this  art should  be forbidden 
to  practise  it.  This is  true,  but  what has  it  to  do  with  the 
attachment  and  affection  and  desire  which  you  have
2 
for 
these  outward  adornments  and  decorations,  when  your 
senses are absorbed by them in such a  way that your heart is 
1  E.p.  omits:  • and rejoicing.' 
•  [Again  the  Saint  begins.  repeatedly and  emphatically,  to employ  the 
pronoun tu.  Cf.  p.  312,  n.  4.  above.] 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XXXVIII  319 
hindered from journeying to God,  and from loving Him and 
forgetting all things for love of Him ?  If you fail  in the latter 
aim for  the sake of the former,  not only will  God not esteem 
you  for  it,  but  He  will  even  chasten  you  for  not  having 
sought  His  pleasure  in  all  things  rather  than  your  own. 
This  you  may  clearly  gather  from  the  description  of that 
feast  which  they  made  for  His  Majesty  when  He  entered 
Jerusalem.  They  received  Him  with  songs  and  with 
branches,  and  the  Lord  wept; 1  for  they  kept  their  hearts 
very far removed from Him and paid Him reverence only by 
outward  adornments  and  signs.  We  may say  of them  that 
they  were  making  a  festival  for  themselves  rather  than  for 
God;  and this is  done             by many, who,  when there 
is  some  solemn  festival,2  are  apt  to  rejoice  because  of the 
pleasure  which  they  themselves  will  find  in  it-whether in 
seeing or in being seen, or whether in eating or in some other 
way-rather  than  to  rejoice  at  being  acceptable  to  God. 
By  these  inclinations  and  intentions  they  are  giving  no 
pleasure  to  God.  Especially  is  this  so  when  those  who 
celebrate  festivals  invent ridiculous  and  undevout  things  to 
intersperse  in  them,  so  that  they  may  incite  people  to 
laughter, which causes them greater distraction.  And other 
persons invent things which simply please people rather than 
move  them to devotion. 
3.  And what shall I  say of persons  who  celebrate festivals 
for reasons connected with their own interests?  They alone, 
and God Who sees  them, know if their regard and desire      
set upon such interests rather than upon the service of God. 
Let  them  realize,  when  they  act in any of these  ways,  that 
they  are  making  festivals  in  their  own  honour  rather  than 
in  that  of  God.  For  that  which  they  do  for  their  own 
pleasure or for  the pleasure of men,  God will  not account as 
done  for  Himself.  Yea,  many  who  take  part  in  God's 
festivals  will  be  enjoying  themselves  even  while  God  will 
be growing wroth  with  them,  as  He  was  with  the  children 
of Israel  when  they  made  a  festival,  and  sang  and  danced 
before  their idol,  thinking that they  were  keeping  a  festival 
in honour of God  ;  of whom He slew many'thousands.
3 
Or 
again,  as  He was  with the priests  Nadab and Abihu,  sons  of 
Aaron,  whom  He  slew  with  the  censers  in  their  hands, 
1  S.  Matthew  xxi, 9.  [ef. S.  Luke xix,  41.] 
2  E. p.:  • when  there is a  solemnity anywhere: 
3  Exodus xxxii,  7-28. 
320  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
because they offered strange fire.
l 
Or as  with the man that 
entered the wedding feast ill-adorned 
2 
and ill-garbed, whom 
the  king  commanded  to  be  thrown  into  outer  darkness, 
bound hand and foot.
3 
By this it may be known how ill God 
suffers  these  irreverences  in assemblies  that are held for  His 
service.  For how many festivals,  0  my God, are made Thee 
by the sons of men in which the devil gains more than Thou ! 
The devil  takes  a  delight  in  them,  because  such gatherings 
bring him business, as to a trader.  And how often wilt Thou 
say concerning them:  This people honoureth Me with their 
lips  alone,  but their heart is  far from  Me, for  they serve Me 
from  a  wrong  cause.'  For  the  sole  cause
5 
for  which  God 
must  be  served  is  that  He  is  Who  He  is,  and  not  for  any 
other mediate ends.  And thus to serve Him for other reasons 
than solely  that  He  is  Who  He is,  is  to serve  Him  without 
considering  this final  end. 
8 
4.  Returning  now  to  oratories,  I  say  that  some  persons 
deck  them  out  for  their  own  pleasure  rather  than  for  the 
pleasure of God;  and some  persons  set so  little account  by 
the  devotion  which  they  arouse  that they  think no  more  of 
them  than  of  their  own  secular  antechambers;  some, 
indeed,  think even less  of them,  for  they take  more pleasure 
in the profane than in the Divine. 
5.  But  let  us  cease  speaking  of  this  and  speak  only  of 
those who are more particular
7
-thdt is  to say,  of those who 
consider  themselves  devout  persons.  Many  of these  centre 
their  desire  and  pleasure  upon  their oratory and its  adorn-
ments,  to such  an extent that they squander on them  all the 
time that  they  should  be  employing  in prayer  to  God  and 
interior recollection.  They cannot see that, by not arranging 
their  oratory  with  a  view  to  the  interior  recollection  and 
peace  of the  soul,  they  are  as  much  distracted  by  it as  by 
anything else,  and the pleasure which they take in it will  be 
a  continual distraction to them,  and  more so  still  if anyone 
endeavours to take it from  them. 
1  Leviticus x,  1-2. 
I  E.p.:  'ill-clad: 
I  S.  Matthew xxii,  12-13. 
,  S.  Matthew xv, 8.  [Lit.,' they serve Me  without cause.'] 
6  E.p.:  'For the principal cause.' 
•  This last sentence is omitted in e.p. 
7  [Lit.,  • that spin more finely  '-a common Spanish metaphor.] 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XXXIX  321 
CHAPTER  XXXIX 
OJ the  way  in  which  oratories  and churches  should he  used,  in  order 
to  direct  the  spirit to  God. 
I.  With  regard  to  the  direction  of  the  spirit  to  God 
through  this  kind  of good,  it is  well  t.o  point  out  that  it is 
certainly  lawful,  and  even  expedient,  for  beginners  to  find 
some sensible sweetness and pleasure in images, oratories and 
other  visible  objects  of devotion,  since  they  have  not  yet 
weaned or detached their desire from things of the world, so 
that they can leave the one pleasure for the other.  They are 
like a  child holding something in  one of its hands;  to make 
it loosen its hold upon it we give it something else to hold in 
the  other hand lest it should cry because  both its hands are 
empty.  But  the spiritual  person  that would  make  progress 
must strip himself of all  those  pleasures  and desires  wherein 
the will may rejoice, for  pure spirituality is  bound very little 
to  any of those objects,  but only to  interior recollection and 
mental converse  with  God.  So,  although  he may make use 
of images  and  oratories,  this  will  be  only  for  a  time;  his 
spirit  will  seon  come  to  rest  in  God  and  he  will  forget  all 
t   i n ~   of sense. 
2.  Wherefore,  although  it  is  best  to  pray  where  there  is 
most  decency,  yet  notwithstanding  one  should  choose  the 
place where sense and spirit are least hindered from journey-
ing to God.  Here we  should consider that answer made  by 
Our Saviour to the Samaritan woman,  when she asked Him 
which was the more fitting place wherein to pray, the temple 
or the mountain, and He answered herl that true prayer was 
not  connected  with  the  mountain  or  with  the  temple,2  but 
that those  who  adored  the Father and were pleasing to Him 
were those that adored Him in spirit and in truth. 
3 
Where-
fore,  although  churches  and  pleasant  places  are
c 
set  apart 
and furnished  for  prayer  (for a  church must not be used for 
aught  else),  yet,  for  a  matter as  intimate
5 
as  converse  held 
with  God,  one  should  choose  that  place  which  gives  sense 
the  least  occupation  and  the  least  encouragement.  And 
thus  it must  not  be  a  place  that is  pleasant  and  delectable 
1  E.p. omits:  • and He answered her.' 
•  E.p. omits:  • or with the temple: 
•  S.  John iv,  23-4.  '  E.p.  has' may be '  for' are.' 
•  A.  B:  • as important and intimate.' 
322  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
to sense  (like the places that some habitually contrive to find), 
for otherwise, instead of the recollection of the spirit in God, 
naught  will  be  achieved  save  recreation  and  pleasure  and 
delight of  sense.  Wherefore it is good to choose a place that is 
solitary,  and  even  wild,  so  that  the  spirit  may  wholly  and 
directly  soar  upward  to  God,  and  be  not  hindered  or 
detained  by  visible  things;  for,  although  these  sometimes 
help to raise  up the spirit,  it is  better to forget  them at once 
and  to  rest  in  God.  For this  reason  Our Saviour  used  to 
choose  solitary  places  for  prayer,  and  such  as  occupied  the 
senses  but little,  in order to  give  us  an example.  He chose 
places  that  lifted  up  the  soul  to  God,  such  as  mountains, 
1 
which are lifted up above the earth, and are ordinarily bare, 
thus  offering no occasion for  recreation of the senses. 
3.  The truly spiritual man; then, is  never bound to a place 
of prayer  which  is  in any way convenient,  nor does  he even 
consider  this,  for  that  would  be  to  remain  bound  to  sense. 
But, to the end that he may attain interior recollection,  and 
forget  everything,  he  chooses
2 
the  places  most  free  from 
sensible  objects  and  attractions,  withdrawing  his  attention 
from all these,  that he may be able to rejoice in his  God and 
be far  removed from  all  things  created.  But it is  a  remark-
able thing  to see  some  spiritual  persons,  who  waste  all  their 
time  in  setting  up  oratories  and  furnishing  places  which 
please  their  temperaments  or  inclinations,  yet  make  little 
account of interior recollection,  which is  the most important 
thing,  but of which  they have very  little.  If they had  more 
of it,  they  would  be  incapable  of taking  pleasure  in  those 
methods  and  manners  of  devotion,  which  would  simply 
weary them.  . 
CHAPTER  XL 
Which  continues  to  direct  the  spirit  to  interior  recollection  with 
reference  to  what has b(Jen  said . 
.  1.  The  reason,  then,  why  some  spiritual  persons  never 
enter  perfectly  into  the  true joys  of the  spirit  is  that  they 
never succeed in raising their desire for rejoicing above these 
1  Ale.  ends  the paragraph here. 
•  E.p.  abbreviates,  from  the  beginning  of the paragraph:  • Wherefore 
the truly spiritual man, considering only interior recollecting and forgetting 
everything, chooses.'  . 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XLI  323 
things that are outward and visible.  Let such take note that, 
although  the  visible  oratory  and  temple  is  a  decent  place 
set  apart for  prayer,  and  an  image  is  a  motive  to  prayer, 
the  sweetness  and  delight  of the soul  must  not  be set  upon 
the  motive and visible  temple,  lest the soul should forget  to 
pray in the living  temple,  which  is  the interior recollection 
of the soul.  The Apostle, to remind us of this, said  :  See that 
your  bodies  are  living  temples  of the  Holy  Spirit,  Who 
d welleth in you.
l 
And this thought is suggested by the words 
of Christ  which  we  have  quoted,  namely  that  they  who 
truly  adore  God  must  needs  adore  Him  in  spirit' and  in 
truth. I  For God takes little heed of your oratories and your 
places  set  apart for  prayer  if your  desire  and  pleasure  are 
bound to them, and thus you have little interior detachment, 
which is  spiritual poverty and renunciation of all things that 
you  may possess. 
2.  In order,  then,  to purge the will  from  vain desire  and 
rejoicing  in  this  matter,  and  to  direct  it  to  God  in  your 
prayer,  you  must  see  only  to  this,  that  your  conscience  is 
pure,  and your w;ill  perfect with  God,  and your spirit truly 
set upon Him.  Then,  as  I  have said, you should choose the 
place that is  the farthest withdrawn and the most solitary that 
you  can  find,  and  devote  all  the  rejoicing  of the  will  to 
calling upon God and glorifying Him;  and you should take 
no account of those whims about outward things,  but rather 
strive to renounce them.  For, if the soul  be attached to the 
delight  of sensible  devotion,  it will  never succeed  in  passing 
onward  to the  power of spiritual delight,  which  is  found  in 
spiritual  detachment  coming  through  interior  recollection. 
CHAPTER  XLI 
Of certain evils  into  which  those persons fall  who  give  themselves  to 
pleasure  in  sensible  objects  and  who frequent  places  of devotion 
in  the  way  that has  been  described. 
I.  Many  evils,  both  interior  and  exterior,  come  to  the 
spiritual  person  when  he desires  to follow  after sweetness  of 
sense  in these matters aforementioned.  For,  with  regard  to 
1  I  Corinthians iii,  16.  Rp.  adds:  'And Christ  said  through  Luke: 
The kingdom of God  is within you'  (S.  Luke xvii,  21). 
I  S.  John iv,  24. 
2  C 
324  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
the spirit,  he will  never  attain to interior spiritual  recollec-
tion,  which  consists  in  neglecting  all  such  things,  and  in 
causing  the soul  to  forget  all  this  sensible  sweetness,  and to 
enter  into  true                  and  to  acquire  the  virtues  by 
dint of effort.  With regard to exterior things, he will become 
unable to dispose himself for prayer in all places,  but will be 
confined  to those  places  that are to  his  taste;  and  thus  he 
will  often  fail  in  prayer,  because,  as  the  saying  runs,  he 
knows  no other book than that of his  own village. 
2.  Furthermore,  this  desire  leads  such  persons  into  great 
inconstancy.  Some of them never continue in one place nor 
sometimes in one state:  now they will be seen in one place, 
now in another;  now they will go to one hermitage, now to 
another;  now they will set up this oratory, now that. 
1 
Some 
of them,  again,  wear  out  their  lives  in  changing  from  one 
state  or  manner  of life  to  -another.  For,  as  they  possess 
only the sensible fervour and joy which they find in spiritual 
things, and have never had the strength to attain to spiritual 
recollection  by the renunciation  of their own  will,  and sub-
mitting  to  suffering  inconveniences,  whenever  they  see  a 
place which they think well suited for devotion,  or any kind 
of  life  or  state  well  adapted  to  their  temperament  and 
inclination,  they at once go  after it and leave  the condition 
or state in which they were before.  And, as  they have come 
under the influence of that sensible  pleasure,  it follows  that 
they  soon  seek  something  new,  for  sensible  pleasure  is  not 
constant, since it very quickly fails. 
2 
CHAPTER  XLII 
Of three  different  kinds  of place  of devotion  and  of how  the  will 
should conduct  itself with  regard  to  them. 
I.  I  can think of three kinds  of place  by  means  of which 
God is  wont to move the will  to devotion.  The first consists 
in  certain  dispositions  of the  ground  and  situation,  which, 
by meanS of a pleasing effect of variety, whether obtained by 
the  arrangement  of the  ground  or of trees,  or  by  means  of 
quiet solitude, naturally awaken devotion.  These places it is 
beneficial  to  use,  if they  at once  lead  the  will  to  God  and 
1  Alc.  omits:  • now  they  .  .  .  now  that.' 
•  E.p.:  • and very quickly fails.' 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XLII 
cause  it to forget  the places  themselves,  even  as,  in order to 
reach  one's journey's  end,  it is  advisable  not  to· pause  and 
consider the  means  and  motive  of the journey more than is 
necessary.  For those  who strive to refresh  their desires  and 
to gain sensible sweetness will rather find spiritual aridity and 
distraction;  for  spiritual  sweetness  and satisfaction  r e   not 
found  save  in  interior  recollection. 
2.  When  they are in such  a  place,  therefore,  they should 
forget  it and strive to be inwardly with God,  as  though they 
were not in that place at all.  For, if they be attached to the 
pleasure and delight of the  place,  as  we  have said,  they are 
seeking  refreshment  of sense  and  instability  of spirit  rather 
than  spiritual  tranquillity.  The anchorites  and  other  holy 
hermits,  who  in  the  most  vast  and  pleasing  wildernesses 
selected the smallest places that sufficed for them,  built there 
the smallest cells and caves, in which to imprison themselves. 
S.  Benedict was  in such a  place for  three y e a r ~     and another 
-namely,  S.  Simoni-bound  himself with  a  cord  that  he 
might have no more liberty nor go any farther than  to places 
within  its  reach;  and  even  so  did  many  who  are  too 
numerous ever to be counted.  Those saints understood very 
clearly  that,  if they  quenched  not  the  desire  and  eagerness 
for  spiritual sweetness  and pleasure, they could not attain to 
spirituality. 
3.  The  second  kind  is  of a  more  special  nature,  for  it 
relates  to certain places  (whether deserts  or any other places 
whatsoever),  where  God  is  accustomed  to  grant  to  certain 
particular persons  certain very  delectable spiritual favours; 
ordinarily,  such a  place attracts the heart of the person who 
has  received  a  favour  there,  and sometimes  gives  him great 
desires  and  yearnings  to  return  to  it;  although,  when  he 
goes  there,  what  happened  to  him  before  is  not  repeated, 
since  this  is  not  within  his  power.  For  God  grants  these 
favours
2 
when and how and where He pleases, without being 
tied  to any  place  or time,  nor to  the free-will  of the person 
to whom He grants them.  Yet it is  good  to go  and pray in 
such  places  at  times  if the  desire  is  free  from  attachment ; 
and  this  for  three  reasons.  First,  because  although,  as  we 
said,  God is  not bound to any place, it would seem that He 
1  E.p.  omits:  • namely  S.  Simon:  The  allusion  is,  of  course,  to 
S.  Simon  Stylites. 
2  A,  B:  . since  it  is  not  within  his  power  to  receive  those  favours; 
God grants them  .  .  .' 
326  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
has willed to be praised  by a  soul in the place where He has 
granted  it  a  favour.  Secondly,  because  in  that  place  the 
soul  is  more  mindful  to  give  thanks  to  God  for  that  which 
it  has  received  there.  Thirdly,  because,  by  remembering 
this,  the soul's  devotion is  the more keenly awakened. 
4.  It is for these reasons that a man should go to such places, 
and not because  he thinks  that God  is  bound  to grant  him 
favours  there,  in such a  way as  to be  unable  to grant  them 
wheresoever He wills, for the soul is a fitter arid more comely 
place for God than any physical place.  Thus we read in Holy 
Scripture  that Abraham  built an altar in the same  place at 
which  God  appeared  to  him,  and  invoked  His  holy  name 
there,  and that afterwards,  coming from  Egypt,  he returned 
by  the  same  road  where  God  had  appeared  to  him)  and 
called upon God there once more at the same altar which he 
had  built.
1 
Jacob,  too,  marked the place  where  God  had 
appeared  to  him,  leaning  upon a  ladder,  by  raising  there a 
stone which he anointed with oil. 2  And Hagar gave a  name 
to  the  place  where  the  angel  had  appeared  to  her,  and 
prized  it  highly,  saying:  Of a  truth  I  have  here  seen  the 
back  of Him that seeth  me. 
3 
5.  The third  kind consists  of certain special  places  which 
God chooses  that He may be called  upon and served  there, 
such  as  Mount  Sinai,  where  He  gave  the  law  to  Moses.' 
And  the  phce  that  He  showed  Abraham,  that  he  might 
sacrifice his  son  there.  5  And likewise  Mount Horeb,  where 
He appeared  to our father  Elijah. 
6 
6.  The reason for  which  God  chooses  these  places  rather 
than  others,  that  He  may  be  praised  there,  is  known  to 
Himself alone.  What it behoves us  to know is  that all    ~   for 
our advantage, and that He will hear our prayers there,  and 
also  in any place where we pray to Him with perfect faith; 
although there is much greater occasion for  us to be heard in 
places  that  are  dedicated  to  His  service,  since  the  Church 
has  appointed  and  dedicated  those places  to  that end. 
1  Genesis  xii, 8;  xiii,4.  a  Genesis xxviii,  13-19. 
a  Genesis  xvi,  13.  t  Exodus xxiv,  12.  6  Genesis xxii, 2. 
•  3  Kings [A.V.,  1  Kings]  xix, 8.  A,  B, e.p.  amplify,  thus:  'And like-
wise  Mount  Horeb,  whither God  sent  for  our father  Elijah  to  come,  that 
He might show Himself to him then'.  And  the place which S.  Michael set 
apart for  his  service,  namely  Mount  Garganus,  when  he  appeared  to  the 
bishop of Siponto, and said that he was the guardian of that place and that 
an  oratory  should  be  dedicated  to  God  in  memory  of  the  angels.  And 
the glorious  Virgin chose  (by  the remarkable sign of snow)  a  place for  the 
church,  to be named after her,  which she desired  Patricius to build.' 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XLIII  327 
CHAPTER  XLIII 
Which  treats  of other  1TWtives  for  prayer  that  many  persons  use-
namely,  a great  variety  of ceremonies. 
I.  The  useless  joys  and  the  imperfect  attachment  which 
many  persons  have  to  the  things  which  we  have  described 
are  perhaps to  some  extent  excusable,  since  these  persons 
act  more  or less  innocently  with  regard  to  them.  But
l 
the 
grea,t  reliance  which  some  persons  place  in  many  kinds  of 
ceremonies introduced by uninstructed persons who lack the 
simplicity offaith is  intolerable.  Let us  here disregard those 
which  bear certain extraordinary names  or are described in 
terms  that  signify  nothing,  and  other  things  that  are  not 
sacred which persons who are foolish and gross and naturally 
suspicious  of soul  are  wont  to  interpolate  in  their  prayers. 
For these are clearly evil, and contain sin,  and many of them 
imply a  secret compact with the devil;  by such means these 
persons  provoke  God to  wrath and not to  mercy,  wherefore 
I  treat them not here. 
2.  I  wish  to  speak solely  of those  ceremonies  into  which 
enters  nothing  of a  suspicious  nature,  and  of which  many 
people make use nowadays with indiscreet devotion, attribut-
ing such efficacy and faith to these ways and manners where-
in  they  desire  to  perform  their  devotions  and prayers,  that 
they  believe  that,  if they fail  to  the  very  slightest  extent in 
them,  or go  beyond  their limits,  God  will  not  be served  by 
them nor will He hear them.  They place more reliance upon 
these  methods and kinds  of ceremony than upon the reality 
of their prayer, and herein they greatly offend and displease 
God.  I  refer,  for  example,  to a  Mass  which is  said  with so 
many candles, neither more nor fewer;  which is said  by the 
priest in such  or such a  way;  and must be at such or such 
an hour,  and neither sooner nor later;  and must be after a 
certain day,  and neither sooner  nor later;  and the prayers 
and stations must be made at such and such times, with such 
and  such  ceremonies,  and  neither  sooner  nor  later  nor  in 
any  other manner;  and the person  who  makes  them  must 
have such or such qualities or qualifications.  And there are 
those who think that if any of these details  which they have 
laid  down  be  wanting,  nothing is  accomplished. 
2 
1  E.p.  alone has' but.' 
I  A,  B  add:  • and [there are]  a  thousand  other things that are offered 
and  used.'  So  e.p.,  but omitting:  • offered and.' 
328  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
3.  And,  what  is  worse,  and  indeed  intolerable,  is  that 
certain persons desire to feel  some effect in themselves,  or to 
have their petitions fulfilled,  or to  know that the purpose of 
these ceremonious prayers of  theirs will be accomplished. This 
is nothing less  than to tempt God and to offend Him greatly, 
so  much  so  that  He  sometimes  gives  leave  to  the  devil  to 
deceive  them,  making them feel  and understand things that 
are  far  removed  from  the  benefit  of their  soul,  which  they 
deserve  because of the attachment which  they have in their 
prayers, not desiring God's will to be done therein more than 
their  own  desires;  and  thus,  because  they set  not  all  their 
confidence in God,  nothing goes  well with them.
1 
CHAPTER  XLIV 
Of the  manner  wherein  the  rejoicing  and strength  of the  will must  be 
directed to  God through  tllese  devotions. 
I.  Let these  persons,  then,  know  that,  the  more  reliance 
they  place  on  these  things  and  ceremonies,2  the  less  con-
fidence  they have in  God,  and that they  will  not obtain  of 
God that which they desire.  There are certain persons who 
pray3 because of their own desire rather than for the honour 
of God.  Although  they  suppose  that  a  thing  will  be  done 
if it be for the service of God, and not otherwise, yet,  because 
of their attachment to  it and the vain  rejoicing  which  they 
have  in  it,  they  multiply  a  large  number  of petitions  for 
a  thing,  when it would  be  better for  them  to  change  these 
petitions into others  of greater importance  to them,  such as 
for  the  true  cleansing  of their  consciences,  and  for  a  real 
application to things concerning their own salvation, leaving 
to  a  much  later  season  all  those  other  petitions  of theirs 
which  are  not  of this  kind.  And  in  this  way  they  would 
attain that which 'is  of the greatest importance to them, and 
at the same time all the other things that are good for them 
(although they might not have prayed for them), much better 
and much earlier than if they had expended all their energy 
1  With the last word  of this chapter, which is also the last word  of the 
page  in  Ale.,  the  copy  of  P.  Juan  Evangelista  comes  to  an  end.  The 
remainder of Ale.  comes from  another very early copy  which,  in the time 
of P.  A n d r ~ s     existed at Duruelo  (cf.  p.  xxvi,  above). 
I  B:  • the more they rely on their ceremonies.'  E  p.:  • the more they 
lean on these their ceremonies.' 
•  A,  e.p.:  • who work' [ob,an  for  oran]. 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XLIV  329 
on  those  things .. For  this  the  Lord  promised,  through  the 
Evangelist,  saying:  Seek ye  first  and principally the  King-
dom of God and His righteousness, and all these other things 
shall  be added unto you.
1 
2.  This is  the seeking and the asking that is  most pleasing 
to God, and, in order to obtain the fulfilment of the petitions 
which we  have in our hea.rts,  there is  no better way  than to 
direct the energy of our prayer to the thing that most pleases 
God.  For then not only will  He give  that which  we  ask  of 
Him,  which  is  salvation,  but also  that which  He sees  to  be 
fitting  and  good  for  us,  although  we  pray not for  it.  This 
David  makes  clear in a  psalm  where  he says:  The Lord is 
nigh unto those that call upon Him in truth,2 that beg Him 
3 
for  the  things  that  are  in  the  highest  degree  true,  such  as 
salvation;  for  of these  he then says:  He will  fulfil  the will 
of them that fear Him, and will hear their cries, and will save 
them.  For God is the guardian of those that truly love Him.' 
And  thus,  this  nearness  to  God of which  David here speaks 
is  naught  else  than  His  being  ready  to  satisfy  them  and 
grant them even that which it has  not passed through their 
minds  to ask.  Even  so  we  read that,  because  Solomon  did 
well  in  asking  God for  a  thing that  was  pleasing  to  Him-
namely,  wisdom  to  lead  and  rule  his  people  righteously-
God answered  him,  saying:  Because  more than aught else 
thou  didst  desire  wisdom,  and  askedst  not  victory  over 
thine  enemies,  with  their  deaths,  neither  riches  nor  long 
life,  I  will not only give thee the wisdom that thou askedst to 
rule  My people righteously,  but I  will likewise give thee that 
which  thou  hast  not  asked-namely,  riches  and  substance 
and  glory-so  that  neither  before  thee  nor after  thee  shall 
there  be any king like unto thee. Ii  And this  He did,  giving 
him peace also from his enemies, so that all around him paid 
tribute to him and troubled him not.  We  read of a  similar 
incident  in  Genesis,  where  God  promised  Abraham  to 
increase  the  generation  of his  lawful  sons,  like  the  stars  of 
Heaven,  even  as  he  had  asked  of Him,  and  said  to  him: 
Likewise  I  will increase the children of the bondwoman, for 
they are thy children. 
8 
1  S.  Matthew vi,  33.  I  Psalm cxliv,  18  [A.V.,  cxlv,  18]. 
a  E.p.,  keeping  near the Latin text of the psalm,  has:  ' ... that call 
upon Him, to those that call upon Him in truth.  And those that call upon 
Him in truth are such as beg Him.' 
,  Psalm cxliv,  19  [A.V.,  cxlv,  19-20]. 
I  2  Paralipomenon [A. V.,  2  Chronicles]  i,  II-U.  •  Genesis xxi,  13. 
330  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
3.  In  this  way,  then,  the  strength  of  the  will  and  its 
rejoicing  must  be directed  to  God  in our petitions,  and  we 
must not be anxious to cling to ceremonial inventions which 
are not used or approved by the Catholic Church.  We must 
leave  the  method  and  manner of saying  Mass  to  the priest, 
whom  the  Church sets  there  in  her  place,  giving  him  her 
orders as  to how he is  to do it.  And let not such persons use 
new methods, as  if they knew more than the Holy Spirit and 
His  Church.  If,  when  they  pray  in  their  simplicity,  God 
hears  them  not,  let  them  not  think  that He will  hear them 
any the  more  however many may be their inventions.  For 
God  is  of such  a  kind  that,  if they  behave towards  Him as 
they should, and conformably to His nature, they will do with 
Him as much as  they will;  but, if they act from selfish ends, 
they cannot speak with  Him. i 
4.  With  regard  to  further  ceremonies  connected  with 
prayer and other devotions, let not the will be set upon other 
ceremonies  and  forms  of prayer  than  those  which  Christ
2 
taught us.
3 
For it is  clear that, when His disciples  besought 
Him that He would teach them to pray;  He would  tell  them 
all  that  is  necessary  in  order that  the  Eternal  Father  may 
hear  us,  as  He knew  His  nature  so  well.  Yet  all  that  He 
taught  them  was  the  Pater  Noster,  with  its  seven  petitions, 
wherein  are  included  all  our  needs,  both  spiritual  and 
temporal ;'  and  He  taught  them  not  many  other kinds  of 
prayer,  either in words  or in ceremonies.  On the contrary, 
He told them that when they prayed they ought not to desire 
to speak  much,  since our heavenly Father knows  well  what 
is  meet  for  us.
5 
He  charged  them  only,  but  with  great 
insistence,  that  they  should  persevere  in  prayer  (that  is,  in 
the  prayer  of the  Pater  Noster),  saying  elsewhere:  It be-
hoves  us  always  to pray and never to fail. 
8 
But  He taught 
not a  variety of petitions,  but rather that our petitions should 
be repeated frequently and with fervour and care.  For, as  I 
say,  in them is  contained  all  that is  the  will  of God and all 
that is  meet for us.  Wherefore, when His  Majesty drew near 
three times to the Eternal Father,  He prayed all these three 
times  using  those  very  words  of the  Pater  Noster,  as  the 
Evangelist tells us, saying:  Father, if it cannot be but that I 
must drink this cup, Thy will be done. 
7 
And the ceremonies 
1  So  Alc.  E.p.  omits the sentence:  • For God  ... speak with Him.' 
I  E.p.:  • Christ and His Church.'  I  S.  Luke xi,  1-4. 
,  A,  B:  • both corporal  and spiritual.'  •  S.  Matthew vi,  7-8. 
•  S.  Luke xviii,  I.  '  S.  Matthew xxvi,  39. 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XLV 
33
1 
which  He  taught  us  to  use  in  our  prayers  are  only  two. 
Either  we  are  to  pray in  the secret  place  of our chamber, 
where without noise and without paying heed to any we can 
pray  with  the  most  perfect  and  pure  heart,  as  He  said  in 
these  words:  When thou prayest,  enter into thy closet  and 
shut the door and  pray.1  Or else  He taught  us  to  go  to a 
solitary and desert place, as  He Himself did,  and at the best 
and  quietest  time  of night.  And thus  there is  no reason to 
fix  any limit of time,  or any appointed days,  or to set apart 
one  time  more  than  another  for  our  devotions,  neither  is 
there any reason to use 
2 
other forms, in our words and prayers, 
nor phrases with double meanings,  but only those which the 
Church uses  and in the manner wherein she  uses them;  for 
all  are reduced  to those  which we  have  described-namely, 
the Pater Noster. 
5.  I  do  not  for  this  reason  condemn--nay,  I  rather 
approve-the fixing  of days  on which  certain persons  some-
times arrange to  make their devotions,  such as  novenas,3  or 
other  such  things.  I  condemn  only  their  conduct  as  con-
cerns  the  fixity  of their  methods  and  the  ceremonies  with 
which  they  practise them.  Even  so  did Judith  rebuke  and 
reprove the people of Bethulia because they had limited God 
as  to  the  time  wherein  they hoped for  His  mercy,' saying: 
Do ye set God a time for His mercies?  This, she says, is  not to 
move  God  to clemency,  but to awaken  His  wrath. 
6 
CHAPTER  XLV 
Which  treats  of the  second  kind of distinct  good,  wherein  the  will 
rna  y  rejoice  vainly. 
I.  The second kind of distinct and delectable good where-
in  the  will  may  rejoice  vainly  is  that  which  provokes  or 
persuades  us  to  serve  God  and  which  we  have  called  pro-
vocative.  This belongs to preachers, and we  might speak of 
it in two ways, namely, as affecting the preachers themselves 
and  as  affecting  their  hearers.  For,  as  regards  both,  we 
1  S.  Matthew vi,  6. 
I  E.p.  abbreviates:  'And thus there is no  reason  to fix  times or fixed 
[sic]  days, nor is there any reason to use.' 
a  So  A,  B.  The  other authorities  [and  P.  Silverio]  read:  'such as  to 
fast.' 
,  A,  B:  'for mercy from  His hand: 
6  Judith viii,  11-12. 
332  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
must not fail to observe that both must direct the rejoicing of 
their will to God,  with respect to this exercise. 
2.  In the first place, it must be pointed out to the preacher, 
if he  is  to cause  his  people profit and not to  embarrass  him-
self!  with  vain  joy  and  presumption,  that  the  exercise  of 
preaching is  spiritual rather than vocal.  For, although it be 
practised by means of outward words, its power and efficacy 
reside  not  in  these  but  in  the  inward  spirit.  Wherefore, 
however lofty be the doctrine that is  preached, and however 
choice the rhetoric and sublime the style wherein it is clothed, 
it brings as a rule no more benefit than is  present in the spirit 
of the preacher.  For, although it is true that the word of God 
is  of itself efficacious,  according  to  those  words  of David, 
, He will  give to His  voice  a voice of virtue,' 2  yet fire,  which 
has  also  a  virtue-that of burning-will not burn when the 
material is  not prepared. 
3.  To the end that the force  of the preacher's instruction 
may take hold  upon the hearer,  there must  be two  kinds  of 
preparation:  that of the preacher and that of the  hearer ; 
for as a rule the benefit derived from a sermon depends upon 
the preparation of the teacher.  For this reason it is said that, 
as  is  the master,  so  is  wont to be the disciple.  For, when in 
the Acts  of the Apostles  those  seven sons  of that chief priest 
of the Jews 
3 
were wont to cast out devils in the same form as 
S.  Paul,  the  devil  rose  up  against  them,  saying:  Jesus  I 
confess and Paul  I  know,  but you,  who are ye?'  And then, 
attacking  them,  he stripped  and wounded  them.  This  was 
only  because  they  had  not  the  fitting  preparation,  and 
not  because  Christ  willed  not  that  they  should  not  do  this 
in His name.  For the Apostles once found a  man, who was 
not a  disciple,  casting out a  devil in the name of Christ, and 
they forbade him, and the Lord reproved them for it, saying: 
Forbid him not, for no man that has done any mighty works 
in  My name shall  be able to  speak  evil  of Me  after  a  brief 
space  of time. 
5 
But  He  is  angry  with  those  who,  though 
teaching  the law of God,  keep  it not,  and,  while  preaching 
spirituality, possess it not.  For this reason God says, through 
S.  Paul:  Thou  teachest  others  and  teachest  not  thyself. 
Thou  who  preach  est  that  men  should  not  steal,  stealest.
6 
1  E.p.:  • and not to become vain.' 
I  Psalm lxvii,  34 [A. V.,  lxviii,  33]. 
3  E.p.:  'those seven SODS  of Sceva.' 
I  S.  Mark ix, 38--9. 
,  Acts  xix,  IS. 
I  Romans ii,  21. 
BOOK  III.  CHAPTER  XLV 
333 
And through David the Holy Spirit says:  To the sinner, God 
said:  'Why speakest  thou  of My righteousness  and  takest 
My law  in thy mouth,  when thou hast hated discipline and 
hast  cast  My  words  behind  thee? '1  Here it is  made plain 
that  He  will  give  them  no  spirituality  whereby  they  may 
bear fruit. 
4.  It is  a  common matter of observation that, so far as we 
can judge here below,  the  better is  the life  of the preacher, 
the  greater  is  the  fruit  that  he  produces,  however  undis-
tinguished  his  style  may be,  however small  his  rhetoric  and 
however  ordinary  his  instruction.  For warmth  that  comes 
from  the  living  spirit  clings;  whereas  the  other  kind  of 
preacher will  produce very little  profit,  however sublime be 
his  style and his  instruction.  For,  although it is  true  that a 
good style and gestures and sublime instruction and eloquent 
language  influence  men  and  produce  much  effect  when 
accompanied by true spirituality,  yet without this,  although 
a  sermon  give
2 
pleasure  and  delight  to  the  sense  and  the 
understanding, very little or nothing of its sweetness remains 
in the will.  As  a  rule,  in this  case,  the will remains  as  weak 
and  remiss  with  regard  to  good  works  as  it  was  before. 
Although marvellous things may have been marvellously said 
by  the  preacher,  they  serve  only  to  delight  the  ear,  like  a 
concert of music or a  peal of bells;  the spirit, as  I  say,  goes 
no  farther from  its habits  than before, since the voice has no 
virtue to raise  one that is  dead from his grave. 
5.  Little does it matter that one kind of music should sound 
better  than  another  if the  better  kind  move  me  not  more 
than the other to  do good  works.  For, 'although marvellous 
things may have been said,  they are at once forgotten if they 
have not fired  the will.  For, not only do they of themselves 
bear little fruit, but the fastening of  the sense upon the pleasure 
that it finds  in that sort of instruction hinders the instruction 
from  passing to  the spirit,  so  that only  the  method  and the 
accidents  of what  has  been  said  are  appreciated,  and  the 
preacher  is  praised  for  this  characteristic  or  for  that,  and 
followed  from  such  motives  as  these  rather than  because  of 
the  purpose  of amendment  of life  which  he  has  inspired. 
This doctrine is well explained by S.  Paul to the Corinthians, 
where he says:  I, brethren,  when I  came to you,  came not 
1  Psalm xlix,  16-i7 [A.V.,  I,  16-17]. 
a  So  Ale.  The other authorities have:  • although it give  .  •  .' 
334  ASCENT  OF  MOUNT  CARMEL 
preaching  Christ  with  loftiness  of doctrine  and  of wisdom, 
and  my  words  and  my  preaching  consisted  not  in  the 
rhetoric  of human wisdom,  but in the showing  forth  of the 
spirit and of the  truth.
1 
6.  Although the intention of the Apostle here, like my own 
intention,  is  not  to  condemn  good  style  and  rhetoric  and 
phraseology,  for,  on  the  contrary,  these  are of great impor-
tance  to  the  preacher,  as  in  everything  else,  since  good 
phraseology  and  style  raise  up  and  restore  things  that  are 
fallen and ruined, even as  bad phraseology ruins and destroys 
good  things .... 2 
1  1  Corinthians ii,  1-4.  B,  e.p.:  • and of virtue.' 
a  E.p.  adds:  • End of the Ascent of Mount Carmel.'  The treatise thus 
remains incomplete,  the  chapter on  the preacher  being  unfinished  and  no 
part of any  chapter  upon  the  hearer  having  come  down  to  us.  Further, 
the  last  two  divisions  of  the  four  mentioned  in  Chap.  xxxv,  §  J  are  not 
treated in any of the MSS.  or early editions. 
The  fragments  which  P.  Gerardo  added  to  the  Ascent,  forming  two 
chapters,  cannot  be  considered  as  a  continuation  oi  this  book.  They  are 
in reality a  long and admirable letter,  written to a  religious,  who was  one 
of the Saint's spiritual  sons,  and copied by P.  Jeronimo de San  Jose in his 
History  of S.  John  of the  Cross  (Bk.  VI,  Chap.  vii).  There  is  not  the 
slightest doubt  that the letter,  which  was written  at Segovia,  and is  fully 
dated,  is  a  genuine  letter,  and  not  an  editor's  maltreatment  of  part  of  a 
treatise.  Only the similarity of its subject with that of these last chapters 
is  responsible  for  its  having  been  added  to  the  A scent.  It is  hard .to  see 
how  P.  Gerardo  could  have  been  misled about a  matter which is so clear. 
DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
INTRODUCTION 
SOMEWHAT  reluctantly,  out  of  respect  for  a  venerable 
tradition,  we  publish  the  Dark  Night  as  a  separate  trea:tise, 
though in reality  it is  a  continuation of the  Ascent ·of Mount 
Carmel  and fulfils  the undertakings given in it : 
The first  night or purgation is  of the  sensual  part of the soul, 
which  is  treated in the  present stanza and will  be  treated in the 
first  part of this  book.  And  the second  is  of the spiritual  part ; 
of this  speaks  the  second stanza,  which follows;  and of this  we 
shall treat likewise,  in the second and the third part, with respect 
to the activity of the soul;  and in  the fourth  part,  with  respect  to  its 
passivity.l 
This '  fourth  part' is  the Dark  Night.  Of it the Saint writes 
in a  passage which follows  that just quoted: 
And  the  second  night,  or  purification,  pertains  to  those  who 
are  already  proficient,  occurring  at the  time  when God desires 
to set them in the state of union with God;  and this latter night 
is  a  more  obscure· and  dark  and  terrible  purgation,  as  we  shall 
say afterwards. 
2 
In  his  three  earlier  books  he  has  written  of the  Active 
Night,  of Sense and of Spirit;  he now proposes to deal with 
the Passive Night, in the same order.  He has already taught 
us how we are to deny and purify ourselves with the ordinary 
help of grace, in order to prepare our senses and faculties  for 
union with God through love.  He now proceeds to explain, 
with  an  arresting  freshness,  how  these  same  senses  and 
faculties  are purged and purified  by God with a  view  to the 
same end-that of union.  The combined description of the 
two  nights  completes  the  presentation  of active and passive 
purgation, to which the Saint limits himself in these treati£es, 
1  Ascent,  Bk.  Y,  chap.  i,  § 2.  Cf.  pp.  2-3, above. 
a  Cf..  p.  18,  above. 
335 
336  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
although  the subject of the stanzas  which  he is  glossing is  a 
much  wider  one,  comprising  the  whole  of the  mystical  life 
and ending only with the Divine embraces of the soul  trans-
formed  in  God through love. 
The stanzas  expounded  by the  Saint  are  taken  from  the 
same poem in the two treatises.  The commentary upon the 
second,  however,  is  very  different from  that  upon  the first, 
for it assumes  a  much more advanced state of development. 
The  Active  Night  hall  left  the  senses  and  faculties  well 
prepared, though not completely prepared, for the reception 
of Divine influences and illuminations in greater abundance 
than before.  The Saint here postulates a  principle  of dog-
matic theology-that of himself, and with the ordinary aid of 
grace,  man cannot attain to that degree  of purgation which 
is  essential  to his  transformation in God.  He  needs  Divine 
aid  more  abundantly.  'However  greatly  the  soul  itself 
labours,'  writes  the Saint,  ' it cannot actively purify itself so 
as  to be in the least degree prepared for  the Divine union of 
perfection of love, if God takes  not its hand and purges it not 
in that  dark fire.'l 
The Passive Nights,  in which it is  God  Who accomplishes 
the purgation, are based upon this incapacity.  Souls' begin 
to enter' this dark night 
when  God d r   w ~   them forth  from  the state of beginners-which 
is  the  state  of those  that meditate  upon  the  spiritual  road-and 
begins  to  set  them  in  the  state  of progressives-which is  that of 
those  who  are  already  contemplatives-to  the  end  that,  after 
passing  through  it,  they  may arrive  at  the state  of the  perfect, 
which  is  that of the  Divine  union of the soul with  God. II 
Before  explaining  the  nature  and  effects  of  this  Passive 
Night,  the Saint touches,  in passing,  upon certain imperfec-
tions found  in those  who are about to enter it and which it 
removes  by  the  process  of purgation.  Such  travellers  are 
still  untried  proficients,  who  have  not  yet acquired  mature 
habits  of spirituality  and who  therefore  still  conduct  them-
selves  as  children.  The imperfections are examined one by 
one, following the order of the seven deadly sins,  in chapters 
(ii-viii)  which once more reveal the author's skill as a director 
of souls.  They are easy chapters to understand, and of great 
practical utility,  comparable to those in the first  book of the 
1  Dark  Night,  Bk.  I,  chap. iii. § 3. 
lOp. cit .•  Bk. I, chap. i. § I. 
INTRODUCTION 
337 
Ascent  which  deal with the active purgation of the desires  of 
sense. 
In Chapter viii, S.John of the Cross begins to describe the 
Passive Night of the senses,  the principal aim of which is the 
purgation  or  stripping  of the  soul  of its  imperfections  and 
the preparation  of it for  fruitive  union.  The Passive  Night 
of Sense,  we  are  told,  is  '  common'  and' comes  to  many,' 
whereas that of Spirit ' is  the portion of very few.' 1  The one 
is  '  bitter and terrible' but' the second bears no comparison 
with it,' for  it is  ' horrible and awful to  the spirit.'2  A good 
deal of literature on the former  Night existed  in the time of 
S.  John  of the  Cross  and  he  therefore  promises  to  be  brief 
in his  treatment of it.  Of the latter,  on the other hand,  he 
will  ' treat more fully  .  .  .  since very little has  been said of 
this,  either in speech  or in writing,  and very  little is  known 
of it, even by experience.' 3 
Having  described  this  Passive  Night  of Sense  in  chapter 
viii,  he  explains  with  great insight and  discernment  how  it 
may  be  recognized  whether  any given  aridity  is  a  result  of 
this  Night  or  whether  it  comes  from  sins  or  imperfections, 
or  from  frailty  or  lukewarmness  of  spirit,  or  even  from 
indisposition  or  'humours'  of  the  body.  The  Saint  is 
particularly  effective  here,  and  we  may  once  more  com-
pare this  chapter with a  similar one in the Ascent  (II, xiii)-
that  in  which  he  fixes  the  point  where  the  soul  may 
abandon discursive  meditation and enter the contemplation 
which  belongs  to loving and simple faith. 
Both  these chapters  have contributed to the reputation of 
S. John of the Cross as  a  consummate spiritual master.  And 
this  not only for  the objective  value of his  observations,  but 
because,  even  in  spite  of himself,  he  betrays  the  sublimity 
of his  own  mystical  experiences.  Once  more,  too,  we  may 
admire  the crystalline transparency of his  teaching  and  the 
precision of the phrases in which he clothes it.  To judge by 
his  language  alone,  one  might  suppose  at  times  that  he  is 
speaking of mathematical, rather than of spiritual operations. 
In Chapter x,  the Saint describes  the  discipline which the 
soul  in  this  Dark  Night  must  impose  upon  itself;  this,  as 
might  be  logically  deduced  from  the  Ascent,  consists  in 
, allowing the soul to remain in peace and quietness,' content 
'with  a  peaceful  and  loving  attentiveness  toward  God.'11 
lOp. cit.,  Bk.  I,  chap.  viii,  § I. 
I  Ibid. 
lOp. cit.,  Bk.  I. chap.  viii,  § 2. 
,  op.  cit.,  Bk.  I,  chap.  x,  § 4. 
338  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
Before  long  it  will  experience  enkindlings  of love  (chapter 
xi),  which  will  serve  to purify its  sins  and imperfections and 
draw it gradually nearer to God;  we  have here, as  it were, 
so many stages on the ascent of the Mount on whose  summit 
the soul attains to transforming union.  Chapters xii and xiii 
detail with great exactness the benefits that the soul receives 
from  this  aridity,  while  chapter  xiv  briefly  expounds  the 
last  line  of the  first  stanza  and  brings  to  an  end  what  the 
Saint  desires  to  say  with  respect  to  the  first  Passive  Night. 
At  only  slightly  greater  length  S.  John  of  the  Cross 
describes  the  Passive  Night  of the  Spirit,  which  is  at  once 
more  afflictive  and  more  painful  than  those  which  have 
preceded  it.  This,  nevertheless,  is  the  Dark  Night  par 
excellence,  of which  the  Saint  speaks  in  these  words:  'The 
night which  we  have called  that of sense  may and should be 
called  a  kind of correction  and restraint  of the desire  rather 
than purgation.  The reason is that all the imperfections and 
disorders  of the sensual  part have their strength and root in 
the spirit,  where all habits,  both good  and bad, are brought 
into subjection,  and  thus,  until  these  are purged,  the  rebel-
lions and depravities  of sense cannot be purged throughly.' 1 
Spiritual  persons,  we  are  told,  do  not  enter  the  second 
night  immediately after leaving  the  first;  on  the contrary, 
they generally pass a  long time,  even years,  before doing SO,2 
for  they  still  have  many  imperfections,  both  habitual  and 
actual  (chapter ii).  After a  brief introduction  (chapter iii), 
the  Saint  describes  with  some  fullness  the  nature  of this 
spiritual purgation or dark contemplation referred  to  in the 
first stanza of his poem and the varieties of pain and affliction 
caused by it,  whether in the soul  or in its faculties  (chapters 
iv-viii).  These chapters are brilliant beyond all description; 
in  them  we  seem  to  reach  the  culminating  point  of their 
author's mystical experience;  any excerpt from them would 
do  them an injustice.  It must suffice  to say  that S. John of 
the  Cross  seldom  again  touches  those  same  heights  of 
sublimity. 
Chapter ix describes how,  although these purgations seem 
to blind the spirit, they do so  only to enlighten it again with 
a  brighter and  intenser light,  which  it is  preparing itself to 
:eceive  with  greater  abundance.  The  following  chapter 
makes  the  comparison  between  spiritual  purgation and the 
log  of wood  which  gradually  becomes  transformed  through 
lOp. cit.,  Bk.  II, chap. iii, § I.  lOp. cit.,  Bk.  II, chap. i, § I. 
INTRODUCTION 
339 
being  immersed  in  fire  and  at  last  takes  on  the  fire's  own 
properties.  The force  with  which  the familiar  similitude  is 
driven  home  impresses  indelibly  upon  the  mind  the funda-
mental  concept  of  this  most  sublime  of  all  purgations. 
Marvellous,  indeed,  are its  effects,  from  the first  enkindlings 
and burnings of Divine love,  which are greater beyond com-
parison than those  produced by the Night of Sense,  the one 
being as different from the other as is the body from the soul. 
, For  this  (latter)  enkindling  of love  is  (produced)  in  the 
spirit,  where,  in the midst  of these  dark afflictions,  the soul 
feels itself to be keenly and acutely wounded in strong Divine 
love and to have a  certain sentiment and foretaste  of God.'l 
No  less  wonderful  are  the  effects  of the  powerful  Divine 
illumination which from  time to time enfolds  the soul in the 
splendours of glory.  When the effects of the light that wounds 
and yet  illumines  are combined  with  those  of the  enkindle-
ment  that  melts  the  soul  with  its  heat,  the  delights  experi-
enced are so  great as  to be ineffable. 
The second line of the first stanza of the poem is expounded 
in three admirable chapters  (xi-xiii), while one short chapter 
(xiv)  suffices for the three lines remaining.  We then embark 
upon  the  second  stanza,  which  describes  the soul's  security 
in the  Dark Night-due, among other reasons,  to its  being 
freed  'not  only  from  itself"  but  likewise  from  its  other 
enemies,  which are the world and the devil.' 2 
This  contemplation  is  not  only  dark,  but  also  secret 
(chapter  xvii),  and  in  chapter  xviii  is  compared  to  the 
, staircase'  of the  poem.  This  comparison  suggests  to  the 
Saint an exposition  (chapters  xviii,  xix)  of the  ten  steps  or 
degrees of love which comprise S.  Bernard's mystical ladder. 
Chapter xxi  describes  the soul's' disguise,'  from  which  the 
book  passes  on  (chapters  xxii,  xxiii)  to  extol  the  'happy 
chance'  which  led  it  to journey , in  darkness  and  conceal-
ment '  from  its  enemies,  both without and within. 
Chapter  xxiv  glosses  the  last  line  of the  second  stanza-
, my  house  being  now  at  rest.'  Both  the  higher  and  the 
lower  'portions  of  the  soul'  are  now  tranquillized  and 
prepared  for  the  desired  union  with  the  Spouse,  a  union 
which  is  the subject that the  Saint  proposed  to  treat in his 
commentary  on  the  five  remaining  stanzas.  As  far  as  we 
know,  this  commentary  was  never  written.  We  have  only 
lOp. cit.,  Bk.  II, chap. ii, § I. 
• op.  cit.,  Bk.  II, chap.  xvi,  § 2. 
2D 
340  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
the briefest outline of what was  to have been covered in the 
third,  in  which,  following  the  same  effective  metaphor  of 
night,  the  Saint  describes  the  excellent  properties  of the 
spiritual  night of infused  contemplation,  through  which the 
soul journeys with no other guide or support, either outward 
or inward, than the Divine love' which burned in my heart.' 
I t is difficult to express adequately the sense of loss that one 
feels at the premature truncation of this eloquent treatise.  We 
have  already  given  our  opinion
1 
upon  the  cqmmentaries 
thought to have been written on the final stanzas of the' Dark 
Night.'  Did we possess them, they would explain the birth of 
the light-' dawn's first  breathings in the heav'ns  above ,-
which breaks through the black darkness of  the Active and the 
Passive Nights;  they would tell us,  too,  of the soul's further 
progress  towards  the  Sun's  full  brightness.  It is  true,  of 
course, that some part ofthis great gap is filled  by S. John of 
the  Cross  himself in his  other treatises,  but it is  small  com-
pensation for the incomplete state in which he left this edifice 
of such  gigantic  proportions  that  he  should  have  given  us 
other  and  smaller  buildings  of a  somewhat  similar  k i n   ~  
Admirable as are the Spiritual Canticle and the Living Flame of 
Love,  they  are  not  so  completely  knit  into  one  whole  as  is 
this great double  treatise.  They lose  both  in flexibility  and 
in  substance  through  the  closeness  with  which  they  follow 
the stanzas  of which  they are the exposition.  In the  Ascent 
and  the  Dark  Night,  on  the  other  hand,  we  catch  only  the 
echoes of the poem, which are all but lost in the resonance of 
the philosopher's voice and the eloquent tones of  the preacher. 
Nor have  the  other treatises  the  learning and the authority 
of these.  Nowhere else does the genius ofS.John of the Cross 
for  infusing  philosophy  into  his  mystical  dissertations  find 
such  an  outlet  as  here.  Nowhere else,  again,  is  he  quite so 
appealingly  human;  for,  though  he  is  human  even  in  his 
loftiest  and  sublimest  passages,  this  inte.rmingling  of philo-
sophy  with  mystical  theology  makes  him  seem  particularly 
so.  These  treatises  are  a  wonderful  illustration  of  the 
theological  truth that grace,  far from  destroying nature,  en-
nobles  and dignifies  it, of the way in which  the  natural and 
the supernatural can agree together,  the principles of sound 
reason and the manifestations  of Divine grace. 
1  Cf.  pp. liv-vili, above. 
INTRODUCTION 
34
1 
MANuSCRIPTS  OF  THE  DARK  NIGHT 
The autograph of the  Dark  Nigkt  is  unknown  to  us,  as  is 
that of the Ascent of Mount Carmel;  the second seems to have 
disappeared  in  the  same  period  as  the  first.  There  are 
extant,  however,  as  many as twelve early copies  of the Dark 
Nigkt,  some  of which,  though  none  of them  is  as  palreo-
graphically accurate as  the best  copy of the Ascent,  are very 
reliable;  there is  no trace in them of conscious adulteration 
of the original or of any kind of modification to fit  the sense 
of any  passage  into  a  preconceived  theory.  We  definitely 
prefer one of these copies to the others but we nowhere follow 
it  so  literally  as  to  incorporate  in  our  text  its  evident  dis-
crepancies from  its  original. 
MS.  3446.  An early  MS.  in the  clear,  masculine  hand  of 
an Andalusian:  MS. 3446 in the National Library,  Madrid. 
Like  many  others,  this  MS.  was  transferred  to  the  library 
from  the Con  vento de San Hermenegildo at the time  of the 
religious persecutions in the early nineteenth century;  it had 
been presented to the Archives of the Reform by the Padres 
de  los  Remedios  in  Seville-a  Carmelite  house  founded  by 
P.  Gracian in  1574.  It has no title and a  fragment from  the 
Living Flame  of Love is  bound up with it. 
This MS. has only two omissions of any length;  these form 
part respectively of Book  II, Chapters xix and xxiii,  dealing 
with  the  Passive  Night  of  the  Spirit.  It has  also  many 
copyist's  errors.  At the same time its  antiquity and origin, 
and the ,good faith  of which it shows  continual signs,  give it, 
in  our  view,  primacy  over  the  other  copies  now  to  come 
under  consideration.  It must  be  made  clear,  nevertheless, 
that  there  is  no  extant  copy  of the  Dark  Nigkt  as  trust-
worthy  and  as  skilfully  made  as  the  Alcaudete  MS.  of the 
Ascent. 
MS.  of  tke Carmelite Nuns of Toledo.  Written in three hands, 
all  early.  Save for  a  few' slips  of the  copyist,  it agrees  with 
the  foregoing;  a  few  of its  errors  have  been  corrected.  It 
bears  no  title,  but  has  a  long  sub-title  which  is  in  effect  a 
partial  summary of the argument. 
MS.  of tke  Carmelite  Nuns  of Valladolid.  This famous  con-
vent,  which  was  one of S.  Teresa's foundations,  is  very  rich 
in Teresan autographs,  and has also a  number of important 
documents  relating  to  S.  John  of the  Cross,  together  with 
some  copies  of his  works.  That here described is  written in 
342  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
a  large and clear hand and probably  dates from  the  end of 
the  sixteenth  century.  It has  a  title  similar  to  that  of the 
last-named  copy.  With  few  exceptions  it follows  the  other 
most important  MSS. 
MS.  Alba de  Tormes.  What has been said of this in the in-
troduction  to  the  Ascent  (pp.  5-6)  applies  also  to  the  Dark 
Night.  I t  is  complete,  save  for  small  omissions  on  the  part 
of the amanuensis,  the  ' Argument' at the beginning of the 
poem,  the  verses  themselves  and  a  few  lines  from  Book  II, 
chapter vii. 
MS.  6624.  As  we  have seen  (pp. 6-7), this  copy is  almost 
identical with the foregoing.  It omits the '             and 
the poem itself but n.ot  the lines from Book II, chapter vii. 
MS.  8795.  This  contains  the Dark Night,  Spiritual  Canticle, 
Living  Flame  of Love,  a  number of poems  by S.  John  of the 
Cross and the Spiritual  Colloquies  between  Christ and the  soul  His 
Bride.  It is written in various hands, all very early and some 
feminine.  A  note  by  P.  Andres  de la Encarnacion,  on  the 
reverse of the first folio,  records that the copy was  presented 
to  the  Archives  of the  Reform  by  the  Discalced  Carmelite 
Nuns of Baeza.  This convent was founded in 1589, two years 
before  the  Saint's  death,  and  the  copy  may well  date from 
about  this  period.  On  the  second  folio  comes  the  poem 
, I entered in-I knew not where.'  On the reverse of the third 
folio  begins a kind of preface to the Dark Night,  opening with 
the  words:  'Begin  the  stanzas  by  means  of which  a  soul 
may  occupy  itc;elf  and  become  fervent  in  the  love  of 
God.  It deals with the Dark Night and is  divided into  two 
books.  The  first  treats  of  the  purgation  of sense,  and the 
second of the spiritual purgation of man.  It was  written by 
P.  Fr. Juan de la Cruz, Discalced Carmelite.'  On the next 
folio,  a so-called' Preface:  To the Reader'  begins :' As  a 
beginning  and  an  explanation  of these  two  purgations  of 
the  Dark  Night  which  are to  be  expounded  hereafter,  this 
chapter  will  show  how  narrow  is  the  path  that  leads  to 
eternal life and how completely detached and disencumbered 
must be those that are to enter thereby.'  This fundamental 
idea is  developed for the space of two folios.  There follows  a 
sonnet  on  the  Dark. Night,
l 
and  immediately  afterwards 
comes  the text of the treatise. 
1  [It  contains  a  series  of  paradoxical  statements,  after  the  btyle  of 
those  in  Ascent,  Bk.  I,  chap.  xiii,  and  is  of  no  great  literary  merit.  P. 
Silverio reproduces it in Spanish on p. 302  (note)  of his first  volume.) 
INTRODUCTION 
343 
The  copy  contains  many  errors,  but  its  only  omission 
is  that  of the  last  chapter.  There  is  no  trace  in  it  of any 
attempt to modify its  original;  indeed, the very nature and 
number  of the  copyist's  errors  are  a  testimony  to  his  good 
faith. 
MS.  12658.  A note by P.  Andres states  that he acquired 
it in  Madrid  but gives  no other indication  of its provenance. 
'The Dark  Night,'  it  adds,  'begins  on  folio  43;  our holy 
father  is  described  simply  as  "  the  second  friar  of the  new 
Reformation,"l which is  clear evidence of its antiquity.' 
The. codex  conta.ins  a  number  of opuscules,  transcribed 
no  doubt  with  a  devotional  aim  by  the  copyist.  Its  epoch 
is  probably the end of the sixteenth century;  it is  certainly 
earlier than the editions.  There is no serious omission except 
that of six lines of the' Argument.'  The authors of the other 
works  copied  include  S.  Augustine,  B.  Juan  de  Avila, 
P. Baltasar Alvarez and P. Tomas deJesus. 
The copies which remain to be described are all mutilated 
or abbreviated and can be disposed of briefly: 
MS.  13498.  Cf.  p.  7,  above.  This copy omits less  of the 
Dark Night than of the Ascent but few  pages are without their 
omissions.  In  one  place  a  meticulous  pair  of scissors  has 
removed  the  lower  half of a  folio  on  which  the  Saint deals 
with spiritual luxury. 
MS.  of the  Carmelite  Friars  of Toledo.  Dates  from  early in 
the  seventeenth  century  and  has  numerous  omissions, 
especially in the chapters on the  Passive Night of the Spirit. 
The date is  given  (in the same hand as that which copies the 
title)  as  1618.  This  MS.  also  contains an opuscule  by  Suso 
and another entitled' Brief compendium of the most eminent 
Christian perfection of P.  Fr. Juan de la Cruz.' 
MS.  18160.  Cf.  p.  7,  above.  The copyist has  treated the 
Dark Night little better than the Ascent;  except from the first 
ten and the last three chapters, he omits freely. 
MS.  12411.  Entitled  by  its  copyist  'Spiritual  Compen-
dium,'  this  MS.  contains  several  short  works  of devotion, 
including  one  by  Ruysbrreck.  Of S.  John  of the  Cross's 
works it copies the Spiritual Canticle as well as the Dark Night; 
the  latter  is  headed:  'Song  of one  soul  alone.'  I t  also 
contains a  number of poems, some of them by the Saint, and 
1  The  • first  friar' would  be P. Antonio de  Jesus  (p.  xxvi, above),  who 
Was  senior to S.  John of the Cross in  the Carmelite  Order,  but not in the 
Reform. 
344  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
many passages from  S.  Teresa.  It is  in several  hands,  all of 
the seventeenth century.  The copy of the Dark Night is  most 
unsatisfactory;  there  are  omissions  and  abbreviations 
everywhere. 
MS.  of the  Carmelite  Nuns  of Pamplona.  Cf.  p.  7,  above. 
This  MS.  also omits  and abbreviates  continually,  especially 
in  the  chapters  on  the  Passive  Night  of Sense,  which  are 
reduced  to  a  mere skeleton. 
Editio  princeps.  This  is  much  more  faithful  to  its  original 
in  the  Dark  Night  than  in  the  Ascent.  'Both  the  passages 
suppressed!  and  the  interpolations!  are  relatively  few  and 
unimportant.  Modifications  of  phraseology  are  more 
frequent and alterations are also  made with  the aim of cor-
recting hyperbaton.  In the first  book  about thirty lines  are 
suppressed;  in the second, about ninety.  All changes which 
are of any importance have been shown in the notes. 
The present edition.  We have given  preference, as  a  general 
rule,  to  MS.  3446,  subjecting  it,  however,  to  a  rigorous 
comparison with the other copies.  Mention has already been 
made (pp.lviii-Ix, above)  of certain apparent anomalies and 
a certain lack of uniformity in the Saint's method of dividing 
his commentaries.  This is  nowhere more noticeable than in 
the  Dark  Night.  Instead of dividing  his  treatise  into  books, 
each with its proper title, the Saint abandons this method and 
uses titles only occasionally.  As  this makes comprehension of 
his  argument  the  more  difficult,  we  have  adopted  the 
divisions  which  were introduced by P.  Salablanca and have 
been  copied  by  successive  editors. 
M.  Baruzi  (Bulletin  Hispanique,  1922,  Vol.  xxiv,  pp.  18-
40)  complains  that  this  division  weighs  down  the spiritual 
rhythm of the treatise  and interrupts its  movement.  We  do 
not agree.  In any case,  we greatly prefer the gain of clarity, 
even  if the  rhythm  occasionally  halts,  to  the  other  alter-
native-the  constant  halting  of  the  understanding.  We 
have, of course, indicated every place where the title is  taken 
from  the editio princeps  and was  not the  work of the author. 
1  The  longest  of  these  are  one  of  ten lines  in  Bk.  I.  chap.  iv.  [in  the 
original]  and  those  of  Bk.  II.  chaps.  vii.  viii.  xii.  xiii.  which  vary  from 
eleven  to  twenty-three  lines.  Bk.  II.  chap.  xxiii.  has  also  considerable 
modifications. 
I  The chief interpolation is in  Bk.  I.  chap.  x. 
INTRODUCTION 
345 
The following abbreviations are adopted in the footnotes: 
A = MS.  of the Discalced  Carmelite  Friars of Alba. 
B=MS. 6624  (National Library,  Madrid). 
Bz. =MS. 8795  (N.L.M.). 
C =MS.  13498  (N.L.M.). 
G. =MS.  18160  (N.L.M). 
H=MS. 3446  (N;L.M.). 
M=MS. of the Discalced Carmelite Nuns of Toledo. 
Mtr. =MS.  12658. 
P =MS. of the  Discalced  Carmelite Friars of Toledo. 
V =MS.  of the  Discalced  Carmelite  Nuns  of Valla-
dolid. 
E. p. =Editio princeps  (16 I 8) . 
MS.  12411  and the  MS.  of the Discalced  Carmelite Nuns 
of Pamplona  are  cited  without  abbreviations. 
DARK  NIGHTl 
Exposition  of the  stanzas  describing  the  method followed by  the  soul 
in  its journey  upon  the  spiritual  road  to  the  attainment  of the 
perfect  union  of love  with  God,  to  the  extent  that  is possible  in 
this  life.  Likewise  are  described  the  properties
2 
belonging  to 
the  soul  that  has  attained  to  the  said perfection,  according  as 
they  are  contained in  the  same  stanzas. 
3 
PROLOGUE' 
In this  book are first  set down all the stanzas which are to 
be expounded  ;  afterwards, each of the stanzas is expounded 
separately,  being  set  down  before  its  exposition;  and  then 
each line is  expounded separately and in turn,  the line itself 
also  being  set  down  before  the  exposition.  In the first  two 
stanzas  are  expounded  the  effects  of the  two  spiritual  pur-
gations:  of the sensual part of man and of the spiritual part. 
In the other six are expounded various and wondrous effects 
of the  spiritual  illumination  and union of love  with  God. 
STANZAS  OF  THE  SOUL 
1.  On  a  dark night,  Kindled  in love  with  yearnings-oh,  happy 
chance !-
I  went forth  without  being  observed,  My house  being  now  at 
rest. 
2.  In darkness  and  secure,  By  the  secret  ladder,  disguised-oh, 
happy  chance!-
In darkness  and in concealment,  My house  being  now  at rest. 
a.  In the  happy night,  In secret, when none saw me, 
Nor  I  beheld  aught,  Without  light  or guide,  save  that  which 
burned in my heart. 
1  This title is lacking in all  the MSS.  except Mtr.  and  P. 
I  C (incorrectly]:  • prospcrities.' 
8  This sub-title is  found  in C,  G,  M,  Mtr.,  which  add  some such words 
as  '  by  Fray  Juan  de  la  Cruz,  Discalced  Carmelite.'  The  editio  p,inceps 
has both title and sub-title. 
•  So  M and  G.  Bz.  has' Proem' and e.p .• Argument.' 
347 
348  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
4.  This light guided me  More  surely than the light of noonday 
To the  place where he  (wellllmew who 1)  was awaiting me--
A place where none appeared. 
&.  Oh, night that guided me,  Oh, night more lovely than the dawn, 
Oh, night that joined Beloved with lover.  Lover transformed in 
the Beloved  I 
8.  Upon my flowery breast,  Kept wholly for himself alone, 
There he stayed sleeping, and I  caressed him,  And the faDDing 
of the cedars made a breeze. 
7.  The breeze blew from the turret  As I  parted his locks ; 
With his gentle hand he wounded my neck  And caused all my 
senses to be suspended. 
8.  I remained, lost in oblivion;  My face I  reclined on the Beloved. 
All  ceased  and  I  abandoned  DlJ'S8lf,  Leaving  my  cares  for-
gotten among the lilies. 
Begins the exposition of the stanzas which treat of the way 
and  manner  which  the  soul  follows  upon  the  road  of the 
union of love with  God.
l 
Before we enter upon the exposition of these stanzas,  it is 
well to understand here that the soul that utters them is  now 
in the state of perfection, which is the union oflove with God, 
having  already  passed  through  severe  trials  and  straits,  by 
means  of spiritual exercise in the narrow way of eternal life 
whereof Our Saviour speaks in the Gospel, along which way 
the  soul  ordinarily  passes  in  order  to  reach  this  high  and 
happy  union  with  God.
2 
Since  this  road  (as  the  Lord 
Himself says likewise)  is  so  strait,  and since there are so few 
that enter by it,3  the soul  considers it a  great happiness  and 
good chance to have passed along it to the said perfection of 
love, as it sings in this first stanza, '  calling this strait road with 
full  propriety' dark night,'  as  will  be explained hereafter in 
the lines ofthe said stanza.  The soul, then, rejoicing at having 
passed  along  this  narrow  road  whence  so  many  blessings 
have  come  to  it,  speaks  after  this  manner. 
1  Thus  H,  M  and  other  authorities.  Some  (including  H)  add  the 
author's name.  Others omit the title.  A,  B  have:  'Book the fifth  of the 
Dark Kight.'  E.p.  has:  'Exposition of the intent of the Stanzas.' 
2  Thus the Codices.  E.p. and M read:  'along which the soul ordinarily 
passes in order to reach this high and Divine union with God.' 
8  S.  Matthew vii,  14. 
,  Bz.:  'as it relates in this stanza.' 
BOOK  THE  FIRST 
Which  treats of the Night of Sense. 
1 
STANZA  THE  FIRST 
On  a  dark  night,  Kindled  in love  with  yearnings-oh,  happy 
chance  I-
I  went  forth without  being  observed,  My house  being  now at 
rest. 
EXPOSITION 
I-.  In this first stanza the soul relates the way and manner 
which it followed in going forth,  as to its affection, from itself 
and from all things, and in dying to them all and to itself, in 
order to  attain to living the sweet and delectable life  of love 
with  God;  and it says  that  this  going forth  from  itself and 
from  all  things  was  a  'dark  night,'  by  which,  as  will  be 
explained  hereafter,  it here  understands  purgative  contem-
plation,  which  causes  passively2  in the  soul  the  negation  of 
itsolf and  of all  things  referred  to  above. 
2.  And  this  going  forth  it  says  here  that  it  was  able  to 
accomplish  in  the  strength  and  ardour  which  love  for  its 
Spouse gave to it for that purpose in the dark contemplation 
aforementioned.  Herein  it  magnifies
3 
the  great  happiness 
which it found  in journeying to God through this night with 
such signal success that none of the three enemies, which are 
world,  devil  and flesh  (who  are they that ever impede'  this 
road),  could  hinder  it;  inasmuch  as  the  aforementioned 
night of purgative
6 
contemplation lulled  to sleep and morti-
1  The  Codices  all  begin  with the stanza.  The title  belongs  to the e.p. 
only. 
a  E.p.  omits' passively.' 
•  V;  • desired to magnify.' 
•  E.p  .•  B:  • disturb.' 
6  [More exactly:  • purificative.'J  E.p.:  • purified.' 
349 
350  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
fied,  in  the  house  of sensuality,  all  the  passions  and  desires 
with respect to their mischievous  desires  and motions. 
1 
The line,  then,  says: 
On  a  clark  night 
CHAPTER  I 
Sets  down  the  first  line  and  hegins  to  treat  of the  imperfections  of 
heginners.
2 
I.  Into  this  dark  night  souls  begin  to  enter  when  God 
draws  them forth  from  the state  of beginners-which is  the 
state  of those  that  meditate  upon  the  spiritual  road-and 
begins to set them in the state of progressives a-which is  that 
of those  who  are  already  contemplatives-to the  end  that, 
after passing  through it,  they  may arrive at the state of the 
perfect,  which  is  that  of the  Divine  union  of the  soul  with 
God.  Wherefore,  to the end that we  may the better under-
stand and explain what night is  this  through which  the soul 
passes,  and for  what cause  God sets it therein,  it will be well 
here  to  touch  first  of  all  upon  certain  characteristics  of 
beginners  (which,  although  we  treat  them with  all  possible 
brevity, will not fail  to be of service likewise to the beginners 
themselves),'  in  order  that,  realizing  the  weakness  of the 
state  wherein  they  are,  they  may  take  courage,  and  may 
desire  that God will  bring them into this  night,  wherein the 
soul is  strengthened and confirmed in the virtues,  and made 
ready for  the inestimable delights  of the love of God.  And, 
although  we  tarry here for  a  time,  it will  not  be for  longer 
than is  necessary,  so  that we  may go  on to speak at once of 
this  dark night. 
2.  I t  must be known,  then, that the soul, after it has been 
definitely  converted  to  the  service  of God,  is,  as  a  rule, 
spiritually  nurtured  and  caressed  by  God,  even  as  is  the 
tender  child  by  its  loving  mother,  who  warms  it  with  the 
1  Thus  B,  C,  G,  H,  M,  Mtr.  The  other  authorities  and  e.p.  have: 
, with respect to their mischievous motions.' 
a  From e.p. 
•  Thus  [aprovechantes]  A,  B,  C,  E,  G,  H,  Mtr.  The other authorities, 
and e.p., read:  aprolJechados  [' proficient.'] 
•  E.p.  omits  this  parenthesis,  which,  however,  'is  found  in  all  the 
Codices,  except C and E. 
BOOK  1.  CHAPTER  I 
35
1 
heat of her bosom  and  nurtures it with  sweet  milk  and soft 
and pleasant food,  and carries it and caresses it in her arms  ; 
but,  as  the  child  grows  bigger,  the mother gradually ceases 
caressing  it,  and,  hiding  her  tender  love,  puts  bitter  aloes 
upon  her sweet  breast,  sets  down  the  child
l 
from  her arms 
and  makes  it  walk  upon  its  feet,  so  that  it  may  lose  the 
characteristics  of a  child  and  betake  itself  to  greater  and 
more substantial occupations.  The loving mother is  like the 
grace of God, for,  as soon as the soul is regenerated by its new 
warmth and fervour for the service of God, He treats it in the 
same  way;  He  makes  it  to  find  spiritual  milk,  sweet  and 
delectable, in all the things of God, without any labour of its 
own,  and  also  great  pleasure  in  spiritual  exercises,  for  here 
God is giving to it the breast of His  tender love,  even as  to  a 
tender  child. 
3.  Therefore, such a  soul finds  its delight in spending long 
periods-perchance whole  nights-in prayer;  penances  are 
its  pleasures;  fasts  its joys,  and its  consolations are to  make 
use  of the  sacraments  and 'Commune  of Divine  things.  III 
the  which  things  spiritual  persons  (though  taking  part  in 
them  with  great  efficacy  and  persistence  and  using  and 
treating  them  with  great  care),  commonly  find  themselves, 
speaking  spiritually,  very  weak  and  imperfect.  For  since 
they  are  moved  to  these  things  and  to  these  spiritual  exer-
cises  by the consolation and pleasure that they find  in them, 
and since,  too,  they have not been prepared for them by the 
practice  of earnest  striving  in  the  virtues,  they  have  many 
faults  and  imperfections  with  respect  to  these  spiritual 
actions of theirs  ;  for,  after all, everyone's actions correspond 
to  the  habit  of perfection  attained  by  him.  And  as  these 
persons  have  not  had the opportunity of acquiring  the said 
habits  of strength,  they have necessarily  to work like feeble
2 
children,  feebly.  In  order  that  this  may  be  seen  more 
clearly,  and  likewise  how  much  these  beginners  in  the 
virtues  lack
3 
with  respect  to  the  works  in  which  they  so 
readily  engage  with  the  pleasure  aforementioned,  we  shall 
describe it by reference to the seven  capital  sins,  each  in  its 
turn,  indicating some of the many imperfections which  they 
have  under  each  heading;  wherein  it will  be  clearly  seen 
1  E.p.  modifies  these  lines  of  the  Codices.  thus:  'and.  hiding  her 
tender breast.  puts bitter aloes upon it. sets down  the child.' 
I  E.p. and M omit' feeble.'  . 
I  Thus  B.  G.  H.  Mtr.,  p.  V.  The other Codices  and  e.p.  have:  • how 
feeble  are these beginners in the virtues.' 
352  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
how like to children are these persons in all they do.  And it 
will  also  be  seen  how  many  blessings  the  dark  night  of 
which  we  shall  afterwards  treat  brings  with  it,  since  it 
cleanses  the soul and purifies it from  all  these imperfections. 
CHAPTER  II 
Of certain  spiritual  imperfections  which  beginners  have  with  respect 
to  the habit of  pride. 
1 
I.  As  these  beginners  feel  themselves  to  be  very  fervent 
and  diligent  in  spiritual  things  and  devout  exercises,  from 
this  prosperityZ  (although it is  true that holy things  of their 
own  nature  cause  humility)  there  often  comes  to  them, 
through  their  imperfections,  a  certain  kind  of secret  pride, 
whence  they come  to  have some  degree  of satisfaction  with 
their  works  and  with  themselves.  And  hence  there  comes 
to  them  likewise  a  certain  desire,  which  is  somewhat  vain, 
and  at  times  very  vain,  to  speak  of spiritual  things3  before 
others,  and sometimes even to teach such things  rather than 
to  learn  them.  They    o n d e ~ n   others  in  their  heart  when 
they see that they have not the kind of devotion which they 
themselves  desire;  and  sometimes  they  even  say  this  in 
words,  resembling  herein  the  Pharisee,  who  boasted  of 
himself,  praising  God for  his  own good  works  and despising 
the publican. 
4 
2.  In  these  persons  the  devil  often  increases  the  fervour 
that  they  have  and  the  desire  to  perform  these  and  other 
works  more frequently,  so  that their pride and presumption 
may  grow  greater.  For the  devil  knows  quite  well  that  all 
these  works  and  virtues  which  they  perform  are  not  only 
valueless  to  them,  but  even  become  vices  in  them.  And 
such a  degree of evil are some of these persons wont to reach 
that  they  would  have  none  appear  good  save  themselves; 
and  thus,  in  deed  and  word,  whenever  the  opportunity 
occurs,  they  condemn  them  and  slander  them,  beholding 
the mote in their brother's eyeS and not considering the beam 
1  This title is found  in e.p.  and also in all  the Codices. 
2  M,  H:  • from  this property.' 
I  E.p.:  • And hence there comes to them likewise a  certain exceedingly 
vain desire to speak of spiritual things.' 
,  S.  Luke xviii,  11-12. 
6  E.p.:  • in another's eye.' 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  II 
353 
which  is  in  their  own;l  they  strain  at  another's  gnat  and 
themselves  swallow a  camel. 2 
3.  Sometimes,  too,  when  their  spiritual  masters,  such  as 
confessors  and superiors,  do  not approve  of their spirit and 
behaviour  (for  they  are  anxious  that  all  they  do  may  be 
esteemed  and  praised),  they  consider  that  they  do  not 
understand them, or that, because they do not approve of this 
and  comply  with  that,  they  are  themselves  not  spiritual. 
And  so  they  immediately  desire  and  contrive  to  find  some 
one else  who will  fit  in with  their tastes;  for  as  a  rule  they 
desire  to  speak  of spiritual  matters  with  those  who,  as  they 
understand,  will  praise  and  esteem  what  they  do,  and 
they flee,  as they would from death, from those who disabuse 
them in order to lead them into a safe road-sometimes they 
even  harbour  ill-will  against  them.  Presuming thus,3  they 
are  wont  to  resolve  much 
4 
and  accomplish  very  little. 
Sometimes  they  are  anxious  that  others  shall  realize  how 
spiritual and devout they are, to which end they occasionally 
give outward evidence thereof in movements, sighs and other 
ceremonies;  and  at times  they  are apt to fall  int0
6 
certain 
ecstasies,  in  public  rather than in  secret,  wherein  the  devil 
aids  them, and they are pleased  that this should  be noticed, 
and are often eager that it should  be  noticed  more. 
6 
4.  Many such persons  desire  to be favoured  by their con-
fessors  and to be intimate with them 
7
,  whence there come to 
them  continual  occasions  of envy  and  disquietude. 
8 
They 
are too  much embarrassed
9 
to confess  their sins  nakedly,  lest 
their  confessors  should  think  less  of. them,  so  they  palliate 
them and make them appear less evil, and thus it is  to excuse 
themselves  rather than to accuse  themselves  that they  go  to 
confession.  And  sometimes  they  seek  another  confessor  to 
tell  the  wrongs  that they have  done,  so  that their own  con-
fessor  shall  think  they  have done  nothing  wrong  at all,  but 
only  good;  and  thus  they  always  take  pleasure  in  telling 
1  S.  ~   a t t h e w   vii,  3.  a  S.  Matthew  xxiii,  24. 
8  [Lit.,  . Presuming.'.]  E.p.  reads:  • Presuming upon  themselves.' 
•  A,  B  abbreviate:  '  ... who  disabuse  them  in order  to  cause  them 
fear.  They are wont to resolve  much.' 
•  The words' they are apt to fall  into' are found  in e.p.  alone. 
•  [The  original  merely  has:  • and  are  often  eager.']  E.p.  modifies: 
• that this about which  they are so eager should  be noticed.' 
7  E.p.:  • Many  such  desire  to  be  intimate  with  their  confessors.'  H 
has:  'desire  to  preach  and  to  be  intimate  with  their  confessors,'  which 
destroys the sense of the passage. 
•  [Lit.,  • a  thousand envies and disquietudes. 'J 
•  Bz.:  • They are asham.ed.' 
354  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
him what is  good, 
1 
and sometimes  in such  terms  as  make it 
appear to be greater than it is  rather than less,  desiring that 
he  may think them  to  be  good,  when  it  would  be  greater 
humility  in  them,  as  we  shall  say,  to  depreciate  it,  and  to 
desire that
2 
neither he nor anyone else should consider them 
of account. 
5.  Some of these beginners, too,  make little  of their faults, 
and at other times become over-sad when they see themselves 
fall  into  them,  thinking  themselves  to  have  been  saints 
already;  and  thus  they  become  angry  and  impatient  with 
themselves,  which  is  another  imperfection.  Often  they 
beseech  God,  with  great yearnings,3  that He will  take from 
them  their  imperfections  and  faults,  but  they  do  this  that 
they may see  themselves  at peace,  and may not be troubled 
by  them,  rather  than for  God's  sake;  not realizing that,  if 
He  should  take  their  imperfections  from  them,  they  would 
probably  become  prouder  and  more  presumptuous
4 
still. 
They  dislike  praising  others  and  love  to  be  praised  them-
selves;  sometimes  they  seek  out  such  praise.  Herein  they 
are like  the foolish  virgins,  who,  when their lamps could  not 
be lit,  sought oil from  others. 
5 
6.  From these imperfections some souls  go  on to develop· 
many  very  grave  ones,  which  do  them  great  harm.  But 
some  have  fewer  and  some  more,7  and  some,  only  the  first 
motions  thereof or little  further;  and  there  are  hardly  any 
of these beginners who,  at the time of these signs of fervour, 8 
fall not into some of these errors. 
9 
But those who at this time 
are going on to perfection proceed very differently and with 
quite  another  temper of spirit;  for  they progress  by means 
of humility and arc greatly edified, not only thinking naught 
of their  own  affairs,IO  but having very little satisfaction with 
themselves;  they  consider  all  others  as  far  better,  and 
usually  have a  holy envy of them,  and an eagerness  to serve 
God as these do.  For the greater is their fervour, and the more 
numerous are the works that they perform, and the greater is 
the  pleasure  that  they  take  in  them,  as  they  progress  in 
1  A,  B, M omit:  • and thLlS  .  .  .  is good.' 
2  E.p.:  • and to say naught, so that  .. .' 
3  E.p.,  M omit' great.' 
,  E.p.,  1\-1  omit:  • and more presumptuous.' 
&  S.  Matthew xxv,  8.  [Lit.,' who,  having their lamps dead,  sought oil 
from  without.'] 
8  [Lit.,  • to have.']  M,  A omit this verb and read:  • go on to many .. .' 
7  E.p.:  • and others more.'  a  [Lit.,  • these fervours.'] 
•  [Lit.,  • into something of this.']  10  E.p.:  • their own works.' 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  11 
355 
humility,  the more do they realize  how  much God  deserves 
of them,  and  how  little  is  all  that  they  do  for  His  sake ; 1 
and  thus,  the  more they  do,  the less  are  they satisfied.  So 
great is  that which  they  would  gladly  do  from  charity and 
love  for  Him,  that all that they  do seems  to them  naught; 
and so greatly are they importuned, occupied and absorbed I 
by this loving care,  that they never notice what others do or 
do not;  or if they do notice it, they always believe, as I  say, 
that all others are far better than they themselves.  Where-
fore,  holding  themselves  as  of little  worth,  they are anxious 
that  others  too  should  thus  hold  them,3  and should  despise 
and  depreciate  that  which  they  do.  And  further,  if men 
should  praise and esteem  them,  they can in no wise  believe 
what they say;  it seems to them strange that anyone should 
say these good things  of them. 
7.  Together with great tranquillity and humbleness, these 
souls  have  a  deep  desire  to  be  taught  by  anyone  who  can 
bring them profit;  they are the  complete  opposite of those 
of whom  we  have spoken above,  who  would  fain  be  always 
teaching,  and who,  when  others  seem  to  be  teaching  them, 
take  the  words  from  their  mouths  as  if  they  knew  them 
already.  These  souls,  on  the  other  hand,  being  far  from 
desiring to be the masters of any, are very ready to travel and 
set  out  on  another  road  than  that  whieh  they  are  actually 
following,  if they  be  so  commanded,  because  they  never 
think  that  they  are  right  in  anything  whatsoever.  They 
rejoice  when  o t   ~ r s   are  praised;  they  grieve  only  because 
they serve not God like them.  They have no desire to speak 
ofthe things that they do,  because they think so little of them 
that they are ashamed to speak of them even to their spiritual 
masters,  since  they seem to  them to  be things  that merit not 
being  spoken  of.  They  are  more  anxious  to  speak  of their 
faults  and  sins,  or  that  these  should  be  recognized  rather 
than  their  virtues;4  and  thus  they  incline  to  talk  of their 
souls  with  those  who  account
6 
their  actions  and  their 
spirituality  of little  value.  This  is  a  characteristic  of the 
spirit  which  is  simple,  pure,  genuine  and  very  pleasing  to 
God.  For as  the wise  Spirit of God dwells  in these  humble 
1  H  omits:  'and how  .  .  .  His sake.' 
D  Bz.  has  'fascinated'  for  'absorbed.'  E.p.:  • importuned  and 
occupied.' 
I  A,  B  omit this clause [interrupting the sense of the passage]. 
•  E.p., M:  • or that it should  be recognized  that these [faults and sins] 
are  not virtues.'  6  E.p.:  • esteem.' 
2  E 
356  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
souls,  He moves them and inclines them to keep His treasures 
secretly  within  and  likewise  to  cast  out  from  themselves 
all evil.  God gives  this  grace to  the humble,  together with 
the other virtues, even as  He denies it to the proud. 
8.  These souls  will give their hearts' blood to anyone that 
serves  God,  and will help others to serve Him as  much as  in 
them lies.  The imperfections into which they see themselves 
fall  they  bear  with  humility,  meekness  of  spiritl  and  a 
loving  fear  of God,  hoping  in  Him.  But  souls  who  in the 
beginning journey  with  this  degree  of perfection  are,  as  I 
understand,  and  as  has  been  said,  a  minority,  and  we 
should  be  glad even if there  were  only  a  very  few  who  fell 
not into contrary errors.  For this  reason,  as  we  sha:ll  after-
wards  say,  God  leads  into  the  dark  night  those  whom  He 
desires  to  purify  from  all  these  imperfections  so  that  He 
may bring them farther onward. 
CHAPTER  III 
OJ some  imperfections  whicp  some  of these  souls'  A  are  apt  to  have, 
with  respect  to  the  second capital sin,  which  is  avarice,3  in  the 
spiritual  sense. 
I.  Many  of  these  beginners  have  also  at  times  great 
spiritual  avarice.  They  will  be  found  to  be  discontented 
with  the  spirituality  which  God  gives  them;  and  they 
are very disconsolate and querulous because they find  not in 
spiritual  thirigs  the  consolation  that  they  would  desire. 
Many  can  never  have  enough  of listening  to  counsels  and 
learning'  spiritual  precepts,  and  of possessing  and  reading 
many books which treat of this  matter, and they spend their 
time on all these things rather than on works of mortification Ii 
and  the  perfecting8  of the  inward  poverty  of spirit  which 
1  H:  • with humility and with humility of spirit.' 
•  E.p.:  'which some beginners: 
•  Bz.:  • which is pride and boasting:  '  E.p., M omit' learning: 
•  Bz.,  P  insert here:  'and they  have  and  read  many  spiritual books 
which  treat  of  this  vice  and  of  gluttony,  which  generally  lead  them  to 
attempt many kinds of exercise. either to make great use of their capital, 
from  a  craving for  great  profits  or through  mere  pleasure  and  cupidity; 
whence comes inconstancy to them and lack of stability in their particular 
exercises,  which  are  chiefly  necessary  in  these  beginnings;  and  this 
spoils  their  labour  and  makes  it of  none  effect  and  vain.  wasting  their 
time in experiments and trials.' 
•  E.p.  reads:  'rather than  on  works,  without the  mortification  and 
the perfecting: 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  III 
357 
should be theirs.  Furthermore, they burden themselves with 
images  and rosaries  which are very curious;1  now they put 
down  one,  now take  up  another;  now  they change about, 
now change back again;  now  they want this  kind  of thing, 
now that,  preferring one kind of cross  to another,  because it 
is  more  curious. 
2 
And  others  you  will  see  adorned  with 
agnusdeis 
3 
and relics and tokens, ,  like children_with  trinkets. 
Here  I  condemn  the  attachment  of  the  heart,  and  the 
affection  which  they  have  for  the  nature,  multitude  and 
curiosity  of these  things,  inasmuch as  it is  quite  contrary to 
poverty  of spirit,  which  solely  considers  the  substance  of 
devotion,  makes  use  only  of what  suffices  for  that  end  and 
grows  weary  of this  other kind  of multiplicity and curiosity. 
For  true  devotion  must  issue  from  the  heart,  and  consists 
in the truth and substanceS  alone  of what is  represented  by 
spiritual  things;  all the rest is  affection and attachment pro-
ceeding  from  imperfection;  and  in  order  that  one  may 
pass  to any kind of perfection 
6 
it is  necessary for such desires 
to  be  killed. 
2.  I  knew a  person who for  mort"  than ten years  made use 
of a  cross  roughly  formed  from  a  branch 
7 
that  had  been 
blessed,  fastened  with  a  pin twisted  round it;  he had never 
ceased using it, and he always carried it about with him until 
I  took it from  him;  and this  was a  person of no  small sense 
and  understanding.  And  I  saw  another  who  said  his 
prayers using  beads that were  made of bones from  the spine 
of a  fish;  his  devotion was  certainly no less  precious on that 
account in the sight of God,  for  it is  clear  that  these  things
8 
carried  no  devotion  in  their  workmanship  or  value. 
Those,  then,  who  start  from  these  beginnings  and  make 
1  So  H,  P.  A,  B,  C,  G,           V  have:  'which  are  sometimes  very 
curious and show}".'  So  Bz.,  but with' costly' for' showy.'  E.p.  and :\1  : 
, images and crosses  which are very curious and costly.' 
a  Bz.  adds:  'or costly.'  Other authorities add:  'or valuable.' 
3  The  agnusdei  was  a  wax  medal  with  a  representation  of  the  Lamb 
stamped upon it, often blessed  by the Pope;  at the time of the Saint such 
medals  were  greatly  sought  after,  as  we  know  from  various  references  in 
S.  Teresa's letters. 
,  [The  word  nominCt,  translated' token: and  normally  meaning' list' 
or  '  roll:  refers  to  a  relic  on  which  were  written  the  names  of  saints.  In 
modern Spanish it can denote a  medal or amulet used superstitiously.] 
•  E.p.  alone modifies  thus:  'from the heart, in truth alone,  and  must 
consider only the truth and substance.' 
B  E.p.  alone  has:  'pass to the estate of perfection.' 
7       doubt a  branch of  palm, oliVe!  or rosemary,  blessed  in church on 
Palm  Sunday, like the  English  palm crosses of to-day.] 
8  Thus e.p.  alone.  The other authorities have' these.' 
358  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
good  progress,  attach  themselves  to  no  visible  instruments, 
nor  do  they  burden  themselves  with  such,  nor  desire  to 
know more than is necessary in order that they may act well; 
1 
for  they set their eyes  only on  being right with  God and on 
pleasing Him, and therein consists  their covetousness.  And 
thus with great generosity they give away all that they have, 
and delight to know that they have it not, for  God's sake and 
for  charity  to  their neighbour,2  no  matter whether  these  be 
spiritual things or temporal.  For, as  I  say, they set their eyes 
only upon the reality of interior
3 
perfection,  which is  to give 
pleasure to God and in naught to give pleasure to themselves. 
3.  But  neither  from  these  imperfections  nor  from  those 
others can  the  soul  be perfectly  purified  until God  brings it 
into  the  passive  purgation  of that  dark  night  whereof  we 
shall  speak  presently.  It befits  the  soul,  however,  in so  far 
as  it can, to contrive to labour, on its own account, to purge 
and  perfect itself,  so  that it may  merit  being  taken  by  God 
into that Divine care wherein it becomes  healed of all  things 
that it was unable ofitselfto cure.  Because, however greatly 
the soul itselflabours, it cannot" actively purify itself so as to 
be  in  the  least  degree  prepared  for  the  Divine  union  of 
perfection  of love,  if God  takes  not:;  its  hand and purges  it 
not  in  that  dark  fire,  in  the  way and manner that we  have 
to  describe. 
6 
CHAPTER  IV 
OJ other  imperfections  which  these  beginners  are  apt  to  have  with 
respect  to  the  third sin,  which is luxury. 
7 
I.  Many of these beginners have many other imperfections 
than those which I  am describing with respect to each of the 
deadly sins,  but these I  set aside,  in order to avoid prolixity, 
touching upon ,a  few  of the most important,  which are,  as it 
were,  the  origin  and  cause
8 
of  the  rest.  And  thus  with 
1  1\-1:  'neither do  they  desire  to  know  much  in  order  to  act  [well].' 
[The  word' well' does  not occur anywhere in the original.) 
I  E.p.:  'and for  charity to  their neighbour,  ruling  everything  by the 
laws of  this virtue.' 
a  E.p.,  M omit' interior.'  '  E.p.:  'it cannot by its industry.' 
•  E.p.,  M:  'of love  with God,  if He takes not.' 
•  E.p.:  'in  the  manner  that  we  have  to  describe';  M:  'in  the 
manner that we  have described.' 
7  E.p. adds:  'spiritually understood.'  '  Bz.:  'origin and head: 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  IV 
359 
respect  to  this  sin  of luxury  (leaving  apart  the  falling  of 
spiritual persons 
1 
into this  sin,  since  my intent is  to treat of 
the  imperfections  which  have  to  be  purged  by  the  dark 
night),  they  have  many  imperfections  which
2 
might  be 
described  as  spiritual  luxury,  not  because  they  are  so,  but 
because the imperfections proceed from spiritual things.  For 
it often  comes  to  pass  that,  in their very  spiritual  exercises, 
when they are powerless  to prevent it,  there arise and assert 
themselves  in  the  sensual  part of the  soul  impure  acts  and 
motions,3 and sometimes this happens even when the spirit is 
deep in prayer,  or taking part in the  Sacrament  of Penance 
or in the  Eucharist.  These things are  not,  a.s  I  say,  in their 
power;  they  proceed from  one of three causes. 
4 
2.  The  first  cause  from  which  they  often  proceed  is  the 
pleasure which human nature takes in spiritual things.
6 
For 
when  the  spirit  and  the  sense  are  pleased,  every  part  of a 
man  is  moved  by  that  pleasures  to  delight according  to its 
proportion?  and  character.  For  then  the  spirit,  which  is 
the higher part, is  moved  to  pleasures  and  delight in God ; 
and the sensual  nature,  which  is  the lower part, is  moved to 
pleasure and delight of the  senses,  because  it cannot possess 
and lay hold upon aught else,  and it therefore lays hold upon 
that which  comes  nearest to itself,  which  is  the impure  and 
sensual. 9  Thus  it comes  to  pass  that  the  soul  is  in  deep 
prayer  with  God  according  to  the  spirit,  and,  on the  other 
hand,  according  to  sense  it  is  passively  conscious,  not 
without great displeasure, of rebellions and motions and acts 
of the senses, 10 which often happens in Communion, for when 
1  E.p.  omits:  • of spiritual persons.'  [A  better reading:  the omission 
throws into relief  the author's contrast  between  the actual commission  of 
the deadly sin and the imperfections connected  with it.] 
2  So e.p.  The Codices  read  [more emphatically]:  • many which.' 
I  E.p.:  • in the sensual part of the soul  unclean motions.'  The edition 
of  1630  reads:  • not because  this is  so,  but because at times it is felt  and 
experienced in the flesh,  by reason  of  its weakness,  when  the soul  receives 
spiritual  things.  For  it often  comes  to  pass  that,  ill  their  very  spiritual 
exercises,  when  they  are  powerless  to  prevent  it,  there  arise  and  are 
experienced in the sensual part of  the soul  unclean  motions.' 
6  Thus the chief Codices.  Others, and e.p.,  read:  • three things.' 
6  E.p.:  '  ... occasionally proceed, albeit rarely and in weak natures, 
is from: etc.  '  [Lit.,  recreation.]  I  [Lit.,  recreatioll.] 
7  So  H,  P.  The  other  authorities  [followed  by  P.  Silverio]  have 
• portion.'  •  E.p.  omits:  • and it  ... and sensual.' 
10  E.p.  reads:  'Thus  it  comes  to pass  that  the  soul  is  in  prayer with 
God  according  to  the  spirit,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  according  to  sense 
it is  passively  conscious,  not without  great  displeasure,  of  rebellions  alld 
motions of the senses.'  It then omits the  following  words:  • which of  tOil 
•. after its manner: 
360  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
the soul receives joy and comfort in this act of love,  because 
this Lord bestows it (since it is to that end that He gives Him-
self),  the sensual  nature takes  that which is  its own likewise, 
as  we  have said,  after  its  manner.  Now as,  after all,  these 
two parts form  one subject,  they ordinarily both participate 
in that which  one  of them  receives,  each  after  its  manner; 
for,  as  the philosopher says,  everything that is  received is in 
the recipient
l 
after the manner of the same recipient.  And 
thus, in these beginnings,  and even when the soul  has  made 
some  progress,  its  sensual  part,  being  imperfect,  oftentimes 
receives the Spirit of God with the same' imperfection. 2  Now 
when  this  sensual  part  is  renewed  by  the  purgation  of the 
dark  night  which  we  shall  describe;  it  no  longer  has  these 
weaknesses;  for  it  is  no  longer  this  part  that  receives 
aught,  but  rather  it is  itself received  into  the  Spirit.  And 
thus  it  then  has  everything  after  the  manner  of  the 
Spirit. 
8 
3.  The  second  cause  whence  these  rebellions  sometimes 
proceed is  the devil,  who,  in order to  disquiet'  and  disturb 
the soul,  at times  when it is  at prayer or is  striving to  pray, 
contrives  to stir up  these  motions  of impurity in its  nature; 
and if the soul gives  heed to any of these,  they cause it great 
harm.  For through fear of these not only does a soul become 
lax in prayer-which is  the aim of the devil  when he begins 
to  strive  with  it-but some  persons  abandon  prayer  alto-
gether,  because  they  think  that  these  things  attack  them 
more during that exercise  than apart from  it,  which is  true, 
since  the  devil  attacks  them  then  more  than  on  other 
occasions, so that they may abandon spiritual exercises.  And 
not  only  so,  but  he  succeeds  in  portraying  to  them  very 
vividly things that are most foul and impure, and at times are 
very  closely  related  to  certain  spiritual  things  and  persons 
that are of profit to  their souls,  in order to terrify them and 
make  them fearful; 
6 
so  that those  who  are affected  by this 
1  E.p. omits:  • in the recipient: 
•  E.p.:  • since its sensual  part is imperfect. it occasionally partakes of 
spiritual pleasures with the same imperfection. '  . 
•  E.p.  expands thus:  '. .  .  has these weaknesses;  for  so abundantly 
does  it receive  the  Divine  Spirit  that it seems  rather  to  be  received  into 
that same Spirit-into One.  in  brief.  that is very much greater.  And  thus 
it possesses everything after the manner of the Spirit, in a  wondrous way, 
iD  Whom it is a  partaker.  being united with God.' 
•  M,  V:  • to disgust';  Mtr.:  • to retaliate.' 
•  E.p.  has' make an  end  of them' [acabarlas]  for' make them fearful  • 
[acobardarlas]. 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  IV 
3
61 
dare not even look  at anything or meditate upon anything, 
because  they  immediately  stumble  upon  this  temptation. 
And  upon  those  who  are .inclined  to  melancholy  this    ~ t    
with such effectl that they become gready to be pitied since 
they are suffering so sadly ;  for this trial reaches such a point 
in certain persons, when they have this evil humour, that they 
believe it to be clear that the devil is  ever present with them 
and that they have no power to prevent this,  although some 
of these persons can prevent his attack by dint of great effort 
and  labour. a  When  these  impurities
3 
attack  such  souls 
through  the  medium  of melancholy,  they  are  not as  a  rule 
freed  from  them  until  they  have  been cured  of that kind  of 
humour,  unless  the  dark  night  has  entered  the  soul,  and 
gradually rids  them of all  impurities." 
4.  The  third  source  whence  these  impure  motions  are 
apt to  proceed in order to  make  war upon the soul  is  often 
the  fear  which  such  persons  have  conceived  for  these 
impure  representations  and  motions;  for  the  fear  which 
comes  to  them  from  a  sudden  remembrance  of  them, 
arising  from  something  that  they  see  or  say  or  think, 
makes  them  suffer  from  them  through  no  fault  of  their 
own. 
5.
a 
There 'are  also  certain  souls  of so  tender  and frail  a 
nature  that,  when  there  comes  to  them  some  spiritual. con-
solation or delight in prayer, the spirit ofluxury is with them 
immediately,  inebriating 
8 
and  delighting  their  sensual 
nature in such manner that they are, as it were, plunged into 
the enjoyment and pleasure of this  sin;  and the 6I1joyment 
remains with the consolation, passively,  and sometimes  they 
are  able  to  see  that  they  have  committed  certain  impure 
and  rebellious  actions.  The  reason  for  this  is  that,  since 
these natures  are,  as  I  say,  frail  and  tender,  their  humours 
are  stirred  up  and  their  blood  is  excited  at  the  least  dis-
turbance.
7 
And  hence  come these  motions;  and the same 
1  So  H.  A,  B,  Bz.,  G,  MtT.,  P,  V  have:  'with  such  effect  and  fre-
quency.'  E.p., M:  'with such effect and vehemence.' 
I  E.p. omits:  • since they are suffering  ... effort and labour.'  C also 
omits these lines and a  number of other passages in this chapter. 
I  E.p.:  • these things.' 
•  [Lit.,  'of  everything.')  E.p.:  • and  gradually  purifies  them 
altogether.' 
I  E.p. omits the whole  of this paragraph and C omits the greatest part 
of it. 
I  M has' hindering'  [emba,.ga)  for' inebriating' [emb,iaga). 
,  V:  • the least operation.' 
362  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
thing  happens  to  such  sows  when  they  are  enkindled  with 
anger or suffer any disturbance  or grief.
l 
6.  Sometimes,  again,  there  comes  to  these  spiritual  per-
sons,  whether  they  be  speaking  or  performing  spiritual 
actions,  a  certain energy and boldness,  through their ~   v i n g  
regard to persons  who  are present,  and before these  persons 
they display a  certain kind of vain delight.  This also  arises 
from luxury of  spirit, after the manner wherein we here under-
stand it, which  is  accompanied as  a rwes by complacency in 
the will. 
7.
8 
Some  of these  persons  make friendships  of a  spiritual 
kind with others, which oftentimes arise from lUXUry  and not 
from  spirituality;  this  may  be  known  to  be  the  case  when 
the  remembrance  of that friendship  causes  not  the  remem-
brance  and love  of God  to  grow,  but  occasions  remorse  of 
conscience.  For, when the friendship is  purely spiritual, the 
love of God grows with it;  and the more the soul remembers 
it, the more it remembers the love of God, and the greater the 
desire  it has  for  God;  so  that,  as  the  one  grows,  the  other 
grows  also.  For the spirit of God  has  this  property,  that it 
increases good by adding to it more good, inasmuch as there 
is  likeness  and  conformity  between  them.  But,  when  this 
love arises from the vice of sensuality aforementioned, it has 
the contrary effects;  for  the more the one grows,  the more 
the other decreases,  and the remembrance of it likewise.  If 
that sensual love grows,  it will  at once  be observed  that the 
soul's love of God is  becoming colder, and that it is forgetting 
Him  as  it remembers  that  love;  there  comes  to  it,  too,  a 
certain remorse of conscience.  And, on the other hand, if the 
love  of God grows  in the soul,  that other love  becomes cold 
and is forgotten;  for,  as the two are contrary to one another, 
1  All  writers  who  comment upon  this  delicate  matter  go into  lengthy 
and  learned  explanations of it,  though in reality  there is  little that needs 
to be added to the Saint's clear and apt exposition.  It will  be remembered 
that  S.  Teresa  once  wrote  to  her  brother  Lorenzo,  who  suffered  in  this 
way:  • The movements of  your. senses,  as  I  told  you,  are  to  try  you;  I 
am convinced that they are of no account, and that it is best not to notice 
them'  (Letters  oj S.  Teresa,  trans.  Benedictines  of  Stanbrook,  London, 
1921,  Vol.  II,  pp.  241-2].  The  most  effective  means  of  calming  souls 
tormented  by these  favours  is to commend  them  to  a  discreet  and  wise 
director whose counsel they may safely follow.  The Illuminists committed 
errors  so  gross  in  dealing with  this  matter that it is  difficult  to  write  of 
them in temperate language, save in a  study devoted  exclusively  to their 
heretical teaching. 
I  E.p.  reads' at times' for' as a  rule.' 
•  H,  V  insert  here  a  sub-title:  • Rule  for  knowing  the  love  which  is 
with God  and that which is not so.' 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  V 
not only  does  the one not aid the other,  but the  one  which 
predominates  quenches  and  confounds  the  other,  and 
becomes  strengthened  in  itself,  as  the  philosophers  say. 
Wherefore Our Saviour said  in the  Gospel:  That which is 
born of the flesh  is  flesh,  and that which is  born of the spirit 
is spirit. 
1 
That is to say,  the love which is  born of sensuality 
ends in sensuality,  and that which is  of the spirit ends in the 
spirit  of God  and  causes  it to  grow.  This  is  the difference 
that  exists  between  these  two  kinds  of love,  whereby  we 
may  know  them. 
8.  When  the  soul  enters  the  dark  night,  it  brings  these 
kinds  of love  under control.  It strengthens and purifies  the 
one,  namely that which is  according to God;  and the other 
it removes  and  brings  to an end ; S  and in the beginning it 
causes  both to be lost sight of,  as  we shall say hereafter. 
CHAPTER  V 
Of the  imperfections into  which  beginners fall with respect  to  the  sin 
of wrath. 
I.  By  reason  of the concupiscence which  many beginners 
have for spiritual consolations, their experience of these con-
solations is  very commonly accompanied by many imperfec-
tions  proceeding  from  the  sin  of wrath;  for,  when  their 
delight and their pleasure in spiritual things come to an end, 
they  naturally  become  embittered,3  and  bear  that  lack  of 
sweetness  which they have to suffer with a  bad grace,  which 
affects  all  that  they  do;  and  they  very  easily  become 
irritated over the smallest matter-sometimes, indeed,  none 
can tolerate them.  This happens frequently after they have 
been  very  pleasantly recollected  in  prayer according  to  the 
senses;  when their pleasure and delight therein come to an 
end, their nature is naturally vexed and disappointed  ;  even 
so is  the child  when  they take it from  the breast of which it 
was  enjoying  the sweetness.  There is  no sin in this  natural 
vexation, '  when it is not permitted to indulge itself,  but only 
imperfection,  which  must  be  purged  by  the  aridity  and 
severity  of the  dark  night. 
1  S.  John iii, 6. 
•  E.p.:  • removes,. brings to an eud or mortifies.' 
•  [Desabridos.  Cf.  note on sinsabor.  p.  298,  above.] 
,  M:  • natural disillusion: 
364  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
2.  There are other of these  spiritual  persons,  again,  who 
fall into another kind of spiritual wrath:  this happens when 
they become irritated at the sins of others, and keep watch on 
those  others  with  a  sort  of uneasy  zeal.  At  times  the  im-
pulse comes  to them to reprove them angrily,  and occasion-
ally they go  so far  as  to indulge it
l 
and set themselves  up as 
masters  of virtue.  All  this is  contrary to spiritual meekness. 
3.  There are others  who are vexed  with themselves  when 
they  observe  their  own  imperfectness,2  and  display  an im-
patience  that is  not humility;  so  impatient are they  about 
this that they would fain  be saints in a  day.  Man)ll  of these 
persons purpose to accomplish a  great deal and make grand 
3 
resolutions;  yet,  as  they are  not humble  and have  no  mis-
givings  about themselves,'  the  more  resolutions  they  make, 
the greater is their fall and the greater their annoyance, since 
they have  not  the patience t9  wait for  that which  God will 
give them when it pleases  Him;  this likewise is  contrary to 
the  spiritual  meekness
6 
aforementioned,  which  cannot  be 
wholly  remedied  save  by  the  purgation  of the  dark  night. 
Some souls,  on the other hand, are so  patient
8 
in this matter 
of the progress  which they desire, that God would gladly see 
them less  so. 
CHAPTER  VI 
Of imperfections  with respect  to  spiritual gluttony 
I.  With  respect  to  the  fourth  sin,  which  is  spiritual 
gluttony,  there is  much  to  be said,  for  there is  scarce  one of 
these  beginners  who,  however  good  his  progress,  falls  not 
into  some  of the  many  imperfections  which  come  to  these 
beginners with respect to this sin,  on account of the sweetness 
which  they  find  at first  in spiritual  exercises.  For many  of 
these, lured by the sweetness and pleasure which they find  in 
such exercises,  strive more after spiritual sweetness than after 
spiritual  purity  and  discretion,
7 
which  is  that  which  God 
J  [Lit.,  ' they even do it.']  E.p.:  • they even carry it out.' 
1M:  'impatience' for' imperfectness.' 
•  Some codices read:  'make many.' 
,  So  A,  G,  H,  M,  Mtr.  The  other  authorities  read:  • nor  trust  in 
themselves'  [con!'an  for  descon!lan]. 
Ii  All  the  MSS.  have  'meekness.'  H  reads  'dishonour,'  which  a 
corrector has altered to  '  misgivings'  [desconjianza]. 
•  E.p. adds:  'and travel so slowly.' 
7  E.p.:  'than after  true devotion  and  purity.' 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  VI 
3
6
5 
regards  and  accepts  throughout  the  spiritual  journey.1 
Therefore,  besides  the imperfections  into  which  the  seeking 
for sweetness of this kind makes them fall,  the gluttony which 
they  now  have  makes  them  continually  go  too  far,.  so  that 
they  pass  beyond the limits  of moderation within  whieh  the 
virtues  are acquired and wherein they consist.  For some of 
these persons, attracted by the pleasure which they find there-
in,  kill  themselves  with  penances,  and  others  weaken them-
selves  with  fasts,  by  performing  more  than  their frailty  can 
bear,  without  the  order  or  advice  of any,2  but  rather  en-
deavouring  to  avoid  those  whom  they  should  obey in these 
matters;  some,  indeed, dare to do  these things even though 
the contrary has  been commanded them. 
2.  These  persons  are  most  imperfect  and  devoid  of 
reason;  for  they  set  bodily  penance  before  subjection  and 
obedience, which is penance of the reason and discretion, and 
therefore  a  sacrifice  more  acceptable  and  pleasing  to  God 
than  any  beside.  But  this,  when the other side  of it is  dis-
regarded,  is  no  more  than  the  penance  of beasts,  to  which 
they  are  attracted,  exactly  like  beasts,  by  the  desire  and 
pleasure which they find  therein. 
3 
Inasmuch as all extremes 
are sinful, and as in behaving thus such persons' are working 
their own will,  they grow in vice rather than in virtue;  for, 
at the least, they are acquiring spiritual gluttony and pride in 
this  way,  through  not  walking  in obedience.  And  many  of 
these  the  devil  assails, li  stirring  up  this  gluttony  in  them 
through the pleasures  and desires  which  he increases  within 
them,  to  such  an extent that,  since  they can no longer  help 
themselves, they either change or vary or add to that which is 
commanded  them,  since  any obedience  in this  respect  is  so 
bitter
6 
to them.  To such depravity have some persons fallen 
that, simply because it is through obedience that they engage 
in  these  exercises,  they  lose  the  desire  and  devotion  to  per-
form  them,  their only desire  and pleasure being to do what 
they themselves are inclined to do,7 so that it would probably 
1  [Lit .• • spiritual road.'] 
I  A,  P;  • without  any  ordl'l"  or  advice.'  H;  • without  order  and 
advice.' 
I  E.p.  softens thus:  • This,  disregarding  this other  side of  it,  is  most 
imperfect, for  they arc attracted  thereto  only  by  the  desire  and  pleasure 
which they find  therein.'  . 
t  [Lit.,  • these persons.'  E.p., 1.1;  • all  persons.'] 
6  E.p.:  . the devil deceives.' 
8  E.p.  :  'so severe and  bitter.' 
7  C,  G,  Mtr.,  Vadd:  • and  not  because it is commanded  them.' 
366  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
be more profitable for  them not to  engage in these exercises 
at all. 
3.  You  will  see  many of these  persons  very insistent  with 
their spiritual  masters  to  be granted that which  they desire, 
extracting  it  from  them  almost  by  force;  if  they  be 
refused  it  they  become  as  peevish  as  children and  go  about 
in great displeasure,  thinking that they are not serving  God 
when they are not allowed to do that which they would.  For 
they go about clinging to their own will and pleasure, which 
they  treat as  though  it came from  God  ; 1  and immediately 
their directors! take it from  them and try to subject them to 
the  will  of God,  they  become  peevish,  grow  faint-hearted 
and  fall  away.  These  persons  think  that  their  own  satis-
faction  and pleasure are the satisfaction and service of God. 
4.  There are others,  again,  who,  because  of this  glu.ttony, 
know  so  little  of their  own  unworthiness  and  misery  and 
have  thrust so  far  from  them the loving  fear  and reverence 
which  they  owe  to the  greatness  of God,  that they hesitate 
not  to  insist  continually  that  their  confessors  shall  allow 
them  to  communicate
3 
often.  And,  what  is  worse,  they 
frequently  dare to communicate without the leave and con-
sent
t 
of the minister and steward of Christ,  merely acting on 
their own opinion,  and contriving to conceal the truth from 
him.  And for  this  reason,  because they desire to communi-
cate  continually,  they  make  their  confessions Ii  carelessly, 
8 
being  more  eager  to  eat  than  to  eat cleanly  and  perfectly, 
although it would  be healthier and holier for  them had they 
the  contrary  inclination  and  begged  their  confessors  not to 
command  them  to  approach  the  altar  so  frequently:  be-
tween these two extremes,  however,  the better way is  that of 
humble resignation.  But the boldness referred to is?  a  thing 
that does  great harm,  and men may fear  to  be punished for 
such temerity. 
5.  These  persons,  in  communicating,  strive  with  every 
nerve to obtain some kind of sensible sweetness and pleasure, 
instead of humbly doing reverence and giving praise within 
1  [Lit.,  'and treat  this  as  their  God.']  This  e.p.  omits  (softening the 
sense of the whole,  as above (p.  365)]. 
•  (The Spanish is impersonal:  • immediately this is taken from  them,' 
etc.] 
a  E.p .•  G,  M:  'to confess and communicate.' 
,  [Lit.,  ' and opinion.']  •  H  erroneously reads:  • their passions.' 
•  [Lit.,  • anyhow.'J 
7  [Lit .•  ' the  other  boldnesses  are.']  A. e.p. read:  • the  excessive  bold-
nesses  are.' 
BOOK  1.  CHAPTER  VI 
themselves  to God.  And in such wise  do they  devote  them-
selves  to  this  that,  when  they  have  received  no  pleasure  or 
sweetness  in  the  senses,  they  think  that  they  have  accom-
plished  nothing  at  all.  This  is  to  judge  God  very  un-
worthily;  they have not realized that the least of the advan-
tages  which  comes  from  this  Most  Holy  Sacrament  is  that 
which concerns the senses;  and that the invisible part of the 
grace that it bestows is  much greater;  for,  in order that they 
may  look  at it with  the  eyes  of faith,  God  oftentimes  with-
holds  from  them these  other consolations  and sweetnesses  of 
sense.
1 
And thus they desire to feel  and taste God as  though 
He  were  comprehensible  by  them  and  accessible  to  them, 
not only in this,  but likewise in other spiritual exercises.  All 
this is  very great imperfection and completely opposed to the 
nature of God,  since it is  impurity in faith. 
2 
6.  These  persons  have  the  same  defect  as  regards  the 
practice  of prayer,  for  they  think  that  all  the  business  of 
prayer consists in experiencing sensible pleasure and devotion 
and they strive to  obtain  this  by great effort,3  wearying and 
fatiguing  their  faculties  and  their  heads;  and  when  they 
have  not  found  this  pleasure  they  become  greatly  dis-
couraged,  thinking  that  they  have  accomplished  nothing. 
Through these efforts they lose true devotion and spirituality, 
which  consist  in  perseverance,  together  with  patience  and 
humility, and mistrust of themselves, that they may please God 
alone.  For this  reason,  when  they  have once  failed  to  find 
pleasure in  this  or some  other exercise,  they have  great dis-
inclination and repugnance to return to it, and at times they 
abandon it.  They are, in fact,  as  we have said, like children, 
who  are  not  influenced  by  reason,  and  who  act,  not  from 
rational motives but from inclination.'  Such persons expend 
all  their effort in seeking spiritual pleasure and consolation  ; 
they never tire, therefore, of reading books;  and they begin, 
now  one  meditation,  now  another,  in  their  pursuit  of this 
pleasure  which  they  desire  to  experience  in  the  things  of 
God.  But God,  very justly,  wisely and lovingly,  denies  it to 
1  E.p.,  M:  • and favours of sense.'  [The  difference,  in a  Spanish MS., 
between saboYes  and favores  would  be of the slightest.] 
I  So the MSS.  E.p. modifies the last clause and reads:  'Who demands 
the purest faith.' 
•  [Lit.,  'they  strive  to  obtain  this,  as  they  say,  by  the  strength  of 
their  arms.'  The  phrase  is,  of  course,  understood  in  the  Spanish  to  be 
metaphorical,  as  the  words'  as they say , clearly indicate.] 
,  [Lit.,  'who  are  not  influenced,  neither  act  by  reason,  but  from 
pleasure.'] 
368  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
them,  for  otherwise  this  spiritual  gluttony  and  inordinate 
appetite  would  breed  innumerable  evils.  It is,  therefore, 
very  fitting  that  they  should  enter  into  the  dark  night, 
whereof we shall speak!,  that they  may be purged from this 
childishness. 
7.  These  persons  who  are thus  inclined  to  such  pleasures 
have another very great imperfection,  which is  that they are 
very weak and remiss  in journeying upon the hard 
2 
road of 
the  Cross;  for  the soul  that is  given  to  sweetness  naturally 
has  its  face  set  against  all  self-denial,  which  is  devoid  of 
sweetness. 
3 
8.  These  persons  have  many  other  imperfections  which 
arise hence,  of which in time the Lord heals  them by means 
of temptations,  aridities  and  other  trials,  all  of which  are 
part  of the  dark  night.  All  these  I  will  not  treat  further 
here, lest I  become too lengthy;  I will only say that spiritual 
temperance and sobriety lead to another and a very different 
temper,  which  is  that of mortification,  fear  and submission 
in all things.  It thus  becomes clear that the perfection and 
worth of things consist not in the multitude and the pleasant-
ness  of one's  actions,'  but in  being  able  to  deny  oneself in 
them;  this  such  persons  must endeavour to  compass,  in so 
far as  they may,  until God is  pleased to purify them indeed, 
by  bringing  them
6 
into  the dark night,  to arrive at which  I 
am  hastening  on  with  these  imperfections. 
CHAPTER  VII 
Of imperfections  with  respect  to  spiritual  envy  and  sloth. 
8 
I.  With  respect  likewise  to  the  other two  sins,  which  are 
spiritual  envy  and  sloth,  these  beginners  fail  not  to  have 
many  imperfections.  For,  with  respect  to  envy,  many  of 
them  are  wont  to  experience  movements?  of displeasure  at 
the spiritual good of others, which  cause  them a certain sen-
sible grief at being  outstripped  upon this  road,  so  that they 
1  [Lit.,  • which we shall give.')  E.p. omits:  • whereof we  shall speak.' 
A,  G,  V:  • which we  shall describe.' 
2  [Aspel'o:  harsh, rough,  rugged.] 
3  [Lit., • against all  the sweetlessness of self-denial.') 
•  Bz.,  1\1:  'of one's things.'  E.p.  abbreviates:  'in the  multitude  of 
one's actions.' 
i  [Lit.,  ' causing them to enter.')  Bz.:  • putting them.' 
•  Bz.,  H  omit:  • and sloth.'  7  Bz.  qualifies with' many.' 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  VII 
would  prefer  not  to  hear  others  praised;  for  they  become 
displeased  at  others'  virtues  and  sometimes  they  cannot 
refrain  from  contradicting  what  is  said  in  praise  of them, 
depreciating  it as  far  as  they  can;  and  their  annoyance 
thereat  grows
l 
because  the  same'  is  not  said  of  them, 
for  they  would  fain  be  preferred  in  everything.  All 
this  is  clean  contrary  to  charity,  which,  as  S.  Paul  says, 
rejoices  in goodness. 
3 
And,  if charity  has  any envy,  it is  a 
holy  envy,  comprising  grief  at  not  having  the  virtues  of 
others,  yet  also joy  because  others  have  them,  and  delight 
when  others  outstrip  us  in  the  service  of God,  wherein  we 
ourselves are so remiss. 
2.  With respect also to spiritual sloth,  beginners are apt to 
be wearied by the things that are most spiritual, from which 
they flee  because these things are incompatible with sensible 
pleasure.  For, as they are so  much accustomed to sweetness 
in spiritual things,  they are wearied by things in which  they 
find  no sweetness.  If once they failed  to  find  in prayer the 
satisfaction which their taste required  (and after all it is  well 
that God should take it from them to prove them) ,they would 
prefer not to return to it:  sometimes they leave it;  at other 
times they continue it unwillingly.  And thus  because of this 
sloth  they abandon the  way of perfection  (which is  the way 
of the  negation  of their will  and  pleasure  for  God's  sake) 
for  the  pleasure  and  sweetness  of  their  own  will,  which 
they  aim  at  satisfying  in  this  way  rather  than  the  will  of 
God. 
3.  And many of these would fain have God will that which 
they  themselves  will,  and  are fretful  at  having  to  will  that 
which  He  wills,  and  find  repugnance  in  accommodating 
their  will  to  that of God. '  Hence  it  happens  to them  that 
oftentimes  they  think that that  wherein  they  find  not  their 
own will and pleasure is not the will of God;  and that, on the 
other  hand,  when  they  themselves  find  satisfaction,  God  is 
satisfied.  Thus  they  measure  God  by  themselves  and  not 
themselves by God, acting quite contrarily to that which He 
I  (Lit.,  '  and, as they say. their eye (elojo)  grows '-a colloquial phrase 
expressing  annoyance.)  E.p.  omits this  phrase  altogether.  Bz.,  G  read 
enojo  for el ojo  [destroying the metaphor but not altering the sense of this 
translation.] 
•  E.p.:  . and they greatly regret that the same: 
•  I  Corinthians  xiii,  6.  The  Saint  here  cites  the  sense,  not the  letter, 
or  the  epistle.  n,  11  give  the  quotation  correctly,  as  • rejoiceth  in  the 
truth.'  •  E.p.:  . to the Divine will: 
370  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
Himself taught in the Gospel,  saying:  That he who  should 
lose  his  will  for  His  sake,  the  same  should  gain  it;  and 
he who should desire to gain it,  the same should lose it.
1 
4.  These  persons  likewise  find  it  wearisome  when  they 
are  commanded  to  do  that  wherein  they  take  no  pleasure. 
Because  they  aim  at  spiritual  sweetness  and  consolation, 
they  are  too  weak  to  have  the fortitude  and  bear the  trials 
of perfection. 2  They resemble those who are softly nurtured 
and who run fretfully away from everything that is hard, and 
take offence at the  Cross,  wherein consist the delights of the 
spirit.  The  more  spiritual  a  thing  is,  the  more  wearisome 
they  find  it,  for,  as  they  seek  to  go  about  spiritual  matters 
with  complete  freedom  and  according .to  the inclination  of 
their  will,  it  causes  them  great  sorrow  and  repugnance  to  . 
enter upon the narrow way,  which, says Christ, is the way of 
life. 
3 
5.  Let it suffice here to have described these imperfections, 
among the many to be found in the lives of those that are in 
this first state of beginners, so that it may be seen how greatly 
they  need  God to set them in the state of proficients.  This 
He does  by  bringing  them into  the  dark  night  whereof we 
now speak;  wherein He weans them from the breasts of these 
5weetnesses  and  pleasures,  gives  them  pure  aridities  and 
in  ward  darkness,  takes  from  them  all  these  superficialities' 
and puerilities,  and by very  different  means  causes  them to 
win  the  virtues.  For,  however  assiduously  the  beginner 
practises the mortification in himself of all these actions and 
passions  of his,  he  can  never  completely  succeed-very far 
from  it-until God  works  it  in  him  passively  by  means  of 
the purgation of the said  night.  Of this  I  would fain  speak 
in  some  way  that  may  be  profitable;  may  God,  then,  be 
pleased  to  give  me  His  Divine  light,  because  this  is  very 
needful  in  a  night  that  is  so  dark  and  a  matter  that  is  so 
difficult Ii  to  describe  and to expound. 
The line,  then,  is  ; 
In a  dark  night. 
1  S.  Matthew xvi,  25. 
I  [Lit., , they are very weak for  the fortitude and trial of perfection.'] 
•  S.  Matthew vii,  14. 
•  E.p.,  M,  P:  'all these imperfections.' 
I  E.p. and a  number of MSS.  omit all that follows  the word  • difficult.· 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  VIII 
37
1 
CHAPTER  VIII 
Wherein is expounded the first line of  the first           and a beginning 
is made of the explanation of this dark  night.
l 
I.  This night, which, as we say, is contemplation, produces 
in  spiritual  persons  two  kinds  of  darkness  or  purgation, 
corresponding  to  the  two  parts  of man's  nature-namely, 
the  sensual  and  the  spiritual.  And  thus  the  one  night  or 
purgation  will  be  sensual,  wherein  the  soul  is  purged 
according  to  sense,  which  is  subdued  to  the  spirit;  and 
the  other  is  a  night  or  purgation  which  is  spiritual; 
wherein  the  soul  is  purged  and  stripped 
2 
according  to  the 
spirit,  and  subdued  and  made  ready  for  the  union  of love 
with  God.  The  night  of sense  is  common  and  comes  to 
many;  these are the beginners;  and of this night
3 
'we shall 
first speak.  The night of the spirit is the portion of very few, 
and these are they that are already  practised and proficient, 
of whom  we  shall treat hereafter. 
2.  The  first  purgation  or  night  is  bitter  and  terrible  to 
sense,  as  we  shall  now  show.'  The  second  bears  no 
comparison  with  it,  for  it  is  horrible  and  awful
6 
to  the 
spirit, as  we shall shows  presently.  Since  the  night of sense 
is first in order and comes first,  we shall first of alF say       
thing about it briefly, since more is written ofit, as  of a thing 
that is  more  common;  and  we  shall  pass  on  to  treat more 
fully  of the spiritual  night,  since  very  little has,  been said of 
this,  either in speech
8 
or in writing, and very little
9 
is known 
of it,  even by experience. 
3.  Since,  then,  the  conduct  of these  beginners  upon  the 
way of God is  ignoble,lo and has much to do with their love 
of self  and  their  own  inclinations,  as  has  been  explained 
above,  God desires  to lead them farther.  He seeks  to  bring 
them  out of that ignoble  kind  of love  to a  higher  degree  of 
1  The title is taken from  e.p.  The Codices have no  title. 
a  E.p.:  'wherein a  soul is  purged or stripped.' 
3  E.p.:  • of  whom.'  '  [Lit.,  • say.') 
•  E.p.:  'for it is  very awful.'  6  [Lit.,  'say.') 
7  E.p.  omits:  . first  of all.' 
•  [Pldtica:  the word is frequently used in Spanish to denote an informal 
sermon or address.] 
•  This' very little'  [which in  the original comes in  the  emphatic final 
position]  is  omitted in e.p.  . 
10  [Lit.,' low';  the same word recurs below and is similarly translated.] 
2F 
372  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
love for  Him, to free them from  the ignoble exercises of sense 
and meditation (wherewith, as  we have said, they go seeking 
God so unworthily and in so many ways that are unbefitting), 
and to lead them to a kind of spiritual exercise wherein they 
can  commune  with  Him  more  abundantly  and  are  freed 
more  completely  from  imperfections.  For  they  have  now 
had  practice  for  some  time  in  the  way  of virtue  and  have 
persevered in meditation and prayer,  whereby,  through the 
sweetness  and  pleasure  that  they  have  found  therein,  they 
have  lost  their  love  of the  things  of the  world  and  have 
gained  some  degree  of spiritual  strength  in  God;  this  has 
enabled them to some extent to refrain from creature desires, 
so  that  for  God's  sake  they  are  now  able  to  suffer  a  light 
burden  and  a  little  aridity  without  turning  back  to  a 
time
1 
which  they  found  more  pleasant.  When  they  are 
going about these spiritual exercises with the greatest delight 
and pleasure,  and when  they  believe  that the sun of Divine 
favour  is  shining  most  brightly  upon  them,  God  turns  all 
this light of theirs into darkness,  and shuts  against them the 
door and the source of the sweet spiritual water which they 
were  tasting  in  God  whensoever  and  for  as  long  as  they 
desired.  (For,  as  they were  weak  and tender,  there was  no 
door closed to them, as  S. John says in the Apocalypse, iii, 8). 
And thus He leaves them so completely in the dark that they 
know not whither to  go  with  their sensible imagination and 
meditation;  for  they cannot
2 
advance a  step in meditation, 
as  they were wont to do aforetime,  their inward senses  being 
submerged in this  night,  and left  with such dryness  that not 
only  do they  experience  no  pleasure  and consolation  in the 
spiritual  things  and good  exercises  wherein  they  were  wont 
to find  their delights and pleasures,  but instead,  on the con-
trary,  they find  insipidity and  bitterness  in  the  said  things. 
For,  as  I  have  said,  God  now  sees  that  they  have grown  a 
little,  and  are  becoming  strong  enough  to  lay  aside  their 
swaddling  clothes  and  be  taken from  the gentle  breast;  so 
He sets them down from His arms and teaches them t0
3 
walk 
on  their  own  feet;  which  they  feel  to  be  very  strange,  for 
everything seems to be going wrong with them. 
4.  To recollected  persons  this  commonly  happens  sooner 
after  their  beginnings  than to others,  inasmuch  as  they  are 
1  (Lit.,  • to the better time.'] 
•  E.p.,  M:  • for  they know not how  to.' 
I  E.p .•  M:  • and shows them how to.' 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  IX 
373 
freer  from  occasions  of backsliding,  and  their  desires  turn 
more quickly from the things  of the  world,  which  is  what is 
needful  if they  are  to  begin  to  enter  this  blessed 
1 
night  of 
sense.  Ordinarily no great time passes after their beginnings 
before they begin to enter this  night of sense;  and the great 
majority of them do in fact enter it, for  they will generally be 
seen to fall  into these aridities. 
5.  With  regard  to  this  way  of purgation  of the  senses, 
since it is so common, we  might here adduce a great number 
of quotations  from  Divine  Scripture,  where  many  passages 
relating  to  it  are  continually  found,  particularly  in  the 
Psalms  and  the Prophets.  However,  I  do not wish  to spend 
time  upon these, for  he that cannot see  them there will  find 
the common  experience of them to be sufficient. 2 
CHAPTER  IX 
Of the  signs  by  which  it  will  be  known  that  the  spiritual person  is 
walking along  the  way  of this night and purgation  of sense. 
I.  But since  these  aridities  might frequently  proceed,  not 
from  the  night  and  purgation  of the  sensual  desires  afore-
mentioned,  but from  sins  and  imperfections,  or from  weak-
ness  and lukewarmness,  or from  some  bad humour or indis-
position  of the  body,  I  shall  here  set  down  certain signs  by 
which  it  may  be  known  if such  aridity  proceeds  from  the 
aforementioned  purgation,  or  if it  arises  from  any  of the 
aforementioned  sins.  For  the  making  of this  distinction  I 
find  that  there  are  three  principal  signs. 
2.  The first  is  whether,  when  a  soul  finds  no pleasure  or 
consolation in the things of God,  it also fails  to find  it in any 
thing created;  for,  as  God sets  the soul in this dark night to 
the  end  that  He  may  quench  and  purge  its  sensual  desire, 
He  allows  it  not  to find  attraction  or sweetness  in  anything 
whatsoever.  Hence it  may  be  laid  down  as  very  probable
3 
that  this  aridity  and  insipidity  proceed  not  from  recently 
committed sins or imperfections.  For, if this were so, the soul 
would  feel  in  its  nature  some  inclination  or  desire  to  taste 
other things  than those  of God;  for,  whenever the  desire  is 
1  E.p.  has' happy' for  .             
2  E.p.,  C  omit  this  entire  sentence,  substituting:  • And,  to  avoid 
prolixity,  we omit them,  albeit  we  shall  adduce certain of them  later.' 
3  [Lit.,  • And in  this it is  known  very probably.']  E.p.  omits' very.' 
374  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
allowed indulgence in any imperfection, it immediately feels 
inclined  thereto,  whether  little  or  much,  in  proportion  to 
the pleasure and the love that it had for it.  Since, however, 
this  lack of enjoyment in things  above  or below  might  pro-
ceed from  some indisposition  or melancholy humour,  which 
oftentimes makes it impossible for the soul to take pleasure in 
anything,  it becomes necessary to apply the second sign and 
condition. 
3.  The second sign whereby a  man may believe himself to 
be  experiencing  the  said  purgation!  is  that  ordinarily  the 
memory is  centred  upon  God,  with  painful  care  and solici-
tude,  thinking that it is  not serving  God,  but is  backsliding, 
because it finds  itself without sweetness in the things of God. 
And in such a case it is evident that this lack of sweetness and 
this aridity come not from weakness and lukewarmness  ;  for 
it  is  the  nature  of lukewarmness  not  to  care  greatly  or  to 
have any inward solicitude for  the things  of God.  There is 
thus  a  great  difference  between  aridity  and  lukewarmness, 
for lukewarmness consists in great weakness and remissness in 
the will and in the spirit, without solicitude as to serving God; 
whereas  purgative  aridity  is  ordinarily  accompanied  by 
solicitude,  with  care  and  grief,  as  I  say,  because  the soul  is 
not  serving  God.  And  although  this  may  sometimes  be 
increased  by  melancholy  or  some  other  humour  (as  it 
frequently is)  it fails not for this reason to produce a purgative 
effect  upon  the  desire,  since  the  desire  is  deprived  of all 
pleasure,2  and  has  its  care  centred  upon  God  alone.  For, 
when  mere  humour  is  the  cause,  it  spends  itself  in  dis-
pleasure and ruin of the physical nature, and there are none 
of  those  desires  to  serve  God  which  belong  to  purgative 
aridity.  When the cause is  aridity, it is  true that the sensual 
part of the soul  has fallen  low,  and is  weak  and feeble  in its 
actions, by reason of the little pleasure which it finds in them; 
but the spirit,  on  the  other  hand,  is  ready and strong. 
4.  For the cause of this aridity is  that God transfers to the 
spirit the good  things  and the strength  of the senses,  which, 
since the soul's  natural strength and senses  are incapable of 
using them, remain barren, dry and empty.  For the sensual 
part of a  man has  no  capacity for  that which  is  pure spirit, 
and thus,  when it is  the spirit that receives  the pleasure,  the 
flesh  is  left  without  savour  and is  too  weak  to  perform  any 
1  E.p.:  • The second  sign and  condition  of  this purgation.' 
a  A.  B:  . since it is completely purged as to [its]  pleasure.' 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  IX 
375 
action.  But  the  spirit,  which  all  the  time  is  being  fed, 
goes  forward  in  strength,  and  with  more  alertness  and 
solicitude  than  before,  in  its  anxiety  not  to  fail  God;  and 
if it is  not immediately conscious  of spiritual  sweetness  and 
delight,  but only of aridity and lack of sweetness,  the reason 
for this is the strangeness  of the  exchange;  for  its  palate has 
been  accustomed  to  those  other  sensual  pleasures  upon 
which  its  eyes  are still  fixed,  and,  since  the  spiritual  palate 
is  not made ready or purged for such subtle pleasure, until it 
finds itself becoming prepared for it by means of this arid and 
da.rk night, it cannot experience spiritual pleasure and good, 
but  only  aridity  and  lack  of sweetness,  since  it  misses  the 
pleasure which  aforetime it enjoyed so  readily. 
5.  These  souls  whom  God  is  beginning  to  lead  through 
these solitary places of the wilderness are like to the children 
of Israel;  to whom in the wilderness God began to give food 
from  Heaven,  containing  within  itself all  sweetness,  and,  as 
is  there said, 
1 
it turned to the savour which each one of them 
desired.  But  withal  the  children  of Israel  felt  the  lack  of 
the  pleasures  and delights  of the flesh  and the onions  which 
they had eaten aforetime in Egypt, the more so because their 
palate  was  accustomed  to  these  and  took  delight  in  them, 
rather than in the delicate sweetness  of the angelic  manna; 
and they wept and sighed for the fleshpots  even in the midst 
of the food  of Heaven. I  To such depths  does  the vileness of 
our  desires  descend  that  it  makes  us  to  long  for  our  own 
wretched  food 3  and  to  be  nauseated  by  the  indescribable' 
blessings  of Heaven. 
6.  But, as I say, when these aridities proceed from the way 
of the purgation of sensual desire, although at first  the spirit 
feels  no sweetness,  for  the reasons  that we have just given,  it 
feels  that it is  deriving strength and  energy  to  act from  the 
substance  which  this  inward  food  gives  it,  the  which  food 
is  the beginning of a  contemplation that is  dark and arid  to 
the senses;  which  contemplation is  secret and hidden from 
the very person that experiences it;  and ordinarily, together 
with  the aridity and emptiness which it causes  in the senses, 
it gives  the soul an inclination and desire  to  be alone and in 
quietness, without being able to think of any particular thing 
1  E.p.  abbreviates:  • God  began  to  give  such  delicious  food  from 
Heaven that,  as is there said.' 
a  Numbers xi,  5-6. 
I  [Lit .• . makes us  to desire  our miseries.') 
•  [Lit.,  • incommunicable.']  E.p.  has' incommutable! 
376  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
or having  the  desire  to  do  so.  If those  souls  to  whom  this 
comes to pass knew how to be quiet at this time, and troubled 
not about performing any kind of action,  whether inward or 
outward,  neither  had  any  anxiety  about  doing  anything, 1 
then  they  would  delicately  experience  this  inward  refresh-
ment in that ease and freedom from care.  So delicate is this 
refreshment that ordinarily, if a  man have desire or care' to 
experience it,  he experiences it not;  for,  as  I  say,  it does its 
work  when  the  soul  is  most  at  ease  and  freest  from  care; 
it is like the air which, if one would close one's hand upon it, 
escapes. 
7.  In this sense we may understand that which the Spouse 
said to the Bride in the Songs, namely:  Withdraw thine eyes 
from me, for they make me to soar aloft. 3  For in such a way 
does  God bring the soul into this state,  and by so  different a 
path  does  He  lead  it  that,  if it  desires  to  work  with  its 
faculties,·  it  hinders  the  work  which  God  is  doing  in  it 
rather than aids it;  whereas aforetime ~     was quite the con-
trary.  The  reason  is  that,  in  this  state  of contemplation, 
which  the  soul  enters  when  it  forsakes  meditation  for  the 
state of the  proficient,  it is  God  Who is  now  working in the 
soul  ; He binds Ii its interior faculties, and allows it not to cling 
to the understanding,  nor to have delight in the will,  nor to 
reason with the memory.  For anything that the soul can do 
of its own accord at this time serves only,  as  we  have said, to 
hinder  inward  peace  and  the  work  which  God  is  accom-
plishing in the spirit by means  of that aridity of sense.  And 
this  peace,  being  spiritual  and  delicate,  performs  a  work 
which is quiet and delicate, solitary, productive of peace and 
satisfaction 
6 
and far removed from all those earlier pleasures, 
which were very palpable and sensual.  This is the peace which, 
says  David,  God speaks  in the soul  to the end  that  He may 
make it spiritual. 7  And we proceed hence to the third point. 
1  E.p.  teads:  '  ... [outward],  which  they  strive  with  their  labour 
and  .their  reasoning  to  perform,  and  had  no  anxiety  to  do  anything 
save  to allow  thenlselves  to  be  led  by  God, to  receive  and  to listen  with 
loving interior attentiveness,  then  .  .  :  etc. 
I  E.p.:  'if a  man have superadded  and particular desire and care.' 
•  Canticles vi,  4  [A.V.,  vi,  5J. 
t  E.p.:  'that, if it will  work of itself and  by its own ability: 
,  Nearly  all  authorities  read  thus.  E.p.  and  M,  however,  have:  'He 
seems to bind: and  V:  . He veils: 
I  [Lit.,  • satisfactory  and  pacific.']  E.p.  omits:  'solitary,  productive 
of  ... satisfaction:  H  has' solicitous' for'  solitary.'  Comits' SOlitary.' 
All  other authorities  read  as in  the text. 
;  Psalm  lxxxiv,  9  [A. V.,  lxxxv,  8]. 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  IX 
377 
8.  The third sign whereby this purgation of sense  may be 
recognized is  that the soul  can no lon"'er meditate or reflect 
in its sense of the imagination, as it was wont,
l 
however much 
it may of itself endeavour to do so.  For God  now begins to 
communicate  Himself to  it,  no longer through sense,  as  He 
did  aforetime,  by  means  of reflections  which  joined  and 
sundered its  knowledge,  but by pure spirit,  into which  con-
secutive  reflections  enter not;  but He communicates  Him-
self to it by an act of simple contemplation, to which neither 
the  exterior  nor the  interior senses  of the lower  part of the 
soul can attain.  From this time forward,  therefore, imagina-
tion and fancy can find  no support in any meditation, t  and 
can gain no foothold  by means thereof. 
g.  \Vith  regard  to  this  third  sign  it  is  to  be  understood 
that  this  embarrassment  and  dissatisfaction  of the faculties 
proceed not from indisposition, for, when this is  the case, and 
the  indisposition,  which  is  never  permanent,3  comes  to  an 
end,  then  the  soul  is  able  once  more,  by  taking  some  care 
about the  matter, to do what it did  before,  and the faculties 
find  their  wonted  support.  But  in  the  purgation  of the 
desire  this  is  not  so:  when  once  the  soul  begins  to  enter 
therein,  its  inability  to  reflect  with  the  faculties  grows  ever 
greater.  For, although it is  true that at first,  and with some 
persons,  it is  not as  continuous· as  this,  so  that occasionally 
they fail  to a bandon their pleasures  and reflections 
5 
of sense 
(for perchance
6 
by reason of their weakness it was not fitting 
to  wean  them  from  these  immediately),  yet  this  inability 
grows  within  them more imd  more and brings  the workings 
of sense  to  an end,  if indeed  they  are  to  make  progress,  for 
those  who  walk  not  in  the  way  of contemplation  act  very 
-differently.  For  this  night  of aridilies  is  not  usually  con-
tinuous  in  their senses.  At times  they have  these  aridities; 
at others they have them not.  At times they cannot meditate; 
at others they can.  For God sets  them in this  night only  to 
prove  them  and  to  humble  them,  and  to  reform  their 
desires,  so  that they go  not nurturing in themselves  a  sinful
7 
gluttony in spiritual things.  He sets  them not there in order 
1  E.p.  is  slightly  more  explicit:  '  ... or  reflect,  making  use  of  its 
sense of the imagination.  that it may move it as it was wont.' 
I  E.p.:  . cannot find  support or make a  beginning with any meditation.' 
3  [The  original  bas:  • which  is  never  permanent  in  a  being.'  The 
reference is  evidently  to transient distempers,  whether moral or physica1.) 
•  Bz.:  • as continent.'  6  E.p.:  • and alleviations.' 
,  E.p.  omits' perchance.'  7  E.p.  omits:  • a.  sinful.' 
378  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
to lead  them in the  way  of the  spirit,  which  is  this  contem-
plation;  for  not all  those  who  consciously  walk  in the  way 
of the spirit are brought by God to contemplation,  nor even 
the halfofthem1-why, He best knows.  And this is  why He 
never completely weans  the senses  of such  persons  from  the 
breasts  of meditations  and  reflections,  but  only  for  short 
periods and at certain seasons,  as  we  have said. 
CHAPTER  X 
OJ the  way  in  which  these  souls  are  to  conduct  themselves  in  this 
dark night. 
I.  During  the  time,  then,  of the  aridities  of this  night  of 
sense  (wherein  God  effects  the  change  of which  we  have 
spoken  above,  drawing forth  the soul  from  the  life  of sense 
to that of the spirit-that is,  from  meditati.on  to contempla-
tion-wherein  it  has  no  longer  any  power  to  work  or  to 
reason with its faculties  concerning the  things  of God,  as has 
been said)  spiritual persons suffer great trials,  by reason  not 
so much of the aridities which they suffer, as of the fear which 
they have of being lost on the road, thinking that all spiritual 
blessing is  over for  them and that God  has  abandoned them 
since  they find  no  help  or pleasure  in  good  things. 
2 
Then 
they grow weary,  and  endeavour  (as  they  have  been  accus-
tomed  to do)  to concentrate their faculties with some degree 
of pleasure  upon  some  object  of meditation,  thinking  that, 
when they are not doing this and yet are conscious of  making 
an  effort, they  are  doing  nothing.  This  effort  they  make 
not without great inward  repugnan.ce  and  unwillingness  on 
the part of their soul,  which was  taking pleasure in being in 
that quietness and ease, instead of working with its faculties. 3 
So  they  have  abandoned  the  one  pursuit,4  yet  draw  no 
profit from the other;  for, while they seek 
5 
what is prompted 
by their  own  spirit,6 they lose  the  spirit of tranquillity and 
peace 
7 
which they had before.  And thus they are like to one 
1  E.p.  reads' to  perfect contemplation'  and omits' nor even  the  half 
of them.' 
I  H:  'no help whatever in good  things.' 
I  E.p. omits:  . instead  ... faculties.' 
•  (Lit.,  '  spoiling themselves in the one.']  E.p.  has:  'turning aside  in 
[i.e.,  from]  the one.' 
6  A,  B,  M,  e.p.  have' use.'  Bz.:  'taste.' 
•  [Lit.,  '  for  to seek their spirit.'] 
7  G,  H,  P  omit;  • and peace.' 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  X 
379 
who abandons what he has done in order to do it over again, 
or to one who leaves a city only to re-enter it,  or to one who 
is  hunting and lets his  prey go in order to hunt it once more. 
This is  useless  here, for  the soul  will gain  nothing further  by 
conducting itself in this  way,  as  has  been said.
1 
2.  These souls turn back at such a time if there is none who 
understands them;  they abandon the road or lose courage ; 
or,  at  the  least,  they  are  hindered  from  going  farther 
by the great trouble which they take in advancing along the 
road  of meditation  and  reasoning.  Thus  they  weary  and 
overwork their nature, imagining that they are failing through 
negligence  or  sin.  But  this  trouble  that  they  are  taking  is 
quite useless,  for  God is  now leading them  by another road, 
which  is  that  of contemplation,  and  is  very  different  from 
the first;  for the one is  of meditation and reasoning, and the 
other  belongs  neither to imagination  nor yet to  reasoning. 
3.  It is  well for those who find  themselves in this condition 
to take comfort, to persevere in patience and to be in no wise 
afflicted.  Let  them  trust  in God,  Who  abandons not  those 
that seek Him with a simple and right heart, and will not fail 
to  give  them  what  is  needful  for  the  road,  until  He  bring 
them into the clear and pure light of love.  This last He will 
give  them  by  means  of that  other  dark  night,  that  of the 
spirit,  if they merit that He should  bring them thereto. 
4.  The  way  in  which  they  are  to  conduct  themselves  in 
this night of sense is  to devote themselves not at all to reason-
ing  and  meditation,  since  it  is  not  the  time  for  this,  but to 
allow the soul to remain in  peace and quietness,  although it 
may seem clear
2 
to them that they are doing nothing and are 
wasting their time,  and although it may seem to them 
3 
that 
it  is  because  of their  weakness  that  they  have  no  desire  in 
that state  to  think of anything.  The  truth is  that they  will 
be doing quite sufficient if they have patience and persevere 
in prayer without making any effort.·  What they must do is 
merely to leave the soul free  and disencumbered and at rest 
from all knowledge and thought, troubling not themselves, in 
that state,  about what they shall think or meditate,  but con-
tenting themselves  with  no  more than a  peaceful and loving 
1  G  modifies and abbreviates  the rest of the chapter considerably from 
this point onward. 
I  E.p.  omits' clear.' 
•  E.p.  omits:  'although it may seem  to them.' 
•  [Lit.,  'without  doing  anything  themselves.')  E.p.  abbreviates; 
• persevere io prayer, ooly leaving the soul free,'  etc. 
380  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
attentiveness  toward  God,  and  in  being  without  anxiety, 
without the ability and without desire
l 
to have experience of 
Him or to  perceive  Him.
2 
For all  these  yearnings  disquiet 
and distract the soul from  the peaceful quiet and sweet ease 
of contemplation  which  is  here  granted  to it. 
5.  And  although  further  scruples  may  come  to  them-
that they are wasting  their time,  and that it would  be  well 
for  them  to  do  something  else,  because they can  neither do 
nor think anything in prayer-let them suffer these scruples 
and  remain  in  peace,  as  there  is  no  question  save  of their 
being at ease and having freedom of spirit.  For if such a soul 
should  desire  to  make  any effort  of its  own  with its  interior 
faculties,  this means that it will hinder and lose the blessings 
which,  by  means  of that peace  and ease  of the soul,  God is 
instilling into it and impressing upon it.  It is just as if some 
painter were  painting or dyeing a  face;  if the sitter were to 
move because he desired to do something,  he would prevent 
the painter from  accomplishing anything and would disturb 
him in what he was  doing.  And thus,  when the soul desires 
to  remain  in  inward  ease  and  peace,  any  operation  and 
affection  or attention 3  wherein it may then seek to indulge' 
will  distract  it  and  disquiet  it  and  make  it  conscious  of 
aridity  and  emptiness  of sense.  For  the  more  a  soul  en-
deavours  to  find  help  in affection  and knowledge,  the  more 
will it feel  the lack of these,  which cannot now be supplied to 
it upon  that road. 
6.  Wherefore  it  behoves  such  a  soul  to  pay no heed if the 
operations  of its  faculties  become  lost  to  it;  it is  rather  to 
desire that this should happen quickly.  For,  by not hinder-
ing  the  operation  of  infused  contemplation  that  God  is 
bestowing  upon  it,  it  can  receive  this  with  more  peaceful 
abundance,  and cause
5 
its spirit to be enkindled and to burn 
with  the  love  which  this  dark  and  secret
8 
contemplation 
brings with it and sets firmly in the soul. 7  For contemplation 
1  E.p.  alters  to:  • without  excessive  desire.'  [As  on  p.  379,  n.  4.  this 
edition  is  endeavouring  to  soften  expressions  which  might  be  taken  as 
quietistic. ] 
2  E.p.:  • to  perceive  Him  or  to  have  experience  of  Him.'  Bz.:  • to 
have  experience  of  Him  or  delight  itself  in  perceiving  Him.'  [The  word 
rendered' have experience of '  is gustar:  lit .• • taste.'] 
a  E.p.:  'or anxious attention.' 
,  [Lit.,  • which it may then wish to have.'] 
6  E.p  .•  M:  'and be  refreshed  an<;  cause.'  •  V:  • and  secure.' 
7  E.p.  here  adds:  'I would  not,  however,  have  any  general  rule  laid 
down here e.s  to cessation from  meditation or reflection;  for such cessation 
should  never  come  until  meditation  is  no  longer  possible.  and  only  when 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  XI 
3
81 
is  naught  else  than  a  secret,  peaceful  and  loving  infusion 
from  God,  which,  if it be permitted, enkindles the soul  with 
the  spirit  of love,  according  as  the  soul  declares  in  the  next 
line,  namely: 
Kindled in love  with yearnings.
1 
CHAPTER  XI 
Wberein  are expounded the  three  lines of the  stan1:,a. \I 
I.  This enkindling of love is  not as  a  rule felt  at the first, 
because it has not begun to take hold upon the soul, by reason 
of the impurity of human nature, or because the soul has not 
understood its own state,  as  we  have said,  and has  therefore 
given  it no  peaceful  abiding-place  within  itself.  Yet  some-
times,  nevertheless,  there  soon  begins  to  make  itself felt  a 
certain yearning toward  God;  and the more this increases, 
the more is the soul affectioned and enkindled in love toward 
God,  without  knowing  or  understanding  how  and  whence 
this love and affection come to it,  but from  time to time see-
ing this  flame  and this  enkindling grow  so  greatly within  it 
that it desires  God  with  yearning  of love;  even  as  David, 
when  he  was  in  this  dark  night,  said  of himself in  these 
words,. 
3 
namely:  Because my heart was enkindled (that is to 
say,  in 10vC?  of contemplation),  my reins  also were changed: 
that  is,  my  desires  for  sensual  affections  were  changed,' 
namely from  the way of sense to the way of the spirit, which 
is  the aridity and cessation from  all these  things  whereof we 
are speaking.  And  I, he says,  was  dissolved  in nothing and 
annihilated,  and I  knew not;  for,  as  we  have said,  without 
knowing  the  way  whereby  it  goes,  the  soul  finds  itself 
annihilated with respect to all things above and below which 
were accustomed to please it;  and it finds  itself enamoured, 
without knowing how.  And because at times the enkindling 
the Lord sets a hindrance to it either in the form of purgation and torment, 
or in  that  of  most  perfect  contemplation.  At  other  times,  a,p.d  on  other 
occasions,  this  help  and  resource  must  always  be  used,  and,  further  [the 
soul  must  meditate  upon]  the life  and  cross  of  Christ,  which  is  the  best 
means  to  purgation  and  patience,  and  to  security  on  the  road,  and  a 
wondrous help to lofty contemplation.' 
1  G departs freely  from  the text throughout the exposition of this line. 
I  Thus e.p.  I  Psalm lxxii,  21  [A. V.,  lxxiii,  21-2). 
,  Thus C,  G,  H,  Mtr.,  V.  The other authorities have only:  • my reins 
also  were  changed.'  E.p.  rcads:  • my  tastes  and  affections  also  were 
changed,' and continues:  • namely,  from  the way of sense,' etc. 
382  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
of love  in  the  spirit  grows  greater,  the  yearnings  for  God 
become so  great in the soul  that  the very  bones  seem  to  be 
dried  up  by this  thirst,  and the natural  powers  to  be fading 
away, and their warmth and strength to be perishing through 
the intensityl of the thirst of love,  for  the soul feels  that this 
thirst  of love  is  a  living  thirst.  This  thirst  David  had  and 
felt,  when  he  said:  My  soul  thirsted  for  the  living  God.! 
Which is as much as to say:  Living was the thirst of my soul. 
Of this thirst, since it is  living,  we may say that it kills.  But 
it  is  to  be  noted  that  the  vehemence  of this  thirst  is  not 
continuous,  but  occasional,  although  as  a  rule  the  soul  is 
accustomed  to feel  it to a  certain degree. 
3 
2.  But it must  be noted  that,  as  I  began to say just now, 
this love is  not as a  rule felt  at first,  but only the dryness  and 
emptiness  are felt  whereof we  are speaking.  Then in place 
of this  love  which  afterwards  becomes  gradually enkindled, 
what the soul  experiences  in the midst  of these  aridities  and 
emptinesses of the faculties is  an habitual care and solicitude 
with respect to God, together with grief and fear that it is  not 
serving Him.  But it is a sacrifice which is not a little pleasing 
to God that the soul should go about afflicted  and solicitous 
fot  His  love.  This  solicitude  and  care  leads  the  soul  into 
that  secret  contemplation,  until,  the  senses  (that  is,  the 
sensual part)  having  in  course  of time  been in some  degree 
p u r g ~     of the  natural  affections  and  powers  by  means  of 
the  aridities  which  it  causes  within  them,  this  Divine  love 
begins  to  be  enkindled  in the spirit.  Meanwhile,  however, 
like one who has begun a  cure, the soul  knows  only suffering 
in this  dark and arid purgation of the desire;  by this means 
it becomes healed of many imperfections,  and exercises itself 
in many virtues, in order to make itself meet for the said love, 
as  we  shall now say with respect to the line following  : 
Oh,  happy chance! 
3.  When  God  leads  the  soul  into  this  night  of sense  in 
order  to  purge the  sense  of its  lower  part and  to  subdue  it, 
unite it and bring it into conformity with the spirit, by setting 
it  in  darkness  and  causing  it  to  cease  from  meditation  (as 
1  [Lit.,  • livingness ':  d. the quotation below.] 
•  Psalm xli,  3  [A.V.,  xlii,  2]. 
S  E.p.  substitutes  for  this  last  sentence:  • although  the  vehemence  of 
this  thirst  is  not  continuous,  but  only  occasional;  howbeit  this  thirst  is 
ordinarily felt  to a  certain degree.' 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  XI 
He  afterwards  does  in  order  to  purify  the  spirit  to  unite  it 
with God, as  we shall afterwards sayl), He brings it into the 
night of the spirit, and  (although it appears not so  to it)  the 
soul  gains so  many advantages that it holds  it to  be a  happy 
chance to have escaped from the bonds and restrictions of the 
senses  of its  lower  self,  by  means  of this  night  aforesaid  ; 2 
and  utters  the  present  line,  namely:  Oh, happy  chance! 
With  respect  to  this,  it behoves  us  here  to  note  the  advan-
tages which the soul finds in this night, and because of which 
it considers it a happy chance to have passed through)t;  all 
of  which  advantages  the  soul  includes  in  the  next  line, 
namely: 
I went forth  without being observed. 
4.  This  going forth  is  understood  of the  subjection  to  its 
sensual  part  which  the  soul  suffered  when  it  sought  God 
through operations so weak, so limited and so defective
3 
as are 
those  of this  lower  part;  for  at every  step  it stumbled  into 
numerous  imperfections  and  ignorances,  as  we  have  noted 
above in writing of the seven capital sins.  From all  of these 
it is  freed,  when  this  night  quenches  within  it  all  pleasures, 
whether from above or from below, and makes all meditation 
darkness  to  it,  and  grants  it other innumerable  blessings  in 
the acquirement of the  virtues,  as  we  shaH  now show.  For 
it will  be a  matter of great pleasure and great consolation, to 
one that journeys on  this  road, to see  how that which seems 
to the soul so severe and adverse, and so contrary to spiritual 
pleasure,  works  in  it so  many  blessings.  These,  as  we  say, 
are  gained  when  the soul  goes  forth,  as  regards  its  affection 
and operation, by means of this night, from all created things, 
and when it journeys to eternal things, '  which is great happi-
ness  and good  fortune: Ii  first,  because  of the  great  blessing 
which  is  in  the  quenching  of the  desire  and  affection  with 
respect  to  all  things;  secondly,  because  they  are  very  few 
that endure and persevere in entering by this strait gate and 
by the narrow way which leads to life,  as  says Our Saviour. 
6 
The strait gate  is  this  night  of sense,  and  the  soul  detaches 
itself  from  sense  and strips itself thereof that it may enter by 
1  E.p.  omits:  • as we  shall afterwards say.' 
Z  E.p.:  • this happy night.'  ' 
3  E.p. omits:  • so  ... so  ... so  .. .' 
,  V:  • to invisible things.' 
•  [Lit .. • and  chance';  the same word  as in the verse-line above.] 
•  S.  Matthew  vii,  14. 
384  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
this  gate,  and  establishes  itself in faith,l  which  is  a  stranger 
to all sense,  so that afterwards it may journey by the narrow 
way, which is the other night-that ofthe spirit-and this the 
soul  afterwards I  enters  in  order  to journey to  God  in  pure 
faith,3 which is  the means whereby the soul is  united to God. 
By this road, since it is so narrow, dark and terrible (for there 
is  no comparison between this night of sense and that other,' 
in its  darkness  and trials,  as  we  shall say later),  they are far 
fewer that journey, but its advantages are far greater without 
comparison  than  those  of this  night.  Of this  we  sJ1allllow 
begin  to  say something,  with  such  brevity  as  is  possible,  in 
order that we  may  pass  to  the  other  night. 
CHAPTER  XII 
Of tI,e  benefits  which  this night
5 
causes in  the soul. 
I.  This night and purgation of the desire,  a  happy one for 
the soul,  works in it so many blessings and benefits  (although 
to the soul it rather seems,  as  we have said, that blessings are 
being  taken  away  from  it)  that,  even  as  Abraham  made  a 
great feast  when  he  weaned  his  son  lsaac,6  even  so  is  there 
joy in  Heaven  because  God  is  now  taking this  soul  from  its 
swaddling clothes,  setting it down from  His  arms,  making it 
to walk upon its feet,  and likewise taking from  it the milk of 
the breast and the soft and sweet food proper to children, and 
making it to eat bread  with crust,  and to  begin to  enjoy the 
food of robust  persons.  This food, in these aridities  and this 
darkness of sense,  is  now given to the spirit, which is  dry and 
emptied  of all  the  sweetness  of sense.  And  this food  is  the 
infused  contemplation  whereof we  have  spoken. 
2.  This is  the first and principal benefit caused by this arid 
and dark night of contemplation:  the knowledge  of oneself 
and of one's misery. 
7 
For, besides the fact that all the favours 
which God grants to the soul are habitually granted to them en-
wrapped in this  knowledge, these aridities and this emptiness 
1  E.p.:  • directing  itself  by  faith.'  Some  codices  have:  • uniting 
itself in faith.'  2  E.p.:  'later.' 
•  E.p.:  'in faith  most pure.'  •  E.p.:  • and  that of the spirit.' 
•  E.p.:  • this night of sense."  •  Genesis  xxi,  8. 
7  So  H  and  the  other  codices.  E.p.  has:  'And  this  is  the  first  and 
principal  benefit which  the soul  gains here,  and from  which  almost all the 
others  are  derived.  Of  these,  the  first  benefit is  the  knowlcdge  of oneself 
and  of onc's misery.' 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  XII 
of the  faculties  compared  with  the  abundance  which  the 
soul  experienced  aforetime  and  the  difficulty  which  it finds 
in  good  works,  make  it  recognize  its  own  lowliness  and 
misery,  which  in the  time  of its  prosperity it was  unable  to 
see.  Of this  there  is  a  good  illustration  in  the  Book  of 
Exodus,  where  God,  wishing  to  humble  the  children  of 
Israel  and desiring  that they should  know  themselves,  com-
manded them to take away and strip off the festal  garments 
and  adornments wherewith  they were  accustomed  to  adorn 
themselves in the Wilderness, saying:  Now from  henceforth 
strip  yourselves  of festal  ornaments  and  put  on  everyday 
working dress, that ye may know what treatment ye deserve. 
1 
This is  as  though He had said:  Inasmuch as  the attire that 
ye wear, being proper to festival  and rejoicing, causes you  to 
feel  less  humble  concerning  yourselves  than  ye  should,  put 
offfrom you this attire, in order that henceforth, seeing your-
selves  clothed  with  vileness,  ye  may  know  that ye  merit  no 
more, and may know who ye are.  Wherefore the soul knows 
the truth that it knew not at first,  concerning its own misery  ; 
for,  at the time when it was clad as for a festival and found in 
God  much pleasure,  consolation and  help, it  was  somewhat 
more satisfied and  contented,  since  it  thought itself to some 
extent to  be serving  God.  It is  true that such souls  may not 
have this idea explicitly in their minds; but some suggestion of 
it at least is  conveyed to them by the satisfaction  which  they 
find in their pleasant experienc.;es.  But, now that the soul has 
put  on  its  other  and  wor:king  attire-that  of aridity  and 
abandonment-and  now  that  its  first  lights  have  turned 
into  darkness,  it  possesses  these  lights  more  truly  in  this 
virtue  of self-knowledge,  which is  so  excellent and so  neces-
sary,2 considering itself now as  nothing and experiencing no 
satisfaction in itself;  for  it sees  that it does  nothing of itself 
neither  can  do  anything.  And  the  smallness  of this  self-
satisfaction,  together with the soul's  affliction  at not serving 
God, is  considered  and  e s ~ e e m e     by God  a.s  greater than all 
the consolations which the soul formerly experienced and the 
works which it wrought, however great they were, inasmuch 
as  they were  the occasion  of many imperfections  and ignor-
ances.  And concerning this attire
3 
of aridity,· there remains 
1  Exodus xxxiii.  5. 
I  E.p.:  • it more truly possesses and has  this virtue of self-knowledge 
so excellent and so  necessary.'  Our reading is  that of H. 
a  H:  • this labour,'  probably in error [trabajo  for traje]. 
386  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
to be described, besides that which we have said already, the 
benefits  which we shall now describe and many more which 
may be spoken of, as they proceed from their fount and source 
of self-knowledge. 
3.  In the first place, the soul learns to commune with God 
with more respect and more courtesy,  such  as  one must ever 
observe in converse with the  Most High.  These it knew  not 
in its  prosperous  times  of pleasure  and consolation,  for  that 
pleasant favour
l 
which it experienced made its desire toward 
God somewhat bolder than was fitting,  and discourteous and 
ill-considered. 
2 
Even  so  did  it  happen  to  Moses,  when  he 
felt  that  God  was  speaking  to  him;  blinded
3 
by  that 
pleasure  and  desire,  without  further  consideration,  he  was 
making bold to go to  Him, if God had not commanded him 
to stay and put off his  shoes.  By  this incident we are shown 
the respect and discretion in detachment of desire wherewith 
a  man is  to  commune with  God.  When  Moses  had obeyed 
in this matter, he became so discreet and so attentive that the 
Scripture says  that not  only  did  he  not  make  bold  to  draw 
near to God,  but that he dared not even look at Him.'  For, 
having  taken  off the  shoes  of his  desires  and  pleasures,  he 
became  very  conscious  of his  wretchedness  in  the  sight  of 
God,  as  befitted  one about to hear the  word  of God.  Even 
so  likewise  the  preparation  which  God  granted
5 
to Job  in 
order that he  might speak  with  Him  consisted  not  in  those 
delights  and  glories  which Job  himself reports  that  he  was 
wont  to  have in his  God,  but in leaving  him  naked  upon  a 
dung-hill,6  abandoned  and  even  persecuted  by  his  friends, 
filled  with  anguish  and  bitterness,  and  the  earth  covered 
with worms.  And then the Most High God, He that lifts up 
the poor man from  the dung-hill, was pleased to come down 
and speak with him there face  to face,  revealing?  to him the 
depths  and  heights 
8 
of His  wisdom,  in  a  way  that  He  had 
never done in the time  of his  prosperity. 
1  E.p.  omits' pleasant.'  Bz.  has:  'that fervour  and pleasure.'  Mtr., 
V:  'that favour and pleasure.' 
2  E.p.  '  somewhat bolder and less courteous than was fitting.' 
3  E.p.  has' carried  away' for' blinded.' 
•  This is the reading of e.p.  Cf.  Exodus iii,  6.  [Po  Silverio reads, with] 
other authorities:  'dared not even reflect.' 
•  E.p.:  'to hear  the  Divine  words.  The  preparation  likewise  which 
God  granted  .. :  •  [Job ii,  7-8.] 
7  E.p.:  'the  Most  High  God,  Who  lifts  up  the  poor  man  from  the 
dung-hill,  was  pleased  to  communicate  Himself  to  him  with  greater 
abundance and  sweetness,  revealing.  ' 
•  [Lit.,  '  the deep  heights:] 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  XII 
4.  And here we must note another excellent benefit which 
there is  in this  night and aridity of the desire  of sense,  since 
we have had occasion  to speak of it.  It is  that, in this  dark 
night of the desire  (to  the end that the words of the Prophet 
may be fulfilled,  namely:  Thy light shall shine in the dark-
ness!),  God will  enlighten  the soul,  giving it knowledge,  not 
only of its lowliness  and  wretchedness,  as  we  have said,  but 
likewise of the greatness and excellence of God.  For, as well 
as  quenching  the  desires  and  pleasures  and  attachments  of 
sense,  He cleanses  and  frees  the  understanding  that it  may 
understand  the  truth;  for  pleasure  of  sense  and  desire, 
even though it be for  spiritual things,  darkens and obstructs 
the  spirit,  and  furthermore  that  straitness I  and  aridity  of 
sense  enlightens  and  quickens  the  understanding,  as  says 
Isaiah: 3  Vexation makes us to understand how the soul that is 
empty  and  disencumbered,  as  is  necessary  for  His  Divine 
influence,  is  instructed supernaturally by God in His  Divine 
wisdom, through this  dark and arid night of contemplation, • 
as  we have said;  and this instruction God gave not in those 
first  sweetnesses  and joys. 
5.  This is  very well explained by the same prophet Isaiah, 
where he says:  Whom shall God teach His knowledge,  and 
whom  shall  He  make  to  hear that  which  He speaks?1i  To 
those,  He  says,  that  are  weaned  from  the  milk  and  drawn 
away from  the breasts. 41  Her,e  it is  shown that the first  milk 
of spiritual  sweetness  is  no  preparation  for  this  Divine  in-
fluence,  neither  is  there  preparation  in  attachment  to  the 
breast of delectable meditations, belonging to the faculties of 
sense,  which gave the soul  pleasure;  such  preparation con-
sists  rather in the lack  of the one  and  withdrawal  from  the 
other.  Inasmuch as, in order to listen to God, the soul needs 
to stand upright and to be detached, with regard to affection 
and  sense,  even  as  the  Prophet  says  concerning  himself,  in 
these words  :  I will stand upon my watch (this is that detach-
ment of desire)  and I  will make firm  my step,  (that is,  I  will 
.1  Isaiah lviii,  10. 
I  A,  B,  Bz.,  C,  H  read' appetite'  [apelito]  for' straitness'  [aP,ieto], 
presumably in error. 
I  Isaiah xxviii,  19.  [The author omits the actual text,] 
•  [To  translate  this  passage  at  all,  we  must  read  the  Dios  c6mo  of 
P. Silverio  (p.  4°3, 1.  20),  which is  also found  in P.  Gerardo and elsewhere, 
as c6mo  Dios.]  , 
I  E.p.:  • to  hear  His  word.'  [The  Spanish  is  audici6n,  • hearing, 
which is the rendering in  A.V.  margin.  A.V.  has' doctrine.'] 
•  Isaiah xxviii,  9. 
2G 
388  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
not  meditate  with  sense),  in  order  to  contemplate  (that  is, 
in  order  to  understand  that  which  may  come  to  me  from 
God).1  So  we  have  now  arrived  at this,  that from  this  arid 
night  comes  first  of all  self-knowledge,  whence,  as  from  a 
foundation,  rises  this  other  knowledge  of God.  For  which 
cause S. Augustine said to God:  Let me know myself,  Lord, 
and  I  shall  know  Thee.
2 
For,  as  the  philosophers  say,  one 
extreme  can be  well  known  by another. 
6.  And in order to prove more completely how efficacious 
is  this  night  of sense,  with  its  aridity  and  its  desolation,  in 
bringing the soul that light which, as  we say, it receives there 
from  God,  we shall quote that passage of David, wherein he 
clearly  describes  the  great  power  which  is  in  this  night  for 
bringing  the  soul  this  lofty  knowledge  of God.  He  says, 
then,  thus:  In the desert land,  waterless,  dry and pathless, 
I  appeared before Thee, that I  might see Thy virtue and Thy 
glory. 
3 
It is  a  wondrous  thing  that David  should  say  here 
that the means  and  the preparation for  his  knowledge of the 
glory of God  were  not  the  spiritual  delights  and  the  many 
pleasures  which  he  had  experienced,  but  the  aridities  and 
detachments  of his  sensual  nature, which  is  here  understood 
by the dry and  desert land.  No less  wondrous  is  it that he 
should describe as the road to his  perception and vision of the 
virtue of God,  not the Divine meditations and conceptions of 
which  he had often  made  use,  but his  being  unable  to form 
any conception of God or to walk by meditation produced by 
imaginary  consideration,  which  is  here  understood  by  the 
pathless land.  So that the means to a knowledge of God and 
of  oneself  is  this  dark  night  with  its  aridities  and  voids, 
although  it  leads  not  to  a  knowledge  of Him  of the  same 
plenitude and abundance that comes from the other night of 
the spirit,  since this is  only,  as  it were,  the  beginning of that 
other. 
7.  Likewise  the soul  draws from  the aridities and voids  of 
this  night of the desire,  spiritual humility,  which is  the con-
trary  virtue  to  the  first  capital  sin,  which,  as  we  said,  is 
spiritual  pride.  Through  this  humility,  which  is  acquired 
by the said knowledge of self,  the soul is  purged from all those 
imperfections  whercinto  it  fell  with  respect  to  that  sin  of 
pride,4 in the  time of its  prosperity.  For it sees  itself so  dry 
1  Habakuk ii,  1.  2  S.  Augustine:  Soliloq.,  Cap.  ii. 
I  Psalm  lxii, 3  [A.V.,  lxiii,  1-2). 
,  E.I'.  omits:  • with respect to that sin of pride.' 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  XIII 
3
8
9 
and miserable, that the idea never even occurs  to it that it is 
making better progress than others,  or outstripping them,  as 
it  believed  itself  to  be  doing  before.  On  the  contrary,  it 
recognizes that others are making better progress  than itself. 
8.  And  hence  arises  the  love  of its  neighbours,  for  it 
esteems them, andjudges them not as it was wont to do afore-
time, when' it saw that itself had great fervour and others not 
so.  It is  aware only of its own wretchedness,  which it keeps 
before its eyes  to such  an extent that it never forgets  it,.  nor 
takes  occasion  to  set  its  eyes  on  anyone  else.  This  was 
described  wonderfully  by David, when he was  in this  night, 
in  these  words:  I  was  dumb  and  was  humbled  and  kept 
silence from good things and my sorrow was renewed.
1 
This 
he says because it seemed to him that the good that was in his 
soul had so completely departed that not only did he neither 
speak nor find  any language concerning it,  but with respect 
to  the  good  of others  he  was  likewise  dumb  because  of his 
grief at the knowledge of his  misery. 
g.  In this  condition,  again,  souls  become  submissive  and 
obedient  upon  the  spiritual  road,  for,  when  they  see  their 
own  misery,  not  only  do  they  hear2  what  is  taught  them, 
but they even desire that anyone soever may set them on the 
way  and  tell  them  what  they  ought  to  do.  The  affective
S 
presumption  which  they  sometimes  had  in  their  prosperity 
is  taken from  them;  and finally,  there are swept away from 
them on this road all the other imperfections which we noted 
above with respect to this  first  sin,  which is  spiritual pride.' 
CHAPTER  XIII 
Of other  henefits  which  this  night  of sense  causes  in  the  soul. 
6 
I.  With  respect  to  the  soul's  imperfections  of  spiritual 
avarice,  wherein it coveted  this  and that spiritual thing and 
found  no  satisfaction  in this  and that exercise  because  of its 
covetousness for the desire and pleasure which it found there-
in,  this  arid  and  dark  night  has  now  greatly  reformed  it. 
For,  as  it finds  not  the  pleasure  and sweetness  which  it  was 
1  Psalm  xxxviii,  3  [A.V.,  xxxix,  2].  I  Bz.:  • do  they obey.' 
8  E.p.  omits' affective.' 
,  E.p.:  .  all  the other imperfections are swept away  from  them  which 
we  touched  on  above  when  speaking  of  spiritual  pride.'  A.  II add:  'as 
we  have said.'  '  From e.p. 
390  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
wont to find,  but finds rather affliction and lack of sweetness, 
it has such  moderate recourse to them that it might possibly 
now lose, through defective use, what aforetime it lost through 
excess;  although  as  a  rule  God  gives  to  those  whom  He 
leads into this  night humility and readiness,  albeit with lack 
of sweetneSs,  so  that what is  commanded them they may  do 
for  God's sake alone;  and thus they no longer seek profit in 
many thingsl because they find  no pleasure in them. 
2.  With  respect  to  spiritual  luxury,  it is  likewise  clearly 
seen  that,  through this  aridity and lack of sensible sweetness 
which the soul finds  in spiritual things,  it is  freed from those 
impurities which we there noted  ;  for we said that, as a rule, 
they  proceeded  from  the  pleasure  which  overflowed  from 
spirit  into sense. 
3.  But  with  regard  to  the  imperfections  from  which  the 
soul  frees  itself in this  dark night with  respect  to the fourth 
sin,  which is  spiritual gluttony,2  although they may be seen 
above,  they have not all  been described  there,  because they 
are innumerable;  and thus I  will not detail them here, fot I 
would fain  make an end of this  night in order to pass  to  the 
next,  concerning  which  we  have  grave  words  and  instruc-
tions.
3 
Let it suffice for  the  understanding of the innumer-
able benefits which, over and above those mentioned, the soul 
gains  in this  night  with respect  to  this  sin' of spiritual  glut-
tony,  to  say  that it frees  itself from  all  those  imperfections 
which have there been described,  and from  many other and 
greater evils,  and vile  abominations
6 
which  are  not  written 
above,  into  which fell  many of whom  we  have  had  experi-
ence,  because  they  had  not  reformed  their  desire  with 
respect to this inordinate love of spiritual sweetness.  For in 
this  arid  and  dark night  wherein  He sets  the  soul,  God  has 
restrained  its  concupiscence  and  curbed  its  desire  so  that 
the  soul  cannot  feed  upon  any  pleasure  or  sweetness  of 
sense,6  whether  from  above  or  from  below;  and  this  He 
continues to do 
7 
after such manner that the soul is subjected, 
reformed  and  repressed  with  respect  to  concupiscence  and 
desire.  It loses the strength of its passions and concupiscence 
1  E.p.:  • and thus they detach themselves from  many things.' 
I  H  erroneously reads:  • spiritual pleasure.' 
•  E.p.:  . grave instructions.' 
,  E.p.:  • against this sin.' 
•  E.p.  omits:  . and  vile  abominations.' 
•  E.p.:  • so that it can hardly feed at all upon sweetnesses or pleasures 
of sense.'  7  H  omits:  '  and this He continues to do.' 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  XIII 
39
1 
and  it  becomes  sterile,  because  it  no  longer  consults  its 
likings.  Just as,  when none is  accustomed to take milk from 
the breast, the courses of the milk
1 
are dried up, so the desires 
of the  soul  are  dried  up.  And  besides
2 
these  things  there 
follow  admirable  benefits  from  this  spiritual  sobriety,  for, 
when  desire  and concupiscence are quenched,  the soul lives 
in  spiritual  tranquillity  and  peace;  for,  where  desire  and 
concupiscence  reign  not,  there is  no  disturbance,  but peace 
and  consolation  of God. 
4.  From  this  there  arises  another  and  a  second  benefit, 
which is  that the soul  habitually has  remembrance  of God, 
with  fear  and  dread of backsliding upon  the  spiritual  road, 
as  has been said.  This is  a  great benefit,  and not one of the 
least that results from this aridity and purgation of the desire, 
for the soul is  purified and cleansed of the imperfections that 
were clinging to it because of the desires and affections, which 
of their  own  accord  debilitate  and  darken  the soul. 
5.  There is  another very  great benefit for  the soul  in this 
night,  which  is  that  it  practises  the  virtues  jointly,  as,  for 
example,  patience  and  longsuffering,  which  are  well  tried 
in these times of emptiness and aridity, when the soul endures 
and  perseveres  in its  spiritual  exercises  without  consolation 
and without pleasure.  It practises  the charity of God, since 
it is  not now  moved by the pleasure of attraction and sweet-
ness  which it finds  in its work,  but only  by God.  It likewise 
practises  here  the virtue of fortitude,  because,  in these  diffi-
culties  and  insipidities  which  it  finds  in  its  work,  it  brings 
strength  out of weakness  and thus  becomes  strong.  All  the 
virtues,  in short-the theological  and  also  the cardinal  and 
moral-both in body and in spirit, 
3 
are practised by the soul 
in  these  times  of aridity. 
6.  And  that  in  this  night  the  soul  obtains  these  four 
benefits  which  we  have  here  described  (namely,  delight  of 
peace,  habitual remembrance  and  thought of God,  cleanli-
ness  and  purity  of soul  and  the  practice  of  the  virtues 
which we have just described),  David tells  us,  having experi-
enced  it himself when he was  in this  night,  in these  words: 
1  A:  • of the breast of the milk';  Mtr.:  'of the veins of the milk.' 
I  E.p.  omits freely,  reading:  • and  this He continues to  do  after such 
manner  that  the  soul  is  gradually  correcting,  mortifying  and  controlling 
itself,  according to concupiscence  and  desire,  so  that it seems  to be losing 
the strength of its passions;  and besides  •  .  : 
•  E.p.  reads:  • ill all the virtues,  the cardinal, and also the theological 
and moral,'  and omits:  • both in body and in spirit: 
Sg2  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
My soul  refused consolations,  I  had remembrance of God,  I 
found  consolation  and  was  exercised  and  my  spirit  failed.! 
And  he  then  says:  And  I  meditated  by  night  with  my 
heart and was exercised, and I swept and purified my spirit-
that is  to say,  from  all the affections. 
8 
7.  With  respect  to  the  imperfections  of the  other  three 
spiritual  sins  which  we  have  described  above,  which  are 
wrath,  envy and sloth,  the soul is  purged hereof likewise  in 
this  aridity of the desire and acquires the virtues opposed  to 
them;  for,  softened  and  humbled  by  these  aridities  and 
hardships  and  other  temptations  and  trials  wherein  God 
exercises it during this night, it becomes meek with r ~ s p e   t   to 
God, and to itself,  and likewise with respect to its neighbour. 
So  that  it  is  no  longer  angry  with  itself  and  disturbed 
because  of its  own faults,  nor with its  neighbour  because  of 
his  faults,  neither  is  it  displeased  with  God,  nor  does  it 
utter  unseemly  complaints  because  He  does  not  quickly 
make it holy. 
8.  Then, as  to envy,  the soul has charity toward others in 
this  respect also;  for,  if it has  any envy,  this  is  no longer a 
vice  as  it  was  before,  when  it  was  grieved  because  others 
were  preferred  to it and  given  greater advantaKe.  Its  grief 
now comes from  seeing how  great is  its  own  misery,  and its 
envy  (if it  has  any)  is  a  virtue,  since  it  desires  to  imitate 
others,  which is  great virtue. 
g.  Neither are the sloth and the weariness which it now has 
concerning spiritual  things  vicious  as  they were  before;  for 
in  the  past these sins  proceeded from  the spiritual pleasures 
which the soul sometimes experienced and sought after when 
it found them not.  But this new weariness proceeds not from 
this insufficiency of pleasure, because God has taken from the 
soul pleasure in all things in this purgation of the desire. 
10.  Besides  these  benefits  which  have  been  mentioned, 
the  soul  attains  innumerable  others  by  means  of this  arid 
. contemplation.  F or  often,  in  the  midst  of these  times  of 
aridity and hardship,  God  communicates  to  the  soul,  when 
it is least expecting it, the purest spiritual sweetness and love, 
together with a  spiritual knowledge  which is  sometimes very 
delicate, each manifestation of which is of greater benefit and 
worth than those which the soul enjoyed aforetime ; although 
in  its  beginnings  the  soul  thinks  that  this  is  not  so,  for  the 
1  Psalm lxxvi,  4  [A.V.,  lxxvii,  3-4]. 
I  [A. V.,  Psalm lxxvii,  6.] 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  XIII 
393 
spiritual  influence  now  granted  to  it  is  very  delicate  and 
cannot  be perceived  by sense. 
I  I.  Finally, inasmuch as  the soul  is  now  purged from  the 
affections  and  desires  of sense,  it  obtains  liberty  of spirit, 
whereby in ever greater degree it gains the twelve fruits of the 
Holy Spirit.  Here,  too,  it is  wondrously delivered from  the 
hands  of its  three  enemies-devil,  world  and  flesh;  for,  its 
pleasure and delight of sense being quenched with respect to 
all things,  neither the devil nor the world  nor sensuality has 
any  arms  or any strength  wherewith  to  make war upon the 
spirit. 
12.  These times of aridity,  then,  cause the soul to journey 
in all purity in the love 'ofGod, since it is no longer influenced 
in  its  actions  by  the  pleasure  and  sweetness  of the  actions 
themselves,  as  perchance it was  when  it experienced  sweet-
ness,  but only by a  desire to please God.  It becomes neither 
presumptuous  nor self-satisfied,  as  perchance it was  wont to 
become  in  the  time  of its  prosperity,  but fearful  and  timid 
with  regard  to  itself,  finding  in itself no satisfaction  whatso-
ever;  and herein consists that holy fear which preserves and 
increases  the  virtues.  This  aridity  also  quenches  natural 
energy  and  concupiscence,  as  has  also  been  said.  Save  for 
the pleasure, indeed, which at certain times God Himself in-
fuses  into it, it is  a  wonder ifit finds  pleasure and consolation 
of sense,  through its  own diligence,  in any spiritual  exercise 
or action, as has  already been said. 
13.  There  grows  within  souls  that  experience  this  arid 
night care for God and yearnings to serve Him, for in propor-
tion  as  the breasts  of sensuality,  wherewith it sustained  and 
nourished  the  desires  that  it  pursued,  are  drying  up,  there 
remains  nothing  in  that  aridity  and  detachment  save  the 
yearning to serve God, which is a  thing very pleasing to God. 
For, as  David says,  a  troubled spirit is  a  sacrifice to  God.
1 
14.  When  the soul,  then,  knows  that,  in  this  arid  purga-
tion through which it has passed, it has  elicited and attained 
so many and such precious benefits
2 
as those which have here 
been  described,  it  tarries  not  in  crying,  as  in  the  stanza 
which we are expounding in this verse, , Oh, happy chance !-
I went forth without being observed.'  That is,  ' I went forth' 
from the bonds and subjection of the desires  of sense and the 
affections,  '  without being observed' -that is  to say,  without 
1  Psalm I,  19 [A. V .•  Ii.  17]. 
I  E.p.;  'attained such  precious benefits,  and so  many.' 
394  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
the  three  enemies  aforementioned  being  able  to  keep  me 
from  it.  These  enemies,  as  we  have  said,  bind  the  soul  as 
with bonds,l in its desires and pleasures,  and prevent it from 
going forth from itself to the liberty of the love
2 
of God ;  and 
without  these  desires  and  pleasures  they  cannot  give  battle 
to the soul,  as  has  been said. 
15.  When,  therefore,  the four passions of the soul-which 
are joy, grief,  hope and fear-are calmed through continual 
mortification;  when the natural desires  have been lulled  to 
sleep, in the sensual nature of the soul,  by means of habitual 
times  of aridity;  and  when  the  harmony of the  senses  and 
the  interior  faculties  causes  a  suspension  of labour  and  a 
cessation  from  the  work  of  meditation,  as  we  have  said 
(which  is  the  dwelling  and  the  household  of the  lower  part 
of the  soul),  these  enemies  cannot  obstruct  this  spiritual 
liberty,  and the house remains  at rest and quiet,  as  says  the 
following  line  : 
My  house  being  now  at  rest. 
3 
CHAPTER  XIV 
Expounds this last verse  of the first  stanza. ' 
I.  When  this  house  of sensuality  was  now  at  rest-that 
is,  was  mortified-its  passions  being  quenched  and  its 
desires put to rest and lulled to sleep by means of this blessed 
night of the purgation of sense, the soul went forth,  to set out 
upon  the  road  and  way  of the  spirit,  which  is  that  of pro-
gressives  and  proficients, &  and  which,  by  another  name, 
is  called the way of illumination or of infused contemplation, 
wherewith God Himselffeeds and refreshes the soul,  without 
meditation, or the soul's active help. 6  Such, as we have said, 
1  E.p.  omits:  • as with bonds.'  a  E.p.:  • of the perfect love.' 
a  [So  e.p..  which  completes  the  sense  of  the  paragraph.  The  o+;her 
versions.  which  P.  Silverio follows.  leave  it unfinished,  rearling:  '  ... of 
the  soul),  which  is  that  which  the  Lord  (sic)  here  calls  His  house.  she 
says:  ..  My house being now at rest." 'J 
,  The title is from  e.p.  In the first  four  lines of the first  paragraph the 
Codices  show  considerable  variations  in  secondary  matters.  We  here 
follow  H. 
I  [de  los  aprovechantes  yaprovechados.J  E.p  .•  Bz.  omit:  'progressives 
and.' 
I  H:  'or the  soul's  active  way.'  The  1630  edition  reads  as  in  the 
text above.  but adds:  • with labour.' 
BOOK I.  CHAPTER  XIV 
395 
is the night and purgation of sense in the soul. 
1 
In those who 
have afterwards to enter the other and more serious night of 
the  spirit,  in  order  to  pass  to  the  Divine  union  of love  of 
God  (for  not all,  but only the  smallest  number,  pass  habit-
ually thereto), it is  wont to  be accompanied by  grave  trials 
and  temptations  of sense,  which  last for  a  long  time,  albeit 
longer  in  some  than  in  others.  For  to  some  the  angel  of 
Satan  presents  himself-namely,  the  spirit  of fornication-
that he may buffet their senses with abominable and violent 
temptations, and may trouble their spirits with vile considera-
tions  and  representations  which  are  most
2 
visible  to  the 
imagination,  which  things  at  times  are  a  greater  affliction 
to  them than death. 
8 
2.  At other times in this night there is added to these things 
the spirit of blasphemy,  which  roams  abroad,  setting in the 
path of all the conceptions and thoughts  of the soul intoler-
able  blasphemies.  These  it  sometimes  !iuggests  to  the 
imagination  with  such  violence  that  the  soul  almost  utters 
them, which is  a grave torment to it. 
3.  At other times another abominable spirit, which Isaiah 
calls Spiritus vertiginis, '  is allowed to molest them, not in order 
that  they  may  fall,  but  that  it  may  try  them.  This  spirit 
darkens  their  senses  in  such  a  way  that  it  fills  them  with 
numerous  scruples  and  problems,  so  perplexing,  as  they 
judge,  that they can  never,  by any  means,  be satisfied  con-
cerning them, neither can they find  any help for  their judge-
ment
i 
in  counsel  or  thought.  This  is  one  of the  severest 
goads  and  horro(S  of this  night,  very  closely  akin  to  that 
which passes  in the night of the spirit. 
4.  As  a  rule  these  storms  and  trials  are  sent  by  God  in 
this  night and purgation of sense  to those  whom  afterwards 
He  purposes  to  lead  into  the  other  night  (though  not  all 
reach  it),  to  the  end  that,  when  they  have  been  chastened 
and buffeted,  they may in this  way continually exercise and 
prepare  themselves,  and  continually  accustom  their  senses 
and faculties  to the union of wisdom which is  to be bestowed 
upon them in that other night.  For, if the soul be not tempted. 
exercised  and proved  with  trials  and  temptations,  it cannot 
1  E.p.  omits:  • in the soul.'  I  Ep  .•  B.z.:  • are very: 
I  The next paragraph is lacking-in  V. 
•  [The' perverse spirit' of A.V., Isaiah xix, 14.]  E.p. adds:  • is allowed 
to  try them: and omits:  • not in order that they may fall,  but: 
•  So  A.  The  other  authorities  [and  P.  Silverio]  read:  • for  the 
judgement: 
396  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
quicken 
1 
its  senses  for  wisdom.  For this  reason  it is  said in 
Ecclesiasticus:  He  that  has  not  been  tempted,  what  does 
he know?  And he that has  not been proved,  what are  the 
things  that  he  recognizes?2  To  this  truth Jeremiah  bears 
good  witness,  saying:  Thou didst chastise  me,  Lord,  and I 
was instructed. 
3 
And  the most  proper form  of this chastise-
ment,  for  one  who  will  enter  into  Wisdom,  is  that  of the 
interior  trials  which  we  are  here  describing,  inasmuch  as 
it  is  these  which  most  effectively  purge  sense  of  all 
favours  and  consolations  to  which  it  was  affected  with 
natural  weakness,  and  by  which  the  soul  is  truly 
humiliated  in  preparation  for  the  exaltation  which  it is  to 
experience. 
5.  For how long a time the soul will be held iIi this fasting 
and this penance of sense, cannot be told with any certainty; 
for all do not experience it after one manner, neither do all en-
counter the same temptations.  For this is meted out by the will 
of God, in conformity with  the greater or the smaller degree 
of imperfection which each soul has to purge away.  In con-
formity,  likewise,  with the degree oflove of union' to which 
God is pleased to raise it, He will humble it with greater or less 
intensity orin greater or less time.  Those who havethedisposi-
tion  and  greater  strength  to  suffer,  He purges  with greater 
intensity and more quickly.  But those who are very weak are 
kept for  a  long time in this  night,  and these  He purges very 
gently  and  with  slight  temptations.  Habitually,  too,  He 
gives  them  refre.shments  of sense  so  that  they  may  not  fall 
away,  and only after a  long time do they attain to purity of 
perfection  in  this  life,  some  of them  never  attaining  to  it. 
Such are neither properly in the night nor properly out of it ; 
for,  although they pass  on no farther,  yet,  in order that they 
may  be  preserved  in  humility  and  self-knowledge,  God 
exercises  them  for  certain  periods  and  at  certain  times 5  in 
those  temptations  and  aridities;  and  at  other  times  and 
seasons He aids them with consolations, lest they should grow 
faint and return to seek the consolations of the world.  Other 
souls,  which  are  weaker,  God  Himself  accompanies,  first 
appearing,6 and then passing to another place,  that He may 
1  So  Bz.,  H,  Mtr.,  P,  V.  E.p.,  A,  B,  C,  M  read:  • arrive'  [which 
involves  a  retranslation:  • its  senses  cannot  arrive  at  wisdom '-this is 
not a  natural reading in the Spanish], 
I  Ecclesiasticus xxxiv,  9-10.  •  Jeremiah  xxxi,  18. 
,  E.p.:  • of union of love.'  I  [Lit.,  • for  certain days.'] 
•  E.p.:  • now disappearing.' 
BOOK  I.  CHAPTER  XIV 
397 
exercise  them in His  love;  for  without such  turnings  away 
they would not learn to reach God. 
6.  But the souls which are to pass on to so happy and high 
an estate as is  the union oflove are wont as a  rule  to remain 
for  a  long  time in these  aridities and temptations,
l 
however 
quickly God may lead them, as has been seen by experience. 
I t is  time, then, to begin to treat of the second night. 
2 
1  E.p. omits:  • and temptations.' 
I  So  end  the  MSS.  A  and  B  add:  • wherein  God  places  the  soul.' 
E.p.  substitutes for  the last sentence:  • Bringing  here,  then,  this book  to 
a  close, let us begin to treat of the second night.'  G ends:  '.  .  .  aridities 
and temptations. until G.od  set it in the second night of the spirit.  whereof 
we  have  next  to  treat:  Bz.  has:  • End  of  the  Night.  End  of  the  first 
night  and  purgation  which  is  of  sense.  Laus  Deus  (sic).  That  which 
God wills.'  P  has:  • Finis.  Laus Deo Optimo et Maximo.  Es (sic)  Deus 
in nobis agitante calescimus ipso.' 
BOOK  THE  SECOND 
Of the  Dark Nignt of the  Spirit.
1 
CHAPTER  I 
Which  hegins to  treat of the  dark  night
D 
of the spirit and says at what 
time-it hegins. 
I.  The soul which God is  about to lead onward is  not led 
by His  Majesty into this night of the spirit3 as soon as  it goes 
forth  from  the  aridities  and  trials  of the  first  purgation  and 
night  of sense;  rather it is  wont  to  pass  a  long  time,  even 
years,  after leaving the state of beginners,  in exercising itself 
in that of proficients.  In this latter state it is like to one that 
has come forth from a rigorous imprisonment;'  it goes about 
the things of God with much greater freedom and satisfaction 
of the soul, and with more abundant and inward delight than 
it dido at the beginning before it entered the said night.  For 
its  imagination  and  faculties  are  no  longer  bound,  as  they 
were before,  by meditation and anxiety of spirit, since it now 
very  readily  finds  in  its  spirit  the  most  serene  and  loving 
contemplation and spiritual sweetness  without  the labour of 
meditation;  although,  as  the  purgation  of the  soul  is  not 
complete  (for the principal part thereof,  which is  that of the 
spirit, is wanting, without which, owing to the communication 
that  exists  between  the  one  part  and  the  other,6  since  the 
subject is one only, the purgation of sense,  however violent it 
may have been,  is  not yet complete and perfect),  it is  never 
without  certain  occasional  necessities,  aridities,7  darknesses 
and  perils  which  are  sometimes  much  more  intense  than 
those  of the past, for  these  were as tokens  and heralds  of the 
1  The 1\ISS.  vary as  to the title;  some  have  none.  B  begins:  • Book 
the SeCond  of the Purgation of the Spirit called Dark Night: 
Z  Thus the Codices.  E.p. has:  • the second night: 
a  So  H.  P.  Bz.  has:  • into  this  night  and  purgation  of  the  spirit: 
E.p.:  • into the union of love: 
•  [Lit., • from a  narrow prison:]  I  E.p.:  'than it had: 
•  [i.e.,  between sense and spirit.] 
.,  E.p. omits:  'occasional necessities.' 
39
8 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  I 
399 
coming night of the spirit, and are not lasting, as  will be the 
night which is to come.  For, having passed through a period, 
or periods,  or days  of this  night and tempest,  the soul  soon 
returns  to its  wonted  serenity;  and  after  this  manner God 
purges  certain  souls  which  think  not  to  rise  to  so  high  a 
degree  of love  as  do others,  bringing them at times,  and for 
short periods, into this night of contemplation and purgation 
of the  spirit,  causing  night  to  come  upon  them
1 
and  then 
dawn,  and  this  frequently,  so  that the  words  of David  may 
be fulfilled,  that He sends  His  crystal-that is,  His  contem-
plation-like the  morsels;2  although  these  morsels  of dark 
contemplation are never as intense as is  that terrible night of 
contemplation  which  we  are  to  describe,  into  which,  of set 
p u ~ p o s e     God  brings  the soul  that He may lead it to  Divine 
UDlon. 
2.  This  sweetness,  then,  and  this  interior  pleasure  which 
we  are  describing,  and  which  these  progressives  find  a.nd 
experience  in  their  spirits  so  easily  and  so  plentifully,  is 
communicated  to  them  in  much  greater  abundance  than 
aforetime,  overflowing into their senses  more than was  usual 
previously  to  this  purgation  of sense;  for,  inasmuch  as  the 
sense is  now purer, it can more easily feel  the pleasures of the 
spirit  after  its  manner.  As,  however,  this  sensual  part 
of the soul is  weak  and  incapable of experiencing the strong 
things  of the  spirit,  hence  these  proficients,  by reason  of this 
spiritual communication which is  made to their sensual part, 
endure therein  many frailties  and sufferings  and  weaknesses 
of the  stomach,  and  in  consequence  are  fatigued  in  spirit. 
For,  as  the  Wise  Man says:  The corruptible body presseth 
down  the  soul. 3  Hence  comes  it  that  the  communications 
that are granted to these souls  cannot be very strong or very 
intense or very spiritual, as is  required for Divine union with 
God, by reason of the weakness and corruption of the sensual 
nature which  has  a  part in them.  Hence arise  the raptures 
and  trances  and  dislocations  of  the  bones  which  always 
happen when the communications are not purely spiritual-
that is,  are  not given  to  the spirit alone,  as  are  those  of the 
perfect who are purified by the second night 'of the spirit, and 
in whom these raptures and torments  of the body no  longer 
exist, since they are enjoying liberty of spirit, 'and their senses 
are  now  neither clouded  nor transported.  • 
I  E.p.,  A,  B, M omit:  • upon  them.' 
•  Psalm cxlvil,  17  (Vulgate and  A.V.].  •  Wisdom ix,  IS. 
400  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
3.  And in order that the  necessity for  such  souls  to  enter 
this  night of the spirit may be understood,  we will  here note 
certain  imperfections  and  perils  which  belong  to  these 
proficients. 
CHAPTER  II 
Describes other imperfections
l 
which  belong to  these proficients. 
I.  These  proficients have two kinds  of imperfection:  the 
one kind is habitual ;  the other actual.  The habitual imper-
fections  are  the imperfect  habits  and  affections  which  have 
remained  all  the  time  in  the  spirit,  and  are  like  roots,  to 
which  the  purgation of sense  has  been  unable to  penetrate. 
The  difference  between  the  purgation  of these  and  that  of 
this  other  kind  is  the  difference  between  the  root  and  the 
branch,  or  between  the  removing  of a  stain  which  is  fresh 
and one which is  old and oflong standing.  For, as  we  said, 
the purgation of sense is  only the entrance and beginning of 
contemplation leading to  the  purgation of the spirit,  which, 
as we have likewise said,2 serves rather to accommodate sense 
to spirit than to unite spirit with God.  But there still remain 
in  the  spirit  the  stains  of the  old  man,  although  the  spirit 
thinks  not that  this  is  so,  neither  can  it perceive  them;  if 
these  stains  be  not  removed  with  the  soap  and  strong  lye 
of the  purgation  of this  night,  the  spirit  will  be  unable  to 
come  to the purity of Divine union. 
2.  These  souls  have  likewise  the  hebetudo  mentis'  and  the 
natural  roughness  which  every  man  contracts  through  sin, 
and the distraction and outward clinging of the spirit,  which 
must be enlightened, refined and recollected by the afflictions 
and  perils  of that  night.  These  habitual  imperfections  be-
long to all those who have not passed beyond this state of the 
proficient;  they cannot coexist,  as  we say, ..  with the perfect 
state of union  through love. 
3.  To actual  imperfections  all  are  not l ~   b l e   in  the same 
way.  Some, in whom these spiritual blessings
6 
are so super-
ficial  and  so  readily  affected  by  sense,  fall  into  greater
8 
difficulties and dangers, which we described at the beginning 
1  [Lit.,  • Continues  with other imperiection!;.']  The  Codices read  as in 
the text;  but e.p. fl.as:  'Of certain imperfections.' 
I  E.p.  omits:  . as we  have  likewise  said.' 
a  [i.e.,  • deadening of  the mind.']  ,  E.p. omits:  • as we say.' 
•  Hz.:  • these spiritual pleasures:  •  E.p.:  • into certain.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  II 
4
01 
of this treatise.  For, as they find so many and such abundant 
spiritual
1 
communications  and apprehensions,  both in sense 
and  spirit,  wherein  they  .  oftentimes  see  imaginary  and 
spiritual  visions  (for  all  these  things,  together  with  other 
delectable feelings,  come to many souls in this  state, wh,erein 
the  devil  and  their  own  fancy  very  commonly  practise 
deceptions  on  them),  and,  as  the  devil  is  apt  to  take  such 
pleasure in impressing  upon the soul  and suggesting to it the 
said  apprehensions  and feelings,  he fascinates  and deludes it 
with great facility, II when it takes not the precaution of resign-
ing itself to God, and of protecting itself strongly, by means of 
faith, from all these visions and feelings.  For in this state the 
devil  causes  many  to  believe  in  vain  visions 3  i.tnd  false 
prophecies;  and  strives
4 
to  make  them  presume  that God 
and the saints are speaking with them;  and they often trust 
their own fancy.  And  the  devil  is  also  accustomed,  in  this 
state, to fill them with presumption and pride, and, attracted 
by vanity  and  arrogance,  they  allow  themselves  to  be  seen 
performing  outward  acts  which  appear to  be  holy,  such  as 
raptures and other manifestations.  Thus they  become  bold 
with  God,  and  lose  holy  fear,  which  is  the  key  and  the 
custodian of all the virtues;  and in some of these souls so many 
falsehoods  and deceits  are apt to  be  multiplied,  and so  per-
sistent do they  become,  that it is  very doubtful if such souls 
will  return
5 
to  the pure road  of virtue  and true spirituality. 
Into  these  miseries  they  fall  because  they  are  beginning  to 
give  themselves  over  to spiritual  feelings  and apprehensions 
with  too great security,  when  they  were  beginning  to  make 
some  progress  upon the  way. 
6 
4.  There is so much that I  might say of these imperfections 
and  of how  they are  the  more incurable  because such  souls 
consider them to be more spiritual than the others, that I  will 
leave  this subject.  I  only S11.y,  in order to  prove how  neces-
sary  is  the  night  of the  spirit,  which  is  purgation,  for  him 
that  would  go  farther,  that  none  of these  proficients,  how-
ever  greatly  he  may  have  exerted  himself,  is  free,  at  best, 
from  many of those  natural affections  and imperfect habits, 
1  E.p.  omits' spiritual.' 
I  A,  M:  • with. great difficulty':  presumably a  copyist's error. 
e  E.p.,  A. B, M:  • causes to be believed  many visioDs.' 
&  So  e.p.  The  Codices  [and  P.  Silverio,  rather  mea.DiDglessly)  read: 
• h.ere,  in this place,  he strives.' 
•  Bz.:  • it is very difficult for such.  to return.' 
•  E.p.:  • the spiritual way.' 
4Q2  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
the  purification 
1 
whereof we  said  is  necessary if a  soul  is  to 
pass  to  Divine  union. 
5.  And over and above this  (as we have said already), inas-
much  as  the lower part of the soul  still  has  a  share in these 
spiritual  communications,  they  cannot  be  as  intense,  as 
pure  and  as  strong  as  is  needful  for  the  aforesaid  'union  ; 
wherefore,  in  order  to  come  to  this  union,  the  soul  must 
needs  enter  into  the  second  night  of the  spirit,  wherein  it 
must strip sense and spirit perfectly from all these apprehen-
sions  and  from  all  sweetness,  and  be  made  to  walk  in dark 
and  pure  faith,  which  is  the  proper  and  adequate  means 
whereby the soul is united with God, according as Hosea says, 
in these words:  I  will betroth thee-that is,  I  will unite thee 
-with Me  through faith. 
2 
CHAPTER  III 
Annotation/or that  which/ollows. 
I.  These  souls,  then,  have  now  become  proficien.ts, 
because  of the  t   m ~   which  they  have  spent  in  feeding  the 
senses  with  sweet  communications,3  so  that  their  sensual 
part, being thus attracted and delighted by spiritual pleasure, 
which  came  to  it  from  the  spirit,  may  be  united  with  the 
spirit and made one with it;  each part after its own manner 
eating of one and the same spiritual food  and from  one and 
the same dish, from one individuality and being, so that thus 
they may in a  certain way be united and brought into agree-
ment, and, thus united, may be prepared for the endurance of 
the  stern  and  severe  purgation  of the  spirit  which  awaits 
them.  In  this  purgation  these  two  parts  of the  soul,  the 
spiritual  and the sensual,  must  be completely purged,  since 
the one is never truly purged without the other, the purgation 
which  is  effective  for  sense  coming  when  that  of the  spirit 
begins.
40 
Wherefore  the night  which  we  have  called  that of 
sense  may  and  should  be  called  a  kind  of correction  and 
restraint  of the  desire  rather  than  purgation.  The  reason 
1  Bz.:  • the mortification.' 
I  Hosea ii,  20.  E.p.  has:  • I  will  betroth thee with Me  through faith.' 
8  E.p.  begins:  • These  (souls],  then,  have  now  become  proficients  [or 
made progress]  because of the time which they have spent in experiencing 
these sweet communications.' 
,  [The  original  adds  • purposely,'  which  seems  meaningless  in  its 
context.] 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  III 
is  that all the imperfections and disorders of the sensual part 
have  their  strength  and  root  in  the  spirit,  where  all  habits, 
both good  and  bad,  are  brought into subjection,l  and thus, 
until  these  are  purged,  the  rebellions  and  depravities  of 
sense  cannot  be  purged  throughly.2 
2.  Wherefore,  in  this  night  following,  both  parts  of the 
soul are purged together, and it is for this end that it is well to 
have  passed  through  the  corrections  of the  first  night,  and 
the  period  of tranquillity3  which  proceeds from  it,  in  order 
that,  sense'  being  united  with  spirit,  both  may  be  purged 
after  a  certain  manner  and  may  then  suffer  with  greater 
fortitude.  For very great fortitude
5 
is  needful  for  so  violent 
and  severe  a  purgation,  since,  if the  weakness  of the  lower 
part has  not first  been corrected  and fortitude  has  not  been 
gained  from  God  through  the  sweet  and  delectable  com-
munion  which  the  soul  has  afterwards  enjoyed  with  Him, 
its  nature  will  not  have  the  strength  or  the  disposition  to 
bear it. 
3.  Therefore,  since  these proficients are still  at a  very low 
stage of progress,  and follow  their own nature closely8 in the 
intercourse and dealings which they have with  God, because 
the  gold  of  their  spirit  is  not  yet  purified  and  refined, 
they  still  think  of  God  as  little  children,  and  speak  of 
God  as  little  children,  and  feel  and  experience  God  as 
little  children,  even as  S.  Paul says,7  because  they have not 
reached  perfection,  which  is  the  union  of  the  soul
8 
with 
God.  In  the state of union,  however,  they  will  work great 
things  in 9  the  spirit,  even  as  grown  men,  and  their  works 
and faculties  will  then be Divine rather than human, as  will 
afterwards be said.  To this end God is pleased to strip them 
of this  old  man and clothe  them with  the  new  man,  who is 
created according  to  God,  as  the Apostle  says,lO in the new-
ness of sense.  He strips their faculties, affections and feelings, 
both  spiritual  and  sensual,  both  outward  and  inward, 
1  E.p.  omits:  • where  .  .  .  subjection.' 
I  E.p.:  • until the bad habits are purged. the rebellions and depravities 
of sense cannot be purged throughly.' 
•  E.p.:  • and to have attained to the period of tranquillity'  [lit.,  • the 
fair weather 'J. 
,  Only  Bz.,  H,  Mtr  .•  V have the word' sense.' 
•  Most  authorities  omit  • fortitude'  [which  however,  the  context 
supplies].  Bz.  gives it explicitly;  A.  has":  • great preparation.' 
I  E.p.  omits:  • and  ... closely.'  7  I  Corinthians xiii,  II. 
I  E.p.:  • the union of love.' 
•  E.p.,  A,  B, M have' with' for' in. •  10  [Ephesians iv,  24.] 
2  H 
404  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
leaving  the  understanding  dark,  the  will  dry,  the  memory 
empty and the affections  in the deepest affliction,  bitterness 
and straitness,  taking from  the soul  the pleasure and experi-
ence of spiritual blessings which it had aforetime, so that this 
privation  may  be  one  of the  principles  which  are  required 
in  the  spirit  that  the  spiritual  form  of the  spirit  may  be 
introduced into it and  united with it,  which  is  the union of 
love.  All this the Lord works in the soul by means of a pure 
and  dark  contemplation,
l 
as  the  soul  explains  in  the  first 
stanza.  This,  although in the beginningS it was  interpreted 
with            to the first night of sense, is  principally under-
stood  by the soul of this second night of the spirit,  since  this 
is the principal part of the purification of the soul.  And thus 
we shall set it down and expound it here again in this sense. 
CHAPTER  IV 
, 
Sets down  the first         and the exposition  thereof. S 
On  a  dark  night.  Kindled&  in  love  with  ye8l'DiDp-oh.  hap" 
chance I-
I went forth without being observed,  IfJ house being DOW  at nat. 
EXPOSITION & 
I.  Interpreting  this  stanz,a  now  with             to  pur-
gation,  contemplation  or  detachment  or  poverty  of spirit, 
which  here  are  almost  one  and  the  same  thing,  we  can 
expound it after this manner and make the soul speak thus  :. 
In poverty,  and  without  protection' and support in  all.the 
apprehensions  of my  soul-that  is,  in  the  darkness  of my 
understanding and the constraint of my will, in affliction and 
anguish  with  respect  to  memory,  remaining  in  the  dark in 
pure faith,  which is  dark night for  the said  natural faculties, 
the  will  alone  being  touched  by  grief  and  afflictions  and 
yearnings  for  the  love  of God-I went  forth  from  myself-
that  is,  from  my  low  manner  of understanding,  from  my 
weak mode of loving        from  my poor and limited manner 
of  experiencing  God,  without  being  hindered  therein  by 
sensuality or the devil. 
I  Bz.:  • of a  dark and clean contemplation.' 
•  Only e.p.  has:  • in the beginning.' 
•  So  e.p.  The Codices  have only' Stanza the First' or no  title at all. 
V  reads:  • Stanza for  the third part.'  '  B,  G,  H, M:  • aflame.' 
•  Omitted  by e.p.,  A,  B.  •  E.p.  omits:  • protection and.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  V 
2.  This was a great happiness and a  good  chance for  me ; 
for,  when  the  faculties  had  been  perfectly  annihilated  and 
calmed,  together  with  the  passions,  desires
1 
and  affections 
of my  soul,  wherewith  I  had  experienced  and  tasted  God 
after a lowly manner, I  went forth  from  my own human way 
and operation  to  the operation and  way  of God.
2 
That is 
to say,  my understanding went forth from itself, turning from 
the human an.d  natural to the Divine  ;  for,  when it is  united 
with  God  by  means  of this  purgation,  its  understanding  no 
longer  comes  through  its  natural  light  and  vigour,3  but 
through the Divine Wisdom wherewith it has become united. 
And  my will  went forth  from  itself,  becoming  Divine;  for, 
being  united  with  Divine  love,  it  no  longer  loves  with  its 
natural  strength  after  a  lowly  manner,'  but  with  strength 
and purity from  the Holy Spirit; 6  and thus the will,  which 
is  now  near  to  God,  acts  not  after  a  human  manner,  and 
similarly  the  memory  has  become  transformed  into  eternal 
apprehensions  of glory.  And finally,  by means of this  night 
and purgation of the old man, all the energies and affections 
of the  soul  are  wholly  renewed  into  a  Divine  temper  and 
Divine  delight. 
There follows  the line  : 
On  a  dark  night. 
CHAPTER  V 
Sets  down  the  first  line  and  hegins  to  explain  how  this  dark  con-
templation  is  not  only  night for  the  soul  but  is  also  grief and 
purgation. 
8 
I.  This  dark  night  is  an inftowing  of God  into  the  soul, 
which purges it from its ignorances and imperfections,  habi-
tual,  natural  and  spiritual,  and  which  is  called  by contem-
platives infused                  or mystical theology.  Herein 
God  secretly  teaches  the  soul  and  instructs  it  in  perfection 
of love,  without  its  doing  anything,  or  understanding  of 
1  E.p.  omits' desires.' 
I  E.p.:  • I  went  forth  from  the  way  and  limited  operation  afore-
mentioned  to the operation and way of God.' 
•  E.p.:  'it no  longer has understanding after the narrow and limited 
manner that it had aforetime.· 
,  E.p.:  • with the limited vigour and strength that it had aforetime.' 
•  E.p.:  'from the Divine Spirit.' 
•  So  e.p.  The Codices have no title. 
406  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
what manner is this infused contemplation.
1 
Inasmuch as  it 
is  the loving wisdom  of God,  God  produces striking  effects
l 
in the soul, for,  by purging and illumining it, He prepares it 
for the union of love with God.  Wherefore the same loving 
wisdom that purges
3 
the blessed  spirits  and enlightens  them 
is  that which here  purges  the soul  and illumines it. 
2.  But the question arises:  Why is the Divine light (which, 
as  we say,  illumines and purges the soul from its ignorances) 
here called  by the soul a  dark night?  To this  the answer is 
that for two reasons' this Divine wisdom is not only night and 
darkness  for  the soul,  but is  likewise  affliction  and torment. 
The first  is  because  of the  height of Divine  Wisdom,  which 
transcends the talent of the soul,  and in this way is  darkness 
to  it;  the  second,  because  of its  vileness  and  impurity,  in 
which  respect  it  is  painful  and  afflictive  to  it,  and  is  also 
dark. 
3.  In order to prove the first  point,  we  must here assume 
a  certain  doctrine  of the  philosopher,  which  says  that,  the 
clearer and  more  manifest  are  Divine  things  in  themselves, 
the darker and more hidden are they to the soul  naturally; 
just as,  the clearer is the light, the more it blinds and darkens 
the pupil  of the owl,  and,  the more  directly we  look  at the 
sun,  the greater is  the darkness  which  it causes  in our visual 
faculty,  overcoming  and  overwhelming  it  through  its  own 
weakness.  In  the  same  way,  when  this  Divine  light  of 
contemplation  assails  the  soul  which  is  not  yet  wholly  en-
lightened, it causes spiritual darkness in it;  for not only does 
it overcome it, but likewise  it overwhelms it and darkens the 
act of its natural intelligence.  For this  reason S.  Dionysius 
and  other  mystical  theologians  call  this  infused  contem-
plation  a ray of darkness-that is  to say,  for the soul that is 
not enlightened and purged-for the natural strength of the 
intellect is  transcended  and overwhelmed by its great super-
natural  light.  Wherefore  David  likewise  said:  That  near 
to  God  and  round  about  Him  are  darkness  and  cloud  ;6 
not that this is so  in fact,  but that it is  so  to our weak under-
standing,  which is  blinded and darkened  by so  vast a  light, 
I  E.p.:  • without  its  doing  any  more  than  wait  lovingly  upon  God, 
hear Him and receive His light, though  it understand not of what manner 
is this infused contemplation.' 
I  E.p.:  '  .•. of God, it produces special effects.' 
•  A,  B, M:  • Wherefore the same wisdom,  as a  thing that purges.' 
,  So A,  B, Bz.  The other authorities have:  • for  two things.' 
•  Pu.lm xC\ri,  2  [A.V.,  xcvii,  2]. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  V 
to  which  it cannot attain.l  For this  cause  the  same  David 
then  explained  himself,  saying:  Through  the  great  splen-
dour of His  presence passed  clouds
2
-namcly, between  God 
and our understanding.  And  it is  for  this  cause  that,  when 
God  sends  it  out  from  Himself to  the  soul  that  is  not  yet 
transformed,  this  illumining  ray3  of  His  secret  wisdom 
causes"  thick  darkness  in  the  understanding. 
4.  And it is  clear that this  dark contemplation is  in these 
its  beginnings painful likewise to the soul;  for,  as  this Divine 
infused  contemplation  has  many  excellences  that  are  ex-
tremely  good,  and  the  soul  that  receives  them,  not  being 
purged, has  many miseries  that arc likewise  extremely bad,6 
hence  it  follows  that,  as  two  contraries  cannot  coexist  in 
one  subject-the  soul-it must  of necessity  have  pain  and 
suffering,  since it is  the subject wherein  these  two  contraries 
war against  each  other,  working  the  one  against  the  other, 
by  reason  of the  purgation  of the  imperfections  of the  soul 
which  comes  to  pass  through  this  contemplation.  This  we 
shall  prove inductively in the  manner following. 
5.  In the first  place,  because the light and wisdom of this 
contemplation is  most  bright and  pure,  and  the  soul  which 
it  assails  is  dark and  impure,  it follows  that  the  soul  suffers 
great pain when it receives it in itself, just as,  when
6 
the eyes 
are  dimmed  by  humours,  and  become  impure  and  weak, 
they  suffer  pain  through  the  assault  of  the  bright  light. 
And when the soul is  indeed assailed  by this  Divine light, its 
pain,  which  results from its impurity, is  immense;  because, 
when  this  pure  light  assails  the  soul,  in  order  to  expel  its 
impurity,  the soul  feels  itself to  be so  impure and  miserable 
that it believes God to be against it,  and thinks that it has set 
itself up against God.  This causes it so  much grief and pain 
(because it now believes  that God  has  cast it away)  that one 
of the greatest trials  which Job felt  when  God  sent him this 
experience,  was  as  follows,  when  he  said:  Why  hast  Thou 
set me against Thee, so  that I  am grievous  and  burdensome 
to myself?7  For,  by'means of this  pure light,8  the soul  now 
1  (Lit.,  '  not  attaining.']  B,  Bz.:  'not attaining  to  it.'  E.p.:  'not 
attaining to so great a  height.'  a  Psalm,  xvii  13  (A.V.,  xviii,  12]. 
a  H  has '  kingdom'  for' ray' (reina  for  raya],  an evident error. 
,  So  e.p.  The other authorities  [and  P.  Silverio]  read:  'produces.' 
I  E.p. omits:  'that  ... bad.' 
•  E.p.:  . it follows  that to receive  it afflicts  the  soul  greatly,  even  as 
when,' etc.  1  Job vii,  20. 
•  Thus  the  Codices,  except  A,  B,  P,  which  read:  • this  clear  light.' 
E.p.  has:  'this clear and pure light.' 
408  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
sees its impurity clearly (although darkly), and knows clearly 
that  it is  unworthy  of God  or of any  creature.  And  wha.t 
gives  it  most  pain  is  that  it  thinks  that  it  will  never  be 
worthy1  and that its  good  things  are all  over for  it.  This is 
caused  by the profound immersion of its spirit in the  know-
ledge and realization of its evils and miseries  ;  for this Divine 
and  dark light now  reveals  them  all  to the  eye,  that it  may 
see  clearly  how in its  own strength it can never  have  aught 
else.  In  this  sense  we  may  understand  that  passage  from 
David,  which  says:  For iniquity Thou hast corrected  man 
and  hast  undone  his  soul:  he  consumes  away  as  the 
spider.! 
6.  The  second  way  in  which  the  soul  suffers  pain  is  by 
reason  of its  weakness,  natural,  moral  and  spiritual;  for, 
when  this  Divine  contemplation  assails  the  soul  with  some 
strength,  in  order  to  strengthen  it  and  subdue  it,  it suffers 
such  pain in its  weakness that it nearly swoons  away.  This 
is  especially so at certain times when it is assailed with some-
what  greater  violence;  for  sense  and  spirit,  as  if beneath 
some  immense  and  dark  load,  are  in  such  great  pain  and 
agony  that  the  soul  would  find  advantage  and  relief  in 
death.  This had been experienced by the prophetJob, when 
he said:  I  desire  not that He should  have intercourse with 
me in great strength,  lest  He oppress  me  with  the  weight of 
His  greatness. 
3 
7.  Beneath  the  power  of this  oppression  and  weight  the 
soul feels  itself so  far from  being favoured  that it thinks,  and 
correctly so, that even that wherein it was wont to find some 
help  has  vanished  with  everything  else,  and  that  there  is 
none who has pity upon it.  To this effect Job says likewise: 
Have  pity  upon  me,  have  pity  upon  me,'  at  least  ye  my 
friends,  because  the  hand  of the  Lord  has  touched  me. Ii  A 
thing of great wonder and  pity is it that the soul's  weakness 
and impurity should  now  be so great that,  though the hand 
of God  is  of itself so .  light  and  gentle,  the  soul  should  now 
feel  it  to  be  so  heavy  and  so  contrary,8  though  it  neither 
weighs it down nor rests upon it, but only touches it, and that 
mercifully,  since  He  does  this  in  order  to  grant  the  soul 
favours  and not to chastise it. 
I  E.p.:  'is the fear that it will  never be worthy.' 
I  l'salm xxxviii,  12  [A. V.,  xxxix.  II]. 
I  Job xxiii.  6.  a  Some codices do  not repeat this phrase. 
I  Job xix.  21. 
•  lThis is the word  translated' (set)  against,' as in A.V.,  in § s. above.] 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  VI 
CHAPTER  VI 
Of other kinds of  pain dlat  the soul suffers in  this night. 
1 
I.  The  third  kind  of suffering  and  pain  that  the  soul 
endures  in  this  state  results  from  the  fact  that  two  other 
extremes  meet  here  in  one,  namely,  the  Divine  and  the 
human.  The  Divine  is  this  purgative  contemplation,  and 
the  human  is  the  subject-that  is,  the  soul.  The  Divine 
assails  the  soul  in  order  to  renew  it
2 
and  thus  to  make  it 
Divine;  and,  stripping  it  of the  habitual  affections  and 
attachments of the old man, to which it is very closely united, 
knit  together  and  conformed,  destroys  and  consumes  its 
spiritual  substance, II  and  absorbs  it  in  deep  and  profound 
darkness.  As  a  result of this,  the soul feels  itself to be perish-
ing and melting away, in the presence and sight of its miseries, 
by a  cruel spiritual  death,  even  as  if it had  been swallowed 
by  a  beast  and felt  itself being  devoured  in  the  darkness  of 
its  belly,  suffering  such  anguish  as  was  endured  by Jonah 
in the belly of that beast of the sea.'  For in this sepulchre of 
dark death it must needs abide until the spiritual resurrection 
which  it hopes for. 
2.  A  description  of this  suffering  and  pain,  although  in 
truth it transcends  all  description,  is  given  by  David,  when 
he says:  The lamentations  of death  compassed  me  about; 
the pains of hell surrounded me;  I  cried in my tribulation. 6 
But  what  the  sorrowful  soul  feels  most  in  this  condition 
is  its  clear perception,  as  it thinks,  that God  has abandoned 
it,  and,  in  His  abhorrence  of it,  has  flung  it into darkness  ; 
it is  a  grave and  piteous grief for  it to  believe  that God  has 
forsaken  it.  It is  this  that  David  also  felt  so  much  in  a 
like  case,  saying:  After  the  manner  wherein  the  wounded 
are dead in  the sepulchres,6  being  now  abandoned  by  Thy 
hand,  so  that  Thou  rememberest  them  no  more,  even  so 
have they set me in the deepest and lowest lake, in dark places 
and in the shadow of death, and Thy fury is confirmed upon 
1  So r..p.  The other authorities have no title. 
I  So H,  V.  A,  B:  • purge it and renew  it.'  M:  '  make it and  renew 
it.'  C,  P:  • take  it and  renew  it.'  Bz.:  • cut  it and  renew  it.'  E.p.: 
• season  it  and  renew  it.'  As  will  be  seen,  there  is  a  reading  for  every 
prtlference.  We cannot be sure  which  is the true one. 
•  E.p.  omits:  • its spiritual  substance' and  reads:  • breaks it up and 
bruises it.'  The  two verbs are greatly varied  by the different authorities 
but their geneTal sense remains much as in  the text a.bove, which gives  the 
reading of H, Mtr., V.  '  Jonah ii,  I. 
I  Psalm xvii,  5-7 [A.V.,  xviii,  4-5].  •  H  omits:  • in the sepulchres.' 
410  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
me  and  all  Thy  waves  Thou  hast  discharged  upon  me.
1 
For  indeed,  when  this  purgative  contemplation  is  most 
severe,  the  soul  feels  very  keenly  the  shadow  of death  and 
the lamentations of death 
2 
and the pains of hell,  which con-
sist in its feeling  itself to be without God,  and chastised  and 
cast  out,  and  unworthy  of Him; 3  and  it feels  that  He  is 
wroth with it.  All  this  IS  felt  by the soul in this  condition-
yea,  and more, for it believes' that it is  so  with it for  ever. 
3.  It feels,  too, that all creatures have forsaken it, and that 
it is  contemned by them, particularly by its friends.  Where-
fore  David  presently continues,  saying:  Thou hast  put far 
from  me my friends  and acquaintances;  they have counted 
me an abomination. 
6 
To all  this  will Jonah testify,  as  one 
who  likewise  experienced  it in  the  belly  of the  beast,  both 
bodily and spiritually.  Thou hast cast me  (he says)  into the 
deep, into the heart of the sea,  and the flood  came nigh unto 
me;  all its  billows and waves  passed  over me.  And I  said, 
, I  am  cast  away  from  the  presence  of Thine  eyes,  but  I 
shall  once  again  see  Thy  holy  temple'  (which  he  says, 
because God purifies the soul in this state that it may see  His 
temple);  the  waters,S  came  nigh  unto  me,  even  unto  my 
soul,  the  depth  closed  me  round  about,  the  ocean  covered 
my  head;  I  went  down  to the  bottoms  of the  mountains; 
the bars of the earth shut me up? for ever. 8  By these bars are 
here  understood,  in  this  sense,  imperfections  of the  soul, 
which  have  impeded  it  from  enjoying  this  delectable 
contemplation. 
4.  The fourth kind of pain is caused in the soul by another 
excellence  of this  dark  contemplation,  which  is  its  majesty 
and greatness, 
9 
from  which arises in the soul a  consciousness 
of the other extreme which  is  in  itself-namely,  that  of the 
deepest poverty and wretchedness:  this is one of the chiefest 
pains  that  it  suffers  in  this  purgation.  For  it feels  within 
itself  a  profound  emptiness  and  impoverishment  of  three 
1  Psalm lxxxvii,  6-8 [A.V.,  lxxxviii, 5-7]. 
I  E.p.  omits:  • of death.'  I  E.p.:  • and He is angered with it.' 
,  E.p.  adds:  • with  a  fearful  apprehension,'  but  no  MS.  has  this 
addition.  '  Psalm lxxxvii, 9  [A.V., lxxxviii,  8J. 
I  Bz.:  • the aftlictions.'  7  V:  • surrounded  me.' 
•  Jonah ii,  4-7 [A.V.,  ii, 3-ti] . 
•  So Bz., C, G, H, Mtr., V.  A, B, M omit this phrase.  E.p. has:  • which 
is the majesty and grea.tness  of  God.'  The Saint may mean  that the soul 
acquires in this contemplation a  greater knowledge  of its own  excellence, 
and in consequence has the greater obligation to God,  in Whose image and 
likeness it is  made. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  VI 
kinds of good, which are ordained for the pleasure of the soul, 
which  are  the  temporal,  the  natural  and  the  spiritual; 
and finds  itself set in the midst of the evils  contrary to  these, 
namely,  miseries  of imperfection,  aridity  and  emptiness  of 
the  apprehensions  of the  faculties  and  abandonment  of the 
spirit  in  darkness.  Inasmuch  as  God  here  purges  the  soul 
according to the substance of its sense and spirit, and accord-
ing to the interior and exterior faculties,  the soul must needs 
be  in  all  respects
1 
reduced  to  a  state  of emptiness,  poverty 
and  abandonment  and  must  be  left  dry  and  empty  and  in 
darkness. 
2 
For  the  sensual  part  is  purified  in  aridity,  the 
faculties  are purified in the emptiness of their apprehensions, 
and  the  spirit is  purified in thick  darkness. 
5.  All  this  God  brings  to  pass  by means  of this  dark con-
templation;  wherein the soul not only suffers this emptiness 
and  the suspension  of these  natural supports  and apprehen-
sions,  which  is  a  most  afflictive  suffering  (as  if a  man  were 
suspended  or held  in  the air so  that he  could  not  breathe), 
but likewise  He is  purging  the  soul,  annihilating. it,  empty-
ing it or consuming in it  (even as  fire  consumes  the  mouldi-
ness  and  the  rust  of metal)  all  the  affections  and imperfect 
habits  which  it has  contracted in its  whole  life.  Since  these 
are  deeply  rooted  in  the substance  of the soul,  it is  wont  to 
suffer  great  undoing
3 
and  inward  torment,  besides  the  said 
poverty  and  emptiness,  natural  and  spiritual,  so  that  there 
may here  be fulfilled  that passage from  Ezekiel  which says: 
Heap  together  the  bones  and  I  will  burn them in  the fire; 
the flesh  shall  be consumed and the whole composition shall 
be  burned  and  the  bones  shall  be  destroyed. 
4 
Herein  is 
understood  the  pain  which  is  suffered  in  the  emptiness  and 
poverty of the substance of the soulS both in sense and spirit. 
And  concerning  this  he  then  says:  Set  it also  empty  upon 
the  coals,  that  its  metal  may  become  hot  and  molten,  and 
its  uncleanness  may be destroyed within it,  and its  rust  may 
be  consumed. 
6 
Herein  is  described  the  grave  suffering 
which  the  soul  here  endures  in  the  purgation  of the  fire  of 
this  contemplation,  for  the  prophet says  here  that,  in  order 
for  the rust  of the affections  which are within  the soul  to  be 
purified  and  destroyed,  it  is  needful  that,  in  a  certain 
1  (The original shows that the reference is to the' parts' detailed in the 
next sentence.]  2  Bz.:  • and in black darkness.' 
I  A,  B.  M:  • great burdens and undoing';  Bz.:  . great sorrow.'  The 
text follows  e.p.,  H, Mtr.,  P, V.  '  Ezekiel  xxiv,  10. 
I  E.p.:  • and poverty of the soul.'  •  Ezekiel xxiv,  II. 
412  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
manner,  the soul itself should be annihilated and destroyed, 
since  these  passions  and imperfections  have  become  natural 
to it.
1 
6.  Wherefore,  because  the soul  is  purified in this furnace 
and is  like  the gold  in the crucible,  as  says  the  Wise  Man,S 
it is conscious of this complete undoing ofitselfin its very sub-
stance,  together  with  the  direst  poverty,  wherein it is,  as  it 
were,  coming to an end, as may be seen by that which David 
says  of himself in this respect, in these words:  Save me, Lord 
(he cries to God), for  the waters  have come in even unto my 
soul;  I  am made fast  in  the mire of the depth and there is 
no place where I  can stand;  I  came to the depth of the sea 
and  the  tempest  overwhelmed  me;  I  laboured  crying,  my 
throat
8 
has  become  hoarseJ. mine  eyes  have  failed  whilst  I 
hope  in my  God.·  Here  uod greatly  humbles  the  soul  in 
order  that  He  may  afterwards  greatly  exalt  it;  and  if He 
ordained  not  that these  feelings  should  be  quiCkly  lulled  to 
sleep when they arise within the soul,  it would die
li 
in a very 
few  days;  but at intervals  there  occur times  when  it is  not 
conscious of their greatest intensity.  At times, however, they 
are so keen that the soul seems to be seeing hell and perdition 
opened.  Of such are they  that in truth go  down  alive into 
hell, for here on earth they are purged in the same manner as 
there, II  since  this  purgation is  that which  would  have  to  be 
accomplished there. 
7 
And thris the soul that passes  through 
this
8 
either enters  not that place  at all,  or tarries  there  but 
for  a  very'  short  time;  for  one  hour  of purgation  here  is 
more profitable than are many there. 
CHAPTER  VII 
Continues  the  same  matter  and  considers  other  ajJlidions  and  trials 
oithe will. 10 
I.  The afHictions and trials of the will  are now very great 
likewise,  and of such  a  kind  that they sometimes  pierce the 
1  Bz.:  'eradicated from it.'  •  Wisdom iii, 6. 
•  So  e.p.  The  other  authorities  use  the  plural  form  of  . throat' 
(gargantas).  '  Psalm lxviii,  2-4  [A.V.,  lxix,  1-3]. 
6  E.p.:  'it would  forsake  the body.' 
I  E.p.:  • they are purged here in a  kind of purgatory.' 
,  E.p.  adds: .' when it is for sins, even though they be venial.' 
I  E.p.  adds:  'and is throughly purged.' 
I  E.p.  omits' very.'  10  So •. p.  The Codices have DO  title. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  VII 
soul with a  sudden remembrance of the evils  in the midst  of 
which  it  finds  itself,  and  with  the  uncertairity  of finding 
a  remedy for  them.  And  to this  is  added the remembrance 
of times of prosperity now past;  for as a  rule souls that enter 
this  night have had many consolations
l 
from  God,  and have 
rendered  Him many services,  and it causes them the greater 
grief to  see  that they  are far  removed  from  that  happiness, 
and unable to enter into it.  This was also described  by Job, 
who  had had experience  of it,  in  these  words:  I,  who  was 
wont  to  be  wealthy  and  rich,  am  suddenly  undone  and 
broken asunder;  He hath taken me  by my neck;  He hath 
broken me and set  me up for  His  mark
2 
to wound  me;  He 
hath compassed  me  round about with  His  spears;  He hath 
wounded  all  my  loins;  He hath  not  pardoned;  He  hath 
scattered  my  bowels  on  the  ground;  He  hath  broken  me 
with wound upon wound  ; 3  He hath assailed  me as  a strong 
giant;  I  have  sewed  sackcloth  upon  my  skin  and  covered 
my  flesh  with  ashes;  my  face  has  become  swollen  with 
weeping  and  mine  eyes  are  blinded.· 
2.  So  many  and  so  grievous 
5 
are  the  afflictions  of this 
night,  and  so  many  passages  of Scripture  are  there  which 
could  be cited to  this  purpose, that time and strength would 
fail  us  to  write  of them,  for  all  that  can  be  said  thereof is 
certainly less  than the truth.  Through the  passages  already 
quoted some idea may be gained of them.  And, that we may 
bring the exposition  of this line to  a  close  and explain  more 
fully  what is  worked in the soul  by this  night,  I  shall  repeat 
what Jeremiah  felt  about it,  which,  since  there  is  so  much 
of it,  he  describes  and  bewails  in  many  words  after  this 
manner:  I,  the man  that see  my poverty in  the rod of His 
indignation;  He hath threatened  me  and  brought me into 
darkness and not into light.  So far hath He turned against me 
and hath converted His hand upon me all the day!  He hath 
made my skin and my flesh  old;  He hath broken my bones ; 
He hath  made a  fence  around  me  and  compassed  me  with 
gall  and  trial;  He hath set  me  in dark places,  as  the ever-
lasting dead.  He hath made a fence  around me and against 
me,  that I  may  not  go  out;  He  hath  aggravated  my  cap-
tivity.  Yea, and when I have cried 
8 
and  have entreated, He 
1  The noun occurs only in e.p.  I  E.p.:      for  His target.' 
I  E.p.:  'He hath broken me and added  wounds upon wounds.' 
•  Job xvi, 13-17 [A.V., xvi,  12-16). 
•  E.p., A, B:  'and so great.'  I  E.p.:  'when I am calling and have.' 
414  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
hath shut out my prayer.  He hath enclosed  my ways  and 
exits  with square stones;  He hath thwarted  my steps.  He 
hath set  ambushes
1 
for  me;  He hath  become  to  me  a  lion 
in a secret place.  He hath turned aside my steps and broken 
me  in  pieces,  He  hath  made
2 
me  desolate;  He  hath  bent 
His  bow and set me  as  a  mark for His arrow.  He hath shot 
in  my reins  the  daughters  of His  quiver.  I  have  become  a 
derision  to all  the  people,  and laughter and  scorn for  them 
all  the  day.  He  hath  filled  me  with  bitterness  and  hath 
made  me  drunken  with  wormwood.  He  hath  broken  my 
teeth by number;3  He hath fed  me with ashes.  My soul is 
cast  out  from  peace;  I  have  forgotten  good  things.  And 
I  said:  'Mine end is frustrated and cut short, together with 
my  desire  and  my  hope  from  the  Lord.  Remember  my 
poverty and my excess,  the wormwood and the gall.  I  shall 
be mindful with remembrance and  my soul shall  be undone 
within  me in  pains.'" 
3.  All these complaints Jeremiah makes about these pains 
and  trials,  and  by  means  of them  he  most  vividly  depicts 
the  sufferings  of the  soul  in  this  spiritual  night  and  purga-
tion.
6 
Wherefore the soul that God sets in this tempestuous' 
and  horrible  night  is  deserving  of great  compassion.  For, 
although  it  experiences  much  happiness  by  reason  of the 
great  blessings  that  must  arise  on  this  account  within  it, 
when,  as Job  says,  God  raises  up  profound  blessings  in  the 
soul  out of darkness,  and  brings  out  to  light  the shadow  of 
death,7  so  that,  as  David says,  His  light comes  to  be as  was 
His darkness; 8  yet notwithstanding,  by reason of the dread-
ful  pain which  the soul  is  suffering,  and of the  great  uncer-
tainty  which  it  has  concerning  the  remedy  for  it,  since  it 
believes,9  as  this  prophet  says  here,  that  its  evil  will  never 
end,  and it thinks,  as  David says  likewise,  that God set it in 
dark  places like  those  that  are dead,10  and  for  this  reason 
brought  its  spirit  into  anguish  within  it  and  troubled  its 
heart, 11  it suffers great pain and grief, since there is added to 
all  this  (because of the solitude and abandonment caused in 
it by this dark night),  the fact that it finds  no  consolation or 
1  H, M read:  • bear [sic]  ambushes'  [ef.  Lamentations iii,  10,  A.V.]. 
a  E.p.:  'hath left.'  a  E.p.  : ' one  by one.'  'Lamentations iii, 1-20. 
i  E.p.:  'wherein this spiritual night and  purgation sets it.' 
•  E.p.:  • fearful.'  7  Job xii,  22. 
8  Psalm cxxxviii,  12  [A.V.,  cxxxix.  12].  •  E.p.:  • it thinks.' 
10  [Lit.,' like to the dead ofthe world (01' ofthe age).'] 
11  Psalm cxlii,  3  (A.V.,  cxliii,  3-4]. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  VII 
support  in  any instruction  nor in  a  spiritual  master.  For, 
although in many ways  its  director  may show it good cause 
for  being comforted in the  blessings  which  are contained  in 
these afflictions, it cannot believe him.  For it is so greatly ab-
sorbed and immersed in the realization of those evils wherein 
it sees  its  own  miseries  so  clearly,  that it thinks  that,  as  its 
director  observes  not  that  which  it  sees  and  feels,  he  is 
speaking  in  this  manner  because  he  understands  it  not; 
and so,  instead of comfort,  it rather receives  fresh  affliction, 
since it believes that its director's advice contains no remedy 
for its troubles.  And, in truth, this is so  ;  for,  until the Lord 
shall  have  completely  purged  it  after  the  manner  that  He 
wilis,  no  means  or remedy is  of any service  or profit for  the 
relief  of its  affliction;  the  more  so  because  the  soul  is  as 
powerless in this case as one who has been imprisoned in a dark 
dungeon, and is  bound hand and foot,  and can neither move 
nor  see,  nor  feel  any  favour  whether  from  above  or  from 
below,  until  the  spirit  is  humbled,  softened  and  purified, 
and grows so  keen and delicate and pure that it can become 
one with the Spirit of God, according to the degree of union 
of love which His mercy is pleased to grant it;  in proportion 
to  this  the  purgation 
1 
is  of greater  or  less  severity  and  of 
greater or less  duration. 
4.  But,  if it  is  to  be  really  effectual,  it  will  last  for  some 
years,  however· severe  it  be;  since  the  purgative  process 
allO\  .... s  :  ntervals  of relief,2  wherein,  by  the  dispensation  of 
God,  tilis  dark contemplation ceases  to  assail  the soul in the 
form  and  manner  of purgation,  and  assails  it after  an  illu-
minative  and  a  loving  manner,  wherein  the  soul,  like  one 
that has gone forth from this dungeon and imprisonment, and 
is  brought  into  the  recreation  of spaciousness  and  liberty) 
feels  and  experiences  great  sweetness  of peace  and  loving 
friendship  with  God,  together  with  ready  abundance  of 
spiritual  communication.  This  is  to  the  soul  a  sign  of the 
health which is  being wrought within it by the said purgation 
and  a foretaste of the  abundance for which it hopes.  Occa-
sionally  this  is  so  great  that the  soul  believes  its  trials  to  be 
at  last  over.  For  spiritual  things  in  the  soul  have  this 
characteristic,  when  they  are  most  purely  spiritual,  that, 
when  they  arc  trials,  the  soul  believes  that  it  will  never 
escape from  them,  and that all  its  blessings  are now  over,  as 
1  A.  B. H.  M.  p.  V  have:  'the union.' 
a  E.p .•  A.  V:  • intervals and reliefs.' 
416  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
has  been seen  in the passages  quoted;  and,  when  they are 
spiritual blessings,  the soul  believes in the same way that its 
troubles  are  now over,  and  that  blessings  will  never fail  it. 
This was so  with David, when he found  himself in the midst 
of  them,  as  he  confesses  in  these  words:  I  said  in  my 
abundance:  'I shall  never  be  moved.' 
1 
5.  This  happens  because  the  actual  possession  by  the 
spirit  of one  of two  contrary things,  itself makes  impossible 
the  actual  possession  and  realization  of the  other  contrary 
thing;  this is  not the case,2 however, in the sensual  part of 
the soul, because its apprehension is weak.  But, as the spirit 
is not yet completely purged and cleansed from the affections 
that it has contracted from its lower part, although it changes 
not in so  far  as  it is  spirit,  it can be moved  to  further afflic-
tions in so far as  these affections sway it. a  In this way,  as we 
see,  David  was afterwards moved, and experienced many ills 
and afflictions; although in the time of his abundance he had 
thought and said  that he would  never  be moved.  It is just 
so with the soul in this condition, when it sees itself moved by 
that  abundance  of spiritual  blessings,  and,  being  unable  to 
see  the  root  of the  imperfection  and  impurity  which  still 
remain within it, thinks  that its trials are over. 
6.  This  thought,  however,  comes  to the soul  but seldom, 
for,  until  spiritual  purification  is  complete  and  perfected, 
the  sweet  communication  is  very  rarely  so  abundant  as  to 
conceal from the soul the root which remains hidden, in such 
a  way that the soul  can cease to feel  that there is  something 
within  itself that it lacks  or that it has  still  to  do.  Thus it 
cannot completely enjoy  that relief,  but feels  as  if one of its 
enemies were within it, and although this enemy is, as it were, 
hushed and asleep, it fears that he will come to .life again and 
attack it.'  And this is  what indeed happens, for,  when  the 
soul  is  most  secure and least  a l ~ r t    
6 
it is  dragged  down  and 
immersed  again in another and a  worse' degree of affliction 
which  is  severer  and  darker  and  more  grievous  than  that 
which  is  past;  and  this  new  affliction  will  continue  for  a 
further  period  of time,  perhaps  longer  than  the  first.  And 
1  Psalm xxix,  7  [A. V.,  xxx, 6]. 
I  E.p.:  'which is not so  much the case.' 
I  E.p.:  • the affections  that its lower  part has contracted,  although it 
has  greater  consistency and  firmness;  but, in  so  far  as  it is  a1Iected  by 
them,  it is liable to further sufferings.' 
•  [Lit.,  • and  play his tricks upon it.'] 
•  E.p. omits:  'and least alert.'  '  E.p.  omits;  'and a  worse.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  VII 
the soul once more comes to believe 
1 
that all its  blessings are 
over for  ever.  Although it had thought during its first  trial 
that there were no more afflictions which it could suffer and 
yet,  after  the  trial  was  over,  it  enjoyed  great  blessings,  this 
experience is  not sufficient to take away its belief,  during this 
second  degree  of trial,  that all  is  now over for it and  that it 
will  never again be happy as  in the past.  For, as  I  say,  this 
belief, of which the soul is so sure, is caused in it by the actual 
apprehension of the spirit, which annihilates within it all that 
is  contrary to  it.
2 
7.  This is  the reason why those who lie in purgatory suffer 
great  misgivings  as  to  whether  they will  ever  go  forth  from 
it and whether their pains will  ever be over.3  For, although 
as  a  rule they have the three theological virtues-faith, hope 
and charity-the present realization which they have of their 
- afflictions and of their deprivation of God allows them not to 
enjoy  the  present  blessing  and  consolation  of these  virtues. 
For, although they are able to realize that they have a  great 
love for God, this is no consolation to them, since they cannot 
think that God  loves  them or that they  are worthy that He 
should do so;  rather,  as  they see  that they  are deprived  of 
Him,  and left in their own  miseries,  they think that there is 
that in  themselves  which  provides  a  very  good  reason  why 
they should with perfect justice be abhorred and cast out by 
God for ever.'  And thus, although the soul in this purgation 
1  E_p_:  • to  persuade  itself:  H  omits:  • than  the  first_  And  then 
the soul once more comes to [believe that]: 
a  E.p_  has:  • which  annihilates  in  it  [the  soul,  not  the  spirit,  as  the 
gende, of the  SPanish ,zoun shows]  all that can cause it joy_'  It then omits 
the next paragraph as far  as the words' cast out by God  for ever:  A,  V 
also  make  this  omission,  but not  B,  as  P.  Gerardo  mistakenly  asserts_ 
G  omits  almost the whole of this chapter. 
I  1\1,  probably  in  error  [de5ean  for  de  que  5e  han]:  • and  desire  their 
pains  to  be  over:  Breads  '\lery  similarly  [certainly  with  intention]. 
P  omits:  • and  .  .  .  over.' 
,  B,  Bz.,  C,  H,  Mtr.  all  have  this long  passage  on  the suffering  of  the 
soul  in  Purgatory _  It would  be  rash,  therefore,  to  deny  that  S.  John  of 
the Cross  is  its author,  [or  to  suppose,  as  P.  Gerardo did,  that he deleted 
it during a  revision  of his works].  An  admirably constructed  synthesis of 
these  questions  will  be  found  in  B.  Belarmino,  De  Purgatorio,  Bk.  II, 
chaps.  iv,  v_  He  asks  if  souls  in  Purgatory  are  sure  of  their  salvation_ 
This  was  denied  by  Luther,  and  by  a  number  of  Catholic  writers,  who 
held  that,  among  the  afflictions  of  these  souls,  the  greatest  is  this  very 
uncertainty;  some maintain that, though they have in fact such certainty, 
they are  unaware  of  it.  Belarmino quotes  among other authorities Denis 
the Carthusian,  De  quatluo, novissimis,  Gerson  (Lect.  I  De  Vita  Spi,ituali) 
and  John  of  Rochester  (against  Luther's  32nd  article);  these  writers 
claim  that,  as  Sill  which  is  venial  is only so  through  the  Divine  mercy,  it 
may  with  perfect  justice  be  rewarded  by  eternal  punishment,  and  thus 
.p8  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
is conscious that it desires to have a great love for God and to 
give a  thousand lives for Him (which is the truth, for in these 
trials such souls love  their God very earnestly),  yet this is  no 
relief to it, but rather brings it greater affliction.  For it loves 
Him  so  much  that  it  retains  naught  that  will  cause  Him 
anxiety ;  when, therefore, it sees itself to be so miserable that 
it cannot believe  that God loves  it,  nor that  there is  or will 
ever  be  reason  why  He should  do so,  but rather
l 
that there 
is  reason  why it should  be abhorred,  not only  by Him,  but 
by all  creatures for  ever,  it is  grieved  to see  in itself reasons 
for deserving to be cast out by Him Whom it loves and desires 
so  greatly. 
CHAPTER  VIII 
Of other pains which aJllict  the soul in  this state. B 
I.  But there is  another thing here
3 
which afflicts  and dis-
tresses  the soul  greatly,  which is  that,  as  this  dark night has 
hindered its faculties  and affections  in this  way,  it is  unable 
to raisef.  its  affection or its mind to God,  neither can it pray 
to  Him,  thinking,  as Jeremiah  thought  concerning  himself, 
that God  has set  a  cloud  before it through  which  its  prayer 
cannot  pass. 
6 
For it is  this  that is  meant  by  that  which  is 
said  in the passage  referred  to,  namely:  He hath shut and 
souls that have committed venial sin cannot be confident of their salvation. 
He  also  shows,  however,  that the  common  opinion  of  theologians  is that 
the  souls  in  Purgatory  are  sure  of  their  salvation,  and  considers  various 
degrees  of  certainty,  adding  very  truly  that,  while  these  souls  experience 
no  fear,  they experience hope,  since they have not yet the Beatific vision. 
Uncertainty as to their salvation, it is  said,  might arise from ignorance 
of  the sentence passed  upon  them  by the  Judge or from  the  deadening of 
their  faculties  .by  the  torments  which  they  are  suffering.  Belarmino 
refutes these  and  other suppositions  with  great  force  and  effect.  S.  John 
of the Cross  seems to be referring to the last named  when he writes of       
realization  of  their  afflictions  and  their  deprivation  of  God  not            
them to enjoy the blessings of the theological virtues.  It is not surprisiI!g 
if the Saint,  not having examined  very closely  this question,  of  which  he 
would  have  read  treatments in  various  authors,  thought  of  it principally 
as  an  apt  illustration  of  the  purifying  and  refining  effects  of  passive 
purgation;  and an apt illustration it certainly is.  . 
1  E.p.:  'when  it  sees  itself  to  be  so  miserable,  suspecting  that  God 
loves  it  not,  and  having  then  no  certainty  that  there  is  anything  in  it 
worthy of love  but rather  ... ' 
I  So  e.p.  The Codices have no title. 
•  E.p.:  'There is in this state another thing.' 
•  E.p.  adds here:  'as before.'  '  Lamentations iii,  44. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  VIII 
enclosed  my ways  with square stones. 
1 
And if it sometimes 
prays it does so  with such lack of strength and of sweetness' 
that it thinks  that God  neither hears  it nor pays  heed  to it, 
as this prophet likewise declares in the same passage, saying : 
When  I  cry and entreat,  He hath shut out my prayer. 
8 
In 
truth  this  is  no  time  for  the  soul  to  speak  with  God;  it 
should  rather  put its  mouth  in  the  dust,  as  Jeremiah  says, 
so  that perchance there may come to it some present hope,' 
and it may endure its  purgation  with  patience. Ii  It is  God 
Who  is  passively8  working  here in  the soul;  wherefore  the 
soul  can  do  nothing.  Hence  it  can  neither  pray  nor  be 
present  at  the  Divine  offices  and  pay  attention  to  them, 
7 
much less  can it attend to other things and affairs which are 
temporal.  Not only so,  but it has likewise such distractions 
and times of such profound forgetfulness of the memory, that 
frequent periods pass by without its knowing what it has been 
doing or thinking,  or what it is  that it is  doing or is  going to 
do,  neither can it pay attention,  although it desire  to do so, 
to  anything that occupies it.
8 
2.  Inasmuch as  not only is the understanding here purged 
of its light,
9 
and the will  of its affections,  but the memory is 
also  purged  of meditation  and  knowledge,  it is  well  that it 
be  likewise  annihilated  with  respect  to  all  these  things,  so 
that that which David says  of himself in this  purgation may 
be  fulfilled,  namely:  I  was  annihilated  and  I  knew  not.
10 
This unknowing refers
ll 
to these follies  and forgetfulnesses  of 
the  memory,  which  distractions  and  forgetfulnesses  are 
caused  by  the interior  recollection  wherein  this  contempla-
tion  absorbs  the  soul.  For,  in  order  that  the  soul  may  be 
divinely  prepared  and  tempered  with  its  faculties  for  the 
Divine union of love,  it would  be well for it to be first  of all 
absorbed,  with  all  its  faculties,  in  this  Divine  and  dark 
spiritual  light  of contemplation,  and  thus  to  be  withdrawn 
from  all  the  affections  and  apprehensions  of the  creatures, 
1  [Lamcntationsiii,9.] E.p.omits' shut and ' and reads 'roads' for 'ways,' 
Z  E.p.:  I  with such aridity and lack of sweetness.' 
•  Lamentations iii,  8.  '  Lamentations iii,  29. 
I  E.p.:  '  In -truth,  this is the time to put, as  Jeremiah says, its mouth 
in the dust, enduring its purgation with patience.'  . 
•  E  p.  omits' passively.' 
7  [Lit.,  , at the Divine things.']  Thus A,  B.  C,  G,  Mtr.,  P.  E.p.,  M: 
I  pay  great  attention.'  H:' be  present  at the  Divine  things.'  Bz.:  'be 
present with devotion at the Divine things.' 
•  E.p.:  'nor can it be  very  attentive,  although  it desire  to  be  so,  to 
anything that it is doing.'  •  E. p.:  'of its imperfect knowledge.' 
10  Psalm lxxii,  22  [A.V.,  lxxiii,  22].  11  E.p.:  'extends.' 
2  I 
420  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
which  condition  ordinarilyl  continues  in  proportion  to  its 
intensity.  And  thus,  the  simpler  and  the  purer  is  this 
Divine light in its assault  upon the soul,  the more it darkens 
it,  voids  it  and  annihilates  it  according  to  its  particular 
apprehensions  and  affections,  with  rega.rd  both  to  things 
above and to things below;  and similarly, the less simple and 
pure is  it in this assault,  the less  deprivation it causes  it and 
the less  dark is  it.  Now this is  a  thing that seems incredible, 
to say that, the brighter and purer is supernatural and Divine 
light,  the  more it darkens  the soul,  and  that,  the less  bright 
and  pure is  it,  the  less  dark it is  to  the soul.  Yet  this  may 
well  be  understood 2  if we  consider  what  has  been  proved 
above  by  the  dictum  of the  philosopher-namely,  that  the 
brighter  and  the  more  manifest  in  themselves·  are  super-
natural things the darker are they to our understanding. 
3 
3.  And to the end  that this  may be understood  the  more 
clearly,  we  shall  here  set  down  a  similitude  referring  to 
common  and  natural light.  We  observe  that a  ray of sun-
light  which  enters  through  the  window  is  the  less  clearly 
visible according as it is the purer and freer from specks,  and 
the more  of such  specks  and motes  there are in the air,  the 
brighter is  the light to  the  eye.  The reason  is  that it is  not 
the light itself that is seen;  the light is  but the means where-
by the other things that it  t r i k   s   are seen, and then it is  also 
seen  itself,  through  its  having  struck  them;  had  it  not 
struck  them,  neither  it  nor  they  would  have  been  seen. 
Thus  if the  ray  of sunlight  entered  through  the  window  of 
one room and passed  out through another on the other side, 
traversing the room,  and if it met nothing  on  the way,  or if 
there  were  no  specks  in  the  air  for  it  to  strike,  the  room 
would  have  no  more  light  than  before.  neither  would  the 
ray  of light  be  visible.  In fact,  if we  consider  it carefully, 
there  is  more  darkness  in  the  path  of the  ray  of sunlight, 
because it overwhelms and darkens  any other light,  and yet 
it is  itself invisible,  because,  as  we  have  said,  there  are  no 
visible objects which it can strike. 
4.  Now  this  is  precisely  what this  Divine  ray of contem-
plation does  in the soul.  Assailing  it with  its  Divine  light, 
1  So e.p.,  M.  The Codices have' singularly.' 
2  The  words  'this  may  well  be  understood,'  which· are  necessary  to 
complete the sense of the passage,  are only found in e.p.  and Mtr. 
a  E.p. omits the next paragraph, doubtless because the same comparison 
has already  been  used  in  the  Ascent  of Mount  Ca,mel,  Bk.  II, chap.  xiv, 
§ 9  (p.  IZ:l, above). 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  VIII 
421 
it  transcends  the  natural  power  of the  soul,  and  herein  it 
darkens it and deprives it of all natural affections and appre-
hensions  which  it  apprehended  aforetime  by  means  of 
natural light ;  and thus it leaves itl not only dark,  but like-
wise  empty,  'according  to  its  faculties  and  desires,  both 
spiritual and natural.  And, by thus leaving it empty a.nd  in 
darkness, it purges and illumines it with Divine spiritual light 
even  when  the  soul  thinks  not  that  it  has  this  light,  but 
believes  itself to be in darkness,  even  as  we  have said  of the 
ray of light, which, although it be in the  midst of the  room, 
yet,  ifit be pure and meet nothing on its  path, is  not visible. 
With  regard,  however,  to  this  spiritual  light  by  which  the 
soul  is  assailed,  when  it  has  something  to  strike-that  is, 
when  something  spiritual  presents  itself to  be  understood, 
however  small  a  speck  it  be  and  whether  of perfection  or 
imperfection, or whether it be a judgement of the falsehood or 
the  truth  of a  thing2-it  then  sees  and  understands  much 
more clearly than before  it was  in these  dark places.  And 
exactly in the same way it discerns  the spiritual light which 
it has  in  order that it  may  readily  discern  the  imperfection 
which is  presented to it;  even as,  when the ray of which we 
have spoken,  within the  room,  is  dark  and not itself visible, 
if one introduce
3 
a  hand or any other thing into its path, the 
hand is then seen and it is realized that that sunlight is present. 
5.  'Wherefore,  since  this  spiritual light is  so  simple,
4 
pure 
and general, not appropriated or restricted to any particular 
thing  that  can  be  understood,  whether  natural  or  Divine 
(since  with  respect to all these apprehensions the faculties  of 
the  soul  are  empty and  annihilated),  hence  it follows  that
li 
with  great  comprehensiveness  and  readiness  the  soul  dis-
cerns  and  penetrates  whatsoever  thing  presents  itself to  it, 
1  E.p.  greatly modifies  the first  part of this paragraph,  thus: 
• And thus,  the ray of this lofty contemplation assails  the soul  with its 
Divine light,  and,  since  it transcends  the  natural power of the  soul  itself, 
darkens it and  deprives  it  of  all  the  natural  apprehensions  and  affections 
which  it apprehended  aforetime' by  means  of  natural  light.  Whereby  it 
leaves it,' etc. 
•  E.p.  has:  '  .... even  as  we  have  said.  But even  as  the  ray  of 
light,  if  it  be  pure  and  have  nothing to  strike  or  to  meet,  is  hardly  per-
ceived,  and  when  it  strikes  or  reflects  is  the  better  seen,  even  so  this 
spiritual light whereby the soul is assailed, since it is so pure, is not in itself 
observed  or  perceived;  but  when  it  has  something  to  strike-that  is, 
when  some particular thing presents itself  to be understood,  of perfection 
or judgement of the falsehood  or truth of a  thing,'  etc. 
a  E.p.:  'even  as  when  the  ray  is  in  itself  not  perceived,  yet,  if  one 
introduce,'  etc. 
,  H:  'so sens;ble.·  •  E.p. omits:  • hence it follows  that: 
422  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
whether it come from above or from below;  for which cause 
the Apostle said:  That the spiritual man searches all things, 
even  the  deep  things  of God.
1 
For  by  this  general  and 
simple wisdom is understood that which the Holy Spirit says 
through the  Wise  Man,  namely:  That it reaches  whereso-
ever it wills by reason ofits purity ;2 that is  to say,  because it 
is  not  restricted  to  any  particular  object  of the intellect  or 
affection.  And  this  is  the characteristic  of the spirit  that is 
purged and  annihilated  with  respect  to  all  particular affec-
tions  and  objects  of the  understanding,  that  in  this  state 
wherein it has pleasure in nothing and understands nothingS 
in  particular,  but dwells  in its  emptiness,  darkness  and  ob· 
scurity,  it  embraces  everything  with  great  adaptability,  to 
the end  that those  words  of S.  Paul  may  be fulfilled·  in it : 
Nihil habentes,  et  omnia possidentes. 6  For such poverty of spirit 
as  this  would deserve  such happiness. 
CHAPTER  IX 
How,  although  this  night  brings  darkness  to  the  spirit,  it does  so  in 
order to  illumine  it and give it light. • 
I.  It now  remains  to  be  said  th at,  although  this  happy 
night  brings  darkness  to the spirit,  it  does  so  only to  give  it 
light 'in  everything;  and  that,  although  it humbles  it and 
makes  it miserable,  it does  so  only to  exalt  it and  to  raise it 
up;  and,  although  it impoverishes  it and  empties  it  of all 
natural affection and attachment, it does so  only that it may 
enable  it  to  stretch  forward,  divinely,  and  thus  to  have 
fruition  and experience of all things,  both above and below, 
yet  to preserve its  unrestricted  liberty  of spirit  in  them  all. 
For just as  the elements, in order that they may have a  part 
in  every  natural  being  and  composition,  must  have  no 
particular  colour,  odour  or  taste,  in  order  that  they  may 
combine with all tastes,  odours and colours, just so  must the 
spirit be simple, pure and detached from all kinds of natural 
affection,  whether actual or habitual, to the end that it may 
be able freely  to take its  part in  the breadth  of spirit  of the 
Divine  Wisdom,  wherein,  through  its  purity,  it  has  experi-
1  I  Corinthians ii, 10.  rLit.,· penetrates all things.'] 
I  Wisdom vii,  24.  I  H  omits:  • and understands nothing.' 
I  E.p  .•  A.  M add' mystically.'  I  2'Corinthians vi.  10  • 
•  So e.p.  The Codices have no title. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  IX 
ence  of all  the  sweetness  of all  things  in  a  certain  pre-
eminently  excellent  way.l  And  without  this  purgation  it 
will  be wholly  unable  to  feel  or  experience  the  satisfaction 
of all  this  abundance of spiritual sweetness.  For one single 
affection  remaining in  the spirit,  cr one  particular  thing  to 
which,  actually  or  habitually,  it clings,  suffices  to  hinder  it 
from  feeling  or experiencing or communicating the delicacy 
and  intimate  sweetness  of the  spirit  of love,  which  contains 
within itself all sweetness  to a  most  pre-eminent degree. I 
2.  For,  even  as  the children of Israel,  solely  bec<,\use  they 
retained  one  single  affection  and  remembrance-namely, 
with  respect  to  the  fleshpots  and  the  meals  which  they 
had tasted in Egypt,3-could not relish the delicate bread of 
angels,  in  the  desert,  which  was  the  manna,  which,  as  the 
Divine  Scripture  says,  held  sweetness  for  every  taste  and 
turned to the taste that each one desired  ; 4  even so  the spirit 
cannot  succeed  in  enjoying  the  delights  of  the  spirit  of 
liberty,  according  to  the  desire  of  the  will,  if  it  be  still 
affectioned  to  any desire,  whether  actual  or habitual,  or to 
particular  objects  of understanding,  or to  any  other appre-
hension. 
5 
The reason for  this  is  that the affections,  feelings 
and  apprehensions  of the  perfect  spirit,  being  Divine,6  are 
of another  kind  and  of a  very  different  order  from  those 
that are natural and pre-eminent, 
7 
so that, in order to possess 
the  one  both actually  and  habitually,  it is  needful  to  expel 
and annihilate the other,  as  with two contrary things,  which 
cannot  exist  together  in  one  person. 
8 
Therefore  it is  most 
fitting  and  necessary,  if the  soul  is  to  pass  to  these  great 
things,  that  this  dark  night  of contemplation should  first  of 
of all  annihilate  and  undo  it in  its  meannesses,  bringing  it 
into darkness,  aridity, affliction and emptiness;  for the light 
which is  to be given to it is  a  Divine light of the highest kind, 
which  transcends  all  natural  light,  and  which  of its  nature 
can find  no place in the  understanding. 
3.  And thus it is  fitting  that,  if the understanding is  to  be 
united with that light and become Divine in the state of per-
fection,  it should first  of all  be purged and annihilated as  to 
1  [Lit.,  • with  a  certain  eminence  of  excellence.')  So  C,  H.  M,  Mtr., 
P, V.  E.p., A,  B:  . certain kind of excellence.'  Bz. omits a line or so here. 
B  [Lit.,  '. .  .  sweetness,  with great eminence.'] 
•  Exodus xvi,  3.  '  Wisdom  xvi.  2I. 
•  Thus the Codices.  E.p.  has:  • any other limited apprehension.' 
•  E.p.:  .  being so high and very specially  Divine.' 
7  E.p. omits the last two words.  I  E.p. omits:  • as with  •.. person.' 
424  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
its  natural light,  and,  by  means  of this  dark contemplation, 
be  brought  actually  into  darkness.  This  darkness  should 
continue for  as  long as is  needful  in order to expel and anni-
hilate  the  habit  which  the soul  has  long since  formed  in its 
manner of understanding,  and  the  Divine light  and  illumi-
nation will  then take its  place.  And thus,  inasmuch  as  that 
power  of understanding  which  it  had  aforetime  is  natural, 
it follows  that the darkness  which it here suffers  is  profound 
and  horrible  and  most  painful,  for  this  darkness,  being felt 
in the deepest substance of the spirit, seems  to be substantial 
darkness. 
1 
Simiiarly,  since  the  affection  of love  which  is 
to  be  given  to  it in  the  Divine  union  of love  is  Divine,  and 
therefore  very  spiritual,  subtle  and  delicate,  and  very 
intimate,  transcending  every  affection  and  feeling
2 
of the 
will,  and every desire  thereof, it is  fitting  that, in order that 
the  will  may  be  able  to  attain  to  this  Divine  affection  and 
most  lofty delight,  and  to feel  it and experience it
3 
through 
the union of love, since of its nature it can find no place in the 
will,4  it be first  of all  purged and annihilated in all its affec-
tions  and  feelings,  and  left  in  a  condition  of aridity  and 
affliction,  proportionate  to  the  habit  of natural  affections 
which it had before,  wi.th  respect both to Divine  things  and 
to human.  Thus,  being exhausted,  withered  and throughly 
tried 5  in  the  fire  of this  dark  contemplation,  and  having 
driven  away every  kinde  of evil  spirit  (as  with  the  heart of 
the  fish  which  Tobias  set  on  the  coals?),  it  may  have  a 
simple  and  pure  disposition,  and  its  palate  may  be  purged 
and  healthy,  so  that it  may feel  the  rare  and  lofty  touches 
of Divine love, wherein it will see itself divinely transformed, 
and all the contrarieties,  whether actual  or habitual,  which 
it had aforetime,  will  be  expelled,  as  we  are saying. 
1  E.p.  reads:  '  ... painful,  for  it touches,  and  is  felt  in,  the  depths 
of the spirit. ' 
I  E.p.:  'every natural and imperfect affection and feeling.' 
•  E.p.  omits:  'feel it and.' 
I  E.p. omits:  'since  ... will.' 
6  So  H.  There  are  many  variants.  A:  'that  it  may  be  dry  and 
withered  aQd  well  proved.'  B:  'that it may  be  dry,  withered  and  well 
entangled  (sic).'  [Probably  a  copyist's  error:  entrincada  for  extricada, 
wrung.]  Bz.:  'that it may  be  withered  and  well  bruised.'  C,  M,  P: 
'Thus,  exhausted  and  withered  and  well  wrung.'  Mtr.:  'that  it  may 
be  withered  and  well  wrung.'  V:  'that it  may  be  clean  and  withered 
and  well  wrung.'  E.p.:  'Thus,  exhausted,  withered  and  deprived  (of 
every kind,  etc.).' 
•  [Lit.,  '  from  every  kind.'  But  see  Tobit  viii,  2.  The' deprived'  of 
e.p.  gives  the  best  reading  of  this  phrase,  but  the  general  sense  is  clear 
from  the Scriptural reference].  7  Tobit viii,  2. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  IX 
4.  Moreover,  in  order  to  attain  the  said  union  to  which 
this  dark night is  disposing and leading it,  the soul  must be 
filled and endowed with a certain glorious magnificence in its 
communion  with  God,  which  includes  within  itself  in-
numerable blessings springing from delights which exceed all 
the  abundance  that the  soul  can naturally possess.  For by 
nature the soul is  so  weak and impure that it cannot receive 
all this.  As  Isaiah says:  Eye hath not seen,  nor ear heard, 
neither  hath  it entered  into  the  heart  of man,  that  which 
God hath prepared,  etc.
1 
It is  meet,  then,  that the soul  be 
first  of all  brought into emptiness  and  poverty of spirit and 
purged from  all help,  consolation and natural apprehension 
with  respect  to  all  things,  both  above  and  below.  In  this 
way,  being empty,  it is  able indeed to  be poor in spirit and 
freed from the old man, in order to live  that new and  blessed 
life  which  is  attained  by  means  of this  night,  and  which  is 
the state of umon with God. 
5.  And  because  the  soul  is  to  attain  to  the  possession  of 
a  sense,  and of a  Divine knowledge,  which is  very generous 
and  full  of sweetness,  with  respect  to  things  Divine  and 
human,  which  fall  not  within  the  common  experience  and 
natural knowledge of the soul  (because it looks on them with 
eyes  as  different from  those  of the past,  as  spirit is  different 
from sense
2 
and the Divine from the human), the spirit must 
be humbled 
3 
and inured to hardships as  regards its common 
and  natural  experience,  and  be  brought  by  means  of this 
purgative  contemplation  into  great  anguish  and  affliction, 
and  the  memory must be borne far  from  all  agreeable and 
peaceful knowledge, and have an intimate" sense and feeling 
that it is  making  a  pilgrimage  and  being  a  stranger  to  all 
things, so that it seems to it that all things are strange and of 
a  different kind from  that which  they  were wont to be.  For 
this  night  is  gradually  drawing  the  spirit  away  from  its 
ordinary  and  common  experience  of things  .  and  bringing 
it nearer the  Divine sense,  which  is  a  stranger and an alien 
to all human ways.  It seems  now to the soul that it is  going 
forth from its very self, with much affliction.
6 
At other times 
1  Isaiah lxiv,  4  [I  Corinthians ii,  9].  E.p.  adds:  • for  those  that love 
Him.' 
Z  E.p.:  • as the light and @Tace  of the Holy Spirit differ from sense.' 
8  [Lit.,  '  be made thin.']  I  E.p.:  • a  very intimate.' 
I  E.p.,  A:  '  ... human  ways;  so  much  so  that it seems  to the soul 
that it is  going  out from  its  very self.'  So  M,  omitting the words' much 
so.'  B, Bz.,  C,  H, V I'ead  as in  the text. 
426  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
it wonders if it is under a  charm or a spell,  and it goes about 
marvelling  at the  things  that it sees  and  hears,  which  seem 
to it very strange and rare,  though they are the same that it 
was accustomed to experience aforetime.  The reason  of this 
is  that  the  soul  is  now  becoming  alien  and  remote  from 
common sense and knowledge of things,  in order that, being 
annihilated  in  this  respect,  it  may  be  informed  with  the 
Divine-which belongs  rather to the next life  than to this. 
6.  The  soul  suffers  all  these  afflictive  purgations
l 
of the 
spirit  to  the  end  that it may  be  begotten  anew in spiritual 
life  by  means  of this  Divine  in flowing,  and  in  these  pangs 
may  bring  forth  the  spirit  of salvation,  that  the  saying  of 
Isaiah may be fulfilled:  In Thy sight, 0  Lord, we have con-
ceived,  and we  have been as in the pangs oflabour, and we 
have brought forth  the spirit of salvation. 2  Moreover, since 
by means ofthis contemplative night the soul is  prepared for 
the attainment of inward peace and tranquillity,  which is  of 
such a  kind and so  delectable that,  as  the ScriptureS says,  it 
passes  c.L11  understanding, I.  it behoves the soul  to abandon all 
its  former  peace.  This  was  in  reality  no  peace  at all,  since 
it  was  involved  in  imperfections;  but  to  the  soul  afore-
mentioned it appeared  to be so,  because it was  following  its 
own inclinations,  which  were for  peace.  It seemed,  indeed, 
to  be a  twofold  peace-that is,  the soul  believed  that it had 
already  acquired  the  peace  of sense  and  that  of spirit,  for 
it  found  itself to  be  full  of the  spiritual  abundance  of this 
peace  of sense  and  of spirit-as  I  say,  it is  still  imperfect. 
First of all,  then, it must be purged of that former peace and 
disturbed  in  it  and  withdrawn  from  it.
6 
Even  so  was 
Jeremiah when,  in the  passage  which  we  quoted from  him, 
he felt  and lamented e thus, in order to express the calamities 
of this night that is  past, saying:  My soul is  withdrawn and 
removed from  peace. 
7 
1  A,  B, M, Mtr., P:  'all these afilictions and purgations.'  C:  'affective 
purgations. ' 
•  Isaiah xxvi,  17-18. 
I  (P.  Silverio  reads,  with]  A,  B,  M:  • the  gloss.'  (This  was  probably 
what the  Saint actually wrote.]  Bz.,  C,  H, Mtr.,  P  [not understanding it] 
have:  'the Church' [Ia  Iglesia for la Glosa].  E.p. and V give  [the correct 
sense  by reading]:  • the Scripture.' 
,  [Philippians iv,  7.] 
,  (We have  here  split  up a  parenthesis of about seventy words.]  E.p. 
abbreviates:  '[It s ~ e m e     to  be]  a  twofold  peace,  that  is,  of  sense  and 
spirit.  First  of  all  it  must  be  purged  that  it  may  be  disturbed  in  that 
imperfect peace,  and withdrawn from  it.' 
•  (Lit.,  ' and wept.']  7  Lamentations iii, 17. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  IX 
7.  This  is  a  painful  disturbance,  involving  many  m   s ~  
givings,  imaginings  and strivings  which  the soul  has  within 
itself,  wherein,  with  the  apprehension  and  realization  of 
the  miseries  in  which  it  sees  itself,  it fancies  that  it  is  lost 
and  that  its  blessings  have  gone  for  ever.  Wherefore  the 
spirit experiences
1 
pain and sighing so  deep  that they cause 
it vehement spiritual  groans  and  cries,  to  which  at times  it 
gives  vocal  expression;  when  it has  the  necessary  strength 
and power it dissolves  into  tears,  although this  relief comes 
but seldom.  David 
2 
describes  this  very  aptly,  in  a  Psalm, 
as  one  who  has had experience of it,  where he says:  I  was 
exceedingly afflicted and humbled;  I roared by reason of the 
groaning of my heart.
3 
This roaring implies great pain;  for 
at times,  with  the  sudden  and acute remembrance  of these 
miseries wherein the soul sees itself, pain and affliction rise up 
and surrmmd it, and I know not how the affections of the soul 
could  be expressed' save in the similitude of holy Job, when 
he was in the same trials,  and uttered these words:  Even as 
the avenues  of the  waters,  even so  is  my roaring. 
6 
For just 
as  at times the waters make such inundations that they over-
whelm  and fill  everything,  so  at times  this  roaring  and  this 
affliction  of the soul  grow  to such  an extent  that they over-
whelm it and penetrate it completely, filling  it with  spiritual 
pain and  anguish  in  all  its  deep  affections  and  energies,  to 
an extent surpassing  all  possibility  of exaggeration. 
B.  Such is  the work wrought in the soul  by this  night that 
hides  the  hopes  of the  light  of day.  With  regard  to  this 
the  prophet Job says  likewise:  In  the  night  my  mouth  is 
pierced with sorrows and they that feed  upon me sleep  not. «I 
Now  here  by  the  mouth  is  understood  the  will,  which  is 
pierced with  these  pains that tear the soul  to pieces,  neither 
ceasing  nor  sleeping,  for  the  doubts  and  misgivings  which 
pierce the soul in this  way never cease. 
7 
9.  Deep  is  this  warfare  and  this  striving,  for  the  peace 
which the soul hopes for will be very deep  ;  and the spiritual 
1  So C,  H,  Mtr.,  P,  V.  The other codices and  e.p.  read:  'Wherefore 
there has entered into the spirit.' 
I  E.p.:  • The royal prophet David.' 
•  Psalm xxxvii, 9  [A.V.,  xxxviii, 8]. 
,  [Lit.,  '. .  .  sees  itself,  it  arises  and  is  surrounded  with  pain  and 
affliction,  the  afiections  of  the  soul,  that  I  know  Dot  how  it  could  be 
expressed.'  A confused,  ungrammatical sentence,  of which,  however,  the 
general  meaning is  not doubtful.]  E.p.  has:  '  ... sees  itself,  the affec-
tions of the soul  feels  [sic]  such pain l1-nd  affliction.' 
•  Job iii,  24.  •  Job xxx,  17.  7  H:  • never sleep.' 
428  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
pain  is  intimate  and  delicate,l  for  the  love  which  it  will 
possess  will  likewise  be  very  intimate  and  refined.  The 
more  intimate  and  the  more  perfect the finished  work  is  to 
be and to remain,  the more intimate, perfect and pure must 
be the labour;  the firmer the edifice, the harder the labour. II 
Wherefore,  as Job says,  the soul  is  fading  within itself,  and 
its vitals are being consumed without any hope. 
3 
Similarly, 
because in thf' state of perfection toward which it journeys by 
means of thj,  purgative night the soul will  attain to  the pos-
session  and  fruition  of innumerable  blessings,  of gifts  and 
virtues, both according to the substance of the soul and like-
wise  according  to  its  faculties,  it must  needs'  see  and  feel 
itself  withdrawn  from  them  all  and  deprived  of them  all 
and  be empty and  poor without them;5  and it must  needs 
believe itself to  be so  far  from  them that it cannot persuade 
itself that it will ever reach  them, but rather it. must be con-
vinced  that  all  its  good  things  are  over.  The  words  of 
Jeremiah  have  a  similar  meaning  in  that  passage  already 
quoted,  where he says:  I  have forgotten good  things. 
6 
10.  But  let  us  now  see  the  reason  why  this  light  of con-
templation,  which  is  so  sweet  and  blessed  to  the  soul  that 
there is  naught  more desirable  (for,  as  has  been said above, 
it is the same wherewith the soul must be united and wherein 
it  must  find  all  the  good  things  in  the  state  of perfection 
that  it  desires),  produces,  when  it  assails  the  soul,  these 
beginnings  which are so  painful and  these  effects  which  are 
so  disagreeable,  as  we  have here said. 
I  I.  This  question  is  easy for  us  to  answer,  by explaining, 
as  we have already done in part, that the cause of this is  that, 
in contemplation and  the  Divine  infiowing,  there is  naught 
that of itself can cause  affliction,  but that they rather cause 
great sweetness  and delight,  as  we  shall say hereafter. '1  The 
cause  is  rather  the  weakness  and  imperfection  from  which 
the soul then suffers,  and the dispositions which it has in itself 
and which  make it. unfit for the reception  of them.  Where-
fore,  when 8  the  said  Divine  light  assails  the  soul,  it  must 
needs  cause it to suffer after the manner aforesaid. 
1  E.p.  adds:  • and refined.' 
I  Some MSS.  omit the words' the labour,' but the meaning is evidently 
the same.  I  Job xxx,  16. 
•  E.p.  : • thus, according to the substance of  the soul, it must needs,' etc. 
,  E.p.  omits:  • and be empty  ... them.'  •  Lamentations iii, 17. 
7  So  Bz.,  C,  H,  Mtr.  A,  B,  M:  • as  was  [sic]  afterwards  given  it.' 
E.p.:  • as will  afterwards 'be given it.'  V:  • as was said before.' 
•  E.p.:  • unfit  [lit.,  • contrary':  this  also applies  to our text]  for  the 
reception of that sweetness.  And thus,  when,' etc. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  X 
CHAPTER  X 
Explains this purgation fully  h  y  a comparison. 
1 
I.  For the greater clearness  of what has  been said,  and of 
what has still to be said, it is well to observe at this point that 
this purgative and loving knowledge or Divine light whereof 
we  here  speak  acts  upon  the  soul  which  is  purged  and 
prepared  for  perfect  union  with  it in  the  same  way  as  fire 
acts upon a  log of wood  in order to transform it into itself; 
for  material fire,  acting upon wood,  first of all hegins  to dry 
it, B  by  driving  out  its  moisture  and  causing  it  to  shed.  the 
water  which  it  contains  within  itself.  Then  it  begins  to 
make  it  black,  dark  and  unsightly,  and  even  to  give  forth 
a  bad odour,3 and,  as  it dries  it little by little,  it  brings  out 
and drives away all the dark and unsigh tly  accidents which 
are contrary to the nat.ure  of fire.  And,  finally,  it begins  to 
kindle it externally and give it heat, and at last transforms it 
into itself and makes  it as  beautiful  as  fire.  In this  respect, 
the  wood  has  neither  passivity  nor  activity  of  its  own,
4 
save for its weight, which is  greater, and its substance,  which 
is  denser,  than that of fire,  for  it has  in itself
5 
the properties 
and activities  of fire.  Thus  it is  dry and  it dries;  it is  hot 
and heats;  it is  bright and gives  brightness;  and it is  much 
less  heavy  than  before.  All  these  properties  aRd  effects  are 
caused in it by the fire. 
2.  In this same  way we  have to  philosophize  with respect 
to  this  Divine  fire  of contemplative  love,  which,  before  it 
unites and transforms the soul in itself, first purges it of all its 
contrary accidents.  It drives out its unsightliness, and makes 
it black and dark, so that it seems worse than before and more 
unsightly  and  abominable  than  it  was  wont  to  be.
6 
For 
this  Divine  purgation  is  removing
7 
all  the  evil  and  vicious 
humours  which  the  soul  has  never  perceived  because  they 
have been so deeply rooted and grounded in it;  it has never 
realized,  in fact,  that it  has  had so  much  evil  within  itself. 
But  now  that  they  are  to  be  driven  forth  and  annihilated, 
these  humours reveal  themselves,  and  become visible  to  the 
I  So e.p.  The Codices  have no title.  I  E.p.:  • to dry it up.' 
•  E.p. omits:  • and  ... odour: 
&  E.p.  has' proper  to wood' for' of its own: 
•  E.p.:  • which is  less  subtle than that of fire;  it has in itself.' 
•  E.p.  omits:  • and  more  ... to be: 
7  V:  • is consuming and  removing.' 
430  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
soul  because it is  so  brightly illumined  by this  dark light of 
Divine  contemplation  (although  it is  no  worse  than before, 
either in itself or in relation to God)  ;  and, as  it sees  in itself 
that which it saw not before, it is clear to it that it is not only 
unfit for God to see it, but that it deserves His abhorrence and 
that  He ~ o   s   indeed  abhor it.  By  this  comparison 
1 
we  can 
now understand many things concerning what we are saying 
and purpose to say. 
3.  First,  we  can  understand  how  the  very  light  and 
the  loving  wisdom  which  are  to  be  united  with  the  soul 
and  to  transform  it  are  the  same  that  at  the  beginning 
purge and prepare it:  even as  the very fire which transforms 
the  log  of wood  into  itself,  and  makes  it  part  of itself,  is 
that  which  at  the  first  was  preparing  it  for  that  same 
purpose. 
4.  Secondly,  we  shall  be  able  to see  how  these  afflictions 
are  not  felt  by  the  soul  as  coming  from  the  said  Wisdom, 
since,  as  the  Wise  Man says,  all  good  things  together come 
to  the  soul  with  her.:a  They  are  felt  as  coming  from  the 
weakness  and  imperfection  which  belong  to  the  soul; 
without  such  purgation,  the  soul  cannot  receive  its  Divine 
light,  sweetness  and  delight,  even  as  the log of wood,  when 
the  fire  acts  upon  it,  cannot  immediately  be  transformed 
until  it  be  made  ready;  wherefore  the  soul  is  greatly 
afflicted.
3 
This statement is fully supported by the Preacher, 
where he describes all that he suffered in order that he might 
attain to  union with wisdom and to the fruition  of it, saying 
thus:  My soul  hath wrestled  with her and my bowels  were 
moved  in acquiring her;  therefore  it  shall  possess'  a  good 
possession. r; 
5.  Thirdly,  we  can  learn  here  incidentally  in  what 
manner souls  are afflicted in purgatory.  For the fire  would 
have  no  power over them,  even though they came into con-
tact with it, ifthey had no imperfections for which to suffer. 
8 
These  are  the  material  upon  which  the  fire  of purgatory 
seizes;  when that material is  consumed there is  naught else 
1  Bz.,  H, V  erroneously read:  • By this contemplation.' 
I  Wisdom  vii,  II. 
B  E.p.:  • wherefore the soul suffers greatly.' 
•  A,  B:  • therefore shall I  acquire.' 
Ii  Ecclesiasticus Ii,  29  [A.V., Ii,  19-21]. 
•  E.p.:  • would  ha.ve  no  power  over  them,  if  they  were  completely 
made  ready  to  reign  and  be  united  with  God  in  glory  and  had  no  faults 
for  which  to suffer.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  X 
43
1 
that  can  bum.  So  here,  when  the  imperfections  are  con-
sumed,  the  affliction  of  the  soul  ceases  and  its  fruition 
remains. 
1 
6.  The fourth thing that we shall learn here is  the manner 
wherein the soul, as it becomes purged and purified by means 
of this  fire  of love,  becomes  ever  more  enkindled  in  love, a 
just  as  the  wood  grows  hotter  in  proportion  as  it becomes 
the  better  prepared  by  the  fire.  This  enkindling  of love, 
however, is not always felt by the soul, but only at times when 
contemplation  assails  it  less  vehemently,  for  then  it  has 
occasion  to see,  and even to enjoy,  the work which is  being 
wrought  in  it,  and  which  is  then  revealed  to  it.  For  it 
seems  that  the  worker  takes  his  hand  from  the  work,  and 
draws the iron out of the furnace,  in order that something of 
the work which is  being done may be seen;  and then there 
is  occasion for  the soul  to observe in itself the good  which it 
saw  not  while  the  work  was  going  on.  In  the  same  way, 
when the flame ceases to attack the wood,  it is possible to see 
how  much of it has been enkindled. 
7.  Fifthly,  we  shall  also  learn from  this  comparison  what 
has been said above-namely, how true it is that after each of 
these  periods  of relief the  soul  suffers  once  again,  more  in-
tensely  and  keenly  than  before.  For  after  that  revelation 
just referred  to has  been made,  and after
3 
the more outward 
imperfections  of the soul  have been  purified,  the fire  of love 
once again attacks that which is to be consumed and purified 
more inwardly.  The suffering of the soul now becomes more 
intimate,  subtle  and  spiritual,  in  proportion  as  it  refines 
away the more intimate, subtle' and spiritual imperfections, 
and those  which  are most  deeply rooted  in its  inmost  parts. 
And  it is  here just as  with  the  wood,  which,  when  the fire 
begins  to  penetrate  it  more  deeply,  acts  with  more  force 
and  vehemence
5 
in  preparing  its  most  inward  part  to 
possess it. 
8.
6 
Sixthly,  we  shall  likewise  learn  here  the  reason  why 
it seems to the soul that all its good is over, and that it is  full 
of evil, since naught comes  to it at this  time  but bitterness  ; 
it is like the burning
7 
wood, which is touched by no air nor by 
•  E.p. adds:  • of the kind that in this life is possible.' 
2  E.p.:  • enkindled therein:  I  E.p.:  • and when at last.' 
•  [Lit.,  • delicate.']  II  [Lit .• • fury.'] 
•  This paragraph is only found in the Codices. 
7  Several codices omit' burning.' 
432  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
aught  else  than  by consuming  fire.  But when  there  occur 
other periods  of relief like  the first,  the rejoicing  of the soul 
will  be more interior because the purification has been more 
interior also. 
9.  Seventhly,l  we  shall  learn  that,  although  the soul  has 
most  ample 
2 
joy  at  these  periods  (so  much  so  that,  as  we 
said, it sometimes thinks that  they3  can never  return  again, 
although it is certain that' they will return quickly), it cannot 
fail  to realize, if it is  aware  (and at times it is  made aware)  of 
a  root of imperfection  which  remains,  that its joy is  incom-
plete,  because  a  new  assault  seems  to  be  threatening  it ;5 
when  this is  so  it happens quickly.  Finally,  that which still 
remains to be purged and enlightened most inwardly cannot 
well  be  concealed  from  the soul  in view  of its  experience of 
its  former  purification ; 8  even  as  also  in the  wood  it is  the 
most  inward part  that  remains  longest unkindled,7  and  the 
difference  between  it  and  that  which  has  already  been 
purged  is  clearly  perceptible;  and  when  this  purification 
once  more  assails  it  most  inwardly,  it  is  no  wonder  if it 
seems  to  the  soul  once  more  that all  its  good  is  gone,  and 
that it  never  expects  it to  return,  since  in  its  most  inward 
sufferings  all  outward goodness  is  over for it.
8 
10.  Keeping  this  comparison,  then,  before  our  eyes, 
together with  what has already been said  upon the first  line 
of the first stanza concerning this dark night and its  terrible 
properties,  it will  be  well  to  leave  these  sad  experiences  of 
the soul and to begin to speak ofthe fruit of its tears and their 
blessed  properties,  whereof the soul  begins  to sing from  this 
second  line  : 
Kindled in love I  with ,earnings. 
1  E.p.:  . Sixthly.'  2  E.p.:  'intense.' 
I  E.p.  clarifies  the  sense  of  the  passage  by  substituting  for' they' 
• the trials.' 
•  Thus e.p.  The other authorities have:  • yet when'  [probably in the 
sense,  however,  of' nevertheless,'  as in our text]. 
6  [The  sudden  change  of  metaphor is  the  author's.  The' assault'  is, 
of course,  the renewed growth of the '  root. '] 
•  [Lit.,  ' ... from  the  soul,  with  regard  to  that  which  has  already 
been purified. '] 
7  [Lit.,  'not  enlightened':  the  word  is  the  same  as  that  used  just 
above.] 
•  [The  word  translated' over' is  rendered' gone'  just above.]  So  A, 
B,  M.  [Po  Silverio  reads,  with]  Bz.,  C,  H,  !\Itr.,  V:  • blinded'  [Le.,  • is 
shut off  from it '].  E.p.:  'is hidden from it: 
•  [Lit.,  • in loves';  and so throughout the exposition of this line.] 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XI 
433 
CHAPTER  XI 
Begins to  explain  the second line  of the first stanza.  Describes how, 
as  the fruit of these  rigorous aJllictions,  the  soul finds  itself with 
the  vehement passion  of Divine  love.
1 
I.  In  this  line  the  soul  describes  the  fire  of love  which, 
as  we  have said, like the material fire  acting upon the wood, 
begins  to  take  hold  upon  the  soul  in  this  night  of painful 
contemplation.  This enkindling,  although in a  certain  way 
it resembles that which we described above as coming to pass 
in  the sensual  part of the soul,  is  in some  ways  as  different 
from  this which is  now described as is  the soul from the body 
or the spiritual part from  the sensual.  For this is  an enkind-
ling  of love  in  the  spirit,  where,  in  the  midst of these  dark 
afflictions,  the  soul  feels  itself  to  be  keenly  and  acutely 
wounded  in  strong  Divine  love,  and  to  have  a  certain 
realization  and  foretaste  of God,  although  it  understands 
nothing  definitely,  for,  as  we  say,  the  understanding  is  in 
darkness.  . 
2.  The spirit feels  itself here to be deeply and passionately 
in  love,  for  this  spiritual  enkindling  produces  the  passion  of 
love.  And,  inasmuch  as  this  love  is  infused,  it  is  passive 
rather  than  active,2  and  thus  it  begets  in  the  soul  a  strong 
passion  of love.  This love  has in it something of union with 
God,  and  thus  to  some  degree  partakes  of its  properties, 
which are actions of God rather than of the soul,  these being 
subdued  to  it passively.  What the  soul  does  here is  to give 
its  consent;  the  warmth  and  strength 
3 
and  temper  and 
passion  of love-or  enkindling,  as  the  soul  here  calls  it-
belong'  only  to  the  love  of God  which  enters  increasingly 
into union with it.  This love finds  in the soul  more occasion 
and  preparation  to  unite  itself  with  it  and  to  wound  it, 
according as  all  the  soul's  desires  are the  more recollected, 
5 
and  are  the  more  withdrawn  from  and  disabled  for  the 
enjoyment of aught either in Heaven or in earth. 
3.  This  takes  place to a  great extent,  as  has already been 
1  So  e.p.  The Codices make no division  here. 
I  E.p.:  '  ... is infused,  the soul  here concurs rather  with  its  passive 
aspect.' 
3  E.p.:  'which are more especially actions of God  received in the soul 
than of the soul itself,  the soul  giving them its simple and loving consent. 
Yet the  warmth and  strength,' etc. 
,  [Lit.,  '  cling,'  , adhere.']  Ii  [Lit.,  '  shut  up.'] 
434  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
said,  in this  dark  purgation,  for  God has  so  weaned  all  the 
inclinations
1 
and caused them to be so recollected:l that they 
cannot find  pleasure in anything they may wish.  All  this 'is 
done by God to the end that, when He withdraws them and 
recollects them in Himself,  the soul  may have more strength 
and fitness  to receive this strong union oflove of God, which 
He is  now  beginning  to give it through this  purgative way, 
wherein  the soul  must love  with great strength  and with  all 
its  desires  and  powers  both  of spirit  and  of sense;  which 
could not be if they were dispersed in the enjoyment of aught 
else.  For this  reason  David said  to God,  to the end that he 
might receive the strength of the love of this union with God: 
I  will  keep  my strength for  Thee; 3  that is,  all  the capacity 
and  desires  and  energies  of my  faculties,  nor  will  I  apply 
their operation or pleasure to  aught else  than Thyself. 
4.  In  this  way  it  can  be  realized  in  some  measure  how 
great and  how strong may be  this  enkindling of love  in the 
spirit,  where  God  keeps  in  recollection  all  the  energies, 
faculties  and  desires  of the soul,  both  of spirit  and of sense, 
so that all this harmony may employ its  energies and virtueS 
in  this  love,  and  may thus  attain to a  true fulfilment  of the 
first  commandment,  which  sets  aside  nothing  pertaining  to 
man not excludes from this love anything that is his, but says: 
Thou shalt love  thy God  with all thy heart and with all  thy 
mind,  with  all  thy soul  and with  all  thy strength.' 
5.  When all the desires and energies of the soul, then, have 
been  recollected  in  this  enkindling  of love,  and  when  the 
soul  itself has  been  touched  and  wounded  in them all,  and 
has  been  inspired  with  passion,  what  shall  we  understand 
the  movements  and  digressions
5 
of all  these  energies  and 
desires to be, if they. find  themselves enkindled and wounded 
with strong love  and without the possession  and satisfaction 
thereof,  in  darkness  and  doubt?  . They  will  doubtless  be 
suffering  hunger,  like  the  dogs  of which  David  speaks  as 
running about t ~     city;  finding  no satisfaction in this love, 
they  keep  howling  and  groaning.  For  the  touch·  of this 
1  A,  B,  M  have  • unbound'  for' weaned.'  E.p.  reads:  • for  God  has 
60  weaned  all the faculties.' 
•  [Here,  and  below,  the  original  has  recogidos,  the  word  normally 
translated  • recollected. 'J 
•  Psalm lviii,  10  [A. V.,  Iix,  9].  •  Deuteronomy vi,  s. 
6  E.p.:  • and afiections.' 
•  E.p.:  '  ... and  without  satisfaction  thereof,  in  darkness  thereof 
and  doubt?  Suffering  greater  hunger,  doubtless,  as  they  have  greater 
experience of  God.  For the touch.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XI 
435 
love  and  Divine  fire  dries  up  the  spirit  and  enkindles  its 
desires, 
1 
in  order  to satisfy  its  thirst for  this  Divine love,  so 
much so that it turns upon itself a thousand times and desires 
God  in  a  thousand  ways  and  manners,  with  the  eagerness 
and  desire  of the  appetite.  This  is  very  well  explained  by 
David in a psalm, where he says:  My soul thirsted for Thee: 
in  how  many  manners  does  my soul  long for  Thee : I  that 
is,  in desires.  And another version reads:  My soul thirsted 
for  Thee,  my soul is  lost  (or  perishes)  for Thee. 
6.  It is  for  this  reason  that the soul  says  in  this  line  that 
it was' kindled in love with yearnings.'s  For in all the things 
and  thoughts  that  it  revolves  within  itself,  and  in  ~       the 
affairs  and  matters  that present  themselves  to it, it loves  in 
many ways, and also desires and suffers in the desire in many 
ways,  at all  times  and  in  all  places,  finding  rest  in naught, 
and  feeling  this  yearning  in its  enkindled  wound,'  even  as 
the  prophet Job declares,  saying:  As  the hart
5 
desireth  the 
shadow, and as the hireling desireth the end of his work, so  I 
also  had  vain  months  and  numbered  to  myself wearisome 
and  laborious  nights.  If I  lie  down  to  sleep,  I  shall  say  : 
,  When shall  I  arise?'  And then  I  shall  await the  evening 
and shall be full  of sorrows even until the darkness of night. • 
Everything  becomes  insufficient  for  this  soul:  it  finds  no 
pleasure either in Heaven or on earth;  and it is  filled  with 
griefs  even  unto  the  darkness  to  which  Job  here  refers, 
speaking  spiritually  and  in  the  sense  of our interpretation. 
What the soul here endures is affliction 
7 
and suffering without 
the  consolation  of a  certain  hope  of any light  and spiritual 
good.  Wherefore  the  yearning  and the grief of this  soul in 
this enkindling of love are greater because it is multiplied in 
two  ways:  first,  by  the  spiritual  darkness  wherein  it finds 
itself,  which  afflicts  it with  its  doubts  and  misgivings;  and 
then  by  the  love  of  God,  which  enkindles  and  stimulates 
it,  and,  with  its  loving  wound,  causes  it  a  wondrous 
1  E.p.:  • its affections.'  I  Psalm lxii,  2  [A.V., lxiii,  I). 
I  [Lit.,  as in the verses,  • in loves. 'J  Bz. adds:  • and says not" kindled 
in  love  with  yearning.'"  H  has:  • and  says  not  "kindled  in  love  and 
with yearning."  , 
,  Thus  the  Codices.  E.p.  has:  • feeling  this  yearning  enkindled  and 
wounded.'  . 
•  [For ciervo,  hart,  read siervo,  servant, and we have the correct quota-
tion  from  Scripture.  The  change,  however,  was  evidently  made  by  the 
Saint  knowingly.  In  P.  Gerardo's  edition,  the  Latin  text,  with  cenJus, 
precedes the  Spanish translation,  with cienJo.J 
•  Job vii,  2-4.  '  B,  H, M:  • is expectation.' 
2K 
436  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
fear. 
1 
These two kinds of suffering at such a  season  are well 
described  by Isaiah,  where he says:  My soul  desired  Thee 
in the night II-that is,  in misery. 
7.  This is  one kind  of suffering  which  proceeds from  this 
dark  night;  but,  he  says,  with  my  spirit,  in  my  bowels, 
until  the  morning,  I  will  watch  for  thee.  And  this  is  the 
second  way of grieving in desire  and yearning  which  comes 
from love in the bowels  of the spirit,  which are the spiritual 
affections.  But in the midst of these  dark and loving afflic-
tions the soul feels  within itself a  certain companionship and 
strength,  which  bears  it  company  and  strengthens  it  so 
greatly  that,  if this  burden  of grievous  darkness  be  taken 
away, it often feels  itself to be alone,  empty and weak.  The 
cause  of this  is  that,  as  the strength  and  efficacy  of the soul 
was derived and communicated passively from  the dark fire 
of love which assailed it, it follows  that, when that fire ceases 
to assail it, the darkness and power and heat of love cease in 
the soul.
8 
CHAPTER  XII 
Shows how this horrible night is purgatory,  and how  in  it the  Divine 
wisdom  illumines  men  on  earth  with  the  same  illumination  that 
purges and illumines  the  angels  in  Heaven. ' 
I.  From what has  been said  we  shall  be  able  to see  how 
this  dark  night. of loving  fire,  as  it  purges  in  the  darkness, 
so also in the darkness  enkindles  the soul.  We shall likewise 
be able to see that, even as spirits6  are purged in the next life 
with  dark  material  fire,  so  in  this  life  they  are  purged  and 
cleansed with the dark spiritual fire  of love.  The difference 
is  that in the next life they are cleansed with fire,  while here 
below  they  are  cleansed  and illumined  with  love  only.  It 
was  this  love  that  David  entreated,  when  he  said:  Cor 
mundum  crea  in  me,  Deus,  etc. 
6 
For  cleanness  of  heart  is 
1  Atemof'iza  [evidently  having  puzzled  the  editor]  is  changed  in  e.p. 
into atiza  (' stirs  up '-the word  used  for  poking  the fire.  I  cannot  think 
that the  emendation,  which  repeats  the  idea  of  estimula  above  and  finds 
DO  support in any MS.,  is worth adopting]. 
•  Isaiah xxvi, 9.  •  H  reads only:  'the darkness ceases.' 
,  Chapter-heading and title are from e.p.  The Codices make no division 
here. 
•  E.p.:  • even as the predestinate.'  A,  B:  • even as sins.' 
•  Psalm I,  u  [A.V.,  Ii,  10)' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XII 
437 
nothing less  than the love and grace of God.  For the clean 
of heart are called  by our Saviour' blessed';  which is  as if 
He had called them ' enkindled with love' 
1
,  since blessedness 
is  given by nothing less  than love. 
2.  And Jeremiah well shows how the soul is  purged when 
it  is  illumined  with  this  fire  of  loving  wisdom  (for  God 
never grants  mystical  wisdom  without love,  since  love  itself 
infuses it),  where he says:  He hath sent fire  into my bones, 
and hath  taught  me.
2 
And  David says  that the wisdom  of 
God is  silver tried in fire
3
-that is, in  purgative fire  of love. 
For  this  dark  contemplation  infuses  into  the  soul  love  and 
wisdom jointly,  to  each  one  according  to  his  capacity  and 
need,  enlightening  the soul  and  purging  it,  in the  words  of 
the  Wise  Man,  from  its  ignorances,  as  he said  was  done  to 
himself. 
3.  From this we shall also infer that the very wisdom of God 
which  purges  these  souls  and  illumines  them'  purges  the 
angels  from  their  ignorances,  giving  them  knowledge, 
enlightening  them  as  to  that  which  they  know  not,5  and 
flowing down from God through the first hierarchies even to 
the last, and thence to men. 6  All the works, therefore, which 
are done by the angels,  and all their inspirations, are said.in 
the  Scriptures,  with  truth  and  propriety,  to  be  the  work  of 
God  and  of themselves;  for  ordinarily  these  inspirations 
come through the angels, and they receive them likewise one 
from  another  without  any  delay-as  quickly  as  a  ray  of 
sunshine is communicated through many windows  arranged 
in  order.  For  although  it  is  true  that  the  sun's  ray  itself 
passes through them all, still each one passes it" on and infuses 
it into the next, in a modified form, according to the nature of 
the glass, and with rather more or rather less power and bright-
ness,  according as  it is  nearer to the sun or farther from it. 
4.  Hence it follows  that, .the nearer to God are the higher 
spirits  and the lower, '1  the more completely are they purged 
and  enlightened  with  more  general  purification;  and  that 
the lowest ul' them will  receive  this illumination 
8 
very much 
1  [Lit.,  • enamoured.']  2  Lamentations i,  13. 
3  Psalm xi,  7 [A.V.,  xii, 6]. 
,  The Codices  omit the words  • purges  .  .  .  them' which  are supplied 
bye.p. 
6  E.p.  omits:  • giving  .... know not.' 
•  The  5choolmen  frequently  assert  that  the  lower  angels  are  purged 
and illumined  by the higher.  Cf.  S.  Thomas,  Summa,  I, q.  106, a.  I,  ad  I. 
7  50 e.p.  The  M55.  have:  . and  those below.' 
    E.p.:  . this enlightenment.' 
438  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
less  powerfully  and  more  remotely.  Hence  it follows  that 
man, who is  the lowest of all those to whom this loving con-
templation flows down continually from God, will, when God 
desires to give it him, receive it perforce after his own manner 
in a  very limited  way and with great pain.!  For when  the 
light  of  God  illumines  an  angel,  it  enlightens  him  and 
enkindles
z 
him in love, since, being pure spirit, he is prepared 
for that infusion.  But, when it illumines man, who is impure 
and weak, it illumines him, as has been said above, according 
to his  nature.  It plunges him into darkness  and causes  him 
affliction and distress, as does the sun to the eye that is weak;8 
it enkindles him' with passionate yet  afflictive love,  until he 
be spiritualized and refined by this same fire  of love;  and it 
purifies him until he can receive with sweetness the union' of 
this loving infusion after the manner of the angels,  being now 
purged,  as  by  the help  of the  Lord we  shall  explain  later.· 
But  meanwhile  he  receives  this  contemplation  and  loving 
knowledge in the  distress  and yearning of love  of which  we 
are here speaking. 
5.  This  enkindling  and  yearning  of love  are  not  always 
perceived  by  the  soul.  For  in  the  beginning,  when  this 
spiritual  purgation  commences,  all  this  Divine  fire  is  used 
in drying up and making ready the wood  (which is  the soul) 
rather than in giving it heat.  But,  as  time goes  on,7  th,'  fire 
begins  to give  heat to the soul,  and the soul then very com-
monly  feels  this  enkindling  and  heat  of love.  Further,  as 
the understanding is  being more and more purged by means 
of this darkness, it sometimes comes to pass that this mystical 
and loving theology, as well as enkindling the will, strikes and 
illumines the other faculty also-that of the understanding-
with a certain Divine light and knowledge, so delectably and 
delicately8  that  it  aids  the  will  to  conceive  a  marvellous 
fervour,  and, without any action of its own,9 there burns in it 
this Divine fire oflove, in living flames, so that it now appears 
1  E.p.  modifies  thus;  'Hence it follows  that, since  man is  lower than 
the  angels,  when  God  will  give  him  this  contemplation,  he  will  perforce 
receive it after his manner, in  a  more limited  way and with greater pain: 
a  [Lit.,  • and softens.'] 
I  [More literally,  . is sick.']  So most MSS.  and e.p.  Bz.:  'impure and 
sick.'  H;  'bleared and sick.' 
,  E.p.,  A:  'it enlightens him.'  I  A,  B, M;  'the infusion.' 
•  E.p.  adds:  'For there  are souls who in this life have received  more 
perfect illumination than the angels.' 
,  E.p.  omits:  'as time goes on.'  I  E.p.:  • and divinely.' 
I  E.p. omits:  'without  .  •  .  its own.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XII 
439 
to the soul a living fire by reason of the living understanding 
which  is  given  to  it.  It is  of this  that  David  speaks  in  a 
Psalm,  saying:  My  heart  grew  hot  within  me,  and,  as  I 
meditated,  a  certain fire  was  enkindled.
1 
6.  This  enkindling of love,  which  accompanies  the union 
of  these  two  faculties,  the  understanding  and  the  will, 
which  are  here  united,2  is  a  thing  of great  wealth  and 
delight for  the soul;  for  it is  a  certain touch of the divinity 
and is  already the beginning
3 
of the perfection of the  union 
of love  for  which  it  hopes.  Now  the  soul  attains  not  to 
this touch of so  sublime a  sense  and love  of God,  save  when 
it  has  passed  through  many  trials  and  a  great  part  of its 
purgation.  But  for  other  touches  whkh  are  much  lower 
than these,  and which  are of ordinary  Clccurrence,  so  much 
purgation is  not needful. 
. 7.'  From what we  have said it may here be inferred how 
in  these  spiritual  blessings,  which  are  passively  infused  by 
God  into  the soul,  the will  may very  well  love  even  though 
the understanding understand not;  and similarly the under-
standing  may understand and the  will  love  not.  For, since 
this  dark night of contemplation consists  of Divine light and 
love, just as  fire  contains light and heat, it is  not unbefitting 
that,  when  this  loving  light  is  communicated,  it  should 
strike the will at times  more effectively by enkindling it with 
love  and  leaving  the  understanding  in  darkness  instead  of 
striking it with  light;  and,  at other  times,  by  enlightening 
it  with  light,  and  giving  it  understanding,  but leaving  the 
will in aridity (as it is also true that the heat of the fire can be 
received without the light being seen,  and also the light of it 
can  be  seen  without  the  reception  of heat);  and  this  is 
wrought by the Lord,  Who infuses  as  He wills. Ii 
1  Psalm xxxviii,  4  [A.V.,  xxxix,  3]. 
•  E.p.  omits:  'which are here united.' 
a  [Lit.,  ' the beginnings.']  E.p.:  'for it is certain that in this darkness 
it already has the  beginnings.' 
,  The whole of this paragraph is omitted in e.p. 
6  The  Saint  here  treats  a  question  often  debated  by  philosophers 
and  mystics-that  of  love  and  knowled:;e.  Ct.  also  Spiritual  Canticle, 
Stanza  XVII  (See  Vol.  II),  and  Living  Flame,  Stanza  III  (See  Vol.  III). 
Philosophers  generally  maintain  that  it  is  impossible  to  love  without 
knowledge,  and  equally so  to love  more of an object than what is  known 
of  it.  Mystics  have,  however,  their  own  solutions  .of  the  philosophers' 
difficulty  and  the  speculative  Spanish  mystics  have  much  to  say  on  the 
matter.  (Ct.,  for  example,  the  Midula  M{stica,  Trat.  V,  Chap.  iv,  and 
the  Escuela de  Oraci6n,  'frat.  XII,  Duda S.) 
440  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
CHAPTER  XIII 
Of other delectable  effects  which  (lre  wrought  in  the  soul  by this  dark 
night of  contemplation.
l 
I.  This type of enkindling will explain to us certain of the 
delectable  effects  which  this  dark  night  of contemplation 
works in the soul.  For at certain times,  as  we have just said, 
the soul becomes enlightened in the midst of all this darkness, 
and  the  light  shines  in  the  darkness;1  this  mystical  intelli-
gence  flows  down  into  the  understanding  and  the  will 
remains  in  dryness-I  mean,  without  actual  union  of love, 
with  a  serenity3  and  simplicity  which  are  so  delicate  and 
delectable  to  the  sense  of the  soul  that  no  name  can  be 
given to them.  Thus the  presence  of God  is  felt,  now  after 
one  manner,  now  after another. 
2.  Sometimes,  too,  as  has been said, it wounds the will at 
the  same  time,  and  enkindles  love  sublimely,  tenderly  and 
strongly;  for  we  have  already  said  that  at  certain  times 
these  two  faculties,  the  understanding  and  the  will,  are 
united,  when,  the  more  they  see,'  the  more  perfect  and 
delicate  is  the  purgation  of the  understanding.  But  before 
this  state  is  reached,  it  is  more  usual  for  the  touch  of the 
enkindling of love  to be felt in the will  than for  the touch of 
intelligence
6 
to  be felt  in the understanding. 
3.
8 
But  one  question  arises  here,  which  is  this:  Why, 
since  these  two  faculties  are  being  purged  together,  are t1!e 
enkindling  and  the  love  of purgative  contemplation  at first 
more commonly felt in the will  than the intelligence  thereof 
is felt in the understanding?  To this it may be answered that 
this  passive love does  not now directly strike the will,  for  the 
will  is  free,  and  this  enkindling  of love  is  a  passion  of love 
rather  than  the  free  act  of the  will;  for  this  heat  of love 
strikes the substance of the soul and thus moves the affections 
passively.  And thus, this is called passion oflove rather than 
a free act of the will  ;  for this is only called an act of the will 
in so far as it is  free.  But, since these passions and affections 
come into the sphere of the will, it is said therefore that if the 
1  So  e.p.  The Codices make no division.  I  S.  John i.  5. 
I  E.p.:  • this mystical  intelligence  flows  directly'into  the  understand-
ing and the will to some extent partakes of it, with a  serenity: etc. 
,  E.p.  omits these four  words,  which are found  in A,  M.  B,  Bz.,  C,  H. 
Mtr., V have:  'the more they go.'  P:  'the more this is so.'  [Po  Gerardo 
follows P, which certainly best agrees with the general sense of the passage.] 
6  E.p.;  'of perfect intelligence.'  •  E.p.  omits this paragraph. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XIII 
soul  conceives passion  with a  certain affection,  the  will  con-
ceives passion;  and this is  indeed so"  for  in this  manner the 
will  is  taken  captive  and  loses  its  liberty,  according  as  the 
impetus  and  power  of its  passion  carries  it  away  with  if. 
And therefore we can say that this enkindling oflove is in the 
will-that is,  it enkindles  the desire  of the  will;  and  thus, 
as  we  say,  this  is  called  passion  of love  rather than the free 
work  of the will.  And  because  the receptive  passion  of the 
understanding  can  only  receive  intelligence  in  a  detached 
and  passive  way  (and  this  is  impossibJe  without  its  having 
been  purged)  therefore  until  this  happens the soul  feels  the 
touch of intelligence less frequently than that of the passion of 
love.  For it is  not necessary to this  end that the will  should 
be  so  completely  purged with  respect to  the  passions,  since 
these  very passions  help it to feel  impassioned love. 
4.  This enkindling and thirst oflove, which now belongs to 
the spirit, is very different from that other which we described 
in writing of the night of sense.  For, although the sense  has 
also  its  part here, since it fails  not to take a  part in the work 
of the spirit, yet the most radical and living part of the thirst 
oflove is  felt  in the superior part of the soul-that is,  in the 
spirit.  It feels,  and understands what it feels  and its lack of 
what  it  desires,  in  such  a  way  that  all  its  affliction  of 
sense,  although  greater  without  comparison  than  in  the 
first  night  of sense,  is  as  naught to  it,  because  it recognizes 
within  itself the lack of a  great  good  which  can  in  no  way 
be measured. 
1 
5.  But here  we must note that although, at the beginning, 
when this spiritual night commences, this enkindling oflove is 
not felt,  because this fire oflove has not begun to take a hold, :I 
God gives  the soul, in place of it, an estimative love of Him-
self so great that,  as  we have said, the greatest sufferings and 
trials of which it is  conscious in this  night are the anguished 
thoughts  that  it
3 
has  lost  God  and  the  fears  that  He  has 
abandoned  it.  And thus  we  may always say that from  the 
very  beginning of this  night the soul  is  touched  with yearn-
ings oflove, which is  now that of estimation, '  and now again, 
that  of  enkindling.  And  it  is  evident  that  the  greatest 
1  E.p  .•  Bz.:  • be  remedied.'  I  E.p,:  • has not acted.' 
3  [Lit .• • the yearning to think if it:] 
•  [The  word  translated  • estimation'  might also  be rendered  • reverent 
love.'  The' love  of estimation,'  which  has its  seat in the understanding, 
'is  contracted  with  the  . enkindling'  or the • love  of  desire,'  which  has its 
s ~   t   in  the will.  So elsewhere in this paragraph.] 
442  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
passion which it feels  in these trials is  this misgiving;  for,  if 
it could be certified at that time that all is  not lost and over, 
but that what is happening to it is for the best-as it is-and 
that  God  is  not  wroth,  it  would  care  naught  for  all  these 
afflictions,  but would rejoice to know that God is making use 
of them  for  His good  pleasure.  For the love  of estimation 
which it has for God is so great, even though it may not realize 
this and may be in darkness, that it would be glad, 1 not only to 
suffer in this  way,  but even  to  die  many  times over in order 
to give  Him satisfaction.  But when once the Hame  has  en-
kindled  the  soul,  it  is  wont  to  conceive,  together  with  the 
estimation  that  it  already  has  for  God,  such  power  and 
energy, and such yearning for Him, when He communicates 
to it the heat of love,  that, with great boldness,  it disregards 
everything  and  ceases  to  pay respect  to  anything,  such  are 
the power and the inebriation oflove and desire.  It regards 
not what it does, forI it would do strange and unusual things 
in  whatever  way  and  manner  may  present  themselves,  if 
thereby its soul  may find  Him  Whom it loves. 
6.  It was for this reason that Mary Magdalene, though as 
greatly  esteemed  in  herself  as  she  was  aforetime,  took  no 
heed 
3 
of the multitude of men who were at the feast, , whether 
they  were  of little  or of great importance;  neither did she 
consider that it was  not seemly,  and that it looked ill,  to go 
and  weep  and shed  tears  among the guests,  provided  that, 
without  delaying  an  hour  or waiting  for  another  time  and 
season,  she  could reach  Him for love of Whom ~   r   soul was 
already wounded and enkindled.  And such is the inebriating 
power and the boldness
s 
of love, that, though she  knew that 
her  Beloved  was  enclosed  in  the  sepulchre  by  the  great 
sealed stone,  and surrounded by soldiers who were guarding 
Him lest  His  disciples  should steal  Him away,
6 
she  allowed 
none of these things to impede her, but went before daybreak 
with the ointments  to  anoint Him. 
7.  And  finally,  this  inebriating  power  and  yearning  of 
love caused her to ask one whom she believed to be a gardener 
and to have stolen Him away from the sepulchre, to tell her, 
1  E.p.:  • it would  be very glad,' etc. 
•  E.p.  omits:  • such are the power  ... what it does,  for.' 
•  E.p.:  • noble as she was,  took no heed.' 
•  E.p.:  • at the feast  which was given at the house of the Pharisee,  as 
Saint Luke says.' 
I  H:  • and the superfluity.' 
•  S.  John xx,  I  (S.  Matthew xxvii,  6l-6J. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XIII 
443 
ifhe had taken Him, where he had laid Him, that she might 
take  Him  away;1  considering  not  that  such  a  question, 
according  to  independent  judgement  and  argument,  was 
foolish  ; I  for it was evident that, if the other had stolen Him 
away, he would not say so, still less would he allow Him to be 
taken.  I t is  a  characteristic of the power and vehemence  of 
love  that  all  things  seem  possible  to  it,  and  it  believes  all 
men to be of the same mind as itself.  For it thinks that there 
is  naught wherein one may be employed, or which
8 
one may 
seek,  save  that which it seeks  itself and that which it loves; 
and  it .believes  that there  is  naught  else  to  be  desired,  and 
naught  wherein  it  may  be  employed,  save  that  one  thing, 
which  is  pursued  by all.·  For this  reason,  when  the  Bride 
went out to seek  her Beloved,  through  streets  and squares,s 
thinking  that  all  others  were  doing  the  same,  she  begged 
them that, if they found  him1  they would speak  to  him  and 
say·  that  she  was  pining  for  love  of him. 
7 
Such  was  the 
power of the love  of this  Mary that she  thought that,  if the 
gardener would tell her where he had hidden Him, she would 
go  and take  Him away,  however difficult it might be made 
for  her. 
8.  Of this  manner,  then,  are  the  yearnings  of  love  of 
which  this  soul  becomes  conscious  when  it  has  made  some 
progress in this spiritual purgation.  For it rises  up  by night 
(that is, in this purgative darkness)  according to the affections 
of the will.  And  with  the yearnings  and vehemence  of the 
lioness or the she-bear going to seek her cubs when they have 
been taken away from  her and she finds  them not,  does  this 
wounded soul go forth to seek its God.  For, being in darkness, 
it feels  itself to  be  without  Him and  to  be  dying of love for 
Him.  And this is  that impatient love  wherein the soul  can-
not long  subsist  without  gaining  its  desire  or dying.  Such 
was  Rachel's  desire  for  children  when  she  said  to Jacob: 
Give me children, else  shall I  die. 
8 
g.  But we  have  now  to  see  how  it is  that the soul  which 
feels  itselfso miserable and so  unworthy of God, here
a 
in this 
purgative  darkness,  has  nevertheless  energy  both  bold  and 
daring  to journey towards  union with  God.  The reason  is 
that,  as  love  continually gives  it strength  wherewith  it may 
1  S.  John xx,  15.  I  E.p.:  • was not prudent.' 
•  E.p.:  • or no other thing which.'  'E.p. omits:' which ... all.' 
•  [Lit.,  '  outskirts: • suburbs.']  ,  E.p.,  • they would say of her.' 
7  Canticles v,  8.  '  Genesis xxx,  I. 
•  E.p. bas • as it feels itself' for' here: 
444  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
love  indeed,  and  as  the  property  of love  is  to  desire  to  be 
:united, joined and  made equal and like  to the  object  of its 
love,  that it may perfect itself in love's good  things,  hence it 
comes  to  pass  that,  when  this  soul  is  not  perfected  in  love, 
through not having as yet attained to union,  the hunger and 
thirst  that  it has  for  that  which  it  lacks  (which  is  union) 
and  the  strength  set  by  love  in  the  will  which  has  caused 
it  to  become  impassioned,  make  it  bold  and  daring  by 
reason  of the  enkindling  of its  will,  although  in  its  under-
standing, which is still dark and unenlightened,l it feels  itself 
to be  unworthy and knows  itself to  be miserable. 
10.  I  will  not  here  omit  to  mention  the  reason  why  this 
Divine  light,  which  is  always  light  to  the  soul,  illumines  it 
not as soon as  it strikes it,  as  it does  afterwards,  but causes it 
the darkness  and the trials of which we have spoken.  Some-
thing has already been said concerning this, but the question 
must now be answered directly.  The darkness and the other 
evils  of which  the  soul  is  conscious  when  this  Divine  light 
strikes  it are  not  darkness  or evils  caused  by  this  light,  but 
pertain to  the soul itself,  and the light illumines  it so  that it 
may see  them.  Wherefore it does indeed receive light from 
this  Divine light;  but the soul cannot see at first,  by its  aid, 
anything  beyond  what  is  nearest  to  it,  or  rather,  beyond 
what  is  within  it-namely,  its  darknesses  or  its  miseries, 
which  it  now  sees  through  the  mercy  of God,  and  saw  not 
aforetime,  because  this  supernatural  light  illumined  it  not. 
And  this  is  the  reason  why  at first  it is  conscious  of nothing 
beyond  darkness  and  evil;  after  it  has  been  purged,  how-
ever,  by  means  of the  knowledge  and  realization  of these, 
it  will  have  eyes  to  see,  by  the  guidance  of this  light,  the 
blessings  of the  Divine light;  and,  once  all these darknesses 
and these imperfections
2 
have been driven out from the soul, 
it seems
3 
that the benefits  and the great blessings  which  the 
soul is gaining in this blessed night of contemplation become 
clearer.' 
I  I.  From what has  been  said,  it is  clear that God grants 
the soul in this  state  the favour  of purging it and  healing it 
with  this  strong  lye  of  bitter  purgation,  according  to  its 
1  E.p. omits:  'and unenlightened.' 
I  Bz.,  H,  Mtr.,  P  have  • impressions.'  The  other  authorities  read 
• imperfections.' 
a  E.p.:  . it  will  have  eyes  to be shown  the  blessings  of  this  Divine 
light.  and once all  these darknesses and these imperfections of the soul are 
driven out and  taken away.  it seems.'  etc. 
,  E.p.:  • become known.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XIV 
445 
spiritual and its sensual part, of all the imperfect habits and 
affections which it had within itself with respect to temporal 
things  and  to  natural,  sensual
l 
and  spiritual  things,  its 
inward faculties  being darkened,  and voided of all  these,  its 
spiritual and sensual affections being straitened and dried up, 
and  its  natural  energies  being  attenuated  and  weakened 
with  respect  to  all  this  (a  condition  which  it  could  never 
attain  of itself,  as  we  shall  shortly  say).  In  this  way  God 
makes it to die to all that is  not naturally2 God, so that, once 
it is  stripped  and denuded of its former skin,  He may begin 
to  clothe  it  anew.  And  thus  its  youth  is  renewed  like  the 
eagle's  and  it  is  clothed  with  the  new  man,  which,  as  the 
Apostle  says,  is  created  according  to  God.
3 
This is  naught 
else  but  His  illumination  of the  understanding  with  super-
natural light,  so  that it is  no  more a  human  understanding 
but becomes Divine through union with  the Divine.  In the 
same  way  the  will  is  informed' with  Divine  love,  so  that it 
is  a  will  that  is  now  no  less  than  Divine,  nor  does  it  love 
otherwise  than  divinely,  for  it  is  made  and  united  in  one 
with the Divine will and love.  So, too, is it with the memory; 
and  likewise  the  affections  and  desires  are  all  changed  and 
converted
5 
divinely,  according  to  God.  And  thus  this  soul 
will now be a soul of heaven, heavenly, and more Divine than 
human.  All  this,  as  we  have  been  saying,  and  because  of 
what
6 
we have said,  God continues to do and to work in the 
soul  by  means  of this  night,  illumining  and  enkindling  it 
divinely  with  yearnings  for  God  alone  and  for  naught  else 
whatsoever.  For which  cause  the soul  then very justly and 
reasonably adds the third line to the song,  which says  : 7 
•  •  .  •  oh. happ, chance ! 
I  went  forth  without  being observed. 
CHAPTER  XIV 
Wherein are set down and explained the last three lines of  the first stanza. 8 
I.  This  happy chance  was  the  reason  for  which  the  soul 
speaks,  in the next lines,  as follows  : 
I went forth without being observed,  lib house  being now at rest. 
1  H  adds' speculative.'  I  E.p.  omits' naturally.' 
I  Ephesians iv,  24.  '  E.p.,  Mtr.,  V:  . enkindled.' 
6  E.p.  omits:  • and converted.' 
•  E.p.:  . as will  have  been clearly seen  from  what.' 
7  E.p.:  '  ... to  the  song,  which,  with  the  other  lines,  we  shall  set 
down and exphiin in the  chapter following.'  f  Thus e.p. 
446  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
I t  takes  the metaphor! from  one who,  in order the better to 
accomplish  something,  leaves  his  house  by night and in the 
dark, when those that are in the house are now at rest, so that 
none  may  hinder  him.  For  this  soul  had  to  go  forth  to 
perform  a  deed  so  heroic  and  so  rare-namely  to  become 
united with its Divine Beloved-and it had to leave its house 
because the Beloved is  not found  save alone and without,  in 
solitude.  It was for this reason that the Bride desired to find 
Him alone, saying:  Who would give thee to me, my brother, 
2 
that I  might find thee alone, without, and that my love might 
be communicated to thee. 
3 
It is  needful for the enamoured 
soul,  in  order  to  attain  to  its  desired  end,  to  do  likewise, 
going  forth  at  night,  when  all  the  inmates  of its  house  are 
sleeping  and  at  rest-that  is,  when  the  low  operations, 
passions  and desires  of the  soul  (who  are  the  people  of the 
house)  are sleeping and at rest  because of this  night.  When 
these are awake, they invariably hinder the soul from seeking 
its good, since they are opposed to its going forth in freedom. 
These  are  they  of whom  Our Saviour speaks in  the  Gospel, 
saying that they are the enemies of man. 4  And thus it would 
be  meet that their operations  and motions  should  be  put to 
sleep  in this  night,  to  the end  that they may not hinder  the 
soul  from  attaining  the  supernatural  blessings  of the  union 
of love  of God,  for,  while  these  are  alive  and  active,  this 
cannot  be.
5 
F or all  their  work  and  their  natural
6 
motions 
hinder,  rather  than aid,  the soul's  reception  of the spiritual 
blessings  of the union of love, inasmuch as  all natural ability 
is  impotent  with  respect  to  the  supernatural  blessings  that 
God,  by  means of His  own  infusion,  bestows  upon  the  soul 
passively,  secretly and in silence.  And thus it is  needful that 
all  the  faculties  should  receive  this  infusion,  and  that,  in 
order  to  receive  it,  they  should  remain  passive,7  and  not 
interpose  their  own  base  acts  and  vile  inclinations. 
2.  It  was  a  happy chance for  this  soul  that  on  this  night 
God should put to sleep all the inmates
8 
of its house-that is, 
all  the  faculties,  passions,  affections  and  desires  which  live 
in the soul,  both sensually and  spiritually.  For thus  it went 
1  E.p.  modifies  thus:  'The  happy  chance  whereof  the  soul  sings  in 
the  first  of  these  three  lines  was  the  reason  for  which  it says in  the  two 
following  .  .  .  taking the metaphor,' etc. 
a  A,  B,  M  have:  .  my spouse,  my brother.' 
•  Canticles  viii,  I.  •  S.  Matth"w  x,  36. 
•  E.p.:  'this cannot be attained.'  I  E.p.  omits' natural.' 
7  E.p.  omits:  'and  .  .  .  pas.<;ive: 
•  [Lit.,  • all  the domestic people:]  E.p. omits' domestic.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XV 
447 
forth  'without  being  observed' -that  is,  without  being 
hindered  by these  affections,  etc.,  for  they were put to sleep 
and  mortified  in  this  night,  in  the  darkness  of which  they 
were left,  that they  might exercise  no observation or feeling 
after  their  own  low  and  natural  manner,  and  might  thus 
be unable to hinder the soul from going forth from itself and 
from  the  house  of its  sensuality.  And  thus  only  could  the 
soul  attainl  to  the  spiritual  union  of perfect  love  of God.
2 
3.  Oh, how happy is  the chance of the soul which can free 
itsclffrom the house of its sensuality!  None can understand 
it, unless, as it seems to me, it be the soul that has experienced 
it.  For such  a  soul  will  see  clearly  how  wretched  was  the 
servitude  in  which  it lay  and  to  how  many  miseries  it was 
subject when it was  at the mercy of its  faculties  and desires, 
and  will  know  how  the  life  of the  spirit  is  true  liberty  and 
wealth, bringing with it inestimable blessings.    o ~   of these 
we  shall  point out,  as  we  proceed,  in  the following  stanzas, 
wherein  it  will  be  seen  more  clearly  what good  reason  the 
soul  has to sing of3 the happy chance of its passage from  this 
dreadful  night which  has  been described  above. 
CHAPTER  XV 
Sets  down  the  second stanza and its exposition. \I 
In darkness and secure,  By the secret ladder, disguised-oh, happy 
chance  l-
In darkness and in concealment,  My house being now at rest. 
I.  In this  stanza the soul still  continues to sing of certain 
properties of the darkness of this night,  reiterating how great 
is  the  happiness  which  came  to  it through  them.·  It speaks 
of them in replying to  a  certain tacit objection, saying that
5 
it is  not to be thought that, because in this night and darkness 
it has passed through so many tempests of afflictions, doubts, 
fears  and horrors, as has been said,.it has for that reason run 
1  The  verb  . could  attain'  is  found  in  e.p.  but,  though  necessary  to 
the sense, is  missing from  all  the  MSS. 
•  So  the 1.1SS.  E.p.  modifies and shortens:  • which live in the sensual 
and  spiritual  soul,  that  it might  attain  to  the  spiritual  union  of  perfect 
love  of  God  ..  without  being  observed "-that is,  without  being  hindered 
by  them,  because  they  were  put  to  sleep  and  mortified  in  that  night,  as 
has been said.'  I  E.p.,  A,  P:  'to relate.' 
&  So e.p.  The Codices have only:  'Stanza the Second.'  A,  B  have no 
heading.  Ii  E.p.:  • pointing out that.' 
448  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
any  risk  of  being  lost.  On  the  contrary,  it  says,  in  the 
darkness of this night it has gained itself.  For it has freed itself 
in the  night and escaped  su.btly from  its  enemies,  who  were 
continually hindering its progress.  For in the darkness of the 
night it changed its  garments and disguised itself with  three 
liveries  and colours  which  we shall describe  hereafter;  and 
went forth  by a  very secret ladder,  which  none in the house 
knew,  the  which ladder,  as  we  shall  observe  likewise  in  the 
proper  place,  is  living  faith.  By  this  ladder  the  soul  went 
forth in such complete hiding and concealment, in order the 
better  to  execute its  purpose,  that it  could  not fail  to  be in 
great  security;  above  all  since  in  this  purgative  night 
the  desires,  affections  and  passions  of the  soul  are  put  to 
sleep,  mortified  and  quenched,  which  are  they  that,  when 
they were  awake  and alive,  consented  not to this.l 
The first  line,  then,  runs  thus  : 2 
In darkness and secure. 
CHAPTER  XVI 
Explains how,  though  in  darkness,  the soul walks securely. 3 
I.  The darkness  which  the soul  here  describes  relates,  as 
we  have  said,  to  the  desires  and  faculties,  sensual,  interior 
and  spiritual,  for  all  these  are  darkened  in  this  night  as  to 
their natural light, so  that,  being purged in this respect,  they 
may be illumined with respect to the supernatural.  For the 
spiriti_ al and the sensual desires are put to sleep and mortified 
so that they can experience' nothing, either Divine or human; 
the  affections  of the  soul  are  oppressed  and  constrained  so 
that they can neither move nor find support in anything;  the 
imagination  is  bound  and  can  make  no  useful  reflection; 
the  memory is  gone;  the  understanding is  in darkness,  un-
able  to  understand  anything ; S  and  hence  the soul  likewise 
is  arid  and  constrained  and  all  the  faculties  are  void  and 
useless  ;6  and in addition  to all this a  thick and  heavy cloud 
1  Thus  Hz.,  H,  P.  The  other  MSS.  and  e.p.  have:  'they that,  were 
they awake and alive,  would  not consent to this.' 
a  (Lit.,  '  The  line,  then,  continues,  and  says  thus.'  In  fact,  however, 
the author is returning to the first  line of the stanza.] 
3  So  e.p.  •  [Lit.,  . taste.'  E.p.  adds' delectably.'] 
&  E.p.  omits:  • unable to understand  anything.' 
•  E.p.  omits:  . and useless.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XVI 
449 
is  upon  the soul,  keeping it in affliction,  and,  as  it  were,  far 
away from  God.
l 
It is  in  this  kind  of '  darkness'  that  the 
soul says here
2 
it travelled' securely.' 
2.  The  reason  for  this  has  been  clearly  expounded;  for 
ordinarily the soul never strays save  through its desires or its 
tastes or its reflections  or its understanding or its  affections  ; 
for  as  a  rule  it  has  too  much  or  too  little  of these,  or  they 
vary  or  go  astray,  and  hence  the  soul  becomes  inclined  to 
that which behoves it not.  Wherefore,  when all these opera-
tions  and  motions  are  hindered,  it  is  clear  that  the  soul  is 
secure  against  straying  because  of them;  for  it  is  free,  not 
only  from  itself,  but  likewise  from  its  other  enemies,  which 
are  the  world  and  the  devil.  For  when  the  affections  and 
operations  of the  soul  are  quenched,  these  enemies  cannot 
make  war  upon  it  by  any  other  means  or  in  any  other 
manner. 
3.  It follows  from  this  that,  the  greater  is  the  darkness 
wherein  the  soul  journeys  and  the  more  completely  is  it 
voided  of its  natural  operations,  the  greater  is  its  security. 
For,  as the Prophet says,3  perdition comes  to  the  soul  from 
itself alone-that is, from its sensual and interior desires  and 
operations;'  and  good,  says  God,  comes  from  Me  alone. 
Wherefore, when it is thus hindered from following the things 
that  lead  it into  evil,  there  will  then  come  to  it  forthwith 
the  blessings  of  union  with  God  in its  desires  and faculties, 
which  in  that  union  He  will  make  Divine  and  celestial. 
Hence,  at the time  of this  darkness,  if the soul  considers  the 
matter,  it  will  see  very  clearly  how  little  its  desire  and  its 
faculties  are  being  diverted  to  things  that  are  useless  and 
harmful;  and how secure it is
5 
from vainglory and pride and 
presumption, vain and false  rejoicing and many other things. 
It  follows  clearly,  then,  that,  by  walking  in  darkness,  not 
only is  the soul not lost,  but it has  even greatly gained, since 
it is  here gaining the virtues. 
1  Some  have  considered  this  description  exaggerated,  but  it  must  be 
borne  in  mind  that  all  souls  are  not  tested  alike  and  the  Saint is  writing 
of those whom  God  has willed to raise to such ~   n c t i t y   that they drain  the 
cup  of  bitterness  to  the  dregs.  We  have  already  seen  (Uk.  I,  chap.  xiv, 
§ 5)  that  '  all  do  not  experience  (this)  after  one  manner  ... for  (it)  is 
meted  out  by  the  will of  God, in conformity with the greater or the smaller 
degree  of  imperfection  which  each soul  has  to  purge  away,  (andj  in  con-
formity,  likewise,  with the degree of love of union to wllich  God is pleased 
to  raise it '  (p.  396,  above). 
2  E.p.:  'It is in this  kind  of darkness that it says.' 
3  Hosea xiii,  9.  4  E.p.  adds:  'not harmonized.' 
~   E.p.:  • to things that are useless and vain;  and that it is secure', etc. 
450  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
4.  But  there  is  a  question  which  at  once  arises  here-
namely,  since  the  things  of God  are  of themselves  profit-
able to the soul and bring it gain and security, why does God, 
in this  night, darken the desires  and faculties  with respect to 
these good things likewise, in such a  way that the soul can no 
more taste of them 
1 
or busy  itself with  them  than with  these 
other things,  and indeed in some ways  can do so less?  The 
answer is  that it is  well for  the soul  to  perform no operation 
touching  spiritual  things  at  that  time  and  to  have  no 
pleasure in such things,  because  its faculties  and desires  are 
base, impure and wholly natural;  and thus,  although these 
faculties  be  given  the  desire  and  interest  in  things  super-
natural and Divine,  they could not receive them save after a 
base  and  a  natural  manner,  exactly  in  their  own  fashion. 
2 
For, as the philosopher says, whatsoever is  received comes to 
him  that  receives  it  after  the  manner  of  the  recipient. 
Wherefore,  since these  natural faculties  have  neither  purity 
nor strength nor capacity to receive and taste things that are 
supernatural after the manner of those things, which manner 
is  Divine,  but can do so only after their own manner, which 
is  human  and  base,  as  we  have  said,  it  is  meet  that  its 
faculties  be in darkness concerning  these  Divine things  like-
wise. 
3 
Thus,  being  weaned  and  purged  and  annihilated 
in this respect first of all, they may lose that base and humanc 
way of receiving and acting,  and thus  all these faculties  and 
desires  of the soul  may come  to  be prepared  and  tempered 
in such  a  way  as  to  be  able  to  receive,  feel  and  taste  that 
which is  Divine and supernatura1
6 
after a  sublime and lofty 
manner, which is impossible if the old man die not first of all. 
5.  Hence it follows  that  all  spiritual  things,  if they  come 
not from  above and    ~   not communicated  by the Father of 
lights to human  e s i ~ e   and free will,  (howsoever much a man 
may exercise  his  taste and faculties  for  God,  and howsoever 
much it may· seem to the faculties  that they are experiencing 
these  things),  will  not  be  experienced  after  a  Divine  and 
1  E.p.,  B:  'can no more enjoy them.' 
I  E.p.  modifies;  'that it is  meet  at  that  time  for  its  operation  and 
pleasure  to  be  void  touching  spiritual  things;  for  its  faculties  and 
desires are  base and impure;  and thus, even though these faculties should 
be given  desire and interest in things supernatural and Divine,  they could 
not receive  them save after a  base manner.' 
I  E.p.:  '  ... wbich  manner is  Divine,  but  after  their OWD  manner; 
it is meet that [its faculties]  be in darkness concerning these Divine things 
likewise,  for perfect purgation.' 
,  E.p.  omits;  • and human.'  •  E.p. omits:  'and supernatural: 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XVI 
spiritual  manner,  but  after  a  human  and  natural  manner, 
just  as  other  things  are  experienced,  for  spiritual  blessings 
go not from man to God, but come from God to man.
1 
With 
respect to this  (if this  were the proper place for it)  we  might 
here  explain  how  there  are  many  persons  whose  many 
tastes and affections and the operations of whose faculties are 
fixed  upon  God  or  upon  spiritual  things,  and  who  may 
perhaps  think  that  this  is  supernatural  and  spiritual,  when 
it is  perhaps  no  more  than  the  most  human 
2 
and  natural 
desires
3 
and  actions.  They  regard  these  good  things  with 
the same disposition as  they have for  other things,  by means 
of a  certain natural facility  which  they possess  for  directing 
their  desires  and  faculties  to anything  whatever. 
6.  If perchance we  find' occasion  elsewhere  in this  book, 
we shall treat of this,  describing certain signs  which indicate 
when  the  interior  actions  and  motions  of the  soul  are  only 
natural,  when  they  are  spiritual,  and  when  they  are  both 
natural and spiritual,  with respect to communion with God. 
I t suffices for  us  here to know that, in order that the interior 
motions and acts of the soul  may come to be moved by God 
divinely,  they  must  first  be  darkened  and  put to  sleep  and 
made  to  rest  naturally5  as  touching  all  their  capacity  and 
operation,  until they have no more strength. 
7.  Therefore,  0  spiritual soul,  when  thou seest thy desire 
obscured,  thy  affections  arid  and  constrained,  and  thy 
faculties  bereft of their capacity for  any interior exercise,  be 
not afflicted by this,  but rather consider it a great happiness, 
since  God  is  freeing  thee  from  thyself and  taking  the  work 
from  thy hands.  For with those hands,  howsoever well they 
may serve thee,  thou  wouldst never labour so  effectively,  so 
perfectly  and  so  securely  (because  of their  clumsiness  and 
uncleanness)  as  now,  when  God  takes  thy hand  and guides 
thee  in  the  darkness,  as  though  thou  wert  blind,  to  an 
end  and  by  a  way  which  thou  knowest  not.  Nor  couldst 
thou  ever hope to  travel with  the aid of thine own eyes and 
feet,  howsoever good thou mayest be as a  walker. 
1  E.p.  modifies:  • howsoever  much  the  taste  and  desire  of  man  and 
his faculties  with respect to God  be exercised, and howsoever much it may 
seem  to them  that they experience  Him, they experience Him not in this 
way divinely and perfectly.' 
•  E.p.:  . than very human.' 
•  A,  B,  M read' trials'  [ap,.ietos]  for' desires'  [apetitos]. 
,  E.p.,  A,  B,  P:  • we  have.' 
I  E.p.,  A  [clarify  the  somewhat  vague  adverb  by  reading):  • in  that 
which  is  natural.' 
2L 
452  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
8.  The  reason,  again,  why  the  soul  not  only  travels 
securely,  when  it  travels  thus  in  the  darkness,  but  also 
achieves  ever  greater  gain  and  progress,  is  that  usually, 
when  the  soul  is  receiving  fresh  advantage  and  profit,  this 
comes  by a  way  that it least  understands-indeed,  it quite 
commonly  believes  that  it is  losing  ground.  For,  as  it has 
never experienced  that new feeling  which  makes  it go forth 
and 
1 
dazzles it and disturbs its first manner ofliving, it thinks 
itself to  be  losing  ground  rather  than  su<;ceeding  and  pro-
gressing,  since  it sees  that  it is  losing  with  respect  to  that 
which it knew and enjoyed,  and is  going  by a  way  which it 
knows  not  and  wherein  it  finds  no  enjoyment.  It is  like 
the traveller, who, in order to go to new and unknown lands, a 
takes  new  roads,  unknown  and  untried,  and journeys  un-
guided by his past experience, but doubtingly and according 
to  what others  say.  It is  clear that such  a  man  could  not 
reach  new  countries,  or  add  to  his  past  experience,  if he 
went  not  along  new  and  unknown  roads  and  abandoned 
those  which  were  known  to  him.
3 
Exactly  so,  one  who  is 
learning further  details  concerning  any office  or art always 
proceeds  in  darkness,  and  receives  no  guidance  from  his 
early  knowledge,  for  if he  left  not  that  behind  he  would 
get no further nor make any progress;  and in the same way, 
when  the  soul  is  making  most  progress,  it  is  travelling  in 
darkness,  knowing  naught.  Wherefore,  since  God,  as  we 
have said,  is  the  Master and Guide of this blind soul, it may 
well and truly rejoice, once it has learned to understand this, 
and say:  'In darkness and secure.' 
g.  There  is  another  reason  why  the  soul  has  walked 
securely  in  this  darkness,  and  this  is  because  it  has  been 
suffering;  for  the road of suffering is  more secure and  even 
more  profitable  than  that  of fruition  and  action:  first, 
because in suffering  the strength  of God  is  added to  that of 
man,  while  in  action  and  fruition  the  soul  is  practising  its 
own weaknesses  and imperfections;  and second,  because in 
suffering  the  soul  continues  to  practise  and  acquire  the 
virtues  and become purer,  wiser  and more cautious. 
10.  But  there  is  another  and  a  more  important  reason 
why  the  soul  now  walks  in  darkness  and  securely; 4  this 
1  E.p. omits:  . makes it go  forth and.' 
2  M adds:  . and untried' and omits:  . takes  ... untried, and.' 
I  E.p.  modifies:  'unknown  and  untried  by  the  report  of  any  other 
person,  and  would  clearly  never  reach  new  countries  save  by  new  and 
unknown roads,  abandoning those which were  known  to him.' 
,  E.p.,  A:  'now, walking in darkness,  walks securely.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XVI 
453 
emanates  from  t   ~   dark  light  or  wisdom  aforementioned. 
For  in  such  a  way  does  this  dark  night  of contemplation 
absorb  and  immerse  the  soul  in  itself,  and  so  near  does  it 
bring the soul to God, that it protects and delivers it from all 
that is  not God.  For this soul is now,  as it were,  undergoing 
a  cure,  in  order  that  it  may  regain  its  health-its  health 
being  God  Himself.  His  Majesty  restricts  it  to  a  diet  and 
abstinence  from  all  things,  and  takes  away  its  appetite  for 
them  all.  I t  is  like  a  sick  man,  who,  if he  is  respected  by 
those  in  his  house,  is  carefully  tended  so  that  he  may  be 
cured;  the air is not allowed to touch him,  nor may he even 
enjoy  the  light,  nor  must  he  hear  footsteps,  nor  yet  the 
noise of those in the house;  and he is given food  that is  very 
delicate,  and  even  that  with  great  moderation-food  that 
nourishes  rather  than  pleases  him. 
I  I.  All  these particularities (which are for the security and 
saL-keeping of the soul)  are caused by this  dark contempla-
tion,  because  it  brings  the  soul  nearer  to  God.  For
l 
the 
nearer the soul approaches  Him,  the blacker is  the darkness 
which  it feels  and  the  deeper is  the  obscurity  which  comes 
through its  weakness;  just as,  the nearer a  man approaches 
the sun, the greater are the darkness and the affliction caused 
him through the great splendour of the sun and through the 
weakness  and  impurity:!  of his  eyes.  In  the  same  way,  so 
immense is  the spiritual light of God,  and so  greatly does  it 
transcend  our  natural  understanding,  that  the  nearer  we 
approach it,  the more it blinds  and darkens us.  And this is 
the  reason  why,  in  Psalm  xvii,  David  says  that  God  made 
darkness  His  hiding-place and covering,  and His  tabernacle 
around  Him  dark  water  in  the  clouds  of the  air. 
3 
This 
dark water in the clouds of the air is dark contemplation and 
Divine  wisdom  in  souls,  as  we  are  saying.  They  continue 
to  feel  it  as  a  thing  which  is  near  Him,  as  the  tabernacle 
wherein  He  dwells,  when  God  brings  them  ever  nearer  to 
Himself.  And thus,  that which in God is  supreme light and 
refulgence  is  to  man  blackest  darkness,  as  S.  Pflul  says, 
according  as  David  explains  in  the  same  Psalm,  saying: 
Because  of the  brightness  which  is  in  His  presence,  passed 
clouds and cataracts'-that is to say, over the natural under-
1  E.p.,  A:  'For, in truth.'  2  E.p.,  A add:  'and defectiveness.' 
3  Psalm  xvii,  12  [A.V.,  xviii,  1 I].  A  alone  gives  the  passage  both  in 
Latin and in  Spanish. 
•  Psalm xvii,  13  [A.V.,  xviii,  12]. 
454  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
standing,  the  light  whereof,  as  Isaiah  says  in  chapter  v  : 
Ohtenehrata  est  in  caligine  ejus.
1 
12.  Oh, miserable  is the fortune  of our life,  which  is  lived 
in  such  great  peril  and  wherein  it is  so  difficult  to  find  the 
truth!  For  the  thing  that  is  most  clear  and  true  is  to  us 
most dark and doubtful;  wherefore,  though  it  is  the thing 
that is  most needful for  us,  we flee  from  it.  And that which 
gives  the  greatest  light  and  satisfaction  to  our  eyes  we  em-
brace  and  pursue,  though it be  the  worst  thing  for  us,  and 
make us fall at every step.  In what peril  and fear does man 
live,  since  the very natural light of his  eyes  by which  he has 
to guide himself2 is  the first  light that dazzles him and leads 
him astray on  his  road  to  God!  And if he is  to know  with 
certainty by what road he travels,  he must perforce keep  his 
eyes  closed  and  walk  in  darkness,  that  he  may  be  secure 
from  the  enemies  who  inhabit  his  own  house-that  is,  his 
senses  and faculties. 
13.  Well  hidden,  then,  and  well  protected  is  the  soul  in 
these  dark  waters,  when  it  is  close  to  God.  For  as  these 
waters· serve  as  a  tabernacle  and  dwelling-place  for  God 
Himself,  they  will  serve  the soul  in  the  same  way and for  a 
perfect protection and security, though it remain in darkness, 
where;n,  as  we  have  said,  it  is  hidden 3  and  protected  from 
itself,  and  from  all  evils'  that come  from  creatures;  for  to 
such  the  words  of David  refer  in  another  Psalm,  where  he 
says:  Thou shalt hide them in the hiding-place of Thy face 
from  the  disturbance  of men;  Thou  shalt  protect  them  in 
Thy tabernacle from  the contradiction of tongues. S  Herein 
we  understand  all  kinds  of protection;  for  to  be  hidden  in 
the face  of God from the disturbance of men is  to be fortified 
with  this  dark contemplation  against all  the  chances  which 
may come upon the soul from  men.  And to be protected in 
His  tabernacle  from  the  contradiction  of tongues  is  for  the 
soul  to  be  engulfed  in  these  dark  waters,  which  are  the 
tabernacle  of David  whereof we  have  spoken.  Wherefore, 
since the soul has all its desires and affections weaned and its 
faculties set in darkness, it is free from all imperfections which 
contradict  the spirit,  whether  they  come  from  its  own  flesh 
or from  other creatures.  Wherefore  this  soul  may  well  say 
that it journeys' in darkness  and secure.' 
1  Isaiah v,  30.  2  E.p.:  'wherewith he guides himself.' 
a  E.p.:  • though in darkness,  where it is hidden.' 
t  E.p.,  A.  V.:  • and  from  all  the other evils.' 
6  Psalm xxx,  21  [A.V.,  xxxi,  20]. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XVII 
455 
14.  There  is  likewise  another  reason,  which  is  no  less 
effective than the last, by which we may understand how the 
soul journeys  securely  in  darkness; 1  it is  derived  from  the 
fortitude by which the soul is at once inspired in these obscure 
and  afflictive  dark  waters  of God.  For  after  all,  though 
the waters be dark,  they are none the less  waters,  and there-
fore they cannot but refresh and fortify the soul in that which 
is most needful for it, although in darkness and with affliction. 
For  the  soul  immediately  perceives  in  itself a  true  deter-
mination  and  an  effective  desire  to  do  naught  which  it 
understands  to  be  an  offence  to  God,  and  to  omit  to  do 
naught that seems  to be for  His service.  For that dark love 
cleaves  to  the  soul,  causing  it a  most  watchful  care  and  an 
inward solicitude concerning that which it must do,  or must 
not do, for His sake, in order to please Him.  It will consider 
and ask itself a thousand times ifit has given Him cause to be 
offended;  and all this it will  do with much greater care and 
solicitude  than  before,  as  has already  been said  with respect 
to the yearnings oflove.  For here all the desires and energies 
and faculties  of the soul  are  recollected  from  all  things  else, 
and its  effort and strength are employed  in pleasing its  God 
alone. 
2 
After this  manner the soul goes forth from itself and 
from  all  created things  to  the sweet and delectable union of 
love  of God,  '  In darkness  and secure.' 
By the secret ladder,  disguised. 
CHAPTER  XVII 
Explains how  this dark  contemplation  is secret. 
3 
I.  Three  things  have  to  be  expounded  with  reference  to 
three  words  contained  in  this  present  line.  Two  (namely, 
, secret'  and' ladder ')  belong to  the dark night of contem-
plation  of which  we  are  treating;  the  third  (namely,  '  dis-
guised ')  belongs  to  the  soul  by  reason  of  the  manner 
wherein  it  conducts  itself in  this  night.
4 
As  to  the  first,  it 
must  be  known  that in this  line  the soul  describes  this  dark 
1  E.p.:  .  journeys well,  though in  darkness.' 
Z  E.p.:  '  ... of  the  soul,  since  they  are  recollected  from  all things 
else,  employ  their effort and  strength in pleasing their God  alone.' 
3  So  e.p.  The codices  make no division. 
,  E.p.:  .  but  the  third,  which  is  . disguised,'  touches  the  manner 
wherein  the soul conducts itself in this night.' 
456  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
contemplation,  by  which  it goes  forth  to  the  union  of love, 
as a secret ladder, because of the two properties which belong 
to it-namely, its  being  secret  and its  being  a  ladder.  We 
shall  treat of each separately. 
1 
2.  First,  it  describes  this  dark  contemplation  as  'secret,' 
since,  as  we  have  indicated  above,  it  is  mystical  theology, 
which  theologians  call  secret  wisdom,2  and  which,  as 
S.  Thomas says,  is  communicated  and  infused  into  the soul 
through love.
3 
This happens' secretly and in darkness, so as 
to be hidden from the work & of the understanding and of the 
other faculties.  Wherefore,  inasmuch  as  the faculties  afore-
mentioned  attain  not  to  it,  but the  Holy  Spirit infuses  and 
orders it in the soul,6  as  says  the Bride in the Songs,  without 
either its  knowledge  or its  understanding,  it is  called secret. 
And,  in  truth,  not  only  does  the  soul  not  understand  it, 
but there is  none that does so,  not even the devil  ;  inasmuch 
as  the  Master  Who  teaches  the  soul  is  within  it in  its  sub-
stance,  to  which  the  devil  may  not  attain,  neither  may 
natural  sense  nor  understanding. 
7 
3.  And it is  not for this reason alone that it may be called 
secret, but likewise because of the effects which it produces in 
the  soul.  For  it  is  secret  not  only  in  the  darknesses  and 
afflictions of purgation, when this wisdom oflove
8 
purges the 
soul,  and  the  soul  is  unable  to  speak  of it,  but  equally  so 
afterwards  in  illumination,  when  this  wisdom  is  communi-
cated to it most clearly.  Even then it is still so secret that the 
soul  cannot speak of it
9 
and give it a  name whereby it may 
be  called;  for,  apart  from  the  fact  that  the  soul  has  no 
desire to speak of it, it can find  no suitable way or manner or 
similitude  by  which  it  may  be  able  to  describe  such  lofty 
understanding  and  such  delicate
lO 
spiritual  feeling.  And 
thus,  even  though  the  soul  might  have  a  great  desire  to 
express it and might find  many ways  in which to  describe it, 
it  would  still  be  secret  and  remain  undescribed.
ll 
For,  as 
1  E.p.  abbreviates:  • which  belong  to it,  and  which  we  shall  proceed 
to expound.' 
I  H.:  .  mystical wisdom.' 
I  •  Propter  hoc  Gregorius  (Hom.  I.f  in  Ezech.)  constituit  vitam 
contemplativam in charitate Dei.'  Cf.  Summa Theologica,  2
a
. 2"'. q.  45. a. 2. 
4  E.p.:  'through love  more especially.  And this happens.' 
5  E.p.,  A:  'from the natural work.' 
8  E.p.  omits:  'and orders.'  A.  B,  M read:  'infuses and adorns it.' 
7  E.p.  omits:  'to which  .  .  .  understanding.' 
I  E.p .•  A.  B:  'this secret wisdom.'  •  E.p.:  'cannot discern it.' 
10  E.p.:  'delicate and infused.' 
11  E.p.:  'it would  ever remain secret.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XVII 
457 
that inward wisdom  is  so  simple,  so  general  and so  spiritual 
that it has  not entered  into the understanding enwrapped or 
clad  in  any  form  or image  subject  to  sense,l  it follows  that 
sense  and  imagination  (as  it  has  not  entered  through  them 
nor has  taken  their form  and  colour)  cannot  account  for  it 
or imagine it,  so  as  to say anything concerning it,2 although 
the soul be clearly aware that it is experiencing and partaking 
of  h   ~   rare and delectable  wisdom.  It is  like  one  who sees 
something  never  seen  before,  whereof he  has  not  even  seen 
the like;  although he might understand its nature and have 
experience  of it,  he  would  be  unable  to  give  it  a  name,  or 
say  what it is,  however  much  he  tried  to  do so,  and this  in 
spite  of its  being  a  thing  which  he  had  perceived  with  the 
senses.  How  much  less,  then,  could  he  describe  a  thing 
that has not entered through the senses!  For the language of 
God has this characteristic that, since it is  very intimate and 
spiritual
3 
in  its  relations  with  the  soul,  it transcends  every 
sense  and  at  once  makes  all  harmony  and  capacity  of the 
outward  and  inward  senses  to  cease  and  be  dumb. 
4.  For this  we  have both authorities and examples  in the 
Divine  Scripture.  For the incapacity  of man  to  speak of it 
and  describe  it  in  words  was  shown  by Jeremiah,«  when, 
after  God  had  spoken  with  him,  he  knew  not  what  to  say, 
save' Ah, ah, ah !'  This interior incapacity-that is,  of the 
interior sense ofthe imagination, and also that ofthe exterior 
sense  corresponding  to  it-was  also  demonstrated  in  the 
case  of  Moses,  when  he  stood  before  God  in  the  bush  ; 
5 
not only did he say to God that after speaking  with  Him he 
knew  not  neither  was  able  to  speak,  but also  that not  even 
(as  is  said  in  the  Acts  of the  Apostles) 6  with  the  interior 
imagination  did  he  dare  to  meditate,  for  it  seemed  to  him 
that his  imagination  was  very  far  away  and  was  too  dumb, 
not  only  to  express  any  part  of that  which  he  understood 
concerning  God,  but  even  to  have  the  capacity  to  receive 
aught  therefrom.  Wherefore,  inasmuch  as  the  wisdom  of 
this  contemplation  is  the  language  of  God  to  the  soul, 
addressed  by  pure  spirit  to  pure  spirit,  naught  that  is  less 
than  spirit,  such  as  the senses,  can  perceive  it,  and  thus  to 
1  E.p.  adds:  'as sometimes happens.' 
:  E.p.:  'or imagine it, in such a  manner as to be able to say anything 
well  concerning it: 
3  E.p.:  'that, when it is very intimate, infused and spiritual.' 
,  Jeremiah i,  o.  ;;  Exodus iv,  IU  (d. iii,  zJ. 
•  Acts vii,  3l. 
them it is  secret,  and they know it not,  neither can they say 
it,l nor do they desire to do so,  because they see it not. 
2 
5.  We  may  deduce  from  this  the  reason  why  certain 
persons-good and fearful  souls-who walk  along  this  road 
and would  like  to give  an account of their spiritual state to 
their director,3 are neither able to do so  nor know how.  For 
the reason we have described,' they have a great repugnance 
in speaking of it, 5  especially  when  their contemplation is  of 
the purer sort, so  that the soul itself is  hardly conscious of it. 
Such a  person is  only able to say that he is  satisfied, tranquil 
and  contented  and  that  he  is  conscious  of the  presence  of 
God, and that, as it seems to him, all is going well with -him; 
but he  cannot say  what is  the  state  of his  soul,  nor can he 
describe it save in general terms like these.  It is  a  different 
matter when the experiences of  the soul are of  a particular kind, 
such as visions, feelings, etc., which, being ordinarily received 
under some  species  wherein  sense  participates,  can  be  des-
cribed  under that species,  or by some  other similitude.  But 
this capacity for  being described is  not in the nature of pure 
contemplation,  which  is  indescribable,  as  we  have  said,
8 
for  the which reason it is  called secret. 
6.  And not only for this reason is it called secret, and is so, 
but  likewise  because  this  mystical  knowledge  has  the  pro-
perty of hiding the soul within itself.  For, besides performing 
its  ordinary  function,  it  sometimes  absorbs  the  soul  and 
engulfs  it  in  its  secret  abyss,  in  such  a  way  that  the  soul 
clearly  sees  that  it  has  been  carried  far  away  from  every 
creature and has become most remote therefrom;7  so that it 
considers  itself as  having  been  placed  in  a  most  profound 
and  vast  retreat,  to  which  no  human  creature  can  attain, 
such as an immense desert, which nowhere has any boundary, 
a  desert  the  more  delectable,  pleasant  and  lovely  for  its 
secrecy,  vastness  and solitude,  wherein,  the more the soul  is 
raised  up  above  all  temporal  creatures,  the  more  deeply 
1  [Or:  'and they know not how to say it nor are able  to do so. '] 
•  E.p. abbreviates:  • was very far away and dumb.  And as the wisdom 
of this contemplation is the language of God to the soul, of [or' from 'J  pure 
spirit,  the  senses,  which  are  not this  [i.e.,  • pure  spirit 'J,  perceive  it not, 
and thus it is secret to them, and they know it not, neither can they say it.' 
I  [Lit.,  '  to him that rules them.']  ,  E.p.:  • And thus.' 
I  A,  B:  • Hence arises the great repugnance that they have in speaking 
of it.' 
I  E.p.:  • which can hardly be described.' 
,  [Lit.,  • that  it  is  set  most  far  away  and  most  remote  from  every 
creature.']  E.p.  has' most completely abandoned' for' most far away.' 
458
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XVII 
459 
does it find  itself hidden.  And so  greatly does  this  abyss  of 
wisdom  raise  up  and  exalt  the soul  at this  time,  making  it 
strike  deep  into  the veins  of the science  of love,  that it not 
only shows it how  base are all properties of the creatures by 
comparison  with  this  supreme  knowledge  and  Divine 
feeling,  but likewise  it learns  how base  and  defective,  and, 
in  some  measure,  how  inapt,  are  all  the  terms  and  words 
which are used in this life to treat of Divine things, and how 
it is  impossible,1  in  any  natural  way  or  manner,  however 
learnedly  and  sublimely  they  may  be spoken  of,  to  be  able 
to know and perceive them as they are, save by the illumina-
tion  of this  mystical  theology.  And  thus,  when  by  this 
illumination  the  soul  discerns  this  truth,  namely,  that  it 
cannot reach it, and still less explain it, by common or human 
language, it rightly calls it secret. 
7.  This  property  of secrecy  and  superiority  to  natural 
capacity,  which  belongs  to  this  Divine  contemplation, 
belongs  to  it,  not  only  because  it  is  supernatural,  but  also 
inasmuch as it is a road that guides and leads the soul I  to the 
perfections  of union  with  God;  which,  as  they  are  things 
unknown after a  human manner, must be approached, after 
a  human manner,3 by unknowing and by Divine ignorance. 
For,  speaking  mystically,  as  we  are  speaking  here,  Divine 
things and perfections 
4 
are not known or understood as  they 
are  when  they  are  being  sought  after  and  practised,5  but 
when they have been found and practised.  To this purpose 
speaks  the  Prophet Baruch concerning this  Divine wisdom  : 
There is  none that can know her ways  nor that can imagine 
her paths. 6  Likewise the royal Prophet speaks in this manner 
concerning  this  road  of the  soul,  when  he  says  to  God  ; 
Thine illuminations lighted and illumined the round earth ; 
the earth was moved and trembled. 
7 
Thy way8  is  in the sea 
and  Thy paths  are  in  many waters  and Thy footsteps  shall 
not  be  known. 
9 
8.  All this, speaking spiritually, is  to be understood in the 
I  E.p.:  • and how it is Dot possible.' 
•  E.p.:  • inasmuch as it is a  guide that guides the soul.' 
•  E.p. omits:  . after a  human manner.' 
,  E.p.  has' these things' and omits' and perfections.' 
I  E.p. omits:  • and practised.'  •  Baruch iii, 31. 
,  P  omits  this  passage  and  G  omits an  entire  page  here.  Other  MSS. 
have  various  words  for  that  which  is  here  rendered  'trembled'  (but 
English  has only the one word  which fairly expresses them all]. 
•  E.p.:  . Thy road.' 
•  Psalm lxxvi,  19-20 [A.V.,  lxxvii,  18-19]. 
460  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
sense  wherein we are speaking.  For the illumination of the 
round earth
l 
by the lightningsB of God is  the enlightenment 
which  is  produced  by  this  Divine  contemplation  in  the 
faculties  of the soul;  the moving and trembling of the earth 
is  the painful purgation which is caused therein;  and to say 
that the way and the road of God whereby the soul journeys 
to Him is  in the sea,  and  His  footprints  are in many waters 
and for  this  reason shall  not be known,  is  as  much as  to say 
that this  road whereby the soul journeys to  God is  as  secret 
and as  hidden from  the senses  of the soul  as  the  way of one 
that  walks  on  the  sea,  whose  paths  and  footprints  are  not 
known, is hidden from the senses  of the body.  The steps and 
footprints  which  God  is  imprinting  upon  the souls  that He 
desires to bring near to Himself,  and to make great in-union 
with  His  Wisdom,  have also this property,  that they are not 
known.  In the Book of  Job this matter is gready emphasized, 
in these words  :  Hast thou perchance known the paths of the 
great clouds or the perfect sciences?3  By this are understood 
the ways and roads whereby God continually exalts souls and 
perfects  them  in  His  Wisdom,  which  souls· are  here  under-
stood by the clouds.  It follows,  then, that this contemplation 
which is guiding the soul to God is secret wisdom. 
CHAPTER  XVIII 
Explains how this secret  wisdom is likewise a ladder. f, 
I.  It now remamso to consider the second point-namely, 
how this secret wisdom is  also a ladder.  With respect to this 
it must be known  that we  can call  this  secret contemplation 
a  ladder for  many reasons.  In  the first  place,  because, just 
as  men  mount up  by means  of ladders  and  climb  to  posses-
sions and treasures and things that are in strong places, even 
so also,  by means of this secret contemplation, without know-
ing how, the soul ascends and climbs up to a knowledge and 
possession  of8  the  good  things  and  treClsures  of  Heaven. 
This is  well  expressed  by the royal  p r o p h   ~   David,  when  he 
I  [Lit.,  ' of the roundness of the earth.'] 
I  [Lit.,  'the  coruscations.']  E.p.,  A,  P:  • the  illuminations'  [a 
difierent word in Spanish from  that previously translated  • illumination' : 
it is translated' enlightenment' immediately below]. 
3  Job xxxvii,  16.  '  So e.p.  There is no division in the Codices. 
•  E.p.:  • It remains.'  .' [Lit.,  • rises  to scale,  know and possess.'] 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XVIII  461 
says:  Blessed is he that hath Thy favour and help, for such 
a  man  hath  placed  in his  heart  ascensions  into  the  vale  of 
tears  in  the  place which  he hath appointed;l  for  after this 
manner  the  Lord  of the  law  shall  give  blessing,  and  they 
shall  go  from  virtue  to  virtue  as  from  step  to step,  and  the 
God of gods shall be seen in Sion.
2 
This God is  the treasure 
of the strong place of Sion,  which is  happiness. 
2.  We may also call it a ladder because, even as the ladder 
has  these  same  steps  in  order  that  men  may  mount,  it has 
them also that men may descend;  even so is it likewise with 
this  secret  contemplation,  for  those  same  communications 
which it causes  in the soul  raise it up to God,  yet humble it 
with respect to itself.  For communications which are indeed 
of God have this property, that they humble the soul and at 
the same time exalt it.  For upon this  road to go down is  to 
go up, and to go up, to go down, for he that humbles himself 
is  exalted  and  he  that  exalts  himself  is  humbled. 
3 
And 
besides  the  fact  that  the  virtue  of humility  is  the  soul's 
great  capacity  for  being  exercised  therein,  God  is  wont  to 
make it mount by this ladder so  that it may descend,  and to 
make it descend so that it may mount,  that the words  of the 
Wise  ~   n   may thus be fulfilled,  namely:  Before the soul is 
exalted,  it  is  humbled;  and  before  it  is  humbled,  it  is 
exalted.' 
3; Speaking  now  in a  natural way,5  the soul  that desires 
to consider it will be able to see how on this  road  (we leave 
apart the spiritual  aspect,  which is  not discernible) it has to 
suffer  many ups  and downs,  and how the prosperity which 
it enjoys is followed immediately by certain storms and trials; 
so much so, that it appears to have been given that period of 
calm in order that it might be forewarned and strengthened 
against the poverty which has followed  ; 
6 
just as after misery 
and torment there come abundance and calm.  It seems  to 
the soul as if,  before celebrating that festival, it has first been 
made  to  keep  that  vigil.  This  is  the  ordinary  course  and 
proceeding of the state of contemplation until the soul arrives 
1  A:  'for such  a  man  hath  placed  in  his  heart of  sighs';  B:  'for 
such a  man hath placed in his heart his sighs.' 
I  Psalm lxxxiii, 6  [A.V.,  lxxxiv,  7]. 
I  S.  Luke xiv,  II.  '  Proverbs xviii,  12. 
I  So  H.  A,  B,  M  read  [' hablando  ahora  manualmente,'  which in  its 
context I  take to mean]:  f  Speaking now in a homely way';  Bz., Mtr., V : 
, in  a  somewhat  homely  way.'  E.p.  has:  'Likewise,  according  to  this 
quality of a  ladder.  the soul,' etc. 
•  E.p.:  • against its present hardships: 
462"  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
at the         of quietness;  it never remains in the same state 
for  long  together,  but  is  ascending  and  descending  con-
tinually. 
4.  The  reason  for  this  is  that,  as  the  state  of perfection, 
which  consists  in the  perfect love  of God  and  contempt for 
self,  cannot  exist  unless  it  have  these  two  parts,  which  are 
the knowledge of God and of oneself, the soul has of necessity 
to  be  practised  first  in  the  one  and  then in  the  other,  now 
given to taste of the one-that is,  exaltation-and now being 
made to experience the other-that is,  humiliation-until it 
has  acquired  perfect  habits;  and  then  this  ascending  and 
descending  will  cease,  since  the  soul  will  have  attained  to 
God  and become  united  with  Him,  which  comes  to  pass  at 
the summit of this ladder, for the ladder rests and leans upon 
Him.  For this  ladder of contemplation,  which,  as  we  have 
said, comes  down from  God, is foreshadowed  by that ladder 
which Jacob saw as  he slept, whereon angels were ascending 
and  descending  from  God  to  man,  and  from  man  to  God, 
Who  Himself  was  leaning  upon  the  end  of  the  ladder.1 
All  this,  says  Divine  Scripture,  took  place  by  night,  when 
Jacob slept,  in order to  express  how secret is  this  road  and 
ascent to God,  and how different from  that of man's know-
ledge.  This is very evident, since ordinarily that which is  of 
the greatest profit in it-namely, to be ever losing oneself and 
becoming as nothingS-is considered the worst thing possible; 
and  that which is  of least worth,  which is  for  a  soul  to find 
consolation and sweetness  (wherein it ordinarily loses  rather 
than gains),  is              best. 
5.  But,  speaking  now  somewhat  more  substantially  and 
properly  of  this  ladder  of secret  contemplation,  we  shall 
observe  that  the  principal  characteristic  of contemplation, 
on account of which it is  here called a ladder, is  that it is  the 
science  of love.  This,  as  we  have  said,3  is  an  infused  and 
loving  knowledge  of God,  which  enlightens  the soul  and at 
the same time enkindles it with love, until it is  raised up step 
by step, even unto God its Creator.  For it is love alone that 
unites and joins the soul with God.  To the end that this may 
be seen more clearly,  we  shall here indicate the steps of this 
Divine  ladder  one  by  one,  pointing  out  briefly  the  marks 
and  effects  of each,  so  that the soul  may conjecture hereby 
on  which  of them  it  is  standing.  We  shall" therefore  dis-
1  Genesis  xxviii,  12.  I  [Lit., • and annihilating oneself.'] 
•  E.p.  omits:  • as we  have said.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XIX 
tinguish  them  by  their  effects,  as  do  S.  Bernard  and  S. 
Thomas,
l 
for to know them in themselves is  not possible after 
a  natural manner,  inasmuch  as  this  ladder of love  is,  as  we 
have said, so  secret that God  alone is  He that measures  and 
weighs it. 
CHAPTER  XIX 
Begins  to  explain  the  ten  steps'/.  of the  mystic  ladder  of Divine  love, 
acc.ording  to  S.  Bernard  and  S.  Tlwmas.  The  first  five  are 
here  treated. 3 
I.  We  observe,  then,  that the steps  of this  ladder of love 
by which the soul  mounts, one by one, to God, are ten.  The 
first  step  of love  causes  the  soul  to  languish,  and  this  to  its 
advantage.  The Bride is speaking from this step oflove when 
she says:  I  conjure you,  daughters of  Jerusalem,  that,  if ye 
find my Beloved, ye tell him that I  am sick with 10ve.4.  This 
sickness, however, is not unto death, but for the glory of God, 
for  in  this  sickness  the  souls  swoons  as  to  sin  and  as  to  all 
things that are not God, for the sake of God Himself, even as 
David testifies, saying:  My soul hath swooned awaye-that is, 
with  respect  to  all  things,  for  Thy salvation.  For just as  a 
sick  man first  of all loses  his  appetite  and  taste  for  all  food, 
and  his  colour  changes,  so  likewise  in  this  degree  of love 
the soul  loses  its  taste  and  desire for  all  things  and changes 
its  colour  and  the  other accidentals  of its  past life,7 like one 
in love.  The soul falls  not into this sickness if excess  of heat 
be not communicated to it from  above,8  even  as  is  expressed 
in  that  verse  of  David  which  says:  Pluviam  voluntariam 
segregabis,  Deus,  Juereditati  tUtB,  et  infirmata  est,9  etc.  This sick-
ness  and swooning to all  things,  which is  the beginning and 
the first step on the road  to God,  we  have clearly described 
1  •  Ut  dicit  Bernardus,  Magna  res  est  amor,  sed  sunt  in  eo  gradus. 
Loquendo  ergo  aliquantulum  magis  moraliter  quam  realiter,  decem 
amoris  gradus  distinguere  possumus'  (D.  Thom.,  De  dileclione  Dei  eI 
f'roximi,  cap. xxvii.  Cf.  Opusc.  LXI of the edition of Venice,  1595). 
•  [The word translated • step' may also  (and  often  more  elegantly)  be 
rendered  • degree.'  The  same  word. is  kept,  however,  throughout  the 
translation of this chapter, except where noted below.] 
•  So e.p.  The Codices make no division.  '  Canticles v, 8. 
a  E.p.:  'for herein the soul.'  •  Psalm cxlii,  7 [A. V.,  cxliii, 1]. 
7  E.p. omits:  'and the  ,  .  .  life.' 
•  E.p. adds:  'which is here the mystic fever.' 
•  Psalm  lxvii,  10  [A.V.,  lxviii,  9).  The  Latin  text is  found  in all  the 
Codices except C,  G, P. 
464  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
above,  when  we  spoke of the annihilation  wherein  the soul 
finds itself when it begins to walk upon 
1 
this ladder of  contem-
plative  purgation,2  when  it can  find  no  pleasure,  support, 
consolation or abiding-place in anything soever.  Wherefore 
from  this step it begins at once to climb to the second. 
3 
2.  The  second  step  causes  the soul  to seek  God  without 
ceasing. 
4 
Wherefore,  when  the  Bride  says  that she  sought 
Him  by  night  upon  her bed  (when  she  had swooned  away 
according  to  the first  step  of love)  and found  Him not,  she 
said:  I  will  arise and will seek Him Whom my soulloveth. Ii 
This,  as  we  say,  the  soul  does  without  ceasing,  as  David 
counsels  it,  saying  : . Seek ye  ever the face  of God,  and seek 
ye  Him in all  things,  tarrying not until  ye  find  Him ; 
8 
like 
the Bride,  who,  having enquired for  Him of the watchmen, 
passed  on at once  and left them.  Mary Magdalene did  not 
even  notice  the  angels  at the  sepulchre.
7 
On this  step,  the 
soul  now  walks  so  anxiously  that it seeks  the  Beloved  in all 
things.  In  whatsoever  it  thinks,  it  thinks  at  once  of the 
Beloved.  Of whatsoever  it  speaks,  in  whatsoever  matters 
present  themselves,  it  is  speaking  and  communing  at  once 
with  the  Beloved.  When  it  eats,  when  it  sleeps,  when  it 
watches,  when it does  aught soever,  all its  care is  about the 
the Beloved, even as is said above with respect to the yearnings 
of love.  Here,  as  love  begins  to  recover its  health  and find 
new strength in the love of this second step, 
8 
it begins at once 
to mount to the third,  by means of a  certain degree
9 
of new 
purgation  in  the  night,  as  we  shall  afterwards  describe, 
which  causes  in the soul  the following  effects. 
3.  The third step of the ladder oflove is  that which causes 
the soul to work and gives it fervour so that it fails  not.  Con-
cerning this the royal  Prophet says:  Blessed is the man that 
feareth  the  Lord,  for  in  His  commandments  he is  eager  to 
labour greatly.lO  Wherefore if fear,  being  the  son  of love, 
causes  within him  this  eagerness  to  labour,l1  what  will  be 
1  [Lit .• • to enter (upon).')  2  v:  . of purgative contemplation.' 
a  E.p.:  • to climb to the rest.' 
,  The word' God  • is found  only in e.p.,  A,  B.  i  Canticles iii,  2. 
•  Psalm civ, 4  [A.V.,  cv, 4). 
7  S.  John  xx.  [This  is  the  reading  of  all  MSS.  and  editions.  The 
reference is presumably to v.  14.  But d. vv.  II-I3.) 
•  E.p.:  '  •.. its health, gathering strength on this second  step.' 
•  [The word in Spanish is that elsewhere translated  • step.'] 
10  Psalm cxi,  I  [A. V.,  cxii,  I). 
11  [Lit.,  • makes in  him  this  labour  of eageroess.']  E.p.:  • causes  this 
effect of eagerness.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XIX 
done  by  love  itself?  On  this  step  the  soul  considers  great 
works  undertaken for the Beloved as small;  many things  as 
few;  and  the long time wherein it serves  Him as  short,  by 
reason of the fire oflove wherein it is  now burning.  Even so 
to  Jacob,  though  after  seven  years  he  had  been  made  to 
serve  seven  more,  they seemed few  because of the greatness 
of his love. 
1 
Now if the love ofa mere creature could accom-
plish so much in Jacob, what will love of the Creator be able 
to do when on this  third step it takes  possession  of the soul ? 
Here,  for  the  great  love  which  the  soul  bears  to  God,  it 
suffers  great pains and afflictions  because  of the little  that it 
does  for  God;  and if it were lawful for  it to  be destroyed  a 
thousand  times for  Him it would  be comforted.  Wherefore 
it considers  itself useless  in  all  that it  does  and  thinks  itself 
to be living in vain.  Another wondrous effect produced here 
in the soul is  that it considers itself as  being, most certainly, 
worse than all other souls:  first,  because love is  continually 
teaching it how much is due to God; 2  and second,  because, 
as  the  works  which  it  here  does  for  God  are  many  and  it 
knows  them all  to be faulty  and imperfect,  they all  bring it 
confusion and affliction, for it realizes in how lowly a manner 
it is  working  for  God,  Who  is  so  high.  On this  third step, 
the soul is  very far from vainglory or presumption, and from 
condemning others.  These anxious  effects are caused in the 
soul  by  this  third  step,3  with  many  others  of this  kind  ; 
wherefore it
4 
gains courage and strength from them in order 
to mount to the fourth  step,  which is  that that follows. 
4.  The fourth  step  of this  ladder  of love  is  that  whereby 
there is  caused  in the  soul  an habitual suffering  because  of 
the  Beloved,  yet  without  weariness.  For,  as  S.  Augustine 
says,  love  makes  all  things  that  are  great,  grievous  and 
burdensome, to be almost naught. 
5 
From this step the Bride 
was speaking when, desiring to attain to the last step, she said 
to  the  Spouse:  Set  me  as  a  seal  upon  thy  heart,  as  a  sea] 
upon thine arm;  for love-that is,  the act and work of love 
-is strong as  death,  and emulation and importunity last as 
long  as  hell. 
8 
The spirit here has  so  much strength  that it 
has  subjected  the  flesh  and  takes  as  little  account  of it  as 
1  Genesis xxix,  20.  I  [Lit.,  • how much God merits.'] 
I  E.p.  adds:  . of love.'  t  E.p.:  • wherefore  the soul.' 
•  E.p.  adds:  • and  very light.'  Cf.  S.  Augustine:  Serm.  IX de  Verbis 
Domini in Evang. secundum Math., in fine:  • Omnia enim salva et immania 
prorsus facilia et prope nulla efficit  amor.' 
•  Canticles viii,  s. 
466  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
does  the tree  of one  of its  leaves.  In no  way  does  the soul 
here seek  its  own  consolation  or pleasure,  either in  God,  or 
in  aught else,  nor  does  it desire  or seek  to  pray to  God for 
favours,  for it sees clearly that it has already received enough 
of these,  and all its  anxiety is set upon the manner
l 
wherein 
it will  be able to do something that is  pleasing  to  God  and 
to render Him some service such as  He merits and in return 
for what it has received from  Him,  although it be greatly to 
its cost.  The soul  says  in its heart and spirit:. Ah,  my God 
and Lord !  How many are there that go to seek in Thee their 
own consolation and pleasure, and desire Thee to grant them 
favours  and gifts;  but those  who long  to  do Thee pleasure 
and. to  give  Thee something at their cost,  setting  their own 
interests last,  are very  few.  The failure,  my God,  is  not in 
Thy unwillingness to grant us new favours,  but in our neglect 
to  use  those  that  we  have  received  in  Thy  service  alone, I 
in order  to constrain  Thee to  grant them  to  us  continually. 
Exceeding  lofty is  this  degree  of love;  for,  as  the soul  goes 
ever  after  God  with love  so  true,  imbued  with  the  spirit  of 
suffering  for  His  sake,  His  Majesty  oftentimes  and  quite 
habitually grants it joy, and visits it sweetly and delectably in 
the  spirit;  for  the  boundless  love  of  Christ,  the  Word, 
cannot suffer  the  afflictions  of His  lover without succouring 
him.  This  He affirmed  through Jeremiah,  saying:  I  have 
remembered  thee,  pitying  thy  youth  and  tenderness,  when 
thou wentest after  Me in the wilderness. 
3 
Speaking spiritu-
ally,  this  denotes  the  detachment  which  the  soul  now  has 
interiorly  from  every  creature,  so  that  it  rests  not  and  no-
where  finds  quietness.  This  fourth  step  enkindles  the  soul 
and  makes  it to  burn  in  such  desire  for  God  that it causes 
it to mount to the fifth,  which is  that which follows. 
5.  The fifth  step  of this  ladder  of love  makes  the soul  to 
desire  and  long  for  God  impatiently.  On  this  step  the 
vehemence of the lover to apprehend the Beloved  and to be 
united with  Him is  such  that  every delay,  however  brief it 
be,  becomes very long,  wearisome  and oppressive to it,  and 
it ever believes itself to be finding the Beloved.  And when it 
sees  its desire frustrated  (which is  at almost every moment), 
1  E.p.:  • or in aught else.  nor from that motive of consolation or self-
Interest  does  it beg favours  of  God.  For all its  anxiety is now  about the 
manner.' 
•  E.p.:  • For  Thou.  my  God.  failest  not  in  willingness  to  grant  us 
favours;  it  is  we  who  fail  to  use  those  that  we  have  received  in  Thy 
service alone.'  a  Jeremiah ii, 2. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XX 
it swoons away with its yearning, as says the Psalmist, speak-
ing from this step, in these words:  My s()ullongs and faints 
for  the             of the  Lord.
l 
On this step  the lover  must 
needs see that which he loves, or die; at this step-was Rachel, 
2 
when,  for  the  great  longing  that  she  had  for  children, 
she  said  to  Jacob,  her  spouse:  Give  me  children  or  else 
I  shall die.
3 
Here men suffer hunger like dogs  and go about 
and surround the city of God.  On this step,  which is  one of 
hunger,"  the  soul  is  nourished  upon love;  for  even as  is  its 
hunger,  so  is  its  abundance;  s6  that  it  rises  hence  to  the 
sixth step,  producing the effects  which follow. 
CHAPTER  XX 
Wherein  are  treated the other jive steps of love. 
6 
I.  The sixth step causes the soul to run swiftly to God and 
feel  oftentimes  after  Him;  and it runs without fainting
6 
by 
reason of its hope.  For       the love that has made it strong 
makes it to fly swiftly.  Of this step the Prophet Isaiah speaks 
thus:  The saints that hope in God shall renew their strength; 
they shall  take  wings  as  the eagle;  they shall  fly  and shall 
not faint,7  as  they did at the fifth  step.  To this step likewise 
belongs  that  verse  of the  Psalm:  As  the  hart  desires  the 
waters,  my soul  desires  Thee,  0  God.
8 
For the  hart,  in its 
thirst,  runs to the waters with  great swiftness.  The cause of 
this  swiftness  in love  which  the  soul  has  on  this  step  is  that 
its charity is greatly enlarged £/  within it, since the soul is here 
almost  wholly  fortified,  as  is  said  likewise  in  the  Psalm, 
namely: Sine  iniquitate  cucurri.lO  And  in  another  Psalm:  I 
ran the way of Thy commandments when Thou didst enlarge 
my heart ;11  and  thus  from  this  sixth  step  the  soul  at  once 
mounts to the seventh,  which is  that which follows. 
1  Psalm lxxxiii,  2  [A.V., lxxxiv,  2]. 
I  E.p.:  • attain that which he  loves,  or die,  even as  Rachel: etc. 
a  Genesis  xxx,  i. 
•  [Ut.,  '  On this hungering step. ']  E. p. omits the whole of the preceding 
sentence and then abbreviates:  • Here the soul  is nourished,'  etc. 
I  So  e.p.  The Codices  make no division. 
I  E.p.:  •... to  run  swiftly  to  God.  And  thus  it  runs  without 
fainting.' 
7  Isaiah xl,  31.  So e.p.  The Codices mistakenly attribute this passage 
to  David.  •  Psalm  xli,  2  (A.V.,  xlii,  I). 
•  V:  • is  very delicate'  [probably an error:  delicada  for  dilatada). 
II  Psalm lviii,  5  rA.V.,  lix, 4).  11  Psalm cxviii, 32  [A.V.,  cxix, 32). 
2M 
468  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
2.  The seventh step of  this ladder makes the soul to become 
vehement in its  boldness.  Here love  employs  not its judge-
ment in order to hope, 
1 
nor does it take counsel so that it may 
draw back, neither can any shame restrain it;  for the favour 
which  God  here  grants  to  the  soul  causes  it  to  become 
vehement  in  its  boldness.  Hence  follows  that  which  the 
Apostle  says,  namely:  That  charity  believeth  all  things, 
hopeth all things  and is  capable of all  things. 
2 
Of this step 
spake  Moses,  when he entreated  God  to  pardon the people, 
and if not, to blot out his name from the book oflife wherein 
He  had  written  it.
3 
Men  like  these  obtain from  God  that 
which they beg of Him with desire.  Wherefore David says: 
Delight  thou  in  God  and  He  will  give  thee  the  petitions  of 
thy  heart. C  On this  step  the  Bride  grew  bold,  and  said  : 
Osculetur  me  osculo  oris  sui.
5 
To this  step  it is  not lawful· for 
the soul  to aspire  boldly,  unless  it feel  the interior favour  of 
the King's sceptre extended  to it, lest  perchance it fall  from 
the  other steps  which  it has  mounted  up  to  this  point,  and 
wherein it must ever abide with humility.  From this daring 
and power which God grants to the soul on this seventh step, 
so  that it .may  be  bold with  God  in  the vehemence  of love, 
follows  the eighth, which is that wherein it takes the Beloved 
captive and is  united  with  Him,  as  follows. 
7 
3.  The eighth step of love causes the soul to seize Him and 
hold  Him  fast  without  letting  Him  go,  even  as  the  Bride 
says,  after this  manner:  I  found  Him Whom my heart and 
soul love;  I  held  Him and I  will  not let Him gO.8  On this 
step of union the soul satisfies her desire, but not continuously. 
Certain  souls  climb  some  way,9  and  then  lose  their  hold; 
for,  if this  state were  to  continue,  it would  be  glory itself in 
this  life;  and thus  the soul  remains therein
10 
for  very short 
periods of time. 11  To the prophet Daniel, because  he was  a 
1  E.p.:  '  ... in  its  boldness,  and  it is  carried  away  thereby  with 
love  and  intensity,  so  that  it  follows  not  its  judgement  in  order  to 
hope.'  . 
I  I  Corinthians  xiii,  7.  The  sentence' Hence  .  .  .  things' is  omitted 
from  e.p.  a  Exodus xxxii,  31-2. 
,  Psalm xxxvi,  4  [A.V.,  xxxvii,  4].  6  Canticles i,  I. 
I  E.p.:  • But it is  to be emphasized  here that it is  not lawful,'  etc. 
7  E.p.  omits:  • as follows.'  8  Canticles iii,  4. 
•  [Lit.,  • attain to setting their foot.']  10  P:  • walks therein.' 
11  So Bz., H, M,  V.  P  reads as in n.  10, above.  The other codices have: 
• the  soul  spends  very  brief  periods  of  time  herein.'  E.p.  modifies  the 
whole  passage  thus:  • for,  if it  were  not  so,  and  they  remained  on  this 
step,  they  would  have  a  certain  kind  of  glory  in  this life,  and  thus  tbe 
soul  spends  very short periods of time on thill  step.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XX 
man of desires,  was sent a command from God 
1 
to remain on 
this  step,  when  it  was  said  to  him:  Daniel,  stay  upon  thy 
step,  because  thou  art  a  man  of desires. 
2 
After  this  step 
follows  the  ninth,  which  is  that of souls  now  perfect,  as  we 
shall  afterwards  say,  which  is  that that follows. 
3 
4.  The  ninth  step  of love  makes  the  soul  to  burn  with 
sweetness.  This  step  is  that  of the  perfect,  who  now  burn 
sweetly  in  God.  For  this  sweet  and  delectable  ardour  is 
caused  in  them  by  the  Holy  Spirit  by  reason  of the  union 
which  they have with  God.  For this  cause S.  Gregory says, 
concerning  the  Apostles,  that  when  the  Holy  Spirit  came 
upon them visibly they burned inwardly and sweetly through 
love. '  Of the possessions  and riches  of God  which  the soul 
enjoys on this step, we cannot speak;  for if many books were 
to be written concerning it the greater part would still remain 
untold.  For this  cause,  and because we shall say something 
of it hereafter, I say no more here than that after this follows 
the tenth and last step  of this ladder of love,  which  belongs 
not to this life. 
5.  The  tenth  and  last  step  of this  secret  ladder  of love 
causes  the  soul  to  become  wholly  assimilated  to  God,  by 
reason  of the  clear  and  immediate
6 
vision  of God  which  it 
then  possesses;  when,  having  ascended  in  this  life  to  the 
ninth step, it goes forth from the flesh.  These souls,  who are 
few,  enter not into purgatory, since  they have  already been 
wholly  purged  by love.
8 
Of these  S.  Matthew says:  B,ati 
mundo  cortie:  quoniam  ipsi  Deum  videbunt.
7 
And,  as  we  say, 
this  vision  is  the  cause  of the  perfect likeness  of the soul  to 
God, for, as S. John says, we know that we shall be like Him. 
8 
Not because the soul will come to have the capacity of God, 
for  that is  impossible;  but because all that it is  will become 
like  to  God,9  for  which  cause it will  be  called,  and will  be, 
God  by participation. 
6.  This  is  the secret  ladder  whereof the soul  here speaks, 
1  E.p.:  • The prophet Daniel  ... was told,  on behalf of God,'  etc. 
I  Daniel x,  II.  E.p.  gives the passage in Latin also. 
a  E.p.  has only:  • as we shall say.' 
4  •  Dum Deum in ignis visione suscipiunt, per amorem suaviter arserunt' 
(Hom.  XXX in  Evang.). 
I  [i.e.,  direct,  not mediate.)  This adjective is omitted in e.p. 
•  E.p.:  'And these souls, who are few,  love is wont to leave completely 
purged in this life,  working that which in the next life is wrought in others 
by purgatory.'  7  S.  Matthew v,  8. 
•  J  S.  John iii,  2. 
•  E.p.  modifies:  'We know that we shall be like  Him, for  we  shall see 
Him as  He is.  Wherefore all  that [the soul)  is  will be like to God.' 
470  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
although  upon these  higher steps  it is  no longer very secret 
to the soul,  since  much is  revealed to it by love,  through the 
great effects which love produces in it.  But, on this  last step 
of clear vision,  which  is  the last  step  of the ladder whereon 
God leans,  as  we  have said  already,  there is  naught that is 
hidden from  the soul,  by reason of its complete assimilation. 
Wherefore  Our Saviour says:  In that day ye  shall  ask  Me 
nothing,  etc.
1 
But,  until  that  day,  however  high· a  point 
the  soul  may  reach,  there  remains  something  hidden  from 
it-namely,  all  that  it  lacks  for  total  assimilation  in  the 
Divine  Essence.  After  this  manner,  by  this  mystical 
theology  and  secret  love,  the  soul  continues  to  rise  above 
all  things  and  above  itself,  and  to  mount  upward  to  God. 
For love is  like fire,2  which ever rises  upward with the desire 
to be absorbed in the centre of its sphere. 
CHAPTER  XXI 
Which  explains  this  word' disguised,'  and describes  the  colours  of 
the  disguise  of the  soul  in  this  night. 
8 
I.  Now that we  have  explained the reasons  why the soul 
called  this contemplation a  '  secret ladder,' it remains for  us 
to explain likewise the word' disguised,'  and the reason why 
the soul says also that it went forth by this' secret ladder' in 
, disguise.' 
2.  For the understanding  of this  it  must  be  known
t 
that 
to disguise oneself is naught else but to hide and cover oneself 
beneath another garb and figure than one's own-sometimes 
in  order to  show  forth,
6 
under  that garb or figure,  the  will 
and purpose which. is  in the heart to gain the grace and will 
of one  who  is  greatly  loved;  sometimes,  again,  to  hides 
oneself from one's rivals and thus  to accomplish one's object 
better.  At  such  times  a  man  assumes  the  garments  and 
livery which  best  represent and indicate the affection  of his 
heart and which  best conceal  him from  his  rivals. 
3.  The  soul,  then,  touched  with  the  love  of Christ  the 
]  S.  John xvi,  23. 
a  So e.p.  The other authorities [and P. Silverio) read:  ' is assimilated 
to fire.' 
I  So e.p.  H  lacks the first  paragraph of this chapter. 
,  E.p.:  'it is necessary to know.' 
•  E.p.  omits' forth.'  [The word  has in Spanish rather the meaning of 
, abroad,' , to those outside.')  ,  E.p.:  'or to hide.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XXI 
471 
Spouse, and longing to attain to His grace and gain His good-
will, goes forth 
1 
here disguised with that disguise which most 
vividly  represents  the  affections  of its  spirit  and  which  will 
protect it  most  securely  on  its journey from  its  adversaries 
and  enemies,  which  are  the  devil,  the  world  and  the  flesh. 
Thus  the  livery  which  it  wears  is  of three  chief colours-
white,  green  and  purple-denoting  the  three  theological 
virtues,  faith,  hope  and charity.  By  these  the soul  will  not 
only gain  the grace  and  goodwill  of its  Beloved,  but it will 
travel  in  security  and  complete  protection  from  its  three 
enemies:  for faith is  an inward tunic of a  whiteness so  pure 
that  it  completely  dazzles  the  eyes  of the  understanding.
2 
And  thus,  when  the  soul  journeys  in  its  vestment  of faith, 
the devil can neither see  it nor succeed  in harming it,  since 
it is  well protected  by faith -more so  than  by all  the  other 
virtues
3
-against the devil,  who is  at once the strongest and 
the most cunning of enemies. 
4.  It is  clear that S.  Peter could find  no  better protection 
than  faith  to  save  him  from  the  devil,  when  he  said:  Cui 
resistite  fortes  in fide. f.  And in order to  gain the grace of the 
Beloved,  and  union  with  Him,  the  soul  cannot  put  on  a 
better vest  and tunic,
5 
to  serve  as  a  foundation  and  begin-
ning  of the  other  vestments  of the  virtues,  than  this  white 
garment
8 
of faith,  for  without  it,  as  the  Apostle  says,  it  is 
impossible  to please  God,  and with  it,  it is impossible  to fail 
to  please  Him. 
7 
For  He  Himself says  through  a  prophet: 
Sponsaho  te  mihi in fide. 8  Which is  as  much as to say:  If thou 
desirest,  0  soul,  to  be  united  and  betrothed  to  Me,  thou 
must come inwardly clad in faith. 
5.  This  white  garment of faith  was  worn  by  the  soul  on 
its going forth from this dark night, when, walking in interior 
afflictions  and  darkness,  as  we  have  said  above,  it received 
no aid,  in  the form  of light,  from its  understanding,  neither 
from above, since Heaven seemed to  be closed to it and God 
hidden  from  it,  nor  from  below,  since  those  that  taught 
it satisfied it not.  It suffered with constancy and persevered, 
passing  through  those  trials  without  fainting  or failing  the 
1  E.p.:  • of Christ its Spouse,  because it longs  ..  goes forth: 
2  [Lit.,  • that it dislocates the sight of all  understanding.'] 
I  E.p.  omits:  • more.  .  virtues.'  '  I  S. Peter v,  9. 
•  [Lit.,  • a  better undershirt and tunic.'] 
,  [Lit.,  • this whiteness.'] 
,  E.p.:  'and  with  it,  if it  be  [ ...  ]  living  [faith],  it  pleases  Him  and 
seems well  to Him.'  •  Hosea ii, ZOo 
~ 7     DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
Beloved,  Who  in  trials  and  tribulations  proves  the  faith  of 
His Bride, so that afterwards she may truly repeat this saying 
of David,  namely:  By  the  words  of Thy lips  I  kept  hard 
ways. 
1 
6.  Next,  over  this  white  tunic  of faith  the  soul  now  puts 
on the second  colour,  which  is  a  green vestment. 
2 
By  this, 
as  we  said,  is  signified 
3 
the virtue of hope,  wherewith,  as  in 
the  first  case,  the  soul  is  delivered  and  protected  from  the 
second  enemy,  which is  the world.  For this  green colour of 
living  hope  in  God  gives  the soul  such  ardour and  courage 
and aspiration to the things of eternal life  that,  by compari-
son  with  what  it  hopes  for  therein,  all  things  of the  world 
seem to it to be,  as in truth they are, dry and faded and dead 
and  nothing  worth.  The  soul  now  divests  and  strips  itself 
of all these worldly vestments and garments, setting its  heart 
upon  naught  that  is  in  the  world  and  hoping  for  naught, 
whether of that which is or of that which is to be;  but living 
clothed  only  in  the  hope  of eternal  life.  Wherefore,  when 
the heart is  thus lifted up above the world,  not only can the 
world  neither  touch  the  heart'  nor  lay  hold  on  it,  but  it 
ca.nnot even come within sight of it. 
7.  And  thus,  in  this  green  livery  and  disguise,  the  soul 
journeys in complete security from this second enemy, which 
is  the  world.  For  S.  Paul  speaks  of hope  as  the  helmet  of 
salvation 6-that is,  a piece of armour that protects the whole 
head,  and covers  it so  that there  remains  uncovered  only a 
visor  through  which  it  may  look.  And  hope  has  this 
property, that it covers all the senses  of the head of the soul, 
so  that  there  is  naught  soever  pertaining  to  the  world  in 
which  they  can  be  immersed,  nor  is  there  an  opening 
through  which  any  arrow  of the  world 
6 
can  wound  them. 
It has  a  visor,  however,  which  the  soul  is  permitted  to  use 
so  that  its  eyes  may  look  upward,  but  nowhere  else;  for 
this  is  the  function  which  hope  habitually  performs  in  the 
soul,  namely, the directing of its eyes upwards to look at God 
alone,  even  as  David  declared  that his  eyes  were  directed, 
when he said  : 7  Oculi mei semper  ad Dominum. 8  He hoped for 
1  Psalm xvi,  4  [A.V.,  xvii, 4]. 
t  So e.p.,  substituting this more general word  for the almilla  [a kind of 
under-waistcoat)  of the Codices. 
I  E.p.:  • By the which colour is signified.' 
,  E.p.:  • touch it.'  i  I  Th("ssalonians v,  8, 
I  E.p.:  . any arrow thereof.' 
7  E.p.  abbreviates:  . even  as  Da,dd says: 
•  Psalm  xxiv,  IS  [A.V.,  xxv,  15). 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XXI 
473 
no good  thing elsewhere,  save  as  he himself says  in another 
Psalm:  Even as  the eyes  of the handmaid are set  upon the 
hands of her mistress, even so are our eyes set upon our Lord 
God,  until  He have mercy  upon us  as  we  hope in Him.
1 
8.  For this  reason,2 because of this  green livery  (since  the 
soul  is  ever looking  to God and sets  its  eyes  on  naught else, 
neither  is  pleased  with  aught  save  with  Him  alone),  the 
Beloved  has  such  great pleasure with  the soul  that it is  true 
to say that the soul obtains from Him as  much as it hopes for 
from  Him.  Wherefore  the  Spouse
3 
in  the  Songs  tells  the 
Bride  that,  by  looking  upon  Him  with  one  eye  alone,  she 
has  wounded  His  heart.'  Without this  green livery of hope 
in God alone  it would  be impossible for  the soul  to go forth 
to encompass  this loving achievement,  for  it would  have  no 
success,  since  that which  moves  and  conquers  is  the impor-
tunity of hope. 
9.  With  this  livery of hope  the  soul  journeys  in  disguise 
through this secret and dark night whereofwe have spoken  ;6 
since  it.  is  so  completely  voided  of  every  possession  and 
support  that it fixes  its  eyes  and its  care  upon  naught  save 
upon God,  putting its mouth in the dust,8 if so be there may 
be hope-to repeat the quotation made above fromJ eremiah. 7 
10.  Over the white and the green vestments, as  the crown 
and perfection of this  disguise  and livery,  the soul  now puts 
on the third  colour,  which  is  a  splendid  garment of purple. 
By this is denoted the third virtue, which is charity.  This not 
only adds grace to the other two colours,  but causes  the soul 
to rise  to so lofty a  point that it is  brought near to God,  and 
becomes very beautiful and pleasing to Him, so that it makes 
bold to say:  Albeit I  am black,  0  daughters of Jerusalem,  I 
am  comely;  wherefore  the  King  hath  loved  me  and  hath 
brought  me  into  His  chambers. 
8 
This  livery  of charity, 
which is  that oflove, and causes greater love in the Beloved,9 
not only protects the soul and hides it from  the third enemy, 
which  is  the  flesh  (for where  there is  true love  of God  there 
enters  neither love  of self nor that of the  things  of self),  but 
even  gives  worth  to  the  other  virtues,  bestowing  on  them 
1  Psalm cxxii,  2  [A.V.,  cxxiii, 2].  I  E.p.  omits:  • For this reason.' 
a  E.p.:  'Wherefore He.'  •  Canticles iv,  9. 
L  E.p.  omits:  'whereof we  have spoken.' 
r;  Lamentations iii.  29. 
1  Ibid.  [For the quotation, see  Bk.  II, chap. viii,  §  I. p.  ,419.  above.] 
•  Canticles i.  4.  [For' chambers'  (A. V.),  the Spanish has' bed.'] 
,  E.p.  omits:  . and  .  .  .  Belovod.' 
474  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
vigour  and  strength  to  protect  the  soul,  and  grace  and 
beauty to please the Beloved with  them,  for  without charity 
no virtue has grace before  God.  This is  the purple which is 
spoken  of in  the  Songs,l  upon  which  God·  reclines. II  Clad 
in  this  purple  livery  the  soul  journeys  when  (as  has  been 
explained  above  in  the first  stanza)  it goes  forth  from  itself 
in  the  dark  night,  and  from  all  things  created,  '  kindled  in 
love  with yearnings,'  by this secret ladder of contemplation, 
to the perfect union of love of God, its  beloved salvation. 
3 
I  I.  This,  then,  is  the  disguise  which  the soul  says  that it 
wears in the night of faith,  upon this secret ladder, and these 
are its  three colours.  They constitute a  most fit  preparation 
for  the  union  of the  soul  with  God,  according  to  its  three 
faculties,  which  are  understanding,  memory  and  will.  For 
faith voids and darkens the understanding as to all its natural 
intelligence,  and  herein  prepares  it for  union  v.rith  Divine 
Wisdom.  Hope voids  and  withdraws  the  memory from  all 
creature  possessions;  for,  as  S.  Paul  says,  hope  is  for  that 
which is  not possessed;4  and thus it withdraws the memory 
from  that  which  it  is  capable  of possessing,5  and  sets  it  on 
that  for  which  it  hopes. 
6 
And  for  this  cause  hope  in  God 
alone  prepares  the  memory  purely  for  union  with  God.
7 
Charity, in the same way, voids and annihilates the affections 
and desires ofthe will for whatever is  not God, and sets them 
upon Him alone;  and thus  this  virtue prepares this faculty 
and  unites  it with  God  through  love.  And  thus,8  since the 
function  of these  virtues  is  the  withdrawal  of the soul  from 
all  that is  less  than God,  their function  is  consequendy that 
of  joining it with God. 
12.  And  thus,  unless  it journeys  earnesdy,  clad  in  the 
garments of these three virtues, it is impossible for the soul  to 
attain  to  the  perfection  of union  with  God  through  love. I 
Wherefore,  in order that the soul  might attain that which it 
desired,  which was  this  loving and delectable union  with its 
Beloved,  this  disguise  and  clothing  which  it assumed  was 
most  necessary  and  convenient.  And  likewise  to  have 
succeeded  in  thus  clothing  itself  and  persevering  until  it 
1  Canticles iii.  10. 
a  Some authorities add:  • whereby He goes  up to the reclining-place.' 
•  [Or' health.']  •  Romans viii,  24. 
i  E.p. adds:  'in this life.'  . 
•  E.p.:  • on that'which it hopes to possess.' 
7  E.p.  substitutes  for' for  union  with  God'  • according  to  the  void 
caused in it that it may be  united  with  Him.'  I  E.p.:  • Wherefore.' 
•  E.p.:  . to the perfection of the love of  God: 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XXII 
475 
should obtain the end and aspiration  which it had so  much 
desired,  which was  the union of love,  was a  great and happy 
chance,  wherefore in the next phrase the soul says: 
Oh,  happy  chance  ! 
CHAPTER  XXII 
Explains tke  third line
1 
of the  second stanza. 2 
I.  It is  very clear that it was  a  happy chance for  this soul 
to go forth with such an enterprise as  this, for it was its going 
forth  that  delivered  it
3 
from  the  devil  and  from  the  world 
and from  its  own sensuality,  as  we  have said. 
4 
Having at-
tained liberty of spirit, so precious
6 
and so greatly desired by 
all,  it went forth  from  low things  to high;  from terrestrial, 
it became celestial;  from  human,  Divine.  Thus it came to 
have its  conversation  in the  heavens,  as  has  the soul  in the 
state  of perfection,  even  as  we  shall  go  on  to  say  in  what 
follows,
6 
although with rather more brevity. 
2.  For the most important.part of my task,  and the part 
which chiefly led me to  undertake it, was  the explanation  of 
this  night  to  many souls  who pass  through it and yet  know 
nothing  about  it,  as  was  said  in  the  prologue.  Now  this 
explanation and exposition has already been half completed. 
Although  much less  has  been said  of it than might  be said, 
we  have shown  how  many are  the  blessings  which  the soul 
bears with it through the night and how happy is  the chance 
whereby it passes  through it, so  that, when a soul is  terrified 
by the horror of so  many trials,  it is  also  encouraged by the 
certain hope of so  many and such precious  blessings  of God 
as it gains therein.  And furthermore, for yet another reason, 
this  was  a  happy  chance  for  the soul;  and this  reason  is 
given in the following line  : 
In  darkness  and  in concealment. 
1  [Le.,  in  the  original  Spanish  and in our v ~ r s     rendering of the poem 
in Vol.  II.] 
2  So  e.p.  The Codices  make  no division. 
S  E.p.  has [for' for it  ... it ']  • wherein it was delivered.'  .  • 
4  E.p.  omits:  'as we have said.'  6  H  has' happy' for' preclOUS. 
•  E.p.  omits:  'in what follows.' 
2  !'ol  • 
476  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
CHAPTER  XXIII 
Expounds  the  fourth  line!  and  describes  the  wondrous  hiding-place 
wherein  the  soul is set  during  this night.  Shows how,  although 
the  devil  has  an  entrance  into  other  places  that  are  very  high, 
he has none  into  this. 2 
I.  'In concealment'  is  as  much  as  to  say  , in a  hiding-
place,'  or  ' in  hiding';  and  thus,  what  the  soul  here  says 
(namely,3  that  it  went  forth' in  darkness  and  in  conceal-
ment ')  is  a  more complete explanation of the great security 
which  it  describes  itself  in  the  first  line  of the  stanza  as 
possessing,  by  means  of this  dark  contemplation  upon  the 
road of the union of the love of God. 
2.  When the soul, then, says' in darkness and in conceal-
ment,'  it means  that,  inasmuch  as  it journeyed in  darkness 
after  the  manner aforementioned,  it went  in hiding  and  in 
concealment from  the  devil  and  from  his  wiles  and  strata-
gems.  The  reason  why,  as  it journeys  in  the  darkness  of 
this  contemplation,  the soul  is  free,  and  is  hidden  from  the 
stratagems  of the  devil,  is  that  the  infused  contemplation 
which it here possesses is infused into it passively and secretly, 
without the knowledge  of' the senses  and faculties,  whether 
interior or exterior, of the sensual part.  And hence it follows 
that,  not only does it journey in hiding,  and is  free from  the 
impediment which  these faculties  can set in its  way because 
of its  natural  weakness,  but likewise  from  the  devil;  who, 
except  through  these  faculties  of the  sensual  part,  cannot 
reach  or know  that  which  is  in  the soul,  nor  that  which  is 
taking  place  within  it.  Wherefore,  the  more  spiritual,  the 
more  interior  and  the  more  remote  from  the  senses  is  the 
communication,  the  farther  does  the  devil  fall  short  of 
understanding it. 
3.  And thus it is  of great importance for the security of the 
soul  that its inward communion with God should be of such 
a  kind  that its  very  senses  of the  lower  part will  remain  in 
darkness 
6 
and be without knowledge of it, and attain not to it: 
first,  so  that it may  be  possible  for  the  spiritual  communi-
1  [Le.,  in  the original  Spanish  and  in  our verse  rendering  of the poem 
in  Vol.  II.]  I  So e.p.  The Codices make no division. 
•  E.p.  omits' namely.' 
,  A,  B,  C,  V:  'concealed by the darkness from.' 
6  [The  Spanish  also  admits  of  the  rendering:  • remain  shut  off  from 
it by darkness.'] 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XXIII  477 
cation  to  be  more  abundant,  and  that  the  weakness  of its 
sensual part may not hinder the liberty of its spirit;  secondly 
because,  as  we  say,  the  soul  journeys  more  securely  since 
the  devil  cannot  penetrate  so  far.  We  may  understand  in 
this  way  that  passage  where  Our  Saviour,  speaking  in  a 
spiritual  sense,  says:  Let  not  thy left  hand  know  what thy 
right hand  dQeth.l  Which  is  as  though  He had said:  Let 
not  thy  left  hand  know  that  which  takes  place  upon  thy 
right hand, which is the higher and spiritual part of the soul; 
that is,  let it  be of such  a  kind  that the lower portion of thy 
soul,  which  is  the  sensual  part,  may  not attain to  it;  let  it 
be a  secret  between the spirit and God  alone. 
4.  It is quite true that oftentimes, when these very intimate 
and  secret  spiritual  communications  are  present  and  take 
place  in the  soul,  although  the  devil  cannot get  to  know  of 
what  kind  and  manner  they  are,  yet  the  great  repose  and 
silence  which  some  of them  cause  in  the  senses  and  the 
faculties  of the  sensual  part  make  it clear  to  him  that they 
are  taking  place  and  that  the  soul  is  receiving  a  certain 
blessing
2 
from  them.  And  then,  as  he  sees  that  he  cannot 
succeed  in thwarting them in the depth of the soul,  he does 
what he can to disturb and disquiet the sensual part, to which 
he  is  able  to  attain-now  by  means  of afflictions,  now  by 
terrors  and  fears,  with  intent  to  disquiet  and  disturb  the 
higher  and  spiritual  part  of the  soul  by  this  means,  with 
respect  to  that  blessing  which  it  then  receives  and  enjoys. 
But  often,  when  the  communication  of such  contemplation 
makes its  naked assault upon the soul  and exerts its strength 
upon it,  the devil,  with all his  diligence,  is  unable to disturb 
it;  rather the soul  receives  a  new and a  greater advantage
3 
and  a  securer  peace.  For,  when  it  feels  the  disturbing 
presence  of  the  enemy,  then-wondrous  thing !-without 
knowing how it comes to pass,  and without any efforts  of its 
own, C  it  enters  farther  into  its  own  interior  depths,  feeling 
that it is  indeed being set in a  sure refuge,  where it perceives 
itself  to  be  most  completely  withdrawn  and  hidden  from 
the enemy.  And  thus  its  peace  and joy,  which  the  devil  is 
attempting  to  take from  it,  are increased;  and  all  the fear 
that assails  it remains  without;  and it becomes  dearly and 
exultingly  conscious  of its  secure  enjoyment  of that  quiet 
1  S.  Matthew vi,  3.  2  E.p.:  r  a  certain great blessing.' 
a  E.p.:  • a  new advantage and love.' 
•  E.p.  omits:  • and without any efforts of its own.' 
478  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
peace  and  sweetness  of the  hidden  Spouse,l  which  neither 
the world nor the devil  can give it or take from  it.  In that 
state, therefore, it realizes the truth of the words of the Bride 
about  this,  in  the·  Songs,  namely:  See  how  threescore 
strong men surround the bed of Solomon, etc., because of the 
fears of the night. 
2 
It is  conscious of this strength and peace, 
although it is  often equally conscious that its flesh  and bones 
are  being tormented from  without. 
5.  At  other  times,  when  the  spiritual  communication  is 
not made in  any great  measure  to the spirit,  but the senses 
have  a  part therein,3  the devil  more  easily  succeeds  in  dis-
turbing the spirit and raising a tumult within it,  by means of 
the  senses,  with  these  terrors.  Great  are  the  torment  and 
the affliction  which  are  then  caused  in  the  spirit;  at times 
they exceed  all  that can be expressed.  For,  when there is  a 
naked  contact  of spirit  with  spirit,  the  horror  is  intolerable 
which the evil spirit causes in the good spirit  (I  mean, in the 
soul), once it succeeds in disturbing it with this tumult.  This 
is expressed likewise by the Bride in the Songs,  when she says 
that it has  happened thus  to her at a  time  when she wished 
to descend  to  interior  recollection  in order  to  have  fruition 
of these  blessings.  She says:  I  went  down  into the garden 
of nuts  to see  the apples  of the  valleys,  and  if the  vine  had 
flourished.  I.knew  not;  my  soul  troubled  me  because  of 
the chariots-that is,  because of the chariots and the noise of 
Aminadab,  which  is  the devil. 4 
6.  At  other times  it comes  to  pass  that  the  devil  is  occa-
sionally  able  to  see  certain favours  which  God is  pleased  to 
grant  the  soul  when  they  are  bestowed  upon  it  by  the 
mediation of a  good angel;  for  of those favours  which come 
through  a  good  angel  God  habitually allows  the  enemy  to 
have  knowledge
5
:  partly  so  that  he  may  do  that  which 
he  can  against  them  according  to  the  measure  of justice, 
and that thus he may not be able to allege with truth that no 
opportunity is  given him for  conquering the soul,  as  he said 
concerning Job. 6  This would  be the case if God allowed not 
a  certain  equality  between  the  two  warriors-namely,  the 
1  E.p.:  'of the Spouse in hiding.'  2  Canticles iii,  7-8. 
3  E.p.:  'is accompanied  by [communications toJ  sense.' 
•  Canticles vi,  10  [A.V.,  vi.  II-IZJ. 
5  E.p.:  • At other times this  opposition  of the devil  takes place  when 
God  grants  favours  to  the  soul  by  the  mediation  of  a  good  angel;  for 
these [favoursJ  the devil is occasionally able to see  because God  habitually 
allows the enemy to have knowledge of them.'  '  Job i,  I-II. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XXIII  479 
good  angel  and  the  bad -when they  strive for  the  soul,  so 
that the  victory  of either  may be  of the greater worth
l 
and 
the soul  that is  victorious  and· faithful  in. temptation may be 
the  more  abundantly rewarded. 
7.  We  must  observe,  therefore,  that  it  is  for  this  reason 
that,  in  proportion  as  God  is  guiding  the  soul  and  com-
muning with  it,  He gives  the devil  leave  to  act with  it after 
this  manner.  When  the  soul  has  genuine  visions  by  the 
instrumentality of the good angel  (for it is  by this instrumen-
tality that they  habitually come,  even  though  Christ  reveal 
Himself, for  He scarcely ever appears2 in His actual person), 
God  also  gives
3 
the  wicked  angel  leave· to  present  to  the 
soul  false  visions  of  this  very  type  in  such  a  way  that 
the soul  which is  not cautious  may easily be deceived by the 
appearance  that  they  bear,  as  many  souls  have  been.  Of 
this  there is  a  figure  in Exodus,' where it is  said  that all  the 
genuine signs  that  Moses  wrought  were  wrought likewise  in 
appearance  by  the  magicians  of Pharaoh.  If he  brought 
forth  frogs,  they brought  them forth  likewise;  if he turned 
water into blood, they did the same. 
8.  And not only does the evil one imitate God in this  type 
of bodily vision, but he also imitates and interferes in spiritual 
communications which  come through the instrumentality of 
an  angel,  when  he  succeeds  in seeing  them,  as  we  say  (for 
as Job says5:  Omne  sublime  videt).  These,  however,  as  they 
are  without form  and figure  (for it is  the  nature of spirit  to 
have  no such  thing),  he cannot imitate and counterfeit like 
those  others  which  are  presented  under  some  species  or 
figure.  And  thus,  in  order  to  attack  the  soul,  in  the  same 
way  as  that  wherein  it  is  being  visited,  his  fearful  spirit 
presents  a  similar  vision  in  order  to  attack  and  destroy 
spiritual things by spiritual.  When this comes to pass just as 
1  E.p.  substitutes  for  this  sentence:  • And  thus  it  is  meet  that ·God 
should  allow  a  certain  equality  between  the  two  warriors-namely.  the 
good  angel  and  the  bad-when they  strive for  the soul.  that the  victory 
may be of the greater worth.' 
I  Such is the unanimous opinion of theologians.  Some.  with S.  Thomas 
(Pt.  III. q.  57.  a.  6).  suppose that the appearance which converted S.  Paul 
near Damascus was that of Our Lord  Jesus Christ in person. 
•  E.p.  modifies:  '. .  .  for  this  reason  that. at  certain times.  in  that 
order  whereby  God  is  leading  the  soul.  He  gives  leave  to  the  devil  to 
disquiet  and  tempt  it.  as  happens  when  it  has  genuine  visions  by  the 
instrumentality of a  good  angel.  and  God  also gives.' etc. 
,  Exodus vii.  II-22;  viii.  7. 
I  Job xli.  25.  E.p.  modifies:  '  ... of an angel,  when  he  succeeds  in 
seeing them;  since, as  Job says,' etc. 
480  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
the  good  angel  is  about  to  communicate  spiritual  contem-
plation  to  the  soul,  it  is  impossible  for  the  soul  to  shelter 
itself in the secrecy  and hiding-place  of contemplation with 
sufficient rapidity not to be observed  by the devil;  and thus 
he  appears  to  it  with  a  certain  horror and perturbation  of 
spiritl which at times is  most distressing  to the soul.  Some-
times the soul can speedily free itself from him, so  that there 
is  no  opportunity for  the  aforementioned  horror of the  evil 
spirit to make an impression on it;  and it becomes recollec-
ted within itself,  being favoured,  to this  end,  by the effectual 
spiritual grace that the good  angel then communicates to it. 
g.  At other  times  the  devil  prevails  and  plunges  the  soul 
into a  perturbation  and horror which  is  a  greater  affliction 
to  it  than  any  torment  in  this  life  could  be.  For,  as  this 
horrible  communication  passes  direct  from  spirit  to  spirit, 
in something  like  nakedness  and  clearly  distinguished  from 
all  that is  corporeal, it is  grievous  beyond  what  every  sense 
can feel;  and  this  lasts  in  the spirit for  some  time,  yet  not 
for long,  for  otherwise the spirit would  be  driven forth from 
the  flesh  by  the  vehement  communication  of  the  other 
spirit.  Afterwards  there  remains  to it the  memory  thereof, 
which  is  sufficient to cause it great affliction. 
2 
10.  All  that we  have here  described  comes  to pass  in the 
soul passively, without its doing or undoing anything of itself; 
with respect to it.
3 
But it must be known in this connection 
that,  when  the  good  angel  permits  the  devil  to  gain  this 
advantage of assailing the saul
4 
with this  spiritual horror, he 
does  it to  purify the soul  and to prepare it by  means  of this 
spiritual  vigil  for  some  great  spiritual  favour  and  festival 
which  he  desires  to  grant  it,  for  he  never  mortifies  save  to 
give life,  neither humbles save to exalt,  which comes  to pass 
shortly  afterwards.  Then,  according  as  was  the  dark  and 
horrible
6 
purgation which the soul suffered, so is the fruition 
now  granted it of a  wondrous  and  delectable  spiritual  con-
1  E.p.  abbreviates:  • his  fearful  spirit  presents  it [i.e.,  the  vision]  as 
it can, when  the good  angel is about to communicate to the soul spiritual 
contemplation, with a  certain horror and perturbation 'of spirit.' 
I  E.p.  abbreviates:  • At other times  God  allows this perturbation and 
horror  to  last  longer,  which  is  a  greater  affliction  to  the  soul  than  any 
torment  in  this  life  could  be.  And  afterwards  there  remains  to  it  the 
memory thereof,  which is sufficient to cause it great affliction.' 
I  E.p.:  • All  that we  have  said  comes  to  pass  in  the  soul  without  its 
doing  or undoing  anything of itself with  respect  to  this  representation  or 
feeling.' 
•  E.p.:  . when  God  permits the dcyil  thus  to afflict  the soul.' 
•  E.p.  omits:  . and  horrible: 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XXIII  481 
templation,l sometimes so  lofty that there is  no language to 
describe  it.
2 
But  the  spirit has  been  greatly  refined  by the 
preceding  horror  of the  evil  spirit,  in  order that it may. be 
able to receive this blessing  ;  for these spiritual visions belong 
to the next life  rather than to this,  and when one is  seen this 
is  a  preparation for  the next. 
I  I.  This  is  to  be  understood  with  respect  to  occasions 
when  God  visits  the  soul  by  the  instrumentality  of a  good 
angel,  wherein,  as  has  been  said,  the  soul is  not  so  totally3 
in darkness and in  concealment that the enemy cannot come 
within  reach  of it.  But  when  God  Himself visits  it,  then 
this  line is  indeed fulfilled,  and it is  in total darkness and in 
concealment  from  the  enemy  that  the  soul  receives  these 
spiritual favours  of God.  The reason for  this  is  that,  as  His 
Majesty  dwells'  substantially  in  the  soul,  where  neither 
angel nor devil can attain to an understanding of that which 
comes  to  pass,  they  cannot  know  the  intimate  and  secret 
communications which take place there between the soul and 
God.  These communications, since the Lord Himself works 
them, are wholly Divine and sovereign, for  they are all sub-
stantial  touches
6 
of Divine  union  between  the  soul  and 
God;  in  one  of which  the  soul  receives  a  greater  blessing 
than in all the rest,  since  this is  the loftiest degreeS  of prayer 
in existence. 
12.  For these  are the  touches  that the Bride entreated of 
Him in the Songs, saying:  Osculetur me  osculo  oris sui.
7 
Since 
this  is  a  thing which takes  place in such close intimacy with 
God,  whereto the soul  desires  with such yearnings to attain, 
it esteems and longs for a touch of this divinity more than all 
the other favours  that God grants it.  Wherefore, after many 
such favours have been granted to the Bride in the said Songs, 
of which she has sung therein, she is not satisfied, but entreats 
Him for  these Divine touches, saying:  Who shall give Thee 
to  me,  my  brother,  that  I  might  find  Thee  alone  without, 
sucking  the  breasts  of my mother,  so  that I  might kiss  Thee 
with  the  mouth  of my  soul,  and  that  thus  no  man should 
despise me or make bold to attack me.
8 
By  this she denotes 
1  E.p. omits:  'wondrous and.' 
I  The remainder of this paragraph is omitted in e.p. 
S  E.p.:  'the soul is [lit.,  goes]  not secure,  nor is so  totally" 
,  E.p.:  'as His Majesty is  the supreme Lord and dwells.' 
•  E.p.:  'and, as it were,  touches.' 
•  (Lit.,  'step.'  Cf.  p.  463.  n.  2,  above.] 
7  Canticles i,  I.  •  Canticles viii,  I. 
482  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
the communication which  God  Himself alone makes  to  her, 
as we are saying, 
1 
far from all the creatures and without their 
knowledge, I  for this is meant by , alone and without, sucking, 
etc.' '-that is,  drying  up  and  draining  the  breasts  of the 
desires  and  aftections  of the  sensual  part of the  soul.  This 
takes  place  when  the  soul,  in  intimate  peace  and  delight, 
has fruition of these blessings, with liberty of spirit, and with-
out the sensual  part being able to hinder it,  or the  devil  to 
thwart it by means  thereof.  And  then  the  devil  would  not 
make  bold  to  attack  it,  for  he  would  not  reach  it,  neither 
could  he attain to an understanding of these  Divine touches 
in  the  substance  of  the  soul  in'  the  loving  substance  of 
God. 
13.  To  thiS  blessing  none  attains  save  through  intimate 
purgation  and  detachment and  spiritual  concealment from 
all that is  creature;  it comes  to pass  in the darkness,  as  we 
have already explained at length and as  we say with respect 
to this line.  The soul is in concealment and in hiding, in the 
which hiding-place,  as  we  have now said,  it continues  to  be 
strengthened'in union with  God through love,  wherefore it 
sings  this  in the same  phrase,  saying:  'In darkness  and in 
concealment. ' 
14.  When it comes  to pass  that those favours  are granted 
to the soul  in concealment  (that is,  as  we have said,  in spirit 
only),  the  soul  is  wont,  during  some  of them,  and  without 
knowing how this comes to pass, to see itself so far withdrawn 
and separated 
8 
according  to the  higher  and  spiritual  part, 
from the sensual and lower portion, 7  that it recognizes in itself 
two parts so distinct from each other that it believes that the 
one has naught to do with the other, but that the one is  very 
remote  and far  withdrawn from  the other.  And in reality, 
in a  certain way,  this is  so;  for  the operation is  now wholly 
spiritual,8  and  the  soul  receives  no  communication  in  its 
sensual  part.  In  this  way  the  soul  is  becoming  wholly 
spiritual;  and in this  hiding-place of unitive  contemplation 
its  spiritual desires  and passions  are to  a  great degree  being 
1  E.p. omits:  • as we are saying.' 
Z  B. C,  M,  Mtr.,  V  have:  • and concealed from them by darkness.' 
I  The remainder of this sentence is omitted in e.p.  'E.p.:· with.' 
,  E.p.  shortens this sentence thus:  • This is in darkness, in the which 
hiding-place the soul continues to be strengthened,' etc. 
•  E.p.:  • so far separated.' 
7  E.p.:  • according to the higher part, from the lower portion.' 
•  E.p.,  A,  B:  • the operation which now works is wholly spiritual.' 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XXIV 
removed  and  purged  away.  And  thus,  speaking  of  its 
higher part, the soul  then says in this last line: 
M,  house  being  now  at  rest. 
1 
CHAPTER  XXIV 
Completes  the explatlation of the  second stanza. 2 
I.  This  is  as  much as  to  say:  The  higher  portion  of my 
soul  bdng, like the lower part also,  at rest with respect to its 
desires and faculties,  I  went forth to  the Divine  union of the 
love of Cod. 
2.  Inasmuch  as,  by means  of that war of the  dark  night, 
as has been said,  the soul is  combated
3 
and purged after two 
manners-namely,  according  to  its  sensual and  its  spiritual 
part-with its senses, faculties and passions, so likewise after two 
manners-namely,
4 
according to these  two parts, the sensual 
and the spiritual-with all  its  faculties  and  desires,  the soul 
attains to an enjoyment of peace and rest.  For this  reason, 
as  has likewise  been said,  the soul  twice pronounces this line 
-namely,
D 
in  this  stanza  and  in  the  last-because of these 
two portions of the soul, the spiritual and the sensual, which, 
in order that they may go forth  to the Divine union of love, 
must  needs  first  be  reformed,  ordered  and  tranquillized 
8 
with respect to the sensual and to the spiritual, according to 
the  nature  of the  state  of innocence  which  was  Adam's. 
7 
And  thus  this line which,  in the first  stanza, was  understood 
of the  repose  of the  lower  and  sensual  portion,8  is,  in  this 
1  See p.  10,  n.  4, above.  2  So e.p. 
S  Hz.  has:  • is converted';  [perhaps]  in  error. 
a  E.p.  omits' namely.' 
i  [Lit.,  '  twice repeats '-a loosely  used  phrase.]  E.p.  omits' namely.' 
II  Hz.  reads:  'and taken away'  [quitadas  for  quietas],  an error. 
7  H  omits this last phrase,  which is  found  in all  the other codices,  and 
in  e.p.  The  latter  adds:  • notwithstanding  that  the  soul  is  not  wholly 
free  from  the  temptations  of  the  lower  part.'  The  addition  is  made  so 
that  the  teaching  of  the  Saint  may  not  be  confused  with  that  of  the 
illuminists, who supposed the contemplative in union to be impeccable do 
what he might.  The Saint's meaning is that for  the mystical union of the 
soul  with  God  such  purity  and  tranquillity  of  senses  and  faculties  are 
needful  that  his  condition  resembles  that  state  of  innocence  in  which 
Adam was created, but without the attribute of impeccability,  which does 
not  necessarily  accompany  union,  nor can  be  attained  by any,  save by a 
most special privilege of God.  Cf.  S.  Teresa's Mansions  [or Inte,io, Castle], 
VII,  chap.  ii.  S.  Teresa  will  be  found  occasionally  to  explain  points  of 
mystical  doctrine  which  S.  John  of  the  Cross  takes as being  understood. 
•  E. p.:  . part '  for  • portion.' 
484  DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
second  stanza,  understood  more  particularly  of the  higher 
and spiritual part;  for  which  reason it is  repeated.
1 
3.  This  repose  and  quiet  of this  spiritual  house  the  soul 
comes  to  attain,  habitually  and  perfectly  (in  so  far  as  the 
condition  of this  life  allows),  by  means  of the  acts  of the 
substantial  touches
2 
of Divine  union  whereof we  have just 
spoken;  which,  in  concealment,  and  hidden  from  the  per-
turbation  of the  devil,  and  of its  own  senses  and  passions, 
the soul has  been receiving from the Divinity, wherein it has 
been  purifying  itself,  as  I  say,  resting,  strengthening  and 
confirming itself in order to be able to receive  the said union 
once and for  all,  which  is  the Divine  betrothal  between  the 
soul and the Son of God.  As  soon as these two houses  of the 
soul  have  together  become  tranquillized  and  strengthened, 
with  all  their  inmates-namely,  the  faculties  and  desires-
and  have  put these  inmates  to sleep  and  made  them to  be 
silent  with  respect to all  t.hings,  both above and below,  this 
Divine  Wisdom  immediately  unites  itself with  the  soul  by 
making a new bond of loving possession, and there is fulfilled 
that which is written in the book of Wisdom, in these words  :3 
Dum quietum  silentium contineret omnia,  et  nox in  suo  cursu  medium 
iter  haberet,  omnipotens  sermo  tuus  Domine  a  regalibus  sedibus.4-
The  same  thing  is  described  by  the  Bride  in  the  Songs, Ii 
where  she  says  that,  after  she  had  passed  by  those  who 
stripped  her of her  mantle  by  night  and  wounded  her,  she 
found  Him  Whom her soul loved . 
.  4.  The  soul  cannot  come  to  this  union  without  great 
purity,  and  this  purity  is  not  gained  without  great  detach-
ment  from  every  created  thing  and  sharp  mortification. 
This  is  signified  by the stripping  of the  Bride of her  mantle 
and by her being wounded  by night as  she sought and went 
after the Spouse  ;  for the new mantle which belonged to the 
betrothal  could  not  be  put  on  until  the  old  mantle  was 
stripped  off.  Wherefore,  he  that  refuses  to  go forth  in  the 
night aforementioned to seek the Beloved, and to be stripped 
of his  own  will  and  to be  mortified,  but seeks  Him upon his 
bed  and  at his  own  convenience,  as  did  the  Bride,  will  not 
succeed  in  finding  Him.  For  this  soul  says  of itself that it 
found  Him by going forth in the dark and with yearnings of 
love. 
1  [Lit.,' twice repeated.'] 
I  E.p.:  'of these  (as it were)  substantial touches.' 
•  E.p.:  f  that which it [i.e.,  Wisdom]  says.' 
•  Wisdom xviii,  14.  I  Canticles v,  7. 
BOOK  II.  CHAPTER  XXV 
CHAPTER  XXV 
Wherein  is expounded the  third stanza. 
1 
In the  happy night,  In secret,  when  none  saw me, 
Nor  I  beheld  aught,  Without  light  or  guide,  save  that  which 
burned in my heart. 
EXPOSITION 
I.  The  soul  still  continues  the  metaphor  and  similitude 
of temporal  night  in  describing  this  its  spiritual  night,  and 
continues to sing and extol the good properties which belong 
to it,  and which  in  passing through this  night it found  and 
used,  to  the  end  that  it  might  attain  its  desired  goal  with 
speed  and  security.  Of these  properties  it  here  sets  down 
three. 
2.  The first,  it says,  is  that in this happy night of contem-
plation God leads the soul  by a  manner of contemplation so 
solitary and secret, so remote and far distant from sense, that 
naught  pertaining  to  it,  nor  any  touch  of created  things, 
succeeds in approaching the soul in such a  way as  to disturb 
it and detain it on the road of the union of love. 
3.  The second  property whereof it speaks  pertains  to  the 
spiritual  darkness  of this  night,  wherein  all  the  faculties  of 
the  higher  part of the  soul  are  in  darkness.  The  soul  sees 
naught neither looks  at aught,  neither stays  in aught that is 
not God,  to the end that it may reach  Him, inasmuch as  it 
journeys  unimpeded  by  obstacles  of forms  and  figures,  and 
of natural  apprehensions,  which  are  those  that  are  wont to 
hinder the soul from  uniting with the eternal Being of God. 
2 
4.  The third is that, although as it journeys it is supported 
by no particular interior light of understanding,  nor by any 
exterior guide,  that it may receive satisfaction therefrom  on 
this  lofty  road-it is  completely  deprived  of all  this  by this 
thick  darkness-yet its love alone,  which burns
3 
at this Ume, 
and  makes  its  heart to  long  for  the  Beloved,  is  that  which 
now  moves  and  guides  it,  and  makes  it  to  soar  upward  to 
1  From  e.p.  Some  of  the  Codices  have' Stanza the  Third' and  some 
simply'Stanza.'  Bz.,  P  omit the whole  chapter.  . 
I  So  G,  H,  Mtr.  [Lit.,' that it may not unite itself in  the  ever  bemg 
of  God.'  Siempre,      ever,'  , always,'  is normally an adverb.]  A,  B  have: 
• that it may not unite itself always and be with God.'  E.p.,  C,  M:  'that 
it may Dot  unite itself always with God.' 
•  E.p.:  • but it is love and faith  which burn.' 
DARK  NIGHT  OF  THE  SOUL 
its  God  along  the road of solitude,  without its knowing how 
or in what manner. 
There follows  the line  : 
In  the  happy  night. 
1 
1  Thus end  the  majority  of  the MSS.  Cf.  pp. liii-viii,  340,  above,  on 
the incomplete state of this treatise.  The MSS.  say nothing of this, except 
that in  the  Alba de Tormes  MS.  we  read;  • Thus far  wrote  the hqly  Fray 
John  of  the  Cross  concerning the  purgative way,  wherein he treats of the 
active and the passive [aspect]  of it as is seen in  the treatise of  the Ascent 
Df  the  Mount  and  in  this of  the  Dark  Night,  and,  as he  died,  he  wrote  no 
more.  And hereafter follows  the illuminative way, and then the unitive.' 
Elsewhere  we  have said that the lack of any commentary on  the last five 
stanzas is not due to the Saint's death, since he lived for  many years after 
writing the commentary on the earlier stanzas. 